"As to converting the Jews, it would be much better for the United
  States to send missionaries to Monmouth-street. There remain, then,
  but the Maronite, the Greek, the Greek Catholic, Armenian, and
  Nestorian churches, that is to say Christians, to convert. From the
  pre-existing animosities among the Christians, the missionaries
  could not so much as open their mouths to any of the members of
  these communities on the subject of religion, and therefore it is a
  totally different course that they have adopted. They have offered
  themselves as schoolmasters; not as persons depending for
  remuneration on their claims to the confidence of parents, and on
  their proficiency; but supplying instruction gratuitously, and
  adding thereto remuneration to the scholars in various shapes. Their
  admission in this form has been forced upon the people by the
  Turkish government. The condition, however, has been appended to it,
  that they should not attempt to interfere with the religious belief
  of the pupils. This has been going on for years; the money
  continuing to be supplied on the grounds that Protestant
  congregations are being created, and the proceeds enjoyed by the
  missionaries on their undertaking that they shall not create them.

  "The statistical under-current is, however, veiled or disguised from
  the men (the missionaries) themselves. The one generation has, so to
  say, succeeded the other. The new men come out occupied with their
  zeal, not caring critically to examine the position in which they
  stand, in entering at once on a contest already engaged. They are
  filled with contempt for everything around them; and to religious
  zeal, itself a sufficiently active impulse, is superadded the
  necessity of furnishing reports for public meetings and periodicals
  in America--reports which, failing to contain statements proselytes
  secured, have at last to supply narratives of contests undertaken
  and martyrdom endured."--_The Lebanon_, vol. ii. pp. 79, 80.

Our author has, in the foregoing paragraph, certainly touch most of
the weak points of Protestant missionary working. Even a cursory
analysis of the reports before thus confirm every word of this
quotation from his book. Like every Protestant account of missionary
work, the Turkish Missions-Aid Society's Reports are interlarded with
scriptural quotations, having always the same significance--that the
time for seeing the results of the labor has not yet come, but soon
will be; or, as Mr. Urquhart puts it, they supply to those who
subscribe the funds, plausible grounds for expecting that the
consummation is near.

Some years ago, a grand case of _quasi_ martyrdom was reported that
Exeter Hall, and must have been worth much money to the societies who
furnish missionary funds for the East, both in England and America. It
was the cause of many questions being asked, and much correspondence
being furnished, in both Houses of Parliament. Dispatches were
written, the Turkish Government threatened, and the life of Lord
Stratford de Redcliffe, who was then our representative at the Porte,
made a burden to him for a time with extra work. The story was that
some American Protestant missionaries, when "preaching the Gospel" on
Mount Lebanon, were stoned and otherwise ill-treated, being finally
turned out of the village in which they resided; some of them being
badly wounded. The tale was well told, but, like other histories of
the kind, was allowed to the forgotten {347} as soon as it had served
its purpose. Here is Mr. Urquhart's version of the affair, gathered as
it was in the country itself, is not unlikely to prove the true
version of the story:

  "The missionaries arriving at Eden (a village not far from the
  celebrated cedars of Lebanon, the inhabitants consisting entirely of
  Maronite Catholics) entered a house, and disposed themselves to
  occupy it. The master of  the house told them that he would not and
  could not receive them. They persisted, threatening him in the name
  of the Turkish authorities. A great commotion ensued, and the
  people, with the fear of the Turkish authorities before their eyes,
  devised a plan for dislodging the missionaries by unroofing the
  house. A roof in the Lebanon is not composed of tiles and rafters;
  to touch a roof is a very serious affair, not to be undertaken in
  wantonness. The people had the satisfaction of seeing the
  missionaries mount and depart without any act on their part which
  would expose them to after-retribution."--_The Lebanon_, vol ii. p.
  82.

I said before, Mr. Urquhart is one of the very last men who could be
accused of any leaning toward Catholicism, still less of any affection
toward the native Christian population of Syria and Lebanon. Of this
his volumes bear witness in every chapter. But in a dozen instances he
proves what we have so often heard asserted by travellers returned
from these regions, that the people do not want, and do not wish for,
the American missionaries, and would far rather be without them. Also
that wherever these Protestant apostles are located, their presence is
a continual source of trouble and annoyance, by causing quarrels among
the people, and that their sojourn in the land is most certainly not
conducive either to the glory of God on high, or of peace on earth to
men of good will. That their so-called mission has been a most
complete religious _fiasco_, is pretty well proved by the returns
which at page 308 we copy from these reports. If the reader will but
turn back to it, he will find that with twenty-four missionaries and
thirty-seven native assistants, the number of "church members" in the
Syrian "field" amounts to no more than two hundred, and this after the
Americans have worked as missionaries in this "field" for the last
quarter of a century or more. Surely no clearer proof than this is
wanting for endorsing what Mr. Urquhart has said above respecting the
way and the reason why these religious undertakings are puffed up, and
"plausible grounds" given for expecting that the consummation of
"gospel" triumph is at hand.

There is, perhaps, no Christian population in the world more united as
a body, more attached to their clergy, more faithful in their holding
to the See of Peter, or more orthodox in every particle of their
faith, than the Maronites of Mount Lebanon. To illustrate, even in the
most superficial manner, the history and ritual of this singular
people would extend this paper far beyond our limits. Suffice it to
say that upward of ONE THOUSAND years before the discovery of America,
the holy sacrifice of the mass was offered up in their churches, and
matins, lauds, vespers, and complins sung every morning and evening in
their sanctuaries, just as at the present day. Their name is derived
from that of St. Maroun, a holy hermit, who, in the fourth century,
when the heresies of Eutyches and the errors of Monothelism were so
common throughout the East, preserved the inhabitants of Lebanon and
the adjacent parts from those influences. "The Maronites," says Mgr.
Patterson, in his work, which is the third on our list at the head of
this paper,--

  "The Maronites maintain that they have never swerved from the
  Catholic faith, and love to assert that their Patriarch is the only
  one whose spiritual lineage from St. Peter, in the see of Antioch,
  has been unbroken by the taint of heresy or schism." (P. 389.)

Their secular clergy number about 1,200, and the regulars, inhabiting
sixty-seven monasteries, comprise some 1,400 monks, priests, and lay
brothers. They have besides fifteen convents, in which there are about
300 nuns.

{348}

  "The blessings of education (continues the same author) are widely
  diffused among the Maronites. Almost all are able to read and write;
  and though few even of the clergy can be called learned, they are
  all sufficiently instructed in the most necessary things, and
  especially in the practical knowledge of their faith. Offences are
  rare among them, crimes almost unknown. The number of the Maronites
  of Lebanon appears to be about 250,000. In 1180, William of Tyre
  estimated them at more than 40,000; in 1784 Volney placed them at
  115,000; and Perrier, in 1840, at 220,000. Elsewhere they are hardly
  to be found; the largest number I know of is at Cyprus, where there
  are about 1,500. A few also are found at Aleppo and Damascus, and
  some at Cyprus.



  "There are (among the Maronites of Lebanon) four principal colleges
  for the education of the clergy. The most ancient is that of Ain
  Warka, in which between thirty and forty pupils are educated. They
  are taught Arabic (their vernacular), Syriac, which is the
  liturgical language of this rite; logic, moral theology, Italian,
  and Latin. Six exhibitions for the maintenance of as many scholars
  at the College of Propaganda were attached to this college. At the
  time of the first French occupation of Rome, the funds which
  provided for them were seized, and have never been restored; but the
  pupils still go to Rome, and many of them are to be met with in the
  higher ranks of the Maronite clergy." (P. 388.)

It is then to turn this people, and these priests, from the faith
which they have so long and so honestly held, and from the spiritual
paths in which they have walked for at least fifteen hundred years,
that respectable black-coated American gentlemen, whose experience of
life has been confined to Boston or New York, are sent over and
maintained by the funds furnished by the zealous evangelicals of
England and the United States. No wonder if those to whom they come
would rather be without them. With the people whom they are sent to
"convert" they have not a single idea in common. The very vernacular
of the country has to be studied and learnt by them (an undertaking of
at least two or three years, as Arabic is perhaps the most difficult
language in the world for an adult to acquire a proficiency in),
before they can preach or even converse with those whom they wish to
teach what they themselves deem, the truths of eternal life. Without
the most remote approach to a thing like a ritual, and without even
the barest liturgy to recommend them, they come among a people who
from very very infancy are perhaps more familiar with the meaning and
teaching of earnest ritualism than any nation on earth. Mr. Urquhart,
in the quotation we have given elsewhere, says of  the American
missionaries, that "as to converting the Turks, they might just as
well try to convert the Archbishop of Canterbury;" might he not have
said the same as to the converting of the Maronites? From the 200
"church members," which the returns of the Turkish Missions-Aid
Society state as the result of the "missionary" labor on the Syrian
"field" during the quarter of a century and more which the work has
been going on, if we deduct the personal servants of the twenty-four
missionaries, and of thirty-seven native assistants, how many will
then be left as real, true, and earnest converts from their own faith
to that which the American missionaries would teach them? "It has to
be observed," says Mr. Urquhart, "that the proselytism carried on is
not, as is supposed in Europe, against  unbelievers, but between
Christians;"   [Footnote 105] and surely here is proselytism of the
kind forced upon a people against their will, by the inhabitants of
another far-off country, who would do very much better if they spent
their yearly L25,000 among themselves, in "converting" the thousands
of worse than pagans to be seen daily in the streets of every great
town of England and America, and whose "faith" is from time to time
shown in their "works."

  [Footnote 105: The Lebanon, vol ii. p.79.]

We have no desire to hold up to the ridicule they deserve the absurd
canting sentences and so-called scriptural ejaculations with which the
of the Turkish Missions-Aid Society is interlarded. All who have
perused similar documents must be well acquainted with the way in
which {349} verses from Holy Writ are made to serve _L. s. d._ by  the
writer. Nor do we wish to make our readers laugh I reproduce some of
the "pious" anecdotes which are to be met with in these pages. Thus it
may, or may not, be true that at Nicomedia "a few years ago all was
darkness and bigotry;" but it can hardly be taken what the French
would call "_au serieux_" that two Armenian priests in this locality
were "awakened" by reading an Armeno-Turkish translation of The
Dairyman's Daughter, and that, since the conversion of these
gentlemen, a flourishing church, with a large congregation, has been
gathered together, and a home mission formed to carry the Gospel to
the towns and villages around.   [Footnote 106] Also, from a personal
knowledge of the facts, we permit ourselves to doubt whether the
so-called "missionary" work in Constantinople has been, to say the
least of it, judiciously carried on; and whether, about two years ago,
the zeal without knowledge on the part of the missionaries did not
very nearly cause a rising of the whole Mahometan population, and a
general massacre of all the Christian population in that city. Nor--on
the testimony of Anglicans, Presbyterians, and other Protestants--can
we subscribe to the eulogium sung in praise of "the excellent Bishop
Gobat." We have far more serious matters to deal with as regards the
American missions in Syria and the East, and of which, if they are in
the least degree consistent, Protestants more than Catholics whom it
really does does not concern, would do well to take heed.

  [Footnote 106: See Tenth Annual Report of the Turkish Missions-Aid
  Society. p. 10.]

In the appendix to his "Tour," Mgr. Patterson has, with a fairness and
impartiality of judgment which cannot the too highly praised,
investigated the question as to what it is that the native Protestants
in the East really believe with the process of their so-called
"conversion" is complete. And it may not be out of place here to that
mention that the present writer, who has lately returned from a
residence of nearly ten years in those countries, entirely and to the
letter agrees with what this author has stated. Were it allowable to
mention names, he could also adduce the authority of many Englishmen
who have resided in Smyrna, Constantinople, Beyrout, Damascus, the
Lebanon, and other parts of the East, all of them Protestants, most of
them attending every Sunday the English ministrations of the American
missionaries, and some of them even communicants in their churches.
The evidence of these is varied in different points, but, as a whole,
certain pages of Dr. Patterson's appendix might serve as a precis of
the various opinions which these gentlemen have spoken, and which the
writer himself has formed during his prolonged residence in the East.
Be it, however, noted, that the objections here raised are not against
the American missionaries themselves, but against the result of their
labors, as well as against those of other Protestant missionaries--
wherever throughout these lands their labors have produced any fruit
whatever in the shape of "converts."

  "Most true it is," says Mgr. Patterson, "that though large sums are
  expended yearly by Protestants for their missions, the result is
  nevertheless small indeed; but yet a great work is being done (I
  sincerely think unintentionally) by those establishments. _The faith
  of hundreds and thousands in their own religion is being shaken,
  without any other faith being substituted for it_.  [Footnote 107]
  The missionaries' reports are full of expressions to the effect that
  many persons come to them, declaring their readiness to hear what
  they had to say, and their disbelief of their own national or common
  faith; and yet the 'converts' registered by themselves may be told
  in units, or at most by tens. Accordingly, I never came in contact
  with 'liberals' in politics or religion, whether Jew, Christian, or
  Gentile, who did not commence the conversation (on the supposition
  that I was a Protestant) by declaring their disbelief of this or
  that current dogma of their faith; and in all such cases I found I
  was expected, at a _Protestant_ to applaud {350} and admire their
  lamentable condition of mind. I repeat, most emphatically, that I
  never saw a single person of this description who had one doctrine
  to _affirm_. The work of the Protestant missions is simply
  descriptive. In Turkey it is detaching Mohammedan subjects from
  their allegiance to their spiritual and temporal head; in Greece it
  is introducing the mind of youth to the conceit of private judgment;
  in Egypt it does the same for the Copts; and in Mesopotamia for the
  Nestorians. The missionaries report that, among the Jews, they
  prefer to have to do with the rationalists rather than with the
  Talmudists; and acting on that principle everywhere, they first make
  a _tabula rasa_ of minds, on which they never afterward succeed in
  inscribing the laws of sincere faith or consistent practice." (P.
  456.)

  [Footnote 107: The italics an our own, and we give them to mark the
  pith of the whole question, with which nearly all Protestants, as
  well as every Catholic we have met, that have inhabited Syria,
  Palestine, or the Holy Land for any time, most fully concur.]

Here, then, we have, in a few words, an account of what the teachings
of the Protestant missionaries in the East result in. They take away
the faith that is in these people, and give them nothing in return.
[Footnote 108] In other and plainer words, the end of all this
teaching, and preaching, and denouncing of "popish" doctrines, is
simple unbelief or infidelity, embellished with Scriptural verses and
the current cant of the evangelical school. Do the subscribers to the
Turkish Missions-Aid Society contemplate this as one of the results of
their liberal donations? Is _this_ what the society put forth so
boldly as the "Gospel in Turkey?" Is it for such a change that the
traditions mounting to within less than four hundred years of our
Lord's sojourn on earth, preserved as they are by a people living in
the land which he inhabited, are to be cast off? Surely, even from the
most enthusiastic of the evangelical school, these questions can have
but one answer.  [Footnote 109]

  [Footnote 108: An English official who had resided upward of
  twenty-five years in Syria, and who is a very earnest Protestant,
  told the present writer exactly the same. "The American
  missionaries," he said, "destroy the faith these native Christians
  had, but give them no other in return. The consequence is, that they
  invariably become more rationalists."]

  [Footnote 109: About four years ago, a party of English travelers
  were journeying over Mount Lebanon. While halting at a roadside
  "khan," they were accosted by a native who spoke English very well.
  They asked him who he was, and where he had learnt their language.
  He said he was, or had been, servant to one of the American
  missionaries, naming the gentleman, and that he was "a good
  Protestant." One of the ladies present put a few questions to him,
  and among others, asked him what he now believed of the Virgin Mary?
  "_That_ for the Virgin Mary," said the miscreant, spitting at the
  same time, and using an Arabic gesture indicating the utmost
  contempt. The lady--an Anglican, not a Catholic--of course dropped
  the conversation, feeling too disgusted to continue it. Some days
  afterward she related that anecdote to the wife of an American
  missionary; but the latter was not at all shocked, merely making the
  remark. "I guess the the man had got rid of his old superstitions."
  Is this what they call evangelizing the native Christians?]

And let not the subject be either misunderstood or blinked. Take any
dozen Englishmen really conversant with the ways of the country and
the ideas of the inhabitants; let them all the Protestants, and even
be of those who, finding no other Protestant ministration, attend the
chapels of the American missionaries. Of the twelve, certainly nine
will tell you that, although well-meaning and honest made in their
way, the preaching of the Protestant missionaries in the East holes
down but never builds up belief, and that in sober truth the native
Protestant "converts" are but so many free-thinkers--theoretical
Christians, but practical infidels. There is, with respect to this
part of our subject, one more extract from Mgr. Patterson's book,
[Footnote 110] which, although somewhat lengthy, we find so much to
the purpose, with respect to some of the questions of the day, that we
copy it entire:--

    [Footnote 110: No one interested in the present spiritual state of
    the East should be without this volume, and every traveller to
    Palestine--Catholic or Protestant--should take it with him.]

  "The Protestant sects of the West (says our author) are represented
  in the East by missions of several denominations; but since they all
  represent but one principle, namely the denegation of spiritual
  authority as the basis of belief, it is unnecessary to to
  distinguish them here. At first sight it might appear that the
  Episcopalians, or representatives of the Anglican establishment,
  should command a distinct notice, since they have one point (that of
  episcopal superintendence) in common with the Eastern sects; but
  when is considered, not merely that the fact of their having real
  bishops is denied by all sects of the East,  [Footnote 111] as well
  as by the Catholic Church, {351} but that they themselves entirely
  repudiate any claims which might be founded on their supposed
  possession of an apostolic commission and authority through the
  episcopate; and when, moreover, it is remembered that a few persons
  who think differently on these points are wholly unrepresented in
  the East, it seems evident that the distinction would be unreal.
  Further, the Protestant missions in the East are mainly supplied by
  ministers in the communion of the Establishment in England, but
  often not episcopally appointed or ordained, and in all cases a
  perfect the equality is admitted between such as are so appointed
  and those who are not. Hence the Anglo-Lutheran 'Episcopalians,' the
  independents, the American Congregationalists, etc., act in unison,
  and on one principle. They teach that the belief they advocate in
  certain doctrines is to be acquired by each individual through a
  perusal of certain writings, and must be held by him as the result
  of convictions proceeding from his own investigation of those
  writings, which they assert to be the inspired word of God. This
  procedure they call 'the right of private judgment.'

    [Footnote 111: This, be it remembered, was written in 1852, ten
    years before the recent attempt at union on the part of certain
    Anglicans with the Greek Church. What Mgr. Patterson says is the
    simple truth, and is confirmed by numerous conversations which the
    present writer had, during a ten years' residence with several
    patriarchs and numerous bishops, priests, and deacons of the
    Greek, Armenian, Nestorian, Copt, and Jacobite sects. All these
    clergy hate the very name of Rome, but they acknowledge she has
    real bishops and a real priesthood; while one and all deny that
    the Anglican Church as neither. The English Book of Common Prayer,
    translated into Arabic, is very often met with throughout the
    East, but it does not appear to have impressed the Oriental
    Churches, whether in communion with the See of Peter or not, very
    favorably respecting the Established Church of this country. The
    Thirty-nine Articles they regard with especial horror, as showing
    the church to be heretical at core. Nor have the members of the
    Anglican Church and Anglican Bishop of Jerusalem done much to
    remove this impression, but rather the contrary.]

  "But the very terms of the Protestant principle, thus represented,
  involve, not merely a disregard of existing authorities, but also of
  that which presents that system for the acceptance of Eastern
  Christians. Those, however, who advocate its claims are not usually
  to be bound by the laws of consistency in logic. Though they will
  have every man to read the Sacred Scriptures (that is, _their_
  version of them) and to judge for himself, they have also a few
  doctrines, built on them, as they suppose, to which they attach an
  importance equal to that ascribed by Catholics to the dogmas of
  faith. Of these, the chief is what they term 'justification by faith
  only' the doctrine which teaches that man is accounted (but not
  made) fit for eternal life in the divine presence, by a _subjective_
  act or sentiment of the mind, called by them 'faith.' This 'faith'
  is not the 'faith' of theological writers, but a persuasion, or
  enthusiastic feeling, on the part of the individual, that he is
  saved from eternal death by sacrifice of the cross. Laying such
  stress as this view does on a persuasion, or feeling of the mind, it
  might be expected that other acts of the mind would be regarded by
  those teachers as of cognate importance. With singular
  inconsistency, however, they regard all such acts, whether of love,
  hope, or fear, or the like, as not only unimportant or indifferent,
  but even sinful in fact or tendency. The one operation of the soul
  to which they attach salvation is that of persuasion that itself is
  saved. To account for so arbitrary a distinction, they allege that
  this persuasion is not a natural gift, but a divine grace--or,
  rather, the divine grace; for in it are contained, and from it flow,
  all those good results which Catholic writers call 'graces;' such as
  humility, charity, hope, etc. This extraordinary and almost
  inexplicable doctrine, they consider not only conveyed in Holy
  Scripture, but the whole sum and substance of its teachings; and
  they allege portions of the epistles of St. Paul, in which he
  declares that man is not justified by works, done irrespectively of
  the divine sacrifice of the cross, to prove that all works or acts
  of the mind (saving always the one act of persuasion, which they
  call 'faith') are valueless and ineffectual to work out salvation.
  The teachers of this view among us are often pious persons, who act
  morally from natural good feelings; but the Eastern mind is too
  consistent and too voluptuous to imitate them. If it is possible,
  they say, to attain salvation by means of a sentiment so pleasant,
  we regard it as quite unnecessary to add to it supererogatory
  performances disagreeable to our inclinations." (P. 453.)

Here, in sober fact, and if we will only give things their right
names, is one of the chief reasons of such "conversions" as take place
in the East to Protestantism. An oriental mind is difficult to fathom
at once; but take any of the professed Protestants in Syria or other
parts of Turkey, clear away all the rubbish they have learnt to talk
in imitation of their new teachers--separate if you can (and it is
merely a matter of time and patience) all the prating about "the Lord
Jesus," and "the blessed Scriptures," the "teaching of the Spirit,"
and suchlike spiritual mouthings, from what are the actual thoughts of
the individual and the real reasons for his change, and you will
invariably find at the bottom of his mind the all-prevailing idea,
that of what use are confession, penance, private prayer, fasting,
giving alms, and other good works, when salvation can be accomplished
by the far more easy and pleasant process of a mere sentiment of the
mind, which any man can train his understanding into believing when he
wishes to do so. And these, be it understood, are the best of the
converts. As Mgr. Patterson says of them:--

{352}

 "Such persons as I am alluding to have really embraced the principle
 on which Protestantism rests. They have thrown off the authority of
 their own belief, not to accept the formula of another, but to reject
 all authority. They are like the German 'philosophic' Protestants, or
 the French universitaries of the West--their conduct is often
 irreproachable, but their belief is a blank, and their principles
 distinctly Antinomian, even when they themselves do not put them in
 practice. I maintain that to one class or other of these all the
 proselytes made to Protestanism in the East belong. They are either
 worthless persons, who are happy to substitute an easy-simulated
 sentiment for whatever amount of discipline their communion imposed,
 or they are 'philosophers,' sceptics, and infidels. The reports of
 these allegations, and the existing state of religious and political
 parties in the East, give scope for these results." (P. 453.)

There are, however, two other reasons, which also act powerfully upon
such natives of the East as come under the influence of Protestant
missionary teaching, and of which when they have abandoned their own
creed, they take especial pride in the possession. The one is the
notion which they imbibe from certain misquotations of Holy Writ, as
well as from ill-judged (even looking at it from a Protestant point of
view) teaching on the part of their new pastors; namely, that every
man is "a priest unto God," and that once a Protestant and a
"church-member," they are as high in spiritual rank, and far superior
in "saving faith" to those whom they formerly regarded and respected
as their clergy. The idea is, of course, utterly false, and childish
in the extreme, to our views. But the native mind can only be judged
by its own standards of worth, and the fact remains as we have said.
That the Protestant missionaries would knowingly foster such notions
it would be uncharitable to believe; but that such is another result
of their teaching there can be no doubt whatever. The missionaries
themselves, however, see very little indeed of their congregations,
small as they are, save at prayer-meetings and preachings once or
twice in that week. It is a curious fact, but one which has struck
many even of those who have not yet found courage to knock and ask for
admittance into the Catholic Church, that in proportion has a sect, or
people, or nation, stray far from unity of the one true fold, so to
their pastors and teachers neglect and despise that visiting and
looking after their flocks, which forms with us such a prominent part
of every parish priest's or missionary's duty. The High-Church
Anglican Protestant clergymen--although still very far short of what
is done by our clergy--come next to the Catholic priest in this work;
and as we descend the scale of Protestantism, we find the practice
more and more rare, until I the Socinians such acts of supererogation
on the part of their preachers are never heard of. With Protestant
missionaries in the East the practice is exceedingly rare: perhaps it
is regarded as an infringement upon true religious liberty?

The third reason which has often--very generally, if not
always--influence in making the native of Syria, Palestine, or other
Eastern lands embrace Protestantism, is that when he has done so, the
fact of his being a proselyte puts him indirectly under the
"protection" of the English or American consul, if such an official
there is--and there generally is one--within even a couple of days'
journey from the convert's place of abode. Not that the individual is
at once put on the rolls of the English or American subjects. Such was
some years ago the practice; but now for very shame's sake this has
been altered. But, as the English consuls-general, consuls, and
vice-consuls have a sort of standing order to "protect" all
Protestants against the tyranny or ill-usage of the local authorities;
and as every native Protestant has nearly always some grievance which
he makes out to be an injustice committed on him _because he is_ a
Protestant, so his complaint invariably finds its way to the English
consulate, and either the chief of the office or one of his native
dragomen deems it imperative upon him to interfere, if not officially,
at any rate officiously, with the pasha or other authority of the
place. {353} As a matter of course the complaint is listened to,
and--justice or not justice--the "protected" of the consul gets what
he calls justice, but which his opponent often deems the very reverse.
For, be it remarked, that, as a general rule in the East, "justice"
means obtaining what you want, not what is yours by law or equity.
Your complaint, and what in Europe we call justice, _may_ be on the
same side. If so, all the better; but if not, you will term your view
of the affair "justice" all the same; and, if you don't get what you
want, you are unjustly treated. This sort of administration is but too
often ruled by the consuls, and the "converts" know full well how to
make use of it. No one who has not lived in the Turkish dominions can
imagine the power which an European consul or vice-consul has in those
countries. Mr. Urquhart has done good service in exposing this evil,
which is, in point of fact, one of the chief reasons why the Ottoman
Empire has been gradually but surely verging toward ruin since the
foreign consular power became virtually far greater than that of the
local authority. Of this interference of one country in the affairs of
another, Mr. Urquhart says, it presents "a terrible prospect for the
human race; for it involves the extinction of each people, and the
absorption ultimately of the whole in some one government more
dexterous than the rest." All the chief governments of Europe have
been more or less guilty of this meddling with the executive of
Turkey, but notably England, France, and Russia, in whose hands every
local pasha is a plaything, to be tossed here and there at will.
England says--or, rather, each English consul says for her--that he
most interfere, else French influence would be too powerful in the
province or district. France returns the compliment, and declares that
England--that is, the English consul--is such a deep diplomat that,
unless she uses her influence, England would be paramount in the
place. Russia, on the other hand, declares that she must maintain her
_prestige_, else the Turks would say of their old enemy that she had
fallen in the scale of nations. This interference in the
administration of the Ottoman empire is thus described by Mr.
Urquhart:

  "In other countries it has been known as diplomatic representations
  made in regard to principles; here (that is, in Turkey) it is
  administrative. It bears upon the taxes, the customs, the limitation
  of districts, the administrative functions, the parish business, the
  selection and displacement of functionaries, the operations of the
  courts of law--whatever is included under the word 'government'
  belongs here to 'interference.' This operation is exercised with
  authority, without control, without responsibility. The discussions
  in reference thereto are carried on between the functionaries of a
  foreign government; and as that foreign government can enter upon
  the field only by an act of usurpation, its position is that of an
  enemy. Every act is directed to subvert and to disturb; the object
  of each individual is of necessity to supersede the legitimate
  authority of the native functionary with whom he is in contact.

  "Thus it is that the administrative interference, which has in Syria
  replaced the diplomatic, is carried on through consuls." (Vol ii.
  pp. 349, 360.)

Hitherto this work of "interference" has been carried on by our
English consuls in Syria in very much the same way as it has by their
Russian and French colleagues, no better, but no worse. At any rate,
in all matters of influencing religious affairs, directly or
indirectly, they have held perfectly aloof. But if we are to judge
from a document lately put forth by the Turkish Missions-Aid Society,
the title of which stands at the end of the list of books and
pamphlets that heads this paper, either an entire change has in this
respect come over our policy, or else several of our Anglo-Syrian
official must be acting in direct disobedience {354} of the wishes of
the Foreign office. We allude to an appeal for the building of "A
SYRIAN PROTESTANT COLLEGE," together with a prospectus of the same,
and a list of the "_Local Board of Managers_," among which, to their
shame be it said, appear the names of Mr. Geo. J. Eldridge, her
majesty's consul-general in Syria; Mr. W. H. Wrench, her majesty's
vice-consul at Beyrout; Mr. Noel Temple Moore, her majesty's consul at
Jerusalem; and Mr. E. T. Rogers, her majesty's consul at Damascus.
That there can be no real desire or want for such an institution in
the country, and that the very appeal for help to found it is about
the most outrageous piece of pious impudence that has ever been
published, even in the name of sectarian so-called religion, will
appear upon a further examination of this document. We will do the
American missionaries the justice of saying that no Englishman would,
or could, ever have had the _toupe_ to ask for money for such a
purpose; the whole document bears the unmistakable impress of "smart"
New-England. As we have shown before, from the "summary" of American
Missions Statement given elsewhere, copied from the report of the
Turkish Missions-Aid Society, the number of Protestant "church
members" on the Syrian field is two hundred; this, too, after nearly
thirty years of missionary "labor" in the country. And now these same
missionaries come forward and modestly tell us that "more than L20,000
have already been secured and invested in the United States" for the
building of this proposed "institution," and that "it is proposed to
raise an equal amount in England, the income annually going to the
support of the College." The president of the proposed college, and
_ex-officio_ president of the board of managers, is an American
missionary, the Reverend Dr. Bliss, and among the members of the board
are the names of some thirteen or fourteen other missionaries of all
sorts. The trustees, who "are to have the general supervision of the
institution," reside in New York, where we should imagine they will be
able, from their proximity to the college in Syria, to supervise the
whole affairs exceedingly well. With these, or with such persons as
have parted with their money for such a pious folly, we have nothing
to do. But as regards the English officials, it is another matter and
Protestants, as well as Catholics must agree that men holding the
positions they do in a country where religious discord is the bane and
curse of the land, have no business to mix themselves up with an
undertaking which is purely and wholly got up for the purpose of
proselytism. Had the subscription been to build a Protestant chapel or
church, or to endow any such establishment for the use of the English
residents in Syria, it would have been a very different matter. To
lend their names to any such undertaking these gentlemen would you a
perfect right; but to give their official sanction to a scheme which
is but a renewed campaign on the religion of the country, and as
English government officers to say that they--and consequently the
government they represent--approved as consul-general and consuls of a
wholesale sectarian converting shop, is nothing less than a
prostitution of the name of this country in Syria. The "dodge" is a
good one; the American missionaries, notwithstanding their "tall"
pious talk in missionary newspapers, have actually done nothing toward
perverting the native Christians of Syria. Two hundred "church
members" in nearly thirty years is at the rate of seven converts a
year less than the third of a convert every twelve months for each the
twenty-four missionaries. This pay. Even American subscribing
"Christians" will, after a time, cease to contribute for what brings
forth so little fruit. Something must be done; and therefore they have
started the idea of this "Syrian Protestant college," having got the
promises of these {355} consular gentlemen to countenance it as they
have done.

Did these proselytizing consuls, before they allowed their names to be
made use of in this prospectus, read the third paragraph of the
document, in which we are coolly told that "THE ENEMIES OF
CHRISTIANITY, PROFESSED INFIDELS AS WELL AS PAPISTS, FULLY ALIVE TO
THE ADVANTAGES TO BE GAINED FROM THE PRESENT STATE OF THE COUNTRY, ARE
ADOPTING BOLD AND ENERGETIC MEASURES TO FORESTALL PROTESTANTISM IN
BECOMING THE EDUCATORS OF THIS VAST POPULATION"?

Or, if they _did_ read it, did it not strike them that there was an
insolence, as well as an amount of sickening cant and implied
falsehood, throughout these words which ought to have prevented them,
as _English gentlemen,_ to say nothing of their official character,
from countenancing such a concern? Have English consuls in Eastern
lands so far lost whatever teaching they may have had as to forget
that, taking all her majesty's subjects throughout the world, the
"Papists" are very nearly as numerous as the Protestants; and that to
class them "infidels," and call them "the enemies of Christianity," is
an insult--to say nothing of the loud vulgarity and the utter untruth
of the assertion, which there can be no excuse for any English
gentleman, far less any English official, to lend his name to? In
this, every person with the slightest pretension to the name of
gentleman or an educated man, no matter what may be his religious
persuasion, must agree with us. And to talk of "Syrian Protestantism,"
with its two hundred "church members" amidst a population of half a
million native Christians, and three times that number of Moslems,
being "forestalled" in "becoming the educators of this vast
population," is much as if the Mormons in London were to complain that
the English Church was "forestalling" them in being the educators of
the capital of England. The Latter-day Saints of the metropolis bear a
much larger and not at all less respectable proportion to the rest of
the population of London, than the Protestant "converts" of Syria do
to the rest of their fellow-countrymen.

Three excuses may be put forth in defence of these consular gentlemen
who have thus disgraced the country they serve. It may be
asserted--1st, That if French, Russian, and Austrian consuls give
official protection to Catholic and Greek religious establishments, it
is quite lawful for English authorities to do the same to Protestant
undertakings. 2dly, That "the Syrian Protestant college" is to be got
up for literature, the sciences, jurisprudence, and medicine, and not
for religious purposes. And, 3dly, That they have allowed their names
to be made use of without reading over the prospectus. Of these the
third and last excuse is the only one that will hold water for an
instant; and for their sakes we hope it may be true, poor and lame as
such a plea would be for official men. As regards the first of these
pleas, which we have put into the mouths of the defendants, it is
quite true that the French, Russian, and Austrian consuls have and do
afford official protection to Catholic and Greek religious
establishments, but the cases are by no means parallel.

To quote again the words of Mr. Urquhart:--"The Roman Catholic regular
and secular clergy are established here (in Syria) as in any other
Roman Catholic countries;  [Footnote 112] that is to say, they are
pastors of flocks, and not missionaries. The Protestants have no
flocks, and they are sent with a view of creating them."

  [Footnote 112: The same may be said of the Greek clergy, who have
  many and very large congregations--in the country--in some parts
  much more numerous than the Maronites or other Catholic churches.]

We wonder what this writer would have said could he have seen a
"Syrian Protestant college" proposed as a means toward this
much-desired end, or could he have foreseen that four {356} English
consuls could ever have went their names--officially, too--to such a
combination of Little Bethel and "smart" American doings. Nor will it
suffice to say that this institution is not being got on foot for the
express purpose of proselytism, more or less direct. In paragraph
number eight we are told that--

  "The college will be conducted on strictly protestant and
  evangelical principles."

What _that_ means, we all know; also--

  "It will be open for students from any of the Oriental sects or
  nationalities who will conform to its laws and regulations."

That is to say, any student belonging to the Latin,  [Footnote 113]
Maronite, Greek Schismatical, Greek Catholic, Armenian Catholic,
Armenian Schismatical, or other Eastern church, will be admitted to
this college, provided he attends "Protestant" and "evangelical"
preachings and prayers, and is humble-minded enough to hear the faith
of his fathers denounced every day as one line of "the enemies
Christianity," and "Papists" lovingly asked with "professed infidels."
And in the very next sentence we are further informed that--

    [Footnote 113: In the East, European Catholics, and all others who
    use the European or Roman Ritual, are called "Latins;" while the other
    Oriental churches in communion with the See of Peter are
    distinguished by their respective names--Maronites, Greek
    Catholics, Armenian Catholics, Syrian Catholics, Chaldeans, and
    others. The whole are termed "Catholics," and there is nothing of
    which they are so proud as their intercourse with Rome and the
    centre of unity. Of the various schismatical and heretical sects,
    there is not one that assumes the name of "Catholic" except
    certain of the "advanced" school English Established Church.]

  "It is hoped that a strong Christian influence will always centre in
  and go forth from this institution; and that it will be instrumental
  in raising up a body of men who will fill the ranks of a
  well-trained and vigorous 'native ministry;' become the authors of a
  native Christian literature; supply the educational wants of the
  land; encourage its industrial interests; develop its resources;
  occupy stations of authority, and in a large degree aid in carrying
  the Gospel and its attendant blessings wherever the Arabic language
  is spoken."

With the help of one English consul-general, two English consuls, and
one English vice-consul, this may be in a certain measure be done:
yes, and _will_ be done; for consular influence in those lands is all
powerful. But without it, no: without this English state-help the
"Syrian Protestant college" will wither, and only bear fruit in such
proportion as have done the "Protectant churches" in Syria, with their
twenty-four missionaries, their thirty-seven native assistants, and
their two hundred communicants, after nearly thirty years labor in the
Syrian "field."

After the extracts we have given from the prospectus, can there be any
doubt as to the proselytizing intentions of this
American-Syrian-Protestant-evangelical institution? or can there be
two opinions as to the propriety of English gentlemen and English
officials degrading themselves and their office by becoming connected
with such an undertaking? We observe, by the way, as a curious
coincidence in the prospectus, that the name of the New-York Treasurer
to the board of trustees of this proposed college is William E. Dodge;
and that the Rev. D. Stuart Dodge, of New York, has been appointed one
of the professors. Would it not have been better and more appropriate
if her majesty's consuls at Beyrout, Damascus, and Jerusalem had left
all this evangelical speculation to men of like name and calling? It
is true that when the prospectus was drawn out, and these English
officials allowed their name to be made use of, Lord Palmerston was
prime minister, and Lord Russell ruled over the foreign office. That
the Shaftesbury power with the first, and the well-known tendencies of
the author of the Durham letter, may have had some influence with
these individuals in their official character is possible, nay,
probable; but should gentlemen, English gentlemen, ever have allowed
their names to go forth as patrons and directors of this unholy
humbug? A private individual may lend his influence to whatever scheme
he likes to patronize; but a public servant and above all an English
public servant in Turkey--has no right whatever to be so liberal with
his patronage.

{357}

One word more ere we have done with the "Syrian Protestant college."

At the head of the list of subscribers to this proposed institution is
L1,000 from "The late Syrian asylums' committee." If we are rightly
informed, that money was subscribed from the residue of a fund which
was instituted in 1860 to afford assistance to the sufferers from the
Syrian massacres. To this fund Catholics, Protestants, Greeks, and
Jews subscribed, with the express stipulation and understanding that
no part or portion of it was to be used for any religious purpose
whatever. The fact was, that the chief managers of the fund in Syria
were American missionaries, and subscribers to it were afraid that the
money would be used for proselytizing purposes. After a time the great
misery of the Syrian Christians came to an end, and no further relief
was required: but there still remained an unused balance of about
L1,200 of this fund in the banker's hands. If what is reported in
London be correct--and we have very good reason for believing it to be
so--who was it that gave authority for this L1,000 to be given as a
donation to the Syrian Protestant college? To question regards not
only the Catholics, Greeks, and Jews of London, Manchester, Liverpool,
and other towns in England that subscribed to this fund, but also
those belonging to a large--and we are thankful to say a very
large--class of our Protestant fellow-countrymen, who, however much
they may differ from us in matters of faith, are enemies to religion
being made a cloak for fraud, and are honest and honorable in their
dealings between man and man. If this L1,000 which heads the list of
subscriptions in the Syrian Protestant college was really given from
the money which in 1860-61 was gathered together as "the Syrian relief
fund," a gross and most infamous breach of trust has been committed,
and all men should beware how they in future contribute to anything in
which the American Oriental missionaries have any influence.

But where have the projectors of this college learned geography? They
tell us that the establishment will be "LOCATED IN BEYROUT, the
seaport of Syria, a city rapidly growing in size and importance, and
OCCUPYING A CENTRAL POSITION IN RESPECT TO ALL THE ARABIC-SPEAKING
RACES."

The capitals are our own, for we would note these words as bringing a
new light in geographical discovery. That Beyrout is by far the most
pleasant, nay the only pleasant, town in Syria to reside in--that
there is more society, and particularly what the promoters of this
undertaking would call more "Christian" society, we fully admit. That,
on account of its proximity to the sea, it is far more healthy than
most towns in Syria, and that from the number of its European and
native Christian inhabitants it is far safer to reside in, and much
more exempt from the chance of any Moslem outbreak taking place,
cannot be denied. But that it occupies "a central position in respect
to all the Arabic-speaking races," is simply, and very grossly untrue,
as a glance at any school-boy's atlas would show. It would be about as
correct to assert that Plymouth or Falmouth held "a central position
in respect to" the rest of England. If the promoters of "The Syrian
Protestant college" are so very anxious to diffuse the great blessings
of their faith and literature "wherever the Arabic language is
spoken," would not Damascus, Mosul, Aleppo, Antioch, or even Bagdad,
be more central than Beyrout? To reside in any of these places would
not be so pleasant, but it would be more missionary-like, and would
certainly save the money of the subscribers, Beyrout being by far the
most expensive town in all Syria to live in.

But men of American sectarian preacher stamp never knew and never will
know what a missionary spirit is. It is foreign to their habits as
well as to their creed. When we hear of {358} American Protestant
missionaries going forth with barely a change of clothes; when we
learn that they abandon father, mother, family, house and home to
preach the Gospel; when we read of half a score of them undergoing
martyrdom, as did two Catholic bishops and eight priests in Corea, an
account of which was published in the Times of the 27th August
last--when, in fine, we hear of their taking lessons in their work
from the Jesuits, the Lazarists, the Capuchins, the Dominicans, or any
other of those religious orders which have shed such lustre upon the
church in all ages--it may then become a matter of discussion whether,
notwithstanding their gross errors in faith, they have not something
of the missionary spirit among them. At present we can only look upon
them as do all the Moslems, the native Christians, the Jews, and
nineteen-twentieths of the European population in the East, namely,
that they drive a very flourishing trade, and enjoy very comfortable
incomes: but that the work they are paid for doing has neither the
self-denial of man nor the blessing of God to make it prosper.
Protestant missions throughout the world have ever been, are, and ever
will be, most miserable failures. Dr. Littledale was, at any rate,
candid when he spoke of "the pitiful history of Anglican missions to
the heathen;" but he might with equal truth make mention of the
wretched results of Protestant missions throughout the world. That
unison of mawkish sentiment and Biblical phrases selected at random,
which commonly goes by the name of "cant," may certainly influence
weak-minded persons to subscribe to visionary schemes of a Protestant
conversion of Oriental Christians. But exposure must come sooner or
later, and with it the beginning of the end of subscriptions. Some
years ago the American missionaries gave up the "field" they occupied
at Jerusalem; would it not be as well if they conferred a similar boon
on the Syrian and Lebanon districts? The churches against which they
are chiefly engaged in preaching have their own bishops, their own
clergy, and their own missionary preachers from Europe. These latter
are not engaged in perverting men from another quarter, but--at the
request, and with the full concurrence of the native bishops and
clergy--they build up and repair the breaches in the sheep-fold, and
help in driving away the wolves that would enter. There may be--there
are--sheep that go astray from time to time, but considering all
things--and particularly now that the sectarian influence of English
consuls in Syria has been brought to bear on the "work"--these are few
indeed. The Maronites and other sects in communion with St. Peter's
successor, form part and parcel of God's one only true and holy
Catholic Church, against which, we have His word, the gates of hell
shall never prevail.  [Footnote 114]

  [Footnote 114: The fact of four English consuls allowing their names
  to go forth as patrons of a Protestant College, which is to be got
  up for the perversion of native Christians, is so utterly at
  variance with the general practice of our government, that we must
  express our surprise it has been overlooked at the Foreign Office.
  We cannot imagine Lord Stanley lending even a tacit sanction to such
  an outrage of the feelings of the native Syrian Christians.]

In his work upon "Mount Lebanon," from which we have already quoted,
Mr. Urquhart relates a conversation which he had with a certain
Maronite bishop, which seems so _apropos_ that we give it entire:--

  "I wish you to know [said the bishop] that we are not attached to
  France. France is to us on oppression from which we would be most
  happy to escape; we have proved this by acts, but no account is
  taken of them. How France came to be considered our protector is an
  old story, into which it is needless to enter. The connection
  awakened against us the hatred of the Turks and of the Greeks, and
  to it may be attributed the past suffering of our people from both.
  Here and in the other parts of Syria, in Egypt and in Cyprus, from
  the middle of the last century to the close of the campaign of
  Napoleon, we reckon that the blood of 40,000 Maronites has been shed
  by the Turks or the Greeks. This is the debt we owe to French
  protection. When, in 1840, the French government sent to us to
  require us to support Ibrahim Pasha and Emir Beshir, we gave a flat
  refusal. {359} M. ---- came to Saida, and sent a message to the
  Patriarch (of the house of Habesh), who sent his own secretary to
  give him the answer, which had been decided on by the bishops and
  chiefs, which was, 'The Maronites have heard much of, but have never
  seen, the fruit of the protection of France, and could not, in the
  hope of it, expose themselves to the risks they were now required to
  run.' Then the English government sent to us an agent (Mr. Wood),
  accompanied by M. Stendel, on the part of the Austrian government,
  proposing to us to accept the protection of Austria in lieu of that
  of France. We declined to make any application for such protection;
  _and we complained to Mr. Wood of the interference in our religion
  of the Protestant missionaries which made us look with suspicion on
  the intentions toward us of the English government. He assured us
  that the English government was opposed to all missionary schemes,
  and suggested that we should draw up a petition to the Turkish
  government, requesting the missionaries to be prohibited from
  entering the country, promising that the English ambassador would
  obtain from the Porte an order to that effect. Satisfied with these
  assurances, we aided in the expulsion of Mehemet Ali, although he
  had every way favored the Maronites._

  _"The promised order respecting the missionaries never came, England
  set up a Protestant bishop (in Jerusalem), and obtained from the Porte
  the formal recognition of the Protestants as a body."_(Vol. ii pp.
  261, 262.)

The italics in this quotation are our own. They show pretty plainly
whether or not the missionaries are welcome to the natives of Syria.
But what will these same natives say now, when they see our
consuls-general and consuls coming forth as the official patrons and
promoters of Protestant missionary proselytism? If it be true--and we
have certainly always looked upon it as one of the rules of our
government--that the English government "_is opposed to all missionary
schemes,_" how is it that the consul-general in Syria, the consul at
Jerusalem, and the consul at Damascus, are allowed to take upon
themselves the office of "managers" or "local directors" of the
Protestant Syrian college?



ORIGINAL.


DELIA.



  There is a darkness which is still not gloom,
  And thou, poor child, whose young but sightless eyes
  Catch no glad radiance from the summer skies--
  Worse, still, neglected in thy blindness, whom
  Those nurtured like thee in the self-same womb
  Have cast on strangers, strangers truly wise,
  Since more than waif of gold such charge they prize--
  Hast found a joy what others find a doom.
  Thou knowest the way unto the chapel door,
  And, kneeling softly on its blessed floor.
  Thou art no longer blind; the _Presence_ there
  Reveals itself to thy adoring prayer;
  Hours fly with thee that altar's Guest before,
  Till, cowards, we envy what we would not share.



{360}

Original.

MADEMOISELLE DE MONTPENSIER.


How shall we tell in a few words the story of one whose career
extended over sixty-six years? Our heroine's name calls up a picture
of the most brilliant period in French history. A thousand images
arise of pageantry, of genuine magnificence, of jewelled and gilded
wretchedness. Life seemed like a great magic lantern exhibited for her
private amusement; scene after scene passed before her eyes with a
pomp unknown in these days of tinsel splendor; but most welcome of
all, ever returning, never palling, was the slide that presented to
her view La Grande Mademoiselle, the contemplated bride of half the
sovereigns in Europe.

Anne Marie Louise d'Orleans was born in the palace of the Louvre, May
29th, 1627. Fairies met her on the threshold of the world and endowed
her with all earthly goods--boundless wealth, a cheerful temper, keen
wit, excellent health, and a fair share of beauty. Was it a kindly or
a spiteful fairy who crowned these gifts with a vanity that nothing
could undermine or overthrow? This self-love afforded the only
unfailing enjoyment of her long life; but as it made her throw aside
as unworthy of her every scheme of happiness suited to her rank, and
carve out a destiny for herself in defiance of all authority, the
fairies must decide the question, not we.

"The misfortunes of my house," she says, "began soon after my birth,
for it was followed by the death of my mother, which greatly
diminished the good fortune that the rank I hold would have led me to
expect. The great wealth which my mother left, and of which I am sole
heiress, might well, in the opinion of most people have consoled me
for losing her. But to me, who feel now of what advantage her
superintendence of my education would have been to me, and her credit
in my establishment, added to her tenderness, it seems impossible
sufficiently to regret her death."

This passage from her "Memoires" exhibits several of Mademoiselle's
peculiarities: a certain blunt, abrupt mode of expressing her exact
meaning, an egotism that makes her lose or gain a test of the
importance of events, and a right-minded honesty which saved her from
the worst errors of her time.

No unmarried daughter of France had ever enjoyed so magnificent an
establishment as was now accorded to the heiress of the house of
Montpensier. The Tuileries, where she lodged, being connected by a
gallery with the Louvre, the little motherless child was under the
supervision of Louis XIII. and Anne of Austria, as well as of Marie de
Medicis, who expended more tenderness upon this grand-daughter than
she had ever on her own children. Mademoiselle regarded her royal
grandmother with great partiality. She used to say when the Duchess of
Guise was quoted: "She is only a distant grandmother, she is not
queen."

Marie de Medicis left France in disgrace in 1633, followed by
Monsieur, whose career was a series of petty intrigues, from which he
invariably emerged unscathed, leaving his accomplices to bear the
consequences of their folly. Very different was the spirit of his
daughter. At six years old she was taken to see the degradation of Duc
d'Elboeuf and Marquis de {361} la Vienville from the order. On being
told that their disgrace was owing to devotion to her father, she wept
bitterly, and wished to retire, saying that she could not with
propriety witness the ceremony. Ten years later Monsieur supped with
her, enlivened by the music of the twenty-four royal violins. She
writes: "He was as gay as if MM. de Cinq Mars and de Thou had not been
left behind on the road. I confess I could not look at him without
thinking of them, and amid my own joy the sight of his contentment
pained me." Is not a certain reverence due to this generous daughter
of a mean-spirited intriguer, and to one who, with untrammelled
liberty, remained virtuous in the court of Louis XIV.? That her
unspotted character was not the result of coldness, is proved by her
foolish devotion to Lauzun. If pride was her safeguard, at least some
human praise should be given to so high an estimate of royal
greatness.

The king and queen were untiring in tender attentions to Mademoiselle.
She writes: "I was so accustomed to their caresses, that I called the
king _petit papa_, and the queen _petit mama_, really believing her to
be so, because I had never seen my own mother." After enumerating the
various little girls of quality who came to play with her, she adds:
"I was never so occupied with any game as to be inattentive if a
reconciliation with Monsieur was mentioned. Cardinal Richelieu, who
was prime minister and master of affairs, was determined to control
this matter; and with proposals so degrading to Monsieur that I could
not listen to them without despair. He said that to make Monsieur's
peace with the king, his engagement to Princess Marguerite de Lorraine
must be broken, that he might marry Mademoiselle de Combalet, the
cardinal's niece, now Madame d'Aiguillon. I could not help crying when
it was mentioned to me, and in my anger sang, in revenge, all the
songs I knew against the cardinal and his niece. It even redoubled my
friendship for Princess Marguerite, and made me talk of her
incessantly."

Gaston d'Orleans returned to France October 8th, 1634, and his
daughter went to Limours to receive him. Wishing to test her filial
memory, for he had left her at the age of four or five years, he
appeared before her without the _cordon bleu_ which distinguished him
from the members of his suite. "Which of these gentlemen is Monsieur?"
she was asked, and without hesitation sprung to her father's arms; a
proof of fidelity which touched him deeply, that being of all
qualities the one most likely to excite his surprise. Nothing was
spared for her amusement, even to the gratification of her desire to
dance in a _ballet_. A band of little girls of high rank was composed,
with a selection of lords of corresponding stature. The magnificent
dresses and appointments satisfied even Mademoiselle's ambition. In
one figure birds were introduced in cages, and set free in the dancing
room. One unlucky songster became entangled in the dress trimmings of
Mademoiselle de Breze, Cardinal Richelieu's niece, who began to cry
and scream so vehemently as to introduce a new element of amusement
among the assembly. The accident recalls a similar one which occurred
at the time of this lady's marriage with the Duc d'Enghien, afterward
the great Conde. There was a ball afterward, where Mademoiselle de
Breze, who was very small, fell down while dancing a _courante_,
because, in order to make her look tall, they had put such high-heeled
shoes upon her feet that she could not walk. Clearly her sphere of
success was not destined to be the ball-room. Poor little soul! she
played doll for more than two years after her marriage, and was sent
to a Carmelite convent to learn to read and write during her husband's
absence in Roussillon with the king.

Mademoiselle gives a graphic account of a journey which she took in
1637. The events recalled, with the {362} emotions they excited in her
at the time, show an acuteness of perception far beyond that of most
children of ten years old. Her sentiments are too virtuous not to
demand a brief notice. "Arrived at Champigny, I went first to the Holy
Chapel, as a place to which the memory of my predecessors, who had
built and founded it, seemed to summon me, that I might pray to God
for the repose of their souls." A little later we hear of her at the
Convent of Fontevrault. The abbess was a natural daughter of Henri
IV., and the nuns lavished every attention upon their guest,
delighting to honor her with the title of "Madame's niece." Their
devotion bored our princess greatly, and would have made her ill but
for a grain of amusement to be derived from the simplicity of the poor
ladies. But fortune, Mademoiselle's unfailing friend, soon relieved
her from this monotony. Two ladies-in-waiting, Beaumont and
Saint-Louis, instead of going into the church, explored the convent
court-yards. Terrible cries attracted their notice, and were found to
proceed from a poor maniac, confined in a dungeon, according to the
ill-judged practice of those days. After amusing themselves with her
extravagances, they went to find their little mistress, that she might
share the enjoyment. "I broke off a conversation with the abbess and
betook myself in all haste to the dungeon, which I did not leave until
supper-time. The table was wretched, and for fear of suffering the
same treatment the next day, I begged my aunt to let my officers
prepare my meals elsewhere. She made use of them after that day, so
that we fared better during the rest of our visit. Madame de
Fontevrault treated me the next day to a second maniac. As there was
not a third, ennui seized upon me, and I went away in spite of my
aunt's entreaties." And this was the child who, at five years old,
wept over the degradation of two of her father's followers. Through
life, her best impulses seem to have had root rather in a sense of her
own dignity than in compassion for others.

More easily understood is her enjoyment of the royal hunts, during the
days of Louis XIII.'s attachment to the virtuous Madame de Hautefort.
"We were all dressed in colors, mounted upon hackneys richly
comparisoned, and each lady protected from the sun's rays by a hat
covered with plumes. The chase led past several handsome houses, where
grand collations were prepared for us, and on our return the king sat
in my coach between Madame de Hautefort and me. When in a good humor,
he entertained us very pleasantly with many topics. At such times he
allowed us to speak freely of Cardinal Richelieu, and proved himself
not displeased by joining in the conversation."

His eminence was destined to fall more deeply than ever into disgrace
with Mademoiselle in 1638. The dauphin was born at the chateau of
Saint-Germain-en-Laye, September 5th of that year; and his cousin,
who, like any other little girl, enjoyed being in the royal nursery,
used to call him "her little husband." This amused the king
exceedingly, but Cardinal Richelieu viewed the matter more seriously.
Mademoiselle was sent home to Paris. On the way, she was taken to Ruel
to see the minister, and there received a grave reprimand for the
indiscretion of her language. "He said I was too old to use such
terms; that it was unbecoming in me to speak thus. He said so
seriously to me things that might have been addressed to  a reasonable
person, that, without answering a word, I began to cry; to comfort me,
he gave me a collation. None the less did I go away very angry at his
words."

If this rebuke had made a deeper impression upon Louise de Bourbon,
her biographer's task would be a more grateful one. The naivete with
which she reveals all her matrimonial castles in the air would be
incomprehensible if these schemes had not been purely ambitious; as
free {363} from sentiment as a military stratagem or a commercial
speculation.

At fifteen Mademoiselle met with a great loss in the death of her
excellent _gouvernante_, the Marchioness of Saint-Georges. She speaks
of this trial with more tenderness and less egotism than one might
have anticipated. "I learned, on awaking in the morning, how ill she
was, and rose in haste that I might go to her and show by various
attentions my gratitude for her noble performance of her duties toward
me ever since I came into the world. I arrived while they were
applying every possible remedy to revive her, in which they succeeded
after repeated efforts. The viaticum and extreme unction were brought,
and she received them with every evidence of a truly Christian soul.
She responded with admirable devotion to each prayer: no subject of
surprise to those who knew bow piously she had lived. This over, she
called her children to her, that she might bless them, and asked
permission to give me, also, her benediction, saying that the honor
she had enjoyed of being with me from my birth made her venture to
take the liberty. I felt a tenderness for her corresponding to all
that she had shown toward me in the care of my education. I knelt
beside her bed, with eyes bathed in tears; I received her sad farewell
and kissed her. I was so touched by the thought of losing her, and by
the infinite number of good things she had said to me, that I did not
wish to leave the room until her death. She begged that I might be
taken away, and her children too; she was too much agitated by our
cries and tears, _and testified that I alone was the subject of any
regrets the was capable of feeling_. I had hardly returned to my own
room when the agony began, and she died in fifteen minutes."

Mademoiselle retired to the Carmelite convent of Saint Denis, until
Monsieur should select another governess. She requested that the place
might be given either to Mademoiselle de Fieique or Mademoiselle de
Tillieres (both "persons of quality, merit, and virtue, and relations
of her own"), hoping earnestly that the choice might fall upon
Mademoiselle de Tillieres. Her wishes were thwarted, and the Countess
de Fiesque entered upon the task with Spartan firmness. An illness of
six months' duration vanished miraculously when the news of her
appointment was announced, we are told with sarcastic emphasis.

Whether governess or pupil suffered most in this connection, it would
be hard to say. Mademoiselle de Fiesque had an aggravating system of
petty supervision, and Mademoiselle a fixed determination to elude it.
On one occasion when our princess had been shut up in her room by the
tyrant's orders, she managed to escape, stole the key of Mademoiselle
de Fiesque's private apartment, and locked her in. "She was hours in
uneasiness before a locksmith could be found; and her discomfort was
all the greater because I had shut up her grandson in another room,
and he screamed as if I had maltreated him."

But we should soon tire of these reminiscences, did they not bring
upon the stage personages more important than Mademoiselle
herself--hard as it would have been for her to think so.

In 1643 we find the _dramatis personae_ much changed and extended.
Louis XIII. has passed away, making so good an end, that we wonder at
the grace of God to see how noble a death may close an insignificant
career. Richelieu has been succeeded in Mademoiselle's ill graces by
Cardinal Mazarin. Louis XIV. is a precocious, ignorant child of nine
years old. The cabal of the _Importantes_ has arisen and declined, and
two seditions in Paris, founded upon slight provocation, have proved
the populace ripe for the Fronde. Henrietta Maria and her children are
refugees at the French court, and Mademoiselle, with her enormous
possessions, is considered an eligible match for the Prince of Wales.
As Charles Stuart in the character of an unsuccessful suitor is a
novel topic, no {364} apology is needed for introducing at some length
the history of his courtship.

The court was at Fontainebleau when his royal highness arrived in
France; and their majesties went to meet him in the forest. His mother
presented him first to the king and then to the queen, who kissed him,
after which he bowed to the Princess of Conde, and to his cousin. "He
was only sixteen or seventeen years old; quite tall for his age, with
a fine head, black hair, brown complexion, and quite a good figure."
One unpardonable sin he had in Mademoiselle's eyes; that, not speaking
French in the least, he could not shine in society. Clever talk she
enjoyed keenly even in childhood, Monsieur's brilliant conversation
had fascinated her.

The Prince of Wales worked diligently to produce an impression upon
his cousin's flinty heart, which (shall we confess it?) was wasting
itself away in an unrequited attachment for the imperial throne. Many
a suitable match did Mademoiselle reject, because the untimely death
of two empresses kept her in a fever of hope and expectation. In vain
was it represented that the emperor was old enough to be her father;
that she would be happier in England or Savoy. She replied
disinterestedly that "she wished the emperor, . . . that he was not a
young and gallant man; which proved that in good truth she thought
more of the establishment than of the person." In vain did Charles
Stuart follow her about bareheaded, ministering mutely to her love of
importance. In vain did he hold the flambeau this side and that, while
the Queen of England dressed her for Mademoiselle de Choisy's ball.
His _petite ore_, as they called the dainty appointments of a
gentleman's dress in those days, were red, black, and white, because
Mademoiselle's plume and the ribbons fastening her jewels were red,
black, and white. He made himself torchbearer again while she arranged
her dress before entering the ball-room; followed her every step,
lingered about her hotel until the door closed behind her: all in
vain, because at nineteen our heroine had the discretion to prefer a
middle-aged emperor, firmly seated on his throne, to an exiled prince
of seventeen.

His gallantry was so openly exhibited as to excite much remark. It
lasted all winter, appearing in full force at a celebrated
entertainment given at the Palais Royal toward the close of the
season. Anne of Austria herself arrayed her niece upon this location,
and three whole days were devoted to preparing her costume. The dress
was covered with diamonds, and red, black, and white tufts; and she
wore all the crown jewels of France, with the few that still belonged
to the Queen of England. "Nothing could have been more magnificent
than my dress that day," she assures us; "and there were not wanting
those who asserted that my fine presence, fair complexion, and
dazzling blonde hair adorned me more than all the jewels that
glittered on my person."' Mademoiselle does not exaggerate her charms.
Though not strictly handsome, her noble bearing and charming coloring
produced all the effect of beauty.

The dancing took place in a large theatre, illuminated with flambeaux,
and at one end stood a thrown upon a dais, which was the scene of
Mademoiselle's triumphs. "The king and the Prince of Wales did care to
occupy the throne; I remained there alone; and saw at my feet these
two princes and all the princesses of the court circle. I was not in
the least ill at ease in this position, and those who had flattered me
on entering the ballroom found matter the next day for fresh
adulation. Every one I had never appeared less constrained than when
seated on that throne;" and the imperial hopes being at their height,
she adds: "While I stood there with the prince at my feet, my heart as
well as my eyes regarded him _du haut en bas_. . . The thought of the
empire occupied my mind so exclusively, that {365} I looked upon the
Prince of Wales only as an object of pity."

The conclusion of this romance belongs really to the interval between
the first and second Fronde, but we insert it here for the sake of
convenience, pleading guilty of the anachronism. In 1649 we find
Mademoiselle again persecuted to marry her cousin, then Charles II.
"L'Abbe de la Riviere said that I was right, but that it must be
remembered that there was no other match for me in Europe; that the
emperor and King of Spain were married; the King of Hungary was
betrothed to the Infanta of Spain; the archduke would never be
sovereign of the Low Countries; that I would not hear of any German or
Italian sovereign; that In France the king and Monsieur (d'Anjou) were
too young to marry; and that M. la Prince (Conde) had been married ten
years and _his wife was in good health_."

A courier was sent to their majesties to announce the King of
England's arrival at Peronne, and the count went forward to meet him
at Compiegne. Mademoiselle had her hair curled for the occasion, and
was bantered by the regent gently upon the pains she had taken to
please her suitor. "Those who have had admirers themselves understand
such things," replied her royal highness tartly, referring to the
foibles of her majesty's youth.

The royal personages met within a league of Compiegne and alighted
from the carriages. Charles saluted their majesties, and then
Mademoiselle. "I thought him much improved in appearance since he left
France. If his wit had seemed to correspond to his person, he might
perhaps have pleased me; but when the king questioned him in the
carriage concerning the dogs and horses of the Prince of Orange and
the hunting in that country he replied in French. The queen spoke to
him of his own affairs, and he made no reply; and being questioned
several times about grave matters which greatly concerned himself, he
declined answering on the plea of not being able to speak our
language.

  "I confess that from that moment I resolved not to consent to this
  marriage, having conceived a very poor opinion of a king who at his
  age could be so ignorant of his affairs. Not that I could not
  recognize my own blood by the sign, for the Bourbons are beings
  greatly devoted to trifles and not much to solid matters; perhaps
  myself as well as the rest, being Bourbon on both sides of the
  house. Soon after we arrived, dinner was served. He eat no ortolans,
  and threw himself upon a huge piece of beef and a shoulder of
  mutton, as if there had been nothing else on the table. His taste
  did not seem to me very delicate, and I felt ashamed that he should
  show so much less in this, than he had displayed in thinking of me.
  After dinner the queen aroused herself and left me with him: he sat
  there a quarter of an hour without uttering a syllable: I should
  like to believe that his silence proceeded from respect rather than
  from absence of passion. I confess frankly that in this interview I
  wished he would show less (respect). Feeling rather bored, I called
  M. de Comminges to be third party and make him speak; in which he
  fortunately succeeded. M. de la Riviere said to me: 'He looked at
  you all dinner time, and is still looking at you incessantly.' I
  answered, 'He will look a long time without attracting me if he does
  not speak.' He replied, 'Ah! you are concealing the charming things
  he has said to you.' 'Not at all,' said I. 'Come near me when he is
  devoting himself, and you will see how he sets about it.' The queen
  arose; I approached him, and, to make him speak, I asked after
  several persons of his suite whom I had seen; all which he answered,
  but _point de douceurs_. The time came for him to go; we all went in
  a carriage to escort him to the middle of the forest, where we
  alighted, as we had done on his arrival. He took leave of the king
  and came to me {366} with Germin (Lord Jermyn), saying: 'I believe
  that M. Germin, who speaks better than I do, has explained to you my
  wishes and intentions; I am your very obedient servant.' I replied
  that I was his very obedient servant, Germin made me a great many
  compliments, and then the king bowed and left me."

After the battle of Worcester, Charles II. reappeared in Paris and
made a third trial for his cousin's hand. "I thought him very well
made and decidedly more pleasing than before his departure, though his
hair was short and his beard long, two things that change people very
much. He spoke French very well." All went smoothly for some time:
Mademoiselle received from her royal suitor all the douceurs for which
she had formerly listened in vain; and frequent assemblies at her
rooms made them very intimate. But her will was too vacillating to
allow of her coming to any definite decision, and Charles was at
length wearied into giving marked evidence of his displeasure. "The
first time I saw the queen after my interview with Germin, she
showered reproaches upon me. When her son entered (he had always been
accustomed to take a seat in my presence), they brought forward a
great chair in which he seated himself. I suppose he thought to make
me very angry, but I did not care in the least." Indeed, it would have
been an ingenious tormentor who had found a vulnerable spot in
Mademoiselles vanity.

As Queen of England, Louise de Bourbon would have found room for the
legitimate exercise of her best faculties. As an unmarried princess of
immense wealth, she became the tool of men who did not scruple to use
her courage, magnanimity, and energy for their own ends, and requite
her generosity with neglect. Let us follow her adventures in the days
of the second Fronde, and see to what exertions a love of bustle and
notoriety could urge a princess accustomed to seek her own ease in all
things.

The first Fronde took place in 1648, and was directed by the coadjutor
archbishop of Paris, Monsieur M. de Retz, who acted under the
influence of two motives: a desire to supplant Mazarin, and rule
France himself; and an enthusiasm for constitutional liberty. Our
space being limited, we will not pause to reconcile these two
aspirations. The court left Paris by night for St. Germain.
Mademoiselle accompanied the queen, and made herself useful as a
medium of communication with the populace of Paris, who loved her for
being a native of their city. She describe the royal destitution with
graphic frivolity, and is exceedingly merry over this siege, in which
the besiegers starved for want of the luxuries they had left behind
them in the beleaguered city.

In the second Fronde, which broke out about two years later
(1650-1652), the position of affairs is altered. M. de Retz appears in
the character of mediator, and Mademoiselle casts her lot with the
rebels.  The princes of the house of Conde seize the opportunity to
avenge insults offered to them by Mazarin, and Gaston d'Orleans joins
the Frondeurs--perhaps in order to avoid the trouble of leaving Paris.

Skilful writers have left accounts so voluminous of those troubled
times, that they rise before us rather in a series of living pictures
than as historical records. That midnight conference in the oratory,
between fair, queenly Anne of Austria and the little dark, misshapen
coadjutor;  Mazarin threatening Conde; and he, with curled lip and
reverential mockery, leaving the ministerial presence with the words,
"Farewell, Mars!"--the quelled populace, streaming hour after hour
through the king's bedchamber, while his mother's beautiful hand holds
back the velvet hangings, that each one may look upon the sleeping boy
and know that he has not fled from Paris--all is before us as if it
{367} happened yesterday. The chief actors with their talents and
foibles are better known to us than to their contemporaries; and the
French nation is today as it was then--ready to be won over by any
clever bit of scenic effects.

Mademoiselle and Conde, who had hitherto been sworn foes, came to a
formal reconciliation in 1651, and being bound together by their
detestation of Mazarin, welcomed the outbreak of the second Fronde.
Anne of Austria declined the company of her niece on leaving Paris,
and she was thus left to the flattery of those who well understood the
right use of her folly and her strength.

The golden moment of her career arrived. Orleans must be secured to
the Frondeurs, or Conde, coming from Guyenne, would find the line of
the Loire cut and the enemy master of the position. Monsieur was firm
upon two points: that he would not leave Paris himself, and that his
private troops should occupy the position best fitted to protect him
if the royal army should attack Paris. His daughter, who had been
longing for an opportunity to distinguish herself, offered to go to
Orleans in place of the duke, and on Monday, March 25th, 1652, left
Paris amid the benedictions of the people. A contemporary MS. journal
says: "About noon Mademoiselle's carriages assembled in the court of
the Orleans palace, ready for the campaign; she wore a gray habit
covered with gold, to go to Orleans. She left at three o'clock,
accompanied by the Duke de Rohan, Madame de Breante, Countess de
Fiesque, and Madame de Frontenac." Monsieur sneered at the project,
and said her chivalry would not be worth much without the common sense
of Mesdames de Fiesque and Frontenac--her _marechales de camp_, as
they were called between jest and earnest.

Upon the plains of Beauce the young amazon appeared before the troops
on horseback, and was received with enthusiasm. "From that time," she
says, "I began to give my orders;" and a little later at Toury, where
she was joyfully welcomed by a crowd of officers: "they declared that
a council of war must be held in my presence. . . .  That I must
accustom myself to listening to matters of business and war; for
henceforth nothing would be done except by my orders."

Arrived before Orleans, Mademoiselle found closed gates and small
disposition to grant admittance. The unfortunate city government,
pressed on one side by Frondeurs and on the other by royalists, asked
only leave to remain neutral. The rebel army had been left at some
distance from Orleans for fear of alarming its inhabitants, and _M. le
gouverneur_, learning that the attacking party was a lady, sent out a
tribute of confectionery, "which seemed to me amusing," remarks
Mademoiselle.

At last, tired of waiting upon the governors indecision, her royal
highness went out with her ladies for a walk, much against the
judgment of her advisers--or ministers, as she called them. The
rampart was edged with people, who cried, on seeing her, "Long live
the king and princes, and down with Mazarin!" And she answered, "Go to
the Hotel de Ville and make them open the gates;" with other
exhortations of the same kind, occasionally mingled with threats, "to
see if menaces would move them more than friendship."

Now it so happened that before her departure from Paris, M. le Marquis
do Vilaine, a noted astrologer, had drawn the princess into Madame's
private room, and imparted to her the following prophecy: "All that
you shall undertake between Wednesday noon, March 27th, and Friday
will succeed; and you shall even at that time accomplish extraordinary
things." This prediction was in her pocket, and anxiously as she
disclaims all faith in it, we may believe that it encouraged her to
make efforts which gave no apparent promise of success. When, toward
evening, she stood outside the {368} Porte Brulee, did not M. de
Vilaine's horoscope rise in her estimation? The river was crossed and
the bank ascended by the aid of some chivalrous boatmen, an improvised
bridge of boats, and a little more scrambling than would seem
consistent with royal dignity. "I climbed like a cat, grasping at
brambles and thorns, and springing over hedges without hurting myself
in the least. * * Madame de Breante, who is the most cowardly creature
in the world, began to cry out at me, and at every one who followed my
steps; making great sport for me." Outside the gate, a group of
bargemen worked under Mademoiselle's inspiriting direction; inside
were citizens, urged on by the Count de Gramont, to tear down the
planks; while the guards looked on in armed neutrality. When the two
middle planks were torn off from the transverse iron bars, Gramont
signed to the princess to come forward. "As there was a great deal of
rubbish, a footman took me up and passed me through the hole, where no
sooner did my head appear than they began to beat the drums. I gave my
hand to the captain and said: 'You will be glad to be able to boast
that you let me in.' Cries of 'Long live the king and princess, and
down with Mazarin!' were redoubled. Two men took me and placed me in a
wooden chair. I don't know whether I sat in the chair or on the arms,
the rapture of my delight set me so completely beside myself. Every
one kissed my hands, and I was ready to die with laughter to find
myself in such a position." And so the city was taken, and
Mademoiselle earned the title of Maid of Orleans, all in an
afternoon's frolic. If she thought to retain command of Paris in a
fashion so amusing, the battle of Porte Saint Antoine must have
undeceived her.

The heroine was received with rapture on her return to Paris. She was
assured by Conde that the wish of his heart was to see her queen of
France, and that no treaty should be concluded without especial
consideration for her. No one can be more uninteresting than her royal
highness when elated by success, we must confess; but an hour of trial
was approaching that should develop for the first and last time in her
life, truly grand and heroic qualities. Until the 2d of July, 1652,
Mademoiselle had given no signs of feminine feeling except by
exhibiting those foibles which are popularly supposed to be especially
characteristic of women. But on that day, as she hurried through the
streets of Paris, carrying hope to every one she met--consoling poor
Guitant, shot through the lungs, pausing to speak a word of comfort to
the wretched Rochefoucauld, and putting new heart into the great Conde
himself, we recognize sympathies worthy of a better development than
they ever received. During a pause in the battle M. le Prince came to
her in a pitiable condition, covered with dust and blood, his hair
tangled and his cuirass dented with blows. Giving is naked sword to an
equerry, he flung himself down upon a seat and burst into tears
"Forgive my emotion," he exclaimed; "you see a desperate man before
you. I have lost all my friends; Nemours, La Rochefoucauld and
Clinchamp are mortally wounded."

Mademoiselle was able to assure him that these reports were greatly
exaggerated, and Conde, restored to himself, sprang upon a fresh horse
and galloped off to his post. The battle was at its height. Paris had
simultaneously attacked at the Porte Saint-Denis and the Faubourg
Saint-Antoine. Inquiring the whereabouts of Turenne, M. le Prince
rushed to the faubourg, knowing that where the marshal commanded there
must Paris be most in peril. Soon came the tidings that the barricade
of Piepus had been forced. At the head of a hundred musketeers he
threw himself upon the barricade, and drove the enemy back in its own
dust. Never had the conqueror been greater than on that useless,
terrible 2d of July.

{369}

The next meeting between Mademoiselle and Conde was full of triumph.
They parted, she to betake herself to the towers of the Bastile, he to
the belfry of Saint-Antoine. Toward Bagnolet in the valley the
princess saw the king's troops gathering for a fresh attack. Having
communicated with Conde through a page, she left the Bastile, giving
stringent orders that, in case of necessity, its cannon should be
turned upon the royal army; and returned to her post near the gate to
invigorate the soldiers with wine and brave words.

There was indeed need for encouragement. Frondeurs were falling back
in dire extremity--royalists pressing forward, hopeful, and
strengthened with reinforcements. The hours of the Fronde seemed
numbered--when heights of the Bastile blazed forth a flash of light;
the cannon thundered out in quick succession--the royal army paused,
reeled, and retreated in amazement. Mademoiselle had saved the day,
and "killed her royal husband," as Mazarin expressed it. Henceforth
she was to be more than ever an object of distrust to the queen and
minister. But though this victory lent a dignity to the last days of
the Fronde, there was no principle of stability in the party. Weak
policy, quarrels, treachery on their side--opposed to them, Mazarin,
whose keen perception told him that temporary withdrawal from the
ministry would insured unlimited power in the future; and Turenne,
with double the forces of Conde,--nothing was fairly matched except
the courage of the two parties.

The Fronde came to an abrupt end, and every one was left to make his
own terms. Mademoiselle had shown disinterestedness, courage, and
humanity worthy of a better cause. The fruits which she reaped were a
notice to leave Tuileries, and the refusal on her cowardly father's
part to protect one whom the king had condemned. There appear to have
been about eight years and a half enforced banishment from court,
which she spent on her numerous estates, amusing herself with writing
romances, portraits (then in vogue) and her Memoires, which she
continued until within a few years of her death. M. Sainte-Beuve tells
us that the style of her imagination belongs rather to the close of
Louis XIII.'s reign, and to the Hotel Rambouillet, than to the poorer
literary period of Louis XIV.

And now, having given a faint delineation of Mademoiselle during her
prosperous and feted youth, and during the days of the Fronde, which
we are inclined to regard as the period at which she gave most
evidence of kinship with her grandfather, the great Henry; we pass on
to a time when fortune ceased to favor her, and the world began to
hustle her about, as roughly as it does common mortals. La Grande
Mademoiselle, who had hitherto looked upon human griefs and passions
as upon a brilliant theatrical spectacle, was destined at last to
leave the royal box, and figure on the stage herself for the diversion
of her fellow creatures. An amusing afterpiece this exhibition seemed
to her contemporaries; but to us, who have not suffered from her airs
of superiority, there is a certain pathos in this genuine devotion
lavished upon the wrong object at an age when such blindness is simply
absurd. That heart of adamant which had looked above kings and princes
to covet the imperial crown, fell prostrate in the dust before a
colonel of dragoons, a member of the royal household. Alas for pride
of race!

Mademoiselle was forty-three years old when the conviction seized her
that it would be well to marry, that M. Lauzun was the most attractive
person in existence, and that for once it would be pleasant to receive
the love of some one worth loving. That M. Lauzun admired her seemed
evident, but how to give an opportunity for expression to one whose
sense of reverential duty always kept him at a distance?

One day they had an interview in the embrasure of a window, the first
of many similar ones, in which she consulted him about her proposed
alliance {370} with Prince Charles of Lorraine. The tactics of our
modest suitor are worthy of all praise. "By his proud bearing he
seemed to me like the emperor of the world," writes Mademoiselle,
whose circumstantial account must be pressed into few words. "Why
should she marry," he reasoned, "since she had already everything that
could embellish life? The position of queen or empress was little more
exalted than her own, and would be encumbered with burthensome duties.
True, in France she could raise some one to her own rank, and unite
with him in untiring devotion to the king, who must ever be her first
object in life. It was easy to build a castle in the air, but how to
find a companion worthy to share it with her, when no such being
existed? A woman of forty-three had three resources: a convent, a life
of strict retirement apart from court and city, and finally marriage.
Marriage would insure liberty to enjoy the world at any age, but it
might be at the cost of her happiness." Hints only plunged him into
reverential silence. At last the secret was revealed by writing; then
comes incredulity met by protestations, and finally amazed conviction.
"What! would you marry your cousin's servant? for nothing in the world
would make me leave my post. I love the king too well, I am too much
attached to my position by inclination, to leave it even for the honor
you would confer upon me." And when she assured him that his devotion
to the king only endeared him the more to her (for loyalty appears to
have been the mainspring of their attachment), he answered: "I am not
a prince; a nobleman I am assuredly, but that will not suffice for
you;" and she replies, "I am content; you are all that would become
the greatest lord in the kingdom, and wealth and dignities are mine to
bestow upon you," etc., etc, etc.

The story is well known. Louis XIV., after much hesitation, gave his
consent to the marriage. Mademoiselle was to confer great wealth upon
Lauzun, together with the sovereignty of Dombes, the duchy of
Montpensier, and the county d'Eu; always with the agreement that he
should not resign his post at court, but unite with her in exclusive
devotion to the king.

The night before the wedding day Mademoiselle was summoned to his
majesty's presence, with directions to pass directly to his room
through the in _garde-robe_. '"This precaution not a good omen. Madame
de Nogent remained in the carriage. While I was in the _garde-robe_
Rochefort entered and said, 'Wait a moment.' I saw saw that some one
was introduced into the king's room whom I was not intended to see.
Then he said 'Enter,' and the door was closed behind me. The king was
alone, and looked unhappy and agitated. He said, 'I am in despair at
what I have to tell you. I am told that the world says I have
sacrificed you in order to make Monsieur de Lauzun's fortune. This
will injure me in the eyes of foreign powers, and I ought not to allow
the affair to proceed. You have good reason to complain of me; beat me
if you like, for there is no degree of anger I will not submit to, or
do not deserve.' 'Ah!' I exclaimed, 'who do you mean, sire? it is too
cruel! but whatever you do to me, I will not fail in the respect due
to you. It is to strongly implanted in my heart, and has been too well
nourished by Monsieur de Lauzun, who would have given me these
feelings if I had not already been actuated by them, for no one can
love him without acquiring them,' I threw myself at his feet, saying:
'Sire, it would be kinder to kill me outright than to place me in this
position. When I told your majesty of the affair, if you had bade me
forgot it. I would have done so, but think how I shall appear in
breaking it off now that I have gone so far! What will become of me?
Where is Monsieur de Lauzun?' 'Do not be uneasy; nothing will happen
to him.' 'Ah! sire, I must fear everything {371} for him and for
myself, now that our enemies have prevailed over the kindness you felt
toward him.'

"He threw himself on his knees when I knelt, and embraced me. We
remained thus three-quarters of an hour, his cheek pressed to mine; he
wept as bitterly as I did: 'Oh why did you give time for these
reflections? Why did you not hasten matters?' 'Alas! sire, who would
have doubted your majesty's word? You never failed any one before, and
you begin now with me and Monsieur de Lauzun. I shall die, and I shall
be glad to die. I never loved anything before in all my life, and I
love, and love passionately, the best and noblest man in your kingdom.
The joy and delight of my life was in elevating him. I had thought to
pass the rest of my days so happily with him, honoring and loving you
as much as I do him. You gave him to me, and now you take him away,
and it is like tearing out my heart. This shall not make me love you
less, but it makes my grief the more cruel that it comes to me from
him whom I love best in the world."

Mademoiselle's suffering in this scene was heightened by the fact that
a suppressed cough outside the door revealed to her the presence of an
unseen witness. She rightly suspected it to be the Prince de Conde,
and reproached the king with just indignation for subjecting her to
such a humiliation.

His majesty bore her reproaches very patiently, and dismissed her with
the assurance that further discussion would not alter his decision.
"He embraced me and led me to the door, where I found I don't know
whom. I went home as quickly as possible, and there _je criai des
hauts cris_."

Lauzun, sure of his hold upon her royal highness, and fearing to lose
ground with the king, yielded with admirable resignation to the royal
decree. His favor at court seemed for awhile greater than ever; but
suddenly, for reasons never made public, he was disgraced and sent to
the Castle of Pignerol. Mademoiselle spent the ten years of his
imprisonment in faithful efforts to procure his release, and purchased
it finally by an immense donation to the Duke du Maine, a son of
Madame de Montespan. It was a success bitterly to be deplored. Any one
more odious than Lauzun after his release, it would be difficult to
imagine. Peevish, grasping, slovenly, and ungrateful, he hung about
Mademoiselle's establishment; using the power which a private marriage
had undoubtedly given him with an insolence that turned her love to
disgust.

The spirit of a courtier alone remained to recall the Lauzun of former
days. When the princess announced to him the death of Marie Therese,
he cried: "'People deserve to be imprisoned who spread such
falsehoods; how dare they say such things of the queen?' . . . At last
they showed him the letters, and he had to agree that queens are
mortal like other people."

In 1684 Mademoiselle and Lauzun parted in mutual displeasure. She
rejected his efforts at conciliation, and the last entry in her
Memoires is the following: "M. de Lauzun was living as usual in
obscurity, but exciting notice, and often concerning matters which
annoyed me. When I returned from Eu in 1688, my people were dressed in
new liveries. One day, when I was walking in the park of----"

"Mademoiselle knew life late," says M. Sainte-Beuve; "but in the end
she know it well, and passed through every stage of experience. She
felt the slow suffering which wears out love in a heart, the contempt
and indignation that crush it, and reached at last that indifference
which finds no remedy or consolation except in God. It is a sad day
when we find that the being whom we have loved to adorn with every
perfection and load with every gift is _so poor a thing_. She had
years to meditate upon this bitter discovery. She died in March, 1693,
aged sixty-six years."

{372}

Lauzan, with characteristic insolence, appeared at the general in the
mourning of a widowed husband. The king sent the Duke of Saint-Aignan
to bid him withdraw. "At such a moment I cannot listen to the voice of
pride," was the reply; "I am absorbed by my grief, and could wish to
see the king more occupied with his own." He remained to the close of
the ceremony.

The magnificent obsequies were interrupted by a more serious
disturbance. An urn, in which part of the remains were carelessly
embalmed, exploded with a tremendous noise, frightening all the
assistants. It was said that not even death could come to Mademoiselle
without some ludicrous circumstance.

This princess began life with advantages such as fall to the lot of
few human beings. What did she leave behind her in the world? A
hospital and seminary under the charge of Sisters of Charity; a very
fair literary reputation, founded chiefly upon her Memoires, which,
though not elegant in style, are truthful, graphic, and clear; and a
character without spot or blemish, in an age when such characters were
rare. Her written confessions afford ample material for cutting
criticism, but it would be an unkindly task to turn her own artillery
upon herself.



PHYSICAL SCIENCE AND CHRISTIAN REVELATION.



BY REV. JAMES A. STOTHERT.


II.

The advance of science has thrown some light on a subject of extreme
difficulty and abstruseness: the relation of the qualities or
accidents of matter to its substance. It is a subject of extreme
difficulty, into which it seems not permitted to man to penetrate
beyond the surface; but in regard to which much ignorance and
misapprehension have been dispelled by the observations and deductions
of modern philosophers. There are certain external marks or notes by
which we recognize certain material things, as their form, their
color, their hardness or softness, etc. One thing we call wood,
another iron, a third wax, and so on. These external notes or marks by
which we distinguish bodies are called their qualities, accidents, or
properties. Underneath them there is the substance of the material
thing, of which we have no means whatever of knowing anything. What it
is that constitutes the difference between wood and iron, in their
substance, must remain for ever a secret to our senses. We can
perceive that one is harder, heavier, colder, then the other; but
these observations go no further than the external qualities of the
two bodies; regarding their absolute substance, or internal
constitution, we have no possible means of forming a judgment. For all
that we know, it may be the same in all bodies, or it may be as
various as the simple elements of matter, now limited by chemists to
about sixty, or it may be much more various. It is one of the
mysteries of matter which will probably never be disclosed to the eye
of man in this life.

Not only is the nature of material substance thus unknown to us,
except through the external qualities, or accidents, which represent
it; but we are informed by science that most of these qualities are
the result of circumstances wholly distinct from their subject. A
complete revolution in popular ideas has in part been achieved, in
regard {373} to the permanence and immutability of these qualities of
matter. Nothing seems more natural than to say that a red rose must be
always red, a violet always blue, or that the size, shape, etc., of
material bodies are inseparable from their existence. Yet Proteus
himself was not more various in his shapes, than are the violet and
the rose in the varieties of color of which they are so susceptible.
Color, in fact, has no existence at all in the material object which
we look at; it is a condition of the ray of light which enters our eye
after reflection from the object, or after passing through it. Some
objects absorb one or more parts of the three-fold visible ray of
white light, and transmit or reflect to our eye only what remains of
its constituent parts; some objects send the whole ray, undecomposed
to the eye, and we call them white; others absorb it altogether, and
they are said to be black. But all bodies, whatever their original
color, that is, whatever part of the white ray they send to the eye,
after absorbing the rest, may be made to appear of any color, by
viewing them under the influence of variously colored light; which
proves that their color exists not in themselves, but in the light
which falls upon them, and on which their substance acts in some
unknown way.

Sir John Herschel's testimony on this subject is very explicit.
"Nothing at first can seem a more rational, obvious, and
incontrovertible conclusion, then that the color of an object is an
inherent quality, like its weight, hardness, etc.; and to see the
object, and to see it of its own color, when nothing intervenes
between our eyes and it, are one and the same thing. Yet this is only
a prejudice; and that it is so is shown by bringing forward the same
sense of vision which led to its adoption, as evidence on the other
side; for when the differently colored prismatic rays are thrown, in a
dark room, in succession upon any object, whatever be the color we are
in the habit of calling its own, it will appear of the particular hue
of the light which falls upon it: a yellow paper, for instance, will
appear scarlet when illuminated by red rays; yellow, when by yellow;
green, by green; and blue, by blue rays; its own (so called) proper
color not in the least mixing with what it so exhibits."   [Footnote
115] In like manner, other qualities of matter have no absolute
existence, independent of circumstances. Twenty solid inches of sea
water, if subjected to a pressure equal to that at a distance of
twenty miles below the surface, would be reduced in volume to nineteen
inches.  [Footnote 116] A globe, an inch in diameter, consisting of
air of the ordinary density at the earth's surface, if it could be
removed into space one radius of the earth, say 4,000 miles, would
expand into a sphere exceeding in radius the orbit of Saturn, as Sir
Isaac Newton has calculated. Hence the tail of a great comet, such as
that observed in 1843, and which extended from its nucleus 200
millions of miles,  [Footnote 117] may, for aught we know, consist
only of a very few pounds or even ounces of matter, expanded to a
degree of tenuity to our minds almost inconceivable.  [Footnote 118]
The same agent, heat, modifies the extension and form of matter in
totally opposite ways; making clay contract and lose in volume, while
expanding water, and still more largely air. Extension, or form,
therefore, is subject to great modification by change of
circumstances; nor is weight less so. A pound weight of matter at the
earth's equator weighs heavier at the poles; or, which is the same
thing, a pendulum oscillates faster at the poles than at the equator.
If removed to the planet Mars or Mercury, a pound of matter would lose
half its weight; if to the surface of Jupiter, it would weigh nearly
three times heavier.

  [Footnote 115: Discourse, etc. Sec.71.]

  [Footnote 116: Somerville's Physical Geography, I., chap. xvi. p.
  318.]

  [Footnote 117: Hind's Comets, p. 22.]

  [Footnote 118: Herschel's Outlines of Astronomy, chap. xi. Sec.559, note.]

{374}

If there is one quality more than another characteristic of solid
rock, it is the immobility of its parts; as mobility is a distinctive
feature of water and vapor. Yet experiments in crystallization have
demonstrated the existence of mobility even in solid bodies, in an
unimaginable degree. Mrs. Somerville remarks, that "we are led, from
the mobility of fluids, to expect great changes in the relative
position of their molecules, which must be in perpetual motion, even
in the stillest water and the calmest air; but we are not prepared to
find motion to such an extent in the interior of solids. That their
particles are brought nearer by cold and pressure, or removed further
from one another by heat, might be expected; but it could not have
been anticipated that their relative positions could be so entirely
changed as to alter their mode of aggregation. It follows from the low
temperature at which these changes are effected, that there is
probably no position of inorganic matter that is not in a state of
relative motion."  [Footnote 119] And elsewhere, in her Physical
Geography, the same high authority assures us that "nothing can be
more certain than that the minute particles of matter are constantly
in motion, from the action of heat, mutual attraction, and
electricity. Prismatic crystals of salts of zinc are changed in a few
seconds into crystals of a totally different form by the heat of the
sun; casts of shells are found in rocks, from which the animal matter
has been removed and its place supplied by mineral; and the
excavations made in rocks diminish sensibly in size in a short time if
the rock the soft, and in a longer time when it is hard; circumstances
which show an intestine motion of the particles, not only in their
relative positions, but in space, which there is every reason to
believe is owing to electricity; a power which, if not the sole agent,
must, at least, have cooperated essentially in the formation and
filling of mineral veins."   [Footnote 120]

  [Footnote 119: Connection of Phys. Sciences, Sec. 14, p. 125.]

  [Footnote 120: Phys. Geog. I, ch. xv. pp. 288, 289.]



In the language of the older treatise on science, glass is said to be
transparent: gold, coal, etc., opaque, that is, incapable of
transmitting light. But there is no substance known to modern
discovery which, if sufficiently attenuated, is not capable of being
seen through. Opacity, therefore, has no real existence as a quality
of matter; it depends only on condition and circumstances. Hardness or
softness in like manner, are easily separable from the substance of
matter. Clay in its natural state is soft, apply heat to it and it
becomes hard; wax is naturally hard, but becomes soft and ductile when
warmed. Thus our knowledge of the internal constitution of material
substance, through the medium of its external qualities, is in the
highest degree uncertain, variable, and often erroneous. For there is
not one of those external notes or Marx, which we call qualities,
which cannot be changed or modified in such a way as seriously to
derange the accuracy of our observations. Enough of accuracy has been
secured for the purposes of our daily life; but, like the senses, our
knowledge of the relation of quality to substance was never intended
to carry us through the boneless field of knowledge, or enable us to
pronounce with certainty regarding the nature, the difference, or the
identity of substance, merely from the indications given us by its
apparent qualities. These are truly accidents; things which do not
affect the essence of matter; but connected with it in an evanescent
way, liable to sudden change, and totally baffling our attempts to
establish any certain criterion of substance by means of our
observations on its qualities.

Recent observations in chemistry have still further demonstrated the
impossibility of arriving at any knowledge of the internal structure
of matter from its appearances. The delicate tests invented by
chemists, in order to detect the difference between substances which
appear to every human sense the same, though they effect their purpose
with marvelous ingenuity, yet fail in indicating the ultimate reason
for their efficiency.

{375}

Thus syrup extracted from the sugar-cane, or from plants yielding
similar sugar, looks in every respect the same as that extracted from
the juice of the grape. The refinements of modern chemistry, however,
have pointed out several tests to distinguish one from the other.
[Footnote 121] And in a beam of polarized light there is provided a
test as subtle as any contributed by the aid of chemistry. In the
instance of cane sugar, the plane of polarization revolves to the
right; in grape sugar, it revolves to the left. Of this subtle agent,
Mrs. Somerville remarks, when stating this interesting fact, that '"it
surpasses the power even of chemical analysis in giving certain and
direct evidence of the similarity or difference existing in the
molecular constitution of bodies, as well as of the permanency of that
constitution, or of the fluctuations to which it may be liable."
[Footnote 122] The same delicate test of polarization enables us to
distinguish reflected light,  such as the moon's, from the light which
issues from a self-luminous body, like Sirius. But in all these
instances, the ultimate rationale of its indications still remains
veiled in impenetrable darkness; and with it, any knowledge of the
internal substance of matter.

  [Footnote 121: Brande's Lectures on Organic Chemistry, p. 153.]was it

  [Footnote 122: Connexion of Physical Sciences, Sec. xxii, p. 214.]

It is, however, in the mysterious facts to which chemists have given
the names of Isomorphism, Isomerism, and Allotropism, that we perceive
the most direct and remarkable contribution of modern scientific
research to the defence of Catholic revelation. Chemistry enables us
to penetrate further than any other science into the secret operations
of Nature; and strange insight has been thus obtained into the
identity of substance under two or more external appearances; and of
the existence of two or more substances of distinct character under
identical appearances. A few words will not be idly devoted to a
description of these terms, and of the results associated with them.

Isomorphism expresses the phenomenon in crystallization established by
Gay Lussac and Mitscherlich, of different compounds assuming the same
crystalline form. The generally received law of this process had
hitherto been, that the same substances invariably crystallize in
forms belonging to one system, different substances, in forms
belonging to another. Cases had indeed been observed, before the
discovery of Isomorphism, in which the same element had been seen to
crystallize in two forms, belonging to different systems, not
geometrically connected. Sulphur, for instance, crystallizing from its
solution in the bisulphuret of carbon, assumes a geometrically
different crystalline form from sulphur when melted by heat, and
allowed to consolidate as it cools. But these and a few other similar
cases had been explained as depending on a different arrangement of
the particles, due most probably to a difference in the temperature
during the operation. They were not thought to interfere with the
general law of the same substance always assuming the same crystalline
form. The two eminent philosophers just mentioned ascertained beyond a
doubt that, in many instances, compound substances, in the process of
crystallizing, assume the same or a cognate form, though their
elements are totally different. Thus chloride of sodium (sea salt),
sulphate of alumina and potash (alum), and many other compound
substances equally dissimilar, crystallize in the form of the cube and
its congeners. Other crystalline forms also are found to be common to
many differently constituted compounds. "To these groups of analogous
elements," says Professor Gregory, from whose work, On Inorganic
Chemistry, we have abridged this account, "the name of Isomorphous
groups has been given, as there is every reason to believe that as
elements they possess the same form; and the phenomena of identical
form in compounds of different but analogous composition, have
received the name of Isomorphism. Two elements {376} are said to be
isomorphous, which either crystallize in the same form, or may be
substituted for each other in their compounds, equivalent for
equivalent (the other elements remaining unchanged), without affecting
the form of the compound. We can hardly doubt that not only the salt,
but the acids are really isomorphous, and would be found so if we
could obtain them all in crystals; and we have the same reason to
conclude that the elements of these acids are also isomorphous; that
arsenic and phosphorus, sulphur and selenium, for example, crystallize
in the same form."   [Footnote 123]

  [Footnote 123: Inorganic Chemistry, Ed. 1853; pp. 38 _et seq_. ]

The converse of this phenomenon is also included among the discoveries
of modern science; the same substance is sometimes observed to
crystallize in two different forms not geometrically allied; and the
occurrence of this new exception to the received law of
crystallization is called Dimorphism.

Isomerism is the term employed to represent another exceptional class
of facts, observed by later chemists to interfere with the general
rule, that analogy or similarity of composition implies analogy in
form and external properties. Two or more compounds, formed of the
same element, in the same relative proportions, and having, therefore,
the same composition in 100 parts, are often found entirely distinct
and unlike in all their properties. Such bodies are called Isomeric.
"The discovery of Isomerism," says the same eminent chemist, "however
unexpected, is entirely consistent with the atomic theory, of which it
is merely a special case. Isomerism is of very frequent occurrence
among organic compounds, owing, no doubt, to their unusually large
atomic weights, since the numerous atoms of the elements afford much
scope for isomeric modifications; and, doubtless, this principle plays
an important part in the processes of organic life and growth, as well
as in decay."   [Footnote 124]

  [Footnote 124: Ib. p. 43, 44.]

More remarkable than all of these exceptions to hitherto established
laws is the discovery of the existence of simple elements under
totally dissimilar forms. Thus sulphur exists under three distinct and
incompatible forms, or modifications, called Allotropic. Carbon
likewise in three; the diamond, which is crystallized in octohedrons,
and is limpid and transparent; graphite, which is black, opaque, and
crystallized in prisms; and common charcoal, lamp-black, etc., which
is black and quite amorphous. Phosphorus has two allotropic forms: one
crystallized, white and transparent, and easily set on fire; the
other, deep reddish-brown, amorphous, and inflamed with much less
ease. Each of these elementary bodies thus assumes appearances as
dissimilar as if they were totally different bodies, possessed of a
physical character quite unlike each other. Well may Professor
Gregory, after this summary of the subject, add: "the occurrence of
such marked differences in the properties of elementary bodies is very
remarkable, and of great interest in reference to the molecular
constitution of matter; but the subject has not yet been fully
investigated."  [Footnote 125]

  [Footnote 125: Inorg. Chemistry, pp. 44, 45.]

The speculations of another very distinguished chemist, Professor
Faraday, in this field of recent observation, are worthy of place in
this collective testimony of modern science, to the imperfect
acquaintance with the ultimate constitution of material substance
attainable by any amount of study of its external properties or
appearances. "There was a time," says this eminent philosopher, "and
that not long ago, when it was held among the fundamental doctrines of
chemistry, that the same body always manifested the same chemical
qualities; excepting only such variations as might be due to the three
conditions of solid, liquid, and gas. This was held to be a canon of
chemical philosophy, as distinguished from alchemy; and a belief in
the possibility of transmutation was held to be impossible, because at
variance {377} with this fundamental tenet. But we are now conversant
with many examples to the contrary; and, strange to say, no less than
four of the non-metallic elements, namely, oxygen, sulphur,
phosphoros, and carbon, are subject to this modification. The train of
speculation which this contemplation awakens within us is
extraordinary. If the condition of allotropism were alone confined to
compound bodies, that is to say, to bodies made up of two or more
elements, we might easily frame a plausible hypothesis to account for
it; we might assume that some variation had taken place in the
arrangements of their particles. But when a simple body, such as
oxygen, is concerned, this kind of hypothesis is no longer open to us;
we have only one kind of particle to deal with; and the theory of
altered position is no longer applicable. In short, it does not seem
possible to imagine a rational hypothesis to explain the condition of
allotropism as regards simple bodies. We can only accept it as a fact,
not to be doubted, and add the discovery to that long list of truths
which start up in the field of every science, in opposition to our
most cherished theories and long received convictions."  [Footnote
126]

  [Footnote 126: Lectures on Non-Metallic Elements, pp. 115, 116.]

Those persons who have resisted the evidence of Catholic revelation on
the _prima facie_ ground that sound philosophy and a knowledge of the
physical phenomena of nature are directly opposed to some of its
doctrines, must begin, we should think, to feel their position a
little less impregnable than it seemed before such sentiments as these
were warranted by the actually established facts of modern science.
With such evidence of its recent fruits, we may be well satisfied to
watch with interest and congratulation the progress of philosophical
inquiry conducted in such a spirit; not so much for our own sakes, to
whom, indeed, no analogies afforded by any human science could add
anything in the way of confirmation to what we have been taught by
divine testimony, transmitted through the church of Christ to our
remote age; but for the sake of the erring and the doubting among the
intellectual minds of our fellow-countrymen; with the hope that their
attention might be arrested and turned in the direction plainly enough
indicated by such analogies. With one more extract, we must take leave
of Professor Faraday's highly interesting volume; only begging as many
of our readers as are interested in such pursuits to purchase it, and
study it for themselves. After pointing out the difference between
common and allotropic phosphorus, he continues: "We can scarcely
imagine to ourselves a more complete opposition of qualities than is
here presented in these two conditions of phosphorus; an opposition
not limited by merely physical manifestations of density or
crystallographic form, but recognizable through all the phases of
solution, thermal demeanor, and physiological effect The metamorphosis
has, in fact, been so complete, that we can only demonstrate the
allotropical substance _to be_ phosphorus, by reducing it to its
original state, and subjecting it to ordinary tests. If the forces
determining its constitution had been so balanced that the power of
reduction were denied to us, then the substance we now call
_allotropic phosphorus_ must necessarily, according to the strictest
propriety of logic, have been admitted to be not phosphorus, but some
other body. It is impossible, rationally, to deny that such permanent
incontrovertibility may not lie within the power of natural laws to
effect. That we are not aware of such an example, cannot be accepted
as a proof of its non-existence; and analogy, the guidance to which we
refer when direct testimony fails, is in favor of the affirmative."
[Footnote 127] From the great powers of analysis at the command of
this distinguished physicist, directed as much by the courage as by
the wisdom and the candid spirit of true philosophy, it is impossible
to say {378} what further insight into the constitution of matter may
not hereafter be obtained. Such an instance is surely of itself a full
justification of our sanguine hopes for the future of science in its
relation to what has been revealed by eternal and unchanging truth.

  [Footnote 127:  Lectures, etc., pp.42, 43.]

Rather by way of indication than of summary of the reflections
suggested by these inquiries, we would ask, how is it that the almost
illimitable extension of gross material elements should be accepted
without hesitation, while the possibility of the spiritual and
glorified body of the Lord existing, without division or
multiplication of itself, in every Catholic tabernacle, and also in
heaven, is regarded as so wildly impossible, and even monstrous a
conception, as to be scouted at the bare mention of it? When
philosophy expects us to believe that black, crumbling charcoal, and
the hard, shining diamond, are one and the same simple substance, why
should it be thought in the nature of things so incredible as at once
to preclude all further examination of the evidence on which it rests,
that the substance of the Child of Bethlehem, of the risen and
ascended Lord, and of the most holy eucharist, are one and the same.
We are far from saying that the mode of existence is the same in all
these instances; we only claim for revelation what is conceded to
science; that appearances should not be held, _in limine,_ conclusive
of the question, nor be allowed to outweigh or prejudice other
evidence; for in every province of the universe of knowledge things
are not what they seem. If what exists, or may exist, is to be limited
by what human organs of sense can perceive, the boundaries of
knowledge shrink into the narrowest compass: the eye and ear of an
infant are enthroned as the judges of the constitution of nature;
discovery and the progress of science are no more, or would never have
been; mankind would yet be sunk in the imbecility of its primitive
ignorance.



III.

Next to the fallacious testimony of the human senses, and the hidden
nature of material substance, the subtle influences at work in the
physical world seem very remarkably to indicate some curious analogies
between the constitution of matter in its finer forms, and the nature
of spiritual agencies. Recent analysis of the solar beam, for
instance, has revealed rays hitherto unknown, because invisible to the
acutest vision unaided by the appliances of science, and for long
concealed even from its piercing scrutiny, but yielding at last to the
refinements of modern investigation. These invisible rays have been
proved to exercise most important functions in nature; in the
germination and vegetation of plants, and other widely multiplied
physical processes. There are few who have not heard much of the
magnetic and electric currents which permeate every portion of the
surface of the globe and its surrounding atmosphere; but we imagine
that not so many are aware of the powerful influence which they
possess in the economy of our planet. "There is strong presumptive
evidence," says Mrs. Somerville, "of the influence of the electric and
magnetic currents on the formation and direction of the mountain
masses and mineral veins; but their slow persevering action on the
ultimate atoms of matter has been placed beyond a doubt by the
formation of rubies, and other gems, as well as various other mineral
substances by voltaic electricity."  [Footnote 128] And, in another
place, in the same instructive work, she remarks, that "it would be
difficult to follow the rapid course of discovery through the
complicated mazes of magnetism and electricity; the action of the
electric current on the polarized sunbeam, one of the most beautiful
of modern discoveries, leading to relations hitherto unsuspected
between that power and the complex assemblage of visible and invisible
influences on solar light, by {379} one of which nature has recently
been made to paint her own likeness."  [Footnote 129] These
influences, for all their subtlety, have a real, appreciable
existence, and fulfil a definite and beneficent end. A curious example
of the subserviency of the invisible magnetic current to the wants of
men is mentioned by Humboldt as having occurred to himself, in one of
his voyages off the west coast of South-America. Bad weather had
prevailed for several days, so as to shut out all view of land, or of
the sun and stars. The crew were in expectation of making a particular
port on that coast: on consulting his dip-needle, the scientific
passenger discovered that the ship had passed the latitude of its
destined port; the ship's course was altered, and much delay and,
probable, danger avoided.  [Footnote 130] Nor are the agencies
destructive to human life less subtile or recondite. Various miasmata
of a pestilential character defy every refinement of chemical analysis
to detect the cause of their mischievous operation, or the difference
of their elementary constitution from that of pure and wholesome air.
The most universal, and, as far as our knowledge serves, the most
important of all physical influences, that of gravitation, is also the
subtlest and most occult; traversing the vast regions of space with
instantaneous speed, and pervading the remotest fields of the great
universe of matter; penetrating without sensible interval of time to
distances far beyond the utmost reach of human thought, with a force
which maintains the stars of heaven in their courses, and gives
stability to every known material system.

  [Footnote 128: Physical Geography, II., chap. xxii. pp. 92.]

  [Footnote 129: Physical Geography, II., xxxiii. pp. 400, 401.]

  [Footnote 130: Cosmos, I. 171; III. 139.]

If these occult agencies in the material world are recognized as
fulfilling their mission, for all their secrecy and subtlety, or
rather, by means of these very characteristics, why is the possibility
of a hidden yet efficient agency in the spiritual world denounced as a
heresy against common sense and sound philosophy? The physical system
of things has its great laboratory of decomposition and reconstruction
kept in operation by these unseen influences; it is indebted to them
for the maintenance of its existence. Science rejoices to measure them
by their admirable results, to detect their operations in their
sensible effects. Why must the sacramental system revealed in the
spiritual world be with equal justice refused its claim to an agency
hardly more subtle? Philosophers admit the truth of observations in
these occult natural agencies, and have no doubt of their real
existence; why do they so contemptuously regard the result of our
observations in those which are secret and spiritual, when our
observations are as numerous, and their evidence as good?



IV.

The whole question of the relation of space and time becomes one of
vast interest and importance, in connection with a common objection
made to the possibility of our holding communication with the saints
and angels in heaven, as Catholics are taught to believe they may.
Across a space of such unknown vastness, it is alleged that the idea
of transmitting a wish or a prayer is contrary to every principle of
philosophy. Now, assuming, what indeed has never been proved, that the
heaven of the blessed is as remote from our daily path as some
maintain it to be, and without entering here into the abstract
question as to whether the idea of space or of time is the older and
simpler, some considerations are suggested by the study of modern
scientific principles, which may throw light on the objection just
staled, and may help us to ascertain its real worth.

It is evident that time and space may be made a measure of each other.
The distance from one point in space to another may be expressed in so
many units of time, say a minute, an hour, or a day, required to
traverse the intervening distance at a given velocity. Hence, if
velocity of motion {380} from point to point be represented by the
simple formula of (Space/Time) we obtain two other formulas
representing; time and space, respectively, in terms of each other.

  Thus,  if   Velocity = Space/Time

  Then,   Time = Space/Velocity

  and   Space  =  Time X Velocity.  [Footnote 131]



    [Footnote 131: For example, call Velocity 40 miles and hour, and
    Time 10 hours; then Space = 40 X 10 = 400 miles; or call Space 400
    miles, Velocity being the same, then Time = 400/40 = 10 hours.]

There is a little instrument much valued by philosophical observers,
but of no great intricacy in itself, which is at once an unerring
measure of space and time; we mean a common pendulum oscillating
seconds in a given level, say of London, at a given level, say of the
sea, other conditions, as of the thermometer, etc., being the same.
This instrument, beating seconds, is an invariable measure of length;
in the latitude of London, for example, at the level of the sea, with
thermometer at 62 deg. Fahr., it is invariably 39.1393 inches long. And,
conversely, provide such an instrument of the length just mentioned,
and set it a-going; its oscillations will exactly measure out one
second of time. Further, as a measure of length, it enables us to
ascertain the weight of a cubic inch of water, in parts of a pound
troy, whence the imperial standards of weight and capacity are
derived. Hence a pendulum is a constant representative of space, in
its length; and of time, in its oscillation. At any point on the
surface of the globe, a rod of a certain given length will invariably,
in similar circumstances, beat seconds; and a rod, beating seconds as
it swings, will invariably measure a certain fixed length, according
to the latitude. Why it does so, does not enter into our arguments
now; it is enough that the fact is ascertained, and is one of the very
commonest application to practise. Every good house-clock is evidence
of it In the same town, for instance, the seconds' pendulums of all
regularly-going clocks are of equal length to the minute fraction of
an inch; and all pendulums, of the same length exactly, keep the same
time exactly. In other words, space is made a measure of time, and
time is a measure of space.

We said, just now, that space may be represented in terms of time, and
time in those of space, the rate of Velocity being given. London is
said to be ten hours from Edinburgh, when the transit is made at the
rate of forty miles an hour. "As long as it would take to go to
London," may be given as an expression equivalent to ten hours, at the
same rate of motion. But vary that rate, and the terms used instantly
represent very variable quantities. Ten hours from London, at the rate
of a pedestrian travelling his four miles an hour, represent an
insignificant distance of only forty miles; "as long as it would take
to go to London" now expresses a period of a hundred hours, or more
than four days. But take the wings of light, and instantly the
distance supposed, if expressed in terms of time, dwindles to a minute
portion of a second; even this is long, if you measure the space by
the flash transmitted along the electric wire. Leaving the
comparatively insignificant spaces on the surface of the globe for
those vaster distances which divide planet from planet and from the
sun, the time of 8 minutes 3.3 seconds, which the solar light takes to
travel from its source to our globe may be taken as an expression of
its distance from that luminary. Nay, there is a rate of velocity
surpassing all these, bridging over the vast span of Neptune's orbit,
for example, or the vaster diameter of a comet's path, in a unit of
time too minute for the subtlest human instruments or calculations to
appreciate. We mean the force or influence of gravitation, which,
ever since the first moment when the sun and the planets were created,
has been passing instantaneously from the centre of the solar system
to every part, {381} even the most distant, of his wide empire, and
back again from its furthest point to his centre.

Now, it is evident that if you undertake to express the distance of
sun from planet in terms of the time, at this rate of velocity, it is
reduced to nothing. The sun is as effectually present, for instance,
in his all-important gravitating influence, at every instant of time,
in the planet Neptune, nearly three thousand millions of miles away,
as the hand of the schoolboy is present at the end of his sling, while
he whirls it round his head, and retains the stone in its place by the
string. Cut the string, and the stone flies off; suspend for an
instant the influence, or force, or attraction, or whatever you please
to call it, which binds Neptune to the sun, and he flies off in a path
more eccentric than any comet's.

There are two ways of spanning distance: one by actual, bodily
transit; another by the transmission of an impulse or wave, propagated
and repeated along the space intervening, in some medium more or less
mobile or subtle. The planetary motions are good examples of the
actual translation of bodies through space: this earth of ours
sweeping along, in its orbit round the sun, at a rate of something
like nineteen miles in a second, or 68,000 miles in an hour, besides
its rotatory motion on its axis of 24,000 miles every day. The planet
Venus exceeds this velocity, travelling at the rate of 80,000 miles an
hour; while Mercury, in the same time, accomplishes 109,360 miles.
Even this inconceivable velocity is far surpassed by the comet of
1843, which, with a tail two millions of miles long, and a nucleus
apparently larger than our globe, swept round the sun, at its
perihelion, at the rate of 366 miles, or nearly the distance from
Edinburgh to London, in one second.  [Footnote 132]

  [Footnote 132: Outline of Astronomy, Sec.590, 593.]

Velocities of impulse exceed those of bodily translation; that is,
supposing we may class among examples of wave motion the transmission
of sound, light, electricity, and perhaps gravitation. Dr. Lardner
mentions his having, on one occasion, in company with Leverrier,
written a message by electric telegraph, at a distance of more than a
thousand miles, and at the rate of 19,500 words in an hour, or of 5.5
words in a second.  [Footnote 133] At a similar distance, and indeed
at a much greater, a steel bar may be made to vibrate fourteen
thousand miles in a second.   [Footnote 134] Such a velocity evidently
far surpasses the power of human comprehension. Even in regard to the
less rapid transmission of light, the eminent astronomer Bessel
candidly confesses that "the distance which light traverses in a year
is not more appreciable to us, than the distance which it traverses in
ten years. Therefore, every endeavor must fail to convey to the mind
any idea of a magnitude exceeding what is accessible on the earth."
[Footnote 135]

  [Footnote 133: Museum of Science and Art, part viii. p. 116.]

  [Footnote 134: Ib., Part ix. p. 201.]

  [Footnote 135: Quoted, Cosmos, iii. 85.]

Now, even supposing that we are acquainted with all the methods which
exist in nature for spanning vast distances, and if, as we have shown,
distance may be expressed in terms of the time taken to travel over
it, or transmit a communication across it, the thought forcibly
occurs. What is distance, if viewed apart from the means at disposal
for overpassing it? A friend in the next room is not nearer us than
another in the next continent, if in the same interval of time we can
communicate with either. To be sure, one of them we might see sooner
than the other, but sight is no necessary means of communicating; the
blind are forever debarred from it. Man can communicate with man, even
materially, without either sight or hearing; and far beyond the range
of either.

But who shall be bold enough to say that other and subtler methods of
communication may not exist in the material universe? or that the
world of spirit has none more vivid than those subtle currents which
permeate the world of matter? To a generation or two ago, the means of
transmitting intelligence, which are now quite familiar to us, would
have seemed fabulous; a little further back in the history of Europe,
their discovery might have involved the penalty due to witchcraft. If
the passage of a material impulse across the wide orbit of Neptune
unites him intimately at every moment with the sun, is there any
distance that can be said absolutely to present an impassable gulf to
the intercourse of spirit with spirit? Or, can it be said that some
such means of communication do not, and cannot exist, because human
senses do not perceive them, nor human intelligence comprehend them?
Transmission by impulse surpasses in velocity every known instance of
actual, bodily translation: why must what we yet know of the former be
fixed as the limit of what is possible? Why may there not be some
means of communication surpassing in swiftness the flash of the
lightning, or the influence of gravitation, as far as it exceeds the
sweep of the comet or the slow progress of the pedestrian? Why must it
be pronounced an idle dream, that we may hold one end of a chain of
impulses vibrating from earth to heaven, lying along the future track
of our emancipated and purified spirits?

And pursuing analogy one step further, it is no severe demand on the
imagination to conceive that the universal presence of God, which
embraces and interpenetrates the immensity of space, may be, to the
subtle and vivid impulses from spirit to spirit, what, in another
order of things, the elastic ether of the planetary and sidereal
spaces is to vibrations of material creation; that it may fulfil for
those similar functions of propagation and transmission. In him who is
everywhere, at every instant, and forever, intelligence may easily be
conceived to pass between the remotest points of space, with a speed
not slower than coexistence itself; for any him there is no passage or
motion either in time or space; he is the one indivisible Eternal,
here and now.

V.

We are forcibly struck, while referring to the discoveries of modern
science, with the very slender ground on which the mass even of
educated persons accept their most astonishing and improbable results.
How many persons of all those who talk, with much fluency and show of
knowledge on subjects of physical science, have tested, by their own
observation, the truth of one of the phenomena which they converse
about? How many persons, for instance, who tell us that light and heat
in the same ray have been separated, have actually proved it by
personal experiment, or even seen it proved by another? How many
persons are there at this moment in England and Scotland who have
verified by their own observation and calculation the size and figure
of the earth, or its distance from the sun and moon; not to mention
other more intricate problems in physics, of which they have no
personal knowledge whatever? The mass of mankind are content to
receive these things on sufficient testimony of men competent, or whom
they deem competent, to inform them on such subjects. Here, at least,
in the domain of science, there is no exaltation of private judgment,
no rebellion against scientific authority; and it is a wise and a just
arrangement that it should be so. There are not many men, in any age,
furnished with the intellectual outfit necessary for such
verifications; a lifetime would not be sufficient to enable one man to
accomplish them all. Sir John Herschel has the following admirable
remarks, which are very much to our present purpose. "What mere
assertion will make any one believe, that in one second of time, in
one beat of a pendulum of a clock, a ray of light travels over 192,000
Miles, and would therefore perform the tour {383} of the world in
about the same time that it requires to wink with our eyelids, and in
much less than a Swift runner occupies in taking a single stride? What
mortal can be made to believe, without demonstration, that the sun is
almost a million times larger than the earth? and that, although so
remote from us that a cannon ball shot directly toward it would be
twenty years in reaching it, yet it affects the earth by its
attraction in an appreciable instant of time? But what are these to
the astonishing truths which modern optical inquiries have disclosed,
which teach us that every point of a medium through which a ray of
light passes is affected with a succession of periodical movements,
regularly occurring at equal intervals, no less than five hunted
millions of millions of times in a single second? That it is by such
movements, communicated to the nerves of our eyes, that we see; nay,
more, that it is the frequency of their recurrence which affects us
with the sense of the diversity of color. That, for instance, in
acquiring the sensation of redness, our eyes are affected four hundred
and eighty-two millions of millions of times; of yellowness, five
hundred and forty-two millions of millions of times; and of violet,
seven hundred and seven millions of millions of times in a second.
These are nevertheless, conclusions to which any one may most
certainly arrive, who will only be at the trouble of examining the
chain of reasoning by which they have been obtained."

If Theology, or the science of God and his revealed will, is, as might
have been expected, not less, but more recondite than any other, as
its objects are vaster, more remote from human understanding, than
those of any other science; surely, on philosophical principles, it is
not unreasonable that authority should have its weight here, also, and
equal measure at least to be dealt to all. Yet the modern world is
agreed in ridiculing and denouncing the principle of authority in
religious matters, as the bane of human society; and in exalting
private judgment and opinion, as the Christian's only ultimate appeal
in the matter. Apply this principle of independence to any other
science, to any subject of human knowledge, or to any object of
intelligent inquiry; and a race of sciolists, pedants, and sceptics
would inevitably result. The authority of great names in science would
lose all its just honor; there would be no system, no progress in
observations; thousands of persons, incompetent to do more than deny
the conclusions of the learned and the able, would refuse their assent
to these, till the impossible time should arrive, when, by actual and
personal investigation, they should be pleased to pronounce judgment
on the accuracy of these conclusions; life would be consumed in
negation; mutual trust and deference to superior knowledge and
capacity would be annihilated. Whether in this incompatibility of
private judgment with its best interests, and even with its stability,
Revelation is very different from Science, we leave to the study of
our readers, and to their observation of the fine gradations of
independent judgment which conduct from Luther to Strauss; the former
of whom began by denying the pope, and the latter ended by impugning
the divinity of Jesus Christ.



VI.

The principle of authority and its correlative, subordination and
dependence, is represented, in a remarkable manner, in the
constitution of physical nature, especially in the province of
astronomy. It is a remark of Dr. Whewell in his Bridgewater Treatise,
[Footnote 136] "that the relations among the planets is uniformly, not
co-ordinate, but subordinate. Satellites are subject to the influence
of their primaries; primaries to that of the central sun; the central
sun itself to a higher and more distant centre; in a sublimer material
hierarchy, ascending in gradations of {384} immense numerical
magnitude; and thus while insuring the stability of the whole
planetary and stellar systems, ultimately, as every analogy teaches
us, making one grand centre of revolution and subordination, at a
point of space whose distance we cannot even imagine."

  [Footnote 136: Bohn's Edition, p. 175.]

In his remarks on the Third Law of Kepler, namely, that the squares of
the times of planetary revolution round the sun are proportional to
the cubes of their mean distances from that central luminary, Sir J.
Herschel has the following pertinent observations, "Of all the laws to
which induction from pure observation has ever conducted man, this
third law, as it is called, of Kepler, may justly be regarded as the
most remarkable, and the most pregnant with important consequences.
When we contemplate the constituents of the planetary system, from the
point of view which this relation affords us, it is no longer mere
analogy which strikes us--no longer a general resemblance among them,
as individuals independent of each other, and circulating about the
sun, each according to its own peculiar nature, and connected with it
by its own peculiar tie. The resemblance is now perceived to be a true
_family_ likeness; they are bound up in one chain--interwoven in one
web of mutual relation and harmonious agreement--subjected to one
pervading influence, which extends from the centre to the furthest
limits of that great system; of which all of them, the earth included,
must henceforth be regarded as members."  [Footnote 137 ]

  [Footnote 137: Outlines of Astronomy, chap. ix Sec.489.]

The remarks of the same great philosopher on the systems of double
stars, in a later part of his work on astronomy, bear still more
directly on the view we are proposing. "It is not with the revolutions
of bodies of a planetary or cometary nature round a solar centre, that
we are now concerned; it is with that of sun round sun--each, perhaps,
at least in some binary systems, where the individuals are very
remote, and their period of revolution very long, accompanied with its
train of planets and their satellites, closely shrouded from our view
by it the splendor of their respective suns, and crowded into a space
bearing hardly a greater proportion to the in enormous interval which
separates them, than the distance of the satellites of our planets
from their primaries bear to their distances from the sun itself. A
less distinctly characterized subordination would be incompatible with
the stability of their systems, and with the planetary nature of their
orbits. Unless closely nestled under the wing of their immediate
superior, the sweep of another sun in its perihelion passage round
their own might carry them off, or whirl them into orbits utterly
incompatible with the conditions necessary for the existence of their
inhabitants. It must be confessed that we have a strangely wide and
novel field for speculative excursions, and one which it is not easy
to avoid luxuriating in."   [Footnote 138]

  [Footnote 138: Outlines of Astronomy, chap. xvi. Sec. 847.]



VII.

The phenomena of nature or suggest an interesting view all of law in
general, which we shall in a few words faintly outline. It is
constantly urged as an objection to the doctrine of revelation
regarding the Blessed Eucharist, for example, that it is contrary
philosophy, inasmuch as it assumes and implies the suspension of a
universal law, which connects certain definite accidents or qualities
of matter invariably with their corresponding substance; for in the
Holy Eucharist the properties, qualities, or accidents of one
substance are attached to another.

By a "_Law_" in physics no more can be understood than a deduction
from a sufficiently large series of observed facts, establishing, from
long and tearful and extensive observation, a uniformity of result in
the same given circumstances. Some laws are said to be "empirical,"
which though derived from careful noting of invariably {385} recurring
phenomena, enunciate no principle, or rationale, but merely the
numerical result of observation. Thus Kepler's three laws of planetary
motion, and Bode's law of planetary distances from the sun, are
instances of law simply and confessedly empirical. Newton's law of
gravitation is said to furnish the principle which is involved in
Kepler's formula of details; because once Newton's law is admitted as
governing planetary motion, what Kepler observed of the movements of
the planets, can be deduced by calculation. It would be perhaps more
philosophical, in the present state of our knowledge, to regard even
the most apparently elementary and fundamental law as only empirical,
and the ultimate principle as lying deeper than any known law. In this
view, a law like that of Newton's demonstrating, would be said to lie
only one step nearer the ultimate principle than the earlier and more
empirical. Probably there is no ultimate principle nearer than the
divine volition.

In fact, the law of gravitation is now regarded by philosophers as
something short of the ultimate solution of material attraction and
repulsion; they are groping their way, at this moment, to something
more universal than that law, as may be gathered from the following
observations of Sir J. Herschel: "No matter from what ultimate cause
the power which is called gravitation originates--be it a virtue
lodged in the sun, as its receptacle, or be it pressure from without,
or the resultant of many pressures or solicitations of unknown fluids,
magnetic or electric ethers, or impulses--still, when finally brought
under our contemplation, and summed up into a single resultant energy,
its direction is _from_ many points on all sides _toward_ the sun's
centre."  [Footnote 139]

  [Footnote 139: Outlines of Astronomy, chap. ix. Sec.490.]

Whence is this uncertainty about the probable nature of this force?
Because, universal as it has been thought, it fails in certain
circumstances, as in some electrical conditions, and within very small
distances; when the relation of material particles to one another is
one of repulsion, and not of attraction. Take another law, as it is
called, that fluids will always rise as high as their source, and no
higher. The phenomena of capillary attraction prove that this law does
not hold in all cases. The chemical law of atomic combination is
sometimes found signally to fail. Physical laws, therefore, like
these, are good only as far as they go; there are limits to their
application.

Why may not this be true in regard to the law which is said to
militate against the doctrine of the blessed Eucharist? It may hold
good for a thousand instances, and may fail in the next, like other
physical laws; and that instance may be the very one of this revealed
doctrine. _Exceptio probat regulam_ is a sound rule in a certain
sense; it tells the other way, however, when the absolute
impossibility even of an exception is maintained in regard to any
physical law.

But, in fact, we see that this law of relation between quality, or
accident, and substance, is very uncertain in its application to many
conditions of matter. Modern discovery has much diminished the number
of the properties, or qualities, of matter; and has proved that even
these are by no means constant in the same substance, nor always
variable in different substances; so that one substance often looks to
every sense, like another, wholly different; and "behaves," like it,
in a variety of ways; while the same substance has sometimes more than
one mode of appearance. There is, in fact, no law of uniformity
between material substance and its properties; if there is any law on
the subject, it is the other way; and the result of discovery seems
clearly to demonstrate that we know absolutely nothing of the nature
of substance.



VIII.

Closely connected with this view of law is the interesting subject is
{386} throughout nature, but especially in the motions and temporary
disturbances in the heavenly spaces, and which afford, in fact, the
best evidence of the stability of the vast system of creation. A
variation is observed in the ellipticity of the earth's orbit, for
instance, of which one evident proof is the acceleration of the moon's
motion round her primary; it might seem as if, at some vastly remote
period in future time, the total derangement of our planetary system
must ensue; but calculation has assured us that there is a point, far
short of that, at which there will occur a change; and in the lapse of
ages things will return to their original condition. Thus beyond an
exception to law there is still Law existing supreme, regulating the
conditions and the term of such exceptional existence. In a similar
manner, the law of storms, as it is called, establishes the dominion
of definite order even in the confusion and mad fury of the tropical
hurricane; so definite, and so completely under the control of
observed rule, that navigators are provided with certain instructions
for evading the overwhelming force of those terrible visitations. We
think of these cycles of apparent exception and departure from
established order, in the physical world, when we hear objections made
against this or that apparent anomaly in the spiritual and moral
government of God; till the principles and laws of one government are
proved wholly unlike those of the other, we imagine a secular
variation not impossible in the one as it actually exists in the
other; and we can endure even a temporary eclipse of the outward glory
of his church, the prevalence of her enemies against her, for a longer
or a shorter time; the exile of her chief pastor; the triumph of
iniquity in her glorious capital; convinced that erratic trains of
events like these are subject to law in the permission of him who
governs as he made the universe of matter and of mind, by an act of
his sovereign and omnipotent will.



IX.

From what has preceded, one or two general reflections occurred to an
intelligent mind, somewhat to this effect. It seems that the  horizon
of science has never been long stationary, and is now opening wider
then at any former period. Every science has passed through many
strange phases of empiricism, before reaching the philosophical basis
on which it now rests. All of them are disclosing facts and analogies
undreamed of by our grandfathers. A very few years make a book on
chemistry or physiology old and out of date. We are posting on to
further knowledge; strange and unimagined relations between matter and
matter, and still stranger between matter and mind, are no doubt
awaiting the detection of future discoverers; our children, or their
children, will know more than we. A single sentence of Professor
Faraday's reflections on the subject of Allotropism, is sufficient to
open a wide view of the possible career of science. "The philosopher
ends," he says, "by asking himself the questions, In what does
chemical identity consists? In what will these wonderful developments
of allotropism end? Whether the so-called chemical elements may not
be, after all, mere allotropic conditions of purer universal essences?
Whether, to renew the speculations of the alchemists, the metals may
the only so many mutations of each other, by the power of science
naturally convertible? There was a time when this fundamental doctrine
of the alchemists was opposed to known analogies; _it is now no longer
opposed to them, but only some stages beyond their present
development._"  [Footnote 140]

  [Footnote 140: Faraday's Lectures, pp. 105, 106.]

Is it safe to trust to what are considered to be indications of
physical truth in a contest with moral evidence when the limits of
physical knowledge are so floating and ill defined? Is it safe to
erect barriers of supposed physical laws against the entrance of
conviction regarding the truths of {387} revelation, when recent
discovery has established so much that tells on the side of faith;
when it has overturned so many old philosophical objections to it;
when future discovery may, and seems likely to push the advantage of
revelation still further into the domain of matter; when its
indications have so many analogies to the doctrines of revealed truth?
We are sure, at least, that future discovery can take from us no
advantage which we at present derive from our knowledge of physical
laws; it cannot fail widely to extend that advantage, by enlarging our
acquaintance with the laws of nature.



X.

The natural termination of our reflections is the consideration of how
short a way we yet see into the constitution of Nature; how far we are
still from reaching the secrets of her vast operations. "After all,
what do we see?" asks Admiral Smyth, in his _Cycle of Celestial
Objects_. "Both that wonderful (stellar and nebular) universe, our
own, and all which optical assistance has revealed to us, may be only
the outlines of a cluster immensely more numerous. The millions of
suns we perceive cannot comprise the Creator's universe. There are no
bounds to infinitude; and the boldest views of the elder Herschel only
placed us as commanding a ken whose radius is some 35,000 times longer
than the distance of Sirius from us. Well might the dying Laplace
exclaim, 'That which we know, is little; that which we know not, is
immense.'"  [Footnote 141] If, on the one hand, the discoveries of man
in every department of material knowledge prove him to be in genius
and intelligence only "a little lower than the angels," the boundless
expanse of undiscovered worlds of investigation in his own and distant
systems may well abate his enthusiasm, and make the greatest
philosopher acknowledge that we as yet know only in part.

  [Footnote 141: Vol. ii. Bedford Catalogue, p. 303.]

If so, partial knowledge of the laws of divine government can never be
a safe or a philosophical guide to direct us in accepting or rejecting
whatever comes to us claiming to be from the author and sustainer of
that government, as revelation does. It can never be safe even as a
preliminary guide; as an ultimate rule to test the value of
revelation, it is totally disqualified. Till we know all, we can say
nothing of what is possible or impossible, probable or the reverse. We
can understand a person to whom the claims of revelation on his assent
were new and strange, hesitating to accept it at all, till its
credentials had been examined, and their evidence ascertained; but
once that process is concluded, and a revelation established, we
cannot understand a philosophical mind, in the elementary state of
human knowledge, proceeding to select from the sum of revealed truth
what seems to it intelligible, and accepting that, while rejecting
whatever it considers to be the reverse; and maintaining that, because
it cannot comprehend the mysterious things of revelation, therefore
they cannot be from God. The only course, at once safe and
philosophical, is to accept the whole of what is presented to us,
without questioning its coincidence, or otherwise, with our previous
views of what is likely or befitting; with our present notions of what
is intelligible. To our limited knowledge it may seem in its doctrines
unintelligible, imperfect, perhaps even contradictory: clouds of
doubts may seem to hover over it; storms of conflicting principles and
laws and assumptions, subversive, as we think, of the course of
nature, may now rage about its path. But ascend the mountain-top, and
the clouds are left far beneath; the roaring of the storm cannot be
heard so high. Descend a little way into the deep, and the agitation
of its surface ceases; silence and order and everlasting rest are
established there. So the deeper we penetrate into the knowledge of
God, as manifested in his material government, or the higher we ascend
in contemplating his modes {388} of action in nature, the nearer we
shall approach to the vision of that perfect harmony and nice
adjustment of every part of his vast creation, the full disclosure of
which will recreate our intelligence in the light of his eternal
beauty. It cannot be matter for wonder, then, that we rejoice at every
new step in science, at every discovery of the secret powers of
nature. We welcome the advance of physical science as a pioneer of the
ultimately victorious progress of revealed truth, which shall
demonstrate its intimate harmony with all that is known of the divine
operations in the constitution of nature.

Meanwhile, we can afford to wait "till the day breaks and the shadows
flee away." The veil will one day be withdrawn, and we shall see, eye
to eye. Influences and agencies which it has not yet been given to man
even to imagine, will then be disclosed, around us and within us; as
when the eyes of the prophet's servant were opened, and he beheld his
master surrounded with chariots of fire and horses of fire. Things
will then be seen as they are, in the day of the manifestation of the
sons of God. We can afford to wait for that day. We feel within us,
already, much that we cannot account for, on natural principles;
strong presentiments, and instincts of the supernatural and eternal
order of things, are ever and ever crossing our path, stirring us with
strange and sudden and mysterious power; disposing us for the
revelations of the final day. A day of wonder; a day of benediction;
but not for those who have refused to believe because they could not
see, but for Christ's simple little ones, who were content to believe
before, or without seeing; for whom it was enough that the great
Creator had spoken to them by his Son, and since by his church; more
than enough, that, even here, they could recognize the subservience of
philosophy to faith; that they could perceive "in outward and visible
things the type and evidence of those within the veil."



THE VIRGIN'S CRADLE HYMN.



Copied from a print of the Blessed Virgin in a Catholic Village in
Germany. Translated into English by E. T. Coleridge.

  Dormi, Jesu! mater ridet
  Quae tam dulcem somnam videt,
    Dormi, Jesu! blandule!
  Si non dormis, mater plorat,
  Inter fila cantans orat,
    Blande, veni, somnule.


  Sleep, sweet babe! my cares beguiling:
  Mother sits beside thee smiling;
    Sleep, my darling, tenderly!
  If thou sleep not, mother mourneth,
  Singing as her wheel she turneth;
    Come, soft slumber, balmily!



{389}

Original.

CELTIC ANTHOLOGY AND POETIC REMAINS.


There is no people, the annals of which may not be separated into
three distinct periods, namely: the period of heroes and epico-poetic
narration; the period of myth, fable, and apotheosis; and the period
of realistic and definitive history. Or, to range the whole in the
order of historical sequence, the three distinctive phases of
race-annals may be formulated as follows:

  1. The period of myth and apotheosis--which, among the European
  races especially, constitutes the beginning of history.

  2. The period of heroes and poetic annals--which forms a kind of
  transition period.

  3. The period of realistic definitive history, untinted with
  imaginative glories--the beginning of which indicates the point in
  race-history at which literary civilization commences.

To the analysis of the first we apply the term _mythology_; but for
the second it happens that there is no term--unless we may be
permitted so to deepen the sense of the word _anthology_ as to include
within its sweep of definition, not only poetic extracts, but poetic
material and the logical analysis of that material. For the purposes
of this paper, therefore, the word will be used in the sense
suggested, as including the poetic material of a people, and the
discussion of any anthological idiosyncrasies therein manifested.

The use of the word being permitted--it happens that, however
intricate and various in details, the _essential_ data of anthology
are everywhere the same in classification, and everywhere susceptible
of the same logical analysis. Without here pausing to specify reasons,
which may be more conveniently specified hereafter--this division
into classes of _data_, needful because as yet no logicalization has
been here attempted, may be effected with tolerable precision by
recurring to the usual analysis of a people's poetic material. The
analysis of these _data_--anthological because imaginative and
poetic--may, therefore, be exhibited thus:

  1. Mythology and semi-historical or moralistic fable.

  2. Poetic annals and ancient waifs of ballad and song.

  3. Household legends, fairy stories, and superstitions.

In the region of mythology the data have been collected and collated
with considerable thoroughness, especially by German _savans_; in the
region of poetic annals, only the general details have been subjected
to analytic scrutiny; and in that of household lore and legend, saving
the collection of the Brothers Grimm, little has been effected in
comparison with the importance of the subject. Enough has been done,
however, to demonstrate, not only the applicability of the fore-made
classification, but also the singular analogical resemblance in minute
details which exists between the household legends of any one people
as compared with those of any other, and which, in analogy at least,
points to the original historical unity of the human race.

Nor is the analogy which bespeaks this unity to be limited to the
general analysis of class. Amid the vagaries of mythology and
apotheosis, amid the epic-annals of heroes and demi-gods, and, in
short, amid the more minute imaginings and superstitions {390} of
every people may be traced curious and often startlingly singular
analogical resemblances.

The Edda, weird, Northern and Gothic in the _ensemble_ of its
imaginings, reproduces, otherwise nomenclated, the mythology of the
Greek and of the Roman; the dim bat-winged Athor of mystical Egypt,
who presided under the shadows of the pyramids over the creation of
beauty, reappears, less mystically aureola'd, in the classical
_mythos_ of Venus; and the ghoul of the desert-inhabiting
Saracen--most Arabic of all Arabs--haunts the woodlands and
waste-places of Germany, as illusive and wine-dispensing Elle-maid; in
short, in all forms of superstition and in all moods of anthology
there is an essential unity--a unity having its root in the general
unity of the human imagination. For, the imagination, however through
the operation of local causes its dreams may be tipped with
rainbow-tints or imbued with shadowy sublimity--is one in the
ever-varying rhythm of its creations, and one in the vague palaces of
fantasy which it uprears. Valleys and palaces of ideal loveliness it
may evoke--visions to which Poe weds expression in the weird imagery
of his Haunted Palace:

  "And travellers in that happy valley,
  Through two luminous windows, saw
  Spirits moving musically
  To a lute's well-tuned law;"

Or, again, valleys and palaces of lunatic ghastliness and
superstition--visionary lunacies, which Poe graphically, though
somewhat metaphorically, depicts in his own modification of the above
rhythm-painting:

  "And travellers now within that valley.
  Through the red-litten windows, see
  Vast forms that move fantastically
  To a discordant melody."

But, whether the music be discordant or well-tuned, the humanity of
its note cannot be mistaken; and whether the creations of the human
intellect be palaces of loveliness or pagodas of ghastliness, they
still bear the unmistakable impress of man's toiling after the
ideal--of the vague, restless, and unsatisfied yearning for the lost
ideal of his being, to compass which he toils and struggles and
dreams. In this essential unity of human imagination is grounded the
essential unity of the _data_ of anthology, and hence its marvellous
and minute analogical resemblances.

Anthology having never been reduced to definitive system, it happens
that no little of its critical material exists only in lumbering and
uncollated masses. Indeed, not a little of that which might have been
valuable as material has been permitted to rot in mildewed
manuscript--for need of appreciation of its real value on the part of
scholars--instead of having been (as it should have been) treasured
and preserved, as the pabulum of thought and science; and yet more
remains uncollected, and will so remain until a more valid
comprehension of its value shall have been impressed upon the minds of
spectacled professors who are usually the last to comprehend that in
the comprehension of which they ought to be first. But,
notwithstanding this apparent apathy and neglect on the part of the
learned, there are, still, certain problems of history which can only
be unriddled with this key--that of comparative anthology--as, for
instance, the exploits of Joan d'Arc; a hundred riddles of mental
philosophy there are, which can not be unravelled without it; and, in
every language, multitudes of words are based, as to their peculiar
shades of significance, upon anthological criticism. Thus the
_nightmare_ is the _demon which haunts the night_; the _Huguenots_
were _imps of the woods_--from _Hugon_, the demon of the
woodlands;--and not not as a learned dean supposes the _people
eidgenossen_; and a _seer_ is simply a _see-er_, that is, one who has
the gift of the second sight.

{391}

A minute knowledge of anthology--we here use the term to denote that
blossoming of events and moral ideas into imaginative forms, which
constitutes most of that which we denominate the poetic material of a
people, is, therefore, in the highest degree necessary to the proper
comprehension of--

  1. Historical criticism.
  2. Comparative philology.
  3. Mental philosophy--especially in those moods of mind of which
  modern civilization furnishes no examples.

To take a familiar illustration. It has been over and over
demonstrated that, unless we deny the validity of the common
principles of historical evidence, to admit the existence of that
peculiar imaginative faculty denominated "second sight" is a
necessity. Nor is the faculty, if its existence be admitted,
necessarily to be accounted a preternatural gift--being simply the
logical result of the cultivation of certain impulses of human
intellect seldom, in the experiences of modern society, evoked into
activity; being, in fact, the logical deduction of that scenery which
surrounded the Highlanders of Scotland, and of that mood of mind which
was their prevailing habit. Civilization develops no sublimity of
mental strength, except in the region of reason. Moral sublimity is
not developed by communion with streets and avenues. Neither is
imaginative insight--that which, in ultimate deduction, is
inspiration--an inhabiter of palaces. Born of crags, of' mountains,
and of the lurid and ghastly grandeur of the tempest--the imaginative
insight is the lightning of the mind, and like the lightning at
midnight reveals that which to the moon and stars is wrapped in
darkness. To educe the principle: the imaginative forms (anthology)
into which primitive moral ideas, rude reasonings, and epic-events
blossom, are essentially modified by two ever-active causes, namely:
idiosyncrasies of race and scenic surroundings. And hence, in reducing
the fragmentary imaginings of a people to scientific system, we are
compelled to keep constantly in view the idea of answering to the
conditions of three problems:

  1. Given the scenery of a country
  and the idiosyncrasies of its people, and we may, in a general way,
  indicate its anthology; or

  2. Given the anthology and idiosyncrasies, and we may, with
  tolerable accuracy, indicate the leading peculiarities of the
  scenery; or

  3. Given the scenery and anthology, and we may indicate, with
  exactitude, the leading idiosyncrasies of the people.

Having indicated, by way of preface, the general scope of anthology
and the value of its _data_, we shall devote the remaining portion of
this paper to the anthological relics of the Irish race, and
especially to its elfin and poetic phases.

Fairies are (among the Irish peasantry) still believed to exist, and
to exercise no little influence over the affairs of mortals. They are
generally represented as pigmies, and are, so runs the superstition,
often seen dancing around solitary thorns, which are believed to be
among their most frequented haunts. Hence the veneration of the
peasantry for old solitary thorns--the peasantry believing that if
these thorns are cut down or maimed, the fairies are thereby provoked,
and will either maim the person who has cut the tree, cause his cattle
to sicken and die, or otherwise injure his property. Places supposed
to be haunted by fairies are termed gentle, as likewise are several
herbs, in gathering which a strange ritual is observed. If provoked by
any person, it is believed that the fairies will steal and carry away
that which is dearest to that person, as his wife, or especially any
members of his family in babyhood and before baptism. The castles in
which the fairies dwelt were generally believed to be movable at the
pleasure of the proprietor, invisible to human eyes, and usually built
in ancient forths or raths. Among the principal fairy kings were
Firwar, whose castle was at Knock Magha, and Macaneantan, {392} whose
fairy palace was at Sgraba. Whistling Hill (Knock-na-feadalea), in the
county of Down, is still visited by hundreds of the peasantry, who,
especially on the last night in October, which is observed with
singular ceremonials, aver that they can hear the music of the fairies
issuing from the hill. The following verses include the names of the
principal places fabled to be inhabited by fairy kings:

  "Around Knock-Grein, and Knock-na-Rae,
  Bin Builvia, and Keis Korain,
  To Bin Eakhlan and Lokh Da-ean,
  And thence north-east to Sleive Guilin.
  They trod the lofty hills of Mugarna.
  Round Sleive Denard and Beal-at-an-draigh.
  Down to Daudrin, Dundroma, and Dunardalay,
  Right forward to Knock-na-Feadalea."

Which was the route of procession on the night of the last of October,
when aerial spirits were supposed to be peculiarly active. The
following legend of Whistling Hill we extract from a collection of
these legends in the original Irish made by Rev. William Neilson,
D.D., and printed by Hogan, No. 15 Lower Ormond Quay, Dublin, in 1808:

  "There was au honest, pious man, who lived formerly near the river,
  by the side of the hill (Whistling Hill); and the vestiges of his
  house may yet be seen. His name was Thady Hughes; and he had neither
  wife nor family--his mother, an aged woman, keeping his house.

  "Thady went out on a Hallow-eve night to pray, as he was in the
  habit of doing, on the bank of the river; and looking up to observe
  the stars, he saw a dusky cloud from the south moving toward him as
  if impelled by a whirl-wind, and heard the sound of horses just as
  if a troop of cavalry were tramping along the valley. Thady noticed
  that they all came over the ford and round the mountain.

  "Remembering that he had often heard it said, 'if you cast the dust
  under your feet against the cloud, if the fairies have any human
  being with them they are compelled to release him,' Thady seized a
  handful of the gravel which was under his feet and hurled it, in the
  name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, against the whirlwind:
  whereupon fell down a strange lady, weak, faint, and wearily
  moaning.

  "Thady started, but, imagining that the voice of the strange lady's
  moaning was human, went to the spot where she fell, spoke to her,
  and took her in his arms and carried her to his mother, who gave her
  food--the lady eating but little.

  "They asked her few questions that night, knowing that she came from
  the fairy castles. Besides, she appeared to be sick and sorrowful,
  and did not seem to be in any mood for talking. The next morning,
  however, she related her story, having first enjoined secrecy, which
  Thady and his mother promised.

  "The strange lady's name was Mary Rourke, and she had formerly lived
  in the county of Galway, where she was married to a young man named
  John Joyce, who lived hard by Knock Magha. One year after her
  marriage with Joyce, King Firwar and his host carried her away to
  the fairy castle of Knock Magha, leaving something in the form of a
  dead woman in her place which bulk was duly waked and buried.

  "She had been in Knock Magha nearly a year and was daily entertained
  with dances and songs, notwithstanding she was in sorrow at having
  been parted from her husband. At length the host of the castle told
  her that her husband had married another woman; that, therefore, she
  ought to indulge in grief no longer; and that Firwar and his family
  were about to visit the province of Ulster, and intended to take her
  with them. They set out at dawn from Knock Magha forth, both Firwar
  and host; and many a fairy castle they visited from dawn till fall
  of night, traveling all mounted on beautiful winged horses.

  "After they lost Mary, the fairies did not halt; for they were to
  feast that Hallow-eve in the fairy castle of Sgraba, with the fairy
  king, Macaneantan."

{393}

The story adds that Thady Hughes married Mary Rourke, and that a
difficulty subsequently arose between Thady and John Joyce, who,
having heard of the escape of the strange lady from the fairies, went
to Thady's cottage and claimed her as his wife. The matter afterward
came before the bishop for adjudication, who adjudged that as Mary
had, to all appearances, died and been buried as the wife of John
Joyce, she was under no obligation to be his wife after her death. And
thus ends the legend.

The general similarity of the fairies as depicted in this legend to
those of Germany as illustrated in Goethe's Erl King, is obvious, and
seems to argue either historical kin or identity of origin. In
Goethe's ballad a corpse is left in the arms of the father. The
version subjoined is an anonymous newspaper version, but is so far
superior to that of Mrs. Austin, that we quote it in preference:

  "Who rideth so late through the night wind lone?
    Yet is a father with his son.

  "He foldeth him fast; he foldeth him warm;
    He prayeth the angels to keep from him harm.

  "' My son, why hidest thy face so shy?'
  "' Seest thou not, father, the Erl King nigh?

  "'The Erlen King with his train, I wist?'
  "'My son, it is only the fog and mist.'

  "'Come, beautiful one, come away with me,
    And merry plays will I play with thee!

  "'Ah! gay are the blossoms that blow by the shore,
    And my mother hath many a plaything in store.'

  "'My father, my father, and dost thou not hear
    What the Erlen King doth say in my ear?'

  "'Be still my darling, be still, my son,
    Through the withered leaves the winds howl lone.'

  "'Come, beautiful one, come away with me,
     My daughters are fair, they shall wait on thee!

  "'My daughters their nightly revellings keep,
    They shall sing, they shall dance, they shall rock thee to sleep.'

  "' My father, my father, and seest thou not
    The Erl King's daughters in yon wild spot?'

  "'My son, my son, I see, I wist,
    It is the gray willow down there in the mist.'

  "'I woo thee; thy beauty delighteth my sense.
    And, willing or not, shall I carry thee hence.'

  "'O father, the Erl King now puts forth his arm!
    O father, the Erl King, he doeth me harm!'

  "The father rideth, he rideth fast
    And faster rideth through the blast.

  "He spurreth wild, through the night wind lone,
    And dead, in his arms, he holdeth his son."

Of this topic--the folks-lore of the Irish peasantry--we shall here
take leave, merely hazarding the opinion that there is some remote
historical connection between the Irish traditions of the
idiosyncrasies and doings of elves and those of the Germanic races--a
connection probably dating from the Danish occupation of the country
about the seventh or eighth century. In the Irish poetic annals, which
antedate the Danish occupation by several hundred years, no traces of
elfin traditions can be detected; and the same is true of the Ossianic
ballads which McPherson has rather imperfectly collated, and between
which and the several Celtic manuscripts there is a singular
resemblance.

The collation of McPherson, valuable in many respects, is amenable to
almost fatal criticism, in that the sublimity of the Gaelic
composition is marred by being twisted from the parallelism (which, in
the original, is analogous to the Hebraic) into the form of prose: the
parallelism being in English--as in Gaelic, Celtic, and Hebrew--the
most effective form into which sublimity can be wrought. And to
demonstrate the truth of this proposition we need only to put portions
of McPherson's prose version into the parallelistic form, and shall
adopt for this purpose Fingal's interview with the spirit of Loda,
than which, uniquely considered, a poem of more overwhelming sublimity
was never written or conceived. Subjoined is McPherson's version:

  "A blast came from the mountain: on its wings was the spirit of
  Loda. He came to his place in his terrors, and shook his dusky
  spear. His eyes appear like flames in his dark face: his voice is
  like distant thunder. Fingal advanced his spear in night, and raise
  his voice on high. 'Son of night retire: call thy winds, and fly!
  Why dost thou come to my presence with thy shadowy arms? Shall I
  fear thy gloomy form, spirit of dismal Loda? Weak is thy shield of
  clouds; feeble is that meteor thy sword! The blast rolls them
  together; and thou thyself art lost. Fly from my presence, son of
  night! call thy winds and fly!'

{394}

  "'Dost thou force me from my place?' replied the hollow voice. 'I
  turn the battle in the field of the brave. I look on the nations,
  and they vanish: my nostrils pour the blast of death. I come abroad
  on the winds; the tempests are before my face. But my dwelling is
  calm above the clouds; pleasant are the fields of my rest.'

  "'Dwell in thy pleasant fields,' says the king. 'Let Comhal's son be
  forgotten. Have my steps ascended from my hills into thy peaceful
  plains? Have I met thee with a spear on thy cloud, spirit of dismal
  Loda? Why then dost thou frown on me? Why shake thine airy sphere?
  Thou frownest in vain: I never fled from the mighty in war; and
  shall the sons of the wind frighten the king of Morven? No--he knows
  the weakness of their arms.'

  "'Fly to thy land,' replied the form; 'take to the wind, and fly!
  The blasts are in the hollow of my hand: the course of the storm is
  mine. Fly to thy land, son of Comhal, or feel my flaming wrath!'

  "He lifted high his shadowy spear! he bent forward his dreadful
  height. Fingal, advancing, drew his sword, the blade of dark-brown
  Luno. The gleaming path of the steel winds through the gloomy ghost.
  The form fell shapeless into air."

Now, let us put this in the form of the parallelism--a form into which
the sententious sublimity of the composition naturally falls, and in
which nearly all these ancient Gaelic and Celtic epics occur in the
original:

  "A blast came from the mountain:
  On its wings was the spirit of Loda.
  He came to his place in terrors,
  And shook his dusky spear.
  His eyes appear like flame in his dusky face:
  His voice is like distant thunder.
  Fingal advanced his spear into the night,
  And raised his voice on high.
  Son of night, retire;
  Call thy winds, and fly!
  Why dost thou come to my presence with thy shadowy arms?
  Shall I fear thy gloomy form, spirit of Loda?
  Weak is thy shield of clouds;
  Feeble is that meteor, thy sword.
  The blast rolls them together:
  And thou thyself art lost.
  Fly from my presence, son of night!
  Call thy winds, and fly!'
  'Dost thou force me from my place?' replied the hollow voice.
  'I turn the battle in the field of the brave,
  I look on the nations and they vanish:
  In my nostrils is the blast of death.
  I came abroad on the winds:
  The tempests are before my face,
  But my dwelling is calm above the clouds;
  Pleasant are my fields of rest.'
  'Dwell in thy pleasant fields,' said the king.
  'Let Comhal's son be forgotten.
  Have my stops ascended from my hills into thy peaceful plains?
  Have I met thee with a spear on thy cloud, spirit of the dismal Loda?
  Why dost thou frown on me?
  Why shake thy dusky spear?
  Thou frownest in vain;
  I never fled from the mighty in war;
  And shall the sons of the wind frighten the king of Morven?
  He knows the weakness of their arms.'
  'Fly to thy land,' replied the shadow;
  'Take to the wind, and fly!
  The blasts are in the hollow of my hand
  The course of the storm is mine.
  Fly to thy land, son of Comhal,
  Or feel my flaming wrath!'
  He lifted high his shadowy spear:
  He bent forward his dismal height
  Fingal, advancing, drew his sword, the blade of the dark-brown Luno.
  The gleaming path of steel winds through the gloomy ghost.
  The form fell shapeless in air."

For vague sublimity, for weird, dismal, ghastly, and phantasmagoric
grandeur of conception and effect, the imagery of the above episode of
Ossian has never been exceeded in the vast domain of fantasy-weaving;
and this effect is vastly heightened by the sententious step of the
sentences and the shadowy cadence of the parallelism--a cadence which
is the natural expression of sublimity, and to compass which in
ordinary blank verse it is impossible. Compare, for instance, the
following imagery of similar _ensemble_, from Milton's "Paradise
Lost":

       "O'er many a dark and dreary vale
  They passed, and many a region dolorous;
  O'er many a frozen, many a fiery Alp;
  Rocks, caves, lakes, fens, bogs, dens and shades of death--
  A universe of death."

Or the following rhythmical painting of more than Miltonic massiveness
and magnificence of imagination, from the "Orion" of R. H. Horne--a
poem of more idiosyncratic merit than most poems upon the classical
model. Orion thus describes the building of a palace for Hephaistos
(Vulcan):

  "So that great figures started from the roof,
  And lofty coignes, or sat and downward gazed
  On those who stood below and gazed above--
  I filled it; in the centre framed a hall;
  Central In that a throne: and for the light
  Forged mighty hammers that should rise and fall
  On slanted rocks of granite and of flint.
  Worked by a torrent, for whose passage down
  A gape I hewed. And here the god could take,
  Midst showery sparks and swathes of broad gold fire,
  His lone repose, lulled by the sounds he loved:
  Or, casting back the hammer-heads until they stopped
  The water's ebb, enjoy, if so he willed,
  Midnight tremendous, silence, and iron sleep."

{395}

Both of which, though in their manner unparalleled, are, in a less
degree, imbued with that which we may term POETIC ILLUMINATION; that
which constitutes the felicitous sublimity of Ossian; in short, that
for which only one simile, and that an impossible one--namely,
shooting of a sun athwart the heavens at midnight--be adduced.

But--the seasons here specified being deemed insufficient--if further
reasons be necessary for the adoption of of the parallelistic form in
treating the ancient Gaelic and Celtic compositions, these necessary
reasons are fluent from the original form of those compositions, and
from the fact that the parallelism is the only poetic form adapted to
their style; which may be demonstrated by comparing the rhythmical
collocation of a single poem, the Songs of Deardra, a Celtic poem in
manuscript which will form the basis of the remainder of this paper,
with the collocation of the parallelistic English rendering. Adopting
phonographic equivalents for the Irish letters, the initial stanza of
Deardra's song improvised as a farewell to Scotland, runs as follows;

  "Ionmuin lioni an tio ud shoin,
  Alba cona hionghantuio;
  Nokha tliucfuinn aisde de,
  Muna dtioefuinn re Noise."

And the parallelistic rendering, line for line, as follows:

  "Dear to me that eastern shore;
  Dear is Alban, land of delights.
  Never would I have forsaken it,
  Had I not come with Naesa."

Thus the translation is rendered exact, conveying not only the matter
but, also, the manner of the original--without which last any
translation is and must be defective. The song is thus continued:

  "Dear are Dunfay and Dunfin,
   And dear are the hills around them;
   Dear is Inis-drayon,
   In dear to me Dunsaivni.

  "Coilcuan, sweet Coilcuan!
   Where Ainii and where Ardan came.
   Happy passed my days with Naesa,
   In the Western vales of Alban.

  "Glenlee, O Glenlee!
   Amidst thy thickets have I slept,
   And amidst thy thickets feasted,
   With my love in Glenlee.

  "Glenmessan, O, Glenmessan!
   Sweet were thy herbs and bright thy greens,
   Lulled by the falling stream we slept,
   On Inver's banks in Glenmessan.

  "Gleneikh, bright Gleneikh!
   Where my dwelling first was fixed,
   The woods smiled when the rising sun
   Shoots yellow arrows on Gleneikh.

  "Glenarkhon, dear Glenarkhon!
   Fair is the vale below high Dromkhon.
   Sportive were my days with Naesa,
   In the blooming vales of Glenarkhon.

  "Glendarua, O Glendarua!
   To me were thy people dear.
   The birds sang sweetly on the bending boughs
   That shaded over Glendarua.

  "Dear to me is that spreading shore;
   Dear the sandy-margined streams.
   Never would I have forsaken them,
   Had I not come with Naesa."

The events celebrated in these manuscript songs, now mustily rusting
in the Dublin University collection, occurred during the first
century, A. C. Deardra was the daughter of Macdoil, the historian of
Ulla (Ulster); Concovar being at that time king. The plot may be
briefly described:

  1. At the birth of Deardra it is foretold that she shall be the
  cause of many calamities; but the king, unappalled by omens and
  predictions, causes her to be taken from Macdoil and reared under
  persons whom he appoints; proposing to make her queen of Ulla.

  2. The beautiful Deardra conceives a passion for Naesa, one of the
  sons of Usna; and, with the assistance of his brothers, Ainli and
  Ardan, elopes with him to Alban, (Scotland,) in the western part of
  which Naesa has large estates.

  3. A messenger arrives from Concovar conveying the king's
  solicitation that they return to Ulla, and bearing tokens of the
  king's forgiveness to Naesa and Deardra.

  4. Disregarding the forebodings of Deardra, the sons of Usna accept
  the king's hospitality; and on the voyage Deardra sings the pathetic
  farewell to Alban just quoted, as if foreboding the events which
  follow.

  5. As the vessel moors in the haven Deardra ceases to sing; but,
  still foreboding ruin to Naesa, advises him to place himself under
  the protection of Cuculiin, who has his residence at Dundalgan.
  Naesa's confidence in the honor of Concovar, however, prevails; and
  they proceed to Emana, the royal seat--Deardra foretelling their
  fate both in conversation and in frequent prophetic song.

{396}

  6. They are received by Concovar with the semblance of kindness, and
  placed in the castle of the Red Arm with guards to wait upon them;
  while a body of mercenaries are sent to rescue Deardra and burn the
  castle--the troops of Ulla having refused to imbrue their hands in
  the blood of the heroes.

  7. Naesa, Ainli, and Ardan effect their escape with Deardra; but,
  being pursued, are overwhelmed by the king's mercenaries and slain.
  Deardra sings the following lament, calling to mind every
  circumstance which endeared her to Naesa, and reflecting with
  self-tormenting ingenuity upon those transient interruptions which,
  occasioning uneasiness at the moment, now serve to aggravate her
  unavailing sorrow:

  "Farewell for ever, fair coasts of Alban;
   Your bays and vales shall no more delight me.
   There oft from hills with Usna's sons,
   I viewed the hunt below.

  "The lords of Alban met in banquet.
   There were the valiant sons of Usna:
   And Naesa gave a secret kiss
   To the fairest daughter of Dundron.

  "He sent her a bind from the hill,
   And a fawn beside it running;
   He left the hosts of Inverness,
   And turned aside to her palace.

  "My soul was drunk with madness
   When this they told me--told me
   I set my boat upon the sea,
   To sail away from Naesa.

  "Ainli and Ardan brave and faithful.
   Valiantly pursued me,
   And brought me bark again to land,
   And back again to Naesa.

  "Then Naesa swore an oath to me;
   And thrice he swore upon his arms.
   That never would he cause me pain.
   Until unto the grave they bore him.

  "The maid of Dundron swore an oath;
   Thrice swore the maid of Dundron,
   That long as Naesa dwelt on earth
   No lover else should claim her.

  "Ah, did she hear this night.
   That Naesa in his grave was laid,
   High would be her voice of wailing,
   But seven times fiercer shall be mine."

  8. Standing by the grave of Naesa, Deardra concludes her
  lamentations with the following funeral song and panegyric, which
  having: sung, she springs into the grave and falls dead upon his
  breast:

  "Long is the day to me: the sons of Usna are gone.
   Their converse was sweet;
   But as raindrops fall my tears.
   They were as the lions on the hills of Emana.

  "To the damsels of Breaton were the dear.
   As hawks from the mountain they darted on the foe.
  The brave knelt before them,
  And nobles did them honor.

  "Never did they yield in battle.
  Ah! woe is me that they are gone.
  Sons of the daughter of Caifa.
  A host were ye in the wars of Cualna.

  "By careful Aifa were they reared.
   The countries round paid them tribute.
   Bursting like a flood in battle,
   Fought the valiant youths of Sgatha

  "Uatha taught them in their youth.
   The heroes were valiant in fight.
   Renowed sons of Usna,
   I weep, for ye have left me.

  "Dark-brown were their eyebrows;
   Their eyes were fires beneath;
   And their faces were as embers--
   As embers ruddy with flame.

  "Their legs as the down of the swan--
   Light and active were their limbs;
   Soft and gentle were their hands,
   And their arms were fair and manly.

  "King of Ulla, king of Ulla!
   I left thy love for Naesa.
   My days are few after him.
   His funeral honors are song.

  "Not long shall I survive my love;
   Think not so king of Ulla.
   Naesa, Ainli, and Ardan,
   I desire not life when you are gone.

  "Life hath no joy.
   My days are already too many.
   Delight of my soul,
   A shower of tears shall fall upon your grave.

  "Ye men that dig their grave.
   Dig it wide and dig it deep.
   I will rest on the breast of my love
   My sighs shall resound from his tomb.

  "Oft were their shields their pillow,
   And oft they slept upon their spears:
   Lay their strong swords beside them,
   And their shields beneath their heads.

  "Their dogs and hawks,--
   Who will now attend them?
   The hunters are no more on the hills;
   The valiant youths of Connai Cairni.

  "My heart, it groans--it groans.
   When I see the collars of their hounds.
   Oft did I feed them.
   But I weep when they are near.

  "We were alone in the waste.
   We were alone in the woodlands;
   But I knew no loneliness,
   Till they dug thy grave.

  "My sight begins to fail.
   When I view thy grave, my Naesa.
   My soul hastes to depart:
   And my voice of wailing to be hushed."

Thus ends one of the most pathetically beautiful tales, founded upon
original history, which the epico-poetic annals of any people afford.
It is far superior to any single poem amid the Svethico-Gothic remains
rendered famous by the masterly translations of Longfellow. In fact,
to him who shall {397} happily combine the requisite anthological
learning with the requisite skill as a translator, no literary
Golconda, more prolific in the rubies and scintillant glories of
poesy, could be unlocked, except with the Aladdin-key of almost
angelic invention, than is afforded in the mouldering, mildewed, and
musty masses of manuscript, in queer Celtic letters, which have been
permitted to rot for ages in the library of Dublin University. Had
they been English, they would have been magazinistically vaunted as
masterpieces in the piquant pages of "Blackwood," or amid e dreary
sermonoids of the "Westminster." Being Celtic, they are, so being,
neglected.

Albeit, there are to be Longfellows and Tennysons hereafter who shall
be cosmopolitan, and neither exclusively English, exclusively
American, nor exclusively Japanese; and men of learning there are to
be hereafter, who shall be citizens of the world (in a literary
sense), and not especially citizens of England, or of France, or of
America, who will seek for the beautiful in strange places beyond the
narrow limits of London, Paris, or New-York.

Meantime, it has been the object of this paper to play the lamp to the
gem-seeking Aladdin--suggesting that something may be done, rather
than doing it. Hence what has been said and what might have been more
cleverly and elaborately said, has here been curtly said upon the
subject of Celtic anthology--using the term in a sense that suited the
purposes and scope of this paper.



ORIGINAL


  "QUARE TRISTIS ES ANIMA MEA,
  ET QUARE CONTURBAS ME?"


  Why, O my soul! art thou, ofttimes,
    So faint and sad?
  Life shows to thee its brightest side;
    Why not be glad?

  Is not the earth most beautiful,
    What wouldst have more?
  Filled is thy cup with life's best gifts
    And running o'er.

  And all the grandeur and the grace
    Of noble art--
  Do they not beautify thy life,
    And cheer thy heart?

  And love, most heavenly gift of all--
    Is it not thine?
  Yes, truly; yet I cannot say
    Content is mine.

  I feel a sadness of the soul,
    A weariness,
  A constant longing of the heart;
    What meaneth this?

{398}

  I know that once, when journeying far,
    I felt like this,
  But then they only called my grief
    A home-sickness.

  And so, with every gift of God,
    With nought amiss,
  My heart is longing, longing still;
    What meaneth this?

  Why is it that my soul is sad,
    What meaneth this?
  It panteth after thee, O God!
    Thou art its bliss.



From the Reader.

THE LAKE DWELLINGS.  [Footnote 142]

  [Footnote 142: The Lake Dwellings of Switzerland and other Parts of
  Europe. By Dr. Ferdinand Keller, President of the Antiquarian
  Association of Zurich. Translated and arranged by John Edward Lee,
  F.S.A., F.G.S. (London: Longmans.)]


Since 1854, when Dr. Keller published his first report on
pile-dwellings in Lake Zurich, he, and other Swiss archaeologists
stimulated by his example and guided by his counsel, have zealously
explored many other Swiss lakes, and have succeeded in discovering
more than two hundred similar settlements, and in collecting tens of
thousands of relics of the people who during many centuries occupied
them. Six reports on the "wonderful Pfahlbauten" have been published
by Dr. Keller; but, being written in German, they are less known than
the compilation in French by Fred. Troyon, who has absorbed Dr.
Keller's facts, and mingling them with fancies of his own, has given a
sensational character to his work. Excellent notices have, however,
appeared, written by Wylie, Lubbock, Lyell, and others, and
translations of some original memoirs have been printed in the
Smithsonian Reports. Stripped though the subject be, in some degree,
of novelty, the present translation of Dr. Keller's work is not the
less welcome; it is indeed right, that he who gave the first
exposition of these structures should tell the story of their
discovery, and picture forth the state of society which their remains
reveal. In this work we have a general description of the structure of
these dwellings; notices of the various settlements which have been
discovered, with an account of others on the Italian side of the Alps,
and of the Crannoges in Ireland and Scotland; chapters on the remains
of plants, by Dr. Heer, and of animals, by Professor Ruetimeter; and
ninety-nine plates and several woodcuts give graphic, but sometimes
rough drawings of the dwellings, and of the various objects found in
them. As a storehouse of facts, illustrating the character and
progress of an ancient people, this work is invaluable; it will aid
other archaeologists in their researches; and we think, too, that the
cautious and philosophical manner in which Dr. Keller reasons from his
facts will help to correct some hasty and fanciful speculations.

{399}

For the construction of pile-dwellings, Swiss lakes afford favorable
sites, as along the shores there is generally a considerable breadth
of shallow water. Some pleasant bay, protected by well-wooded hills,
abounding in game, was selected for such settlements; and at a little
distance from the land piles of various kinds of would, generally
entire stems with with their bark on, but sometimes split, and from
fifteen to thirty feet in links and three to nine inches in diameter,
were driven into the bottom all the late, the heads of the piles
rising from two to four feet above the water. At the Wangen settlement
there were 40,000 piles, but all may not have been driven down at the
same period. Across this substructure other stems of trees ten of
twelve feet long were laid, and fastened by wooden pegs; and above
them split boards were similarly fastened, for me a solid, even
platform, which was covered by a bed of mud or loam. The platform of a
few, which Dr. Keller calls _fascine dwellings_, was supported not on
piles, but on layers of sticks and small stems built up from the
bottom of the lake, being similar to some of the Scottish Crannoges.
The boards and planks had been imperfectly fitted together, for
numerous objects which had slipped through the chinks of the floor are
scattered over the lake bottom; but quantities of broken implements,
pottery, and animal and vegetable refuse, heaped together on
particular spots, show that spaces had been left in the platform,
through which rubbish had been thrown into the water, thus for me
heaps analogous to the kitchen-middings of Denmark. Huts were erected
on the platform, having a framework of piles and stakes, with waddle
or hurdlework of small branches woven between the upright piles, and
covered over with a thickness of from two to three inches of loam or
clay, evidence of which has been found in pieces of half-burnt day
retaining the impression of the wattle-work. As some pieces have a
curve, Troyon concluded that the huts were circular, and from nine to
twelve feet in diameter; but Dr. Keller shows that the curve had
probably been produced by the great heat to which the clay covering
was exposed before it fell into the water, while also pieces of
different curves are found promiscuously on the same spot with others
perfectly flat, no piece indeed exceeding twelve inches across. It is
now pretty certain that most, if not all the huts, were rectangular;
those at Robenhausen and Niederwyl were found to be twenty-seven feet
by twenty-two feet. They stood close to but apart from each other, and
were thatched with straw and reeds. From the almost universal
prevalence of clay weights for weaving, it may be inferred that every
one was furnished with a loom. A narrow platform or bridge resting on
piles, of which a few remains have been found, connected these
dwellings with the land. Room enough there was in and around these
huts for all the operations of daily life, as well as for the
manufacture of every implement used in household economy; and in
short, this was the place where every craft or art known to the
settlers was brought into play. Even domestic animals were stalled on
the platform, as at Robenhausen the remains of the litter of these
animals has been found.

Such sites for dwellings are not unknown to history. Hippocrates
describes similar habitations on the stagnant, quiet-flowing river
Phasis in Armenia, and Herodotus others on Lake Prasias in Thrace. The
Crannoges in Ireland were inhabited as recently as 1645, but rather as
places of refuge; and at the present time there are analogous
structures in the Eastern Archipelago. Security against the attack of
enemies seems to have been the chief reason of selecting such peculiar
sites for dwellings, at a period when society was in a divided state,
{400} and when war of tribe against tribe was frequent. Similar
conditions were indicated by the numerous hill-forts of the ancient
Britons, and even by the pele towers of the border-land in mediaeval
times. From the great labor bestowed on the pile structures, and the
vast number of instruments of all kinds found in the "relic bed" of
the lakes, it is clear that they had not been temporary places of
refuge, but permanent habitations, which had been occupied during many
generations; and the relics, scattered abundantly beneath these
pile-dwellings, furnish important evidence relating to different eras
of civilization.

In a considerable number of these dwellings--thirty at least--no trace
of metal has been discovered, the instruments having been made of
stone, bone, and wood; in a much larger number bronze, without a trace
of iron, has been found; and in a few, it is clear that iron has been
extensively used. The three ages of stone, bronze, and iron are here
established by better evidence than from any other groups of remains;
for the great number and variety of relics which these lake
habitations have yielded, give a broad basis for true inductive
reasoning on prehistoric conditions. Yet there is evidently no sudden
break in these periods, such as would prove that superior and
conquering races had introduced higher civilization. "It is very
certain that, at least in Switzerland," says Dr. Keller, "there was no
hard line of demarcation between the three periods, but that the new
materials were spread abroad like any other article of trade, and that
the more useful tools gradually superseded those of less value." We
have here, therefore, _continuity_ and _progress_; and it may be
reasonably inferred, that the advance in art from the use of stone to
that of bronze, and then to iron, was made by the same race who
originally took up their abode on these lakes; for during the long
time the pile habitations were occupied, extending over several
thousands of years, there was no essential change in the structure of
the dwellings or in the mode of life. Doubtless, when these
lake-dwellers first arrived in Switzerland, they had the germs of
civilization; they had domestic animals from the first, such as sheep,
though the flesh of wild animals was more used for food; they could
spin, weave, and make cordage from beast or vegetable fibre, rude
pottery they could make, some of which was even painted with graphite
and rubble; fishers they were, using nets and hooks made of bone; from
serpentine, flint, horns and bones they made their weapons and tools;
they had brought with them cereals, and cultivated the soil with very
inefficient instruments made of stag's horns and crooked branches of
trees, and raised wheat and and barley, which they ground by mills of
the primitive form, consisting of a round stone as a corn-crusher, and
a mealing-stone with a hollow in which the corn was bruised. The stone
weapons and implements are similar to those of Denmark; but several
show in an interesting manner how the stone celts or chisels, which
were small, from one to eight inches in length, were hafted. Some were
first inserted into a piece of stag's horn, and then set in a shaft or
club; others were inserted into clefts of branches and fastened by
cord and asphalt. During this early age, it was the most important of
all instruments, and was used for various purposes; fixed at the end
of a pole, it was a lance; set into wood, it was a war-club or
domestic axe; placed in horn, it was the poor man's knife; it served
to skin animals, to cut flesh and hides, and to make all instruments
of horn and wood.

The evidences of commercial intercourse with other people are but
slight; but a bluish glass bead, in a stone age dwelling on the little
reedy or "moor-lake" of Wauwyl, may show some connection with the
Egyptians or Phoenicians; and knives, arrow-heads, and other
implements, made of flints, not found in Switzerland, but derived from
distant parts of France and Germany, {401} may indicate a barter trade
with the north and west. Possibly, too, Nephrite, of which the most
valuable celts were made, and which does not occur in Europe, but in
Egypt, China, and other parts of Asia, may point to intercourse with
the east, unless we suppose the Nephrite implements had been brought
from the east by the lake-dwellers, when they first settled in
Switzerland.

Not a few of the stone-age dwellings had been burnt by accident or by
an enemy, and wore not rebuilt; but others had a continued existence
through both the stone and bronze periods; and hence we see
settlements in a transitional state, and trace a gradual advance in
civilization. At Meilen, where a vast number of stone relics have been
found, there appear one bronze armilla and one bronze celt; but at
Robenhausen we probably see the commencement of the metallurgic art,
for amid a profusion of stone relics belonging to three different
platforms, crucibles have been found, with lumps of melted bronze, and
one lump of pure unmelted copper. It may be that the lake-dwellers
became first acquainted with metal through traders; but, as Dr. Keller
remarks, "May we not venture to assume that the colonists, by their
intercourse with strangers who were acquainted with the nature of
metals, were incited to search their country for copper ore, and try
to melt and cast it? Copper ore is found on the south side of
Muertschenstock, on the Lake of Wallenstadt." The age which was dawning
blends itself with the age which was setting; for we find that the new
instruments of bronze were copies of the old forms in stone. Even the
bronze ornaments were but improved copies of analogous objects in own,
showing indeed the sameness of race in both periods, and the
similarity of their tastes and customs. The gradual introduction of
metal gave to the lake-dwellers new powers, which enabled them to
improve their condition; dwellings were now erected in deeper water;
larger piles were used, and better sharpened and squared, fastened
with cross beams, and strengthened by stones heaped up; pottery was
better made, more elegant in form, and sometimes painted black or red,
or ornamented with tin-foil plates. The bronze implements which had
been made by native artisans were of excellent workmanship and form,
especially the spear and javelin-heads, which prove great proficiency
in casting. The swords with short handles and curved knives and
armillae resemble those which have been found in Denmark; but we
observe none of the graceful leaf-shaped swords which occur in Britain
and Ireland. Varied, peculiar, and sometimes beautiful is the
ornamentation of the period, consisting of zigzag lines, points,
triangles, spiral and lozenge forms.

A transitional state there was, too, between the bronze and the iron
periods. Morges settlement on Lake Geneva may be regarded of the
bronze age; for not only have one hundred and thirty bronze objects
been found there, but also moulds for casting bronze winged celts,
showing that such implements had been made on the spot; yet here there
occurs an iron poniard. But in the lake-dwelling of Marin, one of the
lost occupied, the number of iron objects is surprisingly great,
exhibiting to view weapons, agricultural and domestic implements, and
ornaments made of iron, which in the older dwellings had been made of
stone or bone or bronze. Of these iron relics the most remarkable are
the swords, of which fifty and more have been found at Marin, some
with and others without sheaths, all, with one exception, of iron, and
every one being peculiarly yet differently ornamented. These swords
are masterpieces of the smith's art, and were probably produced at
large manufactories, when there were division of labor and every
practical appliance, for some of them bear upon them makers' marks.
They are, however, the product of Celtic art, and correspond in form
and ornamentation with those of the later Celtic period of northern
nations; and {402} this view is confirmed by the discovery of similar
swords in the ditches of the fortress of Alesia, where a conflict had
taken place between the Romans and Helvetians when it was besieged by
Caesar. Less striking to the eye, however, is the connection between
the productions of the bronze and of the iron age; but our author
remarks:

  "There are, indeed, some forms of implements which remind us of the
  previous age. But, on the whole, when the Marin objects were made,
  iron had taken full possession of the field, and all the implements,
  including ornaments, which could be made out of iron, a metal both
  firmer and more pliable, were manufactured out of this material. But
  the form of these specimens had in some measure undergone a change,
  for the working of iron is a totally different matter from that of
  bronze; and the hammer of the smith and the moulds of the founder
  cannot produce the same forms. The remains of the settlements of
  pure stone, bronze, and iron ages indicate, therefore, epochs of
  civilization among the inhabitants, separated by long intervals,
  while the end for which the lake-dwellings were erected--namely, the
  security of person and property--and their construction remained the
  same."

Of the religion of the lake-dwellers there is no certain information;
but some relics made of stone and pottery, somewhat crescent-shaped,
found in bronze-age settlements, Dr. Keller thinks may be
representative of the crescent moon, and, therefore, probably objects
of worship. According to Pliny, the Druids gathered the mistletoe with
great solemnity on the sixth day of the moon; and hence it is inferred
that the moon images were sacred emblems, having power to avert and
cure diseases. This, however, is but a fancy, for it does not appear
from Caesar that the Celts worshipped the heavenly bodies.

The fauna and flora of the lake-dwellings afford interesting
information to naturalists, and throw some light on the questions as
to the origin, the development, and distribution of species. During
the stone age, the _bos primigenius_ and _bos bison_ were abundant,
but they disappear after the introduction of metallic weapons; the
former is now only found on the marshes of the North Sea. A very large
ox, with great semilunar horns, bent forward from the frontal plane
(_bos trochoceros_), and which had been contemporaneous with the
mammoth and hippopotamus, appears to have been domesticated at Concise
and Chevreaux. It is now extinct; but the marsh cow (bos brachyceros),
which was most abundant in the stone age, has continued to exist to
the present time, and now occupies the mountainous parts of
Switzerland and its wild mountain valleys. In the earlier periods,
several races of swine ran wild, which were subsequently domesticated.
The fox was abundantly eaten; but the hare was not used for food, even
the traces of its existence are few; neither domestic false, nor rats,
nor mice appear. Wild animals predominate in the stone age, but they
gave way in subsequent period. to domestic animals.

The seeds and other parts of plants lying in the lake mud, or buried
under several feet of peat, have been so well preserved, that their
characters can be determined. The small-grained six-rowed barley and
the small lake-dwelling wheat (_triticum vulgare antiquorum_) were,
from the earliest period, the most generally cultivated of farinaceous
seeds; and, notwithstanding the rudeness of the husbandry implements,
the quality of the produce was apparently equal to that of modern
times; the spelt (_triticum spelta_), now one of the most important
cereals of Switzerland, did not appear till the bronze age; while rye
was entirely unknown, thus showing a connection with the countries of
the Mediterranean, the lake colonists having the same cereals as the
Egyptians. Cakes of unleavened bread have been found, made of millet
and wheat, which had been baked on the hearthstone in the dwellings.
Barley seems to have been used boiled or parched; but as corn-crushers
and mealing-stones have been found in most of the settlements, grain
had been extensively used for food The latest settlement, dating
backward {403} not less than 2,000 years, and the older going some
3,000 years and more further backward still, it is interesting to
observe what change this long lapse of time produced on plants:

  "The dense, compact wheat and the close, six-rowed barley have
  undergone no perceptible change, yet it must be confessed that most
  of them agree with no recent forms sufficiently to allow of their
  being classed together. The small Celtic beans, the peas, the small
  lake-dwelling barley, the Egyptian and small lake-dwelling wheat,
  and the two-rowed wheat, or _emmer_, form peculiar and apparently
  extinct races; they are distinguished for the most part from the
  modern cultivated kinds by smaller seeds. Man has, therefore, in
  course of time produced sorts which give a more abundant yield, and
  these have gradually supplanted the old varieties."

With wild plants the case is different:

  "The flora of the lake-dwellings announces to us that all the plants
  which come in contact with man become changed up to a certain point,
  and man participates in the great transformations of nature, while
  the wild plants, which surround us at the present day, still grow in
  the same forms as they did three or four thousand years ago, and do
  not exhibit the slightest change."

The final abandonment of these lake-dwellings, about the beginning of
the Christian era, would result from an improved civilization and a
more united and orderly state of society; but how long before that
time they had been occupied has not yet been definitely determined;
our chronology is still relative rather than absolute. Peat has
accumulated over some settlements, but as its rate of growth varies
under different conditions, we are only told by it that the stone-age
dwellings lasted many centuries. At Robenhausen peat moor, there are
remains of three settlements of the stone age, one over the other; two
of which had been destroyed by fire, and the last had been abandoned,
probably on account of the increase of peat. Between the first and
second settlement there are three feet of peat and one foot of other
deposit, both containing relics; between the second and third
settlements the deposits are the same in character and sickness, and
over the last dwelling are two feet of peat and half-a-foot of mould;
so that during the stone age there had been a slow growth of eight
feet of peat, and the deposit of three and a half feet of other
matter. Other means have been used to obtain more definite results;
the most remarkable of which is that of Professor Morlot, who from an
examination of a cone of gravel and alluvium, connected with deposits
of the stone, bronze, Roman, and recent periods, and gradually built
up by the torrent of Teniere where it falls into Lake Geneva,
concludes that the age of bronze has an antiquity of from 3,000 to
4,000 years, and that of stone from 5,000 to 7,000 years--no very
startling estimate, when we remember the high antiquity which has been
assigned to the drift and cave men.

Of the physical characters of the lake-dwellers, Dr. Keller gives us
little information; that they had small hands is probable from the
shortness of their sword-handles. Few human bones, and those chiefly
of children, have been found. No crania of the stone age have been
seen, but a few out of the bronze period, one of which from Meilen
differs little from the skulls of the existing Swiss. It is,
therefore, mainly from the relics found that we can form any guess as
to the origin and relationship of the lake-dwellers, and by those it
is shown that they belonged to the very people who at the same time
lived on the mainland. Dr. Keller concludes "that the builders of the
lake-dwellings were a branch of the Celtic population of Switzerland,
but that the earlier settlements belong to the pre-historic period,
and had already fallen into decay before the Celts took their place in
the history of Europe."

The history of the lake-dwellers opens a hopeful prospect for those
races who are now in a degraded condition; for here they start with a
low degree of civilization, and yet there is a gradual rise upward to
that point where great skill was reached {404} in metallurgic and
other arts; but even this was only a step onward to that high
cultivation of intellect and morals among their descendants the Swiss
people. Why should not other races pass through the same stages,
especially when influenced by intercourse with modern civilized
nations?



ORIGINAL


PEA-BLOSSOM.


  I hear a faltering footstep
  Crossing the matted floor,
  And a little knock low down
  On the panels of the door.
  A small hand is uplifted
  To raise the iron latch,
  And entrance claimed in a silvery tone
  No nightingale could match.

  Away with books and papers!
  Enter, my fairy bright;
  Sweep the dim cobwebs from my brain,
  And let in air and light.
  Close the dull portals of history,
  Unclasp that magic door
  That leads to the jewelled caverns
  Of fiction and fairy lore:
  The legend of Cinderella,
  Of knights and maidens small.
  Of princely frogs and pigmy dogs.
  And my lady's golden ball.

  Good-night, my white-robed enchantress.
  My blue-sashed, sunny-haired muse;
  Perfection thou art, from that topmost curl
  To the tips of thy dainty shoes.
  Watch her well, angel-guardian!
  Pray for her, crowned saint.
  That when the time for the cross shall come,
  Her spirit grow not faint;
  That she may go to her last repose
  With a heart unspotted by sin--
  That this face of lustrous purity
  May mirror the soul within.



{405}


ORIGINAL



A MONTH AT A FRENCH WATERING-PLACE.

BY AN OLD BACHELOR.


I always had a great veneration for the disciples of Esculapius, but
never so as when my considerate doctor decided that a sea voyage was
absolutely necessary for my my health. Being unblessed by those sweet
cares, a wife and children, I determined to show my obedience to his
commands, and at the same time to ratify my long-cherished plan of
visiting the old world. Be reassured, readers, I have no intention of
harrowing your gentle spirits by a description of sea-sickness, nor of
wearying you with my experiences at custom-house or railroad depot,
but desire to transport you at once to the good little watering place
of V----, which had been recommended to me as the very place for the
exorcising of that tyrant devil, dyspepsia.

It was a lovely evening in July that I took a carriage from D----, for
the said watering-place, for railroads have not as yet invaded the
primitive simplicity of the village; hotels have, however, and much to
my satisfaction I found myself, after a charming hour's drive, seated
in a cozy room with an excellent dinner before me. My Hostess I soon
discovered to be quite a character; a raw-boned, fast-talking
Frenchwoman, with a suspicious darkness on her upper lip. When I had
finished my repast, this worthy dame informed me that it was the
custom of all good "Seigneurs" to repair to the beach after dinner; so
giving me my hat and cane, she showed me the way, and I in all
obedience departed.

The moon was then full, and cast a deliciously deceptive light on all
around; even the wretched huts wherein the French peasantry
contentedly huddle, mellowed by its light, looked picturesque and
quaint. Looking around, I found that the village nestled between two
hills, and that I was at the moment in the principal street, which
cuts it in two, and from which smaller streets diverge in all
directions. Tempted by the quiet of the evening I turned from the main
road, and soon found myself in one of the prettiest winding lanes
imaginable; at that quiet hour, with the moonlight streaming through
the interlacing trees, I know of nothing more charming than a walk
along the winding paths which form a network around the village; what
in the day time might be simply pretty, borrowed from the lovely night
a charm and mystery that was irresistible; and so I wandered on, a
luxurious feeling, half melancholic, half pleasurable, soothing my
spirit, until I was abruptly reminded that all things sweet in this
life are short, by finding myself at the end of my pretty lane, and
once more landed in the village street. Here my landlady's admonition
was brought to my mind, by seeing several parties of red-hooded,
red-cloaked personages all going one way; these were evidently some of
the good bathers, and them I followed. In a few minutes I found myself
in quite a small crowd of strangers, who made the beach look like a
gaden of poppies. I, who had formed my ideas of watering-places from
Newport and Long Branch, looked in amazement at this beach, which is
nothing more or less than a break in the high white cliffs, which
stretch on either side at far at the eye can {406} reach; however,
though small, it seemed convenient, and I looked at the rippling water
in eager anticipation of the morrow's bath. Seating myself on the
stones, which form a poor substitute for the firm white sand of
Newport, I proceed as is my custom, to observe my companions, and from
their trifling actions to form an opinion of their different natures.
A number of groups attracted my attention, but as I merely discovered
that the ladies of the parties were industriously occupied in trying
to out-babble--talk it hardly was--each other, and that the men
carelessly reclined near them smoking, in utter despair of otherwise
making use of their mouths, I was beginning to think that there was
not much food for my observations, when my attention was suddenly
arrested by the familiar sound of a few English words. Turning around,
I saw at a few steps from me a party which I had not yet observed. The
centre figure of this new picture at once arrested my attention;
evidently this lady considered herself of great importance, for she
was laying down the law to the various persons around her, with a
volubility that a French woman only can attain. Her dress was an
extraordinary caricature of rural finery; it was a pity, I thought,
that the face under that peculiarly youthful, flower-ornamented hat,
should be that of a plain woman of fifty. Her court was principally
composed of various feeble imitations of herself, but my attention was
soon entirely occupied by two figures at the extreme verge of the
group, a young lady and a gentleman; the young lady seemed to be
giving an English lesson to her listless companion, who appeared
almost too indolent to turn around in admiration of the girl's
sprightliness; a second glance convinced me that I was near one of my
own countrywomen; the delicate profile, fragile form, and rather
nervous manner could belong to none but an American. My interest was
now excited to the highest pitch, for when an ocean rolls between a
man and his country, all that reminds him of that country has an
irresistible charm, especially when that something happens to be a
pretty girl. But my observations were cut short, for the whole party
arose a few minutes after, and left the beach. I soon followed, and
learned from my voluble landlady that I had been observing
fellow-boarders; that the strangely attired lady was the most
important personage of V---- that she patronized sea-bathing every
summer, and that she rejoiced in the name of Madame la Baronne d'Agri.
The handsome young monsieur with the beard, proved to be her nephew,
and the "Charmante Americaine" was with with her mother, an invalid
for whom sea air had been ordered. Then followed a long description of
the other members of the party, a Mr. and Mrs. Poirier and their
daughter, by young artist and several other personages, to which
description I fear I was but indifferently attentive.

Next morning it rained--rain forming a part of nearly ever day's
programme, as I afterward discovered. Not yet having become hardened
to the fact, I was dolefully looking from the hotel door, vainly
endeavoring to discover a patch of blue sky, when I was joined by
Madame la Baronne's nephew. Remarks on the weather were followed by a
polite offer of a cigar, whose genial fragrance soon induced a more
interesting conversation. A few chance words brought out the fact that
my young companion was quite an amateur chemist, and as, in my college
days, chemistry had been a sort of passion with me, we were soon
launched in an animated discussion. I was much interested to hear what
rapid strides the French had recently taken in that and other positive
sciences. From chemistry we passed to politics, philosophy, and
finally religion. While listening to this young man's clear, strong
exposition of his sentiments on these various subjects, I found myself
wondering at this, to me, new, new phase of the French character, as
unlike the light, {407} frivolous, gay-hearted Frenchman of the novel
and stage, as possible. I must say it pleased me even less; the
down-right scepticism, the well-turned sophisms, the extreme
materialism, were easily traced to the teachings of Voltaire. I am
well pleased to think that this young man is the representative of but
a comparatively small class, but unfortunately that class is composed
of much of the brain of the country, and consequently carries with it
great influence. On all American questions M. Louis d'Agri (for so the
young man was called) showed a curious interest; of our great war his
opinion had been biassed by Southern influence--not unnaturally, since
his only American associates had been from that portion of our
country; these associates had also given him their ideas on the
subject of slavery, but a few facts, put in the simple, plain way
which seemed best to suit his turn of mind, convinced him, or seemed
to convince him, that, in that particular at least, his judgment was
in error. He asked many questions on the present state of affairs in
our country, of the possible future of the South, of the treatment of
Jefferson Davis, etc., etc., all of which I answered apparently to his
satisfaction. Indeed, not only in his case, but in many others, I have
noticed that there is a great curiosity felt about everything
American; to tell the truth, I think that the war brought to their
minds that a vast and important country really does exist on the other
side of the broad ocean, a fact of which before they were but dimly
conscious. Even now, the strange ignorance of our customs, people, and
especially our geography, even among the educated classes, would bring
forth the astonishment and indignation of any American fifth-form
school-boy. The French are singularly devoid of our go-ahead qualities
in everything; they travel but little, and being perfectly convinced
that France is the only country of any real importance on the globe,
trouble themselves but little about any other, especially should that
other be separated from them by an ocean.

From American politics we turned to those of France, a subject which
brought out the young man's most bitter anathemas; dissatisfied with
the form of government, with the people, and especially with the
emperor, he expressed himself with much more freedom than any other
Frenchman I had yet conversed with. Most of them answer any objections
with a shrug of the shoulders, and a furtive glance about them; they
often praise the emperor for the good he has done their beloved Paris,
but with an air which says: "I like not the man, but admire his
sagacity." Very few Americans, however, could have expressed more
republican, more anti-aristocratic sentiments than M. d'Agri, who, as
I learned afterward, is the last direct representative of a decayed
but noble house. On all religious topics he proved to be an utter
sceptic, avowedly believing in nothing, and regarding as either knaves
or dupes all those who did not stoop to his own degrading materialism:
singular that a mind so clear should be so perverted. We had merely
broached the last subject, when the ladies of the party, enticed by
the sun which was beginning to brighten the sky, descended, and
proposed going down to bathe. M. d'Agri, advancing toward the young
lady I had observed the night before, said:

"_Mees Fannee_, I have just been having an interesting conversation
with a countryman of yours."

The young lady's face brightened, and with a frankness that is
certainly a charm peculiar to American girls, extended her hand,
saying in English:

"Is it possible! Americans in a foreign land can scarcely be
strangers!" and so, from that moment, I was considered as one of the
party. Mrs. Hayne, the invalid mother, I found belonged to that rather
extensive class of ladies who, from having some slight {408} nervous
ailment, nurse and pet it till it grows to be a real malady, which
makes them fretful, wrinkled and miserable. As we walked to the beach
I was made the honored recipient of the good lady's woes, and being a
tolerable listener was immediately taken into her favor.

We found the beach already lively with the indefatigable bathers, who
seize on all tolerably sunshiny days to search for health in the
luxurious water. Several groups of people, who either had bathed or
were going to bathe later, were seated on the stones, watching with
interest the extraordinary looking figures that emerged from the long
row of cabins. Notwithstanding my eagerness for a good swim, I stood
for nearly half an hour watching also; many of the ladies who went
into their cabins majestic in width of skirt and flowing drapery,
emerged from them reduced to a mere ghost of their former grandeur. To
all whom it may concern, I give it as my decided opinion, that
oil-silk caps and scant bathing dresses are generally not becoming,
and that a young man must be of a peculiarly susceptible disposition
to become enamored of these sea-nymphs.

One thing let me observe, there is a regard for personal safety here
of which we are too devoid. I noticed in the water two black-clothed
individuals, whose only business seemed to be to exercise those ladies
and children who did not swim, so that they might not catch cold; to
give lessons to beginners in the noble art of swimming, and to have an
eye to the safety of the bathers generally. When the bath is over, the
well-cared-for person is well wrapped up and hurried to the cabin,
where a hot foot-bath is in readiness; to this latter arrangement I
give my most cordial approval.

As I turned around, after these various observations, intending in my
turn to appropriate one of the cabins, I was met by Madame d'Agri,
who, in an eccentric bathing-dress, was tripping down to the water.
Stopping me, she overwhelmed me with voluble patronage, assuring me
that her nephew had spoken of me in the highest terms, and that all
his friends were hers; and finally pointing to the largest cabin on
the batch, over which the family arms floated ostentatiously, informed
me that in that cabin they often retired from the vulgar herd, and
invited me, whenever I felt annoyed by the plebeians around me, to
join them, that a chair would always be at my disposal. Bowing my
thanks, I beat a hasty retreat, out of breath for very sympathy.

After my bath, which I enjoyed as only veteran swimmers can enjoy it,
I sallied forth to verify or destroy the impressions my moonlight
stroll of the night before had given me. To some extent, at least,
they were destroyed; in the moonlight the low, thatched huts
--cottages they could scarcely be called--looked picturesque; in the
broad daylight they looked simply squalid; dirt and discomfort reigned
supreme. In many of these huts there seemed to be but one, unfloored,
wretched-looking room, serving as kitchen, bedroom, and parlor, to a
swarming family of dirty children, with their dirtier parents. Yet I
an told that many of these peasants, who are content to live in these
hovels year after year, and subsist on crabs, periwinkles, and such
trash, are often comparatively well off, some of them being in actual
receipt of rents amounting to ten and fifteen thousand francs a year;
but as their fathers live so do they live, and the natural consequence
is that they are an ill-favored, withered-looking set. I looked in
vain for a fresh, blooming girl, there seemed to be no age between
twelve and fifty; even the children looked withered, and the old
people were fairly bent double; yet they lived on, contented enough,
because dreaming of no other possible life, and enjoying the bustle of
an occasional fete with a zest which our more phlegmatic people would
disdain. While making these {409} reflections, I again found myself in
one of those charming lanes which had so pleased me the night before.
These, at least, were unspoiled by the misery around; what a blessing
that man cannot degrade nature, however he may degrade himself! By my
side murmured and gurgled the prettiest little brook, dignified here
by the name of "petite riviere," which I ever saw; clear as crystal,
swift and cold, it lends beauty and freshness to the whole country
around. An American farmer would laugh at the tiny stream scarcely
more than a mile in length, but an artist would revel in its beauty.

And so, what with bathing, walking, driving, and chatting, time passed
quietly but pleasantly at the little village of V----. Meanwhile I
grew more and more interested in watching my companions, especially
two of them; I often found myself, while seeming to listen to the
Baronne's endless tales of her house's past grandeur, or to poor Mrs.
Mayne's recital of her troubles, closely observing my young
countrywoman and M. Louis d'Agri. Knowing as I did his ideas on
serious subjects, and feeling, too, the influence which a mind like
his, strong, cool, and calculating, could scarcely fail to exercise
over a sensitive and impulsive nature like hers, I found myself
growing more and more uneasy. Evidently accustomed to that sort of
flirting and freedom which is entirely prohibited to French girls,
Miss Hayne delighted in taking her lazy cavalier unawares, and
obliging him, with the most innocent air possible, to give up his dear
comfort--now to fetch a chair, again to hold her worsteds while she
wallowed them; a sort of treatment to which the gentleman was
evidently unaccustomed, and which, perhaps for the very novelty of the
thing, seemed to create not an unpleasant sensation. But, on the other
hand, he was fond of bringing out all her girlish and unsophisticated
ideas, and quietly leveling at them his battery of cold-hearted
sophisms, in order to destroy them one by one; at first she would
battle bravely, but an impulsive girl, untrained to analyze her own
convictions, has but a poor chance against a clear-headed, determined
man, and I noticed, with pain, that after every such discussion she
would seem uneasy and depressed. Then her opponent would lazily settle
himself in his chair, and allow his rival, the young artist, whom I
have strangely slighted heretofore, to bring his gallantries into
play. This young man was a sort of _protege_ of Madame d'Agri's, and
an entirely different type of man from Madame's nephew; all the arts
and graces, compliments and "petits soins" which the latter despised,
M. Dubois employed with true French art. He had from the first been
struck by Miss Hayne's pretty face, which he sedulously introduced
into all his sketches, paying her, whenever he was permitted, most
unremitting attentions; but I noticed that, though the native coquetry
which seemed to be this girl's principal fault, induced her to
encourage him, a word, or even a look from M. Louis d'Agri, would draw
her away from him to the piano, or oftener to the chess-board, where
she invariably received severe lectures on her neglect of the rules of
that noble game. You may, in the mean time, wonder what became of the
other young girls of the party, for there were several; they looked at
_Mees Fannee_, and her freedom of speech and action, in ill-concealed
horror, and remained near their mothers, chattering fast enough among
themselves, but scarcely venturing to answer "yes" or "no," when
addressed by their elders, especially if those elders happened to be
of the other sex. Indeed, M. Louis informed me in confidence that his
young countrywomen, "s'ennuyent bien, et ma foi! elles ennuyent
joliment les autres" before marriage, but after--bah! and an
expressive wave of the hand finished the sentence.

One morning as I was lounging about, thinking with a certain degree of
_ennui_ that doing nothing was, after all, the hardest sort of work, I
was met {410} by Madame d'Agri, who accosted me with one of her
sweetest smiles.

"O Monsieur! I was just wondering where I should find you--so
delighted, really so charmed--you must go with us, indeed you must!
now, no excuse; positively I will accept none; this time you must
allow my will to be law."

"Madame, I am your most obedient; but in what particular am I required
to show my duty?"

"Mon Dieu! and have I not told you? what a giddy thing I am; indeed my
poor husband" (whom I am sure she talked to death) "always said I was
giddy! We are going to C----, where there is to be a fete, and on the
way we can see see a chateau or two, not much, you know, but pretty
well for these degenerate times. Yes, we are all going--that is, no,
not all, for poor Madame Hayne has the migraine: dear! dear! how that
poor woman suffers! So the charming _Mees Fannee_ has accepted me as
her chaperone--interesting girl, is she not? Well, as I was saying,
Madame Hayne has the migraine, and Madame Poirier has the toothache
and will not that her daughter go without her; so the party will be
reduced to Madame Duchemin and her daughter, _Mees Fannee_, my nephew,
M. Dubois--has he not a charming talent--and myself; and you really
must join us--plenty of room I assure you, plenty of room. We shall
go in one of those vehicles they call an 'Americaine'--I fancy it got
its name from the hospitality with which it holds so many people--so
like your delightful country!"

After some little delay occasioned by the ladies, who, as might be
expected, all forgot something at the last woman's, we started. It was
a fresh, breezy morning, just such a one as to excite high spirits,
and make one appreciate every trifling incident. The road was
excellent, indeed it made me blush for some of our own ill-made,
ill-kept roads; but of this I said nothing, for every American feels
bound, when abroad, to represent all concerning his country "couleur
de rose." The scenery was charming; nothing perhaps striking and grand
and vast, like the scenery we are most accustomed to, but a pleasing
alternation of hill and dale, with well-cultivated fields, villages
nestling in groves of fine trees, and above all occasional glimpses of
the blue ocean, to delight the eye and to give one a genial and
pleasing sense of the beautiful, without calling forth rapturous, and
let me add, fatiguing expressions of admiration. When we reached the
first chateau we all agreed that we were tired of the "Americaine,"
and that it was absolutely necessary for our happiness to wander about
for half so hour or so.

"M. d'Agri!" exclaimed Miss Hayne "you once promised me a sketch; here
is my album, and yonder chateau is the very subject for a drawing; so,
sir, please, to sit down and obey my command."

"Obedience was never my principal virtue, _Mees Fannee_, and I feel
particularly lazy this morning."

But a little imperious gesture, accompanied by a half smile, had their
effect, and the young man, perhaps too indolent to make further
objections, took the proffered album, and seeking the softest
grass-plot, sat down. I noticed that the artist, of whose arm the
Baronne had taken possession, looked around angrily, as though this
time M. d'Agri were in reality trespassing on his ground; but that
gentleman, himself quite a clever draughtsman, proceeded with most
imperturbable _sang froid_. The view he chose was really pretty. The
chateau, a large, irregular edifice, stood at the end of a noble
avenue of horse-chestnuts, whose broad leaves made a dense shade; the
country immediately around was charming; a little stream somewhat
resembling that of V----, only larger, was seen in the distance,
wandering through shrubbery and trees, until lost behind a hill which
rose more abruptly than most of the hills in this part of Normandy. On
the other hand, fields of wheat and oats extended for some {411}
distance, ended by a dark belting of woods; not far from us stood one
of those large wayside crosses so often seen in Catholic countries,
near which a shepherd was tending a flock of sheet.

When the sketch was finished Madame d'Agri came up, and admiring it
loudly, thanked _Mees Fannee_, with many caresses, for having made
that lazy nephew of hers exert himself, and during the rest of the
ride showered even more than her ordinary share of condescensions on
the young girl. This brought to my mind various other trifling
circumstances, and I said within myself: "French titles are often
accompanied by French poverty; this girl is rich, and Madame la
Baronne knows it. I will watch."

It was late in the afternoon when we reached the village; leaving our
tired horses at the inn, we walked to the market place. Here, a number
of booths, gay with flags and ribbons, stood temptingly displaying
their wares; most of them were filled with second-rate, but highly
colored china, for which unlucky wretches were induced to try their
chance, through the agency of a particularly dirty pack of cards.
Gambling on a small scale, for pieces of dusty gingerbread, seemed to
be another favorite mode of parting with sous. On the other side, the
beating of drums and clanging of cymbals announced that in a certain
tent the unsophisticated mind could be rejoiced by extra-ordinary
theatrical representations for the moderate sum of three sous; dust,
noise, and bustle reigned supreme, and the peasant's in their holiday
clothes seemed to be at the very height of enjoyment. Altogether it
was a gay and picturesque scene, but I was content to view it at a
respectful distance. Not so Madame d'Agri; she patronized the
peasants, who looked at her eccentric costume in bewildered
admiration; chucked the children under the chin, scolded the parents,
and in short acted out the "grande dame" of the fete to her heart's
content. As night approached, a large building in the centre of the
place, used, I believe, as a sort of flour depot on market days, was
lighted by Chinese lanterns and flaring tallow candles; here the youth
of both sexes enjoyed a rollicking, laugh-abounding dance, to the
sound of a cracked fiddle. Madame was just insisting on forming a
quadrille of her own, to encourage the peasantry, who, by the way,
seemed but little in need of encouragement, when her nephew
represented to her that we should not get home till late as it was,
and that the moon would not serve after a certain hour. Reluctantly
she yielded, and we settled ourselves once more in our "Americaine,"
tired but pleased. The conversation was soon monopolized by M. d'Agri
and Miss Fanny, who, whatever might be their fatigue, always seemed to
have some point of dispute.

After this excursion my vigilance increased, and my observations were
not pleasing; two or three little circumstances brought out in M.
d'Agri's character an insensibility to the pains and sufferings of
others, and a certain cruelty of thought and action, which,
notwithstanding the interest his fine intellect excited in me, brought
a feeling of distrust, and at times of dislike.

One rather misty day, on which but few bathers ventured into the
water, I, feeling a need of exercise, determined to enjoy my customary
swim. The cabin I happened to take stood next to the large one of
Madame d'Agri. When I returned, dripping and glowing from my bath, I
noticed that the lady was seated in it sewing, and that her nephew was
lounging by her, reading the paper. As I was luxuriating in the
delicious feeling which I believe sea-bathing alone can give, I was
startled by a few words which came distinctly to my ears; so far the
conversation had not risen above an occasional, monotonous hum, but
suddenly I found myself in the awkward position of a forced listener,
as the thin wooden partition proved but a slight {412} obstruction to
the heightened voices of the speakers.

"My good aunt, let us not broach that subject again."

"My good nephew, I must and will; the welfare of our noble house--"

"Fiddlesticks!" (this is a mild translation.) "Listen rather to this
account of the transactions at Vienna.

"Louis, you are mad. If you will not be moved by higher
considerations, think at least of your own comfort--that comfort that
you love so well. You are poor, too high born to work, what then is
left you but a wealthy marriage?"

"There you have touched my only vulnerable point, my comfort; but
then, my dear aunt, what becomes of your aristocratic scruples? would
you have the noble blood of the d'Agris contaminated?--"

"But, Louis, Americans are not like others; it is true they do say her
father made his money in commerce, but then, I read somewhere or other
that Americans consider themselves all as sovereigns; besides, we want
money, and if it is said that you married a foreigner, people will not
trouble themselves about the origin of her money-sacks, as they would
if she were the daughter of a French roturier. Come, my boy, be
reasonable; remember that you are the last representative--"

"I remember, rather, that champagne is dear, and so are cigars: what
do you want of me?"

"I want you to marry this rich girl; no hard task--you seem to like
her well enough--"

"My good aunt, everything in life bores me. When I was a child, my
playthings bored me; later, school and college proved almost
intolerable bores; my rank bores me; Paris bores me, the country still
more so; society is an insufferable bore, but above all, French girls
bore me. Now, this _Mees Fannee_ is original or seems to me so; she
stirs me a little with her quickness, her coquetry, and her _outre_
ideas. But remember that has not yet lasted long; a few weeks more,
and she too probably, will bore me--and then for a whole lifetime . . .
good aunt, that is a consideration to make a man tremble!"

"Nonsense, Louis; yon will have to marry some time or other."

"Yes, I suppose so; but French girls are brought up with a becoming
sense of the submission due from wives to husbands; now, this girl
would prove rebellious I know, and, however democratic I may be in my
theory of the government of nations, my theory of the government of
the 'menage' is that of despotism. Besides, I have a remnant of
humanity left in me, and would not condemn that bright young creature
to the misery of being my wife; no, no, let her marry some Quixotical
American, who will place her on a high pedestal and pass his life in
admiring her and letting her henpeck him."

I could not help smiling at this resume of an American husband's
chivalric devotion.

"Very well, you will pass your life as you have commenced it; you will
deny yourself all sorts of luxuries because they are expensive; that
Rembrandt you covet so, will remain unpurchased; you want to travel,
but you will stay at home, because travelling costs money; and finally
you will marry some girl as poor as yourself, or with a dot, which she
will spend, together with more than half your pittance, in buying
silks and satins to outshine Madame this or Madame that--"

"Hold!"

"On the other hand, you might, by marrying this charming _Mees_,
decorate your house with pictures and statutes, go everywhere, see
everything, and take your place among the enlightened patrons of art
and science; all this you reject because you are afraid this little
_Mees_ will prove stronger of will--"

{413}

"Stronger of will than I!" and M. Louis sprang from his chair; the
Baronne was no fool after all. "Diable! there are few women I could
not bend to my will. My aunt, I will try my luck with this little
_Mees_; win her, wed her, and conquer her, too?"

"There spoke a d'Agri; but, my dear boy, you should pay her court more
assiduously, compliment her--"

"Pshaw! I understand your charming sex better than you do yourself; if
flattery could have won her, I should long ago have been beaten by
that soft-headed, smooth-tongued artist. No, the surest way to win a
woman is to make her feel that you can master her, and that if you bow
before her, it is only because you choose to do so."

"So you are not afraid of ultimate success; you think she loves you?"

"No, but I think she is fascinated, mesmerized, what you will, by me,
which answers the same purpose; what I have to do is to hasten
matters, and that is what I mean to do. I think she has gone to the
'Source' for one of her eccentric, solitary rambles. An revoir, ma
bonne Tante!" and the young man sprang from the cabin with an energy
which I had never before noticed in him. Soon after, Madame gathered
up her work apparently, and I heard no more. My toilet finished I also
took my departure, and thoughtfully turned my steps toward the hotel.

On my way I met Miss Fanny just returning from her walk; evidently M.
Louis had missed her. Ascertaining that she was not tired, I begged
her to accompany me to a particularly pretty spot on the hill, from
which the village was seen to advantage; on the way the conversation
was desultory, though I tried gradually to lead it to the subject I
meant soon to attack. Once seated under the trees, I changed my tone,
and looking at her earnestly, said:

"Miss Fanny, will you pardon me if the interest I feel in you, as a
countrywoman, and as a guileless girl, leads me to speak plainly to
you? Remember that I am more than twice your age; come, have I
permission to make myself disagreeable?"

"I do not understand you"--and she looked up startled; then, perhaps
reading a part of my thoughts in my face, she said with a blush, "Yes,
you may speak."

I then, as gently as possible, told her what I had observed, and dwelt
on the young man's unsound religions principles, on his want of
sympathy for others, etc., and finally related the conversation I had
just heard, softening some parts, but giving a detailed account of
others. She bent her head, and seemed considerably moved.

"And now, my child," I continued, "give me the satisfaction of feeling
that I have done right, that you are glad to know this, that your
heart is not as yet so engaged in this affair as to bring you any real
unhappiness; if I thought I had unwittingly wounded any deep and
honest sentiment of yours, if I thought you felt for this young man
that sort of love which hallows its object, and often purifies it from
evil, I could not easily forgive myself."

"You need not fear, my good friend; I thank you for your interest in
me," and she extended her hand, smiling faintly through her tears. "I
have done wrong I know, but this is how it happened: at first, ennuyed
by the quietness of this place, which seemed so dull after Newport, I
commenced a sort of flirtation with this M. Louis d'Agri, merely
because I craved excitement."

"Precisely; in other words you are an example of our as yet imperfect
system of education. In France young girls are kept in severe
restraint, from which they rebound after marriage, often causing much
misery; ours is the other extreme--there is an almost unlimited degree
of liberty among our young people, which is so far good that it
creates a feeling of chivalric honor among the men, and of
self-sustaining strength among the women; but at the same time this
freedom creates also a longing for excitement, a {414} fear of ennui,
which finds vent in an immense amount of flirting, generally innocent
enough, but which becomes a part of the character of almost every
young person, especially every young girl--is it not so?"

"Perhaps it is; at all events the peculiar character of this young man
soon interested me; I felt piqued at his indolent, indifferent manner,
and continued the flirtation; gradually, as I came to know him better,
he acquired over me, I scarcely know how, a sort of influence from
which I could not rid myself; but never once did I mistake the feeling
which prompted me to crave his society, for love."

"Then you do not think he could have succeeded in--"

"I do not know; had I not been made aware of his base, mercenary
motives, he might have strengthened that influence so far as to blind
me to its nature, and make me think it love; but--"

"But now you are warned."

"But now I defy M. Louis d'Agri and his fascinations," and her eyes
flashed.

"Still, do you not think that you would feel more comfortable away
from his society?"

"I feel no fear, but shall be glad to leave this place. Fortunately,
mother was complaining this very morning of the cold sea-winds, and I
can easily persuade her that it is necessary to go further south. Is
your mind easy now? I see you have but little faith in my resolution."

"Pardon me. I have, but I think that the Baronne would find means to
make a longer residence here disagreeable, did she perceive the change
which your manner must necessarily undergo."

Our conversation lasted some little time longer, and ended by most
kindly expressed thanks, and hopes for some future meeting, which
hopes I most cordially reciprocated, for the girl's frank and simple
manner during the past conversation had much heightened my esteem of
her.

That evening there arose a perfect storm of regrets, and expressions
of surprise at Mrs. Haynes suddenly expressed determination. "It was
not possible! Madame's health had improved so perceptibly," which
assertion the worthy lady repudiated with as much energy as though it
had been an insult. "We shall feel so deserted after she and _Mees
Fannee_ have gone," etc., etc. _Mees Fannee_ said nothing, but a
heightened color, and a quiet, determined manner new to her, seemed to
strike M. Louis forcibly; he darted a quick look at me, but whether he
really ever suspected my agency in the transaction or not, I never
knew. If he did, I believe that after the first feeling of anger had
passed, he felt grateful rather than not, for his better nature, I am
glad to think, really revolted at the idea of the contemplated
meanness.

At eleven the next morning the old-fashioned diligence carried _Mees
Fannee_ and her mother away, leaving the hotel _triste_ indeed. A
little while after I saw Madame la Baronne and her nephew walking up
and down the little garden, the lady gesticulating violently, and the
young man quietly smoking a cigar, and answering his excited relative
with an occasional shrug of the shoulders.

Soon after I also took my departure, for I found the interest of the
place strangely diminished, and the evenings at the "plage" stale,
flat, and unprofitable; so leaving the good French ladies and their
daughters discussing the coming winter's fashions with voluble
interest, the indefatigable Baronne eagerly looking out for another
heiress, and the nephew lazily indifferent to her success, I made my
adieux. Thus ended my month at a French watering-place.



{415}


AVE MARIA SINE LABE CONCEPTA.


BY REV M. MULLIN.

  Hail, Mary, our Mother! Hail, Virgin the purest!
    Hail, Mary, the Mother of mercy and love!
  Hail, Star of the Ocean, serenest and surest
    That ever shone brightly in heaven above!
  'Mid the shadows of death stretching down o'er the nations,
    Thy children have always rejoiced in your fame.
  Oh! proudly we witness in our generations
    The last crowning halo that circles thy name.

  Tradition, which, joined with its sister evangel,
    God placed upon guard at the door of his bride.
  Tradition, which beams like the sword of the angel,
    As flame-like, it "turneth on every side,"
  Tradition shoots up o'er the ages victorious--
    Its summit in heaven, its base upon earth--
  Like a pillar of fire, far-shining and glorious,
    And shows thee all sinless and pure in thy birth.

  As fair as the rose 'mid Jerusalem's daughters.
    As bright as the lily by Jordan's blue wave,
  As white as the dove, and as clear as the waters
    That flowed for the prophet and circled his grave;
  As tall as the cedar on Lebanon's mountain,
    As fruitful as vine-tree in Cades' domain.
  As straight as the palm by Jerusalem's fountain.
    As beauteous as rose-bush on Jericho plain;

  As sweet as the balm-tree diffusing its odor,
    As sweet as the gold-harp of David the king,
  As sweet as the honeycomb fresh from Mount Bodor,
    As sweet as the face veiled by Gabriel's wing:
  The silver-lined sky o'er the garden of Flora,
    The rainbow that gilds the dark clouds within view,
  The star that shines brightest, the dawning Aurora--
    More chaste than the moon, and more beautiful too.

  The glass without stain, and the radiance immortal,
    The ever-sealed fount in the city of God,
  The garden enclosed, on whose sanctified portal
    None e'er but the King of the angels hath trod:
  The sign that appeared in mid-Heaven--a maiden
    With the moon 'neath her feet, and twelve stars on her head,
  Sun-clothed, going up from the desert to Eden;
    Such Mary, the Queen of the living and dead.

{416}

  Oh! such are the words of the saints now in glory,
    Whose voices are heard o'er the dark waste of time,
  Like sentinels set through the centuries hoary,
    Proclaiming her free from original crime;
  Of the prophets and pontiffs, and doctors and sages,
    Who once in this dark vale of misery trod,
  Like lamps hanging out on the mist-covered ages
    To light up the ways of the city of God.

  We see by their light with a swelling emotion
    The bark of the church, as it onward doth ride,
  Through tempest and gloom, where the Star of the Ocean
    Doth brightly illumine its path o'er the tide;
  Where clouds become thicker and hurricanes fleeter,
    And threaten to shut out its radiance from view,
  We see through the darkness the figure of Peter
    As he points it out still b the sailors and crew.

  We hear the loud ring of the multitude's paean
    By the nations in triumph exultantly sung,
  From the cliffs of the north to the distant AEgean,
    As Celestine silenced Nestorius' tongue:
  In Ephesus' temple--the temple of Mary--
    The fathers hold council by Peter's command,
  In Ephesus' streets, long expectant and weary,
    The crowds stand with joybells and torches in hand.

  We see the grand figure of Cyril before us,
    Where John, her adopted, before him had trod,
  As pontiffs and people swell loud the glad chorus,
    That Mary our Mother is Mother of God.
  And oh! that we've witnessed the last shining lustre,
    That Star of the Stars, in her diadem set,
  The first in existence, last placed in the cluster.
    To shine through a long line of centuries yet;

  There were journeys by land, there were ships on the ocean,
    That bore Judah's princes to Sion's bright walls;
  The people have heard with a thrilling emotion
    The voice of the high priest, as on them it calls.
  Oh! bless them, dear Mother, we pray with emotion.
    And bless this green island, that looks up to thee;
  For this, dearest Mother, is gem of the ocean,
    And thou art immaculate Star of the Sea.

December 8,1864.



{417}


ORIGINAL.

WOMAN.  [Footnote 143]

  [Footnote 143: Essays on Woman's Work, by Bessie R. Parkes. The
  higher Education of Woman, by Emily Davis. Woman's Work in the
  Church, by J. M. Ludlow. London and New York: Alex. Strahan.]

Among the social topics of the day, that of the present position and
future prospects of woman holds a prominent place. This is the less to
be wondered at, in that the course of civilization, the force of
public opinion, together with the effect of the progress of machinery
upon labor, have materially altered the duties which were once
esteemed peculiarly her own.

We have three small books before plus, all from England, and all
bearing on this one topic. The first ("Essays on Woman's Work")
delineates very forcibly the fact, that the actual work of women,
independently of that performed within the domestic circle, is
(relatively to the employment of numbers) immense. Our authoress calls
it "the great revolution which has been so little noticed amidst the
noise of politics and the clash of war--the withdrawal of women from
the life of the household, and the suction of them by the hundreds of
thousands within the vortex of industrial life." Page 20 she says: "I
was told in Manchester, by one of the most eminent and thoughtful
women in England, that the outpouring of a mill in full work at the
hour of dinner was such a torrent of living humanity that a lady could
not walk against the stream. I was told the same thing at Bradford by
a female friend." (Page 22)--"It is clear then, since modern society
will have it so, women must work." But not women only; "young female
children are winding silk for twelve clear hours a day beneath a hot
African sun, in a charitably economical institution," (27) and
"mothers have left the hearth and the cradle, and the young girls and
the _little_ children themselves have run to offer their feeble arms;
whole villages are silent, while huge brick buildings swallow up
thousands of living humanity from dawn of day until twilight shades."
(33)--"There are to be seen the obvious results of the absence of
married women from their homes, in discomfort, etc., and in the
_utter_ want of domestic teaching and training during the most
important years of youth; besides the sure deterioration of health
consequent on long confinement." Well may Miss Parkes consider it "a
purely economical and selfish tendency, acting by competition alone
and casting aside unprofitable material. Women are more and more left
to provide for themselves, and society takes hardly any trouble to
enable them to do so, either by education or by opening the doors to
salaried employment. The great overplus of the female sex in England,
caused chiefly by the wholesale emigration of men to the colonies,
increases the difficulty tenfold." "In fact, the general freedom and
_laisser aller_ of English political and social life, while it serves
many admirable purposes in the general economy of the nation, allows
the weaker classes, those who are in any way unfitted for the race, to
go to the wall, while the others pass by. I believe the very _poor_ to
suffer far more in England than elsewhere; and I am sure there is no
country on earth where so many women are allowed to drift helplessly
about, picking up the scanty bread of insufficient earnings." "We are
at present in an extraordinary state of social disorganization." (Pp
37, 38.)

This is but a dismal result of progress, of civilization; modern
society with all its boasting seems to have {418} achieved little for
happiness. After this witness for the uneducated class, Miss Parkes
proceeds to show the difficulties that encompass the educated strivers
after bread, and here difficulties seem to increase, from the danger
incurred by exposing young women to intercourse with a corrupted
social state; "it is better," says Miss Parkes, "to be starved in body
than made worse in the moral and spiritual life," and in this we can
but agree with her, as also in the conclusion that this fact renders
many an occupation ineligible which would otherwise be good in itself.
The lady's remarks on the changes of eighty years are interesting, as
her accounts of "educated destitution" are graphic and painful in
their truth. Her remarks are sensible, and her plans proposed are so
modest and unassuming they seem rather suggestions, "helps to
thought," than projects, and as such we cordially recommend them; for
though American society is not yet in the state depicted of the
superabundant populations of Europe, we cannot fail to recognize that
if the _same principles_ are exercised on this side of the Atlantic as
have been exercised on that, the same results will follow when
population becomes denser; it behooves us, then, to be wise in time,
and acknowledge some higher law than that provided by an inexorable
system of political economy, if we would be happy. Men and women are
not necessarily blind agents of capitalists, mere creators of a wealth
which they do not share in due proportion to their intelligence and
their industry. They are moral beings, if they would but know it, if
they would but exercise and cultivate their moral powers; beings
capable of controlling themselves, and, by enlightened industrial
arrangements, of providing for themselves and for their neighbors. The
tendencies of Miss Parkes are evidently to the formation of
joint-stock societies, making the laborer at once a worker and a
capitalist. This _might_ be so contrived as to form another style of
"guild" of auld lang syne, when Catholic workmen protected each other
from want. Christian love, and earnest thought, endeavoring, to form
associations for mutual interchange of kind offices, and for
encouraging each other in practices of piety and good will to men, are
essentially Catholic; it is only when based on a purely selfish
motive, and with purely earthly aims, that they lose their charm and
best security. We confess that for ourselves we do not expect to see
any great improvement in the condition of the worker, whether male or
female, in Europe or elsewhere, by combination or otherwise, while the
effort for improvement is unsustained by a recurrence to first
principles, and unbased on _positive_ religious forms and dogmas. As
long as the _world_ is unchristian it must remain _selfish_, and the
weakest will go to the wall, in every form of of civilization, whether
named co-operative or competitive. But once recognize that man's most
essential life resides in his _soul_, and that he is bound to provide
for the wants of that soul as his first object, "guilds" take form and
shape, and the _laborer_, rising in dignity, performing his labor as
an ordinance of God, "loving his neighbor as himself," establishes, or
may establish, associations, in which the weaker shall be protected,
and the poor recognized as the representatives of Christ. This we
shall see exemplified on another page in speaking of the "_Rosines_"
instituted by Rosa Governo, who had been a servant.

Miss Davis's book on the Higher Education of Woman, is addressed more
especially to the middle classes, for whom she requires education has
a means of obtaining a livelihood. The discrepancies between the
education accorded to English girls and boys are greater than those
existing between American boys and girls; still there is much room for
improvement. Girls are too apt to be superficial, "to read too much,
and think too little;" and even here in free America, some may be
found who think they should lose {419} caste being useful, thorough,
and energetic. To such as these we particularly recommend Miss Davis's
book, for it sifts all such fallacies, and regards the question of
woman's place in the social order, primarily considering them as
"children of God, members of Christ, and heirs of the kingdom of
heaven; and, secondarily, as wives, mothers daughters, sisters" (p.
36). Miss Davis writes modestly, suggestively, not dogmatically;
feeling her way as it were at every step. Her descriptions are of
course English, but much that she says of the _necessity_ of suitable
employment for woman, not only for a maintenance but for _healthy
existence_ as a moral and intellectual being, is applicable to every
nation, and will afford useful hints to any one who has pondered
seriously on woman's present position and future prospects.

We regret that we cannot speak so favorably of the tone of Mr.
Ludlow's book, valuable as is the information it affords as to what
the collective energy of women can effect when strong religious motive
is the prompter of their actions. The author gives a consecutive
account of the work of women in the church from the time all the
apostles to the present era, tracing their usefulness, their power of
varying their action according to the exigencies of the day in which
they lived; the devotedness of the ancient deaconesses the learning of
the nuns, when the world was the prey of the Goths and Vandals and
their successors; the intellectual activity that characterized the
communities while the outer world was sunk in barbarism; the books
they spent their lives in copying, and the works they themselves
composed. Then he gives an account of the active orders, or, perhaps,
rather associations, as of the Beguines--

  "who, without renouncing the society of men or the business of life,
  or vowing poverty, perpetual chastity; or absolute obedience, yet
  lead, either at their own homes or in common dwellings, a life of
  prayer, meditation, and labor. Matthew Paris mentions it as one of
  the wonders of the age for the year 1250, that 'in Germany there
  rose up an innumerable multitude of those continent women who wish
  to be called Beguines, to that extent that Cologne was inhabited by
  more than 1,000 of them.' Indeed, by the latter half of this
  century, there seems to have been scarcely a town of any importance
  without them in France, Belgium, Northern Germany, and Switzerland."
  (P. 118.)

  "The first of these fellowships was composed of weavers of either
  sex; and so diligent were they with their work, that their industry
  had to be restricted, lest they should deprive the weavrers' guilds
  of their bread. Wholly self-maintained at first, they rendered
  moreover essential service in the performance of works of charity.
  As soon as a Beguinage became at all firmly established, there were
  almost invariably added to it hospitals or asylums for the
  reception, maintenance, or relief of the aged, the poor, the sick.
  To this purpose were devoted the greater part of the revenues of the
  sisterhood, however acquired, another portion going to the
  maintenance of the common chapel. The sisters moreover received
  young girls to educate; went out to nurse and console the sick, to
  attend death-beds, to wash and lay out the dead; were called in to
  pacify family disputes." (P. 118.).

  "The Beguines had no community of goods, no common purse for
  ordinary needs. Nevertheless, those among them who were wholly
  destitute, or broken down with infirmities, were maintained at the
  public expense, or out of the poor fund; mendicancy was never
  allowed, unless in the extremely rare case of the establishment not
  being able to relieve its poorest members." (P. 120.)

This is refreshing testimony to woman's powers, and were a similar
_devoted principle_ now at work, many of the problems troubling
earnest, thoughtful female minds might be solved.  "The striking
feature of her self-maintenance by labor" is a very valuable evidence,
for now that machinery is called in to _help_ the race, we cannot
believe that under its rightful application, Christian women could
effect _less_ at the present time than they did in ancient days. A
similar devotedness, a similar idea of the duty of living for God, a
similar appreciation of the divine institution of industry as a means
of sanctification, would produce equal or even superior effects, since
intelligence is more diffused now than formerly, and mechanical
assistance more within the reach of the many. {420} That which is
needed is simply the spirit of _godliness_, and to him that _asketh_
this is _promised_. Shall we then longer look calmly on the evils that
beset the sex, when the means are at hand to remedy them, whenever we
sincerely wish for them?

Mr. Ludlow proceeds to trace the educational fellowships, the
Ursulines, Angustinians, and others. He says that in the sixteenth
century female orders generally devoted themselves to education, even
when founded on the old Franciscan basis of manual labor. Then comes
the enumeration of the charitable sisterhoods, in all their varied
modes of assuaging human misery or diminishing temptation to sin; in
all their efforts for succoring the poor, the sick, the infirm, and
for recalling the lost sheep to the fold. The information contained in
the volume renders the book valuable in spite of Mr. Ludlow's
prejudices, broadly and oftentimes coarsely expressed. We dare not
repeat his blasphemies relative to the adoration of the blessed
eucharist, to the vow of chastity, or to other dogmas; they are
introduced, as he acknowledges, to free the author from the imputation
of Romanizing tendencies, to which the involuntary testimony he bears
to the _right action_ of the church has subjected him. We pity him,
that he did not see the force of his own evidence, that he was not led
to the truth, rather than to the vilifying it. We give but _one_
instance of the manner he has adopted in order to prove himself no
Romanist; it will suffice to show the want of candor which reigns
throughout the book when the _Romish_ Church is touched upon. Having
described, _con amore_, the institution of the Beguines as "being
exempt from almost all the inconveniences of a _convent life_" (to
which he appears to entertain an insuperable objection), he attributes
at first their fall to the jealousy of the regular congregations. Yet
after a while, the innate force of truth compels him to confess that
the institution fell by its own fault. The free fellowships departed
from the _spirit_ of their foundation. "In place of the
self-supporting industry and active charity which at first
characterized them, there crept in the opposites of these--reliance
upon others' alms and indifference to good works! So complete was the
change that the very term Beghard, _prayer_, surviving in our
'beggar,' has come to designate clamorous pauperism" (pp. 136, 137) He
continues on another page:

  "But the Beguine sisterhoods of the north were too numerous, too
  useful, too much in harmony with the spirit of their age and
  country, too deeply rooted in the affections of the people, to
  perish before the canons of the council or a papal bull. Nor,
  indeed, it was soon seen, did Rome's safety require that they should
  perish. The existence of free _brotherhoods_ was, indeed,
  inconsistent with that of Romanism itself; for every community of
  men, not bound by rule or vows, not subject to a clerical head, must
  be of necessity an asylum of free thought, such as a monastic church
  with an infallible head could not, without the greatest danger,
  allow. Sisterhoods, on the other hand, although equally unbound by
  vow or rule, might safely be tolerated; since, through the priestly
  director or confessor, generally an essential part of the
  organization of any Beguinage, they could be kept in dependence,
  tempted on into monachism. And thus, parallel with the current of
  censure against Beghardism and Beguinism as a system, there begins
  to flow another current of toleration, and even, as the danger
  diminishes, approval, for those 'faithful women who, having vowed
  continence, or even without having vowed it, choose honestly to do
  penance in their hospitals, and serve the Lord of virtues in spirit
  of humility.'"

The Beguines were finally absolved from censure by the Council of
Constance, 1414 (pp. 139, 140). The mind which does not see in this
account that one set of Beguines were suppressed on account of
disorder and that the others were retained from the desire of
promoting virtue,  is singularly blinded by prejudice, notwithstanding
that he walks, as he says himself (p. 139), "in the brightness of
Luther's most blessed name."

The Beguines, according to our author, were eventually merged into
{421} Tertiaries, or more regularly organized religious bodies, of
whom he gives so interesting an account that we can but wonder and
admire the more that the account comes, from such a source. There is,
however, in the author's mind, a notable ignorance of the "purity of
intention" enforced by the church as necessary to the sanctification
of good works, and this accounts for much misconception on his part.
He says that when Madame de Miramon, a young widow, began her
religious life in works of active charity, "her director exhorted her
to make a 'retreat' for a year, in order to devote herself to her own
perfection, without exercising her charity toward her neighbor." This
Mr. Ludlow styles "a trait characteristically Romish," in which we
must presume he is right, for if he represents the anti-Romish party,
we must say, judging by his book, there is little apprehension shown
by that party that "good good works," to be acceptable, to be
sanctifying to the agent, must be wrought in God, and therefore that a
year spent in the repression of self-seeking, in acts of humiliation
and self-abasement, might be and probably was necessary to insure that
the future acts of the pious lady should be performed in that "pure
intention" which would draw down upon them the fructifying blessing of
divine grace. We are fain to confess that this is, as "the gentleman
says, characteristically Romish;" and much we rejoice at so beautiful
a characteristic of our faith.

We cannot follow Mr. Ludlow through all his accounts, which we regret
the more as he gives important evidence to the fact, that in every age
of the church pious women have been found to comprehend the needs of
the age in which they live, and to associate with the special purpose
of providing the assistance necessary. In a barbarous age, when
vandalism overturned human learning, "nunneries, like monasteries for
men, became schools or store houses of learning, sometimes even
centres of intellectual activity. At the beginning of the sixth
century, the nunnery founded by St. Cesarius at Arles contained two
hundred nuns, mostly employed in copying books. Their rule bound them
to learn 'human letters' for two hours a day, and to work in common,
either in transcribing or in female labor" (p. 106). The convents of
Tours, founded in the sixth century by Queen Radegund, and the Swabian
nunnery of Gaudesheim, in the latter half of the tenth century, the
glory of female monachism, were specially centres of intellectual
activity. In the latter dwelt the poetess Hrotsvitha, herself not the
first authoress of her convent, whose Latin plays seem to have
especial attraction for Mr. Ludlow, for his panegyric is couched in
these words, "Hrotsvitha, at least, was no hooded Pharisee" (pp. 119,
111).

During the Crusades and European wars, the communities of the
Tertiarian hospitaller nuns, under various names, excite his
admiration, though he thinks "the worship of these nuns may not be the
highest and best, but it is surely genuine" (p. 142). Thanks even for
that admission, Mr. Ludlow. The Beguines, of whom we have already
spoken, and the educational nuns spring up at the hour of need, and
for the present day "the institute of 'Rosines' of Turin presents an
interesting feature." These latter have no vows, no seclusion. They
are a genuine working association of women, only with a strong
religious element infused in their work. They were founded by Rosa
Governo, who had been a servant. There Mrs. Jameson found (see
Communion of Labor) "nearly four hundred women, from fifteen years of
age upwards, gathered together in an assemblage of buildings, where
they carry on tailoring, embroidery, especially of military
accoutrements for the army, weaving, spinning, shirt-making,
lace-making, every trade, in short, in which female ingenuity is
available. They have a well-kept garden, a school for the poor
children of the neighborhood, an infirmary, including a ward for the
aged, a capital dispensary, with a small medical library. {422} They
are ruled by a superior, elected from among themselves; the work-rooms
are divided into classes and groups, each under a monitress. The rules
of admission and the interior regulations are strict; any inmate may
leave at once, but cannot be readmitted. Finally, they are entirely
self-supporting, and have a yearly income of between 70,000f. to
80,000f., that is, about from L2,800 to L3,200. No female organization
is more pregnant with hope than this" (p. 181). With this we conclude
our notice of Mr. Ludlow's book, although he has also accounts of some
few Protestant associations, imitated and modified from the foregoing.

We cannot but rejoice at so much welcome testimony, from an outsider,
to the benefits flowing from the female religious institutions of the
church of Christ, and feel encouraged to believe that whatever may be
the necessities of the times, bands of holy women will rise up to
administer thereunto.

It is refreshing, too, as an evidence that the gratitude which woman
owes to the church, she is willing to repay in self-devotedness to the
_wants_ of the members of that church. No woman who has ever reflected
for one brief hour on the emancipation from slavery that has been
wrought for her by the ministry of the church, can fail to recognize
that in the Church alone is her _real_ protection, her true safety.
The pagan woman--what was she? You may see her type in the Eastern
harem, the Hindoo suttee, the Indian burden-bearer. The few women of
antiquity who broke their chains did so at a fearful cost. The
Aspasias, the Diotemes, the Semiramises, the Zenobias, the
Cleopatras--alas! a cloud obscures their greatness; and even
heathenism condemns while it admires them. Respectable women were
_slaves_; if not nominally so, yet slaves in intellect, slaves by
inferior position, slaves through _ignorance_; slaves because their
_souls_ could find no scope for exertion. And now what are the
tendencies of the age? I fear we must confess that they are purely
materialistic, that they point rather to the reign of physical power
than that of moral force; and if so, what must woman expect save a
return in some shape, modified by existing machinery, to the old idea
of enslavement under another name? The laws of the church are already
annulled by society in respect of marriage. The power of easy divorce
exists in the Eastern states, and polygamy flourishes in Utah. These
are matters calculated to make Catholic women reflect ere they march
too readily with the tendencies of the age. The church, and the church
only, raised the standard of woman, and that incidentally, by
proclaiming that she had a _soul_ to save, and that the powers of the
soul were will, memory, and understanding. Christian men were obliged
to concede to her the exercise of these powers, by the same authority
through which they claimed the right to exercise them for themselves.
But now, the world is for the most part not Christian, and we must
look well to the principles that it puts forth; its associations or
co-operations, if founded on a merely selfish principle, must end in
disorder. It requires the strong religious element spoken of by Mrs.
Jameson as existing among the Rosines, and the "pure intention" which
induced Madame de Miramon to obey her director and make the year's
retreat he prescribed, in order that her future acts might be begun,
continued, and ended in God, to insure that a community life or
association shall produce good. That joint-stock companies may for a
while flourish and contribute to the wealth of the shareholders is
doubtless true; but if the wealth thus obtained is made merely to
contribute to material enjoyment, it will rather injure than profit
the possessor, whether that possessor be man or woman. Strong moral
power is produced by exercise, by endurance, renunciation, rather than
by gratification. {423} Strong intellectual power is produced by deep
thought, head study, unremitting exertion, as strong physical power is
produced by labor, continuous activity, hard fare, and unluxurious
habits. We must not lose sight of these facts when we seek to improve
the condition of either man or woman; and desirable as are
associations for mutual benefit, we must not forget that if they are
to be permanent, they most aim at something higher than improving in
temporalities. The union of the natural law with the supernatural law
should form the especial study of every thinking member of the church;
and to women's associations it seems a study peculiarly desirable, as
woman owes her present improved condition entirely to the effects
produced by that supernatural action on her previous condition. If we
might be allowed to suggest a subject of thought to such Catholic
women as see the evils depicted by Misses Parkes and Davis, and wish
to assist in their removal, it would be that they should meditate and
study the practical bearing of the ancient associations of the church
to mitigate the then existing evils, and having caught the spirit of
devotedness from the many examples therein presented, should proceed
to consider what form of devotedness is demanded by the present
needs--and in the spirit of the church assemble to promote the needful
work.

That there is much to be done, all must confess; but in what way it is
to be done is not altogether so evident. Only tracing from all history
"that woman's work in the church" is to see the difficulties of the
times, to enter with warm sympathy into its distresses, and having
purified the human tenderness with which she is gifted by casting it
into the furnace of divine love, to direct that tenderness,
enlightened by intellectual culture and strengthened by acetic
practice, into the channels needing assistance. We can but feel
confident that Catholic women will now as heretofore ponder over the
position of their sex with regard to labor and intellectual culture,
and that to meet its requirements such institutions will be formed as
will push forward "progress" in the most approved system compatible
with the solemn duties of _Catholicity_: that is, uniting the human
privilege to the far higher and loftier privilege involved in being a
member of the church of Christ.



ORIGINAL.


MY TWO MITES.

"This poor widow hath cast in more than they all."


  Widowed of the world, that once did me betroth.
  Unto the treasury of God brought I,
        In after days,
  A heart and mind--my all--two mites in worth,
  And cast them in. What wealth, if they should buy
        Such priceless praise!



{424}


MISCELLANY.



_A most Important Discovery in Photography_.--That photographic
productions cannot be relied upon as permanent appears a fact only too
well established. The public have been convinced of it by seeing
folios of choice productions and scores of treasured portraits pass
gradually into "the sere and yellow leaf" of their age, and finally
disappear. A few years, more or less, generally works the change.
Photographers, too, have lost all faith in the absolute permanence of
their productions, and have long been looking for this desirable
quality in some ideal process for which their experimentalists were
industriously striving and working, and for which they were most
anxiously looking, rather than to any modification of the old silver
process, which they have now wrought up to such a pitch of perfection.
This fading has been pretty clearly shown to be, at least mainly, due
to the action of the hyposulphites. The print lasts a longer or
shorter time in proportion to the degrees in which the fixing
agent--hyposulphite of soda--has been removed from the paper; but the
slightest trace of it will assuredly bring about the destruction of
the photograph. The only chance of absolute permanence appears to be
in its complete elimination, although even then there are other
elements of evil which may be suspiciously regarded. We have hitherto
relied for this purpose upon the mechanical action of water, and some
able men have run counter to the general experience by affirming that
absolute permanence could be obtained by proper and sufficient
washing. Mr. Carey Lea, for instance, asserted, about a year since,
that he had tested properly-washed prints with a very delicate and
certain test for the hyposulphites without discovering their trace,
and in prints which he considered had been properly washed. This test
was that of placing a few drops of an alcoholic solution of iodine in
several ounces of water, and applying the same with a camel's-hair
brush to photographs on starch-sized paper. The presence of the
starch, if freed from the hyposulphite by sufficient washing, was
indicated by a violet or purple stain where the solution was applied;
but in prints not thus washed the presence of hyposulphite was
indicated by the absence of such stain, which could be at once removed
from the well-washed print by plunging it into a solution of
hyposulphite. On the other and, Mr. Dawson, of King's College, in a
recent number of The British Journal of Photography denies the power
of more washing to give permanence, "unless the prints have been
soaked for some time in hot water so as to remove _all_ the size--even
then, supposing the paper non-albumenized, the elimination of the
whole of the hyposulphite is problematical." He adds--"Some
photographers, we are aware, do treat their prints with a final wash
in hot water; but this, of course, although unquestionably conducive
to the permanence of the proof, does not remove the whole of the size
in which the hyposulphite is locked up; and if it did, the paper would
be as little cohesive as blotting-paper, and prints would lose much in
vigor and brilliancy. In the case of prints on albumen, or albumenized
paper, hot water, we may reasonably suppose, has no more powerful
effect in removing hyposulphite from albumen than cold water, if,
indeed it has so much; and it can only be by acting on the texture of
the paper itself, and removing the size therefrom, that it can
exercise a beneficial influence at all." To demonstrate the
truthfulness of his ideas on this subject, some prints which had been
washed in cold running water, and with the utmost care and attention,
for over twenty hours--and the final drippings from which, when
subjected to the tincture of iodine test, displayed no trace of the
hyposulphite--were experimented with, and still gave up to boiling
water, in which they were steeped, at least one-fortieth part of a
grain of the destructive element to the half sheet of paper, clearly
showing that the cold water had not really removed it all, although it
had eliminated all that it could reach or had influence over. Now
whether Mr. Dawson and his supporters or Mr. Lea and his supporters be
right, {425} whether photographs fade so universally because they are
rarely or never sufficiently washed after the process of fixing, or
because it is impossible to remove all trace of the hyposulphites from
the  paper by washing, it is certain that they do fade, and few
dispute the final cause of such a fading. Therefore, a discovery which
destroys these mischievous agents altogether cannot but be regarded as
most important, and such a discovery is our pleasing duty to announce
as having been recently published by Dr. Angus Smith, F.R.S., in the
pages of The British Journal of Photography, from which we quote:
"Considering that the cause of the destruction of photographs,
apparently by the action of time only, was in reality caused by the
amount of hyposulphite remaining in the paper, D. Reissig, of
Darmstadt, contrived a mode of washing it out by centrifugal force.
For indicating the presence of sulphur assets, he used a small
galvanic arrangement with one cell, and decomposing the acid, had the
sulphur thrown on a piece of polished silver, which became readily
blackened in the solution. Dr. Theodore Reissig, my assistant,
examined several faded photographs for me by his brother's method,
which, however, appeared unnecessarily delicate, as it was found the
amount of sulphur was very large, and roughly, we thought, in
proportion to the amount of decay. I did not determine how much was
hyposulphite and how much sulphate. As I had been interesting myself
in bringing into use some of the remarkable properties of peroxide of
hydrogen in oxidizing metals and organic bodies in fluids, it seemed
to me that we might readily use it for oxidizing the hyposulphites. I
am supposing that the sulphate alone will not be injurious." Dr. Smith
then shows how this powerful, oxidizing agent may be used to convert
the mischievous hyposulphites into the innocuous sulphate, and Mr.
Dawson, in the same number of the journal, gives the following
experimental illustration: "Dissolve in a wineglass any quantity of
sulphate of soda, and add to the solution a few drops of tincture of
iodine. The solution will remain permanently discolored, showing that
sulphate of soda does not dissolve iodine. In another wine-glass, half
filled with plain water, drop sufficient tincture of iodine to strike
a permanent dark sherry color throughout the liquid; then add, drop by
drop, a weak solution of hyposulphite of soda till the color is
discharged, taking care to add as little excess of hyposulphite as
possible. So far this experiment shows that iodine is soluble in
hyposulphite of soda. Now, fill up the glass with an aqueous solution
of peroxide of hydrogen, and observe the effects. After a few minutes
the iodine is no longer held in solution, and the liquid will resume
the dark sherry color it had before adding the hyposulphite of soda."
Every chemist will readily explain this. To apply this new chemical
agent to this new use, take the print, after fixing and washing, and
soak it for a short time in a solution of the peroxide of hydrogen of
the strength of say one ounce of a ten-volume solution in forty ounces
of water.--_Popular Science Review_.



ORIGINAL.

NEW PUBLICATIONS



PASTORAL LETTER OF THE SECOND PLENARY COUNCIL OF BALTIMORE. The
Archbishops and Bishops of the United States, in Plenary Council
Assembled, to the Clergy and Laity of their charge. Baltimore: John
Murphy & Co. 8vo pamphlet. For sale by L. Kehoe, New York.


This is the first official utterance of the Archbishops and Bishops of
the United States in Plenary Council assembled, to the clergy and
laity of their charge. As such it will be listened to with an
attention due to the importance of the subjects on which it speaks,
and to the character and motives of the august assembly from which it
proceeds. It is the warning voice of the shepherds of the people,
raised after long and matured deliberation to remind the flock of its
duties, pointing out the dangers which threaten, the quarters from
which they spring, and the means by which they are to be avoided. It
is the herald of that full legislation which in a few months will be
promulgated for the Catholics of the United States. The outlines of
that {426} legislation are traced with rapid pen in this document; the
details, which have been already filled in, will, after having
received the approval of Rome, be presented to the public stamped with
the seal of the Fisherman. The great object of this Pastoral Address
is to impress upon the minds and hearts of Catholics those cardinal
principles and duties of cheerful obedience to the divinely
constituted authority of the "bishops placed to rule the Church of
God;" in order that when the decrees of the Council are published,
all--bishops, priests, and the laity--may co-operate in heart and
hand in giving them practical effect. _All_ are members of the same
mystical body of Christ, the Church; and therefore _all_ should in
their respective positions and functions unite in harmonious action
for the well-being of the whole, according to the order established by
the divine head and founder. "For there are diversities of ministries,
but the same Lord; and diversities of operations, but the same God,
who worketh in all; and hath set the members every one of them in the
body as it hath pleased him" (Cor. xii. 1).

Such being the object of the Pastoral Letter, it very naturally
commences (Sec. I.) with the "Authority of Plenary Councils;" and
(Sec. II.) with "Ecclesiastical Authority" in its general relations,
and with the correlative obedience thereto binding on the Christian
conscience. As human policy and human action have, even in secular
matters, their religious as well as their civil aspects, the
principles are laid down which mark out the boundary line between the
civil and ecclesiastical powers (Sec III.); a boundary line which
notwithstanding the experience and lessons of past centuries, is often
obliterated or lost sight of. After having, in brief and emphatic
language, called attention to these general truths relating to
authority and consequent obedience founded on the natural and divine
laws, the episcopal legislators devote several sections to the more
prominent questions and wants which affect the Catholic Church in the
United States. Sec. IV. calls attention to the afflicted condition of
the Pope and to the obligation incumbent on his spiritual subjects,
for whom he daily prays and works, of relieving him. Sec. V. to the
"Sacrament of Matrimony," that great and sacred link by which society
is in its nearest and dearest associations held together, but which is
so much exposed to be severed, if not wholly destroyed, in our days.
Sec VI. to the press, that giant engine for good or for evil, wielded,
alas! with such fatal efficacy against the faith and morals of the
"little ones and the weak ones" of the fold, and yet which, properly
directed might be made the instrument most powerful for truth and for
good. Sec. VII. deals with the "education" of youth, on which indeed
the future of society and religion depends. Sec. VIII. with the
subject of '"Catholic Protectories and Industrial Schools." Sec IX.
with the necessity of cultivating "vocations" in the ministry. Secs.
X. and XI. are addressed, respectively, to the "Laity" and the
"Clergy." Sec XII. points to the condition of the emancipated slaves,
and to the means to be used by the Church in ameliorating it. Sec
XIII. glances at those most favored spots in the bosom of the Church,
where the sun shines most brightly, and the fairest lilies spring to
be woven as a garland in her triumphant crown--to "Religious
Communities." The "conclusion" epitomizes the whole by saying:

  "We have taken advantage of the opportunity of the assembling of so
  large a number of bishops from every part of our vast country, to
  enact such decrees as will tend to promote uniformity of discipline
  and practice among us, and to do away with such imperfect observance
  of the rites and approved ceremonies of the church as may have been
  made necessary by the circumstances of past times, but which no
  length of prescription can ever consecrate, and thus to give the
  services of our religion that beauty and dignity which belong to
  them, and for which we should all be so zealous.

  "For the furtherance of these important objects, we have caused to
  be drawn up a clear and compendious series of statements upon the
  most essential points of faith and morals, with which we have
  embodied the decrees of the seven Provincial Councils of Baltimore,
  and of the first Plenary Council, together with the decrees enacted
  by us in the present Council, which, when they have been examined
  and approved of by the Holy See, will form a compendium of
  ecclesiastical law for the guidance of our clergy in the exercise of
  their holy ministry.

  "The result of our labors, when thus returned to us, will be
  promulgated more fully in our Provincial Councils and Diocesan
  Synods and we will then take advantage of the opportunity to bring
  more fully under the notice of the clergy, and the people committed
  to our pastoral charge, the details of what we have done, and the
  exact nature of the means {427} by which we hope to give increased
  efficiency to the whole practical system of the church in this
  country.

  "We have also recommended to the Holy See the erection of several
  additional episcopal sees and vicariates apostolic, which are made
  necessary by our rapidly increasing Catholic population and the
  great territorial extent of many of our present dioceses."

It does not become us to review, but only two direct attention to this
most remarkable and important document. Abstracting from the authority
of those from whom it emanates, and viewed merely as the pronouncement
of so many men distinguished for learning, experience, and piety, it
will be read with respectful consideration by the educated portion of
our community, whether Catholic or Protestant. On the former, however,
it has a higher and holier claim--as the legislative exponent of those
appointed to keep garrison on the watch-towers of Israel, to give
timely warning of danger, from whatever part of the horizon it
approaches, to lead and guide them in their journey through this
earthly desert to the promised land of heaven. In some of the plenary
councils (for instance, of Africa about the time of St. Cyprian or of
St. Augustine, or of Asia before that of St. John Chrysostom) a
greater number of bishops were assembled. In plenary councils, too,
weightier matters may have come under consideration; as, for example,
doctrinal questions at the Council of Orange, not, however, to be
finally settled without the after-sanction all the Infallible Church.
But never, we may venture to say, has any provincial council in other
parts of the church been called to legislate for so vast a territory,
more on questions of discipline and practice affecting the present and
future prospects of a population so widespread and so varied in its
origin, its habits, and its pursuits. Some of the bishops traveled by
sea and land over thousands of miles, and were heard to facetiously
say that "as they had come so far it were a little thing to step
across and see the Pope at Rome." They were all, as we said, picked
men, "chosen among hundreds" of learned and pious priests; actuated
solely by the motive of doing the best their collective prudence
suggested for their people. Hence their opinions on questions with
which they were all practically acquainted in their respective
dioceses, merit to be heard by all classes with the deepest respect.
Doctrinal matters were not discussed at Baltimore; these are reserved
for the supreme authority of general councils and of the Holy See. But
practical remedies are suggested for social and moral evils in a
quiet, calm, and steady tone, which sounds upon the ears of Catholics
like the voice of the Holy Spirit, and wakens in the hearts of the
well-minded children of the church an echo such as we may imagine the
gentle voice of the divine Master to have awakened in those who
listened to his sermon on the mount. The council does not confine
itself to the enunciation of general principles, but enters into
minute, practical details on each subject. Had we space we would wish
to quote much; but we confine ourselves to what it says on the section
on the press:

  "We cheerfully acknowledge the services the Catholic press has
  rendered to religion, as also the disinterestedness with which, in
  most instances, it has been conducted, although yielding to
  publishers and editors a very insufficient return for their labors.
  We exhort the Catholic community to extend to these publications a
  more liberal support, in order that they may be enabled to become
  more worthy the great cause they advocate.

  "We remind them that the power of the press is one of the most
  striking features of modern society; and that it is our duty to
  avail ourselves of this mode of making known the truths of our
  religion, and removing the misapprehensions which so generally
  prevail in regard to them.

  "In connection with this matter we earnestly recommend to the
  faithful of our charge the Catholic Publication Society, lately
  established in the city of New York by a zealous and devoted
  clergyman. Besides the issuing of short tracts, with which this
  society has begun, and which may be so usefully employed to arrest
  the attention of many whom neither inclination nor leisure will
  allow to read larger works, this society contemplates the
  publication of Catholic books, according as circumstances may permit
  and the interests of religion appear to require. From the judgment
  and good taste evinced in the composition and selection of such
  tracts and books as have already been issued by this society, we are
  encouraged to hope that it will be eminently effective in making
  known the truths of our holy religion, and dispelling the prejudices
  which are mainly owing to want of information on the part of so many
  of our fellow-citizens. For this it is necessary that a generous
  co-operation be given, both by clergy and laity, to the undertakings
  which is second to none in importance among the {428} subsidiary
  aids which the inventions of modern times supply to our ministry for
  the diffusion of Catholic truth."



CURIOUS QUESTIONS. By Rev. Henry A. Brann, D.D. 1 vol. 12mo, pp. 272.
Newark, N. J.: J. J. O'Connor & Co., 59 and 61 New street. 1866.

This attractive-looking, well-printed volume reflects great credit on
the enterprise and taste of the publishers, who, we hope, will be
rewarded and encouraged by an extensive sale. We may remark, by the
way, that some of our publishers would do well to imitate the Messrs.
O'Connor in their style of binding and lettering, which is neat and
tasteful but perfectly plain. The flashy style of late adopted in some
cases is in most wretched taste, especially when the book treats of
grave and serious topics; and it is especially displeasing to all
scholars. The only fault in the mechanical execution of the book
before us is, that the margin of the page is somewhat too large.

The book itself treats of much more weighty and important topics than
the title would suggest. It is an analysis and resume of some of the
principal topics treated of in our philosophical text-books. The
author has studied attentively and with understanding, and has
presented us with an abstract of his studies, expressed in a clear,
terse, and methodical style. There are, nevertheless, occasional
infelicities of diction, which could easily be corrected, and which
are pardonable in a young and unpractised author. The use of the word
"conscience" for consciousness appears to us decidedly objectionable,
and likely to mislead the English reader not familiar with the Latin
word "conscientia," of which it is too verbal a translation. Such an
expression as "secundum quid beings" is awkward and quite unnecessary.
The same word sometimes recurs too frequently for euphony, and some
sentences are carelessly constructed or unfinished. These faults are,
however, comparatively slight and infrequent, and do not enter into
the texture of the style and diction itself, which is of good and
serviceable fabric.

The author follows the school of Plato, St. Augustine, Gerdil,
Leibnitz, Gioberti, and the modern ontologists, taking the Abbe
Branchereau as his more immediate guide. The general principles and
drift of the system of philosophy contained in the prelections of the
last-named author we regard as sounds, and we are therefore well
pleased to see this system in part reproduced by one who has mastered
it, and has also illustrated it from his studies in other authors.
There is a certain confusion and incompleteness, however, in the
statements and explanations of M. Branchereau upon one or two
important points, and the same reappears in the work before us. One of
these points relates to the activity of the intellect in its intuition
of being. M. Branchereau does not speak distinctly upon the point, but
Dr. Brann expresses the opinion that the intellect is active, in
contradiction to Gioberti. If by this is meant that the intellect has
an active power to originate the intuition of infinite, eternal,
necessary being, we apprehend that consequences might be deduced from
this statement not in accordance with the Catholic doctrine. Another
point relates to the universals, or genera and species. On this point
the language both of M. Branchereau and of our author seems not to be
sufficiently precise and accurate to guard against the appearance of
maintaining the untenable proposition that genera and species are
contained in God.

There is one more point of very great importance, where our author has
either misapprehended the doctrine of the great writers of whose
system he is the expositor, or has intentionally deviated from it,
and, as we think, without due consideration. He maintains (p. 255)
that material substance is radically spiritual and intelligent.
Leibnitz, who is followed by a great number of the ablest philosophers
of our day, taught that the ultimate components of matter are simple
and indivisible, and so far similar in essence to spiritual
substances. Branchereau has very ably sustained this doctrine in his
philosophy, and we regard this portion of his treatise as one of the
most valuable of his contributions to science. He draws the line,
however, in common with all other Catholic writers with whom we are
acquainted, sharply and distinctly between material and spiritual
substances, as, we think, sound philosophy requires. The theory of our
author opens the way to the Darwinian theory of the evolution of all
the {429} entities of the universe from identical ultimate elements.
We think he would have shown more judgment by abstaining from the
expression of an immature speculation of his own on such an extremely
difficult and abstruse question. A little less of positive assertion,
and a little more diffidence of manner, and deference toward others,
throughout the whole volume, would be more graceful in an author just
at the outset of his career; especially as he is treating of those
profound and momentous questions which task and often baffle the
mightiest and most veteran leaders in the intellectual warfare.

Having finished the ungracious part of our critical task, we take
pleasure in giving our judgment, that the design of the author in the
work before us is one that is praiseworthy, and the manner of its
execution such as to make it really valuable to the class of readers
he has in view. It is worthy of their attentive perusal, and could not
fail to benefit them if they would read and consider it with care. It
is an exposition of principles and doctrines in philosophy far deeper,
sounder, and more satisfactory to the intellect than is usually found
in the English language; and makes accessible to those who are
unacquainted with our best Catholic authors a portion of that treasure
of thought which is locked up in them out of the reach of the majority
of even educated men. We should like to have this book read by our
students and literary men generally, and even by our professors of
metaphysics in the colleges of the United States. It presents the
outlines of a system far superior to that jejune psychologism of the
Scottish school which is usually talked, and ought to be welcome to
those who are in search of something more solid. It will also be
valuable to students of philosophy in our own colleges as a companion
to their text-books, as well as to English readers generally who have
taste and capacity for relishing on philosophical subjects. We wish it
success and a large circulation, and we trust the author will continue
his contributions to literature and science.



THE AUTHORSHIP OF THE WORKS OF SHAKESPEARE By Nathaniel Holmes.  1
vol. 12mo, pp. 601. New York: Hurd &  Houghton. 1866.


Mr. Holmes attempts, in this finely printed volume from the Riverside
Press, to prove that the works of Shakespeare are not Shakespeare's,
but Francis Bacon's. His argument is: Shakespeare did not write them
because he could not; Francis Bacon, my lord Verulam, did write them
because he could. To which it may be replied: Shakespeare could write
them, because he did; Bacon did not, because he could not. That Bacon
could not, is evident from the character of the man and what we know
of his acknowledged writings; that Shakespeare did is the uniform
tradition from their first appearance down to the present, and must be
presumed until the contrary appears.

Mr. Holmes has proved, what all competent judges have always held,
that the author of the works received as Shakespeare's must have had
more learning and greater scientific and linguistic attainments than
his biographers supposed Shakespeare to have had, but has not proved
that he must have had more than Shakespeare might have had. Few
persons capable of appreciating the wonderful productions attributed
to Shakespeare can doubt that he was up to the scientific lore of his
age; knew enough of Latin, Greek, French, Italian, and perhaps
Spanish, to read and understand works written in those languages; had
some general knowledge of medicine; was familiar with many of the
technicalities of English law; was a profound philosopher, with more
than an ordinary knowledge of Christian theology and morals. But who
can say that Shakespeare might not have had all the learning and
science here supposed?

We in reality know next to nothing of the facts of Shakespeare's life.
We know the place and date of his birth and death, the age at which he
was withdrawn from the grammar-school, and of his marriage; we know
that he was in London about the age of thirty, where he chiefly
resided till within two or three years of his death, as an actor,
play-wright, manager, and a large stockholder in a London theatre.
These, and some few business transactions and his retirement, after
having accumulated a handsome property, to his native place, where his
family appear to have resided, constitute nearly all that we know of
William Shakespeare outside of his works; and in these facts there is
nothing that proves it impossible or even difficult, {430} with the
genius, ability, and quickness the author of Shakespeare's works must
have had, for him to acquire all the learning and science those works
indicate in their author.

Ben Jonson says Shakespeare had "little Latin and less Greek," but
Jonson was a pedant, and his assertion meant simply no more than that
he was not profoundly or critically learned either as a Greek or Latin
scholar; and there is no necessity of supposing that he was. Latin and
Greek were taught in the grammar-schools of his time, and as it is
said he was fourteen when called home from school, it is no violent
supposition to suppose that he learned enough while at school to read
and understand Latin and Greek books, at least sufficiently for his
purposes as a poet. We know not how or where he spent the sixteen
years between leaving school, or the twelve years between his marriage
and his appearance in London, but he might, for aught we know, have
easily acquired during those years all the learning and knowledge of
modern languages indicated by his earliest plays. It could not take a
man of his genius and ability many weeks' study to master as much of
law and medicine as his works indicate; and as to his theology and
metaphysics, we must remember that he lived before Bacon, Hobbes, and
Locke had enfeebled theology and philosophy in the English mind, and
obliterated from the memory of Englishmen all traces of Catholic
tradition. Shakespeare, if not a Catholic himself, had been trained to
a greater or less extent in Catholic principles, and he rarely, if
ever, deviates in his philosophy, his theology, or theoretic morals
from Catholic tradition, still in his time retained to a great extent
in spite of Protestantism by the main body of the English people.

Bearing in mind that Shakespeare wrote his plays for the stage, to be
acted, and that he used without scruple any materials from whatever
quarter gathered that he could lay his hands on, there is nothing
wonderful in their production, except the unrivalled genius of their
author. There are many self-educated men, even in our own country, who
in the learning and science acquired from the study of books equal
Shakespeare, but in that which comes from within no one self-educated
or university-educated has ever equalled him; and not unlikely the
fact that his genius had never been cramped by the pedantic rules of
the university, nor his time frittered away in learning minutiae that
never come into play in practical life, and which the student forgets
as soon as he goes forth into the world, was in his case are great
advantage--at least no disadvantage.

But we cannot forgive the author for his sacrilegious attempt to
transfer of the glory of Shakespeare to Francis Bacon, a different and
altogether an inferior man. Shakespeare was infinitely superior to
Bacon. Even if Bacon had been great enough to write Shakespeare's
plays--of which there is no evidence--he was not philosopher enough
to do it. Shakespeare is always in accord with the best philosophical
tradition which comes down from the ancients through the fathers and
doctors of the church, as well as with the dictates of experience and
common sense; Bacon begins a rupture with tradition, and places
philosophy on the declivity to sensism and materialism, whose logical
terminus is universal nullity. Shakespeare's philosophy is Catholic,
Bacon's is Protestant, and has produced the same anarchy in science
that Protestantism has in religion and morals. There is nothing like
in the spirit and tone of the two men. Their _morale_ is quite
different; neither may have been blameless in life, but Shakespeare,
if he sinned, did so from high spirits, joviality, heedlessness; while
Bacon sinned, we we know, from sordidness, and left his name stamped
with the infamy that belongs to a judge that takes bribes. Bacon,
intentionally or not, has favored modern doubt and unbelief, while
Shakespeare crushes the incipient doubt of his age in Hamlet and in
several other of his place, and he could never have said with Bacon,
atheism is better, socially and politically, than superstition. But
enough. Mr. Holmes deserves no thanks for what he has done, and we do
not think that he has proved his theory is not a "crazy theory."



FAMILIAR LECTURES ON SCIENTIFIC SUBJECTS.
By Sir John Herschel. London and New York: Alexander Strahan.


This volume contains, among others, essays on the Sun, Earthquakes and
Volcanoes, Comets, Celestial Measurement, Light, Force, and Atoms. The
author, although upward of seventy years of {431} age, still  writes
with the enthusiasm, vigor and sprightliness of a young votary of
science, and of course with the profundity, range of thought, weight
of judgment, and vastness of learning belonging only to one who has
grown gray scientific studies. The topics he discusses are among the
most important and interesting in science. To their absorbing
intrinsic interest is added the charm of Sir John Herschel's method
and style of exposition. In literary merit and beauty of style this
series of lectures exceeds any of the productions of the professors of
physical science with which we are acquainted, and is equal to our
best English classics. There is a pleasant playfulness also about the
ancient astronomer, which must have made his lectures, as he delivered
them, most delightful to listen to. The religious and moral tone of
the lectures is elevated and wholesome. Without any set and formal
attempts at moralizing or preaching, the illustrious author naturally
and forcibly presents, on fitting occasions, the irresistible evidence
afforded by the stupendous order of the universe of the infinite
wisdom and goodness of God. Some few disparaging remarks about
Catholic superstition occur in his pages; but not so many as we
frequently meet with in similar works by English Protestants, who seem
to be incapable of abstaining for a very long time from their favorite
amusement--one which has as much popularity with the English public as
the national game of "Aunt Sally."

Notwithstanding these little specimens of religious squibbery, which
can do no harm to any intelligent Catholic, whether child or adult, we
recommend this book most cordially to all our readers. It is a great
advantage and pleasure to those intelligent and educated readers who
have not had time or opportunity to study scientific text-books, to
have the grand results of science placed before them in an
intelligible and readable form. We cannot think of anything more
desirable for the interests of general education, than a complete
series of lectures, like those of the volume before us, on all the
principal topics of the several grand divisions of physical science.
The field of knowledge is now so vast, and includes so many distinct,
richly cultivated enclosures, that even students must confine
themselves to the thorough study of a few specialties. Yet, education
ought to include a general survey of the universal domain of
knowledge. Therefore, it becomes important to have generalizations,
compendiums, the condensed cream of science, prepared by the hands of
masters in the several branches of knowledge. We are grateful to Sir
John Herschel for devoting his old age to the task of making the
sublime discoveries of astronomical science intelligible to ordinary
readers. His charming volume should be in every library, and read by
every one who takes pleasure in solid knowledge communicated in the
clearest and most agreeable manner.



THE RISE AND THE FALL; OR, THE ORIGIN OF MORAL EVIL.
In three parts. Part I. The Suggestion of Reason. II. The Disclosure
of Revelation. III. The Confirmation of Theology. New York: Hurd &
Houghton. 1866.

A very thoughtful, sensible, calmly written book, pervaded by a high
tone of moral and religious sentiment. The modest, anonymous author
may be called an orthodox Protestant semi-rationalist. He takes
Scripture as furnishing certain revealed data on which the individual
reason must construct a rational theorem of religion. Revelation, as
apprehended by the individual reason, being a variable quantity, of
course dogmas are reduced to mere hypothesis more or less probable,
according to the force of the argument which sustains them. We have,
accordingly, about as ingenious and plausible an hypothesis of
original sin as any one can well make who does not begin with the true
conception as given him by the Catholic dogma. The author's hypothesis
is, that Adam, having been created in the intellectual, but not in the
moral order, was elevated to the moral order through his own act,
thereby contracting a liability to sin as incidental to moral liberty,
which he transmitted together with the moral nature to his posterity.
In this way sin entered into the world through Adam, not by an
imputation or infusion of his sin into his descendants, but as an
incidental consequence of the transfer of human nature into the sphere
of moral obligation. The transgression of Adam and Eve the author
considers not to have been a sin at all, but an act {432} without any
moral character, like that of a young child climbing to the roof of a
house; a bold experiment which the inexperience of infant man led him
to hazard without regard to the unknown consequences.

We consider the effort to determine the questions discussed by the
author, from the data admitted by him, to be as impossible a task as
to calculate the distance of a fixed star which makes no parallax. The
oscillation of the ground, of the building, and of the instrument used
by the astronomer, and the apparent or proper motions of the stars,
may deceive him by an apparent parallax, from which he will make a
plausible but illusory calculation. The application suggests itself.
We have already discussed the same questions, from the data furnished
by revealed Catholic dogmas, and are now engaged in discussing them in
the series of articles entitled "Problems of the Age;" and it is,
therefore, superfluous to enter here into a new discussion of the same
topics.

We are glad to see these questions discussed, and always read with
interest what is written by a candid, earnest, well-informed, and able
writer like the author of this book. With many of his views we
cordially agree, and recognize the justice, force, and beauty of many
of his observations. We like him particularly for his clear views of
the goodness and justice of God, the freedom of man, the negative
character of evil, the worth and excellence of moral virtue; and for
his denial of physical depravity, of a dark, inevitable doom preceding
all personal existence or accountability, and similar fatalistic
doctrines of the old Protestant theological systems. While, however,
the moderate rationalism of the author avails so far as to refute
certain systems or doctrines which are contrary to reason, and to
furnish certain fragmentary portions of a better system, it is not
sufficient to make a complete synthesis between reason and revelation.
Catholic philosophy alone is competent to achieve this mighty and,
indeed, superhuman task.



THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE CONDITIONED,
comprising some remarks on Sir William Hamilton's Philosophy and on
Mr. J. S. Mill's Examination of that Philosophy. By H. L. Mansel,
B.D., Waynflete Professor of Moral and Metaphysical Philosophy in the
University of Oxford. London and New-York: Alexander Strahan. 1886


The philosophy of Sir William Hamilton has been the subject of an
animated controversy for some time in England and Scotland. It has
been attacked from two opposite sides--some of the principal critics
upon it having been themselves pupils of the distinguished Scottish
baronet, whose system they have undertaken to combat. On the one side,
Mr. Calderwood has assailed it, as deficient in affirming the
principle of certitude respecting ideal truth, and on the other, Mr.
Mill, as affirming too dogmatically the same principle. These assaults
have called out other champions in defense of their great master,
among whom Mr. Mansel is one of the most conspicuous. Those who desire
to know what can be said in favor of the Hamilton system will find
this volume worthy of their perusal. The author brings learning, no
mean ability, and very good temper to his task. We are no admirers of
the system he undertakes to defendant, but still less of that of his
antagonist. The first we regard as inadequate to the need which exists
of a true Christian philosophy, the second as subverting the very
basis of all philosophy and all religion. In this controversy our
sympathy and respect are given to the Oxford professor, as one who is
striving to uphold the belief in God and the Christian revelation,
albeit with insufficient weapons. We find, also, very much that is
admirable in particular portions of his essay.

It is needless to say anything in praise of Mr. Strahan's
publications, so far as the beauty of their mechanical execution is
concerned. The volume before us is a perfect specimen of British
typographical art, just such a book as delights the eye of the
literary amateur.



BOOKS RECEIVED.


From the Author: "The Life of Simon Bolivar, Liberator of Colombia and
Peru, Father and Founder of Bolivia: carefully written from authentic
and unpublished documents." By Doctor Felipe Larrazabal. Vol. 1, 8vo.,
pp. 410.


Anniversary Address and Poem, delivered before the society of the
Alumni of the Detroit High School, August 30th. 1886. Address by H. E.
Bust; Poem by Miss M. F. Buchanan.



From the American News Company: "Utterly Wrecked." A Novel, by Henry
Morford; paper.



{433}

THE CATHOLIC WORLD


VOL. IV, NO. 22.--JANUARY, 1867.


ORIGINAL.

A CHRISTMAS SONG.


  A carol of joy, a carol of joy,
    For the glorious Christmas time;
  While the heavens rejoice and the earth is glad.
    Let the merry bells sweetly chime.
  Let us seek the crib where our Saviour lies--
    See, the shepherds are kneeling there;
  Let us offer, with Mary and Joseph,
    Our worship of love and prayer.

  A carol of praise, a carol of praise,
    With the angels let us sing;
  Let us welcome with notes of rapturous joy
    Our Saviour, our God and King.
  Oh! would we could offer him worthy gifts,
    Oh! would that our hearts could love,
  With some equal return, the Holy Child,
    Who for us left his throne above!

  A carol of joy, a carol of joy,
    Let the whole earth gladly shout;
  She has waited long for this promised day.
    Let the glorious song flow out.
  A carol of praise, a carol of joy.
    Let us sing for the Christmas time.
  While the heavens rejoice and the earth is glad,
    And the merry bells sweetly chime.




{434}


ORIGINAL.

CHARITY AND PHILANTHROPY.


There is no denying that our age, in its dormant tendency, places
philanthropy above charity, and holds it higher praise to call a man
philanthropic than to call him charitable. In its eyes charity is to
philanthropy as a part to the whole, and consists, chiefly, in giving
the beggar a penny or sending him to the poor-house, and in treating
error and sin with even more consideration than truth and virtue.
Could anything better indicate the distance it has fallen below the
Christian thought, or its failure to grasp the principle of Christian
morals?

Philanthropy, according to the etymology of the word, is simply the
love of man; charity, according to Christian theology, is the love of
God, and of man in God. Philanthropy is simply a natural human
sentiment; charity is a virtue, a supernatural virtue, not possible
without the assistance of grace--the highest virtue, the sum and
perfection of all the virtues, the fulfilment of the whole law, the
bond of perfectness which likens and unites us to God; for God is
charity, _Deus est caritas_. It does not exclude but includes the love
of man, our neighbor or our brother; "for if any man say, I love God
and hateth his brother, he is a liar. For if he loveth not his
brother, whom he seeth, how can he love God, whom he seeth not?"
Whoever loves God must necessarily love his brother, for his brother
is included in God, as the effect in the cause, and he who loveth not
his brother proves clearly thereby that he doth not love God. But
charity, though it includes philanthropy, is as much superior to it as
God is to man.

The natural sentiments are all good in their origin and design, as
much so since as before the fall; and man would be worthless without
them; would be a monster, not a man. But in themselves they are blind.
Each one tends, when left to itself, to become exclusive and
excessive, and hence comes that internal disorder, anarchy, or war of
conflicting sentiments of which we are all more or less conscious, and
in which originate all life's tragedies. Even when developed,
restrained, and directed by the understanding, as they all need to be,
they are not even then moral virtues, meriting praise. Moral virtue is
a rational act, an act of free will, done for the sake of the end
prescribed by the law of God; but in the sentiments there is no free
will, except in restraining and directing them, and man acts in them
only as the sun shines, the rain falls, the winds blow, or the
lightnings flash. There may the beauty and goodness in them, as in the
objects of nature, but there is no virtue, because the spring of all
sentimental action is the indulgence or gratification of the sentiment
itself, not the will to do our duty, or to obey the law by which we
are morally bound.

Indeed, what most offends this age--perhaps all ages--and for which
it has the greatest horror, is duty or obedience; for duty implies
that we are not our own, and, therefore, are not free to dispose of
ourselves as we please; and obedience implies a superior, a lord and
master, who has the right to order us. It, therefore, sets its wits to
work and racks its brains to invent a morality that excludes duty, and
exacts no such hateful same as obedience. It has found all that it is
far nobler to act from love than from duty, and to do a thing because
we are prompted to do it by our hearts, then because God, in his law,
commands it. {435} In other words, it is nobler, more moral, to act to
please ourselves, than it is to act to please God. This passes for
excellent philosophy, and you may hear it in conversation of many
young misses just from boarding-school, read it in most popular novels
and magazines, and be edified by it from the pulpit of more than one
professedly Christian denomination.

This philosophy sets the so-called heart above the head, that is, it
distinguishes the heart from the understanding and will, and places
it, as so distinguished, above them. Hence we find the tendency is to
treat faith, considered as an intellectual act, and consequently the
Christian dogmas, with great indifference; and to say, if the heart is
right, it is no matter what one believes, and, it may be added, no
matter what one does. What one does is of little consequence, if one
only has fine sentiments, warm and gushing feelings. Jack Scapegrace
is hard drinking a gambler, a liar, a rake, and seldom goes near a
church; but for all that he is a right down good fellow--has a warm
heart. He gives liberally to the missionary society, and makes large
purchases at charity fairs. Hence a good heart, which at best means
only quick sensibilities, and which is perfectly compatible with the
grossest self-indulgence, and the most degrading and ruinous vices,
constitutes the sum and substance of religion and morality, atones for
the violation of every precept of the Decalogue, and supplies the
absence of faith and Christian virtue.

All errors are half truths. Certainly, love is the fulfilling of the
law, and the heart is all that God requires. "My son, give me thy
heart." But the "heart" in the scriptural sense is reason, the
intellect, and the will; and the love that fulfils the law is not a
sentiment, but a free act of the rational soul, and, therefore, a love
which it is within our power to give or withhold. It is a free,
voluntary love, yielded by intelligence and will. In this sense, love
cannot be contrasted with duty; for it is duty, or its fulfilment, and
indistinguishable from it; the heart cannot be contrasted with the
head, in the scriptural or Christian sense of the word; for in that
sense it includes the head, and stands for the whole rational
soul--the mistress of her own acts. To act from the promptings of
one's own heart, in this sense, is all right, for it is to act from a
sense of duty, from reason and will, or intelligence and free
volition. In souls well constituted and trained, or long exercised in
the practice of virtue, no long process of reasoning or deliberation
ever takes place, and the decision and execution are simultaneous, and
apparently instantaneous, but the act is none the less an act of
deliberate reason or free will.

Plato speaks of a love which is not an affection of the sensibility,
and which is one of the wings of the soul on which she soars to the
Empyreum; but I can understand no love that contrasts with duty,
except it be an affection of the sensitive nature, what the Scriptures
call "the flesh," which is averted by the fall from God, and, as the
Council of Trent defines, "inclines to sin"--"the carnal mind," which,
St. Paul tells us, is at enmity with God, is not subject to the law of
God, nor indeed can be. Christianity recognizes an antagonism between
the flesh and the spirit, between the law in our members and the Law
of the mind, but none between the love she approves and the duty she
enjoins, or between the heart which God demands and the head or the
understanding. Love by the Christian law is demanded as a duty, as
that which is due from us to God. We are required to love God with our
whole heart, mind, soul, and strength, and our neighbor as ourselves.
This is our duty, and therefore the love must be an act of free
will--a love which we are free to yield or to withhold, for our duty
can never exceed our liberty. The Christian loves duty, loves
self-denial and sacrifice, loves the law, and delights in it after
{436} the inner man; but in loving the law he acts freely from his own
reason and will, and he obeys it not for the sake of the delight he
takes in it, but because it is God's law; otherwise he would act to
please himself, not to please God, and his act would be simply an act
of self-indulgence.

The age, in its efforts to construct a morality which excludes duty
and obedience, tends to resolve the love which Christianity demands
into an affection of the sensibility, and thence very logically
opposes love to duty, and holds it nobler to act from inclination than
from duty, to follow the law in our members than the law of the mind.
It may then substitute, with perfect consistency, the
transcendentalist maxim, Obey thyself, for the Christian maxim. Deny
thyself!

But this is not all. The age, or what is usually called the age, not
only resolves virtue, which old-fashioned ethics held to be an act of
free will done in obedience to the Divine law, into a sentiment, or
interior affection, of the sensibility, but it goes further and
resolves God into man, and maintains that the real sense of the
mystery of the Incarnation, of the Word made flesh, is that man is the
only actual and living God, and that beyond humanity there is only
infinite possibility, which humanity in its infinite progress and
evolution and absorption of individual life is continually
actualizing, or filling up. So virtually teaches Hegel,
inconsiderately followed by Cousin, in teaching that _das reine Seyn_,
or simply possible being, arrives at self-consciousness first in man.
So teach the Saint Simonians, Enfantin, Bazard, Carnot, and Pierre
Leroux; and so hold the school or sect of the Positivists, followers
of Auguste Comte, who have actually instituted _un culte_ or service
in honor of humanity. The Positivists are too modest to claim to be
themselves each individually God, but they make no bones of calling
humanity, or the great collective man, God, and offering him, as such,
a suitable worship. This is taught and done in France, the most
lettered nation in Europe; and the principle that justifies it
pervades not a little of the popular literature of Great Britain,
Germany, and the United States.

If man or humanity is God, of course the highest virtue is and must be
philanthropy, the love of all men in general, and of no one in
particular. Resolve now God into man, and philanthropy or the love of
man into an affection of the sensibility or sensitive nature, and you
have in a nutshell the theology, religion, and morality to which the
age tens, which the bulk of our popular literature favors, which our
sons and daughters inhale with the very atmosphere they breathe, and
which explains the effeminacy and sentimentalism of modern society. It
is but a logical sequence that the age, since women are ordinarily
narily more sentimental than men, places woman at the head of the
race, and holds woman--if young, beautiful amiable, sentimental, and
rich--to be the most perfect and adorable embodiment of the divinity.
The highest form of philanthropy is the love of woman. I would say,
philogyny, only that might be taken to imply that the highest virtue
is the love of one's wife, or wifehood, which is to old-fashioned,
unless by wife is meant the wife of one's neighbor. But, my dear young
lady, be not too vain of the homage you receive; it will be withheld
with the first appearance of the first wrinkle or the first gray hair.
It is better to be honored as  a true woman than to be worshipped as a
goddess or even as an angel.

The sentimental worship of humanity, or the reduction of the virtue of
charity to the sentiment of philanthropy, necessarily weaken and
debases the character; and whatever we may say under various aspects
and praise of our age, and however strong our confidence that God in
his providence will turn even its evil tendencies to good, we cannot
deny its moral weakness; and it is doubtful if {437} the debasement of
individual character was greater, even in the Lower Empire, or that
men were more dishonest or fraudulent, more sordid or venal. Other
ages have been marked, perhaps, by less refinement of manners, more
violent crimes, and great criminals, but few are found less capable
either of great virtues or great expiations. This need not surprise
us, for it is only the natural effect of substituting sentiment for
virtue, and sentimental for moral culture, which we are constantly
doing.

Many, perhaps, will be disposed to deny that we have substituted
sentimental for moral culture, and it must be concluded that the
didactic lessons given in our schools throughout Christendom, for the
most part, remain very much as they have been ever since there was a
Christendom, and in general accord with pure Christian ethics. There
are few, if any, schools for children and youth, in which the
sentimental and humanitarian morality, or rather immorality, is
formally taught. But we should remember that the didactic lessons of
the school-room do very little toward forming the character of our
youth, and that the culture that really forms it is given by the home
circle, associations, the spirit and tone of the community in which
they are brought up. There is a subtle influence, what the Germans
call _der Welt-Geist_, which pervades the whole community, and affects
the faith, the morals, and character of all who grow up in that
community without any formal instruction or conscious effort of any
one. So far as formal lessons and words go, the culture of our
children and youth is, for the most part, Christian; but these lessons
and words receive a practical interpretation by _der Welt-Geist_, what
I call s spirit of the age, and should, "the prince of this world,"
which deprives them of their Christian sense, takes from them all
meaning, or gives them an anti-Christian meaning. It is one of the
striking peculiarities of the age that it inculcates the baldest
infidelity, the grossest immorality in the language of Christian faith
and virtue. It is this fact which deceives so many, and that makes the
assertion of sentimental for moral culture appear to be a total
misstatement, or, at least, a gross exaggeration of the fact.

It will, no doubt, also be said that a decided reaction in our popular
literature against sentimentalism has already commenced. The realism
of Dickens and the Trollopes is opposed to it, Bulwer Lytton, in his
late novels at least, is decidedly hostile to it, and Thackeray
unmercifully ridicules it. These and other popular writers have
undoubtedly reacted against one form of sentimentalism, the dark and
suicidal form placed in vogue by Goethe in his Sorrows of Werter, and
now nearly forgotten; but they have not ridiculed or reacted against
the form of sentimentalism which substitutes the sentiment of
philanthropy for the virtue of charity. They encourage
humanitarianism, and make the love of man for woman or woman for man
the great agent in developing, enlarging, and strengthening the
intellect, the spring of the purest and sublimest morality. The hero
of popular literature is now rarely an avowed unbeliever or open
scoffer, and in all well-bred novels the heroine says her prayers
night and morning, and the author decidedly patronizes Christianity,
and says many beautiful and even true things in its favor; but, after
all, his religion is based on humanity, is only a charming
sentimentalism, embraced for its loveliness, not as duty or the law
which it would be sin to neglect; or it is introduced as a foreign and
incongruous element, never as the soul or informing spirit of the
novel.

The fact is undeniable, whether people are generally conscious of it
or not, and we see its malign influence not only on individual
character, but on domestic and social life. It has nearly broken up
and rendered impossible the Christian family in the easy and educated
classes. {438} Marriage is, it is said, where and only where there is
mutual love, and hence the marriage is in the mutual love, is lawful
between any parties who mutually love, unlawful between any who do
not. Love is an interior affection of the sensibility, a feeling, and
like all the feelings independent of reason and will. All popular
literature makes love fatal, something undergone, not given. We love
where we must; not where we would nor where we should, but where we
are fated to love. It needs not here to speak of infidelity to the
marriage vows, which this doctrine justifies to any extent, for those
vows are broken when broken from unreasoning passion or lust, not from
a theory which justifies it. I speak rather of the misery which it
carries into married life, the destruction of domestic peace and
happiness it causes. Trained in the sentimentalism of the age, and to
regard love as a feeling dependent on causes beyond our control, our
young people marry, expecting from marriage what it has not, and
cannot give. They expect the feeling which they call love, and which
gives a roseate hue to everything they look upon, will continue as
fresh, as vivid, and as charming after marriage as before it; but the
honeymoon is hardly over, and they begin to settle down in the regular
routine of life, before they discover their mistake, the roseate hue
has gone, their feelings have undergone a notable change, and they are
disappointed in each other, and feel that the happiness they counted
on is no longer to be expected. The stronger and more intense the
mutual feeling the greater the disappointment, and hence the common
saying: Love matches are seldom happy matches. Each party is
disappointed in the other, frets against the chain that binds them
together, and wishes it broken.

This is only what might have been expected. Nothing is more variable
or transitory than our feelings, and nothing that depends on them can
be unchanging or lasting. When the feelings of the married couple
change toward each other, the marriage bond becomes a galling chain,
and is felt to be a serious evil, and divorce is desired and resorted
to as a remedy. It is usually no remedy at all, or a remedy worse even
than the disease; but it is the only remedy practicable where feeling
is substituted for rational affection. Hence, in nearly all modern
states, the legislature, in direct conflict with the Christian law,
which makes marriage a sacrament and indissoluble, permits divorce,
and in some states for causes as frivolous as incompatibility of
temper. It is easy to censure the legislature but it must follow and
express the morals, manners, sentiments, and demands of the people,
and when these are repugnant to the divine law, it cannot in its
enactments conform to that law; and if did, it's enactments would be
resisted as tyrannical and oppressive, or remained on the statute book
a dead letter, as did so much wise and just legislation inspired by
the church in the middle ages. The evil lies further back, in the
humanitarianism of the age, which reverses the real order, puts the
flesh in the place of the spirit, philanthropy in the place of
charity, and man in the place of God, and which promotes an excessive
culture of the sentiments, at the expense of rational conviction and
affection. There is no remedy but in returning to the order we have
reversed, to the higher culture of reason and free will, not possible
without faith in God and the Christian mysteries.

But passing over the effects of sentimental morality on individual
character, the private virtues, and domestic happiness, we find it no
less hostile to social ameliorations and reforms in the state. The age
is philanthropic, and wages war with every form of vice, poverty, and
suffering, and is greatly shocked at the evils it finds past ages
tolerated without ever making an effort to remove them, hardly even to
mitigate them. {439} This is well as far as it goes; but in an age
when the sensitive nature is chiefly cultivated, when physical pain is
counted the chief evil, and sensible pleasures held to be the chief
good, practically, if not theoretically, many things will be regarded
as evils which, in a more robust and manly age, were unheeded, or not
counted as evils at all. Many things in our day need changing, simply
because other things having been changed, they have become anomalous
and are out of place. What in one state of society is simple poverty,
is really distress in another; and poverty, which in itself is no
evil, becomes a great evil in a community where wealth is regarded as
the supreme good, and the poor have wants, habits, and tastes which
only wealth an satisfy. The poorer classes of today in civilized
nations would suffer intensely if thrown back into the condition they
were in under the feudal regime, but it may be doubted if they do not
really suffer as much now as they did then. Perhaps such wants as they
then had were more readily met and supplied than are those which they
now have. In point of fact, Christian charity did infinitely more for
the poor and to solace suffering in all its forms, even in the feudal
ages, than philanthopy does now; and we find the greatest amount of
squalid wretchedness now precisely in those nations in which
philanthopy has been most successful in supplanting charity.

Philanthropy effects nothing except in so far as it copies or imitates
Christian Charity, and its attempted imitations are rarely successful.
It has for years been very active and hard at work in imitation of
charity; but what has it effected? what suffering has it solaced? what
crime has it diminished? what vice has it corrected? what social evil
has it removed? It has tried its hand against licentiousness, and
licentiousness is more rife and shameless than ever. It has made
repeated onslaughts on the ruinous vice of intemperance, and yet
drunkenness increases instead of diminishing, and has become the
disgrace of the country-. It has professed great regard for the poor,
but does more to remove them out of sight than to relieve them. It
treats poverty as a vice or a crime, looks on it as a disgrace, a
thing to be fled from with all speed possible, and makes the poor feel
that wealth is virtue, honor, nobility, the greatest good, and thus
destroys their self respect, aggravates their discontent, and
indirectly provokes the crimes against property become so general and
so appalling. What a moral New York reads us in the fact that she
makes her commissioners of "Public Charities" also commissioners of
"Public Corrections!" Philanthropy rarely fails to aggravate the evil
she attempts to cure, or to cure one evil by introducing another and a
greater evil. Her remedies are usually worse than the disease.

Owen, Fourier, Cabet, and other philanthropists have made serious
efforts to reorganize society so as to remove the inequalities or the
evils of the inequalities of wealth and social position; but have all
failed, because they needed, in order to succeed, the habits,
character, and virtues which, on their own theories, can be obtained
only from success. As a rule, philanthropy must succeed in order to be
able to succeed.

Philanthropy--humanitarianism--has been shocked at slavery, and in
our country as well as in some others it formed associations for its
abolition. In the West India Islands, belonging to Great Britain, it
succeeded in abolishing it, to the ruin of the planters and very
little benefit to the slave. In this country, if slavery is abolished,
it has not been done by philanthropy, which served only to set the
North and the South by the ears, but by the military authority as a
war measure, necessary, or judged to be necessary, to save the Union
and to guard against future attempts to dissolve it. Philanthropy is
hard at work to make abolition a blessing to the freedmen. It talks,
sputters, {440} clamors, legislates, but it can effect nothing; and
unless Christian charity takes the matter in hand, it is very evident
that, however much emancipation may benefit the white race, it can
prove of little benefit to the emancipated, who will be emancipated in
name, but not in reality.

The great difficulty with philanthropy is, that she acts from feeling
and not reason, and uses reason only as the slave or instrument of
feeling. Wherever she sees an evil she rushes headlong to its removal,
blind to the injury she may do to rights, principles, and institutions
essential to liberty and the very existence of society. Hence she
usually in going to her end tramples down more good by the way than
she can obtain in gaining it. She has no respect for vested rights,
regards no geographical lines, and laughs at the constitutions of
states, if they stand in her way. Liberty with us was more interested
in maintaining inviolate the constitution of the Union and the local
rights of the several states, than it was even in abolishing negro
slavery, and hence many wise and good men, who had no interest in
retaining slavery, and who detested it as an outrage upon humanity,
did not and could not act or sympathize with the abolitionists. They
yield in nothing to them in the earnest desire to abolish slavery, but
they would abolish it by legal and peaceful means--means that would
not weaken the hold of the constitution and civil law on conscience,
and destroy the safeguards of liberty. The abolitionists did not err
in being opposed to slavery, but in the principles on which they
sought its abolition. Adam did not sin in aspiring to be God; for
that, in a certain sense, he was destined, through the incarnation,
one day to become. His sin was in aspiring to be God without the
incarnation, in his own personal right and might, and in violation of
the divine command, or by other means than those prescribed by his
Creator and Lawgiver, the only possible means of attaining the end
sought.

Philanthropy commits the same error whatever the good work she
attempts, and especially in all her attempts at political reforms. She
finds herself "cabined, cribbed, confined" by old political
institutions, and cries out, Down with them. She demands for the
people a liberty which she sees they have not and cannot have under
the existing political order, and so proceeds at once to conspire
against it, to revolutionize the state, deluges the land in blood, and
gets anarchy, the Reign of Terror, or military despotism for its
pains. Never were there more sincere or earnest philanthropists than
the authors of the old French Revolution. The violent revolutions
attempted in modern Europe in the name of humanity, have done more
harm to society by unsettling the bases of society and effacing in
men's minds and hearts the traditional respect for law and order, than
any good they could have done by sweeping away the social and
political abuses they warred against. The French are not politically
or individually freer to-day than they were under Louis Quatorze.

There are, no doubt, times when an old political order, as in Rome
after Marius and Sulla, has become effete, and can no longer fulfil
the duties or discharge the offices of a government, in which a
revolution, like that effected under the lead of Julius an Augustus
Caesar, may be desirable and advantageous, for it establishes a
practicable and a real government in the place of a government that
can no longer discharge the functions of government, and is virtually
no government at all. The empire was a great advance on the republic,
which was incapable of being restored. But revolutions properly
so-called, undertaken for the subversion of an existing order and the
introduction of another held to be theoretically more perfect, have
never, so far as history records, been productive of good. No doubt
England is to-day in advance of what she was under the Stuarts, but
who dares say that she is in advance of {441} what she would have been
had she not expelled them, or that she has become greater under the
Whig nobility than she might have been under the Tory squirarchy?

There has been, I readily concede, a real progress in modern society,
at least dating from the fifth century of our era; but, as I read
history, the progress has been interrupted or retarded by modern
socialistic or political revolutions, and has in no case been
accelerated by philanthropy as distinguished from Christian charity.
Moreover, in no state of Christendom has charity ever been wholly
wanting. Nations have cast off the authority of the church, and have
greatly suffered in consequence; but in none has divine charity been
totally wanting, and the influence of Christianity on civilization,
even in heretical and schismatic nations, is not to be counted as
nothing. I am far from believing that the nations that broke away from
the church are not better than they would have been if they had not
had the benefit of the habits formed under her teaching and
discipline. I know that _extra ecclesiam nulla sit salus_; but I know
also that the church is as a city set on a hill, and that rays from
the light within her may and do extend beyond her walls, and relieve
in some degree the darkness of those who are outside of them. How much
the church continues to influence nations once within her communion,
but now severed from it, nobody is competent to determine, nor can any
one but God himself say how many, in all these nations, though not
formally united to the body of the church, are yet not wholly severed
from her soul. The Russian Church retains the Orthodox faith and the
sacraments, and is officially under no sentence of excommunication
from the body of Christ, and only those who are individually and
voluntarily schismatic, are guilty of the sin of schism; and in other
communions, though undoubtedly heretical, there may be large numbers
of baptized persons who do really act on Christian principles, and
from purely Christian motives. All I mean to deny is, that society or
humanity ever gains anything from violent or sentimental revolutions.

The impotence of philanthropy without charity, or pure humanism, is
demonstrable _a priori_, and should have been foreseen. It is opposed
to the nature of things, and implies the absurdity that nothing is
something, and that what is not can act. It is an attempt to found
religion, morals, society, and the state without God; when without God
there is and can be nothing, and consequently nothing for them to
stand on. It assumes that man is an independent being, and suffices
for himself; which, whether we mean by man the individual or humanity,
"the universal man," "the one man" of the Transcendentalists, or "the
grand collective Being" of the Positivists, we all feel and know to be
not the fact. Man in either sense is a creature, and depends
absolutely on the creative act of God for his existence; and let God
suspend that act, and he sinks into the nothing he was before he was
created. Therefore it is in God _mediante_ his creative act he lives
and moves and has his being. Hence it is, whether we know it or not,
that we assert the existence of God as our creator in every act we
perform, every thought we think, every resolution we take, every
sentiment we experience, and every breath we draw, for no human
operation--physical, intellectual, or moral--is possible without the
divine creative act and concurrence.

Philanthropy, or the love of man, separated from charity, or the love
of God and of man in God, is therefore simply nothing, a mere
negation, for it supposes man separated from God is something, and
separated from God he is nothing. Hence St. Paul, in his first epistle
to the Corinthians, says: "If I speak with the tongues of men and of
angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass or a
tinkling cymbal. And if I have prophecy, and know all mysteries, and
have {442} all knowledge, and have all faith, so I could remove
mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing. And if I should
distribute all my goods to feed the poor, and should give my body to
be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing." This is so
not by virtue of any arbitrary decree or appointment of the Almighty,
even if such decree or appointment is possible, but in the very,
nature of things, and God himself cannot make it otherwise. God is
free to create or not to create, and free to create such existences as
he pleases; but he cannot create an independent self-sufficing being,
for he cannot create anything between which and himself there should
not be the relation of creator and creature. The creature depends
wholly, in all respects whatever, on the creator, and without him is
and can be nothing. The creature depends absolutely on the creator in
relation to all his acts, thoughts, and affections, as well as for
mere existence itself. God could not, even if it were possible that he
would, dispense with charity and count the love of man as independent
of God, as something, because he is truth, and it is impossible for
him to lie, and lie he would were he to count such supposed love
something, for independent of him there is no man to love or to be
loved. Man can love or be loved only where he exists; and as he exists
in God, so only in God can we possibly love him, that is, we can love
our neighbor only in loving God. The humanitarian love or morality is,
therefore, a pure negation, simply nothing.

Man is, indeed, a free moral agent, and he would not be capable of
virtue or a _moral_ action, if he were not; but he can act,
notwithstanding his moral freedom, only according to the conditions of
his existence. He exists and can exist only by virtue of a
supernatural principle, medium, and end. He exists only by the direct,
immediate creative act of God, and God in himself and in his direct
immediate acts, always and everywhere, is supernatural, above nature,
because its creator, and, as its creator, its proprietor. The maker
has a sovereign right to the thing made. The creature can no more be
its own end than its own principle or cause. Man cannot take himself
self as his own end, because he is not his own, but is his creator's,
and because independent of God who he is nothing. So God is both his
principle and end. But the end is not possible without a medium that
places it in relation with the principle, as theologians demonstrate
in their dissertations on the mystery of the ever blessed Trinity, and
as common sense itself teaches. As the principle and end are
supernatural, so the medium must be supernatural, for the medium must
be on the plane of the principle and end between which is the medium.
The medium, in the moral or spiritual order, the gospel teaches us, is
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, which infused by the Holy Ghost
into the soul elevates her to the plane of her supernatural destiny,
and strengthens her to gain or fulfil it. Hence, as says the apostle,
_Ex ipso, et per ipsum, et in ipso sunt omnia_--things are from him,
and by him, and to or in him. These are the essential conditions of
all life, alike in the natural or physical order, and in the moral or
spiritual. In all orders God is the principle, medium, and end of all
existence, of all action.

In the moral or spiritual order, not in the natural or physical order,
man is a free agent, and acts from free will, as Pope sings:

  "God, binding nature fast in fate,
   Leaves free the human will."

Grace assisting, man can conform to the essential conditions of his
existence--conditions determined and unalterably fixed by his
relation to God as his creator--by the free act of his own will; and
by doing so he lives morally, or has moral life. He can also, by
virtue of his liberty or freedom, refuse to conform, or in theological
language, to obey God, but he cannot so refuse and live in the moral
order. This refusal is not a living act, it is simply {443} the
negation of moral life, and therefore is moral death, as the
Scriptures call it. He does not necessarily cease to exist in the
natural or physical order, for in that order he cannot sever himself
from God, even if he would; he may kill his body, but not the physical
life of the soul, immortal, except by the will of its creator. But he
can extinguish his moral life, or refuse to live a moral life, which
is moral or spiritual death; and death is not a positive existence,
but the negation of existence, and therefore, nothing. Hence life and
death in the moral order are set before us, and we are free to choose
which we will. To choose, grace assisting, life, and freely of our own
will to conform to the conditions of life, to God as our principle,
medium, and and, is precisely what is meant by Christian charity, a
virtue that fulfils all the conditions imposed by our relation to God
as his creatures, the whole law of our existence, and unites our will
with the will of God, and by so doing makes us morally or spiritually
one with God. He who refuses charity, or has it not, voluntarily
renounces God, separates himself morally, and so far as his own will
goes even physically, from God; and as severed from God he exists not
at all; and therefore says the apostle, "Without charity I am
nothing." He only declares what is real, what is true in the nature of
things, and which God himself cannot alter.

Philanthropy is, therefore, necessarily impotent, for it tends to
death, not life; and as there is no action, physical or moral, that
does not tend to a real end, it is not action, but a negation of
action, and is therefore in itself nothing positive. All the
sentiments for this reason are negative, simple wants of the soul. The
soul may exert her powers to satisfy them, or to fill up the void in
her being, which they all indicate, but they are in themselves
nothing. They indicate not what the soul has, but what she wants or
needs to complete herself; and that can never the obtained from the
creature save in God, for the creature out of God, separated or turned
away from God, is nothing; it is something only in God. Any morality,
then, built on the sentiments is as unsubstantial as castles in the
air, and as unreal as "the baseless fabric of a vision." The
sentiments being wants, negative, with nothing positive in themselves,
are necessarily impotent. They are unsatisfied wants, and incapable of
attaining to anything that can satisfy them. They are a hungering and
thirsting of the soul for what it is not and has not. Here is the
explanation of the misery and wretchedness of a sentimental age, why
it is so ill-at-ease, so restless, so discontented in the midst of
material progress, and the accumulations of sensible goods. It
explains, too, why the damned, or those who fail in their destiny,
must suffer for ever. Death and hell are not positive existences or
positive creations of God, but are the want of spiritual life, are the
unsatisfied wants, the endless cravings of the soul for what can be
had only in God, and the lost have turned their backs on God.

Charity is not negative, not a want, but a power; and it is easy,
therefore, to understand that while philanthropy is impotent it is
effective. Charity grasps, as do all the rational affections, her
object, and is effective because she is positive not negative, living
not dead; and living, because she conforms to the real conditions of
life, and participates, through his creative act, in the life of him
who is life himself. She is less pretentious and more modest in her
proceedings and promises than philanthropy, but makes up for it in the
richness and magnificence of the results she obtains. She works slowly
and with patience, for she works for eternity, not time--without pomp
or parade, in obscurity and silence, for she seeks the praise of God,
not the praise of men. To the onlooker she seems not to move, any more
than the sun in the heavens; but after a while we find that she has
moved, and has transformed the world. {444} Broad in her love and
expansive as the universe, and embracing all ages and nations in her
affections, she yet wastes not her strength in vague generalities, nor
in manifold projects of reform or progress of the race in general,
from which no one in particular has anything to expect; but takes men
in the concrete as she finds them, does the work nearest at hand and
most pressing to be done, and proceeding quietly from the individual
to the family, from the family to society and the state, she works out
the regeneration of all in working out the regeneration of each. She
works as God works, without straining or effort, for her power is
great and never fails. Power needs make no effort; it speaks and it is
done, commands and it stands fast. Let there be light, and there is
light. It is weakness that must strain and tug, as we see in the
feeble literature of the day, and philanthropy seems to the observer
to be always more in earnest and far harder at work than charity, and
attracts far more attention; but while she fills the world with her
hollow sounds, charity, unheeded and unheard, fills it with her deeds.

History is at hand to confirm the conclusions of reason, though the
full history of charity has never been written, and the greater part
of her deeds are known only to him whose eye seeth all things, and
will be revealed, only at the last day. But something has been
recorded and is known. We in our day think we are doing much to
relieve the poor and oppressed, to console the suffering, and to bind
up the broken-hearted; but the best of us would be put to shame were
we to study what charity did during the decline and fall of the Roman
empire and the barbarous ages that immediately followed. We have
boasted, and perhaps justly, of the services rendered to humanity
during our late civil war by our Christian Commissions and Sanitary
Commissions; but what was done by them during four years is nothing in
comparison with what was done daily by Christian charity to relieve
suffering and distress far greater than were experienced by those even
who suffered most from the ravages of our civil war, and that not for
four years only, but for four centuries. I have here no room for
details, or even for the barest outline of what charity did during the
long agony of the old world and the birth of the new; but this much
must be said, that it was everywhere present and energetic, and seemed
everywhere to renew the miracle of the five loaves and two fishes; and
when that old world had passed away, it was found that a new world on
a far broader and more durable foundation had taken it's place.
Charity had to deal with poverty and want, with sickness and sorrow,
and she relieved them; with captives and prisoners of war, and she
ransomed them even with the plate from the altar; with barbarians
whose highest vision of heaven was to sit in the halls of Valhalla,
and quaff from human skulls the blood of their enemies--she tamed,
humanized, and civilized them, and made them the foremost nations of
the world; with slaves, for Europe was covered over with them--and
she mitigated their lot, lightened their oppression, secured for them
the moral rights of Christians, and finally broke their chains and
made them, not freedmen only, but freemen, Christian freemen, and
brothers of the noblest and proudest.

What if it took centuries to abolish slavery? It did not take her
centuries to christen the slaves, to bring them spiritual freedom, and
provide for their souls. She did not wait till she had abolished the
slavery of the body before abolishing the far more grievous slavery of
the soul, teaching the slaves the truth that liberates, incorporating
them into the church of God, and making them free and equal citizens
of the commonwealth of Christ. With this spiritual freedom, of which
philanthropy knows nothing, but which is the basis of all real
freedom, and with ample provisions for the wants of the soul, {445}
the slave could wait in patience for the day of deliverance from
bodily servitude. That day might be long in coming,  come it surely
would; and it did come, and peaceably, without civil war, social
convulsion, industrial or economical disturbance. But, unhappily, with
us only a feeble portion of the slaves were really Christianized, and
by their moral and spiritual training as free and equal members of the
church, which makes no distinction between the bond and the free, the
white and the black, fitted to take their position and play there are
parts as free and equal members of civil society Moreover, we have not
been able to emancipate them peaceably; we have done it only by a
terrible civil war, in the midst of the clash of arms, as a means of
saving the life of the nation, or of perpetuating the union of the
states; and the most difficult problem remains to be solved, which the
humanitarians flatter themselves will be solved without trouble by
political economy, or the general law of demand and supply; but which
they will find it will need more Christian Charity than the nation has
hitherto possessed to solve, without the gradual extinction in this
country of the negro race. The last thing to be relied on for
adjusting any social question, elevating any class to social or civil
equality, or making freedmen really freemen, is political economy,
which treats man not as a free moral agent, or as a social being, but
simply as a producing, distributing, and and consuming machine, placed
in the same category with the steam-plough, patent reaper,
spinning-jenny, and the power-loom. If the question, What shall be
done with our freedman? be left to politics, political economy, or
philanthropy, without the intervention of Christian charity,
emancipation will only have changed the form of their slavery, or
given them all the cares and burdens of freedom with none of its
blessings.

It is the same in all human affairs. No measured of reform or
progress, individual or social, domestic or political, ever succeed or
succeed without an overbalance of evil, unless inspired and directed
by charity. They may and do succeed without perfect charity, but never
without the principle of charity. Philanthropy is man's method, and
leads to nothing; charity is God's method, and conducts to its end.
But we must not confound charity with weakness or effeminacy of
character, for that would be to confound it with sentimentalism.
Charity is not credulity or mental imbecility; it is always robust and
manly, the rational soul raised above itself by divine grace, and
endowed in the spiritual order with superhuman power.

Charity loves peace, but follows after the things which make for
peace, and shrinks not from following after them, when need is, even
through war. Modern peace-societies are founded by philanthropy, not
by charity, and though they have been in existence for half a century,
and proudly boasted that there would be no more war, yet there have
been more wars and bloodshed during the last twenty years than during
any period of equal duration since modern history began. Charity
founds no anti-hangman societies for the abolition of capital
punishment in all cases whatsoever, or prisoners' friends societies to
convert our prisons into palaces; yet recoils from all cruelty or
undue severity, and seeks to prevent punishment by preventing crime.
She never forgets justice, nor sacrifices in her love for individuals
the protection of society or the safety of the state. Her great care
is to save the soul of the criminal, and to this end she visits the
most loathsome cells, takes her stand on the scaffold by the side of
the condemned, and will not give him up till she has made his peace
with God. She fills the soul with love for enemies and forgiveness of
injuries, but they are _my_ enemies she bids me love, and my personal
injuries she bids me forgive. I cannot forgive injuries, done to my
neighbor, to society, or to my country, for they are not mine; and she
herself bids me, when summoned by the proper authority, to shoulder my
musket and march to the battle-field to defend public right and
repress public wrong. Charity is never weak, sentimental,
lackadaisical, or cowardly. It is the principle of all true greatness
and manliness, and the most charitable are the strongest, bravest, the
most heroic, wherever duty calls them to act as well as to suffer.



{446}

From the London Society.

CHRISTMAS WITH THE BARON.


A RATHER REMARKABLE FAIRY TALE.


Once upon a time--fairy tales always begin with once upon a time, you
know--once upon a time there lived in a fine old castle on the Rhine,
a certain Baron von Schrochslofsleschshoffinger. You won't find it an
easy name to pronounce; in fact, the baron never tried it himself but
once, and then he was laid up for two days' afterward; so in future
well merely call him "the baron," for shortness, particularly as he
was rather a dumpy man. After having heard his name, you won't be
surprised when I tell you that he was an exceedingly bad character.
For a German baron, he was considered enormously rich; a hundred and
fifty pounds a year wouldn't be thought much over here; but still it
will buy a good deal of sausage, which, with wine grown on the estate,
formed the chief sustenance of the baron and his family. Now, you'll
hardly believe that, notwithstanding he was the possessor of his
princely revenue, the baron was not satisfied, but oppressed and
ground down his unfortunate tenants to the very last penny he could
possible squeeze out of them. In all his exactions he was seconded and
encouraged by his steward, Klootz, an old rascal who took a malicious
pleasure in his master's cruelty, and who chuckled and rubbed his
hands with the greatest apparent enjoyment when any of the poor
landholders couldn't pay their rent, or afforded him any opportunity
for oppression. Not content with making the poor tenants pay double
value for the land they rented, the baron was in the habit of going
round every now and then to their houses, and ordering anything he
took a fancy to, from a fat pig to a pretty daughter, to be sent up to
the castle. The pretty daughter was made parlor-maid, but as she had
nothing a year, and to find herself, it wasn't what would be
considered by careful mothers an eligible situation The fat pig became
sausage, of course. Things went on from bad to worse, till at the time
of our story, between the alternate squeezings of the baron and his
steward, the poor tenants had very little left to squeeze out of them.
The fat pigs and the pretty daughters had nearly all found their way
up to the castle, and there was little else to take. The only help the
poor fellows had was the baron's only daughter, Lady Bertha, who
always had a kind words, and frequently something more substantial,
for them, when her father was not in the way. Now, I'm not going to
describe Bertha, for the simple reason that if I did, you would
imagine that she was the fairy I'm going to tell you about, and she
isn't. However, I don't mind giving yon a few outlines. In the first
place, she was exceedingly tiny--the nicest girls, the real lovable
little pets, always are tiny--and she had long silken black hair, and
a dear, dimpled little face, full of love and mischief. Now then, fill
out outline {447} with the details of the nicest and prettiest girl
you know, and you'll have a slight idea of her. On second thoughts, I
don't believe you will, for your portrait wouldn't be half good
enough; however, it'll be near enough for you. Well, the baron's
daughter, being all your fancy painted her, and a trifle more, was
naturally much distressed at the goings on of her unamiable parent,
and tried her best to make amends for her father's harshness. She
generally managed that a good many pounds of the sausage should find
their way back to the owners of the original pig; and when the baron
tried to squeeze the and of the pretty parlor-maid, which he
occasionally did after dinner, Bertha had only to say, in a tone of
mild remonstrance, "Pa!" and pa dropped the hand like a hot potato,
and stared very hard the other way, instantly. Bad as the disreputable
old baron was, he had a respect for the goodness and purity of his
child. Like the lion, tamed by the charm of Una's innocence, the rough
old rascal seemed to lose in her presence half his rudeness; and
though he used awful language to her sometimes (I dare say even Una's
lion reward occasionally) he was more tractable with her than with any
other living being. Her presence operated as a moral restraint upon
him, which possibly was the reason that he never stayed down stairs
after dinner, but always retired to a favorite turret, where he could
get comfortably tipsy, which, I regret to say, he had got so in the
way of doing every afternoon, that I believe he would have felt unwell
without.

The hour of the baron's afternoon symposium was the time selected by
Bertha for her errands of charity. Once he was fairly settled down to
his second bottle, off went Bertha, with her maid beside her carrying
a basket to bestow a meal on some of the poor tenants, among whom she
was always received with blessings. At first these excursions had been
undertaken solely from charitable motives, and Bertha thought herself
plentifully repaid in the love and thanks of her grateful pensioners.
Of late, however, another cause had led her to take even stronger
interest in her walks, and occasionally to come in with brighter eyes
and a rosier cheek than the gratitude of the poor tenants had been
wont to produce. The fact is, some months before the time of our
story, Bertha had noticed in her walks a young artist, who seemed to
be fated to be invariably sketching points of interest in the road she
had to take. There was one particular tree, exactly in the path which
led from the castle gate, which he had sketched from at least four
points of view, and Bertha began to wonder what there could be so very
particular about it. At last, just as Carl von Sempach had begun to
consider where on earth he could sketch the tree from next, and to
ponder seriously upon the feasibility of climbing up into it, and
taking it from _that_ point of view, a trifling accident occurred,
which gave him the opportunity of making Bertha's acquaintance, which,
I don't mind stating confidentially, was the very thing he had been
waiting for. It so chanced, that on one particular afternoon the maid,
either through awkwardness, or possibly through looking more at the
handsome painter than the ground she was walking on, stumbled and
fell. Of course the basket fell too, and equally of course, Carl, as a
gentleman, couldn't do less than offer his assistance in picking up
the damsel and the dinner.

The acquaintance thus commenced was not suffered to drop; and handsome
Carl and our good little Bertha were fairly over head and ears in
love, and had begun to have serious thoughts of a cottage in a wood,
et caetera, when their felicity was disturbed by their being
accidentally met, in one of their walks, by the baron. Of course the
baron, being himself so thorough an aristocrat, had higher views for
his daughter than marrying her to a "beggarly artist," and accordingly
he stamped and swore, and threatened Carl {448} with summary
punishment with all sorts of weapons, from heavy boots to
blunderbusses, if ever he ventured near the premises again. This was
unpleasant; but I fear it didn't _quite_ put a stop to the young
people's interviews, though it made them less frequent and more secret
than before.

Now, I'm quite aware this wasn't at all proper, and that no properly
regulated young lady would ever have had meetings with a young man her
papa didn't approve of. But then it's just possible Bertha mightn't
have been a properly regulated young lady; I only know she was a dear
little pet, worth twenty model young ladies, and that she loved Carl
very dearly. And then consider what a dreadful old tyrant of a papa
she had! My dear girl, it's not the slightest use your looking so
provokingly correct; it's my deliberate belief that if you had been in
her shoes (they'd have been at least three sizes too small for you,
but that doesn't matter) you would have done precisely the same.

Such was the state of things on Christmas Eve in the year----stay!
fairy tales never have a year to them; so on second thoughts I
wouldn't tell the date if I knew--but I don't. Such was the state of
things, however, on the particular 24th of December to which our story
refers--only, if anything, rather more so. The baron had got up in the
morning in an exceedingly bad temper; and those about him had felt its
effects all through the day. His two favorite wolf-hounds, Lutzow and
Teufel, had received so many kicks from the baron's heavy boots that
they hardly knew at which end their tails were; and even Klootz
himself scarcely dared to approach his master. In the middle of the
day two of the principal tenants came to say that they were unprepared
with their rent, and to beg for a little delay. The poor fellows
represented that their families were starving, and entreated for
mercy; but the baron was only too glad that he had at last found so
fair an excuse for venting his ill-humor. He loaded the unhappy
defaulters with every abusive epithet he could devise (and being
called names in German is no joke, I can tell you); and, lastly, he
swore by everything he could think of that if their rent was not paid
on the morrow, themselves and their families should be turned out of
doors to sleep on the snow, which was then many inches deep on the
ground. They still continued to beg for mercy, till the baron became
so exasperated that he determined to kick them out of the castle
himself. He pursued them for that purpose as far as the outer door,
when fresh fuel was added to his anger. Carl, who as I have hinted,
still managed, notwithstanding the paternal prohibition, to see fair
Bertha occasionally, and had come to wish her a merry Christmas,
chanced at this identical moment to be saying good-by at the door,
above which, in accordance with immemorial usage, a huge bush of
mistletoe was suspended. What they were doing under it at the moment
of the baron's appearance, I never knew exactly; but his wrath was
tremendous! I regret to say that his language was unparliamentary in
the extreme. He swore till he was mauve in the face; and if he had not
providentially been seized with a fit of coughing, and sat down in the
coal-scuttle--mistaking it for a three-legged stool--it is impossible
to say to what lengths his feelings might have carried him. Carl and
Bertha picked him up, rather black behind, but otherwise not much the
worse for his accident. In fact, the diversion of his thoughts seemed
to have done him good; for, having sworn a little more, and Carl
having left the castle, he appeared rather better. After having
endured so many and various emotions, it is hardly to be wondered at
that the baron required some consolation; so, after having changed his
tr--s-rs, he took himself off to his favorite turret, to allay by
copious potations the irritation of his mind. Bottle after bottle was
emptied, and pipe after pipe was {449} filled and smoked. The fine old
Burgundy was gradually getting into the baron's head; and altogether
he was beginning to feel more comfortable. The shades of the winter
afternoon had deepened into the evening twilight, made dimmer still by
the aromatic clouds that came, with dignified deliberation, from the
baron's lips, and curled in floated up to the carved ceiling of the
turret, where they spread themselves into a dim canopy, which every
successive cloud brought lower and lower. The fire, which had been
filed up mountain-high earlier in the afternoon, and had flamed and
roared to its heart's content ever since, had now got to that
state--the perfection of a fire to a lazy man--when it requires no
poking or attention of any kind, but just burns itself hollow, and
then tumbles in, and blazes jovially for a little time, and then
settles down to a genial glow, and gets hollow and tumbles in again.
The baron's fire was just in this delightful "da capo" condition, most
favorable of all to the enjoyment of the "dolce far niente." For the
little while it would glow and kindle quietly, making strange faces to
itself, and building fantastic castles in the depths of its red
recesses, and then the castles would come down with a crash, and the
faces disappear, with a bright flame spring up and lick lovingly the
sides of the old chimney; and the carved heads of improbable men and
impossible women, hewn so deftly round the panels of the old oak
wardrobe opposite, in which the baron's choicest vintages were
deposited, were lit up by the flickering light, and seemed to nod and
wink at the fire in return, with the familiarity of old acquaintances.

Some such fancy as this was disporting itself in the baron's brain;
and he was gazing at the old oak carving accordingly, and emitting
huge volumes of smoke with reflective slowness, when a clatter among
the bottles on the table caused him to turn his head to ascertain the
cause. The baron was by no means a nervous man; however, the sight
that met his eyes when he turned round did take away his presence of
mind a little; and he was obliged to take four distinct puffs before
he had sufficiently regained his equilibrium to inquire, "Who
the--Pickwick--are you?" (The baron said "Dickens," but as that is a
naughty word we will substitute "Pickwick," which is equally
expressive, and not so wrong.) Let me see; where was I? Oh! yes. "Who
the Pickwick are you?"

Now, before I allow the baron's visitor to answer the question,
perhaps I had better give a slight description of his personal
appearance. If this wasn't a true story, I should have liked to have
made him a model of manly beauty; but a regard for veracity compels me
to confess that he was not what would be generally considered
handsome; that is, not in figure, for his face was by no means
unpleasing. His body was in size and shape not very unlike a huge
plum-pudding, and was clothed in a bright-green tightly fitting
doublet, with red holly berries for buttons. His limbs were long and
slender in proportion to his stature, which was not more than three
feet or so. His head was encircled by a crown of holly and mistletoe.
The round red berries sparkled amid his hair, which was silver-white,
and shone out in cheerful harmony with his rosy jovial face. And that
face! it would have done one good to look at it. In spite of the
silver hair, and an occasional wrinkle beneath the merry laughing
eyes, it seemed brimming over with perpetual youth. The mouth, well
garnished with teeth, white and sound, which seemed as if they could
do ample justice to holiday cheer, was ever open with a beaming genial
smile, expanding now and then into hearty jovial laughter. Fun and
good-fellowship were in every feature. The owner of the face was, at
the moment when the baron first perceived him, comfortably seated upon
the top of the large tobacco-jar on the table, nursing his left leg.
The baron's {450} somewhat abrupt inquiry did not appear to irritate
him; on the contrary, he seemed rather amused than otherwise.

"You don't ask prettily, old gentleman," he replied; "but I don't mind
telling you, for all that. I'm King Christmas."

"Eh?" said the baron.

"Ah!" said the goblin. Of course you've guessed he was a goblin.

"And pray what's your business here?" said the baron.

"Don't be crusty with a fellow," replied the goblin. "I merely looked
in to wish you the compliments of the season. Talking of crust, by the
way, what sort of a tap is it you're drinking?" So saying, he took up
a flask of the baron's very best and poured out about half a glass.
Having held the glass first to one side and then the other, winked at
it twice, sniffed it, and gone through the remainder of the pantomime
in which connoisseurs indulge, he drank it with great deliberation,
and smacked his lips scientifically. "Hum! Johannisberg! and not so
_very_ bad--for you. But I tell you what it is, baron, you'll have to
bring out better stuff than this when _I_ put my legs on your
mahogany."

"Well, you are a cool fish," said the baron. "However, you're rather a
joke, so now you're here we may as well enjoy ourselves. Smoke?"

"Not anything you're likely to offer me!"

"Confound your impudence!" roared the baron, with a horribly
complicated oath. "That tobacco's as good as any in all Rhineland."

"That's a nasty cough you've got, baron. Don't excite yourself, my
dear boy; I dare say you speak according to your lights. I don't mean
Vesuvians, you know, but your opportunities for knowing anything about
it. Try a weed out of my case, and I expect you'll alter your
opinion."

The baron took the proffered case, and selected a cigar. Not a word
was spoken till it was half consumed, when the baron took it for the
first time from his lips, and said gently, with the air of a man
communicating an important discovery in the strictest confidence, "Das
ist gut!"

"Thought you'd say so," said the visitor. "And now, as you like the
cigar, I should like you to try a thimbleful of what _I_ call wine. I
must warn you, though, that it is rather potent, and may produce
effects you are not accustomed to."

"Bother that, if it's as good as the weed," said the baron; "I haven't
taken my usual quantity by four bottles yet."

"Well, don't say I didn't warn you, that's all. I don't think you'll
find it unpleasant, though it is rather strong when you're not
accustomed to it." So saying, the goblin produced from some mysterious
pocket a black, big-bellied bottle, crusted apparently with the dust
of ages. It did strike the baron as peculiar, that the bottle, when
once produced, appeared nearly as big round as the goblin himself; but
he was not the sort of man to stick at trifles, and he pushed foreword
his glass to be filled just as composedly as if the potion had been
shipped by Sandeman, and paid duty in the most commonplace way.

The glass was filled and emptied, but the baron uttered not his
opinion. Not in words, at least, but he pushed forward his glass to be
filled again in a manner that sufficiently bespoke his approval.

"Aha, you smile!" said the goblin. And it was a positive fact; the
baron was smiling; a thing he hadn't been known to do in the memory of
the oldest inhabitant. "That's the stuff to make your hair curl, isn't
it?"

"I believe you, my b-o-o-oy!" The baron brought out this earnest
expression of implicit confidence with true Paul Bedford unction. "It
warms one--_here!_"

Knowing the character of the man, one would have expected him to put
his hand upon his stomach. But he didn't; he laid it upon his _heart_.

{451}

"The spell begins to operate, I see," said the goblin. "Have another
glass."

The baron had another glass, and another after that. The smile on his
face expanded into an expression of such geniality that the whole
character of his countenance was changed, and his own mother wouldn't
have known him. I doubt myself--inasmuch as she died when he was
exactly a year and three months old--whether she would have recognized
him under any circumstances; but I merely wish to express that he was
changed almost beyond recognition.

"Upon my word," said the baron, at length, "I feel so light I almost
think I could dance a hornpipe. I used to once, I know. Shall I try?"

"Well, if you ask my advice," replied the goblin, "I should say,
decidedly, don't. 'Barkis is willing,' I dare say, but trousers are
weak, and you might split 'em."

"Hang it all," said the baron, "so I might; I didn't think of that.
But still I feel as if I must do something juvenile!"

"Ah! that's the effect of your change of nature," said the goblin.
"Never mind, I'll give you plenty to do presently."

"Change of nature! what do you mean, you old conundrum?" said the
baron.

"You're another," said the goblin, "But never mind. What I mean is
just this. What you are now feeling is the natural consequence of my
magic wine, which has changed you into a fairy. That's what's the
matter, sir."

"A fairy! me!" exclaimed the baron. "Get out; I'm too fat."

"Fat! oh! that's nothing. We shall put you in regular training, and
you'll soon be slim enough to creep into a lady's stocking. Not that
you'll be called upon to do anything of the sort; but I'm merely
giving you an idea of your future figure."

"No, no," said the baron; "me thin! that's too ridiculous. Why, that's
worse than being a fairy. You don't mean it, though, do you? I do feel
rather peculiar."

"I do, indeed," said the visitor. "You don't dislike it, do you?"

"Well, no, I can't say I do, entirely. It's queer, though, I feel so
uncommon friendly. I feel as if I should like to shake hands, or pat
somebody on the back."

"Ah!" said the goblin, "I know how it is. Rum feeling, when you're not
accustomed to it. But come; finish that glass, for we must be off.
We've got a precious deal to do before morning, I can tell you. Are
you ready?"

"All right," said the baron. "I'm just in the humor to make a night of
it."

"Come along, then," said the goblin.

They proceeded for a short time in silence along the corridors of the
old castle. They carried no candle, but the baron noticed that
everything seemed perfectly light wherever they stood, but relapsed
into darkness as soon as they had passed by. The goblin spoke first.

"I say, baron, you've been an uncommon old brute in your time, now
haven't you?"

"H'm," said the baron, reflectively, "I don't know. Well, yes, I
rather think I have."

"How jolly miserable you've been making those two young people, you
old sinner! You know who I mean."

"Eh, what? You know that, too?" said the baron.

"Know it; of course I do. Why, bless your heart, I know everything, my
dear boy. But you have made yourself an old pig in that quarter,
considerably. Ar'n't you blushing, you hard-hearted old monster?"

"Don't know, I'm sure," said the baron, scratching his nose, as if
that was where he expected to feel it. "I believe I have treated them
badly, though, now I come to think of it."

At this moment they reached the door of Bertha's chamber. The door
opened of itself at their approach.

{452}

"Come along" said the goblin, "you won't wake her. Now, old
flinty-heart, look there."

The sight that met the baron's view was one that few fathers could
have beheld without affectionate emotion. Under ordinary
circumstances, however, the baron would not have felt at all
sentimental on the subject, but to-night something made him view
things in quite a different light to that he was accustomed to. I
shouldn't like to make affidavit of the fact, but it's my positive
impression that he sighed.

Now, my dear reader--particularly if a gentleman--don't imagine I'm
going to indulge your impertinent curiosity with an elaborate
description of the sacred details of a lady's sleeping apartment.
_You're_ not a fairy, you know, and I don't see that it can possibly
matter to you whether fair Bertha's dainty little bottines were tidily
placed on the chair by her bedside, or thrown carelessly, as they had
been taken off, upon the hearth-rug, where her favorite spaniel
reposed, warming his nose in his sleep before the last smouldering
embers of the decaying fire; or whether her crinoline--but if she did
wear a crinoline, what can that possibly matter, sir, to you? All I
shall tell you is, that everything looked snug and comfortable; but
somehow, any place got that look when Bertha was in it. And now a word
about the jewel in the casket--pet Bertha herself. Really, I'm at a
loss to describe her. How do you look when your'e asleep?--Well, it
wasn't like _that_; not a bit! Fancy a sweet girl's face, the cheek
faintly flushed with a soft warm tint, like the blush in the heart of
the opening rose, and made brighter by the contrast of the snowy
pillow on which it rested; dark silken hair, curling and clustering
lovingly over the tiniest of tiny ears, and the softest, whitest neck
that ever mortal maiden was blessed with; long silken eyelashes,
fringing lids only less beautiful than the dear earnest eyes they
cover. Fancy all this, and fancy, too, if you can, the expression of
perfect goodness and parity that lift up the sweet features of the
slumbering maiden with a beauty almost angelic, and you will see what
the baron saw that night. Not quite all, however, for the baron's
vision paused not at the bedside before him, but had passed on from
the face of the sleeping maiden to another face as lovely, that of the
young wife, Bertha's mother, who had, years before, taken her angel
beauty to the angels.

The goblin spoke to the baron's thought. "Wonderfully like, is she
not, baron?" The baron slowly inclined his head.

"You made her very happy, didn't you?" The tone in which the goblin
spoke was harsh and mocking. "A faithful husband, tender and true! She
must have been a happy wife, eh, baron?"

The baron's head had so upon his bosom. Old recollections were
thronging into his awakened memory. Solemn vows to love and cherish,
somewhat strangely kept. Memories of bitter words, and savage oaths,
showered at a quiet uncomplaining figure, without one word in reply.
And last, the memory of a fit of drunken passion, and a hasty blow
struck with a heavy hand; and then of three months fading away; and
last, of her last prayer--for her baby and him.

"A good husband makes a good father, baron. No wonder you are somewhat
chary of rashly entrusting to a suitor the happiness of a sweet flower
like this. Poor child! it is hard, though, that she must think no more
of him she loves so dearly. See! she is weeping even in her dreams.
But you have good reasons, no doubt. Young Carl is wild, perhaps, or
drinks, or gambles, eh? What! none of these? Perhaps he is wayward and
uncertain, and you fear that the honied words of {453} courtship might
turn to bitter sayings in matrimony. They do, sometimes, eh, baron? By
all means guard her from such a fate as that. Poor tender flower! Or
who knows, worse than that, baron! Hard words break no bones, they
say, but angry men are quick, and a blow is soon struck, eh?"

The goblin had drawn nearer and nearer, and laid his hand upon the
baron's arm, and the last words were literally hissed into his ear.
The baron's frame swayed to and under the violence of his emotions. At
last, with a cry of agony, he dashed his hands upon his forehead. The
veins were swollen up like thick cords, and his voice was almost
inarticulate in its unnatural hoarsness.

"Torturer, release me! Let me go, let me go and do something to forget
the past; or I shall go mad and die!"

He rushed out of the room and paced wildly down the corridor, the
goblin following him. At last, as they came near the outer door of the
castle, which opened of itself as they reached it, the spirit spoke:

"This way, baron, this way; I told you there was work for us to do
before morning, you know."

"Work!" exclaimed the baron, absently, passing his fingers through his
tangled hair; "oh! yes, work! the harder and the rougher the better;
anything to make me forget."

The two stepped out into the courtyard, and the baron shivered,
though, as it seemed, unconsciously, at the breath of the frosty
midnight air, The snow lay deep on the ground, and the baron's heavy
boot sank into it with a crisp, crushing sound at every tread. He was
bareheaded, but seemed unconscious of the fact, and tramped on, as if
utterly indifferent to anything but his own thoughts. At last, as a
blast of the night wind, keener than ordinary, swept over him, he
seemed for the first time to feel the chill. His teeth chattered, and
he muttered, "Cold, very cold."

"Ay, baron," said the goblin, "it is cold, even to us, who are healthy
and strong, and warmed with wine. Colder still, though, to those who
are hungry and half-naked, and have to sleep on the snow."

"Sleep? snow?" said the baron. "Who sleeps on the snow? why, I
wouldn't let my dogs be out on such a night as this."

"Your dogs, no!" said the goblin; "I spoke of meaner animals--your
wretched tenants. Did you not order yesterday, that Wilhelm and
Friedrich, if they did not pay their rent tomorrow, should be turned
out to sleep on the snow? a snug bed for the little ones, and a nice
white coverlet, eh? Ha! ha! twenty florins or so is no great matter,
is it? I'm afraid their chance is small, nevertheless. Come and see."

The baron hung his head. A few minutes brought them to the first of
the poor dwellings, which they entered noiselessly. The fireless
grate, the carpetless floor, the broken window-panes, all gave
sufficient testimony to the want and misery of the occupants. In one
comer lay sleeping a man, a woman, and three children, and nestling to
each other for the warmth which their ragged coverlet could not
afford. In the man, the baron recognized his tenant, Wilhelm, one of
those who had been with him to beg for indulgence on the previous day.
The keen features, and bones almost starting through the pallid skin,
showed how heavily the hand of hunger had been laid upon all. The cold
night wind moaned and whistled through the many flaws in the
ill-glazed, ill-thatched tenement, and rustled over the sleepers, who
shivered even in their sleep.

"Ha, baron," said the goblin, "death is breathing in their faces even
now, you see; it is hardly worth while to lay them to sleep in the
snow, is it? They would sleep a little sounder, that's all."

{454}

The baron shuddered, and then, hastily pulling the warm coat from his
own shoulders, he spread it over the sleepers.

"Oho!" said the goblin, "bravely done, baron! By all means keep them
warm to-night, they'll enjoy the snow more to-morrow, you know."

Strange to say, the baron, instead of feeling chilled when he had
removed his coat, felt a strange glow of warmth spread from the region
of the heart over his entire frame. The goblin's continual allusions
to his former intention, which he had by this time totally
relinquished, hurt him, and he said, rather pathetically, "Don't talk
of that again, good goblin, I'd rather sleep on the snow myself."

"Eh! what?" said the goblin, "you don't mean to say you're sorry? Then
what do you say to making these poor people comfortable?"

"With all my heart," said the baron, "if we had only anything to do it
with."

"You leave that to me," said the goblin, "your brother fairies are not
far off, you may be sure."

As he spoke he clapped his hands thrice, and before the third clap had
died away the poor cottage was swarming with tiny figures, whom the
baron rightly conjectured to be the fairies themselves.

Now, you may not be aware (the baron wasn't until that night) that
there are among the fairies trades and professions, just as with
ordinary mortals. However, there they were, each with the
accompaniments of his or her particular business, and to it they went
manfully. A fairy glazier put in new panes to the shattered windows,
fairy carpenters replaced the doors upon their hinges, and fairy
painters, with inconceivable celerity, made cupboards and closets as
fresh as paint could make them; one fairy housemaid laid and lit a
roaring fire, while another dusted and rubbed chairs and tables to a
miraculous degree of brightness; a fairy butler uncorked bottles of
fairy wine, and a fairy cook laid out a repast of most tempting
appearance. The baron hearing a tapping above him, cast his eyes
upward and beheld a fairy slater rapidly repairing a hole in the roof;
and when he bent them down again, they fell on a fairy doctor mixing a
cordial for the sleepers. Nay, there was even a fairy parson who, not
having any present employment, contented himself with rubbing his
hands and looking pleasant, probably ably waiting till somebody might
want to be christened or married. Every trade, every profession or
occupation, appeared, without exception, to be represented; nay, we
big pardon, with one exception only, for the baron used to say, when
afterward relating his experiences to bachelor friends, "You may
believe me or not sir, there was every mortal business under the sun,
_but devil a bit of a lawyer_."

The baron could not long remain inactive. He was rapidly seized with a
violent desire to do something to help, which manifested itself in
insane attempts to assist everybody at once. At last, after having
taken all the skin off his knuckles in attempting to hammer in nails
in aid of the carpenters, and then nearly tumbling over a fairy
housemaid, whose broom he was offering to carry, he gave it up as a
bad job, and stood aside with his friend the goblin. He was just about
to inquire how it was that the poor occupants of the house were not
awakened by so much din, when a fairy Sam Slick who had been examining
the cottager's old clock, with a view to a thorough repair, touched
some spring within it, and it made the usual purr preparatory to
striking. When lo and behold, at the very first stroke, cottage,
goblin, fairies, and all disappeared into utter darkness, and the
baron found himself in his turret-chamber, rubbing his toe, which he
had just hit with considerable force against the fender. As he was
only in his slippers the concussion was unpleasant, and the baron
rubbed his toe for a good while. {455} After he had finished with his
toe he rubbed his nose, and finally, with a countenance of deep
reflection, scratched the bump of something or other at the top of his
head. The old clock on the stairs was striking three, and the fire had
gone out. The baron reflected for a short time longer, and finally
decided that he had better go to bed which he did accordingly.

The morning dawned upon the very ideal, as far as weather was
concerned, of a Christmas day. A bright winter sun shone out just
vividly enough to make everything look genial and pleasant, and yet
not with sufficient warmth to mar the pure unbroken surface of the
crisp white snow, which lay like a never-ending white lawn upon the
ground, and glittered in myriad silver flakes upon the leaves of the
sturdy evergreens. I'm afraid the baron had not had a very good night;
at any rate, I know that he was wide-awake at an hour long before his
usual time of rising. He lay first on one side, and then on the other,
and then, by way of variety, turned on his back, with his magenta nose
pointing perpendicularly toward the ceiling; but it was all of no use.
Do what he would, he couldn't get to sleep, and at last, not long
after daybreak, he tumbled out of bed, and proceeded to dress. Even
after he was out of bed his fidgetiness continued. It did not strike
him, until after he had got one boot on, that it would be a more
natural proceeding to put his stockings on first; after which he
caught himself in the act of trying trying to put his trousers on over
his head (which, I may mention for the information of lady readers,
who of course, cannot be expected to know anything about such matters,
is not the mode generally adopted). In a word, the baron's mind was
evidently preoccupied; his whole air was that of a man who felt a
strong impulse to do something or other, but could not quite make up
his mind to it. At last, however, the good impulse conquered, and this
wicked old baron, in the stillness of the calm bright Christmas
morning, went down upon his knees and prayed. Stiff were his knees and
slow his tongue, for neither had done such work for many a long day
past; but I have read in the Book of the joy of the angels over a
repenting sinner. There needs not much eloquence to pray the
publican's prayer, and who shall say but there was gladness in heaven
that Christmas morning?

The baron's appearance down-stairs at such an early hour occasioned
quite a commotion. Nor were the domestics re-assured when the baron
ordered a bullock to be killed and jointed instantly, and all the
available provisions in the larder, including sausage, to be packed up
in baskets, with a good store of his own peculiar wine. One ancient
retainer was heard to declare, with much pathos, that he feared master
had gone "off his head." However, "off his head" or not, they knew the
baron must be obeyed, and in an exceedingly short space of time he
sallied forth, accompanied by three servants carrying the baskets, and
wondering what in the name of fortune their master would do next. He
stopped at the cottage of Wilhelm, which he had visited with the
goblin on the previous night. The labors of the fairies did not seem
to have produced much lasting benefit, for the appearance of
everything around was as wretched as could be. The poor family thought
that the baron had come himself to turn them out of house and home;
and the poor children huddled up timidly to their mother for
protection, while the father attempted some words of entreaty for
mercy. The pale, pinched features of the group, and their looks of
dread and wretchedness, were too much for the baron. "Eh! what! what
do you mean, confound you? Turn you out! Of course not: I've brought
you some breakfast. Here! Fritz--Carl; where are the knaves? Now then,
unpack, and don't be a week about it. Can't you see the people are
hungry, ye villains? Here, lend me the corkscrew." This last {456}
being a tool the baron was tolerably accustomed to, he had better
success than with those of the fairy carpenters; and it was not long
before the poor tenants were seated before a roaring fire, and doing
justice, with the appetite of starvation, to a substantial breakfast.
The baron felt a queer sensation in his throat at the sight of the
poor people's enjoyment, and had passed the back of his hand twice
across his eyes when he thought no one was looking; but his emotion
fairly rose to boiling point when the poor father, Wilhelm, with tears
in his eyes, and about a quarter of a pound of beef in his mouth,
sprang up from the table and flung himself at the baron's knees,
invoking blessings on him for his goodness. "Get up, you audacious
scoundrel!" roared the baron. "What the deuce do you mean by such
conduct, eh! confound you?" At this moment the door opened, and in
walked Mynheer Klootz, who had heard nothing of the baron's change of
intentions, and who, seeing Wilhelm at the baron's feet, and hearing
the latter speaking, as he thought, in an angry tone, at once jumped
to the conclusion that Wilhelm was entreating for longer indulgence.
He rushed at the unfortunate man, and collared him. "Not if _we_ know
it," exclaimed he; "you'll have the wolves for bedfellows to-night, I
reckon. Come along, my fine fellow." As he spoke he turned his back
toward the baron, with the intention of dragging his victim to the
door, the baron's little gray eyes twinkled, and his whole frame
quivered with suppressed emotion, which, after the lapse of a moment,
vented itself in a kick, and _such_ a kick! Not one of your Varsoviana
flourishes, but a kick that employed every muscle from hip to toe, and
drove the worthy steward up against the door, like a ball from a
catapult. Misfortunes never come singly, and so Mynheer Klootz found
with regard to the kick, for it was followed, without loss of time, by
several dozen others, as like it as possible, from the baron's heavy
boots. Wounded Lyons proverbially come badly off, and Fritz and Carl,
who had suffered from many an act of petty tyranny on the part of the
steward, thought they could not do better than follow their master's
example, which they did to such a good purpose, that when the
unfortunate Klootz did escape from the cottage at last, I don't
believe he could have had any _os sacrum_ left.

After having executed this little act of poetical justice, the baron
and his servants visited the other cottages, in all of which they were
received with dread, and dismissed with blessings. Having completed
his tour of charity, the baron returned home to breakfast, feeling
more really contented then he had done for many a long year. He found
Bertha, who had not risen when he started, in a considerable state of
anxiety as to what he could possibly have been doing. In answer to her
inquiries he told her, with a roughness he was far from feeling, to
"mind her own business." The gentle eyes filled with tears at the
harshness of the reply; perceiving which, the baron was beyond measure
distressed, and chucked her under the chin in what was meant to be a
very conciliatory manner. "Eh! what, my pretty? tears? No, surely.
Bertha must forgive her old father. I didn't mean it, you know, my
pet; and yet, on second thoughts, yes I did, too." Bertha's face was
overcast again. "My little girl thinks she has no business anywhere,
eh! Is that it? Well, then, my pet, suppose you make it your business
to write a note to young Carl von Sempach, and say I'm afraid I was
rather rude to him yesterday, but if he'll look over it, and come and
take a snug family dinner and a slice of the pudding with us to-day--"
"Why, pa, you don't mean--yes, I do really believe you do--" The
baron's eyes were winking nineteen to the dozen. "Why, you dear, dear,
dear old pa!" And at the imminent risk of upsetting the breakfast
table, Bertha rushed at the baron, and flinging two soft white arms
about {457} his neck, kissed him--oh! how she _did_ kiss him! I
shouldn't have thought, myself, she could possibly have had any left
for Carl; but I dare say Bertha attended to his interests in that
respect somehow.



Well, Carl came to dinner, and the baron was, not very many years
after, promoted to the dignity of a grandpapa, and a very jolly old
grandpapa he made. Is that all you wanted to know?

About Klootz? Well, Klootz got over the kicking, but he was dismissed
from in the baron's service; and on examination of his accounts, it
was discovered that he had been in the habit of robbing the baron of
nearly a third of his yearly income, which he had to refund; and with
the money he was thus compelled to disgorge, the baron built new
cottages for his tenants, and new-stocked their farms. Nor was he the
poorer in the end, for his tenants worked with the energy of
gratitude, and he was soon many times richer than when the goblin
visited him on that Christmas-eve.

And was the goblin ever explained? Certainly not. How dare you have
the impertinence to suppose such a thing? An empty bottle, covered
with cobwebs, was found the next morning in the turret chamber, which
the baron at first imagined must be the bottle from which the goblin
produced his magic wine; but as it was found, on examination, to be
labelled "Old Jamaica Rum," of course that could not have had anything
to do with it. However it was, the baron never thoroughly enjoyed any
other wine after it; and as he did not thenceforth get drunk, on an
average, more than two nights a week, or swear more than eight oaths a
day, I think King Christmas may be considered to have thoroughly
reformed him. And he always maintained, to the day of his death, that
he was changed into a fairy, and became exceedingly angry if
contradicted.

Who doesn't believe in fairies after this? I only hope King Christmas
may make a few more good fairies this year, to brighten the homes of
the poor with the light of Christmas charity. Truly we need not look
far for almsmen. Cold and hunger, disease and death, are around us at
all times; but at no time do they press more heavily on the poor than
at this jovial Christmas season. Shall we shut out, in our mirth and
jollity, the cry of the hungry poor? or shall we not rather remember,
in the midst of our happy family circles, round our well-filled
tables, and before our blazing fires, that our brothers are starving
out in the cold, and that the Christmas song of the angels was,
"Good-will to men?"



Original.

EPIGRAM.

"Thy father and I have sought thee sorrowing."


  Dear heart! and is it thus thou didst lament
  His absence for a day? How different
  Thy grief from mine! Absent from Him for years,
  I sorrowed not: and only found my tears
  In finding Him. Then, to my bitter cost,
  I knew the priceless treasure I had lost!



{458}

Original.

THE CHRISTMAS TREE.

  Christmas comes but once a year;
  'Tis come at last, O glorious day!
  Let every cross that mortals bear
  Be for the moment flung away.

  "Yes," says the cricket from his hole
  Beside the flame-lit kitchen hearth,
  "It is a time for every soul
  To give himself to joy and mirth,"

  "Christmas comes but once a year,"
  Returns the timid pantry mouse.
  "The cat has told me not to fear;
  To-night I'll scamper through the house."

  So, blow ye winds, and you, Jack Frost,
  Come in the dark and do your worst;
  How wild soe'er the night may be,
  It shall not stir my Christmas Tree.

  Then let us dance and laugh and sing,
  And form in all one happy ring;
  The Yule log never burned so bright.
  Hurrah! hurrah! 'tis Christmas night.

  It is a time to seek the poor,
  And bid them welcome round our door;
  The alms we give, to Christ are given.
  And hung on Christmas Trees in heaven.

  The Christmas Tree is evergreen:
  The hand of time may change the scene,
  The child a gray-haired man may be,
  But memory keeps the Christmas Tree.

W.S., Jr.



{459}

ORIGINAL.


THE PHILOSOPHY OF CONVERSION.  [Footnote 144]

  [Footnote 144: Trials of a Mind in its Progress to Catholicism, etc.
  By L. Stillman Ives, LL.D. Boston. 1865.

  The Path which led a Protestant Lawyer to the Catholic Church. By
  Peter H. Burnett. New York and Cincinnati: Benziger Brothers. 1866

  The Convert; or, Leaves from my Experience. By O. A. Brownson. New
  York. 1857.

  Apologia pro Vita Sua: being a Reply, etc. By John Henry Newman,
  D.D. New York. 1865.]


It is a fact, to which the Catholic heart cannot recur without
emotions of the deepest gratitude, that Christ's holy church is ever
gathering some of the select out of the mad waves of heresy and schism
around us into the safety of her maternal bosom. It is a fact, too,
which every conscientious and thoughtful Protestant must view with
feelings of disquietude and insecurity, that men of unimpeachable
piety and learning are thus ever leaving the external wilderness where
they have walked with him, and seek and find true refuge in the
Catholic ark of God.

The number of these converts it seems almost impossible to estimate.
There can be but little doubt, however, that it far exceeds the
reckonings of the denominations out of which they come, and equally
surpasses our own most sanguine calculations. Reliable statistics show
us that within the last fifty years no less than forty-one clergymen
of the American Episcopal Church alone have laid down the honors and
emoluments they there enjoyed, and have espoused poverty and
insignificance with the Catholic faith.  [Footnote 145] Many of these
were men of eminence in their former sphere of action, and one, at
least, held the highest and most responsible position which his
co-religionists could bestow upon him. Some of them have risen since
their conversion to posts of ecclesiastical dignity and power. Others
have died and rest with God. All of them, with but few exceptions,
have remained faithful, and have endorsed, in life and in death, the
wisdom and sincerity of that step which brought them, after many
wanderings, into the apostolic fold.

  [Footnote 145: See Church Review, July, 1860, p. 254. There have
  been several conversions from the Episcopal clergy since that date.]

How far the clerical ranks of other sects of Protestants in the United
States have been invaded by God's converting grace, no data that we
can command are able to determine. Our personal recollections of their
various ministers, who at one time and another have laid down their
own will for the will of Christ, lead us to the belief that the number
from each will fall little short of that contributed by the
denomination to which we first referred. And as for laymen, they have
come to us from every known religious name and creed, and full as
often from no name and creed at all, until the throng has swelled from
hundreds into tens of thousands, and gone beyond the possibility of
our enumeration or discovery.  [Footnote 146]

  [Footnote 146:  Judging from the statistics of the past few years in
  the dioceses of New York, the number of converts in the United
  States must exceed 30,000.--Ed. C.W.]

Moreover, this work is on the increase. Year by year, almost, the
church is doubling on herself in these triumphs of her toil. Where
individuals once tremblingly isolated themselves from old
associations, and cut the vital cord of earthly friendships and
familiarities by submitting to her guidance, now families and
communities fly together to her arms for safety; while those upon
whose personal decisions her labors and the grace of God seemed to
make no impression, have ceased to persecute and almost ceased to ban
those who have followed {460} her, and recognize conversion from
Protestantism to Catholicity as a change equally legitimate and
rational with conversion from idolatry to God. Nay, more: the very
brain of Protestant America itself is sloughing off the narrow coils
of illogical and degrading error which three hundred years of folly
and of falsehood had woven round it under the name of Christian
doctrine; and, in spite of its self-conceived antagonism between
"_Rome or Reason_," is drinking in long draughts of Catholic theology,
and pouring out broadcast over this great hemisphere the fundamental
tenets of the Roman faith as the indisputable truths of human reason
and divine philosophy.

The tide of popular prejudice thus turning, and the way thus opened to
the American intellect by the instrumentality of those who claim to be
her adversaries, it is no arrogation of prophetic foresight to predict
that the progress of the church in this country must, in the future,
be rapid beyond all precedent, and that the age may not be far distant
when this vast "_Continent of Mary_" shall, with one heart and under
one name, obey the Holy Spouse of Mary's Son.

When such realities are around us and such possibilities before us,
the study of those mental and moral changes in the individual by which
all has been done that is done, and by which also all that shall be
done must be accomplished, cannot be uninteresting or unprofitable. No
religious subject of so much practical importance to non-Catholics is,
probably, so little understood among them; and of none have more false
definitions been given or more inaccurate theories been entertained.
Even Catholics themselves have generally failed in their attempts to
realize the logical processes through which the Protestant mind must,
consciously or unconsciously, find its way before it can receive
Catholic truth with the dear, living faith of a Catholic heart. It is
to correct these errors and to scatter these difficulties, as well as
to justify seeming inconsistencies, and above all, to assist, if
possible, the wavering minds of some who long for a light which they
know not how or where to find, that we devote these pages to a
discussion of those changes in the human soul which make up the actual
conversion from Protestantism to the Catholic Church.

The materials for this discussion are both abundant and satisfactory
The first of the four works upon our list is from the pen of Dr. Ives,
who was for more than twenty years the Protestant Episcopal bishop of
the Diocese of North-Carolina, and one of the acknowledged leaders of
the High church party in the United States. It is a concise and
luminous rehearsal of the reasons which led him to abandon his exalted
ecclesiastical station for that of a mere layman in the Catholic
church, and presents a vivid picture of the "trials" and perplexities
which extreme Tractarians must inevitably undergo, when the
incompatibility of their position with their principles is once fully
apprehended. The second is a voluminous and formal treatise on the
rules of evidence as applicable to revelation, and on those
fundamental axioms which underlie all legislation, human or divine. It
is, obviously, what the title-page professes, the work of a legal mind
which views the whole question of religion as open two, and able to
abide the most thorough tests of reason and philosophy, and brings the
great issues which it raises, in every case, to actual demonstration
for denial. The writer, now a Catholic, was formerly a member of the
so-called "_Disciples;_" a sect which lies on the outskirts of
Christianity, and from which to Catholicity the path must have been
almost as long and devious as that from infidelity itself. The author
of the third is Dr. Brownson, one of the most _positive_ of modern
men; whose range of doctrinal experience has reached from Deism to an
ultramontane Catholicism, and who in every phase of his religious
life, has {461} been a living power, dealing with realities, and
stripping all imaginations and delusions from the realities with which
he dealt. The last is Dr. Newman's, than whom no one knows better,
none can describe so well, that _Via Dolorosa_ which all converts
tread? To these, if we would, the works of Manning, Wilberforce, and
others might be added, each a reflection of the changes which the
inner lives of their writers underwent in the great struggle after
ultimate, unquestionable truth; while, beyond even these, the
inexhaustible volume of experience remains; a volume in which the dark
things of these books find an infallible interpreter, and on whose
hidden leaves the hand of God has written the same history of which
these human pages are the reflection and the shade.

It is not an unreasonable hope, that, out of such materials, we may be
able to construct an accurate definition of that work of grace which,
in the convert's memory, has overshadowed and embraces all other gifts
of God.

Before proceeding, however, with our examination of that change, by
which alone the word "_conversion_" can be properly defined, it will
be necessary to consider and refute those definitions of it which are
false. Conversion is a transformation in itself so simple, yet
involving so many and such vast collateral changes in the inner and
exterior man--it is at once so definite in its own nature, and yet as
widely and, in point of time, so intimately knit together with its
antecedents and its consequences, that a clear view of it apart from
these is almost impossible, until, by a process of negation, it is
separated from its surroundings, and stands out alone, defined as well
by what did is _not_ as by what it _is_. And this is, above all,
important, when we desire to present this subject to the
understandings of non-Catholics. The lines between their religious
bodies are so faintly drawn, and depend so much upon the social and
political circumstances by which the members of those bodies are
controlled, that conversion from one denomination to another is not
regarded as reaching to the very marrow of the spiritual being, or
compassing the salvation or destruction of the soul. Such changes are
often matters of taste or policy or friendship; sometimes of personal
pride and pique, and sometimes, but more rarely, of actual principle;
though even this principle never rests upon higher ground than
individual points of faith or systems of ecclesiastical organization.
It thus seems almost impossible that, left to their own definitions of
that to which we give the technical name "_conversion_," persons
outside the church could ever arrive at an appreciation of its extent
and power. And this is especially true in this country, where the
Catholic Church externally occupies the position of a sect among
sects; the most numerous, perhaps, certainly the most prosperous and
aggressive of them all, but in their view ranking as but one of many
forms of Christianity, and but one of many branches of Christ's
earthly fold. No care that we can take can be superfluous, no
precision we can use can be in vain when we attempt to define the
position of the church on any question which interests our age, or to
delineate the relations which she occupies to that great chaos of
religions in the midst of which she dwells. At the risk, therefore, of
consuming time unnecessarily for some, we feel it none the less our
duty to leave upon the minds of others no doubt upon this subject
which we can remove, and no obscurity around it which it is in our
power to thrust away.

(1.) First, then, the adoption of the articles of the Catholic faith
into the individual's creed is not conversion.

The idea of conversion entertained by nine-tenths of Protestants is
precisely that which we have here denied. It has hardly ever been our
lot to meet one, either in print or conversation, whose arguments and
reasonings with {462} us did not presuppose this definition to be
true. It is very natural, for the reasons before mentioned, that this
should be so. From Unitarian to Methodist, from Methodist to Anglican,
is but a journey from one set of doctrines to another. The same grand
underlying features of Christianity remain. The organic existence is
an accident arising from substantial doctrinal affinity. And, judging
by their own experience and observations, Protestants almost
invariably conclude that we became converts to Catholicity as a
logical result of our faith in individual Catholic doctrines; and that
a so-called Protestant, who holds any or all of these distinctive
dogmas, is not a Protestant in reality, and has no right or title to
the name. Of how much petty persecution this mistake has been the
cause, and how many parishes and pastors it has kept in perpetual
commotion during the past thirty years, hundreds of the unfortunate
victims can remember.

Yet no definition of conversion could be more totally erroneous.
Belief in Catholic doctrines is often chronologically precedent to a
real conversion; but it is not always so. It certainly operates as a
powerful antagonist of prejudice, and determines the interest and
sympathies of the believer toward the church. Candor, humility, and
earnestness being equal, such a believer is far more likely to become
a Catholic than another who does not believe. But, for all that, such
faith does not result in conversion as its necessary, scarcely as its
probable, consequence. We have in our memory, just now, a clergyman
who has for years openly professed his firm belief in
transubstantiation, purgatory, and other equally extreme Catholic
articles of faith. He goes into our churches, and adores the holy
eucharist upon our altars. He venerates the Mother of our Lord, and
supplicates God's mercy on the faithful dead. In all these he is
perfectly sincere, and of the truth of what he believes, and of the
piety of what he does, he is as well convinced as any Protestant can
ever be. Still he is not a Catholic, and we are almost satisfied he
never will become one. Years have found him and left him as we find
him now, and other years will probably work no change upon him in the
nature of conversion. Nearly the same maybe said of Dr. Pusey. His
symbolism in many, if not in most, particulars is Catholic. His tastes
and sympathies are Catholic. Those who have been his nearest and
dearest friends are Catholics. If similarity of doctrine were all that
constitutes conversion, the venerable father of Tractarianism would
long ere this have found the rest we tremble now lest he should never
find. But his life rolls away, and years and honors multiply upon his
head; yet who can say that he is nearer than in the distant and more
hopeful days, when his, now our, "_beloved_" struggled and prayed with
him for the light of God? The reasons for this are perfectly apparent
to us, and will be reached and dealt with by-and-bye. At present it
suffices, by these statements and illustrations, to have made it clear
that belief in Catholic doctrine is not conversion to the Catholic
Church. No, not if a man can tell over on his fingers, one by one, the
definitions of the councils and the traditions of the fathers, and
pronounce a _credo_ over every one of them, is he necessarily a
Catholic, nor must he have passed through that vital transformation
without which there never has been and never can be a true conversion.

(2.) Second: the adoption of our extreme ritualism in worship is not
conversion.

There is but one denomination of Protestants among whom this false
definition is likely to obtain. That one is the Episcopal; and by
large numbers of its members (if we may judge their opinions from
their words), it is actually believed that a fondness for rites and
ceremonies is evidence of Catholicity. Some years ago the church of
the Holy Innocents, and the {463} Madison Street mission chapel of New
York, and the church of St. James the Less, Philadelphia, were, by
this class of persons, uniformly regarded and denounced as Romanizing;
as the church of St. Albans in this city and some others are to-day.
Candles and flowers upon the altar, crosses and paintings on the
walls, the bowed head at the name of Jesus, the cassock-skirted coat,
and other innumerable minutiae, are to these people indubitable
evidence of Popery, and have often served, as they do now, for a
sufficient cause of congregational disunion and parochial decline. It
would seem foolish, in a discussion like the present, to notice an
error so shallow and so reasonless as this, were it not for the
magnitude of its results, and were it not, also, that so many of these
very ritualists themselves imagine that, in mimicking Catholic forms
and ceremonies, they have secured in Anglicanism all that the Catholic
Church can give.

But ritualism is not Catholicism: nor is Catholicism so vitally
connected with ritualism that it may not exist in the entire fulness
of its powers and graces independent of external magnificence and
show. St. Antony in his desert, St. Simeon Stylites on his pillar,
were as true Catholics as St. Ambrose in his basilica, or St. Leo on
his throne. Even the public worship of the church, when stripped to
its essentials, is almost devoid of any outward sign or sound that can
properly be characterized as ceremonial. And the same priest who
stands today before the gorgeous altar of a metropolitan cathedral
amid clouds of incense, will start to-morrow on a year's missionary
journey through the wilderness, with all the "_pomp and circumstance
of Romanism_" contained within the narrow limits of his carpet-bag.
Ritualism is a means used by the church to accomplish certain ends;
and so used, because the example of the divinely instituted Jewish
church, and her own ages of experience, have convinced her that by it
those ends can most surely be attained. But it is no more an essential
element of her being than royal robes are of the being of a king; and
the weak caricature of her stately ceremonial, in which some
Protestant experimentalists indulge, converts them into Catholics as
little as the tinsel crown and sceptre of the stage gives royal birth
and power to the actor in a play.

(3.) Third: union with the visible body of the Catholic Church is not
conversion.

This is the definition which most of those who are born Catholics
would give. Unconscious, as they happily are, of the religious state
of mind in which pure Protestantism rears its children, it is
difficult for them to imagine that a man can be, or can become,
nominally Catholic for any other reason than the simple one that binds
them to their faith; and this habitude of thought leads them
inevitably to confound the outward consequence of an internal change
with that internal change itself.

They also are in error. External union with the church is the best
possible _prima facie_ evidence of conversion, but it alone is not
conversion. That men have came into the body of the Catholic Church
from motives of business, or of politics, or of family sympathy there
can be no doubt. But in these cases there was no real conversion. The
deep, radical changes which so thoroughly unmake and then remake the
spiritual man, never could have taken place in such souls as these.
Their outward act was perfect, their visible communion with us was all
we could demand; but in their inmost heart they were as much
Protestants as ever; and, when they went, acted on the same principles
as when they came. Such examples are not numerous, it is true; but
still they are sufficient to demonstrate that "_joining the church_"
is not conversion, and to deny the minor premise of those who argue
the church's incapacity to satisfy our nature from the fact that these
have tried her and found her wanting. {464} When one man can be cited
who, in his soul of souls, has undergone the work of grace which we
now pass on to consider, and who, in calmness and in piety, and not in
rashness _or in mortal sin_, has voluntarily apostatized, and who, in
life and in death, has adhered to his apostasy, and has died in the
confident and humble hope of heaven; then, and not till then, can such
an argument be worth our while to meet.



The change we call "_conversion_" thus residing neither in the
transfer of ecclesiastical relations to the church, nor in the growth
of ritualism into the external conduct, nor yet even in the adoption
of Catholic doctrine as the individual's creed, must have its sphere
of action in regions deeper and more fundamental than we have yet
explored. The church of God looks with the eyes of God upon the souls
of men. "_Give me thine heart_," is her, is his demand, confident that
if this be given all else is also gained. The change she seeks in
those whom God would make her children is a change, not of opinion,
not of tastes, not of behavior, but of _heart and will_; a change
which reaches to the citadel of life, and thoroughly and permanently
converts the man. With nothing less than this can she be satisfied. On
nothing less than this can she securely build.

And this change is conversion.

Protestantism, so far forth as it is a religious system, is based upon
two principles, from which have been developed all its influence and
power, and to which may be traced the numerous and immeasurable evils
whereof for many ages it has been a fruitful source. The first of
these is: That the church, founded by our Lord, is an _invisible_
church, to which every man who believes he is saved by Christ is _by
that sole belief_ united, whatever else his creed and religious
observance may be. The second is: That every man, by his own reason
working on the text of Scripture, is able to, and must determine for
himself what his religious faith and moral code shall be. The
inevitable consequence of the first principle is--that the doctrine
and moral law of one man, so long as they embrace the Saviourship of
Christ in any sense whatever, are matters in which his brother
Christian can have no concern. The inevitable consequence of the
second is--that the self-eliminated creed and rule of observance of
each Christian are as correct and reliable as those of any or even of
all others, and will be the only standard of his judgment at the bar
of God.

This first principle and its logical deductions have resulted in
simple religious individualism. "_The communion of saints_," in that
sense in which St. Paul describes it, as a Christian society, whose
members mutually depend upon each other, think the same things,
believe the same things, speak the same things, preserving the unity
of the Spirit as well as the bond of peace, has been rendered
practically impossible; while for it has been substituted an ideal
"_Christian union_" which consists either in the abnegation of all
distinctive doctrines as mere human opinions, or in the toleration of
them all as different methods of expressing the same religious truth.
And even this "_union_" which might be possible if pride and self-will
were eradicated from the heart of man, has become so far from a
reality, that the very theories on which it is based have sected and
bisected the original divisions of Protestant Christianity, until from
five they have become five hundred, with every prospect of a similar
multisection to the end of time.

This principle has done more. It has entered the bodies of the sects
themselves, and repelled member from member, minister from flock. It
has destroyed, in the collective sect, all sense of responsibility for
the faith and conduct of its members; and, in the members, all sense
of responsibility for their personal belief and morals to the sect at
large. It has overturned {465} every tribunal established for the
preservation of Christian discipline, and has abrogated "_church
authority_" as wholly incompatible with purity of conscience and
religious freedom. It has reduced the conditions of admission to the
ecclesiastical fellowship to "_the minimum of Christianity_" and has
abolished "_terms of communion_" and "_professions of faith_" as
utterly subversive of denominational integrity.  [Footnote 147] In
this way it has made each man not only _de jure_, but _de facto_ a
spiritual autocrat, and has erected him into an isolated, independent
religious body, depriving the sect of all real organic life, and
degrading it from a church with head and members to a mere aggregation
of discordant particles.

  [Footnote 147: _Vide_ New Englander for July, 1866, pages 477 to 487
  et seq.]

The individual, being thus debarred of all external aid, is thrown
upon his own resources for religious guidance. There is no living man
upon the earth from whom he can receive an an authoritative
enunciation of eternal truths. There is no set of men upon whose
teachings he can rely as more perfect for more ultimately certain than
his own. The common mouth of Christendom utters no voice that puts to
rest the questions of his soul. All stand, like him, upon one level
plain of human fallibility; a fallibility which no diffusion, however
universal, can ever make infallible. All, whether singly or
collectively interrogated, can answer his appeal for light only by
giving their own human judgments in exchange for his.

And hence arises the necessity for that second principle on which, as
well as on the first, the foundations of Protestant Christianity were
laid; a principle which recognizes the intrinsic individualism that
the first produces, and perfects it by removing from man every hope
but one. That one hope is the Bible; a dead and speechless book; a
body whose spirit hides itself in the interminable labyrinth of
languishes long since unspoken; a star which gathers its reflected
rays through paraphrases and translations as chromatic as the
intellects that framed them or the pens that wrote them down.

"_The Bible, and the Bible only_," has been the banner-cry of
Protestantism from the dawn of its existence. The first work of
Luther, after his apostasy, was the publication of such parts of the
New Testament as he considered best suited to his purposes; and the
great aim of his successors, in all countries and in all ages, has
been to flood the world with copies of the Scriptures, in such guise
and such proportions as should soonest and most surely undermine the
principles of church authority, and establish their version of the
Bible as the sole acknowledged teacher of the truth of God. From the
beginning, also, as a part of the same work, they have denied that God
has furnished to mankind other interpreters of his revelation than the
unaided intellect of man, and have declared the private judgment of
the individual to be his all-sufficient and his only guide to the true
meaning of the written law. It will not, therefore, nay, it cannot be
disputed, that every man to whom the name of Protestant belongs,
depends entirely for his knowledge of the truth which God commands him
to believe, and of the laws which God commands him to obey, upon what
he can learn, unled by note or comment, from that collective
translation of ancient books to which he gives the name "[Greek
text]," or "_The Bible_."

Now, were it certain that the Bible contained the entire canon of holy
scripture, with every book and paragraph complete; were it certain
that that Scripture was in every syllable the utterance of God; were
it certain that no error in translation had modulated the clear voice
which spoke from heaven; were it certain that no pride of
self-opinion, no prejudice of early education, no ignorance of the
true meaning and construction of the language, were able to distort
the {466} spiritual vision; then might this principle, to some extent,
subserve the purposes which Protestants allege it to fulfil. But,
while no evidence, by them admissible, can determine beyond cavil the
completeness of their canon, while divine inspiration remains a fact
beyond the power of human testimony to establish; while that confusion
of tongues which the centuries of barbarian incursion wrought has
rendered more or less questionable all translations from ancient Greek
or Hebrew to a modern dialect; while human pride and prejudice have
lost none of their hold upon the heart of man; it is not in our nature
to believe that God has left us to such a guidance as this principle
asserts, and still holds us responsible for the truth of our opinions
and the purity of our conduct at the peril of our eternal damnation.
And thus each of these principles practically affirms and corroborates
the other, and both unite to overthrow all definite revealed religion,
and to prostrate at the feet of human reason the _dicta_ of the
everlasting God.

The state of heart and will which these principles engender no
lengthened paragraphs are needed to describe. Previous to the age of
discretion, the Protestant child, in spite of these principles, is
compelled to recognize, in religion, an authority external to himself.
His parents, his masters, his catechisms are, in his sight, equally
with the Bible, the teachers of divine truth; and, by their aid and
influence, he arrives at maturity with certain more or less distinctly
formed notions of Christian doctrine, and with certain rules of life
grained into his character by the long course of years. At this period
he is emancipated, in theory, from all external direction, and placed
under the sole guidance of his reason and the Bible. That sacred book
he opens. It has no voice to him of its own. Its pages offer to him
the same words as to all men before him; but those words contain no
meaning independent of the meaning that he gives them. It places
before him the formal statement of all doctrine; but teaches him, as
absolutely and infallibly true, no one specific dogma which, whether
consistent with his present views or not, he must receive. That which
interprets, not that which is interpreted, is ever the real teacher;
and, in his case, his privates judgment, trained and biassed by the
prejudices and conclusions of a lifetime, utters the only voice and
defines the only doctrine which it is possible for him to hear or to
receive. The Scripture does not teach him new and otherwise
undiscoverable truth. It rather confirms and expresses the truth,
which is already accepted and declared. The oracle, whose utterance is
the indisputable law, speaks from the depths of his interior being.
The Bible is a mere "phrase-book," in which it finds the words and
symbols fitted to convey its thought. The divine authority dwells in
the _man_, not in the _volume_. He holds the sacred book before the
mirror of his reason. The image it presents, however imperfect or
deformed, becomes to him the truth of the Eternal Word. He casts the
pure wheat of God between the millstones of his human judgment and his
human loves. The grist they grind is all the bread he has whereon to
feed his soul. It is not difficult to see that, by the process of
investigation, every man must become the worshipper of a God who is as
truly his own handiwork as is the brazen idol of the Hindoo or the
living Buddha of Sha-Ssa.

Some of the better class of Protestant minds have perceived this. A
few of the most fearless have declared it, and received, in
consequence, the name of "_infidels_" from their less logical and less
consistent brethren. "_Belief_," says Mr. Emerson, "consists in the
acceptance of the affirmations of the soul; unbelief in their denial."
The English language might be exhausted and no better definition given
of Protestant belief than this. When once the soul--that is, the
reason, {467} the affections, and the will--when once the _soul_
affirms; when once those affirmations are _expressed in Scripture
phraseology_, no Protestant can venture to pronounce them ultimately
untrue without destroying the hold principle on which his own faith
has been built. That many have done so is only evidence that the grace
of God within them rebels against this degradation of a Gospel which
the Eternal Son died in order to inaugurate, and which his church has
battled earth and hell for fifty generations in order to preserve.

The office which the heart and will perform in this religious work is
simply one of _choice_. The element of submission to divine authority
is only so far exercised as consists in the acceptance of Scripture
phrases as the vehicle of individual conclusions. To no extent is the
_formal, detailed idea_ indebted for existence to other than the
intellect, the affections, the will of the believer. He _chooses_ his
dogma for his precept according to the dictates of his reason;
receiving this, denying that, on the sole ground of their consistency
with preconceived ideas; and, anon, discarding old faiths and adopting
new as time and circumstances operate upon his heart and mind. And it
is nothing singular to see him wandering from Tractarianism down to
Unitarianism--from Calvinism to Universalism--and back again,
stopping perchance at Methodism or Congregationalism on the way;
clinging to his Bible all the while, triumphantly pointing to this
paragraph as proving that he is right at last, and as triumphantly
declaring the reverse when a few steps forward have landed him upon
the other side. All this and more--unless, indeed, his inner life
lays at the door of his professions the charge of conscious falsehood,
and underneath his soul is bent the arm of an authority whose very
existence his theory has totally denied.

No truer definition, no better example of _heresy_ than such a
spectacle affords, has any age of Christianity presented. "[Greek
text]" meant "choice." The grand distinction between the heretic and
the Christian resides in this: that the one chooses doctrine to suit
himself, the other receives doctrine on the authority of God. That
Protestantism is choice--nay, that it logically _compels_ choice to
every individual in it, cannot admit a question. It is, therefore,
heresy; not, perhaps, in the most odious sense of the word, but still
in that strict etymological signification which is the best clue to
the appropriate application of the name. Like all other heretics, of
whatever sect, the Protestant relies upon himself. He is his own
Bible-maker, his own doctrine-monger, his own law-giver. Faith and
theology and moral law are only the result of his own private judgment
and divine command, moulded and digested into one confused and
contradicting mass of good and evil.

It is to his deliverance from this spiritual state that the name
_conversion_ alone properly belongs.

Catholicity, on the other hand, is also based upon two principles,
which are the logical postulates of its existence, and whose necessary
developments will account for the immeasurable contrast which its
severe and holy tranquillity presents to the seething and tumultuous
incoherency around it. The first of these is this: that the truths
with which alone revealed religion deals, are in their nature _above_
human reason, and though never _contradicting_ it, cannot by it be
estimated, comprehended, or discerned, but rest upon the sole veracity
of a revealing God. The second is: that God has chosen and appointed,
as the medium of this unerring revelation, a visible, organized
society, founded by Jesus Christ, presided over by the Holy Ghost,
perpetuated through all ages by his own impregnable decree; and that
this society is the Catholic Church. The inevitable consequence of the
first principle is: that revealed truth, as such, is ultimately and
infallibly true, and whether or not consistent {468} with private
judgment, prejudice, and present conviction, must be received and
heartily believed. The inevitable consequence of the second is: that
whatever the church teaches as revealed truth, is so revealed, is
therefore ultimately true, and must be rested on implicitly as the
infallible utterance of God.

The result of this first principle has been that the wonderful, and
often ludicrous, admixture of divine and human truth, which may be
found in the religion of many Protestants, is utterly impossible to
Catholics. With all the questions of natural religion, as
distinguished from revealed; with all the theorems of science and of
art; with the dark mysteries of nature and the still darker mysteries
of man; nay, even with those inferences from divine truth which make
up systems of theology, reason is competent to deal. It may pierce the
glittering nebulae of the Milky Way; it may fathom the recesses of the
ocean and cleave the crystal bowels of the world; it may climb the
dizzy heights of intellectual philosophy; it may conquer the vast
problems of political and social happiness. But here its journey ends.
When it stands beside that boundless sea which rolls between the
finite and the infinite, it finds no bark to bear it outward. Of all
that lies beyond, its eye, its ear, its touch remains insensible. It
can but sit down on the hither shore and wait for light--the light of
revelation.  [Footnote 148]

  [Footnote 148: The able writer of this article certainly does not
  intend to deny the competence of reason to judge of the evidence of
  revelation, or to judge that any proposition evidently contradictory
  to reason cannot be a revealed truth.--Ed. Catholic World.]

Reason is limited from above. Revelation is limited from below. In the
mysteries of God, in the supernatural, and in questions of _faith_,
her voice is law: and where it is law, it is absolute, unconditional,
indisputable. Free as the thought of God is man's thought everywhere
but there. There he must put his shoes from off his feet and listen
and obey. The ground he treads is holy. The voice he hears is that
which spoke of old out of the burning bush. He cannot gainsay God.

And thus it is that, practically, Catholics are so free in all matters
except those pertaining to religion. The line is drawn so clearly and
so definitely between what _is_ and what _is not_ of faith, that not
in one mind in ten thousand is there ever the slightest doubt as to
what must be received and what may be disputed. The consolation given
by this simple maxim: "_If God has not revealed it, I need not believe
it; but if God has declared it, whether or not I understand it, it is
surely true_."--when once incorporated into the guiding principles of
the heart, as in the case of every true Catholic it entirely is,
repays the soul for those dark hours of Protestant doubting and
perplexity, by contrast with which it can alone be truly valued.

The result of the second of these principles has been the perfect
unity of Catholics in doctrine and in morals. The voice of the church
is the voice of God. She is a living teacher. She does not hide her
truths in languages whose meaning sages only can unfold. She speaks to
every man _in his own vernacular_, and proposes to him not only the
_formularies_, but _the exact ideas_ which make up the Christian
faith. She is not confined to general statements, under whose vague
phraseology notions the most opposite may be concealed. She enters
into all the infinite details which every proposition of divine truth
embraces, and prints it in the same unvarying form upon the souls of
men. With the millions who are gone before she has thus labored. With
the millions who are yet alive she is thus laboring to-day. And all,
in their submission to her teaching, have found that perfect concord
of doctrine which the gospel promised to the faithful flock of Christ,
and testify to the eternal wisdom of that God who placed his church
upon the earth to set at naught the foolishness of man.

{469}

In a religion such as this there can be no room for _choice_. To the
church heresy is evermore a name of execration and of horror. The
heart and will of her disciples have but one exercise, and that is
submission. Unconditionally, unquestioningly, unprotestingly, they bow
before her voice and echo its decrees. Reason is quiescent. Where it
cannot comprehend, it passes by. Faith grasps the mystery and lays it
on the heart to be its law for ever. The soul has but one inquiry for
every dogma, for every precept: "_Teacher of God, what hast thou
spoken?_" The teacher answers and the soul obeys.

Such is Catholicity. It is the antithesis of Protestantism. Whatever
similarity may exist in certain of their doctrines, in their ultimate,
essential natures they are simple opposites. The void between them is
as vast as that through which the First-born of the morning fell; the
dividing lines as sharp and as precipitate as the high cliffs which
bound the tides of Acheron. That  "_via media_," along which the easy
traveller may walk secure, rejoicing in the sunlight of both earth and
heaven, is a fond, foolish dream. The church knows but two modes of
existence in reference to herself, submission and rebellion; and even
reason teaches that her judgment, on this point, is unimpeachable.

Through all that weary journey which lies between these nether worlds
of spiritual being the convert's feet must tread. When God's grace
finds him, he is a Protestant--perhaps so pure and logical as to be
standing on the shores of rationalism and looking at his own soul as
his source of light--perhaps so inconsistent and so self-deceived as
to acknowledge an authority which his fundamental Protestantism
denies. But whether from the external Saharas of Christian scepticism,
or whether from beneath the shadow of the truth itself, the path he
follows leads him to one goal, the goal of unconditional submission.
Conversion may come to him through the successive adoption of Catholic
dogmas, through fondness for external rites and forms, through
personal friendship and familiarity, through any of those myriad ways
by which God leads the steps of his elect toward heaven; but, when it
comes, it is the same change for each, for every one--the abnegation
of all choice and self-affirmation, and the complete subjection of the
heart and will to the obedience of faith. Then, and then only, is the
work ended and conversion made complete. What the church teaches is,
from that hour, the faith of that Christian heart. What the church
commands is the law of that Christian will. Doubt and hesitation and
self-following are of the days gone by, and his devotion to the
church, as God's teacher, is only rivalled by his love for her as the
home of God's elect. The waters of the deluge roar and dash around his
mighty ark of safety, and men and women, as they clamber up the rugged
mountains of their own devices, laugh at him for his ignorance and
folly; but he abides in peace, when the dark waves have overtopped
them and engulfed them, and will live to offer sacrifice on Ararat
when the days of divine searching have passed by.



The utter falsehood of those definitions of conversion which we have
denied, becomes apparent from this description of what conversion is.
There is no inherent impossibility that a pure Protestant, exercising
to the fullest extent the right of private judgment, should arrive at
doctrines identical with those which the church teaches, and should,
as a result of this identity, accept even her formularies as
expressive of his faith. The mystery of the Trinity, than which no
mystery is greater, is thus received by the majority of Protestants;
and there is nothing in the doctrines of Transubstantiation.
Purgatory, and the like, which is unreachable by the same process of
scriptural investigation, unaided by the conscious teachings of the
{470} church. There can be no doubt that men have, by this method,
approximated closely to Catholic doctrine, who yet were wholly
actuated by Protestant principles, and never dreamed of submitting
heart and will and reason to the dictation of any authority whatever.

These men apparently hang over the church, ready to drop like ripe
fruit into her open bosom. Nevertheless, whatever of her symbolism
they may cherish, they cherish, not because it is _hers_, but because
it is _their own_. It is not truth which _she_ has taught them; _they_
have discovered it themselves. It brings them no nearer to her in
heart. It does not subject their _will_ to hers. On the contrary; it
often begets in them an arrogance of her divine security, as if their
similarity to her constituted them her equals in the authority of God.
Such men are not with the church, whatever proximity they seem to
have. Their boast of Catholicity deceives many, and most frequently
themselves, but can delude none who realize to what humility her true
children must descend, and how unquestioningly, when God speaks, man
must hear. The prayers of the faithful are more needed for such souls
than for any others, that God would send them the disposition, as well
as the light of faith.

Of the various corollaries which might be drawn from this
demonstration of the real nature of conversion, there is but one which
time and space allow us to notice. That one is this: That the whole
question between Catholics and Protestants is one of fact and not
primarily of doctrine; and can, like any other fact, be investigated
and proved by human evidence. On one side, it is asserted that faith
and morals are of comparative indifference to salvation, and that no
source of divine light exists on earth higher than that of scripture,
interpreted and judged by reason. On the other side, it is claimed
that whatever God has revealed must be received without question or
contradiction, and that the organized society known as the Catholic
Church is the mouthpiece and medium of that revelation. This covers
the whole point in issue. If, as a matter of fact, the first assertion
is correct, Protestants are secure in their acceptance or denial of
any or of all articles of specific Christian doctrine. If the second
is true, the teachings of the Catholic Church must be received
implicitly, under peril of disobedience to God. The question of the
truth of particular dogmas, or of the obligation of certain codes of
law, is entirely foreign to this issue. If the church is right,
transubstantiation, the immaculate conception, the seven sacraments,
are matters not to be _discussed_ or _proven_, but to be _believed_.
If she is wrong, they are simply of no consequence whatever. Any
investigation which escapes this only real point in controversy will
be in vain. Inquiry must begin here and end here, or else result in
making men either bad Catholics or stronger Protestants than ever.

This "question of questions" is to be answered by logical
demonstration based on certain facts. As a historical work, the Bible
is a sufficient witness of the visible and audible facts which it
records; and the miracles of of Christ therein related establish his
personal divine commission and the entire reliability of the
declarations which he made. As historical works also, the writings of
his immediate disciples are a sufficient witness of their
understanding of his teachings, and of the actions which, in pursuance
of that understanding, they performed. If Christ stated that doctrines
and precepts are _not_ conditions of salvation, and placed in the
hands of man the book known as the Bible, with the assurance that he
could safely follow whatever interpretation thereof his human judgment
might give, and if, as so directed, his disciples did _not_ insist on
specific creeds and laws, and _did_ receive and circulate the Bible as
the only organ of revealed truth, then that fact can be ascertained.
If, on {471} the other hand, Christ revealed a certain system of
doctrine, and established certain laws of conduct; if he founded a
church and conferred on her the authority to teach and the right to be
obeyed; and if his followers recognized such an institution, and
uniformly submitted to its authority as divine, then this, as a fact,
can, in its turn, be proved.

To a fair, candid, and complete investigation of this question, in the
light of history, the Catholic Church invites all Protestants
throughout the world; confident that, by the good help of God's grace,
this simple examination, properly conducted, would lead the many
hundred jarring sects of Christendom into a Catholic unity of spirit
and into the bond of a true gospel peace.



From Once a Week.


CHRISTMAS BELL.

  In broken notes of sound,
    The voice of distant bells
  Falls fitfully around,
    Borne o'er the rimy dells.
  Anon in wailing tones
    It breaks against the breeze,
  Or in sad accents moans
    Amidst the shivering trees.
  In fragments o'er the glades
    It falls, or floats aloft;
  Then trumulously fades
    In echoes low and soft.
  But other, nearer chimes,
    In laughing octaves run,
  In memory of old times.
    And what the days have done.
  Then changing, clang and wail
    Up in their prison high.
  And sob and groan and rail
    At their captivity.

  Ringing:--flinging wild notes everywhere!
  Clanging:--hanging discord in the air!
  Chiming:--rhyming words from brazen throat!
  Pealing:--stealing o'er the meadows and the moat!
  Dying:--sighing gently as a child!
  Floating:--gloating o'er their tumult wild!
  Swinging:--springing suddenly to life!
  Surging:--urging nature into strife!
  Laughing:--quaffing the sweet and eager air!
  Groaning:--moaning in a weird note of despair!

{472}

      Yes, how they sigh,
      And seemed to die:
  But like expiring ember,
      At slightest breath
      They leap from death,
  And wrestle with December!

      Oh, 'tis strange
      How they change,
  In rhythmus and in measure,
      Now tolling sad.
      Now almost mad,
  With throbbing pulse of pleasure.

  But not long thus,--the ringers soon
    Will catch the proper metre,
  Staccato first; then rippling tune
    Grows every moment sweeter.

  Away, away, the music flies.
    O'er mead and wold and river,
  Arpeggio movement shakes the skies.
    And makes the belfry quiver.

  Away, away, the cheerful sound
    Flies with its Christmas greeting.
  And laughs along the icy ground.
    Where snow-drops pale are peeping.

  The crocus, hearing chimes of mirth.
    Puts on her brightest yellow,
  What cares she for the frosty earth.
    When peals ring out so mellow?

  The blackbird, in a love-lorn mood,
    Is pecking at red berries.
  But hark! those joy-bells make her food
    As sweet as summer cherries.

  In truth all nature hears the strains,
    With heart of honest gladness;
  They ring surcease of human pains,
    And ring--a death to sadness.

  They ring of friendship, and the grasp
    Of hands in manly greeting;
  They ring the softer tender clasp
    Of Love and Psyche meeting.

  They ring oblivion of the years
    Whose sunset was in sorrow;
  They drown in waves of sound, the fears
    That cloud the dawn to-morrow.

{473}

  They ring the affluent table spread.
    They ring of that sweet maiden
  Who comes, with modest silent tread,
    With gifts for poor folk laden.

  They ring in tones more sweet than all
    Of hopes the Cross has given,
  And then their glad notes rise and fall.
    Like Christmas bells in Heaven.



ORIGINAL.

THE GODFREY FAMILY; OR, QUESTIONS OF THE DAY.


CHAPTER XIII.

HESTER GODFREY IN SEARCH OF PERFECTION.

"Papa,"' said Hester one morning, as she passed from the lawn into the
library, and threw her arms round her father's neck, "papa, I am
thoroughly resolved never to be married."

"Time enough, my darling, to think of that; but why this sudden
resolved?"

"Because married women are so unhappy. Adelaide and Annie were has
merry as crickets when they were single, and now how serious and
unhappy they appear."

"Seriousness is not unhappiness. Age makes one sedate."

"Nay, but I am sure they are miserable, and I tell you I will not
marry; so do not promise my hand to any one". And she put a very
lovely one into her father's hand as she spoke.

"I will not, my dear Hetty; but you may live to alter your mind."

"I shall not, and I will tell you why. I have considered this matter
very closely and I have discovered that a married woman is but a slave
to a man. She must have no will of her own, no purse of her own, and
though she has all the trouble and anxiety with the children, they are
his--not hers--as soon as they begin to reason. I love freedom, papa;
I will be no mere tool to any man. No art, no science, no refinement,
no practical improvement can flourish in slavery; and the reason women
have shown less aptitude for intellectual cultivation than men is,
that they are mere slaves--domestic drudges, for the most part--with
no higher interest than to procure food and clothing."

"Where did my Hester pick up Mary Wolstonecroft's writings?"

"Mary Wolstonecroft--who is she, papa?"

"A lady who advocates woman's rights, my love. I thought you had been
reading her book."

"There is no need if all she says is that which I feel, namely, that
all women are slaves. I learned this from simple observation. I wonder
all women do not feel it so."

"Women are supposed to live in their affections; and those whom we
love we serve willingly."

{474}

"Yes, but you know that soon becomes a mere supposition, even if it be
not so at first. How snappish wives usually are! I notice it in the
cottagers, in the tradesfolks; everywhere, where manners are not
taught to enable one to _sham_ before company. And the husbands are
surly, unmanageable bears; there must be something wrong in marriage
to produce these effects so frequently."

"And what remedy do you propose?" asked Mr. Godfrey, greatly amazed.

"Nay, that I have not considered. I only know that something is wrong
now, and that I will not marry 'till it is set right."

"Wait 'till you fall in love, my dear."

"Fall in love, indeed! What a ridiculous thing to do! No, papa, I
intend no fall; that is just why I will not marry. I might admire and
respect a man as my equal; I might even venerate him as my superior,
if he were my superior in mind; but bind myself to him as a slave I
would not. No Grecian hero in all antiquity could inspire me with love
enough to commit a moral suicide."

"The Grecian women claimed no equal rights," said Mr. Godfrey.

"No; I marked that well, papa. History is a treatise on men--on their
deeds, their daring, their wisdom, their improvement or retrogression.
Now and then, as if by accident, a woman's deeds were recorded, but
very rarely. Why this has been, I cannot divine. Woman ought, could,
should, and must rebel. This is the age of freedom. Does freedom
concern only half of the human race?"

"No; it concerned the horde of women who forced their way into the
royal apartments at Versailles. My Hester should have headed the
procession?"

"Now, papa, that is not fair. You know well I do not wish to
countenance rude and vulgar proceedings. Only I do not see why woman
should not cultivate her intellectual and moral powers, and march
onward in the career of perfectibility as well as man."

"What is that long word you used, Hester?"

"Now, papa, how provoking you are! Have you not yourself taught me to
cultivate every faculty to perfection, as a duty? Have you not often
said that the world has yet to learn the results of an equipoised,
many-sided development? That hitherto too strong a bias has been
given, and that a one-sided training has made a one-sided character?"

"I have said this. Hester, but what is this to the purpose?"

"Why, perfectibility must mean the tendency toward perfection produced
by this equipoised, by this many-sided development; and woman must be
the chief operator in effecting this equipoised development, because
woman is the exclusive educator of the young of either sex; and it is
when young, when very young, that the germs are laid of ideas which
perish not. Physiologists say that though character is modified
afterward, the form is, for the most part, given ere the seventh year
has been attained."

"It may be so, but what of that?" asked the father.

"Why, I think, then, that woman's especial vocation is to the study of
this perfectibility: that is, how to procure a due development--how to
teach the race to aspire. It seems to me that, generally speaking, the
aims of the world are very grovelling and sensual. If we could once
fire the race with the desire of reaching the utmost perfection of
which there nature is capable, methinks a glorious work would be
begun, and after ages might be brought almost to doubt of the misery
that now exists, their own position would be so different."

"It is a glorious project," said the father turning to the animated
girl, "but a difficult one; the world is large, and every one thinks
his own ideas the right ones."

"I know it; but I know, too that that thought must not check an
inspiration. Individuals have changed the face of nations before now.
Had they suffered their enthusiasm to be checked by dwelling on how
little one {475} person can do, nothing would ever have been done. An
individual who feels an intense interest in any subject, and a full
conviction that such a subject is likely to benefit his co-patriots,
is bound to carry forward his views to the utmost of his power."

"You may be right--nay, the principle is right; but what can my little
Hester do?"

"She can study and think and experimentalize and observe and have the
benefit of her father's advice through all, if only he will give it
her, if only he will put it out of his head that every girl is born to
be married, and that a girl cannot think and act for herself, and
cherish ideas of philanthropy and work for the public good."

"Lycurgus would not sanction this, my little Spartan girl."

"Perhaps not, papa; but times have altered. Legislators used to seek
for a numerous population. Now, Dr. Malthus says the world is
over-peopled."

"Why, Hester, I did not think these were subjects that you cared for
at all."

"But I do care for them, papa--more, much more than you think; and
what I ask of you is to forget that I am a girl, and let me think and
study everything--political economy, social economy, natural
philosophy, ethics, and aesthetics. I want to know how each of these
bears upon the condition the race, to see what man might be. I want to
know why man is created--to what he tends."

"Man is created to enjoy life, my child."

"Then why are so many miserable? Why have we disease, plague, famine,
war, and bloodshed?"

"'These are partly the result of man's ignorance."

"And yet man has existed nearly six thousand years, and every kind of
experience and teaching has been his; and philosophers, sages,
religionists, lawgivers have been trying to instruct him, and he is
ignorant still."

"You forget, Hester, that every individual that is born into the world
is born ignorant and helpless; and yet every individual must realize
instruction ere ignorance can be banished. Where you have an educated
people to work upon, you may propound improvements and be understood,
and then you will find instruments who will co-operate with you; but
now look at the population. Occupied in daily toil, as the price of
life, how can they comprehend high theories, or study experimental
philosophy. If they go into it at all, it must be to take upon trust a
few ideas, and they are as likely to take the wrong ideas as the right
ones, by that means."

"And is there no remedy for this? Is all this toil necessary? It seems
to me as if a great deal of unnecessary work is always being
performed. Spartan frugality would disapprove of much of modern
luxury; and is not half the toil for luxury merely?"

"Some of it is; but Spartan pride refused all toil, even for
necessaries. The laborers of the present day do the work of the helots
in Sparta. To work was beneath the dignity of a Spartan."

"And we have no helots in England now," said Hester.

"Would you wish to have?" asked Mr. Godfrey.

"No! Why should one part of mankind be sacrificed to the happiness of
the other? I would have no men slaves, no women slaves. Let all be
free and equal. If there is work to be done, let all do a portion, and
let all have a portion of rest, or rather of leisure, for the
improvement of the mental faculties."

"No man will work, unless compelled, at hard, daily labor. Those who
have property are not compelled. How will you compel them? For
instance, my neighbor, the blacksmith, has a wife and six children to
support. He works from twelve to fourteen hours daily. His wife keeps
no servant; she scrubs, washes, cooks, and attends to all herself.
Now, you {476} and I, being people of leisure, should do half their
work for them. Suppose you go and help the wife, and I go and help the
blacksmith half of every day; they might then study perfectibility the
other half."

Hester laughed. "We might do worse than that," she said; "but that
would only be helping two individuals, whereas I wish to place society
on a right principle. I no longer wonder at the French revolution. Had
I to toil hard and to live hard, seeing all the while some few
privileged beings do nothing at all but revel in luxury, I should be a
revolutionist too; only I should not know how to set the matter right.
One thing is clear from all history, luxury is an injury to the
individual who uses it, and all states have been weakened when luxury
has become common; therefore, father, I will make myself hardy, that I
may not be corrupted in my own proper person."

And true to her resolution, Hester, regardless of public opinion,
became simple in her habits. A hard bed, plain diet, an uncarpeted
room, with singular plainness of dress, distinguished this young
aspirant after perfectibility. Her mother would willingly have seen
her dress in a manner becoming her station; but Hester "did not choose
to make herself a peg on which to hang dressmakers' fancies. Clothes
were for two purposes," she said, "for warmth and decency; when these
two objects were attained it was enough." Her mother's remonstrances
availed nothing, and her father laughed: the eccentricities of the
spoiled child amused him, and daily he became more accustomed to
gratify every wish that she expressed.

Hester was in earnest. She founded schools, she formed societies in
which adult laborers might receive instruction in the evenings; she
established libraries and promoted the scientific associations
afterward more fully developed under the name of "Mechanics'
Institutes." Hester visited the lowly that she might form an estimate
of their real position, observe their improveable points, and
cultivate these latter to good purpose; but the intricacies thickened
upon her. She heard complaints that the poor were improvident and
wasteful.

"How can that be," said she, "when a man pays rent, and provides fuel,
clothing, and food for himself, his wife, and four children, out of
wages at twelve shillings a week? How much does our mere board cost?
twenty times that sum at least, and mamma is called economical. Oh! it
must be a miserable life they lead on such a poor pittance as that!
Papa, a man must have food; he gets it from the ground: he must have
shelter; a few trees chopped down will give him that: he must have
clothes; these also he can grow: why not place man on land where they
can get these, rather than let them half starve at home?"

"It is being done in or colonies; but an emigrant's life, my Hester,
would scarcely assist your perfectible theories. Every moment is
employed in drudgery of some kind. A large proportion of the emigrants
die of hardship."

Hester turned round impatiently, "Ever, ever an obstacle! Yet I will
not give up. There must be a way of improving mankind, and I will find
it yet."

These discussions were frequently renewed, but with little better
success. On one occasion Eugene was present, and he said with a smile,
"So you, too, are seeking the philosopher's stone, sister? I doubt you
will not find it in exterior relationships or in material
circumstance; evil is in the world--evil to a larger amount than you
have any conception of, and no exterior arrangement will suffice to
banish it. Set man free, as you term it, from the restraint of
overlabor, without awakening the interior impulse to realize a higher
life, and the chances are that the ale-house or gin-shop will be his
school."

"But will not education affect this awakening?"

{477}

"Education on a right basis would undoubtedly do much, but not
education on a selfish basis; not if the highest aim is to improve in
temporalities, not if virtue is proposed as the best policy to forward
earthly views. This would be merely teaching a system of selfish
calculation that would make man neither wiser nor better, and
consequently not happier."

"And what other motive would you suggest, brother?"

Eugene glanced at his father and hesitated. After a moment's pause, he
said: "Some philosophers, and among them the divine Plato, have
thought that within man dwelt an essence called a soul, and that its
culture furnished motives superior to all others in enlightening man.
There are other theories respecting the soul worth studying too, I
think. That which has influenced Europe during eighteen hundred years
has been the religion of Christ. Have you ever studied that, Hester?"

"No! I thought it was a superstition akin to, though distinct from,
the ancient pagan mythology."

"You will not find it so." rejoined her brother, "or rather you will
find it the opposite. Paganism is the worship of self, of sensuality,
of self-aggrandizement, and of physical power. Christianity is the
worship of spirituality; it triumphs over selfishness by divine love,
and elevates the soul by the same influence above the paltry views
emanating from an exclusive adhesion to man's lower nature."

Mr. Godfrey's lowering brow betokened a rising storm. Eugene made his
escape, and Hester laid her hand on her father's shoulder, and said
coaxingly, "Did you not say I might study every influence, papa, that
has affected humanity? Why not study this of which Eugene speaks?"

"Hester, there is a serpent in the East which has the power of fixing
his eye on the bird he marks for his prey, and his fascination is such
that by merely continuing to gaze he draws his victim straight into
his mouth."

"What of this, father?"

"It is so of superstition also; it strikes a chord in the human heart,
which, once awakened, becomes restless evermore. Let it but once
attract your notice, it fascinates, monopolizes every faculty, and the
strongest minds have fallen victims to its baneful power of
concentrating the attention. Let it alone, my child."





CHAPTER XIV.

THE DEATH-BED OF THE DUKE OP DURIMOND.



The illness of the Duke of Durimond became more and more serious.
Adelaide's friends offered to join her, but she said the duke's mind
required peculiar treatment, and that more company in the house might
annoy him. From the time of his leaving England the duke's associates
had observed a great alteration in his manners and habits. Whereas he
was formerly the gayest of the gay, he now shunned society. Soon after
his arrival at Vienna he had engaged an Italian servant of seemingly
unusual education and seriousness, and him he admitted into his
confidence; to him he entrusted the direction of his private affairs.
When he returned home, at those different intervals we have mentioned,
this servant accompanied him, and was treated by the duke less as a
humble dependent than as a valuable friend. The man held aloof from
the other inmates of the castle, and was waited on in his own
apartment by the duke's express order. Now, when the duke returned
home, he was accompanied not only by this Italian gentleman or
servant, whichever he might be, but by two other Italian valets, very
serious for their state in life, who waited on the duke and on his
friend to the exclusion of the English menials who had formerly access
to the ducal apartments.

{478}

The duke was a prisoner in his own room, rarely could he ever leave
his bed. Adelaide came at stated intervals to inquire after the state
of his health, and in all formality took her seat at his side. Madame
de Meglior often accompanied her, and to the surprise of both ladies a
request was urgently preferred that Euphrasie might be induced to pay
daily morning visits to the sick chamber, at a time when none were
usually admitted.

The duchess looked her astonishment, but the duke took her hand with
more kindness and less of ceremony than usual, and said:

"Nay, do not be surprised, your grace; I am a poor man, now about to
appear before my Maker. I need all the assistance I can get, and I
have faith in the prayers of Euphrasie. The hour named for her is the
hour of prayer: if you will come also, believe me you will be
welcome."

"Prayer, what prayer?"

"The most solemn prayer that can be offered, that which accompanies
the most holy sacrifice of the new law."

As the duke spoke, M. Martigni, the man of business we have spoken of,
pulled aside a curtain which had been hung before an alcove opposite
to which the duke's bed had been placed, and there a beautiful little
marble altar, appropriately adorned, became visible. Adelaide gazed in
mute surprise.

"What am I to infer from this, your grace?"

"That at the last hour, I, a miserable sinner, dare to hope pardon
from an outraged God, because he sent his Son to die on the cross for
me! O Adelaide! the gods of this world, as your father so justly calls
them--the gods of this world, pride, lust, sensuality, love of power,
and ambition, but rise to reproach us when we draw near to our end.
Long, too long did I resist my sweet Ellen's lessons! I felt, indeed,
that something within me said we could not utterly die; but I was
leading a life for self--I could not see the truth; but at last, late,
too late I knew my duty. Adelaide, for two years past I have been
reconciled to the Catholic church!"

"It is to attend Mass, then, I presume, that your grace desires
Euphrasie's company?" said Adelaide.

"It is," replied the duke; "if any will accompany her, they will be
welcome."

But this the duchess took especial care to prevent. She whispered to
Madame de Meglior, as they quitted the apartment:

"The malady has touched his brain; say nothing of what has happened."

This was the cause of Adelaide's reluctance to have more company in
the house. On this account she declined alike the visits of the duke's
relatives and of her own. She wish the matter to be kept a profound
secret from all; and though she permitted Euphrasie to comply with the
duke's request, it was on the express condition of her keeping the
fact unknown. But such precautions as these, though feasible for a
time, are useless in the end. The duke's disorder was of a painful,
lingering, and variable nature. Sometimes he would be confined to his
room, and even to his bed for weeks together, then he would rally a
little, go into the adjoining sitting-room, and once or twice even
took an airing in his carriage. No excuse could be framed, then, for
excluding relations so rigorously. Mr. Godfrey became annoyed at the
attempt, and at length, suspecting some latent motive, sent Eugene to
the castle to find out the secret, if there were one.

Eugene, on his entrance, met and recognized Martigni, and by him was
introduced into the duke's apartment before Adelaide knew he was in
the house. He found the duke propped up by pillows and seated near the
window. He greeted the young man cordially, though with a half
reproach that he did not come before.

"I have been very ill, Eugene" he said; "sometimes I hardly thought to
be alive till morning, and I wished to say a few words to your father
about my wife, but none of you came near me!"

{479}

Eugene looked, as his felt, surprised. "We were given to understand
that a visit from us would not be agreeable to your grace" he said;
"and being hurt at the intimation, especially as the exclusion lasted
so long, I came to-day to ascertain the cause."

"I gave no such intimation, I wished for no such exclusion, rather the
contrary; but perhaps Adelaide--I think I divine the cause; you must
excuse your sister, Eugene. Perhaps she is more annoyed than she
showed to me. To me she is ever polite, but doubtless she is annoyed;
perhaps it is natural that she should be so," and the duke hesitated.

"Annoyed! At what, may it please your grace? You cannot think that
'annoyed' is a term applicable to my sister's feeling at your
illness?"

"No! no! not at my illness, no! But, Eugene, I have spent a long life
of vanity before the world, and ere I die I should like the world to
know what perhaps the duchess would fain conceal, that I repent of my
iniquities, that I thankfully before the chastising hand that has laid
me low, that I prize my sufferings as the greatest blessing, as a
token that God has not forsaken me, though for so many years I forsook
him. Eugene, I am a Catholic!"

"God be thanked!" involuntarily escaped from the young man's lips, as
his hand was clasped in that of the duke, and tears started to his
eyes, "God be thanked!"

The door opened and the duchess entered. At one glance she understood
all, and that her surmises of Eugene had also been correct.

"The duke is better to-day," she coldly said. "We have had a long time
of anxiety, but perhaps even yet he may rally and be himself again."

"I dare not flatter you, sister," answered Eugene. "His grace's looks
are not those of a convalescent."

"No! no!" said the duke. "No health for me again. Suffering, perhaps,
for a long time yet, but no health; but I know not why my illness
should induce your grace to lead so lonely a life as you have lately
chosen. Let me beg of you to surround yourself with your family;
Eugene says they wait but your bidding."

Adelaide colored. "I fear the disturbance will be too much for your
grace's repose."

"Not at all, not at all; the house is large, many might be in it and I
not hear a sound. I should be gratified by knowing that you had
friends with you when I depart. Send for your friends, I beg of you.
Eugene, perhaps you will write to Mr. Godfrey in my behalf, to inform
him of my wishes?"

"I will, your grace."

And the family came; and still Adelaide tried to conceal from her
father a secret which was already known to Eugene. She scarcely hoped
to be able to do so long; but the annoyance to her was so excessive
that she could not bring herself to speak of it, and she hoped others
would decide, as she tried to decide in her own mind, that the duke's
intellect was affected. But then Eugene! he was smitten with the same
mania! She felt sure of that, though no words had ever passed on the
subject.



"Mr. Godfrey," said the duke, when at length there was an interview
between the two--"Mr. Godfrey, tell me what you wish me to do more for
your daughter. A handsome jointure is secured to her; the estates are
entailed; but tell me anything else I can do to promote her happiness,
and it shall be done."

This was the spirit in which the invalid conversed, and in which he
executed all that was proposed to him for Adelaide. She had no cause
of complaint, and his manifest care of her softened that haughty heart
a little. Had he not been a Catholic she could have been grateful to
him; but she was the more irritated at this fact, that now she dared
not set up the plea of imbecility to account for it, for that {480}
plea would have invalidated the newly drawn up documents in her favor;
all her hope consisted in concealment.

Eugene was often with the duke, who at length ventured to speak to him
on a subject which caused him great mental anguish. He had never been
able to trace Ellen, nor to transmit to her any pecuniary aid. He
suspected, indeed, that the Catholic bishop could have afforded him
information, but he was inflexible in refusing to do so. A
considerable sum of money had been set apart for Ellen's use, and a
fortune provided for the boy. "Perhaps," said the duke, "after my
death the bishop might enable you, Eugene, to trace the mother and
child, and induce them to accept the provision. Will you undertake the
commission?"

"Most willingly," said Eugene.

"When I am dead, let it be," said the duke. "Ellen will take nothing
from me living--when I am dead she will be more easily persuaded. I
know she must wish a high education for her son. She will not, I hope,
refuse assistance for that. But even if she does, I have settled his
money separately, that he may be sure of getting it. Tell Ellen, too,
that I died a Catholic; I know she has long prayed for this; and tell
her that I rejoice now that I have no child save hers, my only son.
Let strangers take the estate that had so nearly wrecked my soul. O
Eugene! none but Catholics can understand the benediction pronounced
by our Lord on poverty! The possession of power, of wealth, of glory,
fan our egotistical feelings, and lead us more and more astray. I
think I should not dare to trust myself with them again, had I still
power to use them. And I thank God I have not the power, lest the
temptation should again prove too strong for my virtue."

The duke lingered on for months, long months. How tediously did those
months pass to the Godfrey family--to the duchess in particular--to
all, save Eugene. In the sick-chamber he passed most of his time. To
Adelaide's joy, her father had not yet discovered the fatal secret. He
was so busy, acting for the duke, transacting business, arranging
tenantry, etc.; and then he spent long hours in the glorious pagan
temple, the gods of which he had taken care to secure as Adelaide's
personal possession, and for the reception of which he was building a
large hall at the jointure-house, that when the castle they now
inhabited should pass to the heir-at-law, he might be able to take
possession of these trophies of art at once.

Such was the friendship and delicacy of the man of the world! The
summer passed, the winter came, and a wintry change came over the
invalid. One evening he called his wife, his friends, his domestics,
every inmate of the house, into his presence, and, one by one, begged
their forgiveness for every uneasiness he had caused them, for every
bad example he had set them, and begged of them to pray for him as for
one who was about to appear before God, to give account of a mis-spent
life. To Adelaide, and to her father, mother, and sister, this
appeared like a well-acted scene; but the domestics, nay, even Madame
de Meglior retired in tears.

Night came. An oppression was over the household. None cared to retire
to rest, and yet none dared again approach the duke's apartment. Mrs.
Godfrey sat in Adelaide's room that night while Hester was with Madame
de Meglior. Euphrasie was missing, but, as usual, was forgotten. Even
Mr. Godfrey partook in some measure of the excitement. He had asked
the physician that evening more anxiously than usual, how the patient
was; and though the response had been, "Somewhat better," he, with the
household, did not give it credence.

He paced his chamber, lay down on a sofa, rose, and paced it again;
looked at his watch--one, two, three, four o'clock; how long the hours
were that night! He opened his door, walked out, and paused at the
door of his daughter's room. He heard speaking, {481} gently he
tapped, his wife opened the door to him; neither she nor the daughter
had been in bed.

"Any news? whispered he.

"No! All is quiet in the duke's chamber."

"I will go and see," he said.

He passed through the whole retinue of domestics in the galleries. Not
one had gone to bed, yet all were hushed; not one had ventured to make
inquiries at the sick-room door.

Mr. Godfrey passed silently on, his foot-fall was scarcely heard. A
dull sound as of low continuous speaking came from the duke's
apartment. The door was not locked; he turned the handle gently and
went in without rapping. What a scene met his view! Candles were
lighted on the altar. Beside it, rapt in prayer, knelt Euphrasie. The
stranger, Martigni, robed in the sacred vestments, was in the act of
placing the Holy of Holies upon the tongue of the dying man, whom
Eugene was tenderly supporting in his arms. The sick man sank back on
the pillow as the priest left him, and the prayers continued; Mr.
Godfrey paused. A sensation of wondering anger stole over him, yet he
waited for the benediction of the priest. Eugene was on his knees by
the bedside. The ceremony over, Mr. Godfrey approached him, shook him,
and in a harsh whisper said:

"Boy, what mummery is this?"

Eugene rose. The sick man opened his eyes. A bright smile broke over
his features. "No mummery," he faintly said.

Then again there was a pause, and a gasping for breath, and the eyes
closed. They opened again: "Jesus have mercy; Mary help," were the
last words he uttered, and he died.

It was no time for explanation. Mr. Godfrey retired. On leaving the
chamber he became aware that imprudently the door he had left half
open had partially revealed to the domestics, now assembled without
the chamber, that something unusual was taking place within. To their
questions, Mr. Godfrey replied: "He is dead." And instantly the
chamber was filled with weeping mourners. Good, kind, and liberal had
been the master they had lost, and he was much beloved. To their
wonder they beheld the altar on which stood the unextinguished
candles. Before it knelt the priest, chaunting, in a very low voice,
the office for the dead, which was responded to by the Italian valets
kneeling beside the bed. Euphrasie had disappeared, but on the bed lay
the corpse, one hand grasping the crucifix. They stood rooted to the
spot at the strangeness of the scene. They had not yet satisfied their
wonder when the duchess entered. She cast one look on the bed; then
approaching the priest, said:

"You will please to quit this chamber as soon as convenient, and
disencumber the room of these useless toys."

Eugene sprang to her side. "Sister," said he, "in the name of Heaven,
do nothing rashly. Leave these things to me; to me give your orders;
on my honor they shall be obeyed."

The duchess bethought herself one moment. "Clear the room of these,
then," she said, pointing to the wondering domestics.

Eugene obeyed.

"Now," said the duchess, "let there be an end of this foolery. In an
hour I will send those hither whose duty it is to tend the dead. By
that time let no vestige remain of this offensive foreign trumpery;
and let these strangers quit the house."

The tone was too decided to be disputed; the commands were obeyed; and
so successfully did Mr. Godfrey assist his daughter in giving the lie
to the reports that were spread through the neighborhood, that it came
at last to be considered as an established fact that the whole scene
of the death-bed was got up by a concerted plan of the Italian valets,
who hoped in this way to convert their master at his dying hour, and
the duke himself being insensible made no opposition! Thus can the
"great ones" of the earth oft condescend to lie, though they would
{482} challenge a man to a duel who dared to question the nicety of
their honor.

For many days the duke lay in state in his ancestral hall; from far
and near crowds came to gaze on the gorgeously fitted up apartment,
hung with emblazoned hatchments, encircled round with all the
trappings of woe. Eugene had quitted the house at the time of the
duke's decease, in company with the foreigners his sister had
commanded to depart. He reappeared on the day of the funeral, and
requested to speak with his mother. To his surprise he found her
haggard and worn, and traces of excessive weeping were on her
countenance. She greeted him kindly, made him sit down beside her,
took his hand in hers and held it, but wept instead of speaking.
Eugene was puzzled and alarmed, for all agitation was unusual with his
mother. They were alone together, yet the silence was not broken.
After awhile a servant came to say that the procession was forming for
the funeral, he supposing that Eugene came expressly to attend it.

"Shall I go, mother?" said Eugene, but his mother held him fast, and
shook her head.

"It would be better not," she said; "they might be bitter even on a
day like this. No, Eugene, do not see your father yet. Go home, I will
be there in a few days. We will talk matters over, and all will be
right again. Your father and Hester will remain a short time with
Adelaide. But you and I will go home. Do not stay here now, but meet
me tomorrow at the post-house ten miles from this. I will be there at
ten o'clock. I will stop the carriage for you to ride home with me."

Eugene wonderingly assented; and as she seemed anxious to get him out
of the house, he left as soon as the vast cortege had disappeared.

Crowds of nobility, crowds of gentry, crowds of tenantry accompanied
the corpse as it was borne to the family vault. A collation was
afterward spread for the guests; they partook of it, went home, and in
less than a month were eager in paying court to a new duke, and the
late one was to them as though he had never been.





CHAPTER XV.

THE MOTHER AND SON.

It was a strange and certainly not a very pleasant feeling to Eugene
to find himself thus secretly, as it were, in his mothers company. Her
agitation, however, had subsided. During the journey she was even
cheerful at times, and she made not the slightest allusion to the
subject which had disturbed her. On their arrival at home she busied
herself more than had ever been her wont in domestic and tenantry
affairs, and kept Eugene occupied in many ways. There was, he fancied,
a tenderness in her intercourse with him that he had rarely observed
before, though she had ever been to him a most loving mother. Some
weeks passed, and then a letter came which made Mrs. Godfrey turn pale
as she read it. Eugene, alarmed, rose and placed himself beside her.
"Is anything the matter, dearest mother?" he asked.

"Yes, no, yes! that is, they are coming home."

"And who are they who cause you this alarm?"

"Your father and Hester."

"My father! he has ever love you dearly! Mother, my dear mother, do
explain yourself!"

The poor lady laid her head on Eugene's shoulder, and wept. Eugene
tried in vain to soothe her. At length he said, "May I see the letter,
mother?"

"No, no; you will know its contents but too soon. Now, Eugene, answer
me: have I not loved you well? have I not been a good mother to you?"

"The best of mothers," said Eugene, caressingly.

{483}

"Then you love me somewhat--you would do something for me!"

"Anything in my power, dear mother. I would lay down my life for you."

"It is not your life I want you to relinquish, foolish boy, but your
_fancies_. Your father has taken most serious offense at your
religious demonstrations, and swears he will disinherit you unless you
recant. Unfortunately, although some of the estate is entailed, much
of it is not, and you will lose a princely fortune if you deny his
wish."

"What does he wish?"

"That you renounce _in toto_, all Catholic friends and all Catholic
opinions."

Eugene made no reply.

"Eugene, my only son, my best hope, my greatest joy, did it depend on
me I would not shackle your freedom of action; Christianity,
Mohammedanism, or any other _ism_, might be at your option. Your
happiness is my desire, and whatever I might think of your creed, I
would not let it stand between me and my love for you. But yet is not
thus with your father. He will not suffer a Catholic in his house."

She paused; still Eugene replied not. She went on: "Eugene, you would
not be the cause of my death! I feel you would not!"' and she threw
her arms about him. "Yet these divisions will surely kill me; I dare
not tell you how I have suffered during the last few weeks."

"I have seen it, dear mother, and though I only partly guessed the
cause, I deeply sympathize with your unhappiness."

"Then you will remedy it?"

"I do not see how just yet. Thought must be free. I dare not bind
myself to think at another's pleasure."

"But you need not declare your thoughts".

"Nay, mother, I must be free: free to think, free to act according to
the dictates of my conscience. I learned this necessity from yourself,
dear mother; do not now belie your own teachings. You told me ever to
seek the truth, and to act upon it when found. I will not bind myself
to follow another course, were a kingdom to be the purchase of the
compromise."

"Or your mother's love, Eugene?"

"My mother will but love me better for practising the lessons that she
taught me. I know my mother's principles, and I do not fear the loss
of her love."

"Flatterer! but were it even so, your father is serious, Eugene. He
will not see you again, unless you accede to his demand."

"When is he coming home?"

"On the day after tomorrow."

"Then I depart to-morrow; I will not encounter him in his present
humor. Besides, I promised the late duke to execute a commission for
him; it is time I set about it."

"And how will you live, rash boy?"

"Will he not continue my allowance to me?"

"I do not know, at least I do not want the question mooted just now.
To prevent the necessity of it, I had a deed drawn up the other day
which will supply you with necessaries till you return to reason." And
Mrs. Godfrey took from her bureau a very business-like document, which
proved to be a deed of gift of the principal part of the property
settled upon herself and her heirs. "Use this," she said, "until right
reason returns to you."

"My mother!"

"No words now; I did it to relieve my own mind, for I must consent to
your departure. We will hope for better times, for I see I cannot
change you at present."

The property thus settled on our young hero was but a modest portion
for one educated as Eugene had been; yet to those numerous middle
people who struggle daily with economy it would have seemed a fortune.

{484}

Eugene departed with a gloom upon his feelings certainly, yet not with
hopelessness. He proceeded at once to call on the bishop, from whom he
hoped to obtain tidings of Ellen; but the bishop was gone to Rome, and
M. Bertolot with him, and they were not expected back till the spring.
It was dull work spending that winter alone, for to return to
Cambridge was not to be thought of. At last the spring advanced, and
the buoyancy of youth restored hope to his spirit; he resolved to take
a pedestrian tour through Wales while waiting the bishop's return.
Several months had passed since he left his home. His mother often
wrote to him, but no invitation to return came with her letters.
Young, and desirous of knowledge, his projected expedition would have
been acceptable to him but for this circumstance of domestic
estrangement. However, he wandered on, with what courage he might, and
found himself already on foot, with knapsack on his back, pursuing his
travels. The rage for making tours was not at that time what it has
since become. The scenes were comparatively untrodden and undescribed,
so that the pleasure and the charms of novelty at least were Eugene's.
He wandered on for some days, delighted with the picturesque scenery,
and gathering health and vigor from his primitive mode of travelling.

One fine morning he rose particularly early, and had gone some miles,
when he began to feel the need of some refreshment. He had neglected
to inquire where this could be obtained, and began to wonder where he
was likely to obtain any breakfast. Feeling somewhat impatient at the
length of the road, he climbed a high bank on the right hand side, to
gain a view of the country, and gladly perceived that immediately
below lay a scattered village. It was the first of May, and children
were carrying garlands from house to house. The morning was lovely,
and every thing wore the aspect of happiness. Our traveller sprang
down the bank, and made his way over fences into the village. He
stopped at the first cottage he came to; it was the picture of
neatness; the honey-suckle and sweet-brier climbed over the porch, and
the little garden-plot in front was the very embodiment of beauty. All
the early flowers were grouped in beds, most elegantly arranged. A
dark-eyed boy stood in the porch, watching the garlands which the
children were displaying. He caught sight of Eugene standing at the
gate, and came forward. His open-heartedness was painted on his
countenance.

"Can I serve you, sir?" said the boy. "You appear to be a stranger
here."

"I am a stranger," replied Eugene, "that is, I am a traveller. Can you
tell me where I may find rest and a breakfast?"

The boy opened the gate, and conducted Eugene into the porch, He then
went to call his mother.

A middle-aged woman of superior manners came forward, and bade him
welcome:

"You will find no inn, sir, nearer this than a mile or two; pray walk
is and partake of such fare as our cottage affords."

Good tea, eggs, bread and butter were produced, and Eugene did them
ample justice; but during the meal and after it was over, he could not
help being struck with the air of both mother and son, and the
appearance of the place altogether. The walls were only whitewashed,
and the floor uncarpeted, but on the said walls hung paintings of a
high order, and in a small recess stood a beautiful marble statuette
of our Blessed Lady. The features of the boy, too, seemed those of a
face familiar to him. A thought glanced through his mind as he gazed
on the finely formed face. "Thank you warmly for your hospitality,
young sir," said he, taking the boy's hand and drawing him nearer to
him. "Now, please to tell me by what name I M to remember you?"

{485}

"My name is Henry Daubrey," said the boy.

"Daubrey" thought Eugene; "can that the her maiden name? I almost
forgot. Ellwood was the name he gave her." He hesitated; then, turning
to the lady, remarked, in a somewhat embarrassed manner: "Judging by
these paintings, madam, I should imagine you, like myself, are almost
a stranger here. These are no country daubs."

"Mamma did these herself," explained the boy. The lady signed to the
boy to be silent. "She had not lived there always;" she said.

"Pardon my impertinence, madam," said Eugene, "but this young lad's
features so strikingly resemble those of a friend I have lately lost,
that I can but fancy he must be in some way related to him."

"What was your friend's name?"

"The Duke of Durimond."

The lady turned alarmingly pale, as she faltered forth, "And is the
Duke of Durimond is dead?"

"He died in my arms, about four months ago."

There was a long pause, which no one seemed inclined to break. At
length Eugene resumed: "The duke's life, latterly, puzzled many. He
married, left his wife suddenly, went abroad, fell ill, for upward of
two years suffered greatly, even tortures occasionally, which tortures
he endured with the patience of a martyr, being even thankful for his
sufferings. He died in the sentiments of the most perfect contrition,
immediately after receiving the Holy Viaticum."

"The Viaticum! Was the duke a Catholic?"

"He came so latterly, though this is not made public; the family
carefully conceal it."

A look of thanksgiving, with clasped hands, upraised, as it were,
involuntarily, confirmed Eugene's presentiment. After awhile he
continued: "When the duke was on his death-bed, he charged me to seek
out a lady, for whom he entertained a high esteem. I have a letter for
her in my knapsack. I will show it to you."

The letter produced was directed, "To Ellen, from Colonel Ellwood on
his death-bed." The lady's hand closed on the lines. Eugene made no
resistance. The lady retired to an inner apartment. The boy followed
her. An hour elapsed; stifled sobs were heard, but the lady came not
back. At length the boy returned with an open note. It contained these
words:

"You have guessed rightly: return in a few days; I cannot see you now.
When you return, ask for

  "ELLEN DAUBREY."

"I will return on this day week, tell your mother so!" was the verbal
message Eugene delivered to the boy.

"I will," said the boy; and Eugene departed.



Ellen's account of herself when Eugene did return, was, that she had
made a very comfortable subsistence by the sale of her paintings,
which she had disposed of to a London dealer, to whom she was
introduced by the Comte de Villeneuve, who had watched over her
interests with a zeal truly fraternal. She and her boy had dwelt
together in seclusion, he giving her what help he could in the garden
and in her domestic affairs, she, in return, instructing him to the
best of her power.

"He loves learning, Mr. Eugene," she said, "and will soon be beyond my
teaching; besides, he wishes to become a priest, but how to get him
the necessary instruction in this most prejudiced country is a real
enigma."

"The Abbe Martigni, who was the duke's private chaplain, and who is
cognizant of all the facts connected with his position, would, I doubt
not, take charge of his education, if you were willing," replied
Eugene; "but how would you be able to bear the separation necessary in
that case?"

"I should fix my abode near, and find some occupation for myself,"
said the mother. "God forbid my selfish affection should stand between
my child and his vocation."

{486}

Ellen might have said that her occupation was already found, for
wherever there was an act of kindness to do, there Ellen found work.
Had she admitted Eugene to the inner room of her own cottage, he might
have found an old paralytic woman, who, deserted by all her friends,
was taken care of by this good Samaritan and tended with the affection
of a daughter. The duke's legacy to her was now employed entirely in
acts of mercy and of charity, offered up for the repose of his soul.
Not one penny was appropriated to her own use, for she still lived on
the product of her pencil. On the return of the bishop the Abbe
Martigni was appointed to a mission, and Henry Daubrey resided with
him as his pupil, preparatory to his being sent to the seminary,
aiding his tutor in that semi-concealed fulfilment of his high duties
which was then the characteristic mode of English Catholicity, induced
by English semi-toleration of Catholic religious rites. The mother
lived close by, and it was not long ere her house was known as a house
of mercy, a refuge for the poor, a hospital for the sick, a haven of
spiritual consolation to any who needed the kind offices practised
beneath its roof. Penitents, lovingly attracted by her angelic
sweetness, often came, as it were, by stealth to inquire of her the
way to God, and by her were led back into the fold whence they had
strayed while inquirers, touched by her life of self-denial, found the
prejudices in which they had been brought up melt away, and many were
led to embrace the saving truths which bind the children of the church
together in the one fold of Christ, at the feet of one Lord, who gave
us one faith, one baptism.



CHAPTER XVI.



FREEDOM OF CONSCIENCE AND LIBERTY OF ACTION.


When Eugene had fulfilled the commission of the late duke, and had
made the arrangement for Henry Daubrey with the Abbe Martigni, spoken
of in the last chapter, he bethought him of his own position. Whither
should he bend his own steps? As long as he had been busied in Ellen's
affairs, the excitement had in some measure kept him up, and prevented
his realizing what it is to be homeless, to have relatives who wish
your absence, loved ones to whom your presence causes annoyance,
positive annoyance. To be alone in this wide world of sin, without the
sanction of family ties; to be disowned, voted an encumbrance, or,
worse, an absolute incubus, crushing vitality and joyousness in the
home circle! what a feeling it produces! It requires a strong courage,
a courage that is the child of faith, that is sustained by grace, to
enable one to bear it bravely, working hard the while. Eugene did bear
it bravely, though he felted most acutely. He determined to seek M.
Bertolot, to take counsel respecting the future. His way lay past his
sister Adelaide's present residents. The duchess was now settled in
the jointure-house. Decidedly, had Eugene thought she was alone, or
with those who to him were strangers, he would have passed quietly on
his way; but Euphrasie, did not Euphrasie live with the duchess? At
least he supposed so; and though with an effort he conquered his
reluctance and announced himself at his sister's mansion.

The duchess received him coldly, almost haughtily. Still the young man
waited, in the hope of seeing her for whom the visit was intended. A
long two hours passed in painful and constrained conversation. Still
neither Madame de Meglior nor her daughter appeared.

Eugene rose to take his leave; then, as if by a sudden impulse,
exclaimed: "But, my aunt, Adelaide, and Mademoiselle de Meglior, I
most not go without paying my respects to them. Will you not let one
of your people tell them that I am here and wish to see them?"

{487}

"Neither the countess nor Mademoiselle Euphrasie are with me," replied
the duchess.

"No! where are they, then? at Estcourt Hall?"

"I think not; they left me at Durimond Castle, before I came here at
all. They went to Annie then; where they are now I do not know."

"Have they, then, left Annie?"

"Yes! Sir Philip took some exceptions Euphrasie's Jesuitical
principles, and the ladies disappeared one day."

"Disappeared! where did they go to?"

"No one knows; truth to say, brother this is a very disagreeable
subject; these quarrels about religion are terrible, and have brought
much unhappiness to all of us; the less we say about it the better."

"But my aunt and Euphrasie?"

"I have already told you I do not know anything about them, and I must
add, I do not wish to know."

"Sister!"

But Adelaide replied no more. Her stateliness and dignity, if they did
not awe Eugene, repelled him. He left the house in disgust.

His next visit was to his sister Annie; but it would be more in order
were we to relate the occurrences which had taken place with regard to
Euphrasie and her mother since the duke's death. Immediately after
that event, the two ladies experienced a great change of demeanor
toward themselves in the persons of all by whom they were surrounded;
even the menials caught the infection, and behaved with supercilious
insolence toward the abetter of popery and the female Jesuit, as they
termed the emigrant ladies. Madame de Meglior, mindful of Annie's
former invitation, wrote to express her willingness to except it now,
if Annie still desired their company. The answer was most favorable,
and within a week of the duke's funeral Madame and Euphrasie had
quitted his haughty and to them now unfriendly widow.

They had not been long at their new abode ere another source of
uneasiness arose. Alfred Brookbank had always vehemently disliked
Euphrasie, and observing the real pleasure that her company afforded
the now too often desolate Lady Conway, he resolved to do his utmost
to destroy that pleasure. The reason of the ladies' departure from the
protection of the duchess was not indeed guessed; so secret had all
transactions connected with the late duke's death been kept, the very
word Catholic was suppressed where possible; it was not supposed, nor
to be supposed, that they had been driven from so lofty a mansion.
Still, Alfred Brookbank knew the religion of Euphrasie, and he deemed
he could so use that knowledge as to spite Annie.

Sir Philip had at first been pleased with the new-comers: their
history interested him, and native good feeling prompted him to show
them kindness and hospitality as his wife's relatives; but Alfred soon
worked on his horror of popery. Of all things, the worthy baronet
detested a Catholic the most, and Euphrasie was, suggested the lawyer,
a Jesuit in petticoats; an insinuating adventuress, one who would risk
the downfall of a noble house to make a convert, even of a cook-maid.

Annie found great relief in the society of her guests. She sympathized
with her aunt, and entertained her fondly; Euphrasie she had always
liked, despite her taciturnity. She would gladly have induced them to
prolong their visit to an indefinite period, and was greatly
disappointed when she first became aware of Sir Philip's revulsion of
feeling in their regard. This revulsion, indeed, soon mastered him so
completely that he could scarcely bring himself to be civil to them in
his outward demeanor.

Annie remonstrated that as her relatives, and as the relatives of the
Godfrey family, they were at least entitled to respect.

{488}

"A respect that will place them at liberty to proselytize all the
parish? No, no, my lady; private feeling must be sacrificed to public
duty;" and the baronet drew himself up in a very Brutus-like fashion.

"But my aunt is not a Catholic that I am aware of," pleaded Annie;
"and as for Euphrasie, she scarcely speaks, so how can she convert any
one?"

"'Twere hard to tell, yet we know these silent people are the very
ones to be dreaded. One thing I am determined on, she shall not remain
here."

"But how can we turn them out of the house?"

"That is your business, my lady; you invited them, now get rid of
them."

The speech was a cruel one, for although Sir Philip did not know they
had already been ejected from the other part of the family, he knew
that Mr. Godfrey and Hester were so taken up just now in establishing
the duchess in her jointure-house and in removing thither the
divinities of the far-famed pagan temple, that they could think of
nothing else. Mrs. Godfrey was at home, but was said to be in delicate
health, and Eugene was absent; none seemed to know where or why. A
moment's reflection might have told Sir Philip that just then the
unfortunate emigrant ladies had no home save the one in which they now
found themselves; but he consulted only his own dogged temper, and
tormented his wife at every private interview to get rid of them.

But Annie knew not how, and her obstinacy in not complying with his
commands enraged him; Sir Philip had a high idea of his marital
authority, though he knew not whence he derived it, nor, indeed, how
to enforce it. In this latter particular, however, he sought counsel
from his friend Brookbank, as he termed his lawyer, and this latter
was not slow in using every advantage he could obtain over Annie.

"Prudence and patience. Sir Philip, will accomplish all things." said
the lawyer; "it would be unwise, as you perceive, to incur the odium
of turning those ladies out of doors, until the grounds of complaint
become ostnsible; wait awhile, they will become so. From my knowledge
of the amiable character of the lady, your wife, Sir Philip, I should
be perfectly surprised at this resistance to your legitimate
authority, did I not fear that my lady herself is somewhat infected
with the opinions of the young French refugee. You, Sir Philip, are
well aware, attachment to that baneful creed overcomes every other
sense of duty."

"My lady Conway a Catholic!" ejaculated the now bewildered Sir Philip.

"Nay, I say not that--I think not that; only a favorer of her cousin's
views. No open profession of Catholicity, only a secret inclination
thereunto."

"They shall be separated this very day," thundered the baronet.

"Pardon me. Sir Philip; I have the utmost confidence in your judgment;
your just antipathy to popish superstition fortifies my own. But if
you will allow me one word which appears to differ, but in fact agrees
with your opinion; may I be permitted to say, that it would be hardly
prudent just now to give any air of martyrdom to this business. Weak
women are flattered thereby. Your object is, of course, to detach Lady
Conway from every Catholic idea. Your strong good sense and powers of
reasoning will effect this, provided that you do not rouse the strong
obstinacy of female nature. Wait till the visit ends in a natural
manner, and then take measures to restore your lady wife to her
senses."

Alfred knew well that in giving this advice he ran no risk of seeing
it acted upon. The character of the man he addressed was too
ungovernable for that; he had but roused into fiercer play the
half-dormant passion, the half-latent suspicion. Sir Philip appeared
{489} to acquiesce, but, as Alfred intended, all his faculties were
now aroused to put and unfavorable construction on his wife's actions
ions. His tone became more churlish, and even more authoritative then
was its wont. Politeness and forbearance were at an end. To his two
guests he scarcely behaved with decency.

Annie was too deeply hurt to feel all the indignation that this course
would naturally have led her to manifest. She used all her endeavors
to shield from actual insult the bereaved emigrants, and to compensate
by her own assiduous attentions for the rudeness of her husband. She
even mastered herself so as calmly to remonstrate with him on the
subject, "Sir Philip," said she, "have you considered that the
revolution of France cannot, from the very nature of things, be
permanent; that these ladies are of the haute noblesse, and one day
their estates will be restored to them?"

"I think not; nay, I hope not," said Sir Philip. "As the French people
have had the good sense to banish priests, I hope they will also have
wisdom enough to keep all Jesuits, male and female, at a distance.
Your cousin is a female Jesuist, depend upon it. It would not surprise
me to  that she is in actual correspondence with the Pope, or
connected with a second Guy Fawkes for the blowing up of this
household. Get rid of her, my lady."

"But how? Just now they can go neither to Estcourt Hall nor to
Adelaide. Where am I to send them to?"

In a towering passion, and in a thundering voice, the baronet replied:
"I don't care a d--n where they go to; but I can't bear the sight of
them here."

Annie's heart sank. The window was open, and as her husband spoke she
became aware that the ladies in question were seated in an alcove
near, partially screened from view by the green boughs of the shrubs
that surrounded it. They must have heard the conversation. At this
moment they rose, passed the window, bowing as they passed to Annie.
There was something of melancholy compassion in that salute; at least
Annie thought so. She longed to run after them, to throw herself into
her aunt's arms, and weep out the bitterness of her soul; but her
husband's eye was upon her, and he was watching her emotions with no
friendly feelings. She turned back into the library with him and
endeavored to master her oppression. The time passed drearily away as
she awaited their return from their walk; but in vain she waited, they
came not; one hour, two hours, three hours; dinner was served and they
came not. The meal was taken silently; each one was too much absorbed
in thought to speak. A long evening was gone through, and at length
when Sir Philip went out to speak to his farm bailiff, Annie wandered
in sadness on to the lawn. It was a fitful night, the clouds were
chasing each other through the atmosphere, here and there revealing a
star, now and then disclosing the moon. A feeling of desolation came
over her, her grief was too great for tears; but when she approached
the deep haw-haw that bounded the garden to the south, she felt as if
she could willingly lie down therein and die. "Was the water there
deep enough to destroy life? What is life? Is it something we hold in
common with cows, horses, dogs? That is easily destroyed! Is man only
an animal? If so, I at least had better die, for what happiness can I
expect with such a mate as I have? But animal life cannot be all! What
is it makes us so sure of this? O Euphrasie! where are you? You could
answer this; why are you so happy, why am I se wretched? If it is not
poverty that makes unhappiness, what does make it? What has Euphrasie
more than I have? She is a wanderer, homeless, penniless, yet I feel
satisfied she is to be envied even now."

{490}

Strange that in her vexation and utter mortification, Annie felt no
intense anxiety respecting the fate of her guests. She had a sort of
belief that Euphrasie bore a charmed life, and that under any
circumstances she was ever the happiest person in the circle in which
she might be placed. She thought her aunt privileged in having such a
companion.

The deep night came, and Sir Philip, uneasy at Annie's prolonged
absence, went to seek her. She was still leaning over a rail close to
the water's edge. "What are you doing there?" he said, but his tone
was softer than usual, for his wife was trembling with emotion; and
her eyes were filled with tears. He took one hand in his, and passed
one arm round her waist, to support her and draw her from her
position. "Are you ill, Annie?" he asked.

Instead of replying, Annie asked in a faltering voice: "What has
become of them?"

"It matters not; it was a providence that made them hear they were not
welcome. It saved us both some uneasiness. They will be taken care of,
never fear. There is a sort of free-masonry among such people. Only
don't let me see my wife, Lady Conway, make herself miserable about a
couple of papists: it would be too absurd."

Two days after, toward the evening, a stranger came, a poor Irishman,
with a cart; he brought a note to Annie. It was from Madame: she
thanked Annie cordially and affectionately for her good wishes and
kind attentions; pleaded that a sudden emergency had arisen which
prevented her profiting longer from them; excused her informal
leave-taking by the same necessity, and begged Annie would forward to
her whatever she had left behind. Annie fairly cried with vexation;
she questioned the man as to where the ladies were, but the man had
seen no ladies. A gentleman, whose name he had forgotten, had given
him the note and two keys, which he said would unlock two trunks,
which were to be packed and sent back. That was all he knew. The
gentleman would meet him at the same place, and receive the trunks
from him. But he was sure the gentlemen did not live there; he was
going further on. Annie could make out nothing more. She packed the
trunks herself, and enclosed a fifty pound Bank of England note, with
a deprecating letter in one of the boxes. It was all the money she had
at that moment in hand.

A week elapsed, and a letter came by a private hand; the bearer
leaving the premises immediately on delivering it. The letter
contained no address, but it returned the fifty pound note, "with
thanks--it was not needed." Sir Philip was present when the letter was
opened; his eyes were fixed on Annie, and he sternly demanded, "From
whom?" There was no alternative native but to hand the letter to him
and he exclaimed in a fury, "And is it thus you would waste my
substance madam? To nourish vipers, Jesuits, beasts! I will take care
from henceforth your means of doing this shall be lessened," and he
stalked indignantly from the room, bearing the money and the letter
with him. This was a manifest injustice, as the money was Annie's
private property, by right of her marriage settlements; but when was
prejudice ever just?



It was several weeks after this that Eugene made his appearance to
inquire after the refugees. Annie would have greeted him warmly, but
Sir Philip's haughty and distant manner plainly told him he was not
welcome. Eugene waited till the baronet had quitted the apartment ere
he inquired for his aunt and her step-daughter. He heard the tale
relative to their withdrawal with undisguised indignation, and said:

"And you do not know what has become of them?"

"No!"

"And you say my father does not know?"

{491}

"No!"

"Will he let his own sister and the orphan daughter of his friend
suffer for want?"

"They cannot be suffering, they refused the fifty pound note."

"That says nothing; or rather it says they preferred suffering to
insult. O Annie! Annie! I had not dreamed you would lend yourself to
persecution like this."

"Young man," said Sir Philip, who now entered the room, "I am master
in my own house; I have heard your conversation with Lady Conway in
regard to your _protege_. I will have no papists here, nor any
encouragement given to them; and the day that Lady Conway holds
communication again with papists, or with suspected papists, without
my sanction, that day she ceases to abide under one roof with me."

Annie looked as if she wished that day were already come, but she said
nothing. Eugene was watching her and he whispered: "Wives must obey
their husbands, Annie, in all that is not sin. Adieu, I blame you no
longer; I see where the fault lies. Adieu once more." And Eugene
hastened from the house without trusting himself to reply to the
haughty speech of it's master.

The whisper had been observed; a frown darkened Sir Philips brow,
"Your brother has forgotten the forms of good breeding," he said, "to
enter a gentleman's house and treat him with contempt. Is that what
the Catholic religion enjoins?"

"The Catholic religion! What do I know of the Catholic religion? How
should that influence our actions?"

"You do not favor Catholics in your heart, I suppose, my lady?"

"Not as Catholics. My regard for Euphrasie had no reference to
religion at all."

"A nice distinction, learnt of the Jesuits, I suppose."

"I never saw a Jesuit that I am aware of," said Annie.

And thus the pair parted, to meet again and jar, and live in jarring
discord every day.

Had Annie been able to make Mr. Godfrey understand how unjustly she
was treated, she would have applied for a separation; but Mr. Godfrey
would not hear of such a thing. "He was glad, for his part," he said,
"that Sir Philip took so sensible a view of Catholic influence. It had
raised his son-in-law in his esteem, and if Annie showed any
disposition to break through the salutary regulations laid down for
her, it would be advisable rather to put her under restraint as a
lunatic, than to emancipate her from marital control. Sir Philip had
the legal power of locking her up in his own house; and if he did so
for such a cause as that, Mr. Godfrey would hold him justified."

Mrs. Godfrey was in dismay. Her health visibly declined. A melancholy
seemed to overspread her intellect, and at times to overpower her. All
was changed at Estcourt Hall now. The once fond, indulgent husband,
seemed to take but little notice of the ailments of his faithful
partner. He dreaded her taking part with Eugene and Annie, if the
subject were introduced, and he avoided all intimate conversation.
Hester was too much wrapt up in her own ideas to watch her mother
closely. She saw that the servants attended to her, that there was no
fear of her suffering for want of care or nourishment; but unheedful
of the power of affection and of sympathy, she gave her little
personal attendance. Annie's case she thought a hard one, and once
ventured to remonstrate with her father on the subject; but Mr.
Godfrey justified his proceedings by painting to her the horrors of
popery in glowing colors. He demonstrated to her that all sincere
Catholics were fools, the wise ones hypocrites, of whom it might be
predicted as it was of the soothsayers by Cicero, that it was a wonder
how one priest could look another in the face without laughing
together at their success in gulling the public mind. "Now," {492}
said Mr. Godfrey, "the object of these priests and rulers being to
subjugate the human will, and to level the human reason to their
standard, in order that themselves may rule supreme, it becomes the
duty of every thinking mind to war with the system on principle. You,
my dear daughter," continued the fond father, for fond even to doting
was Mr. Godfrey of this one child, "you, my dear daughter, would
idolize the hero who fought and achieved his country's
freedom--external freedom merely; should you not unite with those who
would save the world from mental bondage of the most degrading order?"

"Yes, if papistry be really this," said Hester; "but that it is
difficult to conceive it to be. But, grant that it is so, Annie does
not seem to be in any way implicated in it. She disclaims all
connection with it, and certainly she never used to manifest any
religious propensities whatever."

"Even so, surely no harm can come of keeping her apart from papists
for awhile. If this is all she has to complain of, her grievances are
not great."

"I think the real grievance, father, is the shackling her liberty,
denying her freedom of intercourse. Trampling on her freedom is no
light matter."

"Hester, dear, listen: when two people are yoked together, and their
interests differ, one must give way; law and custom say this one must
be the wife. Now, if Sir Philip were thought to encourage Catholics,
his political interests would suffer; therefore he must not encourage
them; but if his wife encourage them, it would appear that the
encouragement had his sanction; therefore his wife must not encourage
them: and if reasonable means fail in teaching her this lesson, others
may be resorted to. A wife is a wife, after all."

"I will never be a wife," said Hester.

"As you please," said her father. "but Annie is one, and must
therefore submit. She has the less excuse for resistance, in that she
had her own choice. No one was more surprised than myself when Sir
Philip applied to me for her hand."

Meantime the cause of all these disagreements was altogether
supposititious. Up to that time Annie had no acquaintance with the
first principles of religion. Probably but for this annoyance she
would ever have remained equally ignorant; but, driven from
friendship, shut out from sympathy, her attention was naturally fixed
on the subject; she began to meditate on Euphrasie's practices, to put
together the ideas she had allowed to escape her. A copy of the
Imitation of Christ had accidentally been left behind by Euphrasie; it
was found under the pillow on which she had slept. It was a book of
mystery to Annie, wonderfully enigmatical; yet this book and the New
Testament were her constant companions for months, and she learned to
cherish them as friends.




CHAPTER XVII.


EXPERIMENTS OF MORE KINDS THAN ONE.


"Papa," said Hester, "did I not hear you say those pretty farms in
Yorkshire are about to change tenants?"

"You did, my dear."

"Have you any tenants in view for them?"

"No! Has any one applied to you for one, or all of them?"

"I want to be the tenant myself."

"You?"

"Yes, indeed; there are good coals beneath the surface; the district
is well watered; I want to try these new steam engines on a large
scale. I will set up factories and form industrial associations,
governing them myself. I will establish them on the principle of
mutual assistance in forming and promoting a wide-spread intelligence:
my factories shall contain schools, reading-rooms, museums,
observatories, everything that can assist the onward progression of
the race."

{493}

"You will at least spend money, Hester?"

"Not more than if I kept race horses for Ascot, or frequented
Crockford's, which you could well afford to let me do if I were a man.
Not more then I might cost you if I insisted on taking a house house
in town, and on becoming the belle of the season; this would the
neither extravagant nor wonderful; and if I wanted diamonds and
emeralds and sapphires and glittering toys, you would get them all for
me, I know you would, for when did you refuse your Hester anything,
dear father?" said Hester, throwing her white arms around her father's
neck. "But now I want none of of these babyish fancies, I want to do
good in my generation, and my father must help me. We do not spend
half our income in our present mode of living, and money is like
manure you know, it wants spreading. Think of the glory of aiding
'progress.' Think of reigning over a population emancipated from
ignorance by your efforts. Think of forming a nucleus whence freedom
and happiness shall spring, handing down your name as a benefactor
throughout all time; it is a project well fitted to my father s noble
mind."

Mr. Godfrey gazed on his darling, and felt that he could refuse her
nothing; still he paused. "Supposing the necessary expenses incurred,
my Hester, your buildings erected, your villages formed, you have
forgotten one thing; your schemes might be suddenly interrupted, when
you least expected it: those farms are all entailed."

"I forgot that," mused Hester. After awhile she said: "Could not some
arrangement be made with my brother on this subject?"

"I do not know. Is he a likely one, think you, to consent to the
catting off the entail?"

"He might be," said Hester; "he must be badly off now, though I
suppose my mother helps him. Offer him a handsome allowance for life,
from this time out, on condition that the entail be cut off: he might
be induced to accept it."

"He would be a fool if he did," said Mr. Godfrey.

"Nay, father, that is not so certain, if you take into consideration
his present position. He is likely to suffer poverty for many years. I
think I would accept the alternative were I in his place."

Mr. Godfrey could deny nothing to Hester, so he replied:

"Well, I will think of it."

. . . . .

But what had Eugene been doing all this time? Eugene, after his
interview with his sister, went straight to M. Bertolot to inquire
after his aunt and Euphrasie. He was not mistaken in supposing that he
knew where they were, but he would tell nothing more than that they
were in good health and spirits. "I have no authority," he said, "to
divulge their place of abode; in fact, I promised secrecy."

"But how do they live? They have no means!" said Eugene.

"How, but by their labor!"

"Labor! my aunt labor?"

"No, I was wrong in saying their labor; it is Euphrasie who does the
work. Euphrasie gives lessons in French, music, and drawing, and waits
on her mother. De Villeneuve has hopes of recovering their estates for
them. He is now in France negotiating with the emperor to that effect.
He took care of them when they left your sister's and procured
Euphrasie the situation she required, as both she and Madame refused
to live at his expense."

"And did he offer to support them?"

"Well, yes; it appears that he and Euphrasie's father were sworn
brothers in friendship, and de Villeneuve made a solemn promise to the
Comte de Meglior to watch over Euphrasie's well-being. This promise
keeps him in Europe to this day, for he had always a misgiving that
she would not be permanently happy among those not of her faith. We
are expecting de Villeneuve very shortly."

{494}

"And if he succeeds, my aunt will go back to France?"

"Probably; but I am not so sanguine about their success as de
Villeneuve is. Madame is an English-woman, and that will not help her
cause with the emperor just now."

"And meantime Euphrasie works for her daily bread?"

"She does, and is happy in doing so. Euphrasie, my friend, is a
practical Catholic; one whose delight it is to _realize_, to make her
own, the life led by the holy family at Nazareth. I venture to say she
is far happier in sweeping her mother's room and in cooking her
mother's dinner than she would be in a glittering ball-room lit up
with its brilliant chandeliers."

"And does she really descend to these menial offices?" asked Eugene,
in a sort of stupefied amazement.

"Descend! Is it to descend when we aspire to imitate Jesus and Mary?
You are a Catholic, my young friend. You must not look at these things
with the eyes of the world: its false maxims are not the ones which
may guide your ideas. Labor, actual manual labor, was imposed on man
in penalty for sin; its acceptance is part of man's atonement for that
undervaluing of grace which led to the commission of that sin: which
still leads to the commission of daily sins. The avoidance of labor is
a child of pride, one which has occasioned multitudinous disorders
among mankind. But Jesus accepted labor--real, genuine labor: he
worked many years at his father's trade, and Mary kept no servant in
her house at Nazareth; she labored, for she felt that in lowly labor
there is a sanctifying influence, and it is this thought that makes
Euphrasie happy now."

"But she is so unused to actual toil!" said Eugene.

"Not so much as you may suppose," replied his friend. "The good nuns
taught her much that was useful, and even when she was at Estcourt
Hall and Durimond Castle she did much work that was unsuspected. The
produce of her needle clothed the poor, fed the hungry, and many times
defrayed the expense of a mission, when accident brought her in
contact with poor Catholics to whom such ministrations were acceptable
and profitable. All this was done so quietly that I suppose your
family knew nothing about it."

"At least I never heard of it," said Eugene.

Our hero was much depressed by this interview, not merely because he
could gain no clue to abode of his friends, but also because he was as
yet too new to the practice of Catholic principles to acquiesce
cheerfully in the idea of the refined, elegant, accomplished daughter
of a French nobleman toiling for her daily bread, and performing all
the menial services required in the household.

It was with right good-will that he greeted the Comte de Villeneuve on
his return, in the hope through him of seeing something accomplished
that would alter these circumstances. But the comte's embassy had been
unsuccessful; all he had been able to effect was to leave the case
with such other friends as should introduce it at a more favorable
period. But he was not so reserved respecting his friends as M.
Bertolot had been. He deemed that Eugene's position in his own family
should plead exemption for him from the ban of exclusion, and
willingly mediated to obtain an interview view for him with Madame.
Euphrasie was not at home when he called; and Madame greeted him
cordially, though she could not refrain from blaming him for running
counter to his friends about religion.

"What a fuss about a matter of opinion," she said. "But perhaps in
France, before the Revolution, a Protestant might have then as little
acceptable to the aristocracy. They say, too, that this new man, this
emperor, patronizes the Catholic religion also, so I shall not ask
Euphrasie to become a proselyte to English notions; her faith is that
of her country and of her kindred, and my brother ought to {495} have
understood this; but why you, Eugene, should wish to adopt the French
religion, I cannot divine."

"Perhaps religion is neither exclusively French nor English, aunt.
There may be a faith necessary to every nation alike, if it be true
that every man has a soul to save."

"Perhaps so; I do not meddle with these matters," replied the lady. "I
think everyone had better let everybody alone; it must be bad to
quarrel about religion; and as to saving the soul, we know so little
about it that it is quite presumptuous for one person to dictate to
another on that subject. I hope we shall all meet in heaven at last,
though we go there by different roads; for my part, I keep nobody
out."

The entrance Euphrasie prevent its the necessity of a reply.
Euphrasie's greeting was that of one who appreciates high principal.
There were respect and kindness in her manner, but no familiarity, no
approach to intimacy. Eugene felt disappointed, though certainly there
was nothing of which he felt he had a right to complain.

Eugene's visits to his aunt were now frequent, but never could he see
Euphrasie alone; whether from design or accident she avoided receiving
him, save in her mother's presence. Yet daily did his reverence for
her increase. To see the young French girl now, the supporter of the
household, the caterer for its wants, the tender minister to her
mother's manifold demands, none would have dreamed that heretofore
contemplation had absorbed her faculties, and that she was making to
duty the greatest sacrifice she could make in thus exchanging the
cherished practices of devotion for the active employments of life.
She was so cheerful, so almost gay, so unusually animated when the
state of her mother's spirits required it; a stranger might have
concluded that all her life she had been accustomed to this manner of
living.

Suddenly Eugene received a missive which had traced him to many
places, requesting him to meet his father in London.


TO BE CONTINUED.



ORIGINAL.


ON ST. PETER'S DENIAL.


"And the Lord, turning, looked on Peter."


  Lord! wilt thou that I also should deny
        That I am thine?
  Behold, my longing soul cries upward to the sky
        For sight divine!
  All through the silent night in livelong day--
        O grievous lot!--
  I seek to know thee more, and yet am forced to say
        "I know thee not".
  With Peter let these bitter tears confess
        My treachery:
  Yet, Lord, to know thee as thou art I need no less
        A look from thee!



{496}


Translated from the German of Hans Wachenhusen.


CHRIST IS BORN.



"Really I take it unkindly of our pastor that he is continually
speaking ill of us thorns, in the church yonder," said the thorn-bush,
standing by a crumbling stable wall among the castle-ruins near the
village church. "It is very unfair in him. How can he know, for
instance, how the subject may affect me? On the bloody field of
Golgotha, nearly two thousand years ago, there stood my ancestor, a
buckthorn, of whose branches they wove our Saviour's crown. But the
pastor yonder little thinks that I come of that same buckthorn;
[Footnote 149] or that all its lineal descendants bear red blossoms
and weep tears of blood on Christmas night; or that we thorns are ever
renewed like Christ's teachings, being woven in with them?"

  [Footnote 149: Kreuzdorn--Cross-thorn, literally.]

So spake the thorn-bush; and the wind blew through its branches, and
shook them until the snow dropped off.

"Positively, this connection ought to be known!" sighed the
thorn-bush.

But it was just then Christmas eve, and midnight was drawing near.
Therefore did the thorn-bush make these pious reflections, which
should have been cherished on other days too, if the lineage were
really so wonderful as it fancied. Meantime the church-bells were
ringing for the midnight mass, and the good priest passed by, going to
the service of God.

"See, now, how indifferently he goes past me," said the thorn-bush.
"And no wonder, since he knows nothing of my connections! And all the
rest brush by me into the church; and if the Lord God could not see
the things that are hidden, yet would he know his faithful by the
footprints that lead from the houses to the church. But he knows them
all, for he guides their steps. I know, though, two in the village who
have not been to church to-day nor yet this whole year, for they are
right godless men: the gloomy lord of our castle, and Wild Stephen,
whom he turned out of his cottage yesterday because the rent was not
paid. Here lie the poor wife and her half-naked children now in this
ruined stable before which I stand guard. Really I must take a peep
and see how the poor woman and her sick child are getting on," said
the thorn-bush, and stretched up its bought to look in at the broken
window.

But it was dark within, and the night-wind moaned through the damp
walls and the open window. "O God! the creature is so good and so
wretched. Here in this stable are tears and chattering teeth on this
day of Christmas gifts. Now, that is too grievous," sighed the
thorn-bush.

And over the way the church-organ poured out its solemn tones. "Christ
is born," sang the people from the choir and benches. "Christ is
born," cried the watchman from the tower. And our thorn-bush was
right. In that old, deserted stable a poor woman knelt and prayed. Hot
tears ran down her cheeks, her hands were convulsively clasped, and
her eyes rested fixedly on the straw in the old stone manger; for in
that manger lay her youngest born, a half-year old child, sick, and
trembling with ague and cold. The moon shone through the
window-opening upon this group. Her rays fell sympathizingly on the
sick child, but they could not warm him; nor could the mother's breast
do it either, she was herself so icy cold. {497} And through the
chinks of the rotting roof, gaps were covered with snow, fell by
hundred thousands the little glittering snow-stars and played in the
moon-beams, but they gave no light or warmth either.

"Saviour of the world, thou who wert born this night, who didst live
and die for us all, who didst lie to-day in a manger, like this poor
helpless creature, save, oh! save my sick child!" So prayed this poor
woman, and the baby stretched out his little cold hands to his mother
and wept. But her strengths was all gone. She let her weary head sink
on the icy edge of the stone manger; her eyes closed, and a heavy sigh
burst forth from her breast. Days and nights had she watched; days and
nights of bitter misery had she endured; but now she broke down, and
sleep took pity on her wretchedness.

"Poor wife, where is thy husband? Poor baby, where is thy father?"
whispered the thorn-bush pityingly, looking in at the window.

Yes, where was the husband, where was the father? Wild Stephen, for so
the villagers called him, had been turned out of his cottage with his
wife and children the evening before, as we have already said. He
sought a refuge among the neighbors, but they would have nothing to do
with him, for they were afraid of godless Stephen, who never had done
a good thing, so they said. And so he and his had come to this
deserted stable. Then he had rushed away breathless, in spite of the
entreaties of his wife, who dreaded some misfortune. Where, then, was
Wild Stephen? The bells ring out, the organ sounded, the people sang
pious songs in the church, and the good priest stood before the altar
and chanted: "Glory be to God on high, and on earth peace to men of
good-will."

Up in the old castle, in a comfortless room, a man of dark, forbidding
aspect set near the long-extinguished fire. He was the lord of the
castle, a hard-hearted man, feared by every one within the limits of
his estate. The light before him on the table burnt low; his face
looked stiff and motionless, his eyes were closed. It seemed like
sleep, only he looked so very pale. Now, while in the out-buildings of
the court-yard servants hurried to and fro, a man was stealing up the
stairs and through the gloomy corridor. He softly opened the door of
the great room, crept lightly in, and up to the arm-chair where the
landlord slept. The stranger's eyes gleamed with passion, a sneering
smile disfigured his weather-beaten face. He cast one look stealthily
around the room. A knife glistened in one hand, the other grasped that
of the sleeping landlord. The blade quivered--

"Christ is born," saying the people in the church below.

Wild Stephen shrank back, for the hand was icy cold. He had touched a
corpse.

"Christ is born," cried the warder from the tower; for mass was over,
and the people were hastening home.

Stephen's knife fell from his hand. He looked again at the dead man,
and it seemed as if the cold eyes were opening to blast him. Covering
his face with both hands, he fled from the room. No one had seen him
glide into the house; no one saw him now pause before the old stable
and looked in the window--no one but the thorn-bush. Ashy pale,
Stephen gazed into the stable. There he saw his wife kneeling,
motionless as the dead man in the castle yonder, but more lovely; and
gentle and pure as innocence, the child in the manger. Then Stephen,
rushed forward, not knowing whither, rushed through the open
church-door, and sank senseless on the steps of the altar.

Now the pastor was just going home. He came to the thorn-bush and saw
two little boys sitting beneath it in the snow. They were shivering,
and hiding their little red hands in their rags.

"Take them with thee," said the thorn-bush to the pastor. "They are
Wild Stephen's children; they dare not {498} go in-doors for fear
their father may beat them because they have come home empty-handed.
Take them with thee. I cannot warm them; I am so poor and naked."

We know not whether it was the pastor's heart or the thorn-bush that
spoke; but he took the children home with him.

"So, now have I one care the less!" said the thorn-bush to itself.
"Now they are beginning to light up the Christmas tree there--and
there--and again over yonder. What a pity that I'm not stationed under
the windows, for here in this dreary stable there will be nothing to
see."

But the thorn-bush was wrong, for just then the interior of the stable
grew bright with a piercing light. Still knelt the poor woman with
closed eyes, but the sick child waked up and stretched out its little
arms laughing; for the roof opened, and down fluttered, surrounded by
a light cloud, two lovely angels, one of them bearing a little
Christmas tree gleaming with countless lights, the other bringing
costly gifts. And it grew warm in the stable, and the light threw such
a gleam into the street that the thorn-bush wondered within itself.

"There is no hut so poor but Christ is there to-night," it said.

The angels fluttered down, and while one offered the Christmas tree,
the other went to the sick child and laid his hand healingly upon its
breast. Then they flew upward again and vanished; but the light
remained in the stable. In the mean time Wild Stephen lay upon the
cold altar-steps. At last his consciousness returned, and he raised
his head from the stone. A wonderful vision had appeared to him in a
dream, for he had seen two beautiful spirits who, blessing him, walked
by his side: and now, on awaking, he saw them standing by him, and
felt each angel lay a little warm hand in his and lead him from the
church.

It seemed to Stephen as if he still dreamed; as if it were in sleep
that the two little angels led him from the church to the stable where
he knew his poor wife and sorrowing children were. Willingly he let
himself be guided; but when they reached the wretched dwelling, and
everything within looked so warm and bright and pleasant; when he saw
the Christmas presents, he rubbed his eyes, and look down at the
angels who had brought him there and were still standing by his side.
Then Stephen recognized his two other boys, grandly and beautifully
dressed as he had never seen them before.

Still it seemed like a vision. He raised both children in his arms; he
held them close and kissed them--no, it could not be a dream.

"Christ is born," cried the watchmen from the tower. "Ay, born is he,
and within my own soul too!" exclaimed Stephen, and, still holding the
two children, sprang to his wife. He drew her toward him and held her
to his breast. "Jenny," he said, "wake up, Christ is indeed born!"

And she lifted her eyes and looked around in amazement, saying: "What
has happened? Is it really thou, Stephen?--and all this light here! Is
my dream true? I saw two angels bringing a Christmas tree and
beautiful presents, and one of them went to the manger and laid his
hand healingly upon my baby's breast. Yes, yes, it is true, for he is
alive," she explained, taking the smiling child from the manger and
clasping it to her bosom. "Get is true, Stephen," she said, and laid
the baby in his arms. "Our Saviour is born, and he will not let my
child die."

And while they were all looking at the Christmas presents the pastor
stepped from behind the tree, for he it was who had sent the gifts
through two good children of his parish; he it was who had seen Wild
Stephen sink down upon the altar-steps; he it was who had dressed the
little boys so beautifully, and led them to their father in the
church.

{499}

"Christ is born," said the pastor, "and it is his will that even the
poorest dwelling should not be without him to-day; but where he lodges
for the first time, Stephen, is in your heart; cherish him tenderly,
for you know that there is more joy in heaven over one sinner that
repenteth than over ninety-nine just persons."

And all this time the thorn-bush was looking in at the window, its
branches rustled with joy, and, like the cross-thorn on Christmas
night, its boughs put forth violet-red eyes, and wept tears of blood
upon the snow.

The next morning Stephen went to church with his wife and children. In
the meantime something must have passed between them and the pastor,
producing a change in material as well as spiritual matters; for they
were seen clad in modest and suitable attire, going to the Lord's
table with deepest devotion. The villagers passed by the thorn-bush in
their holiday dress, and when they saw the snow underneath it bedewed
as if with ruddy pearls, they cried: "See, now, the buckthorn has
borne red blossoms during the night!"

"Yes," answered the cross-thorn, "for Christ is born indeed. These
thorns know it, for we crowned him in death; and you men should know
it also, for he was crucified for you."



From Chambers' Journal.

THE DYING YEAR.


  Scant leaves upon the aspen
    Shake golden in the sun;
  Old Year, thy sins are many,
    Thy sand is almost run.
  The beech-tree, brazen-orange,
    Burns like a sunset down;
  Old Year, thy grave is ready;
    Doff sceptre, robe, and crown.

  The elm, a yellow mountain,
    Is shedding leaf by leaf;
  The rains, in gusts of passion.
    Pour forth their quenchless grief;
  The winds, like banshees mourning.
    Wail in the struggling wood;
  Old Year, put off thy splendor.
    And don thy funeral hood.

  Lay down thy golden glories;
    The bare boughs bar the sky--
  Skeletons wild and warning.
    Quaking to see thee die.
  Thou hast lived thy life, remember;
    Now lay thee down and rest;
  The grass shall grow above thy head,
    And the flower above thy breast.



{500}


From The Dublin University Magazine.

THE HOLY LAND.


There can be no doubt that the Mount Moriah where Abraham would have
sacrificed his son is the same spot as the Moriah upon which Solomon
built the temple. "Then Solomon began to build the house of the Lord
at Jerusalem in Mount Moriah" (2 Chron. iii. 1).  [Footnote 150] It is
also probable that it is the same place as the Salem mentioned in
Genesis xiv. 18, of which Melchisedek was king; for in Psalm lxxvi. 2
we read, "In Salem also is his tabernacle, and his dwelling-place in
Sion." Josephus calls Melchisedek King of Solyma, a name afterward
altered to Hierosolyma. But the first mention of the name Jerusalem
occurs in Joshua x. 1, where Adoni-zedec is spoken of as "King of
Jerusalem." There are to be gathered from sacred and secular annals
the records of twenty-one invasions of this ancient city by hostile
armies. The first attack was made upon her by the children of Judah,
shortly after the death of Joshua. They fought against Jerusalem, took
it, put it to the fire and sword (Judges i. 1-8); but they were unable
to expel the Jebusites, nor were the children of Benjamin any more
successful, but they both dwelt with the Jebusites in the city; the
Jebusites being probably driven from the lower part to Mount Sion,
where they remained until the time of David, who marched against
Jerusalem, drove them from Mount Sion, and called it the City of
David.

  [Footnote 150: Also confirmed by Josephus, Antiq i, 13-2.]

The Ark of the Covenant was conveyed there, an altar built, and
Jerusalem became the imperial residence, the centre of the political
and religious history of the Israelites. Its glory was enhanced by the
labors of Solomon, but under his son Rehoboam ten tribes revolted, so
that Jerusalem became only the capital of Judah, with whom the tribe
of Benjamin alone remained faithful. During the reign of this king,
Shishak, the Egyptian monarch, invaded the holy city and ransacked the
temple. Then about a hundred years rolled by, when Amaziah was king of
Judah, and Joash of Israel; the latter marched against Jerusalem,
threw down the wall, and the temple was once more rifled of its
treasures. In the next century Manasseh the king was taken captive by
the Assyrians to Babylon but ultimately restored. In consequence of
the strange intermeddling of Josiah, a few years later, when
Pharao-necho, king of Egypt, was on his march, he was killed in
battle, and the latter directed his army toward Jerusalem, and placed
Eliakim on the throne by the name of Jehoiakim. The advance of this
Egyptian king is confirmed by Herodotus.  [Footnote 151]

  [Footnote 151: Herodotus, Euterpe, 159. He also mentions a victory
  gained by him at Magdola, then says that he took the city of Cadytis
  [Greek text]. This city Cadytis is generally accepted as Jerusalem,
  which was called "holy," "_Hakkodesh_." The shekel was marked
  "Jerusalem _Kedusha_," a Syriac corruption of the Hebrew "Kodesh."
  Then the word Jerusalem was omitted, and "Kedusha" only used, which,
  being translated into Greek, became [Greek text] as quoted by
  Herodotus.]

Against Jehoiakim, however, came Nebuchadnezzar, who ravaged the city
more than once, and after a siege of two years, in the reign of
Zedekiah, burned it down, took all the sacred vessels to Babylon with
the two remaining tribes (the other ten were already in captivity);
and now that the temple was destroyed, the city in ruins, and {501}
the people all in bondage, it appeared as if the prediction of her
prophets had already been accomplished. But a time of rejoicing was
yet to come, and though the chosen people did writhe under Babylonish
tyranny, and did hitting their harps on the willows, there was still a
prophet of hope among them in the person of Daniel. This was the time
alluded to in that beautiful psalm composed after their return, in
allusion to an occasion when their persecutors had asked them
tauntingly to sing one of their national songs for their amusement,
the Hebrew words of which, if we may be allowed the expression,
glitter with tears:

  "By the rivers of Babylon there we sat down,
  Yea, we wept when we remembered Zion.
  We hanged our harps upon the willows in the midst thereof.
  For there, they that carried us away captive required of us a song;
  And they that wasted us required of us mirth,
  Saying, Sing us one of the songs of Zion.
    How shall we sing the Lord's song
         In a strange land?
         If I forget thee, O Jerusalem,
         Let my right hand forget her cunning;
         If I do not remember thee,
  Let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth,
  If I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief Joy."

In the time of Cyrus their deliverance came; they were released from
captivity, and there was a mighty "going up" to Jerusalem when the
temple was rebuilt and the sacred vessels which Nebuchadnezzar had
taken away were restored; money, too, was given them, and the works,
after being interrupted for a time by difficulties, were resumed under
Darius Hystaspes and completed. Some time afterward another large body
of Jews came up to the holy city with Ezra, and the capital was once
more active with busy life and once more became glorious.

Alexander the Great marched against the Jews, but was prevented from
entering the city by the intercession of the high priest--a scene
which found its parallel in after-times, when the aged Leo went to the
camp of Attila, and by his entreaties diverted that semi-Christian
barbarian from Rome. After the death of Alexander, Ptolemy, king of
Egypt, surprised the Jews on their Sabbath day, when he knew they
would not fight; he made an easy conquest, and carried off thousands
of Jews into Egypt.

For a hundred years of comparative peace this fated city remained
under the Ptolemies, when it fell into the hands of the Syrians.
Antiochus Epiphanes, their king, after his Egyptian campaigns, finding
his treasure-chest nearly empty, bethought him of sacking the temple
of Jerusalem, marched his army upon the city, pillaged it, slew about
forty thousand people, and sold as many more into slavery. He then
endeavored to exterminate the ceremonial; a pagan altar was set up and
sacrifice made to Jupiter. The Maccabaean revolution broke out, and
the city was ultimately recovered by the hero, Judas Maccabaeus, when
a new phase of priesthood was established, which we shall notice
elsewhere. Things went on thus until about the year 60 B.C., when
Pompey seized the city and massacred twelve thousand Jews in the
temple courts. Thus it fell into the hands of the Romans, against whom
it rebelled, and by whom ultimately, after the most terrible siege
recorded in history, it was taken and subjected to violations over
which the mind even now shudders; its temple was ransacked, violated,
and burned, its priests butchered, pagan rites were celebrated in its
holy place, its maidens were ravished, its palaces burned down, an
unrestrained carnage was carried on, Jews were crucified on crosses as
long as trees could be found to make them, and when the woods were
exhausted they were slain in cold blood. Nearly a million of Jews are
said to have fallen in this terrible conflict. For fifty years after
there is no mention of Jerusalem in history. They kept themselves
quiet, watching eagerly and stealthily for an opportunity of throwing
off the hated Roman yoke. About the year 131 A-D., Adrian, to prevent
any outbreak, ordered the city to be fortified. The Jews rebelled at
once, but were so completely crushed by the {502} year 135 that this
date has always been accepted as that of their final dispersion. The
holy city was then made a Roman colony, the Jews were forbidden to
enter into its walls under pain of immediate death, the very name was
altered to the pagan one of AElia Capitolina, a temple was erected on
Mount Moriah to Jupiter Capitolinus, and Jerusalem was henceforth
spoken of by this pagan name until the days of Constantine, when
pilgrimages were rife, and the Christians began to turn their steps
toward the city whose streets had been hallowed by the footsteps of
Christ. Helena, the emperor's mother, wandered there in penitence,
built a church on the site of the nativity, and agitated Christendom
to its foundations by the announcement of the discovery of the true
cross. Constantine then built a church on the site of the Holy
Sepulcher, and at last the Jews were admitted once a year into the
city of their glory to sing penitential psalms over their degradation.
The sorrows of the place were not yet ended, for in the year 614 the
Persians fell upon Jerusalem, and this time the Christians suffered,
ninety thousand of whom were killed. Then it was retaken by the
Romans, when the Emperor Heraclius marched in triumph through its
streets with the real cross on his shoulders. In 637, however, it fell
into the hands of Arabic Saracens, from whom the Turks took it in
1079. Then came that marvellous agitation of Europe, when she poured
out her millions of devotees to drive the Saracen from the holy land;
and in 1099 Godfrey de Bouillon was proclaimed King of Jerusalem by
the victorious Crusaders. The Christians held it for eighty-eight
years, when Saladin, the sultan of Egypt, wrested it from them in
1187, and they held it until the year 1517, when the Ottoman Turks
seizing upon Jerusalem, made the twenty-first and last invasion which
this devoted city has undergone, and in their hands it still remains.

In the very earliest ages of Christianity people begin to bend their
steps toward Jerusalem and to write their travels. Some of these
variations are extant, and the earliest is called "Itinerarium a
Burdigala Hierusalem usque:" it was written by a Christian of
Bordeaux, who went to the Holy Land in the year 333, about two years
before the church of the Holy Sepulchre was consecrated by Constantine
and his mother Helena. It is to be gleaned also from the works of the
Greek fathers that pilgrimages to Jerusalem were becoming so frequent
as to lead to many abuses. St. Porphyry, after living as a recluse in
Egypt, went to the Holy Land, visited Jerusalem, and finally settled
in the country as Bishop of Gaza. Toward the end of the fourth century
(385), St. Eusebius of Cremona and St. Jerome went there and founded a
monastery at Bethlehem. St. Paula also visited it about the same time.
In the seventh century we have St. Antonius going there and telling us
he admired the beauty of the Jewish women who lived at Nazareth. In
the year 637, the taking of Jerusalem by the Saracens interrupted the
the flow of visitors, but Areulf, a French bishop, went there toward
the end of the century. In the early part of the eighth century the
Anglo Saxons began to go there. Willibald, a relative of Boniface,
paid a visit to Jerusalem in 724. Then the war with the Greeks
interposed, and we do not hear much about the Holy Land until the end
of the eighth century, when, through the friendship of Charlemagne
with Haroun al Raschid, the Christians were once more allowed to go to
the Holy Sepulcher. A monk, called Bernard Sapiens, went in 870, and
wrote anon account of it. Then the celebrated Gerbert, who was
afterward pope, under the title of Sylvester II., went to Jerusalem in
986, came back and wrote a work, in which he made the holy city mourn
her misfortunes and woes, her wasted temples and violated sacred
places; then he appealed to the whole Christian world to go and help
her. France {503} and Italy began to move. The Saracens heard of this
agitation, and interdicted the Christians in their dominions from
worshipping, turned their temples into stables, and threw down the
church of the Holy Sepulcher and others in the year 1008. At the
tidings of this devastation Europe was aroused, and in fact we may
fairly say that Gerbert's book of travel was the first spark that
fired the conflagration of the Crusades. The first narrative we have
of any pilgrim who followed the Crusades is by Saewulf, a Saxon, and a
very interesting narration he has left; he went in the year 1102, was
a monk of Malmesbury Monastery, and is mentioned by the renowned
William of that abbey in his Gesta Pontificum. There are accounts also
in the twelfth century by Benjamin of Tudela; in the fourteenth by Sir
John Mandeville; in the fifteenth by Bertrandon de la Brocquiere; and
in the sixteenth by Henry Maundrell.  [Footnote 152]

  [Footnote 152: See Early Travels in Palestine, An interesting
  collection of itineraries and ancient visits to the Holy Land, by
  Mr. Thomas Wright.]

Modern times have multiplied books on the Holy Land, but those
mentioned above are nearly all that are extent of early periods. In
our own day there is a tendency to revive the subject; we have had
many books lately, good, bad, and indifferent, upon Holy
Land--Wanderings in Bible Lands and Scenes, Horeb and Jerusalem, Sinai
and Palestine, Giant Cities of Bashan, Jerusalem as It Is, and many
others, of which we cannot stop to say more than that they are
generally interesting and readable. It would take a wretched writer,
indeed, to make a dull book upon the Holy Land; the subject itself and
the scenes enlist the attention at once. But the last pilgrim who has
returned from that sacred city and emptied his wallet for our
inspection has produced a book not only valuable as an interesting
account of travel, but useful as an excellent commentary upon the
incidents of the Bible and the life and work of our Lord. There have
been many reviews of this book as a book of travel, but it is in this
higher light more particularly that we wish to examine Mr. Hepworth
Dixon's two volumes on the Holy Land. From the very earliest times
down to the present, Jaffa or Joppa seems to be the portal of
Palestine to western travellers, who are, it appears, compelled to
make their _debut_ in Palestine in no very dignified manner. The
water-gate of Jaffa, Mr. Dixon tells us, faces the sea, and is "no
more than a slit or window in the wall about six feet square." Through
this narrow opening all importations from the west must be hoisted
from the canoes; "such articles as pashas, bitter beer, cotton cloth,
negroes, antiquaries, dervishes, spurious coins and stones, monks,
Muscovite bells, French clocks, English damsels and their hoops,
Circassian slaves, converted Jews, and Bashi Bazouks." Once safe
through this slit in the wall, the stranger is ushered into a town
whose scenes recall to his imagination the Arabian Nights of his
childhood, so little has the Holy Land changed; the dress of the
people and their customs being so little altered that Haroun, if he
were allowed to take another midnight trip with his vizier, would be
quite at home. Marvellous it is, too, that civilization has left
another peculiarity untouched in Palestine. Mr. Dixon tells us that
after "three months of Syrian travel you will learn to treat a
skeleton in the road with as much indifference as a gentleman in a
turban and a lady in a veil." Whatever dies in the plain lies
there--asses, camels, or men. The travelling baggage of an Arab
includes a winding-sheet, in which he may be rolled by his companion,
if he has one, and covered with sand; bodies are found, too, who, in
the last gasp, had striven to cover their faces with the loose sand.
There is no exaggeration in this statement--the Saxon Saewulf, who
went there in the year 1102, nearly eight centuries ago, draws the
same picture. He says:

{504}

 "Went from Joppa to Jerusalem, two days' journey by a mountainous
 road, very rough and dangerous on account of the Saracens, who lie in
 wait for the Christians to rob and spoil them. Numbers of human
 bodies lie by the wayside, torn to pieces by wild beasts, many of
 whom have been cut off by Saracens; some, too, have perished from
 heat, and thirst for want of water, and others from too much
 drinking."

Travelling in the Holy Land is not mere sport; there are a myriad of
dangers to be avoided and watched for, armed Bedaween are prowling
about, bands of horsemen scour across the plain like clouds over the
sky.

  "Horsemen!" cries Yakoub, reining in. "Hushing the still night, and
  with hands on our revolvers, bending forward toward the dim fields
  on our left hand, we can hear the footfall of horses crushing their
  way through stubble and stones. In a moment while they sounded afar
  off, they are among us; fine dark figures, on brisk little mares,
  and poising above them their bamboo spears. A word or two of parley,
  in which Ishmael has his share, and we are asking each other for the
  news. . . . . Perhaps they consider us too strong to be robbed, for
  a Bedaween rarely thinks it right to attack under an advantage of
  five to one."

At dawn of day they arrive at the spot where once stood Modin, the
birth place of the Maccabees, now a den of robbers, called Latrun.
This spot is a most interesting one, and Mr. Dixon rapidly sketches
the results of the events which were transacted here, showing how from
the Maccabaean revolt sprang the Great Separation, a new kind of
priesthood, and also, for which the influence of the captivity had
already prepared them, the ignoring of the written law of Moses, and
the introduction and veneration of the oral law or tradition of the
elders. The peculiar aspects of the Jews at the time of the Roman
domination and the advent of Christ, their hopes and opinions, may be
traced back to the drama which was played out on this spot. We
propose, then, to pause for a moment to sketch the history of that
period, as it is the keystone to the whole fabric of Jewish
degeneracy.

About half a century before the birth of Christ the Jews had fallen
into the hands of the Romans, and in the writings of Tacitus we have a
description of them, an attempt at investigation into their history,
and a version of Roman opinion upon them, which is the more
interesting as it affords an admirable corroboration of what is
recorded in the Scriptures. Tacitus endeavors very ingeniously to make
them come originally from Crete, on account of their name, Idaeos or
Judaeos, from Mount Ida, in Crete. We must bear in mind that it is
scarcely probable that Tacitus could have read Genesis. Then he
mentions other theories which were in vogue as to the origin of this
strange people, who were beginning to be very troublesome to the
Romans. In the first theory we get a slight trace of the sacred
tradition; certain people, he say, declare that a great multitude in
the reign of Isis overflowed Egypt and discharged themselves into the
lands of Judea and the surrounding neighborhood, some call them a race
of AEthiops, others Assyrians; and we are told there were some even
who claimed for them a far more renowned descent from the [Greek text]
mentioned by Homer, whence they called their great city Hiero-Solyma.
These theories are very ingenious, but they only serve to prove that
the eye of the philosophical historian of the Romans had never rested
on the Jewish records. Still the character he gives of them is the one
they have universally borne in the world; he speaks also of "Moyses,"
who gave them a distinct legislation; he mentions "circumcision" and
their abstinence from certain kinds of meet; he records their national
exclusiveness, their immovable obstinacy, their notion of one God, so
strange to the a pagan mind, and the temple, _without images_, equally
absurd.

Though the Romans treated the Jews, as indeed they did all the people
they conquered, with great forbearance, still they had a sort of
secret dislike for them, and in the {505} and they served them as they
served no other race of people subject to their power. And this
feeling was reciprocated by the Jews, who now more than ever longed
for the advent of the great Deliverer, whom they also more than ever
felt must come in the shape of a warrior, with power and majesty to
sweep these Romans out of the country, and restore Jerusalem to her
former position of splendor and renown. There can be no question that
the political circumstances in which the Jews were placed at the time
of the coming of Christ helped to unfit them for his reception, by
fostering that idea of a great temporal sovereign which had been
implanted in their bosom. But this idea was of much older origin than
their troubles with the Romans. It is an interesting fact that the
Maccabaean revolution, which restored the priesthood, may be looked
upon as the event which first taught the Jews that fatal error. Before
that time they had a more spiritual conception of the Messiah, but the
events which followed in the wake of the heroism of Judas Maccabaeus
changed the whole character of their hopes. Let us review those
circumstances, for it is only by doing so we can properly understand
how the Jews came to be so persistent in their expectations of a great
omnipotent temporal sovereign. Antiochus Epiphanes, upon the death of
his brother, Seleucus Philopator, king of Syria, seized upon the
vacant throne, although Demetrius, the son of Seleucus, was alive at
Rome, where he had been sent as a hostage. In Daniel xi. 21, we glean
that he obtained the kingdom by flattery, which receives some support
from what Livy says about his extravagant rewards (Livy xli. c.20). He
had undertaken several campaigns against Egypt, and was on his return
from one of these, with wasted army and exhausted treasury, when it
occurred to him that if he could only plunder the temple of the Jews,
it would go far to recruit his finances. He turned his army at once
toward Jerusalem, marched upon it, and sacked it. An altar was raised
and sacrifice made to Jupiter in the holy place. Then he endeavored to
abolish the ceremonial, and to introduce pagan worship, when the Jews,
exasperated beyond endurance, were ripe all over the country for
revolt, but dared not rise. At this time, however, there dwelt in a
little village called Modin, not far from Emmaus, a family who were
called the Maccabees, for what reason it is now impossible to
ascertain; but this family, who had lived there in the peaceable
obscurity of village life, were destined to become heroic. It
consisted of an aged father, Mattathias, and five sons. Antiochus
Epiphanes had sent his officers to this village to erect an altar in
the Jewish place of worship for sacrifice to the gods, when Mattathias
boldly declared that he would resist it. The altar was set up, and one
miserable renegade Jew was advancing toward it to make the pagan
offering, when he was slain on the spot by Mattathias. The family then
fled to the wilderness, and concealed themselves; they were soon
joined by others; a band was formed, which gradually increased, until
it became numerous enough to attack towns. Then Mattathias died, and
his son, even more memorable in the history of patriotism, came
forward, and took the command of the gathering confederation, now a
disciplined army. Apollonius was sent against him, whom Judas met
boldly on the field of battle, and slew. The same success attended him
in his encounter with the Syrian general, Seron. Antiochus now saw the
necessity of vigorous measures to prevent the Jews from recovering
their independence; he went to Persia to recruit his treasures, while
Lysias, the regent, sent an army to Judea of 40,000 foot and 7,000
cavalry, which was reinforced by auxiliaries from the provinces, and
even by Jews who were already becoming jealous of the fame of Judas.
The Jewish hero pointed out to his {506} followers the desperate odds
against which they would have to contend, and resolved upon employing
a stratagem. By a forced march he reached a portion of the enemy
encamped at Emmaus and surprised them, with complete success: several
portions of the army were put to flight, and a great booty secured.
Another and more numerous army was sent against him, but with no
success. At the head of 10,000 followers, fired by fanaticism, Judas
put to flight the army of Lysias, 60,000 strong, and marched on
Jerusalem to purify the temple and restore it to its glory. The
festival of Purification was then inaugurated. Day by day the
successes of Judas increased, when Antiochus Eupator, who had
succeeded Antiochus Epiphanes, invaded Judea, and only made peace with
Judas in consequence of dissensions at home. He was murdered by his
uncle, Demetrius, who seized the kingdom and confirmed the peace with
Judas, but took possession of the citadel of Jerusalem, placing his
general, Nicanor, there with troops. Suspicions were then entertained
that treachery was being plotted between Judas and this general; the
matter was pressed, when Nicanor cleared himself, and Judas was
obliged to flee. A battle took place, which he won, and another
victory followed at Beth-horon, in which Nicanor fell. Re-enforcements
strengthened the enemy, and Judas was compelled to retire to Laish
with 3,000 followers, where he was attacked at a disadvantage. Only
800 of his men remained faithful to him, but with these he boldly
encountered the avenging hosts of Demetrius, and found a hero's death
on the field. Though Judas was dead, yet the Maccabaean spirit was not
extinct. Simon and Jonathan, his brothers, rallied their companions,
and took the lead, fortifying themselves in a strong position in the
neighborhood of Tekoa. Jonathan bid fair to equal Judas; he avoided an
open engagement with the Syrians, but kept his position, and harassed
the enemy for the space of two years, when events brought about what
perhaps the slender forces of his army would have never accomplished.
A pretender to the throne of Syria sprang up in the person of
Alexander Balas, the reputed natural son of Antiochus Epiphanes, and a
party was soon found to promote his claim against Demetrius. By this
time Jonathan's little body of troops had been augmented by continued
re-enforcements, and his position was such that to the contending
parties in Syria it became clear that if either could win over this
obstinate Jew to his cause it would decide the matter. Demetrius took
the first step, by making him at once general of the forces in Judea
and governor of Jerusalem; but Jonathan was in no hurry, he suspected
the wily Demetrius, and having received overtures from Alexander
Balas, that if he would espouse his cause he would make him high
priest when he was on the throne of Syria, he yielded. These overtures
were accompanied by the present of a purple robe, and Jonathan, who,
doubtless, saw in the dissensions of his enemies the opportunity for
Jerusalem, accepted the proposition, joined Alexander, who slew
Demetrius in battle, and ascended the throne of Syria. True to his
engagement, he made Jonathan high priest, with the rank of prince, and
did all he could to ensure his fidelity. Jonathan afterward attended
the marriage of Alexander with a daughter of the King of Egypt, at
Ptolemais, where he received many marks of consideration from the
Syrian and Egyptian monarchs. He ultimately fell, however, a victim to
treachery, and was succeeded by his brother Simon, who confirmed the
Jews in their independence in return, for which, in 131 B.C., they
passed a decree, by which the dignity of high priest and prince of the
Jews was made hereditary in the family of Simon. Thus was founded the
long line of Asmonean priests, which remained unbroken down to about
thirty-four years before Christ. The Mosaic principle was set aside,
and {507} from this time the changes came over the Jews and their
institutions which are admirably sketched by Mr. Dixon in the two
chapters on the Great Separation and the Oral Law, which we recommend
to the careful perusal of any one who wishes to form a clear idea of
the origin of the state of Judaism at the time of our Lord. He thus
sums up in a sentence the results of the Maccabaean insurrection:

  "The main issues, then, as regards the faith and policy in Israel of
  that glorious revolt of Modin, w the elevation of a fighting sect to
  power; the general adoption of separative principles; the
  substitution of an explanatory law for the Covenant; a change in the
  divine succession of high priests, and a lawless union of the
  spiritual and secular forces."

The Idyls of Bethlehem form a most interesting chapter: the death of
Rachel, the idyl of Ruth, the episode of Saul, the house of Chimham,
the idyl of Jeremiah, and the birth of our Saviour, are all sketched
in a manner which tends to impress these well-known scenes upon the
mind indelibly. A chapter on Syrian Khans, which throws much light
upon the incident of the birth of Christ, we would like to extract did
not the exigencies of space forbid. The reader will find in the
chapters, The Inn of Bethlehem, The Province of Galilee, Herod the
Great, John the Baptist, and Jewish Parties, an admirable introduction
to those scenes of the life and wanderings of our blessed Lord which
are contained in the second part of the book, and to which we wish to
devote the remainder of this paper.

When speaking of the early life of Jesus, Mr. Dixon takes up the
question of the obscurity of his origin, that favorite point with the
sceptics of all ages, from the "Is not this the carpenter's son?" of
the Jews, down to puerile objections of the German Strauss. He has
shown that it was the custom to teach the youth of all classes some
useful art; and the best born and greatest men in Jewish history had
been instructed in such trades as weaving, tent-making etc. Beside,
certain trades were held in honor. We cannot understand this if we
think of carpentering by the contemptuous estimate of modern life.
That contempt for hand-labor was unknown in the early ages of
Scripture history. Adam dressed the garden, Abel was a keeper of
sheep, Cain a tiller of the ground. Tubal Cain a smith; and so, among
the Jews, it was a reproach to any man if he had not been taught one
of the useful mechanical arts. It was dignified by the Almighty
himself, who, we are told--

  "Called by name Bezaleel, . . . and he hath filled him with the
  spirit of God in wisdom, in understanding, and in knowledge, and in
  all manner of workmanship, and to devise curious works, to work in
  gold and in silver and in brass, and in the cutting of stones to set
  them, and in carving of wood to make any manner of cunning work. And
  he hath put it in his heart that he may teach." Exod. xxxv. 30-34.

This reverence was cherished by the Jews; carpentering was always
looked upon as a noble occupation; the fact that the carpenter might
have to go into the temple to labor would have rescued that occupation
from contempt. This is a striking peculiarity of eastern life; and
elsewhere the objection of the sceptic to the humble origin of Jesus
has been well answered:

  "The princes of Turkey in Egypt are still instructed in the
  mechanical arts, one being made a brazier, another a carpenter, a
  third a good weaver, and so on. Said Pasha was a good mechanic,
  Ishmael Pasha is not inferior to his brother. Much of the domestic
  life of Israel has been lost to us, but still we know something of
  the crafts in which many of the most famous rabbis and doctors had
  been taught to excel. We know that Hillel practised a trade. St.
  Paul was a tent-maker, Rabbi Ishmael was a needle-maker, Rabbi
  Jonathan a cobbler. Rabbi Jose was a tanner. Rabbi Simon was a
  weaver. Among the Talmudists there was a celebrated Rabbi Joseph who
  was a carpenter. What then becomes of Strauss's inference that
  Joseph must have been a man of low birth--not of the stock of
  David--because he followed a mechanical trade?"   [Footnote 153]

  [Footnote 153: Athenaeum, 27th Jan., 1866.]

{508}

We may conclude this point by adding that among the Jews the only
trades which could prevent a man from attaining to the dignity of high
priest were weavers, barbers, fullers, perfumers, cuppers, and
tanners.

But to return to the life and work of Jesus. His fame was gradually
spreading, and he went about the small towns and hamlets:

  "Capernaum, Chorazin Magdala, Bethsaida, Dalmanutha Gerasa,
  preaching in the synagogues, visiting the fishing-boats and
  threshing-floors, healing the sick, and comforting the poor; gentle
  in his aspect and in his life; wise as a sage and simple as a child;
  winning people to his views by the charm of his manner and the
  beauty of his sayings."

His first aim was to win the Jews from the Oral Law, to convince them
of its emptiness; it is the key to the following scenes graphically
depicted by Mr. Dixon. Christ had gone to Jerusalem for the feast of
Purim, and was walking by the Pool of Bethesda in the sheet market, a
spot he had to pass daily. On the thanks of this pool were crowds of
sick, the halt, aged, and blind, a spectacle sure to attract the eye
of Jesus:

  "It was the Sabbath day.

  "In the temple hard by, these wretches could hear the groaning of
  bulls under the mace, the bleating of lambs under the sacrificial
  knife, the shouting of dealers as they sold doves and shekels.
  Bakers were hurrying through with bread. The captain of the temple
  was on duty with his guards. Priests were marching in procession,
  and crowds of worshippers standing about the holy place. Tongues of
  flame leaped faintly from the altars on which the priests were
  sprinkling blood . . . but the wretches who lay around (the pool) on
  their quilts and rugs, the blind, the leprous, and the aged poor,
  drew no compassion from the busy priests. One man, the weakest of
  the weak, had been helpless no less than thirty-eight years. Over
  this man Jesus paused and said:

  "'Wilt thou be made whole?'

  "'Rabbi, I have no man, when the water is troubled, to put me into
  the pool; but while I am coming, another steppeth down before me."

The Compassionate answered him:

  "'Rise, take up thy bed and walk.'

  "At once the life leaped quickly into the poor man's limbs. Rising
  from the ground he folded up his quilt, taking it on his arm to go
  away; but some of the Pharisees seeing him get up and roll his bed
  into a coil, run toward him crying: 'It is the Sabbath day; it is
  not lawful for thee two carry thy bed.' It was certainly an offense
  against the Oral Law."

The Jews had turned the blessing of the Sabbath into a curse.

  "From the moment of hearing the ram's horn, a sacred trumpet, called
  the shofa, blown from the temple wall, announcing that the seventh
  had commenced, he was not allowed to tight a fire or make a bed, to
  boil him a pot; he could not pool his ass from a ditch, nor raise
  and arms in defense of his life . . . A Jew could not quit his camp,
  his village, or his city on the day of rest. He might not begin a
  journey; if going along a road, he must rest from sundown till the
  same event of the coming day. He might not carry a pencil, a
  kerchief a shekel in his belt; if he required a handkerchief for
  use, he had to tie it round his leg. If he offended against one of
  these rules, he was held to deserve the doom awarded to the vilest
  of sinners. Some rabbins held that a man ought not to change his
  position, but that, whether he was standing or sitting when the
  shofa sounded, _he should stand or sit immovable as a stone until
  the Sabbath had passed away_."

Jesus broke the Oral Law that he might bring his followers to a sense
of its degrading spirit, and announced the new truth that "_The
Sabbath is made for man; not and for the Sabbath_." After two very
interesting chapters upon Antipas Herod and Herodias, we have once
upon the Synagogue. Some writers have striven to claim the remotest
antiquity for this institution, but in all probability it might be
dated from the captivity. There would be a natural desire to meet
together away from the pagans, by whom they were surrounded, to pray
to their God, to sing their psalms, and to read the law. This gave
rise to the synagogue, which means no more then a "meeting together;"
but after the Maccabaean insurrection it became a popular institution,
and every little village had its synagogue. Now, as much of the work
of Christ was done in the synagogue, as he loved to go into them and
to take part {509} in their services, it is desirable that we should
have a clear notion of what a synagogue was:

  "A house of unhewn stones taken up from the hillside; squat and
  square of the ancient Hebrew style, having a level roof, but neither
  spire nor tower, neither dome nor minaret to enchant the eye; such
  was the simple synagogue of the Jews in which Jesus taught. . .
  Inside a Syrian synagogue is like one of our parish schools with
  seats for the men, rough sofas of wood half covered with rushes and
  straw; a higher seat stands in the centre like that of a mosque, for
  the elders of the town, a desk for the reader of the day; at the
  south end a closet, concealed by a hanging veil, in which the torah,
  a written copy of the Pentateuch, is kept in the sacred ark. A
  silver lamp is always kept burning, a candlestick with eight arms, a
  pulpit, a reading-desk, are the chief articles of furniture in the
  room. . . . . In olden times women were allowed to enter with the
  men, though they were even then parted from father and son by a
  wooden screen. . . . Before entering a synagogue a man is expected
  to dip his hands into water. . . . Ten persons are necessary to form
  a meeting; every town or city having a synagogue appointed ten men
  called batlanim (men of leisure), who were bound to appear at the
  hour of prayer. . . Higher in office was the chazzan, who took
  charge of the house and scroll. . . The meturgeman was an
  interpreter of the law, whose duty it was to stand near the reader
  for the day, and translate the sacred verses, one by one, from the
  Hebrew into the vulgar tongue. Above him were the elders. . . . When
  the people came in they first bowed to the ark; the elders took
  their places on the raised platform; the rich went up to high seats
  near the ark; the poor sat on wooden sofas, matted with straw. . . .
  A prayer was said, one of the Psalms of David sung. The chazzan
  walked up to the veil, which he drew aside with reverence, lifted
  the ark from its niche, took out the torah, carried the roll round
  the benches, every one striving either to kiss or touch it with his
  palm; the sheliach read the lesson for the day; at its close the
  elder expounded the text in a sort of sermon, when the torah was
  carried back, the prayers began. . . . Every hearer had in those
  times a right to express his opinion of the sacred text, and of what
  it meant."

Our Lord availed himself of this right, which every Jew possessed, of
speaking in the synagogue upon the text which had been read; and Mr.
Dixon has worked up two scenes well known in the career of our Lord,
with all the surrounding incidents and scenery, so graphically and so
accurately that no one could read these descriptions without rising
from them with a clearer and more complete understanding of the simple
statement of the gospel. The gospels were not written as historical
sketches, but as vehicles for the vital truth they contain;
consequently anything that resuscitates the scene and reproduces the
incidents as they took place, with all their peculiar surroundings,
must be of great value in assisting us to comprehend more readily, and
to retain in our minds more vividly the events of our Lord's career.
We think this is more preeminently the characteristic aim and
achievement of this work than of the many others we have read upon the
subject, and we shall instance one, the scene in the synagogue of
Capernaum. The first alluded to was the declaration of Jesus in the
synagogue at Nazareth; but as many of the incidents are included in
this of Capernaum, we content ourselves with giving it somewhat in
detail, as an illustration of the peculiarity we have already
mentioned. Let the reader first peruse the simple statement in the
gospel of St. John, vi. ch., 25 v., to the end, and then the
following; or better still the whole of chapter xvii. in the second
volume of Mr. Dixon's work, called The Bread of Life, and he will rise
from it with a much more vivid conception of one of the most trying
scenes in our Lord's history. On the steps of the synagogue a motley
crowd had collected, eager, excited, and curious, for it was just
after the miraculous feeding of the 5,000, and they were full of it;
they had heard of it in all its stupendous power; it was the miracle
of all miracles most likely to overpower the Jewish mind; it recalled
to them the words of Jehovah:

  "At even ye shall eat flesh, and in the morning ye shall be filled
  with bread, and ye shall know that I am the Lord your God."

{510}

And this man, this son of Joseph the carpenter, had fed 5,000 people
on fire barley loaves and two small fishes. They saw the little boat
on the beach in which Jesus had come; they had heard of his walking on
the water that very night; and now the crowd was increasing, for the
country was aroused, and people came flocking from all parts to see
this man who did such marvellous things.

  "Jesus sat in the synagogue in his usual place. The Jews poured in,
  each man and woman making lonely reverence toward the ark. . . , The
  service began with the prayer of sweet incense, after which the
  congregation, the batlanim leading, sang Psalms of David; when these
  were sung, the chazzan, going up to the ark, drew aside the veil and
  took out the sacred roll, which he carried round the aisles to the
  reader of the day, who raised it in his hands, so that all who were
  present could see the sacred text. Then the whole congregation rose.
  . . . Opening the scroll, the reader read out the section or chapter
  for the day. . . . When the lesson was finished the chazzan took the
  scroll from the reader and carried it back to its place behind the
  veil. Then when the roll was restored to the ark, they sang other
  psalms, after which the elder delivered the midrash, an exposition
  of the text which had been read. The time now being come to question
  and be question, all eyes turned on the Teacher who had fed the
  5,000 men. . . . Their questions were Sharp and loud:

  "'Rabbi, when camest thou hither?'

  "'Verily, verily, I say unto you, ye ask me not because ye saw the
  miracles, but because ye ate of the loaves and were filled. Labor
  not for the meat which perisheth, but for that meat which endureth
  unto everlasting life, which the Son of Man shall give unto you, for
  him hath God the Father sealed."

  "Then they asked him:

  "'What must we do that we may work the works of God?'

  "To which he answered, with a second public declaration, that he was
  Christ the Son of God:

  "'This is the word of God, that ye believe on him whom he hath
  sent.'

  "'What sign showest thou that we may see and believe thee! What dost
  thou work?'

  "Full of the great act which many witnesses declared that they had
  seen in the desert beyond the lake, they wished to have it repeated
  before their eyes; so they said to him:

  "'Our fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, as it is written, he
  gave them bread from heaven to eat.'

  "Jesus took up their thought.

  "'Verily, verily, I say unto you, Moses gave you not the bread from
  heaven, but my Father giveth you the true bread from heaven. For the
  bread of God is that which cometh down from heaven and giveth life
  unto the world.'

  "'Rabbi, evermore give us this bread.'

  "Jesus answered them:

  "' I am the bread of life. He that cometh to me shall not hunger,
  and he that believeth in me shall never thirst. . . . . . For I am
  come down from heaven not to do mine own will, but the will of him
  that sent me, that of all which he hath given me I should lose
  nothing, but should raise it up at the last day. '. . .

  "The elders, the batlanim, the chazzan gazed into each other's
  faces, and began to murmur against him, just as the men of Nazareth
  had murmured against him.

  "'Is not this Jesus the son of Joseph whose father and mother we
  know? How is it, then, that he saith, I am come down from heaven?"

  "Jesus spoke to them again:

  "Murmur not among yourselves. No man can come to me except the
  Father which sent me draw him; and I will raise him up the last. . . .
  I am the bread of life. . . . . I am the living bread which came
  down from heaven; if any man eat of this bread he shall live
  forever; yea, and the bread that I will give you is my flesh, which
  I will give for the life of the world.'

  "Strange doctrines for Jews to weigh. Then leapt hot words among
  them, and some of those who had meant to believe in him drew back.
  If he were the Christ, the Son of David, the King of Israel, why was
  he not marching on Jerusalem, why not driving out the Romans, why
  not assuming a kingly crown? 'How can this Man give us his flesh to
  eat?'

  "The Lord spoke again, still more to their discontent and chagrin,
  seeing that they wanted an earthly Christ:

  "'Except ye eat of the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood,
  ye have no life in you.'

  "This was too much for many, even for some who had been brought to
  the door of belief. . . . . The service of the synagogue ended, the
  elders came down from the platform, the chazzan put away the sacred
  vessels, the congregation came out into the sun, angry in word and
  mocking spirit. They wanted facts; he had given them truth. They
  hungered for miraculous bread, for a new shower of manna; he had
  offered them symbolically his flesh and blood. They had set their
  hearts on finding a captain who would march against the Romans, who
  would would cause Judas of Gamala to be forgotten, who would put the
  glories of Herod the Great to shame. They had asked him for earth,
  and he had answered them with heaven."

{511}

But the scene was drawing to a close; Jesus went on with his work
after this tumult in the synagogue, opposing himself to the senseless
rites of the Pharisees, defying the oral law, healing the sick, and
preaching to the people. Passing through the country from Galilee a
Syro-Phenecian woman who had heard of him, and perhaps seen him, ran
after him in the road, and besought him to heal her daughter who was a
lunatic. The disciples urged him to send her away, for his life would
not have been safe if he had another conflict with the Jews in that
quarter, and to heal this Gentile woman's child would be sure to bring
them on his track. Turning to the woman, Jesus told her he was sent
only to the lost sheep of Israel; but she persisted, crying, "Lord,
help me!" an evidence of faith which was quite sufficient, and Jesus
turned to her and said, "Great is thy faith, O woman, be it unto thee
as thou wilt." This was a fatal blow to the Jewish exclusiveness, a
Gentile had been called into the church, and the pride of the Jew
humbled forever. On the last Sabbath day which Jesus spent on earth,
he struck another blow at the ceremonial law, by taking his disciples
to dine at the house of one Simon a leper. He had reached Bethany, and
taken up his abode in the house of Martha and Mary, among the outcast
and the poor, for that last seven days now called in the church the
holy week. The scene was an impressive one. The city, as far as the
eye could reach, was one vast encampment, caravans were arriving from
every direction, bringing thousands of Jews to the feast, who,
selecting their ground, drove four stakes into the earth, drew long
reeds round them, and covered them with leaves, making a sort of
bower; others brought small tents with them; the whole city, Mount
Gibeon, the plain of Rephaim, the valley of Gihon, the hill of Olivet,
were all studded with tense, and crowded with busy people hastening to
finish their preparations before the shofa should sound at sunset, and
the Sabbath begin, when no man could work. In the temple, the priests,
the doctors, the money-changers, the bakers of shew-bread, were all at
work, and the last panorama in the life of Christ commenced.

On the first day in Holy Week, now known as Palm _Sunday_, Jesus
entered Jerusalem on an ass's colt, a prominent figure in the
festivities, for the crowds rushed up see him, with their palms, and
marched with him singing psalms; they had come out from Jerusalem to
meet him, and they escorted him into the city. At night he returned to
Bethany.

On the _Monday_ and _Tuesday_ he went early to the temple, mixing
among the people, restoring sight to the blind, and preaching to the
poor. As his life began with a series of temptations, so it was the
will of his Father that he should be persecuted with them at its
close--a lesson we may all do well to dwell upon. Up to the last days
of his life Jesus was subjected to temptations. On the Tuesday some
emissaries of the Sanhedrim came to the court where he was preaching
to question him, and gather evidence against him. They found him
amongst a crowd of Baptists, and demanded his authority for teaching.
Christ retorted by putting them to the dilemma of stating whether
John's baptism was of heaven or not; they were too much afraid of the
people to say it was of men, and if they said of heaven, Jesus would
have reproached them for their want of faith; they confessed their
ignorance. Then each party tried to entrap him.

The _Pharisees_ brought him a woman taken in adultery. By the Mosaic
law this offence would have been punished with death. But the Roman
government would have executed any Jew who would venture to carry out
such a law, and therefore the question seemed to compel Jesus to speak
either against Moses or the Romans. He quietly turned to the
witnesses, and told the man who was {512} innocent among them to cast
the first stone at her.

The _Herodians_ tempted him on a point of tribute. They had two taxes,
one to God and one to Caesar, both were disputed, and they consulted
him in order to involve him with God or Caesar; but he foiled them by
confirming both:

  "Render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and unto God the
  things that are God's."

They began to be astonished.

The _Sadducees_ tempted him with their dogma of the non-resurrection.
They told him sneeringly of a woman who had married seven husbands,
and they wanted to know whose she would be in the life to come. Jesus
replied calmly:

  "In the resurrection they neither marry nor are given in marriage,
  but are as the angels in heaven."

And the Sadducees with their philosophy, their learning, and their
unbelief, retired in confusion.

On the _Wednesday_ he remained in Bethany in seclusion, while Judas
was arranging for his safe betrayal to Annas and the nobles.

_Thursday_ Jesus sent Peter and John into Jerusalem to prepare the
Passover, and at sunset that day he and the twelve sat down to the
last supper; Judas left to see Annas, and after singing a hymn, the
other disciples rose from the table, passed through the sheep-gate
into the Cedron valley, and came to Gethsemane. Here Jesus withdrew,
and while his disciples were sleeping, he watched and prayed until the
betrayers came, and the kiss of Judas revealed him to them. The
Sanhedrim was summoned in the dead of the night, and when the members
arrived they found Annas examining witnesses, but with no avail, they
could not substantiate any charge against him that the Roman
government would allow them to punish with death. Annas told him to
speak for himself, but he would not. The high priest then said, "Art
thou the Christ?" he said, "I am."  Then Annas asked him who were his
disciples, and Jesus replied: "I spake openly to the world, I taught
in the synagogue and in the temple, whither the Jews resort, in secret
I have said nothing; ask them which heard me, they know what I have
said." The officer of the temple smote him, and Annas ordered him to
be bound with cords, and when it was day they went in a body to the
palace of Caiaphas. Here Jesus was questioned again, and answered that
he was the Christ, the high priest rent his clothes, in sign that it
was blasphemy and worthy of death. The Sanhedrim pronounced him
guilty, and the officers carried him to the Praetorian gates and
delivered him a prisoner into the hands of Pilate's guards. The
vacillation of Pilate and the last scene in our Lord's career are
known to all. Mr. Dixon leaves them with the observation, "They form a
divine episode in the history of man, and must be left to the writers
who could not err."

A good book is its own best eulogy, and we may safely leave this of
Mr. Dixon's to itself; but we cannot refrain from testifying our
appreciation of such a valuable addition to the records of eastern
travel. It is superfluous to say that it is excellently written, as it
emanates from the 10, not of a tyro, but of a master-craftsman, whose
style is too well known to need eulogy, a style graphic, pointed, and
impressive, the result of clear vision and accurate delineation,
strengthened by a sort of Frith-like power of grouping as witness the
description of the street life of Jaffa, which, as an exquisite piece
of word-painting, is perfect.

The reader is led through the sacred scenes of the Holy Land by an
artist as well as a scholar, who as he journeys on revives the life of
the past; we see the patriarchal life, the tents, the flocks grazing
on the hills, the ready-writer with his and lingering and the city
gate. We here David's minstrelsy and the tramp of Maccabaean
soldierly; we peer into the depths of {513} one of those ancient wells
build by the patriarchs, and listen to the conversation of the
Samaritan woman with that wonderful stranger; we linger at the wayside
Khan, and see how natural is the tale of the gospel. As we near
Jerusalem the grander figures of the panorama pass over the scene, the
Herods in their luxury and pride, in their humiliation and their sins,
the grim towers of Macherus and the dark deed behind its walls when
the head of the messenger of God fell to please a wanton woman, and
terror was struck into the heart of the tyrant; the splendid
ceremonial service of the temple, with its altars, its sacrifices, and
its robed priests; the Sadducees luxuriating in their palaces, with
servants, carriages, gardens, living their voluptuous, godless lives;
the Pharisees with their demure aspect, broad and multiplied
phylacteries; the elements of Roman soldiery, the imperial eagles
hovering over the scene as the Jews past by scowling at the pagan
rulers of the holy city; and then that marvellous god-like figure
wandering about the streets followed by crowds of people, now entering
the temple courts to preach to them, and now stopping on his way to
heal some lame man or leper; his wanderings' along the wearying roads
of Galilee; his mingling with the people in the synagogues, the
popular gathering-place; his taking part in the service and reading
the Scriptures; his final coming up to the holy city, the betrayal,
this scenes of his trial, the frantic eagerness of the Jews, the
vacillation of Pilate, the terrible suspense and the ultimate triumph
of his foes, all these and many more incidents of biblical and gospel
history are revived and enacted, as it were, amid the very scenes and
in the very places where they once took place. We repeat again, that
this work is an excellent commentary and illustration of the gospel
narrative; and though pen of its author has been nobly wielded in the
controversial defence of that gospel, yet perhaps even greater good
may be done by this exhibition and illustration of the life and work
of Christ. To hold him up to the eyes of men is the best antidote to
scepticism; and whatever tends to do that, to plant the image of
Christ in the hearts of men, is a good work; the illustration of his
individuality, standing out as he did in his times, and as he does in
every time, distinct from all men and things. We take up the great
work of any age, its characteristic achievement, and we find the
impress of the age stamped indelibly upon it; it smacks of the time
and the scenes. Homer is pervaded with the valor of a mythic heroism,
bloodshed and victory. Dante is the very best reflection of
mediaevalism--its deep, superstitious piety, its weird dreams, and its
peculiar theology. Shakespeare, though he has written with spotless
purity, yet bears traces of the tolerated licentiousness of the
Elizabethan age. But Christ and his gospel stand out distinct, totally
distinct from the times and the life when they appeared. That gospel
could not have been produced by the age, for it was an antagonism to
it; the age was a degenerate one, a mixture of formal ceremony, and
licentious unbelief; paganism was waning; Rome becoming debased; the
ancient traditions of the Jews were lost in human inventions and
Rabbinical fantasies, when, rising up in the midst of all this
debasement, this corruption, these anomalies, came Christ and his
gospel, pure among rottenness, gentle in the midst of violence, holy
among flagrant infidelity and wanton vice, the Preacher and the
preaching both sent from somewhere, but manifestly not from the world,
not from oriental barbarism, not from western paganism, not from
Jewish corruption; it could then have come from no other place than
heaven, and had no other author than God. And when we reflect upon
what was compressed in that three years' labor, and compare it with
systems which have occupied men's lives to sketch out merely, and
taken {514} ages to perfect; when we see that this greatest system,
which has spread over the whole civilized world by the force of its
own truth, was in three short years laid down and consolidated, every
principle defined, every rule established, every law delineated, and
an impetus given to it by its great Master, which has always kept it
advancing in the world against every opposing force, and in spite of
every disadvantageous circumstance, all doubt about its individuality,
its superhuman character, and its divine origin, must vanish from the
mind. Therefore we think, in conclusion. that the best thing for
Christians still to do in this world is, to lift up Christ before the
eyes of men, no matter how, so that he be listed up boldly and
faithfully, be it by the voice, the pencil, or the pen (as in this
instance before us), or, better still by the more impressive
exhibition of Christ in a Christian life. If we wish to save men, let
us display him always and everywhere in the confidence that he will
fulfil his own divine promise--"I, if I be lifted up from the earth,
will draw all men unto me."



ORIGINAL.

ON THE APPARITION OF OUR LORD TO THE DISCIPLES AT EMMAUS.


  "Whilst he was at table with them,
  he took bread, and blessed, and brake, and gave to them.
  And their eyes were opened, and they knew him."


DISCIPLE.

  "Lord! grant to thy servant this singular grace,
  To gaze but for once on thy beautiful face."

JESUS.

  "Most easily may'st thou this blessing secure:
    Who gives unto mine, unto me gives instead.
  Of thy loaf give a part to my suffering poor,
    And thy Lord thou shalt see at the breaking of bread."



{515}

ORIGINAL.


LITTLE SUNBEAM'S CHRISTMAS STORY.


God bless you, kind gentlemen, for your merry Christmas, and thank you
kindly for these nice things; but you must not be angry if I say I'm
almost sorry it is Christmas day, for you see it makes me think about
last Christmas and the Christmas before.

I am Mr. Willsup's little girl--Mr. Willsup that is dead, you know. I
suppose you think I ought to wear black; and so I would, but mother
says we are too poor, and we must only mourn in our hearts. I do mourn
in my heart, oh! so much, I can't tell you. I don't like to
acknowledge it, and it gives me an ugly pain and a dreadful sinking
about my heart when I think of it, but it was on a Christmas night
that we lost poor father, and I'm afraid he wasn't right, you
understand, at the time.

There was a time when father was such a nice, good man, and when we
weren't poor, as we are now. We didn't always live up in this cold,
bare garret. We used to live in a fine, large house, all to ourselves;
and we had a nice garden in front, full of pretty flowers, and a long
back porch with a buying running over it; and we had a beautiful
parlor where we talked to the visitors only--not to sleep in and cook
in as we do here, when we have any fire; and I had the cosiest little
bedroom you ever saw, with a little altar in the corner, and on it a
statue of the Blessed Virgin, white as snow; and Chip, that's a
canary-bird, hung in his cage in the window when it was fine weather,
and cat sugar like a good fellow; and then we had silver forks and
spoons; and Zephyr, that's the horse, and Dash, our dog, and Pussy,
and oh! so many nice things, I never could tell you all in a long
time. But we haven't got any of them now, for we are poor, and
father's dead, and we must only mourn in our hearts.

I hardly know how to tell you all about it, for though I am little
I've seen a good deal; so much bad and trouble that my mind goes quite
round and round sometimes thinking over it. If you ever saw poor
father after we got to be poor, that wouldn't tell you how he looked
as I recollect him. Oh! he was so much changed! I used to be so proud
of him, and delighted to go out to walk with him in the street or
across the fields; and I used to love him so much--not that I didn't
always love him just as much as ever, only I didn't get so much chance
to love him, you understand, when he got to stay away from home and
be--oh! my heart, how it aches!

Father was a handsome-looking man once, and so smart. Everybody bowed
to him in the street. But he got rough and careless, I know, and it
made me feel sorry to see him go out without brushing his hat, or
asking me to do it for him, as he used to do. And then his face turned
to such a different look from old times. It got puffed up and red, and
his eyes that I remember were so bright and so deep, for I used to
climb up on his knee often, and look 'way down into them, and then he
would laugh and ask me if I could see his thoughts, and I almost
fancied I could sometimes, and give me a sweet kiss, and call me his
darling Susy; but when he changed, you know, his eyes seemed to be,
how shall I say it? so flat and soft, and he never seemed to be
looking anywhere in particular half the time.

{516}

You see it was business and appointments that changed him. When I
wished him to stay home and we would all enjoy ourselves--for we had
the pleasantest times together, father, mother, and me, and baby,
that's dead; and perhaps Dash and Pussy too sometimes, you know--then
he would be obliged to excuse himself on account of business and
appointments, which I fear were not always with the best of people,
for when he said he was going out mother would sigh _so_ deep and _so_
long; and then when he came home late at night I often woke up and
heard mother coaxing him and soothing him, and I am sure frequently
crying and sobbing, and that would make me cry too, all alone by
myself; and so the time went on, till father began to take less and
less notice of either mother or of me. As for dear little baby, even
when she sickened and died, I don't think he seemed to understand it,
and he stood by the grave and looked at the little coffin being let
down as if he were dreaming.

It was not long before father left off doing almost any business in
the daytime, and only went out at night. I noticed then that we began
to sell some of our nice furniture, and our silver forks and spoons. I
suppose, as we scarcely ever had any visitors now, we did not need
them; but the house began to look bare and desolate and strange, as if
it wasn't our house; and the servant quarrelled with mother and left
us, and we didn't get another, but mother did the work herself, and it
made her sick, for she wasn't used to it. Sam, our man, went away,
because after the horse and carriage was sold he had nothing to do. I
recollect hearing him say to mother:

"I'd stand by you and Susy, miss, as I've always stood by you, and
it's not wages, but times is changed, and I know you ain't able to
have me." And then he pulled his hat down over his eyes so far that he
had to lift it up again before he could see his way out of the front
door; and then ran across the garden and down the street, as if he
were running away from somebody. I cried a good deal when mother told
me he was not going to come back, for I loved Sam very much, and I'm
not I ashamed of if either, though Pinkey Silver said I ought to be,
for he was just like a brother to me, and a better brother than Pinkey
Silver's brother ever was.

Once, on a Christmas eve, I was going to hang up my stocking, as I had
always done, for good Santa Claus to put something in it, when mother
burst out into such a violent fit of crying that I was afraid she
would die. When she could speak to me she wanted me to let Santa Claus
go to some other children this year; but I determined to give him a
chance to leave me, say, a doll, if he happened to have one left over,
and so I slipped down-stairs in my night-gown, after mother had gone
to her room, and hung my stocking up in the old place. Just as I had
done it, father came staggering in. He was very bad, and fell over
several things. The noise brought mother down-stairs, and father
looking at me said so savagely that it sent all the blood to my heart:

"What devilish nonsense is the girl about?"

"Oh! don't blame the child," said mother, turning pale and getting
between him and me. "You know it is Christmas eve, John."

Then he swore many awful oaths, and said he didn't care for Christmas,
and that he was not going to be taunted with his poverty by his own
children, and went stamping around the room in a furious passion.
Mother went up to him to coax him, and put her arms around his neck;
but he threw her off and knocked her down and, though you mayn't
believe it, he actually lifted up his foot and stamped upon her face.
That is why mother looks so bad now, with those great scars, but she
was very beautiful before that, as everybody knows. When mother fell,
Dash sprang up from the hearth where he lay curled up, and barked at
father.

{517}

"They've all turned against me," said he, "even the dog. But I'll
brain _you_", says he to Dash.

When I saw mother trying to get up, with the blood all streaming down
her dress from her face and mouth, I got faint, and don't recollect
any more until I woke up, it must have been noon next day, with a
dreadful headache. I crept out of bed and went into the hall, and
there I heard people talking down in the parlor. It was mother, Mrs.
Thrifty, our next-door neighbor, and the doctor. The doctor and Mrs.
Thrifty were trying to persuade mother to do something, but she kept
saying, "Never! I couldn't--poor John!" and words like that.

Such terrible things had taken place and put my mind so astray that I
quite forgot I shouldn't listen; but I soon remembered it, and went
away. I wondered where father was, and thought I would look in his
room to see if he was there. In the old times, before father changed,
I used to be let come in, bright and early, to his room, and climb up
on a chair and kiss him before he got up; and he used to call me his
"Little Sunbeam" that came creeping in to say it was day. There he was
now, lying on the bed without taking off his clothes or muddy boots,
in a deep, heavy sleep. I did so want to love him, but I was afraid to
wake him up to tell him so, he looked so frightful, gnashing his teeth
in his dreams. But I thought I might be "Little Sunbeam" once more,
even if he didn't know it, and I got a chair and climbed up and
reached my arm over round his neck and gave him a kiss. It did not
seem like father's face, but I suppose I had forgotten, it was so long
since I kissed him before. Poor father! I began to mourn in my heart
for him then, as mother says we must do now. I was afraid to stay
there, but before I went away I knelt down beside the bed and prayed
the Blessed Virgin to ask God to make him a good man again, and make
him give up drinking, and make mother well, and let me be his "Little
Sunbeam" as before. Then I slipped back to my room and dressed myself,
and mother came up-stairs with her face all bandaged up, and she told
me not to say anything to anybody about the last night.

That Christmas day wasn't like any Christmas day I can ever recollect.
I didn't find any toys from Santa Claus in my stocking. We didn't go
to mass, nor to see the little Jesus in the Crib, nor to hear the
children sing around it. Nor we didn't have any plum pudding; and when
I went out on the back porch--oh! dear, how my heart does ache--there
lay poor old Dash, with his head split open, and quite dead.

You see I had so many things happen that I don't recollect how things
turned out, except that mother and I left our house one day, because
we got poor, mother said, and then we came here, and she says we are
never to go back because our house is sold to strangers, to whom
father was in debt. Pinkey Silver told me that the man who keeps the
grog-shop where poor father was stabbed owns it now. And I must tell
you about that.

It was the next Christmas day after the last one I told you about. We
had nothing to eat all day. Toward evening mother told me to go to
Mrs. Thrifty's and ask her to please lend us a loaf of bread. Mrs.
Thrifty was gone to a party, and so I had to wait until near nine
o'clock, when George Thrifty, that's Mrs. Thrifty's son, came in
laughing and singing:

  "Hie for merry Christmas!
  Ho for merry Christmas!
  Hurrah! for Christmas day!"

As soon as I told him what I wanted he ran and got a loaf of bread and
a pie and some cakes, and gave it all to me; and then he put his hand
in his pocket and turned it inside out, but there wasn't anything in
it, and says he:

  "Oh! little one, I'm as sorry as if I'd lost my grandmother; but I
  wish I hadn't spent all my Christmas, for I'd like to give you some
  money."

{518}

I thanked him very much and came away. As I was coming home I passed
the grog-shop I spoke to you about. I heard loud, angry quarrelling
and scuffling going on, and father's voice was among the rest. I was
afraid to go away, for I did not like to leave father there to get
hurt, and thought I had better go in and persuade him to come home
with me. I had no sooner put my head in the door than the then who
keeps the store told me to "be off, that he didn't want any beggars
around his place."

"I don't want to beg," said I, "I want father," and just as I said
that I saw a knife flash in the gaslight, and then--O my poor,
mourning heart!--poor father staggered and reeled toward me, and as
he saw me he cried out:

"Why, is it you, Little Sunbeam! O my God!" and then he fell down
across the sill of the door, at my feet, dead.

You see, dear, good gentlemen, you must not be angry if I'm almost
sorry it is Christmas. I know everybody ought to be happy when
Christmas comes; and I saw a good many little boys and girls to-day as
happy as I used to be, for I've been watching them through a little
peep hole I scratched on the frosty window-pane, and it didn't seem
real that they should be down there so happy, wishing each other
"Merry Christmas," and I up here all alone, mourning in my heart. But
you see what has done it all.

Do you think, dear, good gentlemen, that there are any other "Little
Sunbeams" like me? Do you think there are any fathers that are
changing like mine? Oh! please do run and tell them quick to stop and
change back again, or they will get poor like mother and me, and have
to live up in a cold, bare garret, and Santa Claus won't come down the
chimney on Christmas eve, because their children won't have any
stockings to hang up, and they will feel so hungry and so cold in the
night. Oh! I could tell them, and mother could tell them, as she tells
me, that drink brings a black curse on a family, and that God is angry
when he hears the drunkard's children crying for bread. I don't like
to cry when I think of that, but I couldn't help it this morning
because it is Christmas day.

It's all over now, I do so wish that mother was here to say thank ye
for all those nice things, but she won't be home till night, for she's
gone over to Mrs. Nabob's to work, where they are to have a great
party. But when she comes back I'll tell her all about it, and when we
say our prayers to-night we'll ask God to bless the good, kind
gentleman who thought about coming here to wish us a Merry Christmas.



ORIGINAL.


CHRISTIAN CHARITY.

"As long as ye did it unto the least of these my brethren, ye did it
unto Me."


  There is a secret chamber in my breast
    Of which my Jesus hath sole custody
  But if my neighbor willeth there to rest,
    Then Jesus kindly lendeth him the key.



{519}

ORIGINAL.

PROBLEMS OF THE AGE.



XI.

THE ORIGINAL STATE OF THE FIRST PARENTS OF MANKIND--THE RELATION OF
ADAM TO HIS POSTERITY--THE FALL OF MAN--ORIGINAL SIN.


The grand theatre of probation is this earth, and its chief subject
the human race. The probation of the angels was completed almost
instantaneously, and their transit to an immutable state followed
almost immediately on their creation. The probation of the human race
is long and complicated, diversified and extensive; and by it the most
magnificent exhibition is made of the principle of merit. It has also
this peculiarity that mankind were created, not merely as individuals,
each with his distinct probation, but also as a race; and that the
whole race had a probation at its origin, in the person of its
progenitor. It is our present task to unfold the Catholic doctrine
concerning the nature and results of this original probation of the
collective human race in the first epoch of its creation.

The Catholic doctrine teaches, in the first place, that the entire
human race, at present inhabiting the globe, is one; not merely in
being conformed to one archetype, but also in being descended by
generation from one common progenitor, that is, from Adam.

That this is distinctly affirmed in the book of Genesis, which the
Catholic Church receives as a portion of the inspired Scripture,
according to the obvious and literal sense of the words, is not
questioned by any one. It is only necessary, therefore, to show that
this obvious and literal sense is proposed by the authority of the
Catholic Church as the true sense. That is, that it is an essential
portion of Catholic doctrine, that God created at first one pair of
human beings, Adam and Eve, from whom all mankind are descended.

It seems evident enough that the archaic records, in which the history
of the creation of man is contained, were understood in this sense by
those who transmitted them from the beginning of human history, and
who first committed them to writing; and by Moses, who incorporated
them into the book of Genesis. This was the traditional sense
universally received among the Jews, as is manifest from all the
monuments of tradition. It is also the sense which is reaffirmed in
the other sacred and canonical books which follow those of Moses,
wherever they allude to the subject. For instance: "Who knoweth if the
spirit of the _children of Adam_ ascend upward."  [Footnote 154] "Seth
and Sem obtained glory among men: _and above every soul, Adam in the
beginning_,"  [Footnote 155]

  [Footnote 154: Eccles. iii. 21.]

  [Footnote 155: Eccles. xlix. 19.]

The similar traditions of heathen nations are well known. The Sacred
writers of the New Testament use the same explicit language. The
genealogy of Jesus in St. Luke's gospel closes thus: "Who was of
Henos, who was of Seth, _who was of Adam, who was of God_." St. Paul
affirms repeatedly and emphatically: "By _one man_ sin entered into
this world, and by sin death:" "by _the offence of one_ many have
died:" "the judgment indeed was _by one_ unto condemnation:" "by _one
man's offence_ death reigned through one:" "by the offence of _one_,
unto _all men_ to condemnation:" "for as _by the disobedience of one
man, many were made sinners;_ {520} so also, by the obedience of one,
many shall be made just."  [Footnote 156] These passages are plainly
dogmatic, and teach the relation of all men to Adam, as an essential
portion of the dogma of original sin. The whole force of the parallel
between Adam and Christ depends, also, on the individual personality
of the former, and his relation to all mankind without exception, as
their head and representative. The same parallel reappears in another
epistle: "For by a man came death, and by a man the resurrection of
the dead. And as in Adam all die, so also in Christ all shall be made
alive." "_The first man Adam_ was made a living soul; the last Adam a
quickening spirit. But not first that which is spiritual, but that
which is animal; afterward that which is spiritual. The first man was
of the earth, earthly; the second man from heaven, heavenly. Such as
is the earthly, such also are the earthly; and such as is the
heavenly, such also are they that are heavenly. Therefore as we have
borne the image of the earthly, let us bear also the image of the
heavenly."  [Footnote 157]

  [Footnote 156: St. Luke iii, 38.  Rom. v. 12-19.]

  [Footnote 157: I Cor. xv. 21, 22, 35-49.]

These passages all present the fact of the original creation of
mankind in one pair from whom all men are descended in an intimate and
essential relation with Christian doctrine, especially with the dogma
of original sin. It is, therefore, necessary to regard it as a
dogmatic fact, or a fact pertaining to the essence of the revealed
truth, which the sacred writers taught with infallibility under the
influence of divine inspiration. So it has been always regarded in the
church, and is now held by the unanimous consent of theologians. It is
also incorporated into the solemn definitions of faith.

The canons of the second council of Milevis, and of the plenary
council of Carthage, A.D. 418, against the Pelagians, contain the
following definitions:

_Can_. 1. Placuit, ut quicunqae dicit, _Adam primum hominem_ mortalem
factum, ita, ut sive peccaret, sive non peccaret, moreretur in
corpore, hoc est de corpore exiret, non peccati merito, sed
necessitate naturae, anathema sit.

_Can_. 2. Item placuit, ut quicumque parvulos recentes ab uteris
matrum baptizandos negat, aut dicit in remissionem quidem peccatorum
eos baptizari, sed nihil ex Adam trahere originalis peccati, quod
regenerationis lavacro expietur, unde sit consequens, ut in eis forma
baptismatis in remissionem peccatorum non vera, sed falsa
intelligatur, anathema sit: quoniam non aliter intelligendum est quod
ait Apostolus: Per unum hominem peccatum intravit in mundum, et per
peccatum mors, et ita in omnes homines pertransiit, in quo omnes
peccaverunt: nisi quemadmodum ecclesia catholica ubique diffusa semper
intellexit.

"_Can_. 1. It was decreed, that whoever says that _Adam, the first
man_, was made mortal, so that, whether he sinned or did not sin, he
should die in the body, that is, depart from the body, not by the
merit of sin, but by the necessity of nature, should be under the ban.

"_Can_. 2. It was also decreed, that whosoever denies that new-born
infants are to be baptized, or says that they are to be indeed
baptized for the remission of since, but derive no original sin _from
Adam_, which can be expiated in the laver of regeneration whence it
follows that in them the form of baptism is understood to be not true,
but false, should be under the ban; since that is not otherwise to be
understood which the apostle says: 'By one man sin entered into the
world, and death by sin, and so it passed upon all men, in whom all
have sinned;' _except as the Catholic Church everywhere diffused has
always understood it_."

These canons, although not in active by ecumenical councils, were
nevertheless approved by Popes Innocent I. and Zosimus, by them
promulgated to the universal church and ratified by {521} the consent
of the whole body of bishops; so that they are justly included among
the final and irreversible decisions of the Catholic Church. The
second of these canons was also reenacted by the Council of Trent,
which defined in the clearest terms the dogma of original sin as
derived from the sin of Adam, the head of the human race.

1. Si quis non confitetur, _primum hominem Adam_, mandatum Dei in
paradiso fuisset transgressus, statim sanctitatem, etc., amisisse: A.
S.

2. Si quis Adae prevaricationem sibi soli, non ejus propagini, asserit
nocuisse . . . . aut inquinatum illum per inobedientiae peccatum,
mortem et poenas corporis tantum in omne genus humanum transfudisse,
non autem et peccatum, quod est mors animae: A. S. cum contradicit
Apostolo dicenti: Per unum hominem peccatum intravit in mundum, etc.

3. Si quis _hoc Adae peccatum, quod origine unum est_, et
propagatione, non imitatione, _transfusum omnibus_, inest cuique
proprium . . . . per aliud remedium asserit tolli, etc.: A. S.

"1. If any one does not confess that _the first man Adam_, when he had
transgressed the commandment of God in Paradise, immediately lost
sanctity, etc., let him be under the ban.

"2. If any one asserts that the prevarication of Adam injured himself
alone, and not his posterity . . . . or that he, being defiled by the
sin of disobedience, transmitted death and the pains of the body only
to the whole human race, but not also sin, which is the death of the
soul, let him be under the ban: since he contradicts the apostle, who
says: By one man sin entered into the world, etc.

"3. If any one asserts that this sin of Adam, which in origin is one,
and being transferred into all by propagation, not by imitation,
exists in each one as his own . . . . is taken away by any other
remedy, etc, let him be under the ban."

All these decrees affirm positively that the whole human race without
exception are involved in one common original sin, springing from one
transgression committed by the first man Adam, and transmitted from
him by generation. The dogma of original sin rests, therefore, on the
fact that all mankind are descended from one first man Adam, and is
subverted, if this fact is denied. An allegorical interpretation of
the sacred history of Genesis, according to which Adam and Eve are
taken to symbolize the progenitors of several distinct human species,
cannot be admitted as tenable, in accordance with the Catholic faith.
For, in this hypothesis, the different human races had each a distinct
probation, a separate destiny, a separate fall, and are therefore not
involved in one common original sin, but each one in the sin of its
own progenitor. This doctrine of original sin, namely, that a number
of Adams sinned, and that each one transmitted his sin to his own
progeny, so that every man is born in an original sin derived from
some one of the various primeval men, is essentially different from
the Catholic doctrine as clearly taught by Scripture and tradition,
and defined by the authority of the church. Moreover, the unity and
individuality of Adam, as the sole progenitor of the human race, is
distinctly affirmed in the decrees just cited, and in all the
subsequent decrees concerning the primitive state of man which have
emanated from the Holy See, and are received by the universal church.
We must consider, therefore, the doctrine of the unity of the human
race as pertaining to the faith. Perrone affirms this, in these words:
"Prop. II. Universum humanum genus ab Adam omnium protoparente
propagatium est. Haec propositio spectat ad fidem; huic enim innititur
dogma de propagatione peccati originalis." "The entire human race has
been propagated from Adam the first parent of all. This proposition
pertains to faith; for upon it rests the dogma of the propagation of
original sin."  [Footnote 158]

  [Footnote 158: Perrone, Prael. Theil. De Him. Creat.]

{522}

Bishop Lynch, of Charleston, who is not only one of the most learned
of our theologians, but a man profoundly versed in the physical
sciences, in a very able and interesting lecture recently delivered in
New York, thus speaks on this matter:

"Some nowadays, disregarding all that Holy Scripture teaches us
concerning the origin of man, or treating it as a myth and fable,
referring at most only to the Caucasian race, pretend that America had
her own special Adam and Eve, or, as they think more probable, quite a
number of them contemporaneously or successively in different
localities.

"I shall not here undertake to discuss this last opinion, _ventured
certainly against the teachings of divine revelation_, and, as I
conceive, no less against the soundest principles of philosophy, of
comparative anatomy, of philology, and of natural history. I will
assume it as an established and accepted truth, that God made all
nations of one blood."   [Footnote 159]

  [Footnote 159: Lecture by the Rt. Rev. P. N. Lynch, D.D., on America
  before Columbus. Reported in the New York Tablet.]

The only point we have been endeavoring to make, that the doctrine of
the unity of the race pertains to essential Catholic doctrine, is, we
think, fairly made. The scientific refutation of the contrary
hypothesis is a work most desirable, in our opinion, but one requiring
a degree of scientific knowledge which the author does not possess. It
is a work, also, which could be accomplished only by an extensive
treatise. The judgment of the distinguished author just cited may be
taken, however, as a summing up of the verdict of a great body of
scientific men, given on scientific grounds, in favor of the doctrine
of the unity of the race. The contrary doctrine is mere hypothesis,
which no man can possibly pretend to demonstrate. It cannot,
therefore, be brought out to oppose the revealed Catholic doctrine.
Hypothesis even when supported by a certain amount of scientific
probability, is not science. Real science is indubitably certain.
There cannot, therefore, ever arise a real contradiction between
science and revelation. Science will never contradict revelation, and
revelation does not contradict any part of science which is already
known or ever will become known. We are not, however, to hold our
belief in revealed truths in abeyance, until their perfect agreement
with scientific truths is demonstrated. Nor are we to tolerate mere
hypotheses and probable opinions in science when they are contrary to
truths known by revelation, because they cannot be demonstrated to be
false on purely scientific grounds.

There are only two real difficulties to be encountered in the solution
of the scientific problem. One is, the difficulty of accounting for
the variations In type, language, etc., between different families of
the human race within the commonly received historic period. The other
is the difficulty of explaining certain discoveries in the historical
monuments of Egypt, and certain geological discoveries of the remains
of man or human works, in accordance with the same period. Yet has
been justly and acutely remarked by a recent British writer on this
subject, that the objections made under this second head, if they are
sufficient to establish the necessity of admitting a longer
chronology, destroy the objections under the first head. Given a
longer time for these changes, and the difficulty of supposing them to
be real variations from a unique type vanishes. The chronological
difficulties under the second head are of two classes. One class
relates to the history of well-known post-diluvian nations, whose
historical records have been discovered, indicating a longer period
than the one commonly reckoned between the age of Noah and that of
Moses. The other relates to tribes or individuals about whom nothing
is known historically, but to whom geological evidence assigns a
higher antiquity than that commonly allowed {523} to the epoch of the
creation of man. Now, these difficulties in no way tend to impugn the
doctrine of the unity of the race, but merely the chronology of the
history of the race from the ethics of the creation of the first man,
which has been commonly supposed to be established by the authority of
Scripture. If this last supposition may be classed among theological
opinions not pertaining to essential Catholic doctrine, and we may be
permitted, _salva fide et auctoritate Ecclesiae_, to admit a
chronology long enough to satisfy these claims of a higher antiquity
for man, all difficulty vanishes. One thing is certain, that if the
inspired books of Moses did originally contain an exact chronology of
human history from Adam to the Exodus of Israel, we cannot now
ascertain within fifteen hundred years what it was, since there is
that amount of variation between the Hebrew and Greek copies. The
weight of probability is decidedly in favor of the Septuagint, which
gives the longer chronology. Yet, it is impossible to explain how the
variation between the Septuagint and the Hebrew, and the variation of
the Samaritan version from both, arose. The great essential facts
pertaining to religious doctrine have been handed down by Scripture
and tradition in their unimpaired integrity. We are bound to believe
that the providence of God watched over their transmission, and
protected them from any designed or accidental alteration. Some
general principles and data of chronology are included in this
essential history, which is guaranteed by inspiration and the
authority of the church. Nevertheless, these chronological data are
manifestly so incomplete and imperfect, that a precise and accurate
chronological system cannot be deduced from them. So far as it is
possible to form a chronological system at all, it must be done by the
help of all the collateral evidence we can find, This evidence, so far
as we are aware, does not tend to establish, with a high degree of
probability, an epoch of creation more than a few thousand years
earlier than the common one of 4,000 years before Christ. This is
certainly true of the historical records of Egypt, the principal
source of new light on the ancient historical epochs. We are warranted
by the Septuagint in adding fifteen hundred years to the common
period. It is only, however, on critical and historical grounds that
the Septuagint has greater authority on this point than the Hebrew,
and not as having a higher sanction. For the Hebrew is the original
and authentic Scripture, and the authorized Latin Version follows it,
and not the Greek. If we can admit, then, a chronology longer by
fifteen hundred years than the one contained in the received text, on
historical grounds, why not one still longer, if sound historical
evidence demands it? Supposing that the Scripture originally did
contain a complete and infallible system of chronology, it is evident
that the key to it was lost many ages ago; and we can just as easily
suppose that the discrepancy between the Mosaic chronology as it now
stands and the chronology of the Egyptian records has arisen by the
same causes which produced the discrepancy of the Hebrew and Greek
texts, as we can assign causes why so great a discrepancy should arise
at all, and reconcile this with the reverence due to the sacred books.
[Footnote 160] This is a matter which needs to be more thoroughly
discussed than it has been, by theologians who are fully acquainted
with the subject, before we can lay down positively a principle upon
which to solve the difficulty. We reject, however, as unprovable and
untenable, all theories which throw the antiquity of man back to an
epoch of vast remoteness, and assign hundreds or {524} thousands of
centuries to a prehistoric period, of which no records remain. It is
on geological discoveries solely that this hypothesis is based. At
present it is only a conjecture, founded on the fact that human
remains have been found of a greater antiquity than those formerly
known, whence it is concluded that they may hereafter be discovered of
a greater antiquity still. We may safely wait for geology itself to
clear up the obscurity at present existing in regard to this matter,
and to set right, as science invariably does, the early and hasty
conjectures of its own votaries. Whichever way the matter may be
settled, the fossil remains of human skeletons or human works will be
assignable either to a period not too remote to be included in the
historic period, or to one so remote that it must be excluded from it.
In the first case, there is no difficulty. In the second, nothing is
established from which the falsity of our thesis can be demonstrated.
Our thesis is, that the present human race now inhabiting the earth is
descended from one man, Adam. When there is any very probable evidence
presented that another and distinct species, having a physical
organization like that of the human race, once existed on the earth,
from which it has become extinct, it will be time to examine that
theory. For the present we are concerned with Adam only and his race;
to which both our readers and ourselves have but too conclusive
evidence that we all belong.  [Footnote 161]

  [Footnote 160: Archbishop Manning says: "No system of chronology is
  laid down in the sacred books. There are at least three
  chronologies, probable and admissible, apparently given by Holy
  Scripture. It cannot be said, therefore, that there are
  chronological faults in Holy Scripture, forasmuch as no ascertained
  chronology is there declared."--Temporal Mission of the Holy Ghost,
  p. 171, American edition.]

  [Footnote 161: The Gentle Skeptic, by Rev. C.A. Walworth, now pastor
  of St. Mary's Church Albany, treats of several topics, here noticed
  in a cursory manner. This work is the result of several years close
  and accurate study in theology and science. It has, therefore, the
  solidity and elaborate finish of a work executed with care and
  diligence by one who is both a strong thinker and a sound scholar.
  In style it is a model of classic elegance and purity, and in every
  respect it deserves a place among the best works of English Catholic
  literature. The author has broke ground in a field of investigation
  which it is imperative on Catholic scientific men to work up
  thoroughly. The entire change which has taken place in the attitude
  of science toward revealed religion within a few years, and the
  doctrines of science themselves, makes the old works written on the
  connection between religion and science to a great degree useless.
  The subject needs to be taken up afresh, and handled in a manner
  adequate to the present intellectual wants of the age.]

We have now to consider what Catholic doctrine teaches of that state
in which the first parents of the human race were constituted at their
creation. Briefly, it is this: that this was a supernatural state of
sanctity and justice, in which were contained, or with which were
connected, the gift of integrity, or immunity from concupiscence, the
gift of science, and the gift of corporeal immortality.

That man was created in sanctity and justice is affirmed as _de fide_
by the decree of the Council of Trent, a part of which is cited above,
in which Adam is declared "to have lost immediately the _sanctity and
justice in which he had been constituted:_" "statim sanctitatem et
justitiam in quo constitutus fuerat amisisse." That he possessed
integrity is proved by the same decree, which declares that by the
fall he was "changed _as to his body and soul into something worse_:"
"secundum corpus et animam in deterius commutatum fuisse." That he
possessed science is proved by the declaration of the book of
Ecclesiasticus: "Disciplina intellectus replevit illos. Creavit illis
scientiam spiritus:" "He filled them with the knowledge of
understanding. He created in them the science of the spirit."
[Footnote 162] This is explained and corroborated by the traditional
teachings of all the fathers and great theologians of the church. His
immunity from death is proved by the decrees above cited and others
familiar to all.

  [Footnote 162: Ecclus. xvii. 5, 6.]

It is shown to be the Catholic doctrine that these gifts were
supernatural, by the condemnation of the contrary doctrine by the Holy
See. The following theses of Baius, one of the precursors of
Jansenism, were condemned by Pius V. and Gregory XIII.:

"21. Humanae naturae sublimatio et exaltatio in consortium divinae
naturae, debita fuit integritati primae conditionis, et non
supernaturalis; 26. Integritas primae creationis non fuit indebita
humanae naturae exaltatio, sed {525} naturalis ejus conditio; 55. Deus
non potuisset ab initio talem creare hominem qualis nunc nascitur; 78.
Immortalitas primi hominis non erat gratiae beneficium, sed naturalis
conditio; 79. Falsa est doctorum sententia primum hominem potuisse a
Deo creari et institui sine justitia natarali." Clement XI., in the
Bull _Unigenitus_, also condemned the following proposition, the 33rd
of Quesnel: "Gratia Adami est sequela creationis et erat debita
naturae sanae et integrae."

"21. The elevation and exaltation of human an nature into the
fellowship of the divine nature was due to the integrity of its first
condition, and is therefore to be called natural and not supernatural;
26. The integrity of the primal creation was not an exaltation of
human nature which was not due to it, but its natural condition; 55.
God could not have created man from the beginning such as he is now
born; 78. The immortality of the first man was not a benefit of grace,
but his natural condition; 79. The opinion of doctors is false, that
the first man could have been created and instituted by God without
natural justice (righteousness.") 33d of Quesnel: "The grace of Adam
is a sequel of creation, and was due to sound and integral nature."

It is plain from the decisions which have been quoted, and from the
consentient doctrine of all Catholic doctors, that the Catholic
doctrine is: that the state of original sanctity and integrity did not
flow from the intrinsic, essential principles of human nature, and was
not due to it, but was a free gift of grace superadded to nature, that
is, supernatural. We do not, however, censure the opinion held by some
sound Catholic writers, that congruity, order, or the fitness of
things, exacts that supernatural grace be always given to rational
nature. It is our own opinion, already clearly enough insinuated,
that, although the completion and perfection of the universe does
exact that a supernatural order should be constituted, it does not
exact the elevation of all rational species or individuals to this
order. This opinion appears to be more in accordance with the obvious
sense of the decrees just cited. It is also the opinion of St. Thomas,
and, after him, of the more prevalent school of theology. St. Thomas
thus expresses himself upon this point: "Poterat Deus, a principio
quando hominem condidit, etiam alium hominem ex limo terrae formare,
quem in conditione suae naturae relinqueret, ut scilicet mortalis et
passibilis esset et pugnam concupiscentiae ad rationem sentiens, in
quo nihil humanae naturae derogaretur, quia hoc ex principiis naturae
consequitur; non tamen iste defectus in eo rationem culpae et poenae
habuisset, quia non per voluntatem iste defectus causatus esset." "God
could have formed, from the beginning when he created man, also
another man from the dust of the earth, whom he might have left in the
condition of his own nature, that is, so that he would have been
mortal and passible, and would have felt the conflict of concupiscence
against reason, in which there would have been nothing derogatory to
human nature, because this follows from the principles of nature;
nevertheless this defect in him would not have had the quality of sin
and punishment, because this defect would not have been caused by the
will."  [Footnote 163]

  [Footnote 163: 2 Sentent., Dist. 31, qu. 1, ant. 2 ad 8. ]

The sanctifying grace conferred upon Adam is very clearly shown,
according to this view, to have been a pure and perfectly gratuitous
boon from God, to which human nature, as such, could have no claim
whatever, even of congruity.

The nature of the probation of the father of mankind is now easily
explained. He received a gratuitous gift on conditions, and these
conditions were the matter of his probation. Our scope and limits do
not admit of a minute discussion of the particular circumstances of
the trial and fall of Adam in Paradise. The point to be considered is
the relation in which {526} Adam stood to all mankind his posterity in
his trial, transgession, and condemnation. The Catholic dogma of faith
on this head is clearly defined and unmistakable. The whole human race
was tried, fell, and was condemned, in the trial, fall, and
condemnation of Adam. It is needless to cite again the passages of
Holy Scripture and the decisions of the church which establish this
fundamental doctrine of Christianity. The only question to be
discussed is, What is the real sense and meaning of the doctrine? How
did all mankind sin in Adam, and by his transgression incur the
condemnation of death? What is the nature of that original sin in
which we are born?

One theory is that the sin of Adam is arbitrarily imputed to his
posterity. As a punishment for this imputed sin, they are born
depraved, with an irresistible propensity to sin, and under the doom
of eternal misery. The statement of this theory is its best
refutation. Very few hold it now, and we may safely leave to
Protestant writers the task of demonstrating its absurdity.

Another theory is, that all human wills were included in the will of
Adam, so that they all concurred with his will in the original
transgression.  [Footnote 164]

  [Footnote 164: We refer the reader to the argument of Candace in
  Mrs. Stowe's Minister's Wooing, for a humorous but unanswerable
  reputation of the ancient Calvinistic doctrine of original sin.]

We find some difficulty in comprehending this statement. Did we all
have a distinct existence, and enjoy a deliberative and decisive vote
when the important question of human destiny was decided? If so, the
unanimity of the judgment, and the total oblivion which has fallen
upon us all, respecting our share in it and our whole subsequent
existence, until a very recent period, are very remarkable phenomena
which we have never seen adequately accounted for. The only other
alternative is that of indistinct existence or virtual existence. That
is, that the power of generating souls was in Adam, and that all human
souls are actually derived from his soul by generation. Suppose they
are. A father who has lost an organ or a limb does not necessarily
transmit this defect to his posterity. Even if he does transmit some
defect which he has contracted by his own fault to his son, that son
is not to blame for it. If the principle of all souls was in Adam,
virtually, their personality, which is the principle of imputability,
commences only with there are distinct existence. Personality is
incommunicable. An individual soul cannot communicate with another in
the principle of identity, from which all imputability of acts, all
accountability, all possibility of moral relations, proceeds. This
notion of the derivation of souls, one from another, or from a common
soul-reservoir, is, however, one perfectly inconceivable, and contrary
to the plainest principles of philosophy. Substance is simple and
indivisible. Spirit, which is the most perfect substance, contains,
therefore, in its essence the most manifest contradiction to all
notion of composition, resolution, division, or separation of parts.
The substance of Adam's soul was completely in his own individual
intelligence and will. The notion of any other souls deriving their
substance from his soul is therefore wholly without out meeting. There
is no conceivable way in which spirit can produce spirit, except by
creation, and act to which created spirit is incompetent.

There remains, therefore only the doctrine, which is that of Catholic
theology, that the human species is corporeally propagated by means of
generation, and was therefore, in this respect only, virtually in
Adam; but that each individual soul is immediately created by God, and
comes into the generic and specific relations of humanity through its
union in one integral personality with the body. How, then, can each
individual soul become involved in a original sin? Does God create it
sinful?  This cannot be; and if it could it would not be the sin of
Adam, or the sin of the race, but its own personal sin. The soul as it
comes from the hand of God cannot be sinful in act. {527} The only
possible supposition remaining is, that the soul contracts sin from
contact or union with the body. Here the Calvinist, the Jensenist, or
any other who maintains that original sin consists in positive
deprivation of the soul's essence, or in habitual moral perversity, or
determination of the will to sin, is in a position where he cannot
move a step forward. How can _soul_ be corrupted by body? How has the
innocent soul deserved to be thrust into a body by which it must be
polluted? These questions will never receive an answer. Nor will any
credible or rational method of vindicating the doctrine that all men
are born totally and positively depraved, or with a nature in any
respect essentially evil, on account of Adam's sin, ever be
discovered. The doctrine is utterly incredible and unthinkable, and
will no doubt ere long have a place only in the history of past
errors.

The way is now clear for the exposition of the Catholic doctrine
respecting the mutual relations of Adam and his posterity in the
original probation, trial, and fall of the human race immediately
after its creation. That probation of Adam, in which the human race
was included, must not be understood as including the entire personal
probation either of himself or of his descendants. His own probation
lasted during his lifetime, and so does that of each individual man.
Had he been faithful in that particular trial which is related in the
first chapter of Genesis, it is probable that, although the special
privileges whose perpetuation depended on it would certainly have then
secured to the race, he himself would have had a longer personal
trial. So also, if the progeny of Adam had been confirmed in the
perpetual possession of the privileges of the primeval state, each
individual of the human race would have had a probation of his own,
affecting his own personal destiny alone. Although each one of us
would have been conceived and born in the state of original grace and
integrity, as the Blessed Virgin was by a special privilege, as soon
as the actual exercise of reason became completely developed, a period
of probation would have commenced, in which we should have been liable
to fail, as we are now after receiving grace through baptism.

The probation of the human race in Adam was, therefore, a special
probation, on which the possession in perpetuity of certain
supernatural privileges, freely and gratuitously conceded to the race,
was alone dependent. The merely personal consequences of the sin of
Adam and Eve affected themselves alone individually. That is, the
guilt of an actual transgression with the necessary personal
consequences following from it attached to them alone, and we have
nothing to do with it, any more than with any other sins committed by
our intermediate progenitors. The father of the human race did not
act, however, in a merely individual capacity in this transaction. He
was the federal head and representative of the race. A trust was
committed to him in behalf of all mankind, and this trust was the
great gift of original sanctity and justice, the high dignity of
supernatural affiliation to God, the glorious title to the kingdom of
heaven. By his sin he forfeited this gift in trust, both for himself
as an individual, and also for his descendants who were to have
inherited it from him. There is no ground for asking the question, why
it followed that Adam, having fallen, should transmit a fallen nature
by generation to his posterity. This question is only asked on the
supposition that fallen nature is a nature essentially changed and
depraved, whereas it is really a nature which has fallen from a
supernatural height back to its own proper condition. With all due
respect to the eminent writers who have attempted to answer this
question, we must be allowed to say that we cannot attach any definite
meaning to their answer. {528} Adam, they say, having a fallen nature,
could only transmit the nature which he had. All humanity was in him
when he sinned, and therefore humanity as generic having fallen into
sin, each individual who participates by conception in generic
humanity participates in its sin, or is conceived in original sin.
This language may be used and understood in a true sense; but in its
literal sense, and as it is very generally understood, it has no
meaning. It is derived from the extravagant and unintelligible realism
of William of Champeaux, and some other schoolmen, according to which
humanity as a genus has a real and positive entity, like the great
animal _in se_ of Plato, from whom all particular animals receive
their entity. These notions have long since become obsolete, and it is
useless to refute them. The The human genus or species was completely
in Adam, but it was not distinct from his individuality; rather it was
completely in his individuality constituting it in its own generic or
specific grade of existence, as the individuality of a man. Humanity
is also completely in every other human individual. This humanity,
constituting the specific essence of Adam, as a man, was identical
with his existence, for existence is only metaphysical essence reduced
to act. It could not be essentially changed without destroying his
human existence. Whatever is contained in _humanitas_ must have
remained in him after the fall, otherwise he would no longer have
remained a man, or indeed have continued to exist at all. It is only
this _humanitas_ or specific essence of human nature, that Adam had
any natural power to reproduce by generation. He could not have lost
the power of transmitting it by the fall, except by losing altogether
the power of reproducing his species. The immediate, physical effect
of generation is merely the production of the life-germ, from which
the body is developed under the formative action of a soul, created
immediately by God. The only depravation or corruption of nature,
therefore, which is physically possible, or which can be supposed to
follow by a necessary law from the corruption of nature in Adam, is a
corruption or degeneracy in in this life-germ, through which a
defective or degenerate body is produced. This opinion has then long
ago condemned by the church. It is, moreover, contrary to science. The
human animal is perfect as an animal, and although there is accidental
degeneracy in individuals, there is no generic or specific degeneracy
of the race from it's essential type. But supposing that a defective
body were the necessary consequence of Adam's sin, a defective soul
could not be. The parent does not concur to the creation of the soul
of his offspring, except as an  cause. God creates the soul, and he
cannot create a human soul without creating it in conformity to the
metaphysical archetype of soul in his own idea, and therefore having
the essence on soul completely in itself. How, then, can the infusion
of this soul into a body which is physically degenerate make it
unworthy of that degree of the love of God and of that felicity, which
it is worthy of intrinsically, and apart from its union with the body?

There is no law in nature by virtue of which Adam must or could
transmit anything essentially more than human nature before the fall,
or essentially less after the fall. The law by which he was entitled
to transmit privileges or gifts additional to nature on condition of
is fulfilling the terms of God's covenant with him was therefore a
positive law; why those human laws which enable man to transmit with
their blood property, titles of nobility, or the hereditary right to a
crown. These privileges may be forfeited, by the crime of an
individual in whom they are vested, for himself and for his posterity.
They may be forfeited for posterity, because they are not natural
rights. In the same manner, the supernatural gifts conferred on Adam
were forfeited for the human race by his sin, because they were {529}
not natural rights, or _debita naturae_, but gratuitous gifts to which
Adam's posterity had do hereditary right, except that derived from the
sovereign concession of God, and conceded only in a conditional
manner. This conditional right could only be perfected by the
obedience of Adam to the precept of the Almighty forbidding him to eat
of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil. As he failed
to obey this precept, his posterity never acquired a perfect right to
the gifts of supernatural grace through him. By virtue, therefore, of
our descent from him, we possess nothing but human nature and those
things which naturally belong to it; we are born in the state in which
Adam would have been placed at the beginning if God had created him in
the state of pure nature.

We do not stand, therefore, before God, by virtue of our conception
and birth from the first parents of mankind, in the attitude of
personal offenders or voluntary transgressors of his law. Our
essential relation to God as rational creatures is not broken. Our
nature is essentially good, and capable of attaining all the good
which can be evolved from its intrinsic principles; that is, all
natural knowledge, virtue, and felicity. That which is immediately
created by God must be essentially good. A spirit is essentially
intelligence and will, and therefore good in respect to both, or
capable of thinking the truth and willing the good. Moreover, it is a
certain philosophical truth that when God creates a spirit he must
create it in act, or that the activity of the spirit is coeval with
its existence. The first act or state of a spirit, as it precedes all
reflection, deliberation, or choice, and flows necessarily from the
creative act of God himself, is determined by him, and must therefore
be good. The acts which follow, either follow necessarily from the
first, or are the product of free deliberation. In the first case,
they are necessarily good; and in the second they may be good,
otherwise they would be necessarily evil, which is contrary to the
supposition that they are free. The human soul being in its essence
spirit, and incapable of being corrupted by the body, must therefore
be essentially good at the moment when it attains the full exercise of
reason and of the faculty of free choice. If so, it is capable of
apprehending by its intelligence and choosing by its will that which
is good, and cannot, therefore, come into the state of actual sin or
become a personal transgressor except by a free and deliberate purpose
to violate the eternal law, with full power to the contrary. It may
exercise this power to the contrary by a correct judgment, a right
volition, and thus attains the felicity which is the necessary
consequence of acting rationally and conscientiously. So far as this
is possible to mere unassisted nature, it may continue to put forth a
series of acts of this kind during the whole period of its earthly
existence. That is to say, it is capable of attaining all the good
which can be evolved from its intrinsic principles, or all natural
knowledge, virtue, and felicity. This is equivalent to saying, that it
can have a natural knowledge and love of God, as is affirmed by the
best theologians with the sanction of the church. For Pius V. has
condemned the following proposition, the 34th of Baius: "Distinctio
illa duplicis amoris, naturalis videlicet quo Deus amatur ut auctor
naturae, et gratuiti quo Deus amatur ut beatificator, vana est et
commentitia et ad illudendum sacris litteris et plurimis veterum
testimoniis excogitata." "The distinction of a twofold love, namely,
natural, by which God is loved as the author of nature, and
gratuitous, by which God is loved as the beatifier, is vain and
futile, and invented for the purpose of evading that which is taught
by the Holy Scriptures and by many testimonies of the ancient
writers."  [Footnote 165] It would be easy to multiply proofs that the
doctrine of man's capability of moral virtue, from the intrinsic {530}
principles of here's nature, is the genuine Catholic doctrine.
[Footnote 166] This is not necessary, however, at present.

  [Footnote 165: Denziger's Enchirid., p. 305.]

  [Footnote 166: See Aspirations of Nature by Rev. I. T. Hecker,
  passim.]

We proceed to another point, namely, How it is that mankind can be
said to be born in original sin, when they are innocent of all
personal and actual sin at the time of birth? The state in which
Adam's posterity are born, and which is denominated the state of
original sin, considered subjectively, is a state of privation of
supernatural grace and integrity. If man had been created for a
natural destiny, this state of inhability to the supernatural would
not have been a state of sin. If he had been created in the state in
which he is now born, as a preparatory state to the state of grace, to
be endowed at a subsequent period with supernatural gifts, it would
not have been a state of sin. Entitively it would have been the same
state as that in which he is now born. It would not have been a state
of sin, because the state of sin receives its denomination from a
voluntary transgression which produces it. The particular notion of
sin is an aversion from God as the supreme good produced by the
voluntary election of an inferior good in his place. The posterity of
Adam are born in a state of habitual aversion from God as the supreme
good in the supernatural order, which is the consequence of the
original sin of Adam. Since they virtually possessed a right to be
born in the state of grace and integrity, which was forfeited by his
sin, the state of privation in which they are born, relatively to
their original ideal condition and to the transgression by which they
were degraded from it, is properly denominated a state of sin. This is
incurred by each individual soul through its connection with the body
which descends from our first parents by generation, because it is
this infusion into a human body which constitutes it a member of the
human race. As a member of the human race, and by virtue of his
descent from Adam, each individual man participates in all the generic
relations of the race. If Adam had not sinned, he would have received
by inheritance from from him a high dignity and great possessions,
transmitted to him through the blood; as the case is, he is born
disinherited. There is no injustice or unkindness in this; because the
rights which have been forfeited were not rights involved in the
concession of rational existence itself, but rights gratuitously
conceded on certain conditions, and because no personal blame is
imputed where none exists. The illustration so often employed by
theologians of a nobleman who has suffered attainder is perfectly apt
to the case. His posterity are born under an attainder, which in human
law corresponds to original sin under the divine law, and are thus
placed in a state of privation; relatively to that condition of
nobility which was formerly hereditary in the family; but which in
itself is an honest condition. In the eye of the law, their father's
crime makes them incapable of the privileges of nobility, but it does
not deprive them of the common rights of private subjects.

So the children of Adam, on account of his sin, inherit a disability
to possess the nobility of the state of grace and to inherit the
kingdom of heaven. This disability is inherent in the person son of
each one, and therefore "_inest euique proprium_." It is a separation
from God incurred by the transgression of Adam, who represented the
human race in his trial, and therefore is truly and properly sin. It
is a privation of grace which is the supernatural life of the soul,
and is therefore properly called death, or "_mors animae_." The
"_reatus culpae_" is the obligation of being born in a state of
relative degradation, and the "_reatus poenae_" the obligation of
undergoing the conflicts, sufferings, and death which belong to the
state of despoiled nature, as well as submitting to the sentence of
exclusion from the kingdom of God. By it, human nature has been
changed into something worse as to soul and body, {531} "_in deterius
mulatur quoad corpus et animam_," because it is now deprived of
integrity, immortality, and sanctifying grace. Nevertheless this state
is essentially the same with that which would have been the state of
man if he had been created in the state of pure nature. Man in the
state of lapsed nature differs from man in the state of pure nature,
as Perrone says, only as _nudatus_ from _nudo_, one denuded from one
always nude. This is original sin, which consists formally, as St.
Thomas teaches, in the privation of sanctifying grace and the other
gratuitous gifts perfecting nature which depended on it. Mankind,
therefore, by the sin of Adam, have simply fallen back on the state of
pure nature, and are born with those attributes and qualities only
which are contained in human nature by virtue of its intrinsic
principles. To understand, therefore, the condition, capabilities, and
ultimate destiny of man, apart from the grace which comes through the
Redeemer, we have simply to inquire into the essence of these
intrinsic principles, and ascertain what man is, simply as man, where
he can do, and what is the end he can attain by his earthly life.

Man, as to his rational nature, is in the lowest grade of rational
creatures. Except under very favorable circumstances, his intelligence
is very imperfectly developed, and so far as it is developed it is
chiefly employed in perfecting his merely exterior and social life.
Under the most favorable circumstances his progress is slow, his
capacity of contemplating purely intellectual and spiritual objects
weak and limited. As to his body, he is also frail and delicate, and
naturally liable to death. Moreover, there is in his constitution, as
a being composed of soul and body, a certain contrariety of natural
impulses, one set of impulses inclining him to rational good, the
other to sensible or animal good. Like the inferior animals, he is
capable of an improvement of his species up to a certain point which
cannot be fixed, and also liable to a degeneracy which brings, him
down to a state little above that of the brutes, and even to idiocy.
There are indications enough in his soul of a latent capacity for a
much higher and more exalted state, to make it certain that his
present condition is one of merely inchoate existence, and that he is
destined to a future life in which these latent capacities will be
developed in a more perfect corporeal organization. The great
difficulty of forming an ideal conception of the state in which he
would have been constituted, had he been left to his merely natural
development, consists in the fact that we have no human subject to
study except man as he actually is, that is, under a supernatural
providence from the beginning. The actual development of human nature
has taken place under the influence of supernatural grace, and we
cannot discriminate in human history the operation of natural causes
from those which are supernatural. There are three principal
hypotheses respecting the possible development of pure nature which
may be sustained with more or less plausibility. The first is, that
the human race, beginning in its perfection of type as a species, but
without any revelation of language, or any instruction in natural
theology, morals, or science, would have remained always in the same
state in which it was created, without any intellectual or moral
progress. According to this view, the present state of man on earth
would have been a mere stage of existence, which could have no
ulterior end, except the production of a species destined to begin its
higher life in a future state. The second hypothesis is, that the
human race, beginning from the same point of departure, might have
progressed slowly, through very long periods of time, to a high limit
of civilization, knowledge, virtue, and natural religion. The third
is, that a kind of natural revelation, including a positive system of
religion, morals, and science, would have been requisite; in a word,
that human society must have been placed {532} at first, by the
immediate intervention of the Creator, in the state of civilization,
and conducted in its course by a continuance of the same intervention.
We have little room, however, for anything beyond conjecture in this
matter. The only point we are anxious to establish is, that the state
in which we are now born is not one intrinsically evil; that it is not
one derogatory to human nature as such; that it is not one in which
God might not create man in consistency with his sanctity and
goodness.

This point is established on sound theological and philosophical
principles; and from these principles it follows that all the
phenomena of man which are referrible to his original fall are the
natural consequence of his human constitution, and not evidences of a
positive, innate depravity. He is a weak, frail, inconstant creature,
easily led away by the senses and passions, liable to fall into many
errors and sins, but he is not an object of loathing and abhorrence to
his Creator, or an outcast from his love. He has in him all the
primary elements of natural virtue, the germ from which a noble
creature can be developed. Nevertheless, although his natural
condition is one which is not derogatory to himself or his Creator, it
seems to cry out for the supernatural. Its actual weakness and
imperfection, coupled with its latent capacities for a high
development, mark it as being, what it is, the most fitting subject
for the grace of God; and indicate that it was created chiefly to
exemplify in the most signal manner the supernatural love and bounty
of the Creator. It is only in the idea of the supernatural order that
we can find the adequate explication and solution of all the problems
relating to the destiny of man. For that order he was created by an
absolute, not a conditional decree of God. The fulfilment of that
decree was not risked on the issue of Adam's probation. According to
our view, the creation of man was only the inchoation of the
incarnation of the Eternal Word in human nature; and the decree of the
incarnation being absolute, the elevation of human nature was
necessary and must be efficaciously secured. The fall of man from
original grace could not therefore hinder it. After the sin of Adam,
the human race had still a supernatural destiny, and was under the
supernatural order of Providence. The divine decree to confer grace on
man was not abrogated, but only the form and mode under which the
grace was to be conferred were changed. Moreover, by this change, the
human race was, on the whole, a gainer, and came into a better and
more favorable position for attaining its destiny. There was a reason
both for the original constitution of man in the grace of Adam, and
also for the change of that constitution which followed upon Adam's
sin. By the original grant of grace, God showed to mankind his
magnificent liberality and good-will. He gave them also an ideal which
has remained imperishably in their memory of the state of perfection,
and left a sweet odor of paradise to cheer them along their rugged
road of labor and trial. By the withdrawal of that grace he brought
them under a dispensation of mercy, in which their condition is more
humble and painful, but safer and more advantageous for gaining the
highest merit.

St. Francis de Sales says: "L'etat de la redemption vaut cent fois
plus que l'etat de la justice originalle." "The state of redemption is
a hundred times preferable to the state of original justice."
[Footnote 167] The church herself, in her sublime hymn _Exultet_,
breaks out into the exclamation: "O certe necessarium Adae peccatum; O
felix culpa! quae tantum et talem habere meruit Redemptorem!" "O
certainly necessary sin of Adam; O happy fault! which merited to know
such and so great a redeemer!" We reason to lament our lost paradise,
or to mourn over the fall of our first parents. Our new birth in
Christ is far better than that ancient inheritance forfeited in Eden.
The consideration of the mystery of redemption must be postponed,
however for a future number.

  [Footnote 167: This thought has been beautifully developed by Mr.
  Simpson in some Essays on Original Sin, published in The Rambler]



{533}

Original.

MY CHRISTMAS TREE.



  The Christmas logs were blazing bright, the house was all aglow,
  Five little stockings brimming full were hanging in a row;
  The balls of golden, silver, red, upon the Christmas tree,
  Like fire-flies glancing through the green, were shining merrily,
  And gifts for May and Josey, and for Maggie, Kate, and Will,
  From bending top to sturdy root, the swaying branches fill;
  And I, my labors all complete, sat watching through the night,
  For well I knew that busy feet, before the morning-light,
  Would patter, patter down the stairs in merry Christmas glee,
  And warm and bright as love could make, must their first welcome be.
  The while I mused upon their joy, with eyes fixed on the door.
  The fairest form I ere had seen glided the threshold o'er--
  A sweet and gentle maiden "waxen little past the child,"
  And close upon her steps a man of visage grave and mild.
  As the fair maiden nearer drew, I saw her small hands prest
  The loveliest new-born baby that e'er slept on mortal breast--
  Albeit, five fair little buds had blossomed on mine own,
  Such winning grace of perfectness mine heart had never known.
  Adown, in sudden rapture caught, I fell on bended knee.
  For Jesus and Saint Mary and Saint Joseph were with me!
  The Maiden Mother gently bent, and in my trembling hands
  Laid little baby-Jesus, wrapt up in his swaddling bands.
  "Give rest and food and shelter unto him who for your sake
  Hath reft himself of all things," thus the Maiden Mother spake;
  "Each Christmas eve we, journeying, as once in Bethlehem,
  At every Christian door-step ask for shelter, as of them
  Who in my mother's maiden home had room for all save him
  Before whose throne of living light bow down the seraphim.
  And oft times now, as on that night, rejected, we depart.
  As though they were Judean inns, from many a Christian heart.
  With warmth and light and merry feasts ye hail his natal-day,
  But who have place for Jesus Christ who in the manger lay?
  Mosttimes the doors are closely barred, the fire-light is grown dim,
  And few who watch as now you watch, keep watch or ward for _him_."

  Her tones were tender, sweet, and low, but through the crust of years
  They found the blessed, blessed fount of humble, contrite tears;
  And as they overflowed mine eyes, and plashed upon his head,
  The baby woke to life and warmth, who seemed so cold and dead;
  And pointing where a little gift for "Christ's poor" lowly lay
  Beneath the tree so richly bowed, he smiled, and passed away.
  Ah! me, how little seemed the share that I had laid aside
  To give to him who for our sake was born and crucified!
  _He_ held back naught, the last red drop flowed out for you and me:
  Oh! surely he should have the best on every Christmas tree.

       Genevieve Sales.



{534}


Translated from the German.


THE LITTLE BIRDS ON CHRISTMAS DAY.



On holy Christmas morning there was a grand assemblage of little birds
behind the elder-tree yonder which stands between the court-yard and
the garden, flanked on one side by the barn and on the other by heaps
of grain that had found no shelter in the granary--so rich had been
the blessings of the Lord!

The sparrow with his house and generation was very fully represented
in the meeting; and all who belonged to his family puffed out their
feathers and sat looking as if something vexatious had befallen them.

The lark, sitting between the furrows in the field hard by, raised
himself up a little way now and again, warbling a short kyrie or
gloria as his thoughts came and went.

Finches and goldhammers were there in great spirits, as usual; and the
blackbird perched now inside the court-wall, now on the outside; then
he flew down to the brook, ducked down and up again, flew up into the
tree with the other birds, and praised the cold-water-cure, which
makes one feel right fresh and joyful as nothing else can.

Ravens and crows and the rest of the grab-alls, who are for ever
finding what no one has lost, crowded close together on the
grain-stacks in deep and loud discussion.

But the sparrow began to bewail his fate thus: "I have been sadly
disturbed in my night's rest, for before daybreak all the bells in the
steeples began to ring as if for fire. I flew out into the darkness;
and all around the houses looked bright, as if they were on fire
within. Many tiny candles were lighted, and the trees on which they
burned were covered with all kinds of fruit, such as I never have seen
together on one tree. But we enjoy nothing of all this. Our trees are
bare enough, and have not even leaves to screen us from this winter's
cold. We shall starve to death or freeze, when once food becomes
scarcer and the cold more piercing."

But the lark in the field scratched up a few worms which a mole had
tossed out with the earth; and the blackbird helped her to choose some
little worms, and that was their breakfast.

The shepherd drove his flocks through the narrow path, while
thorn-bushes on each side, and the blackberry briers and wild-rose
bushes, who had heard the birds' complaint, stretched their branches
across the way, so that the little sheep left locks of wool upon them,
some more, some less, but never enough to do them any harm. But the
birds were behind them, and gathered up the wool and carried it to
their homes, in the knot-holes of trees or crevices of walls or
hollows of the earth, and there they grew warmer warmer. Then, as they
picked at the wool, red hips, which the cold had made sweet and soft,
peeped out, and they ate them with joyful hearts.

Again rang out the bells from tower and steeple; the houses-door
opened, and the family came fourth; maid-servants first, then sons and
daughters, and, to close up the procession, the housewife and the
farmer.

"Father," said the eldest son, "it will fare ill with our corn-stacks
in the field if, before going to church, we do not shoot in among the
feathered gentry yonder, who have torn the outer coverings already,
and will soon make their way in among the unthreshed grain. The
magpies willingly read where they have not sown. They cluster here
from the whole neighborhood. Gladly would I give them a few leaden
peas for food, and silence their chattering for ever."

{535}

"By no means," replied the farmer. "No shot shall be fired during this
blessed Christmas season--on the gracious birthday of him who
overthrew indeed the tables of the money-changers, and made a scourge
of cords to drive out both buyer and seller from his temple, but only
said to those who sold doves, 'Take them hence.' He did not blame the
poor little doves; and never, on this day, when dumb beasts gave up to
him their manger for the cradle because men found no room for him in
the inn, never shall any creature find death in my fields for the sake
of a few blades of grass or kernels of grain."

But the farmer's wife had already turned back, and one of the lads
was, at her command, strewing a whole sheaf of grain before the
house-front. So generously did he scatter the food to the doves and
poultry, that there was enough and to spare for their neighbors on the
elder-tree, and magpie and raven had a fair share without being envied
by hens or disturbed by men. Thus in the court-yard was there also a
little of that "peace on earth" of which angels sang one Christmas
night upon the plains of Bethlehem. Nor did the farmer lack anything
in hay-loft or granary because the little birds of heaven had been fed
from his table that blessed Christmas morning.

Remember this: on Christmas feed the poor birds before thy door, and
if thou seest neither lark nor blackbird, nor yet finches,
gold-hammers, nor tomtits, then think of those who have no feathers,
of poor human creatures. Forget not that the angel of the Lord said to
the shepherds: "You will find the child wrapped in swaddling-clothes,
and lying in a manger." Seek out the swaddling-clothes of poverty, and
if thou walkest by that light which rose over Bethlehem, then shalt
thou find in those swaddling-clothes and in works of mercy the little
child Jesus!

Mark this: if thou wouldst be happy, then must thou make others happy!

Remember: because Jesus came to the poor, therefore shouldst thou go
to the poor.



Original.

BARABBAS AND I.


  BABABBAS.

  "Strange that the Jews should set me free,
   And let this Jesus die for me!
   I have their brethren robbed and slain:
   He brought their dead to life again."


  I.

  "Strange, surely, that the ungrateful Jews
   Should thee in place of Jesus choose:
   Yet stranger far it is that he
   Should choose to die to set _me_ free."



{536}


From the Popular Science Review.

AEROLITES.


BY TOWNSHEND M. HALL, F.G.S.


Meteoric stones, or aerolites, as they are generally called (from two
Greek words, _aer_ and _lithos_, signifying "air-stones"), may be
defined as solid masses consisting principally of pure iron, nickel,
and several other metals, sometimes containing also an admixture of
augite, olivine, and hornblende, which, from time to time, at
irregular intervals, have fallen upon the surface of the earth from
above.

Other designations, such as "fire-balls and thunder-bolts," have been
popularly applied to these celestial masses, the former denoting their
usual fiery appearance, whilst the latter has reference to the extreme
suddenness of their descent.

Shooting stars also, although they are not accompanied by the fall of
any solid matter upon the earth, are generally placed in the same
category, since they are supposed to be aerolites which pass
(comparatively speaking) very near our earth, and are visible from it
by night; at the same time their distance from us, varying as it does
from four to two hundred and forty miles and upward, is in most
instances too great to allow of their being drawn down by the
attractive power possessed by the earth. Like comets and eclipses,
these celestial phenomena in former times were universally regarded
with feelings of the greatest awe and superstition; and in Eastern
countries especially, where the fall of a meteoric stone was supposed
to be the immediate precursor of some important public event, or
national calamity, the precise date of each descent was carefully
recorded. In China, for example, such reports reach back to the year
644 before our era; and M. Biot has found in the astronomical section
of some of the most ancient annals of that empire sixteen falls of
aerolites recorded as having taken place between the years 644 B.C.
and 333 after Christ, whilst the Greek and Roman authors mention only
four such occurrences during the same period. Even now, in this age of
science and universal knowledge, aerolites can scarcely be regarded
without a certain degree of dread. Indeed, four or five cases have
occurred in which persons have been killed by them; in another
instance, several villages in India were set on fire by the fall of a
meteoric stone; and it was by no means a pleasant subject for
reflection that such a catastrophe might happen anywhere and at any
moment, especially when we remember that these stones, although not
quite incandescent, are always, more or less, in a heated state; and
sometimes so hot that even after the lapse of six hours they could not
be touched with impunity.

The first fall of meteoric stones on record appears to have taken
place about the year 654: B.C., when, according to a passage in Livy,
a shower of stones fell on the Alban Hill, not far distant from Rome.
The next in chronological order is mentioned by several writers, such
as Diogenes of Apollonia, Plutarch, and Pliny, and described by them
as a great stone, the size of two millstones, and equal in weight to a
full wagon-load. It fell about the year 467 B.C., at AEgos Potamos, on
the Hellespont, and even up to the days of Pliny, four centuries after
its fall, it continued to be an object of curiosity and speculation.
{537} After the close of the first century we fail to obtain any
account or notice of this stone; but although it has been lost sight
of for upward of eighteen hundred years, the eminent Humboldt says, in
one of his works, that notwithstanding all previous failures to
rediscover it, he does not wholly relinquish the hope that even after
such a considerable lapse of time, this Thracian meteoric mass, which
it would be so difficult to destroy, may be found again, especially
since the region in which it fell has now become so easy to access to
European travellers.

The next descent of any particular importance took place at Ensisheim
in Alsace, where an aerolite fell on November 7th, 1492, just at the
time when the Emperor Maximilian, then king of the Romans, happened to
be on the point of engaging with the French army. It was preserved as
a relic in the cathedral at Ensisheim, until the beginning of the
French revolution, when it was conveyed to the Public Library of
Colmar, and it is still preserved there among the treasures.

In later years the shower of aerolites which fell in April, 1803, at
L'Aigle, in Normandy, may well rank as the most extraordinary descent
upon record. A large fire-ball had been observed a few moments
previously, in the neighborhood of Caen and Alencon, where the sky was
perfectly clear and cloudless. At L'Aigle no appearance of light was
visible, and the fire-ball assumed instead the form of a small black
cloud, consisting of vapor, which suddenly broke up with a violent
explosion, followed several times by a peculiar rattling noise. The
stones at the time of their descent were hot, but not red, and smoked
visibly. The number which were afterward collected within an
elliptical area measuring from six to seven miles in length by three
in breadth, has been variously estimated at from two to three
thousand. They ranged in weight from two drachms up to seventeen and
half pounds. The French government immediately deputed M. Biot, the
celebrated naturalist and philosopher, to proceed to the spot, for the
express purpose of collecting the authentic facts concerning a
phenomenon which, until that time, had almost universally been treated
as an instance of popular superstition and credulity. His conclusive
report was the means of putting an end to all scepticism on the
subject, and since that date the reality--not merely the
possibility--of such occurrences has no longer been contested.

Leaving out, for the present, innumerable foreign instances which
might be quoted, we must now glance rapidly at a few of the most
noticeable examples of the fall of meteoric stones which have taken
place in England. The earliest which appears on record descended in
Devonshire, near Sir George Chudleigh's house at Stretchleigh, in the
parish of Ermington, about twelve miles from Plymouth. The
circumstance is thus related by Westcote, one of the quaint old
Devonshire historians:

  "In some part of this manor (Stretchleigh), there fell from above--I
  cannot say from heaven--a stone of twenty-three pounds weight, with
  a great and fearful noise in falling; first it was heard like unto
  thunder, or rather to be thought the report of some great ordnance,
  cannon, or culverin; and as it descended, so did the noise lessen,
  at last when it came to the earth to the height of the report of a
  peternel, or pistol. It was for matter like unto a stone singed, or
  half-burned for lime, but being larger described by a richer wit, I
  will forbear to enlarge on it."

The "richer wit" here alluded to was in all probability the author of
a pamphlet published at the time, which further describes this
aerolite as having fallen on January 10th, 1623, in an orchard, near
some men who were planting trees. It was buried in the ground three
feet deep, and its dimensions were three and a half feet long, two and
a half wide, and one and a half thick. The pamphlet also states that
pieces broken from off it were in the possession of many of the
neighboring gentry. {538} We may here remark that no specimen of this
stone is at present known to be in existence, and that although living
in the county where it fell, we have hitherto failed in tracing any of
the fragments here referred to. A few years later, in August, 1628,
several meteoric stones, weighing from one to twenty-four pounds, fell
at Hatford, in Berkshire; and in the month of May, 1680, several are
said to have fallen in the neighborhood of London.

The total number of aerolitic descents which up to this present time
have been observed to take place in Great Britain and Ireland is
twenty, of which four occurred in Scotland, and four in Ireland. The
largest and most noticeable of all these fell on December 13th, 1795,
near Wold Cottage, in the parish of Thwing, East Riding of Yorkshire.
Its descent was witnessed by two persons; and when the stone was dug
up, it was found to have penetrated through no less than eighteen
inches of soil and hard chalk. It originally weighed about fifty-six
pounds, but that portion of it preserved in the British Museum is
stated in the official catalogue to weigh forty-seven pounds nine
ounces and fifty-three grains--just double the weight of the
Devonshire aerolite.

When we come to inquire into the various opinions which have been held
in different ages respecting the origin of aerolites, and the power
which causes their descent, we must go back to the times of the
ancient Greeks, and we find that those of their philosophers who had
directed their attention to the subject had four theories to account
for this singular phenomenon. Some thought that meteoric stones had a
telluric origin, and resulted from exhalations ascending from the
earth becoming condensed to such a degree as to render them solid.
This theory was in after years revived by Kepler the astronomer, who
excluded fire-balls and shooting stars from the domain of astronomy;
because, according to his views, they were simply "meteors arising
from the exhalations of the earth, and blending with the higher
ether." Others, like Aristotle, considered that they were masses of
metal raised either by hurricanes, or projected by some volcano beyond
the limits of the earth's attraction, so becoming inflamed and
converted, for a time, into starlike bodies. Thirdly, a solar origin;
this, however, was freely derided by Pliny and several others, among
whom we may mention Diogenes of Apollonia, already alluded to as one
of the chroniclers of the aerolite of AEgos Potamos. He thus argues:
"Stars that are invisible, and consequently have no name, move in
space together with those that are visible. . . .  These invisible
stars frequently fall to the earth and are extinguished, as the stony
star which fell burning at AEgos Potamos." This last opinion, it will
be seen, coincides, as far as it goes, almost exactly with the most
modern views on the subject.

As some of the Greeks derived the origin of meteorites from the sun
(probably from the fact of their sometimes falling during bright
sunshine), so we find, at the end of the seventeenth century, it was
believed by a great many that they fell from the moon. This conjecture
appears to have been first hazarded by an Italian philosopher, meeting
Paolo Maria Terzago, whose attention was specially directed to this
subject on the occasion of a meteoric stone falling at Milan in 1660,
and killing a Franciscan monk. Olbers,  however, was the first to
treat this theory in a scientific manner, and soon after about fall of
an aerolite at Siena, in the year 1794, he began to examine the
question by the aid of the most abstruse mathematics, and after
several years' labor he succeeded in showing that, in order to reach
our earth, a stone would require to start from the moon at an initial
velocity 8,292 feet per second; then proceeding downward with
increasing speed, it would arrive on the earth with a {539} of 35,000
feet per second. But frequent measurements have shown that the
_actual_ rate of aerolites averages 114,000 feet, or about twenty-one
miles and a half per second, they were approved by these curious and
most elaborate calculations to have come from a fire greater distance
than that of our satellite. It is but fair to add that the question of
initial velocity, on which the whole value value of this so-called
"ballistic problem" depends, was investigative by three other eminent
geometricians, Biot, Laplace, and Poisson, who during ten or twelve
years were independently engaged is calculation. Biot's estimate was
8,282 feet in the second; Laplace, 7,862; and Poisson, 7,585--results
all approximating very closely with those stated by Olbers.

We have already observed, at the beginning of this paper, that
meteoric stones may fall at any moment, but observations, extending
over many years, have sometimes been brought forward to show that, as
far as locality is concerned, all countries are not equally liable to
these visitations. In other words, the large number of aerolites which
have been known to fall within a certain limited area has been
contrasted with the apparent rarity of such occurrences beyond these
limits. If it could be proved that the earth possessed more attractive
power in some places than in others, this circumstance might be
satisfactorily explained, but in default of any such evidence, the
advocates of this theory must rely solely upon statistics, which from
their very nature require to be taken with a certain amount of
reserve. Professor Shepard, in Silliman's American Journal, has
remarked that "fall of aerolites is confined principally to two zones;
the one belonging to America is bounded by 33 deg. and 44 deg. north latitude,
and is about 25 deg. in length. Its direction is more or less from
north-east to south-west, following the general line of the Atlantic
Coast. Of all known occurrences of this phenomenon during the last
fifty years, 92.8 per cent, have taken place within these limits, and
mostly in the neighborhood of the sea. The zone of the eastern
continent--with the exception that it extends ten degrees more to the
north--lies between the same degrees of latitude, and follows a
similar north-east direction, but is more than twice the length of the
American zone. Of all the observed falls of aerolites, 90.9 per cent,
have taken place within this area, and were also concentrated in that
half of the zone which extends along the Atlantic."

On reference to a map, it will be seen that in the western continent
the so-called zone is simply confined to the United States--the most
densely inhabited portion of America. In like manner the eastern zone
leaves out the whole of desert Africa, Lapland, Finland, the chief
part of Russia, with an average of thirty-two inhabitants to each
square mile; Sweden and Norway, with only seventeen per mile; whilst
it embraces all the well-peopled districts of central Europe, most of
which, like England, are able to count between three and four hundred
persons to every mile of their territory. In fact, Professor Shepard's
statement may almost be resolved into a plain question of population,
for were an aerolite to fall in the midst of a desert, or in a thinly
peopled district, it is needless to point out how few the chances are
of its descent being ever noticed or recorded. That innumerable
aerolites do fall without attracting any attention, is clearly proved
by the number of discoveries continually taking place of metallic
masses which, from their locality and peculiar chemical composition,
could only be derived from some extra-terrestrial source. The great
size also of many of these masses entirely precludes the possibility
of their having been placed by human agency in the positions they have
been found to occupy--sometimes on the surface of the earth, but just
as frequently buried a few feet in the ground.

{540}

Thus the traveller Pallas found, in 1749, at Abakansk, in Siberia, the
mass of meteoric iron, weighing 1,680 lb., now in the Imperial Museum
at St. Petersburg. Another, lying on the plain of Tucuman, near
Otumpa, in South America, has been estimated, by measurement, to weigh
no less than 33,600 lb., or about fifteen tons; and one added last
year to the splendid collection of meteorites in the British Museum
weighs rather more than three and a half tons. It was found at
Cranboume, near Melbourne, and was purchased by a Mr. Bruce, with a
view to his presenting it to the British Museum, when, through some
misunderstanding, it was discovered that one half of it had been
already promised to the museum at Melbourne. In order, therefore, to
save it from any such mutilation, the trustees of our national museum
acquired and transferred to the authorities of the Melbourne
collection a smaller mass which had been sent in 1862 to the
International Exhibition. It weighed about 3,000 lb., and had been
found near Melbourne, in the immediate vicinity of the great
meteorite. The latter was then forwarded entire to London. In the
British Museum may also be seen a small fragment of an aerolite,
originally weighing 191 lb., which from time immemorial had been lying
at Elbogen, near Carlsbad, in Bohemia, and had always borne the
legendary appellation of "_der verwuenschte Burggraf_," or the
enchanted Burgrave. The remainder of this mass is preserved in the
Imperial collection at Vienna. In Great Britain only two meteoric
masses (not seen to fall) have hitherto been discovered; one was found
about forty years ago near Leadhills, in Scotland; the other in 1861,
at Newstead, in Roxburghshire.

Several instances have at different times occurred in which stones
like aerolites have been found, and prized accordingly, until their
real nature was demonstrated by the aid of chemical analysis. One
valuable specimen, found a few years ago, was shown to have derived
its origin amongst the _scoriae_ of an iron foundry; another, picked
up in the Isle of Wight, turned out to be a nodule of iron pyrites,
similar in every respect to those which abound in the neighboring
chalk cliffs; and lastly, some aerolites of a peculiarly glassy
appearance were found shortly after, of which it may, perhaps, suffice
to say that the scene of this discovery was--Birmingham.

When we come to examine the composition of meteoric stones, we find in
various specimens a great diversity in their chemical structure. Iron
is the metal most invariably present, usually accompanied by a
consider percentage of nickel and cobalt; also five other metals,
chromium, copper, molybdenum, manganese, and tin; but of all these
iron is that which largely preponderates, forming sometimes as much as
ninety-six parts in the hundred. Rare instances have, however, been
recorded where the proportion of iron has sunk so low as to form only
two percent, and the deficiency thus caused has been made up by a
larger admixture of some earthy mineral, such as augite, hornblende,
or olivine. Other ingredients, like carbon, sulphur, alumina, etc.,
are also found to enter, in different proportions, into the
composition of aerolites; the total number all chemical elements
observed in them up to this present date the nineteen or twenty. It
has been well remarked by an able writer, that no _new_ substance has
hitherto come to us from without; and thus we find that all these
nineteen or twenty elements are precisely similar to those which are
distributed throughout the rocks and minerals of our earth; the
essential difference between the two classes of compounds--celestial
and terrestrial--being seen most clearly in the respective methods in
which the component parts are admixed.

In the outward appearance aerolites there is one characteristic so
constant that, out of the many hundred examples that have been
recorded, one only (as far as we can ascertain) has {541} been wanting
in it. We refer to the black fused crust or rind with which the
surface of meteoric stones is covered. It usually extends not more
than a few tenths of an inch into the substance of the stone, and is
supposed to result from the extreme rapidity with which they descend
into the oxygen of our atmosphere, causing them to undergo a slight
and partial combustion, which, however, from the short time
necessarily occupied in their descent, has not sufficient time to
penetrate beyond the surface. On cutting and polishing the stones, if
the smooth face is treated with nitric acid, it will in many cases be
found to exhibit lines and angular markings, commonly known by the
name of "widmannsted figures." These are tracings of imperfect
crystals, while the broad intermediate spaces, preserving their
polish, point out those portions of the stone which contain a larger
proportion of nickel than the rest of the mass. We may here add that
the noise said at times to accompany the fall of aerolites, does not
appear to be a constant characteristic, nor does the cause or exact
nature of it seem able to be definitely specified.

In conclusion, we cannot do better than advise those of our readers
who desire further information on this subject to take the earliest
opportunity--if they have not done so already--of paying a visit to
the magnificent collection of meteoric stones, contained in several
glass cases at the end of the mineral gallery at the British Museum.
The catalogue for the year 1856 gave a list of between 70 and 80
specimens; in 1863 this number had increased to 216, mainly through
the energy of the curator, Mr. Maskelyne; and since that date there
have been several further additions. Chief among continental museums
may be mentioned the Imperial collection at Vienna, as possessing a
series of specimens remarkable alike for their size and importance.



From Good Words.


DELIVERANCE.


  As some poor captive bird, too weak to fly,
  Still lingers in its open cage, so I
            My slavery own.
  For evil makes a prison-house within;
  The gloom of sin, and sorrow born of sin.
            Doth weigh me down.
  Ah! Christ, and wilt not thou regard my sighs,
  Long wakeful hours, and lonely miseries,
            And hopes forlorn?
  Let not my fainting soul be thus subdued.
  Nor leave thy child in darkened solitude.
            All night to mourn!

  He hears my prayer! the dreary night is done,
  I feel the soft air and the blessed sun.
            With heavenly beams.
  He comes, my Lord! in raiment glistening white.
  From pastures golden in the morning light
            And crystal streams.
  O let me come to thee!--from this dark place--
  And see my gentle Shepherd face to face,
            And hear his voice.
  So shall these bitter tears no longer flow,
  And thou shalt teach my secret heart to know
            Thy sacred joys!



{542}


ORIGINAL.


WHAT CAME OF A LAUGH ON A CHRISTMAS EVE.


"Beg your pardon, sir," said I, as soon as I could compose myself
sufficiently to speak; "I couldn't help it."

"Glad to hear it. Just what I want. I was debating with myself whether
it was sure for a laugh. I am looking for things that will make one
laugh; in short, buying up causes for laughter on a Christmas day.
There can be no doubt, you think, about this being funny?"

"Not a bit of it," said I.

"Well, I'll have one for every basket, then," said the old gentleman,
his eyes twinkling with delight, as he danced the toy up and down. It
was one of those jointed wooden monkeys that by means of a slide
performs the most comical evolutions around the top of a pole.

"You see," continued he, "I cannot always trust my own judgment.
There's no credit in my laughing, bless your heart. I'd be a monster,
yes, a monster, my dear sir, if I didn't. I'm just like this monkey as
you see him now in this position, ready to go over the other side with
the slightest provocation. I have everything that heart can wish, sir,
to laugh at and be happy; but they, poor dears, they are so far on the
minus side of merriment, as well they may be, that it takes a little
something extra, you see, to get a good hearty squeal out of them."

I became at once intensely interested in the "poor dears" alluded to.
The sight of the old gentleman was enough to make one do unheard-of
feats of heroism in favor of any person or thing of which he might
take the least notice. I ventured to suppose that they had lost
something or somebody lately, with the intention of offering my hand
or purse as the case might be.

"Can't say that they have," he replied, rubbing his shiny bald head.
"Being generally on the minus side of everything, including laughter,
they haven't anything to lose which you or I might think worth
keeping, except their lives, and somehow I think they've got used to
losing even them pretty comfortably."

I was perplexed, and muttered, "Curious sort of people, those."

"But interesting, you'll allow?" said he.

I replied that I had no doubt of it; and I meant it, for so charming
and open-hearted was this old gentlemen, that I was ready to subscribe
unhesitatingly to any asseveration he might be pleased to make;
"but--" I added, about to express my ignorance of the individuals in
question, when he interrupted me.

"Why--but? My Minnie, the Darling of the World and the Sunshine of my
life" (expressing the titles of that person in the largest capitals),
"and I held an ante-Christmas council this morning, and it was
proposed by the president, that is myself, and seconded by the said
Darling of the World and Sunshine of my life, and carried by an
overwhelming majority, including Bob, who said he went in for anything
good, that buts were unparliamentary when Christmas was concerned; and
so we called the roll, twenty in all, and there being no buts, they
all stood unchallenged, making twenty baskets, and now as many monkeys
to go in them. What do you think of it! Capital, wasn't it?"

I was certain it was, and was prepared to go any odds in its favor.

"What's more," he added, "they are going privately."

{543}

Being committed beyond all explanation, I said I was glad to hear that
too, "if Miss Minnie approves." This last supposition I made with a
deprecating cough, not being quite sure of the relation which the old
gentleman bore to the Darling of the World and the Sunshine of his
life.

"It was her own proposal," was his rejoinder, "and you can't imagine
what an immense relief it was to me too. It is more than I can stand
to get through with the "thank ye sir's," and the "much obliged's" and
the "long life to your honor's." I'm a baby, sir, in their presence,
and by the time the distribution is made I'm a spectacle of
unmitigated woe, as if I'd been to as many funerals as there are
baskets. I remember that as I was coming out from a widow and five
children, last Christmas, that rascal Bob saw me wiping my eyes, and
says he, 'Most of 'em dead, sir?' 'No, Bob,' says I, 'it's the smoke,
I suppose; they've a precious smoky chimney.' But when we got to the
next place--let me see--oh! yes, a man with a broken leg, the
scoundrel says to me, as he handed out the basket, 'Now, let us bury
another one, sir.' Not bad for, was it? I had such a good laugh on
each pair of stairs beforehand that I got through that one pretty
comfortably But it was a glorious proposal of my Minnie's, was it not,
that these should go privately? for we'll sit at home, and check them
off as they go in, for I've arranged that the messenger shall deliver
them by the watch, sir, and we'll imagine their surprise and their
happy faces, and the bringing out of the monkeys, and then we'll have
a roar and be jolly, and get rid of the thank ye's and all the rest of
it that chokes up a man's throat and turns him into a born baby." And
here the good-hearted old gentleman, in the fulness of his delight,
caused the monkey in his hand to perform a series of rapid gymnastics
over the top of his pole, beyond the powers of any monkey that ever
lived. He presented such a comical appearance in doing this that I
burst into another hearty laugh in which he as heartily joined.

"It is irresistibly amusing," said I, meaning the monkey.

"I knew it would be," he returned, his mind running upon the happy
scheme by which he might prevent his left hand knowing the deeds of
the right; "we will have twenty merry Christmas laughs all rolled into
one. There I'll be, as it were, on this side," here he took a position
on the floor opposite me, "and my Darling over there, as it were you,"
a distinction I acknowledged by a profound bow, "and Bob standing
behind her chair, as that rocking-horse stands behind you; and then,
watch in hand, we'll check them off: Number One, Widow Bums, two small
children; Number Two, Susy Bell, orphan girl, works in a carpet
factory and supports her two orphan sisters; Number Three, old Granny
Mullen, with consumptive son and three grand-children, and so on; and
there we'll have them all right before us, and they knowing nothing
about it (there's the beauty of it, all due to that blessed Darling of
the World and Sunshine of my life), and out will come the joint of
meat, ready cooked, and the mince-pie, and the plum-pudding with a
dozen of silver quarter dollars in each one, and the shoes and the
stockings, and I don't know what else besides, packed away by my
Darling's own sweet little hands, and last of all the monkey with a
label around his neck, with an inscription, say, for instance, 'From
Nobody in particular, with best wishes for a Merry Christmas.' There
you have it," added he, waving the monkey triumphantly in the air,
"and won't it be grand?"

"I'd give the world to see it," I exclaimed, quite carried away by the
old gentleman's enthusiastic manner. Just then the keeper of the
toy-shop handed me a package of marbles, tops, jewsharps, a pocket
spy-glass, and a few other things of a like nature calculated to make
glad the heart of {544} boys, which I had purchased for my little
nephew, Willie, in the country.

"This for you, Mr. Holiday; but if you wish, I'll send it around to
the doctor's," said the toy-vender.

"Lord bless my heart and soul!" exclaimed the old gentleman, seizing
me suddenly by both hands. "Not Alfred Holiday is it?"

"That is my name," said I.

"Nephew of Dr. Ben?"

"Nephew of Dr. Ben," I repeated.

"And how long have you been in the city?"

"About a week," said I. "I came up to spend Christmas with Uncle Ben
and Aunt Mary."

"And to take a look in at the Owl's Retreat, No. 9 Harmony place, of
course?"

I intimated my ignorance of the Retreat in question, and of my not
having the pleasure, etc.

"My house, man, my house," said he, shaking my hands up and down. "Dr.
Ben and I are old acquaintances; in fact, ever since my Minnie was--I
beg your pardon," added he, suddenly recollecting himself, and
producing a card from his vest pocket. "Name of Acres, Thomas Acres,
who, with the compliments of his daughter Minnie to the same effect,
_will_ be--_most_ happy--_to_ see--Mr. Alfred--_Holiday_--on
to-morrow _morning_--to _join_ in--_the_ grand--checking off--_of_
the--twenty baskets--_and_ their--contents--including--monkeys--and
of course stay to dinner."

If the old gentleman's cordial manner had any weight in deciding my
acceptance of the invitation, it must be confessed that the curiosity
to see the "Darling of the World and the Sunshine of his life" added
not a little to it. Promising to be on hand at No. 9 before eleven
o'clock, at which hour the checking off was to begin, I bade my
new-found friend good-morning and went home.

But it was very provoking not to know more of the "Darling and
Sunshine" This is him him him him question. Standing in such a light
to such a father, she was, of course, a peerless being. Age--say,
twenty. Height--medium, I am five feet ten.  10 Blonde or
brunette--difficult to determine. Sunshine would seem to indicate
blonde, yet darling might be either. Good, amiable, witty,
accomplished--not a doubt of it. Beautiful name too, said I, as I
scribbled it in every style of the caligraphic art, thereby destroying
no small amount of my uncle's property in fine gilt-edged note paper.
Has she suitor already. Hoity-toity, Mr. Alfred Holiday, you are
castle-building on a small amount of material, it seems to me; and if
she have,  what affair is that of yours? a question which that
imaginative young gentlemen finding himself unable to solve fell into
a fit of despondency, and went to bed in a despairing state of mind.

Punctual to the appointed hour I walked into Harmony place, a quiet
unpretentious street, and open the gate of No. 9. There had been both
a rain and heavy frost in the night, and the trees and shrubs, clothed
in a complete armor of ice, sparkled and glittered in the bright
sunshine. Unfortunately, the ground shared in this universal covering,
and being under the impression that someone was looking from behind
the curtains, who might possibly be the Darling of the World and the
Sunshine of the life of Mr. Thomas Acres, I insanely endeavored to
walk upon the glassy pavement with careless ease, as if it were the
most ordinary ground in the world. I now advise my bitterest enemy to
try it. In an unguarded moment my feet slipped, and I came down in the
most unpleasant manner into a sitting posture upon the ground. I
thought I heard the sound of a clear ringing laugh following
immediately upon my ignominious fall. I hoped it was from No. 10 or
No. 8; yet my heart misgave me as Mr. Acres, with a half dozen
superfluous bows, divided between his daughter and myself, introduced
me, and a pair of dark, deep eyes, in which I thought I detected a
merry twinkle, quietly but warmly acknowledged my presence.

{545}

"Mr. Alfred Holiday, my child, our old friend, Doctor Holiday's
nephew; Mr. Holiday, my daughter Minnie, the Darling of the World and
the Sunshine of my life, as I have already told you, and the Dove of
this Owl's Retreat."

I was "most happy," of course, and wished them both, with a bow to
Miss Minnie, a Merry Christmas.

"We were getting afraid, Mr. Holiday, lest we should be obliged to
begin without you," said that bright-eyed and altogether beautiful
young lady, in a tone of voice which I afterward characterized in a
violently worded poem, written just before midnight, as 'rippling
diamonds' and 'dropping pearls.'

"Afraid!--without _me_?" I exclaimed, placing a most unjustifiable
emphasis upon the personal pronoun. "I am highly flattered."

"Not at all; my father tells me he feels deeply indebted to you in
assisting him in the choice of some toys designed for the children."

"For--for--laughing," stammered I. "Do you think, Miss Acres, that one
might be indebted to another for a laugh?" I was thinking of my stupid
fall on the ice, and began to regret my having accredited to No. 8 or
10 those sounds of merriment which reached my ears.

"If one gives good cause," she replied, with the quietest and most
provoking of smiles. The deep, dark eyes twinkled again, and Nos. 8
and 10 stood acquitted.

"Come, Mr. Holiday," said Mr. Acres, "let us take an inspection of the
forces. Wagon is loaded, strange man hired, with a watch in his
pocket, off he goes; whence he comes or whither he goes, nobody knows.
Ha! ha! Minnie, my dear, put me down one, your ancient Owl has struck
a poetic vein; no time to register it, however. Come along; while I am
immortalizing myself, twenty hungry families are waiting for a
Christmas dinner they don't expect to get, and their mouths watering
for plum-puddings and mince pies that they have not the most distant
expectation of"--and the good old soul led the way into the hall, and
thence into the court yard, at the entrance of which stood a large
covered furniture-cart, filled to over-flowing with the wonderful
twenty baskets destined to distribute happiness among as many poor and
suffering families, and make their hearts merry on Christmas day. Each
basket was labelled with its direction, number, and time of delivery.

"Now, John," said Mr. Acres to the driver as he mounted to his place
on the cart, "remember, you are born deaf and dumb, can't hear a word
nor even say 'Merry Christmas,' until you come back here and report."

"Lave me alone, sir," replied John with a broad grin, "the fun shan't
be spiled for me."

"He enters into it, he enters into it, you see," said Mr. Acres,
addressing Minnie and myself. "What's the time, John, by yours?"

"Near eleven, sir."

"Time's up, then.

  "One, two, three, and off you go.
   Twenty baskets piled in a row:
   Ask me no questions, for I don't know.

Positively, my darling, there's something inspiring in the air this
morning."

John cracked his whip, and the cart moved out of the yard, turned down
the street, and was soon out of sight. Mr. Acres was a perfect picture
of happiness as he stood gazing at the departing vehicle, rubbing his
hands with delight, and his full, round face beaming with intense
satisfaction. As I glanced at Minnie I saw her eyes filled with tears
of love and pride as she watched the movements of her father. Turning
about suddenly he noticed her emotion, upon which he went up to her,
and placing a hand on her either cheek said with mock gravity:

{546}

"Miss Minnie Acres, the Darling of the World and the Sunshine of my
life, is hereby invited to attend the funeral of twenty baskets
without further notice. Ha! ha! you recollect Bob, you know; and no
time to lose either," he added, taking Minnie's hand in his right and
mine in his left, and turning toward the parlor; "so let us get at it,
my dears; excuse the liberty, Mr. Holiday, I'm in a glorious humor,
and it's Christmas day, and here we are, and here's  the list, so sit
ye down; and Bob, Bob! you rascal, where are you?"

The rascal thus vociferously called for responded immediately by
presenting at the door a form about four feet in height, of the rarest
obesity, clothed in a dark-gray suit, evidently denned for the first
time, and holding with both hands the stiffest and hardest of hats.
There was no motion of his lips visible, but a sound was heard as if
it proceeded from the inside of a cotton-bale, which was understood to
mean--

"Here I am, sir; respects, gentlemen and ladies, and a Merry
Christmas."

"Pretty time of day for that" said Mr. Acres, "as if a body were just
out of bed, and hadn't heard Mass yet. Oh! I see," he continued,
glancing at Bob's new clothes, which I have no doubt were the delivery
of an order from T. Acres, Esq., made that very morning by Tibbits &
Son, fashionable tailors. "Well, Merry Christmas, Bob; but don't stand
bowing there all day"--which feat that individual seemed to be vainly
attempting to execute, but could not get through with to his entire
satisfaction--"come in, and stand there by Miss Minnie, and listen to
the checking off, and we'll see if it's all right as a trivet, as it
should be. Lord! I'd eat no dinner if there was one left out."

The "checking off" commenced immediately, the time being up for the
delivery of the first basket. Nothing could exceed the delight of the
old gentleman as Minnie read from the list the names of the parties
who at that moment received the basket, their places of residence, and
a detailed account of the articles sent. Each basket contained a
sufficient supply for a hearty Christmas dinner for the family,
jellies, wines, and other delicacies for the sick, some articles of
clothing, and last of all the toy monkey.

"They've all got one," said Mr. Acres, chuckling with glee as monkey
Number One was mentioned; "but we must do it regular and put them all
down, or I should be afraid we overlooked one, which isn't likely,
however, for they are all down at the bottom of each basket, and I
with them there myself."

One by one the baskets were checked off, Mr. Acres with watch in hand
calling "time," and Minnie reading thereupon the names of the parties
and contents of the basket allotted to them. We very soon realized the
old gentleman's promise that we would have a roar, for as the
distribution went on the merriment increased, as all considered it
their bounden duty to laugh louder and longer at the mention of the
monkey of the basket then checked off than they did at the last one.
Even Bob, whose risible powers seemed to be rather limited, and which
were evidently under still greater restraint by reason of the
additional dignity which became the new outfit, succeeded in
increasing the hilarity of the occasion by the comical manner he
performed his appointed duty in the checking off, which consisted in
answering "right" when the number and names were announced, and
submitting any information obtained of the parties in question through
the intervention of a certain Mrs. McQuirey, whose "absence at the
present delightful reunion," explained Mr. Acres, "was owing to the
numerous duties with which that excellent lady had burdened herself."
These duties, I afterward learned, consistent in making a daily
morning visit to a number of sick poor people who Mr. Acres had taken
under his fostering care. Bob's information was remarkable for its
brevity of expression as well as for its peculiarly ventriloquistic
character, due to the extraordinary amount of adipose matter which
enveloped his organs of speech. {547} Of basket Number Five, for
instance, he said, "Bad--husband goes it every Saturday
night--children thin as broom handles." Or Number eight he reported:
"Measles--shanty--rags scare--allers hungry." Of Number Ten,
"Wus--man broken leg--wife no work--ain't fit neither if there was
millions." Of Number Twenty, the last, having by this time exhausted
his stock of adjectives, he summed up his report thus: "Extremely wust
o' the hall lot--widder--nine mortal bags o' hungry bones--and what
will you do with 'em?"

"Do with them!" exclaimed Mr. Acres, "we'll have Mrs. McQuirey look
them up, Bob, eh? Minnie, dear, take a note of Number Twenty, that
basket is only a bite."

The baskets being all checked off, Bob was ordered to produce
forthwith a bottle of wine and glasses. "Now that we've got through
with it comfortably," said Mr. Acres, "we'll drink all their healths,
and wish 'em a Merry Christmas," which was done, all standing.
"Hoping," continued that Prince of Charity, glass in hand, and
following toward the four points of the compass, as if the whole
twenty families were arranged about him in a circle, "that you may all
have many happy returns of the season, and never know a Christmas that
is not a merry one."

Never was a toast drunk with purer enthusiasm or a heartier good-will.
Believing it to be the part of some one to cheer the sentiment, and
not seeing any of the parties present who might with great propriety
perform that duty, Bob took it upon himself to act their proxy, which
he accordingly did by waving his new hat in a circle and giving three
muffled "Hoo-rays" from the cotton bale.

In a few minutes John the messenger returned. He was at once
introduced to the parlor, where he gave a glowing account of his
errand.

"The shammin' deaf an' dumb was thryin' to me sowl above all. It wint
aginst me not to be able to say the top o' the mornin' to ye, or aven
God save all here on a Christmas dhay to the crathers, an' the Lord
forgive me for peepin' an' a listenin' whin they thought I was deaf as
a post, but it was in a good cause. It tuk the tears out o' me two
eyes, so it did, to hear thim wondherin and prayin 'and a blessin'
yez, and a cryin' for joy, and to see the childer dancin' the monkeys
like mad. Och! but it's a glory to be a rich man like yer honor. Me
mouth wathers whin I think o' the threasures ye're a hapin' up above."

"Bob," interrupted Mr. Acres, shifting uneasily in his seat, "you had
better get out the crape hat-bands, for I see a funeral coming round
the corner."

"A funeral is it?" said John. "May it be a thousand years afore it
shtops forninst yer honor's doors."

"Thank ye, John; thank ye," said Mr. Acres, suddenly rising and going
to the window, where he stood apparently deeply interested in the view
of a blank wall and some smoky chimney-pots before him.

"Whin _his_ day comes," continued John, loud enough to be overheard by
Mr. Acres, "what a croonin' and a philaluin' thim poor crathers will
be makin'. Sure, their tears will be droopin' like diamonds into his
grave."

This was too much for Mr. Acres, who turned around, presenting a
picture of inconsolable grief. It was only after two or three violent
efforts to clear his throat of some unusually large obstacle which
appeared to have stuck there that he succeeded in saying:

"Merry Christmas, John! Merry Christmas! You will find a plum-pudding,
John, waiting down-stairs," and immediately began another survey of
the blank wall and chimney-pots, making at the same time several
abortive attempts to whistle.

{548}

John took the hint, and bowed himself out of the room. A dead silence
ensued upon his departure, which no one appeared to find sufficient
reason to break. In vain did I rack my brains to find an appropriate
remark, but the words would not arrange themselves into a grammatical
sentence. As I chanced to lift my eyes to the full-orbed face of Bob,
standing bolt upright behind Minnie's chair, I became convinced at
once of the fact that I had been intently and impudently staring at
that Darling of the World for some time, whose beautiful downcast
face, half shaded by a profuse cluster of raven curls I thought might
engage the attention of any individual, say for an unlimited term of
years. Embarrassed by this discovery, I took up the basket list and
became at once deeply absorbed in its perusal. Unfortunately, the
paper appeared to be possessed of some diabolical fascination which
prevented my looking away from it or opening my mouth. How long this
state of things might have continued is difficult to say, had not Bob
broken the silence by a question, addressed, as it seemed, rather to
mankind in general then to any particular individual within hearing:

"This ain't Christmas is it?"

"Yes, it is, you rascal," replied Mr. Acres; who, being either
satisfied with his inspection of the blank wall and the chimney-pots,
or had concluded to defer their more minute examination to another
time, at that moment came forward to the table. "Go and order up lunch
directly, Minnie, my darling; Mr. Holiday will give us the pleasure of
his company, and also to dinner. Meanwhile, Mr. Holiday will be glad
to hear you sing, my dear, and I will go and have Number Twenty looked
after; that basket was only a bite, only a bite."

Mr. Alfred Holiday immediately led Miss Minnie Acres to the piano,
where he listened with rapt attention to that young lady's singing of
Miss Hemans's "O lovely voices of the sky;" upon which Mr. Alfred
Holiday made the stupid remark that he had never heard any one of
those "voices of the sky" before that day. Afterward Miss Minnie Acres
and Mr. Alfred Holiday looked over a portfolio of prints together,
when that young gentleman discovered that all his fingers were thumbs,
and besought Miss Minnie Acres to hold one of the prints for him,
when, looking at her and at the same time pretending to examine the
picture with a critical eye, he declared he never saw anything so
beautiful in his life, which irrelevant observation caused Miss Minnie
Acres to say to Mr. Alfred Holiday, "Why! you're not looking at it!"
whereupon that gentlemen became speechless and blushed from the roots
of his hair to the depths of his best necktie. Of the events of the
rest of the day Mr. Alfred Holiday distinctly remembers the following
facts. Lunch being announced, Mr. Alfred Holiday took Miss Minnie
Acres to the table, acted in the most insane manner while there, and
lead Miss Minnie Acres back to the parlor; that he played backgammon
with Miss Minnie Acres, and doubtless left an impression on the mind
of that young lady that he was utterly ignorant of the game; that he
accompanied Miss Minnie Acres to Vespers, and returned with her; that
he took Miss Minnie Acres to dinner, during which a gentleman, who to
the best of his belief was Mr. Thomas Acres, told him several times
that he, Mr. Alfred Holiday, ate nothing, a fact of which that
gentleman was not aware; that after the cloth was removed Mr. Alfred
Holiday sat staring at an empty chair opposite him, for the possession
of which he could cheerfully have impoverished himself and gone upon
the wide, wide world; that certain musical sounds proceeded from the
direction of the parlor, Mr. Alfred Holiday asseverated in the
strongest terms to be "divine;" that upon his return to the parlor he
was only restrained by the presence of a third person from throwing
himself upon his knees and explaining: "Thou art the Darling of the
World and the Sunshine of my life," but which he nevertheless repeated
{549} in his mind an innumerable number of times; in a word, that Mr.
Alfred Holiday fell head over ears in love with Miss Minnie Acres, and
made of all, which up to the present writing he has religiously, that
if she would accept his hand and heart, which she did a few weeks
after, he would send her twenty baskets of provisions to as many poor
families every Christmas Eve, as a thank-offering, and a grateful
remembrance of the hour when he laughed, and thereby one the most
beautiful and most faithful wife that a man ever have.




From The London Society.

A CHRISTMAS DREAM.


  A Pilgrim to the West returned, whose palm-branch, drenched in dew,
  Shook off bright drops like childhood's tears when childhood's heart is new,
  Stole up the hills at eventide, like mist in wintry weather,
  Where locked in dream-like trance I lay, at rest among the heather.

  The red ferns, answering to his tread; sent up a savor sweet;
  The yellow gorse, like Magian gold, glowed bright about his feet:
  The waving brooms, the winter blooms, each happy voice in air,
  Grew great with life and melody, as if a Christ stood there.

  Unlike to mortal man was he. His brow rose broad and high:
  The peace of heaven was on his lip, the God-light in his eye;
  And rayed with richer glory streamed, through night and darkness shed,
  To crown that holy Pilgrim's brow, the one star overhead.

  Long gazing on that staff he bore, beholding how it grew
  With sprouts of green, with buds between, and young leaves ever new.
  The marvels of the Eastern land I bade him all unfold.
  And thus to my impassioned ears the wondrous tale he told:

  "Each growth upon that sacred soil where one died not in vain,
  Though crushed and shed, though seeming dead, in beauty lives again:
  The branching bough the knife may cleave, the root the axe may sever,
  But on the ground his presence lighted, nothing dies for ever.

  "Where once amid the lowly stalls fell soft the Virgin's tear,
  The littered straw 'neath children's feet turns to green wheat in ear.
  The corn he pluck'd on Sabbath days, though ne'er it feels the sun,
  Though millions since have trod the field, bears fruit for every one.

  "The palms that on his way were strewn wave ever in the air;
  From clouded earth to sun-bright heaven they form a leafy stair.
  In Cana's bowers the love of man is touched by the divine;
  And snows that fall on Galilee have still the taste of wine.

  "Where thy lost locks, poor Magdalen! around his feet were rolled,
  Still springs in woman's worship-ways the gracious Mary-gold:
  Men know when o'er that bowed down head they hear the angels weeping,
  The purer spirit is not dead--not dead, but only sleeping.

{550}

  "Aloft on blackened Calvary no more the shadows lower:
  Where fell the piercing crown of thorns, there blooms a thorn in flower.
  Bright on the prickled holy-tree and mistletoe' appear,
  Reflecting rays of heavenly shine, the blod-drop and the tear.

  "The sounding rocks that knew his tread wake up each dead abyss,
  Where echoes caught from higher worlds ring gloriously in this;
  And, leaning where his voice once filled the temple where he taught,
  The listener's eyes grew spirit-full--full with a heavenly thought."

  The Pilgrim ceased. My heart beat fast. I marked a change of hue;
  As if those more than mortal eyes a soul from God looked through.
  Then rising slow as angels rise, and soaring faint and far,
  He passed my bound of vision, robed in glory, as a star.

  Strange herald voices filled the air: glad anthems swelled around:
  The wakened winds rose eager-voiced, and lapsed in dreamy sound.
  It seemed all birds that wintered far, drawn home by some blessed power,
  Made music in the Christmas woods, mistaking of the hour.

  A new glad spirit raptured me! I woke to breathe the morn
  With heart fresh-strung to charity--as though a Christ were born.
  Then knew I how each earth-born thought, though tombed in clay it seem,
  It bursts the sod, it soars to God, transfigured in a dream.

                                                ELEANORA L. HERVEY



From the Month.

VICTIMS OF DOUBT.


It is not the fashion at present to scoff at Christianity, or to make
an open profession of infidelity. Ponderous treatises to prove that
revealed religion is an impossibility, and coarse blasphemies against
holy things, are equally out of date. Yet to men of earnest
convictions, whether holding the whole or only some portions of
revealed truth, the moral atmosphere is not reassuring. The pious
Catholic, the Bible-loving Protestant, and the hybrid of the last
phase of Tractarianism, are alike distrustful of the smooth aspect of
controversy and the calm surface of the irreligious element. There is
something worse than bigotry or mischief, and that is skepticism. And,
if we may judge from what we hear and read, it is this to which most
schools of thought outside the Catholic Church are rapidly drifting,
if they have not already reached it, and into which restless and
disloyal Catholics are in danger of being precipitated. An answer made
to an old Oxford friend by one who was once with him in the van of the
Tractarian movement, but did not accompany him into the fold, "I agree
with you, that if there is a divine revelation, the Roman Catholic
Church is the ordained depository of it; but this is an uncertainty
which I cannot solve," would probably express the habitual state of
mind of a fearfully {551} large number of the more thoughtful of our
countrymen, and the occasional reflection of many more who do not
often give themselves time to think. And to the multitudes who are
plunging or gliding into doubts the Catholic system, which there
unhappy training has made it one of their first principles to despise
for detest, has not even presented itself as an alternative.

The current literature of the day, which is mostly framed to suit the
taste of the market, and reacts again in developing that taste further
in the same direction, is pre-eminently, not blasphemous, or
anti-Catholic, or polemical, but sceptical. The following description
of the periodical press by the Abbe Louis Baunard, in his recent
publication,  [Footnote 168] might seem to have been written for
London instead of Paris:

  [Footnote 168: Le Doute ses Victimes dans le Siecle present, par M.
  l'Abbe Louis Baunard. Paris.]

"With some rare exceptions, you will not find any rude scoffing,
violent expressions, unfashionable cynicism, harsh systems, or
exclusive intolerance. Yet is not controversy that is the business of
these writers, but criticism. They deal in expositions and
suppositions, but almost always without deciding anything. It is a
principle with them that there are only shades of difference between
the most contradictory propositions; and the reader becomes accustomed
to see these shades in such questions as those which relate to the
personality of God, the divinity of Jesus Christ, and the supernatural
generally. This does not hinder these men from calling themselves
Christians, in the vague sense of a loose Christianity, which allows
the names of ancient beliefs to remain, while it destroys their
substance. They do not assault the old religion in front, but silently
undermine the foundations on which it rests, and carry on ingenious
parallels by the side of revealed truth, till some conclusion emerges
which utterly subverts it, without having appeared to be intentionally
directed against it. There is one review, the most widely circulated
of all, in the same number of which an article dearly atheistical will
be found by the side of another article breathing the most correct
orthodoxy, and very much surprised to see itself in such company. Such
concessions to truth, which are made only now and then, serve to give
the publication that makes them a certain appearance of impartiality,
and thus to accredit error, and to lay one more snare for the reader."

We may be inclined, on a cursory perusal of such periodicals as The
Saturday Review, to indulge gleefully in the laughter excited by the
ludicrous aspect in which some pompous prelate or fussy evangelical
preacher is presented; or to admire the acute and seemingly candid
dissection, at one time, of a Protestant scheme of evidences, at
another, of an infidel philosophy; or to rejoice in the substitution
of decorous calmness for rancor and raving in handling Catholic truth.
But when we study a series of such publications, and notice how
systematically all earnest convictions are made to show a weak or
ridiculous side, and all proofs of Christianity to appear defective,
and how, under a smooth surface of large-minded impartiality, there
beats a steady tide of attack upon all supernatural virtue and all
supernatural truth, our hearts must needs ache to think of the effects
of such teaching on multitudes of imperfectly grounded minds. In the
words of the author to whom we have referred: "Right and wrong, true
and false, yes and no, meet and jostle each other, and are mistaken
for each other in minds bewildered and off their guard, and mostly
incapable of discrimination: till at length, lost in these
cross-roads, tired of systems and of contradictions, and not knowing
in what direction to find light, all but the most energetic sit down
and rest in doubt, as in the best wisdom and the safest position." But
to sit down in doubt is either to abdicate the highest powers of a
reasonable being, or to admit an enemy that will use them as
instruments of torture. Except for {552} souls of little intellectual
activity, or wholly steeped in sense, this sitting down in doubt is
like sitting down in a train that is moving out of the station with
the steam up and no engine-driver, or in a boat that is drifting out
of harbor into a stormy sea.

The Abbe Baunard has collected the experiences of some of these
reckless and storm-tossed wanderers into a painfully interesting
volume. He has selected from the chief sceptical philosophers and
poets of the present century those who, in private journals or
autobiographical sketches, have made the fullest disclosures of the
working of their own minds, and has let them speak for themselves. He
calls them "victims of doubt," and bids us listen with compassion to
their bitter lamentations over the wreck of the past, and their gloomy
anticipations of the future, and to the cries of pain and shame which
seem forced out of them, even amidst their proudest boasts of
independence and most resolute rejections of revealed truth. But,
although an expression here or there may be unguarded, he
distinguishes very clearly between pitying and excusing these victims.
He reminds us that compassion for the sufferings entailed by doubt
cannot absolve from the guilt of doubt. He protests against the claim
made by sceptics to be regarded as warriors in conflicts in which only
the noble engage, and as scarred with honorable wounds; and against
the notion that to have suffered much in a wrong cause is a guarantee
of sincerity and a title to salvation. He quotes with reprobation the
plea of M. Octave Feuillet: "Ah! despise as much as you choose what is
despicable. But when unbelief suffers, implores, and is respectful, do
you respect it. There are blasphemies, be assured, which are as good
as prayers, and unbelievers who are martyrs. Yes, I firmly believe
that the sufferings of doubt are holy, and that to think of God and to
be always thinking of him, even with despair, is to honor him and to
be pleasing to him." He would not admit the same plea in the more
plausible form and more touching language in which it is urged by Mr.
Froude: "You who look with cold eye on such a one, and lift them up to
heaven, and thank God you are not such as he, and call him hard names,
and think of him as of one who is forsaking a cross, and pursuing
unlawful indulgence, and deserving all good men's reproach! Ah! could
you see down below his heart's surface, could you count the tears
streaming down his cheek, as out through some church-door into the
street come pealing the old familiar notes, and the old psalms which
he cannot sing, the chanted creed which is no longer his creed, and
yet to part with which was worse agony than to lose his dearest
friend; ah! you would deal him lighter measure. What! is not his cup
bitter enough, but that all the good, whose kindness at least, whose
sympathy and sorrow, whose prayers he might have hoped for, that these
must turn away from him as from an offence, as from a thing for bid?
--that he must tread the wine-press alone, calling to God-fearing man
his friend; and this, too, with the sure knowledge that of coldness
least of all he is deserving, for God knows it is no pleasant task
which has been laid on him." The fallacies which are dextrously
interwoven in this passage, that sympathy precludes condemnation, that
intense suffering of any kind sanctities the sufferer, and that the
state of doubt is imposed as a burden and not wilfully incurred and
retained, are refuted out of the mouth of those who resort to them. We
see, indeed, in the records of these victims of doubt, various
circumstances leading to their fall; such as the heathenish state of
the colleges where some of them lost their faith, the antichristian
theories of science and philosophy magisterially propounded to them,
the personal influence of friends who were already committed to
skepticism, poisonous literature thrown in the way, and the excitement
of political revolutions; and, of course, in the case of {553} those
who had not received a Catholic education, the far greater palliation
of the absence of a coherent system of belief. But, at the same time,
we see no less plainly the working of wilful negligence and
presumption in their descent into the abyss, and of wilful pride and
obstinacy in refusing to seek the means of extrication from it. They
are victims of doubt as others are victims of a habit of opium-eating
or gambling; and if we sympathize with them more deeply than with
these latter, it is rather because their anguish is more intense and
more refined than because it is less the harvest of their own sowing.
By the side of those who fell, there were others of the same
sensibility of mind, placed in the same circumstances, exposed to the
same assaults, who stood firm by prayer and humility, and who found in
their faith a provision for all their mental wants, and a fountain of
peace under the heaviest trials. And by the side of those who, having
once made shipwreck of their faith, plunged more and more deeply into
despair of knowing anything with certainty, till they flung away the
life that their own doubts had made an intolerable burden, there were
others equally astray and equally burdened, who worked their way back
to life and peace by the same path of earnest and humble prayer. Some
of these contrasts are very effectively presented by our author, and
others will suggest themselves to his readers.

The victims whose wanderings and sufferings are portrayed in this
volume are Theodore Jouffroy, Maine de Biran, Santa Rosa, Georges,
Farcy, and Edmund Scherer from among the philosophers of the century;
and Lord Byron, Friedrich Schiller, Heinrich von Kleist, and Leopardi
from among the poets; followed by a less detailed account of a group
of French sceptical poets, Alfred de Musset, Henri Heine, Murger,
Gerard de Nerval, and Hegesippe Moreau, whose writings are mostly too
gross for quotation, although enough is given to show that their
experience of the effects of doubt resembled that of the rest. All,
with the exception of M. Scherer, who is the editor of the French
paper Le Temps, have passed into a world where doubt is no longer
possible--two of them by their own hand, and two more by violent
deaths which they had gone to meet rather from weariness of life than
from enthusiasm for the cause for which they fought.

There is only one of the whole number, Maine de Biran, whose death was
thoroughly satisfactory; and he, though certainly to be reckoned among
the victims of doubt, which clouded the best years of his life, and
from which he only very slowly worked his way to freedom, is
introduced rather in the way of contrast to the other philosophers and
especially to Jouffroy. The great difference in his case lay in two
things, that he paid more attention to the moral nature of man, and
did not so wholly subordinate the desire of the good to the search
after the true, and that he was on his guard against that pride of
intellect which we see so rampant in his fellow-philosophers. While
all the most celebrated men of Paris were paying court to him, and
although, even before he had published anything beyond some short
metaphysical treatises, M. Royer Collard cried, "He is the master of
us all," and M. Cousin pronounced him to be the greatest French
metaphysician since Malebranche, his own private reflection was:
"Pride will be the ruin of my life, as long as I do not seek from on
high a spirit to direct mine, or to take its place." Yet it was not
till his fifty-second year, after many years' vain pursuit of truth in
different systems of sensualistic and rationalistic philosophy, and of
happiness first in pleasure and then in study and retirement, that he
set himself resolutely to try surer means. "Not finding," he wrote in
May, 1818, "anything satisfactory either in myself or out of myself,
in the world of my ideas or in that of objects, I have been for some
{554} time past more determined to look for that fixed resting-place
which has become the need of my mind and of my heart, in the notion of
the Absolute, Infinite, and Unchangeable Being. The religious and
moral beliefs which reason does not create, but which are its
necessary basis and support, now present themselves to me as my only
refuge, and I can find no true knowledge anywhere than just there,
where before, with the philosophers, I found only dreams and chimeras.
My point of view has altered with my disposition and moral character."
From this time the progress upward was steady. We find notices in his
journal of earnest prayer, of daily meditation, of study of the
gospels and the Imitation of Christ. Four years of physical suffering
and outward trials deepened the work of conversion, and were passed
with Christian resignation. The last words that he wrote were words of
certainty and peace: "The Christian walks in the presence of God and
with God, by the Mediator whom he has taken as his guide for this life
and the next." The Ami de la Religion of July 24th, 1824, contained
the notice: "Maine de Biran fulfilled his Christian duties in an
edifying manner, and received the sacraments at the hands of his
pastor, the cure of St. Thomas d'Aqnin."

Theodore de Jouffroy, if his life had not been suddenly cut short,
would probably have had the same happiness. After having devoted his
immense powers of mind to the study and dissemination of sceptical
philosophy from 1814 to 1839, when bad health forced him to resign the
professor's chair, he had begun to soften his tone, to speak
respectfully of revealed religion, and to look wistfully and hopefully
to it for the solution of the great problems which it had been the
business and the torture of his life to investigate by the unaided
light of his own intellect. He had conversed with Monseigneur Cart,
the bishop of Nimes, and had said to him, "I am not now one of those
who think that modern societies can do without Christianity; I would
not write in this sense to-day. You have a grand mission to fulfil,
monseigneur. Ah! continue to teach the gospel well." He took pleasure
in seeing his daughter preparing herself for her first communion; and
speaking about a work of Lamennais to the clergyman who was
instructing her, he said with a deep sigh, "Alas! M. le Cure, all
these systems lead to nothing; better--a thousand times better--one
good act of Christian faith." The cure left his room with good hopes
of his conversion, and in the belief that the faith of his childhood
had come to life again in his part. But before he could see him again,
and put these hopes to the test, Jouffroy expired suddenly and without
previous warning on the 1st of March, 1842.

Two or three of the French poets had time to ask for a priest, or to
admit one when, in the hospitals to which their excesses had brought
them, a Sister of Charity proposed it. Leopardi, outwardly at least
sceptical and gloomy to the last, received a doubtful absolution from
a priest, who came when the dying man was insensible.  [Footnote 169]
To all the rest even as much as this was wanting.

  [Footnote 169: We have used this expression, also aware of the
  letter of Father Scarpa published first in the journal Scienza e
  Fede, and afterward in the eighth addition of Father Curci's Fatti
  ed Argomenti in risposta alle molte parole di V. Gioberti, in which
  he gives an account of Leopardi's recourse to his ministry and
  reconciliation by his means to the church in 1836; not, of course
  because we agree with Gioberti that this simple and modest letter is
  "a tissue of lies and deliberate inventions and a sheer romance from
  beginning to end;" but because Leopardi's letters in the beginning
  of 1837 and his continuance in the composition of his last poem the
  Paralipomeni, the conclusion of which was dictated a few days before
  his death, seems to suggest the melancholy alternative either of a
  feigned conversion or of a relapse into skepticism. He told Father
  Scarpa when he offered himself to be prepared for confession that he
  had been banished from his Father's house; and that he was now
  penitent, and was about to publish papers which would show his
  alterated sentiments. It is amusing to notice that to the staid and
  decorus Quarterly Review, as well as to Gioberti, this was to great
  an opportunity to be lost of reviling the Jesuits. Accordingly, on
  no other ground than  that Father Scarpa repeated _as told him by
  Leopardi_ what his letters contradict, and that he was not quite
  correct in guessing at his age and described his appearance ten
  years after his interview with him, the reviewer indorses Gioberti's
  description, and calls the letter "an instance of audacity beyond
  all common efforts in that kind." The habitual mendacity in
  Leopardi's letters, and his offer, while an unbeliever, to be
  ordained in order to hold a benefice which he intended _after saying
  a few Masses_ to have served by another, make it unfortunately not
  improbable that his conversion was only pretended.]

{555}

We have not space to go into the details of these melancholy
histories; but we must give a few extracts in illustration of the keen
regret with which these victims of doubt look back to the religious
convictions of their youth from the cheerlessness and misery of the
state to which they have reduced themselves, and of the involuntary
homage which, even while refusing to submit to the teaching of the
church, they are forced to pay to it. Here is Jouffroy's reminiscence
of the happy days of faith: "Born of pious parents and in a country
where the Catholic faith was still full of life at the beginning of
this century, I had been early wont to consider man's future and the
care of my own soul the chief business of life, and all my subsequent
education tended to confirm these serious dispositions. For a long
time, the beliefs of Christianity had fully answered to all the wants
and all the anxieties which such dispositions introduce into the soul.
To these questions, which to me were the only questions that ought to
occupy man, the religion of my fathers gave answers, and those answers
I believed, and, thanks to my belief, my present life was clear, and
beyond it I saw the future that was to follow it spread itself out
without a cloud. At ease as to the path that I had to pursue in this
world, at ease as to the goal to which it was to conduct me in the
other, understanding the phases of life and death in which they are
blended, understanding myself, understanding the designs of God for
me, and loving him for the goodness of his designs, I was happy with
the happiness that springs from a firm and ardent faith in a doctrine
which solves all the great questions that can interest man." His
faith, the liveliness of which had been somewhat shaken by an
indiscriminate perusal of modern literature during the latter part of
his classical studies at Dijon, gave way entirely before the lectures
of M. Cousin in the Ecole Normale at Paris, to which he was
transferred in 1814, and the combined influences of flattery and
ridicule with which his sceptical fellow-students there assailed him.
He describes the terrible struggle between "the eager curiosity which
could not withdraw itself from the consideration of objections which
were scattered like dust throughout the atmosphere that he breathed,"
and on the other hand the influences "of his childhood with its poetic
impressions, his youth with its pious recollections, the majesty,
antiquity, and authority of the faith which he had been taught, and
the rising in revolt of the whole memory and imagination against the
incursion of unbelief which wounded them so deeply." His faith was
gone before he realized the loss: some time afterward he thus painted
the horrors of the discovery: "Never shall I forget that evening in
December when the veil that hid my unbelief from myself was rent. I
still hear my footsteps in the bare narrow apartment, in which I
continued walking long after the hour for sleep. I still see that moon
half-veiled by clouds which at intervals lit up the cold window-panes.
The hours of night glided by, and I took no note of them. I was
anxiously following my train of thought, which descended from one
stratum to another toward the depth of my consciousness, and
scattering, one after another, all the illusions which had hitherto
concealed it from me, made its outline every moment more visible. In
vain did I try to cling to these residues of belief as a shipwrecked
sailor to the fragments of his ship; in vain, alarmed at the unknown
void in which I was about to be suspended, I threw myself back for the
last time toward my childhood, my family, my country, all that was
dear and sacred to me: the irresistible current of my thought was too
strong. Parents, family, recollections, beliefs--it forced me to quit
all. The analysis was continued with more obstinacy and more severity
in proportion as it approached its term, {556} and it did not pause
till it had reached it. Then I was aware that in my inmost self there
was no longer anything left standing. It was an appalling moment, and
when, toward morning, I threw myself exhausted on my bed, I seemed to
see my former life, so smiling and so full, effaced, and another
gloomy and desolate life opening behind me in which I was henceforth
to live alone--alone with my fatal thought which had just banished me
thither, and which I was tempted to curse."

A few years after this crisis in Jouffroy's life, the same sort of
catastrophe was experienced in a distant country by another highly
gifted soul, and wonderfully similar is the victim's description of
it. Leopardi, the rival, in the opinion of many of his countrymen, of
Tasso in poetry and of Galileo in philosophy, in whom a prodigious
industry was united in rare combination to a subtle intellect and a
refined imagination, who was reading Greek by himself at eight years
old, and  before he was nineteen was versed in several oriental
languages, was engaged in literary correspondence with Niebuhr,
Boissonado, and Bunsen, and was the author of numerous translations
from the Classics, a valuable translation of Porphyry on Plotinus, and
an erudite historical essay in which there are citations from four
hundred ancient authors--had, like Jouffroy, prepared the way for his
fall by an overweening confidence in his own great intellectual
powers, and by a recklessly excessive devotion to study. To this was
added the chafing of disappointed ambition, and irritation against his
father for refusing to give him the means of leaving home. His ruin
was completed by the conversation of Pietro Giordani, an apostate
Benedictine monk, who soothed and condoled with him, flattered his
vanity by telling him that "if Dante was the morning star of Italy's
sky, Leopardi was the evening star," and succeeded in inoculating him
with his own scepticism, which in himself was mere shallow impiety,
but in the deeper mind of his pupil, led, if his writings can be
trusted, to as hopelessly complete a disbelief of God, the soul, and
immortality, as is possible for a human being to bring himself to
endure. In a letter of March 6th, 1820, to his friend and seducer, he
says: "My window being open one of these evenings, while I was gazing
on a pure sky and a beautiful moonlight, and listening to the distant
barking of dogs, I seemed to see images of former times before me, and
I felt a shock in my heart. I cried out, like a convict, baking pardon
of nature, whose voice I seemed to hear. At that instant, as I cast a
glance back on my former state, I stood, frozen with terror, unable to
imagine how it would be possible to support port life without fancies
and without affections, without imagination and without enthusiasm--in
a word, without anything of all that, a year ago, filled up my
existence and made me still happy, notwithstanding my trials. Now I am
withered up like to reed; no emotion finds an entrance any longer into
my poor soul, and even the eternal and supreme power of love is
annihilated in me at my present age." He was but twenty-two then; and
through the seventeen years that is shattered constitution lasted, he
was ever speaking of life as an agony and a burden, sometimes proudly
declaring that he would not bend under its weight, sometimes
passionately asking for sympathy and love, but always recurring to
this sad refrain: "The life of mortals, when youth has past, is never
tinged with any dawn. It is widowed to the end, and the grade is the
only end to our night." "I comprehend, I know only one thing. Let
others draw some profit from these vicissitudes and passing
existences; it may be so, but for me life is an evil."

We have seen the account given by the French philosopher Jouffroy and
the Italian poet Leopardi of their feelings on waking up to the
knowledge that the faith of their childhood had passed away; let us
compare one more such experience that of the German {557} Von Kleist.
"For some time, my dear friend," he writes to the lady to whom he was
affianced, "I have been employed in studying the philosophy of Kant,
and I am bound to communicate to you a conclusion which I am sure will
not affect you as deeply and as painfully as it has myself. It is
this: we cannot be certain whether what we call truth is really the
truth or only an appearance. In this last case, the truth that we
sought after here below would be nothing at all after death; and it
would be useless to try to acquire a treasure which it would be
impossible to carry to the tomb. If this conclusion does not pierce
your heart, do not laugh at a wretch whom it has deeply wounded in all
that is most sacred to him. _My noble, my only aim has vanished, and I
have none_. Since this conviction entered my mind, I have not touched
my books. I have traversed my chamber, I have placed myself by an open
window, I have run along the street. My interior disturbance has let
me to visit smoking-rooms and cafes to get relief. I have been to the
theatre and the concert to dissipate my mind. I have even played the
fool. But in spite of all, in the midst of all this agitation, the one
thought that occupied my whole soul and filled it with anguish was
this: your aim, your noble and only aim has vanished." A few years of
the repetition of this sorrowful wailing, and then, after writing to
his sister, "You have done everything to save me that the power of a
sister could do, everything that the power of man could do; the fact
is, that nothing can help me here on earth," he escaped from doubt to
pass before the Judgment-seat by his own hand.

We must give one more of the many recurring expressions of regret with
which the volume abounds. We are inclined to regard Santa Rosa with
even more profound compassion than the other victims, on account of
the warm and tender piety of his earlier youth, and the absence in him
of the arrogance and scorn that overflows in the others in the midst
of their sufferings. All who knew him agreed that it was hardly
possible to know him without loving him. Unfortunately, his struggles
in the cause of Italy threw him into close association with many who
had mistaken infidelity for liberty. Still more unfortunately, he
contracted a close intimacy with M. Cousin, and soon began to love him
more than truth and than God, and under the blighting influence of his
teaching his own faith disappeared. M. Cousin has published his
letters with frequent and large omissions, but there remains abundant
evidence that he was always regretting the past. The following passage
occurs after something omitted: "O my friend, how unfortunate we are
in being only poor philosophers, for whom the continuance of existence
after death is only a hope, an ardent desire, a fervent prayer! Would
that I had the virtues and the faith of my mother! To reason is to
doubt; to doubt is to suffer. Faith is a sort of miracle. When it is
strong and genuine, what happiness it gives! How often in my study I
raise my eyes to heaven, and beg God to reveal me to myself, but above
all, to grant me immortality!" Twice in his life--when in prison in
Paris with the expectation of being given up to the Piedmontese
police, which would have been to be sent to the scaffold, and again
when beginning a serious philosophical work--he returned to a better
mind. Whether time and grace to return once more were given him,
behind the Greek battery in the isle of Sphacteria, where he fell
fighting bravely, we cannot tell.

Besides the implicit homage to the faith involved in such regrets of
the past as we have been witnessing, the writings of most of these
philosophers and poets contain many testimonies to their involuntary
acknowledgment of the claims of the revealed system which they had
abandoned. We will cite only one, from a discourse of Jouffroy on his
usual subject, the {558} problem of the destiny of man: "There is a
little book which children are made to learn, and on which they are
questioned in church. Read this little book, which is called the
Catechism; you will find in it an answer to all the questions that I
hare proposed--all without exception. Ask the Christian whence the
human race comes, he knows; whither it is going, he knows. Ask this
poor child, who has never in his life dreamed of it, to what end he
exists here below, and what he will become after death; he will give
you a sublime answer, which he will not comprehend, but which is not
the less admirable. Ask him how the world was produced, and for what
end; why God placed animals and plants in it; how the earth was
peopled, whether by one family or several; why men speak different
languages; why they suffer; why they contend; what will be the end of
it all--he knows. The origin of the world, the origin of the human
race, the question of races, the destiny of man in this life and in
the other, the relation of man to God, the duties of man to his
fellows, the rights of man over creation--he is acquainted with all;
and when he is grown up, he will be equally free from hesitation about
natural rights, political rights, and the right of nations; for all
this is the outcome and clear and spontaneous product of Christian
doctrine. This is what I call a great religion; I recognize it by this
sign of its not leaving unanswered any of the questions which interest
humanity."

Edmond Scherer and Friedrich Schiller, as well as Lord Byron, differ
from the other instances in never having known the true faith; but
they show that the loss of a firm hold of those fragments of
Christianity that are retained outside of the fold leads to something
of the same result as the loss of the faith. The sketch of M.
Scherer's life is very interesting, for it shows the inevitable result
of Protestantism in a highly logical and reflective mind which refuses
the alternative of submission to the Catholic Church. His installation
in the chair of theology in the Evangelical Seminary of Geneva in 1844
was hailed as a triumph by all the devout adherents to the reformed
religion, who looked to him as the invincible champion against the
socinianism prevailing all around. He set himself to the work of
proving the inspiration of Scripture without having recourse to the
authority of the Catholic Church, and the result, after passing
through various phases of sentimentalism and eclecticism, was to land
him in such conclusions as that "the Bible has so little of a monopoly
of inspiration, that there are writings not canonical the inspiration
of which is much more evident than in some of the biblical writings;"
and finally, that Protestantism and Catholicism, Christianity and
Judaism, are only conceptions more or less exact of a common object
and phases in a great movement of progressive spiritualization; that
morality itself is only relative; and that absolute certainty of any
kind is a dream. He may well say, as he has lately said: "Alas! blind
prisoners as we are, laboring at the overthrow the past, we are
engaged in a work which we do not understand. We yield to a power of
which it seems at times that we are the victims as well as the
instruments. The terrible logic whose formulas we wield crushes us
while we are crushing others with it."

The moral of these and other such histories--the moral of Froude and
Francis Newman and Clough--is that as God never made his children for
perplexity and anguish, he never made them for doubt, and must have
provided a secure asylum from it, not in ignorance or thoughtlessness,
but in a system of divinely guaranteed authority. The lesson from the
Nemesis of doubt is the conclusion of Augustine Thierry: "I have need
of an infallible authority, I have need of rest for my soul. I open my
eyes, and I see one only authority, that of the Catholic Church. I
believe what the Catholic Church teaches; I receive her Credo."



{559}

Translated from the German


WHAT MOST REJOICES THE HEART OF MAN?


It was two days before the holy Christmas of the old year, and a very
hard season when Martin (a farmer, to whom heaven had granted a rich
harvest, to reward him for the faithful tillage of his land) entered
the house. He had taken his grain to the market-town, and, thanks to
the brisk demand, had parted with it at an unusually high price. And
now, returning home with a full purse, he called his wife, and pouring
out the money before her on the table, said laughingly: "Look, Agnes,
that will give us a rare treat! what thinkest thou, mother? What most
rejoices the heart of man? I want something that shall make me right
joyful."

"O Martin!" replied the wife, "it must be found, then. But this whole
day has my heart been very heavy; and even if I made something very
nice indeed, I don't think it would go to the right spot;" and when
Martin asked why, she continued: "Thou hadst not been gone long
yesterday morning when in came our neighbor's Clara, weeping and
mourning, and said her father was like to die, and would I for God's
sake come to their assistance and give him something nourishing. I
could understand, then, how matters still it, and taking with me just
whatever there was in the house, I ran down to the hut. O dear God!
what misery was there! The man lay on a little straw, so white and
feeble; the poor wife knelt beside him, crying and sobbing; and their
children hung round them, half naked, and living pictures of hunger,
and not a bit of bread in the whole house. And indeed, Martin, that is
not the only home where such want is! I don't know, but it seems as if
I ought not to enjoy one cheerful hour while so much wretchedness
surrounds us."

While Martin let his wife speak out her thoughts, his eyes were
musingly bent before him. Then he rose, and grasping Agnes's hand,
exclaimed: "Now I know what to do, mother! A joyful heart will I have,
for doing good to others gladdens the heart more than wine and good
cheer. Let us see, then, what the dear God has given us." And now he
counted out from the money first the rent due to his landlord, then
enough to pay all that he owed, and lastily all that must go toward
preparing for the next year s crop. Still there remained a pretty
little sum, so he said: "Now, mother, count up the poor of our
village, and heat the oven, and bake for every grown person two big
loaves, and for every child a smaller one; and then send the bread
round, adding to each loaf a jug of wine and two florins. Then when
the people have a Merry Christmas, and can say grace without tears,
our hearts will be light, I am thinking, even if we set nothing on the
table besides our usual fare."

Now when Agnes heard her husband speak thus, her heart grew very
happy, and she said yes to everything, and shook flour into the
bread-trough, and baked all day and all night. So on that day when the
church sings "Gloria in excelsis Deo!" there was not one in that whole
parish who had not enough to eat; and many a one who for a long time
had not tasted wine refreshed himself on that day, thanking with heart
and lips the farmer and his wife. These two had merely their usual
homely fare upon the table, but within their breasts were joyful
hearts and the consciousness of a good deed.

{560}

So far, so good; but something else happened afterward; for as,
according to the proverb, a pleasure never comes alone, so have good
works an especial power of multiplying themselves. And of that we are
now going to hear something.

When it came to the landlord's ears that his farmer, who was no
capitalist, had made a Merry Christmas for himself in the love of the
holy Christ-child, he was well pleased, and thought to himself that he
too might try something of the same sort. Therefore he appointed a day
(the octave of the blessed Christmas, New-Year's day) when all the
poor in his parish should be invited to the castle. In the hall was a
long table covered with a fine white cloth for the poor people, and a
smaller one for himself and his family. At this small table he placed
Farmer Martin and his wife Agnes, and near the head too, which has no
small significance among knights and noblemen. But he said that he
honored such excellent people as his own friends and relations,
believing that the heart makes better nobility than a long pedigree.

When now the table was filled with the sons and daughters of poverty,
grace was said by the chaplain, while all remained standing and joined
devotedly in his prayer. Then were bread-cakes set on the board, and
huge pieces if roast beef, and for each person a bumper of good old
wine; but if any one was ill and could not come to the feast, then was
his share despatched to his home, with a beautiful gold piece and a
friendly greeting from his gracious lord. So all the parish poor had a
second time plenty to eat and drink, and more than one enjoyed himself
better on that day than ever before in his life.

When the people had had a good dinner, they thought the feast was at
an end, and wished to express their thanks courteously to the host,
but he begged them to wait a little quarter of an hour longer, for
something else was coming. Then four lottery vases were placed on the
table, one for the men, another for the women, a third for boys, and a
fourth for girls; and when all the guests had been arranged ranged
according to age and family, one after another put his hand into a
vase and drew forth a number, one fifteen, another twenty-one, a third
two, and so on until each person had a number. Then they looked at
their numbers and thought, What does this all mean? and they waited
full of expectation.

Suddenly a side door opened, and the servants brought in a wooden
frame, on the four sides of which hung all sorts of garments, one side
for men, another for women, and then for boys and girls, as at a fair;
and everything was new and neat and strong, such as peasant-folks like
to wear, and a number was fastened on each piece. Some one called out,
"Now look for the numbers that you have in your hands." The men looked
shyly at each each other, as if to say, "Can he really mean it?" but
the women were more clever, and had soon found white and colored
skirts, aprons, stockings, neckerchiefs, and handkerchiefs to match
their numbers, and were helping their husbands and children in their
search. Before long not one single thread hung on the frame, and every
one possessed his appointed prize, and was rejoicing over it, for it
really seemed as if to each person had fallen the very thing he most
needed. Of course many were there who were in need of everything.

When now the time for leave-taking came, and the happy people thanked
their gracious lord in their best manner, he shook hands with each one
like a good old friend or father, at the same moment slipping into the
palm of every man a thaler. Then were there fresh rejoicings and
renewed thanks, and the worthy folk would not soon have made an end of
it, if their benefactor had not quickly broken {561} a path through
the crowd who blessed him, and so eluded their acknowledgments.

But then their hearts being full to overflowing, they longed to have
some outlet to their gratitude; so they seated farmer and his wife in
two chairs, placed them in a pretty wagon, to which they harnessed
themselves; and the worthy couple, in spite of expostulation, were
borne home in triumph. Such rejoicings had not been seen for many a
long day, and even now do the people of B---- talk of brave Martin and
his excellent wife Agnes; of the feast and the lottery and the dollars
of their kind and gracious lord in the castle yonder.



From The Reader.


THE REPUBLIC OF ANDORRA.


The Val d'Andorra lies on the southern side of the central Pyrenees,
between two of the highest mountains, the Maladetta and the Moncal. It
is bounded on the north by the department of Ariege; on the south by
the district of Barrida, the territory of Urgel, and part of the
viscounty of Castelbo; on the east by the valley of Carol and part of
the Cerdana; on the west at by the viscounty of Castelbo, the valleys
of San Juan and Terrem, the Conca de Buch, and the communes of Os and
Tor. The principal mountain-passes into France are those of Valira,
Soldeu, Fontargente, Siguer, Anzat, Arbella, and Rat; those
communicating with Spain are Port Negre, Perefita, and Portella. Some
of these are only passable during part of the year. The greatest
length of the territory is about forty miles; the greatest breadth
about twenty-four miles. The country is mountainous, but includes some
excellent pasturage. The highest summits visible are Las Mineras,
Casamanya, Saturria, Montclar, San Julian, and Juglar. The principle
rivers are the Valira, the Ordino, and the Os, none of which are
navigable. At the greatest elevation the snow remains upward of six
months. In summer the rains are very frequent. The purity of both air
and water renders the climate very healthy, and the inhabitants are
remarkable for their longevity, many living to the age of one hundred.
Devonian beds lie unconformably on upper silurian, which latter forms
a valley of depression, having the town of Andorra in its synclinal
axis. There are many mines producing iron of the best quality; one of
lead, several of alum, quartz, slate, some quarries of jaspers, and
several kinds of marble. Besides the trees common to Europe, the flora
includes the cacao or chocolate. There are, likewise, many medicinal
roots and plants. Wheat, barley, rye, and hemp are cultivated; and
grapes, figs, dates, and olives are also seen. In the low parts of the
south tobacco is much grown. Indian corn is only occasionally to be
met with. The fauna include the bear, wild boar, wolf, boquetin
(_Capra Pyrenaica?_), chamois, mule, fox, blackcock, or _gallina de
monte_, squirrel, hare, partridge, pheasant, and several species of
eagles; there are also a great many blackbirds and nightingales. The
population of the whole republic has been estimated as low as 5,000,
and even higher than 15,000, but it probably does not exceed 10,000;
that of the capital has been reckoned as high as 2,800, but this
probably refers to the whole parish, {562} and is, even then, greatly
over-estimated. The name Andorra has been derived from the Arabic, but
it is, without doubt, considerably older than the time of the Moors.
It is probably from the Gaelic _an-dobhar, an-dour_, which will
variously translate, "the water," "the territory," "the border of a
country." In the Roman period the Val d'Andorra formed part of the
country of the Ceretani, who gave their name to the Cerdana; and, at
the time of the Goths, of the district called Marea de Espana. It was
the last tract of country of which Moors obtained possession in
Catalonia, and the first which they abandoned. There are traditions of
the republic even prior to the time of Charlemagne. Catalonia, being
invaded by the Moors, the Andorrans, in 778, asked aid of the emperor,
who thereupon crossed the Pyrenees, and having united his forces with
those of Catalonia, which consisted principally of the mountaineers of
Andorra, after a brilliant campaign drove the Moors to the left bank
of the Ebro. Having established a military organization for the
defence of the territory, Charlemagne recognized certain rights in
favor of the Andorrans; but, at the same time, gave to the see of
Urgel the tithes of the six parishes into which the valley of Andorra
was divided. The Moors having again invaded the territory, the emperor
despatched his son, Louis le Debonnaire, who drove out the Moors, and
ceded the sovereignty of the valley to Sisebertus, first bishop of
Urgel. The charter bears the date of 803, and the signature of
Ludovicus Pius, the name by which Louis has always been known to the
republic. Charles the Bold having illegally granted to the Counts of
Urgel the sovereignty over the lands of the republic, another dispute
arose between the bishop and the counts, and the independence of the
valley was again disturbed. Upon this the bishop asked assistance of
Raymond of Foix, and an alliance was entered into by which the
independence of the valley wad vested jointly in the house of Foix and
the see of Urgel, and Raymond forthwith expelled the Counts of Urgel
from Andorra. This took place in the twelfth century. The bishop
failing to surrender the moiety of the republican lands, Bernard of
Foix, in 1241, laid siege to the city of Urgel, and the Bishop was not
only compelled to yield to the demands of the count, but also, within
a certain time, to procurers of papal ratification of the investiture
of the house of Foix in the joint sovereignty of the republic. The
convention having been again violated by the see of Urgel, it was
finally settled, in 1278, that the right of suzerainte should be
possessed jointly by the Bishop of Urgel and the Counts of Foix. This
tree is the act of independence Of the republic, and is known to the
people of Andorra by the name of "Parialge." It stipulated that the
republic should pay annually a tribute of 960 francs to the Counts of
Foix, and half that amount to the see of Urgel, and that each should
have the privilege of nominating one of the two officers called
viguiers. The house of Foix being united, first with that of Bearn,
and then to that of Moncada and Castellvel Rosanes, was finally
absorbed in the house of Bourbon, and the joint protectorate became at
the end of the sixteenth century, merged in the government of France,
and the see of Urgel. On 25th March following a treaty was concluded
by which the republic should pay the annual tribute to the
receiver-general of the department of Ariege, in return for which it
was to receive some commercial privileges as to the free export of
certain goods. It was further stipulated that one of the viguiers of
the republic should be chosen from the department of Ariege, and that
three deputies of the Valley should nearly take an oath to the prefect
of the same department. Napoleon is said to have affixed his name to
the original charter of Charlemagne. {563} The privileges of the
Andorrans have been several times acknowledged by France and Spain.
Even the war with Spain did not injure the neutrality of the republic.
In 1794, a French column having penetrated into the centre of Andorra,
for the purpose of laying siege to the city of Urgel, the Andorrans
sent a deputation to assert the neutrality and independence of the
valley, and General Charlet gave immediate orders to withdraw. The
Andorrans have never taken part in the wars of their neighbors. The
rich pasturages between Hospitalet, in France, and Soldeu, in Andorra,
in former times attracted the cupidity of the people of Hospitalet,
who have several times endeavored to take forcible possession of them:
the Andorrans having appealed to the law, judgment was given in their
favor in 1835 by the Court Royal of Toulouse. There is no form of
sovereignty in Europe exactly similar to that of Andorra. The republic
is governed by a syndic, a council of twenty-four, together with two
viguiers or magistrates, and two judges. The French government and the
see or Urgel possess a co-ordinate right of confirmation over the
appointment of the syndic. The twenty-four members of the council
consist of the twelve consuls who represent the six parishes or
communes, and the twelve consuls who held office during the preceding
year. These latter are called councillors. One of the viguiers is
appointed by the French government, the other Bishop of Urgel. The
former is chosen for life, and is generally a magistrate of the
department of Ariege; the latter holds office for three years only,
and is chosen from among the subjects of the republic. He is not
required to be an educated man. The viguiers alone exercise the
criminal authority. Civil justice is rendered by two other judges, one
of whom is appointed by each viguier from a list of six members, drawn
up and presented by the syndic. In both criminal and civil cases the
judges are guided by equity, common sense, and custom only, and yet no
complaints are heard of. Parties to suits, both criminal and civil,
have the right of appearing by counsel, who is styled _rahonador_, or
speaker. The decision of the criminal courts is communicated to the
council, who reassemble to receive it. The sentence of the court, once
proclaimed by the council, is irrevocable, and is put in execution
within twenty-four hours. The criminal court is rarely convoked. There
are few crimes committed in the republic. One man was executed for
murder about six years since. The expenses of justice are paid partly
by the delinquents, partly by the council. The armed forces consist of
six companies, one for each parish, and scarcely amount to 600, but in
case of need all the inhabitants are soldiers. There is no enlistment;
one individual between the age of sixteen and sixty is chosen from
each family. There is no national flag, and no drums are used. The
service is unpaid. Public instruction is in the worst state. The
priest of each parish is obliged to provide a school in his own house,
but no one is compelled to send his children. Those who desire a
better education for their children send them either to France or
Catalonia. The only form of religion is the Roman Catholic. Political
refugees from Spain and France are always hospitably received.
Foreigners resident in the republic pay yearly five Catalan sous, and
enjoy all the privileges of the natives, except that of holding any
public office. If a foreigner marries an heiress, he is accounted a
citizen, but he must first obtain an authorization from the
council-general. The Andorrans are somewhat above the ordinary size of
Spaniards. In stature they are thin and wiry. In character they are
active, proud, industrious, independent, religious, faithful to their
ancient customs, and very jealous of their liberties. They are
inquisitive, great talkers, but suddenly dumb and ignorant when they
imagine their interest at stake. Those engaged in public affairs are
generally {564} hospitable, but most of the people are rather
suspicious of strangers. They speak the Catalan dialect, which is a
compound of Castilian and the ancient languages of the south of
France. They also use many modern French words, which they pronounce
after their own fashion. The people are poor, and glory in their
poverty, as they thereby preserve their independence. Should they grow
rich, they would be sure to be absorbed either by France or Spain. A
large portion of the wealth of the republic consists in its flocks of
sheep. Each landowner is possessed of a considerable flock. The price
of a sheep ranges from twelve to twenty francs. The fleeces suffice to
clothe the whole of the male population. The exports into Spain
consist of iron, in large quantities, sheep, mules, and other cattle;
cloths, blankets, cheese, butter, and excellent hams. Those into
France include untanned skins, sheep, mules, calves and wool. The
number of sheep and mules sent annually into Spain and France amounts
to 1,000. Considering the size of the republic, the imports from Spain
are considerable: they include some of the necessaries of life, as
corn and salt. The only imports from France are fish and compound
liquors. There is a good deal of contraband between the republic and
Spain and France. It consists principally in wines, vinegar, salt, and
a small quantity of silk. The contrabandistas between the valley and
Spain are generally Spaniards. There are no land conveyances, and the
transport of goods and merchandise is carried on with horses and
mules. There are no restrictions on commerce, and no stamps; and no
passports are required. The republic contains six parishes or
communes, namely, Andorra la Vieja, San Julia de Loria, Canillo,
Ordino, En Camp, and La Massana. There are also thirty-four villages
and hamlets, the chief of which are Escaldas, Santa Caloma, and
Soldeu. There are but few ancient remains in the republic. The
capital, Andorra la Vieja, or "The Old" is so called to distinguish it
from Andorra in Spain, Province Teruel. There is a good weekly market,
and considerable business is transacted in imported corn. It is a
miserable place, with houses built of the _debris_ of schist and
granite, and generally without stucco. During the civil wars it
suffered greatly from hostile attacks, and the suspension of commerce.
The palace, called Casa del Valle, is an ancient building, constructed
of rough pieces of granite. The _facade_ is heavy and massive, and has
only three windows, of unequal dimensions, with some louvers;  in its
left angle is a turret pierced with loopholes, and surmounted with a
cross. Above the portal, which resembles a _porte cochere_, is  the
inscription _Domus_ consilii, _sedes justitiae_, under which is and
escutcheon of white marble, with the arms of the republic. The
interior of the palace is in a state of complete ruin. On the ground
floor is the national prison and the stables, where the members of the
council have the privilege of putting up their horses during the
sessions. The kitchen is on a grand scale, with immense hearts and
cauldrons. A staircase, which savors of antiquity, leads to the
chamber on the first floor, where the council meets. It is a vast hall
of an imposing aspect. At one end is a chair for the syndic, who sits
as president of the assembly; along either wall are benches of oak for
the twenty-four councillors; and between the corridors is a picture of
Jesus Christ. In another part of the hall are preserved in the
archives of the government, which include the grant of Charlemagne and
his son. They are kept in an armory or cupboard in the wall, closed by
two wooden shutters, where they have remained intact since the
expulsion of the Moors. The cabinet has six different locks and keys,
which are kept by the executive officers of the six communes whose
documents have been separately deposited. This cabinet has no outer
door, and can only be opened in the presence of the six heads of the
departments, who are bound to be present at the deliberations {565} of
the council. There are five sessions of the council annually, but when
necessary, extraordinary sessions are also held. When the general
council is unable to assemble, the syndic general, or, in his absence,
the sub-syndic, represent it, and act in its name; sometimes, also, a
junta general is convoked, at which assist a consul, or a consul and a
councillor, for each parish. In the juntas, matters of minor interest
are discussed, and the consuls and councillors who take part in them
are entrusted with the powers of their colleagues. To the general
council pertains everything relating to police, and all disputes in
commercial matters. The chapel is dedicated to San Heremengol,
formerly Bishop of Urgel and Prince of Andorra, and will repay a
visit.



ORIGINAL.


CATHOLIC CHRISTMAS.


The evening of the last day of the church's advent arrives. She
gathers her ministers around her, and, singing hymns of glad
expectation, they remain in her temples, even until midnight. Let us
listen to the grand harmony!

Divided into two vast bodies, they peal forth the verses of the royal
prophet in alternate chorus; and who could tire hearkening? Well does
Durendus say, that "the two choirs typify the angels and the spirits
of just men, while they cheerfully and mutually excite each other in
this holy exercise." We fancy ourselves among the choirs of heaven, as
St. Ignatius once was in spirit, when he learned the method of
alternate chanting.

Oh! whose heart does not yearn toward the church in these her days of
longing! She has laid away from her all that is dazzling and joyous;
yet is she most charming. Anxious love, like a sun, burns over her,
altering her color; yet is she all beauty--bright and rich and
warm--her aspect teeming with purity and love and inspiration. "I am
black, but beautiful." (Cant. i. 4)

It is midnight. Long since men ceased from their labors. The din of
traffic has been hushed for hours. Yet there is a sound through all
the world. From every city and town and village, from spire-crowned
hill and from holy valley, from numberless sweet nooks and by-ways, it
swells forth, the sound of a grand harmony, the voices of myriads
chanting. Now the tones speak of longing; now they tremble with
expectation; then there is a burst of rapture following the mellow
warbling of desire. It is the voice of the church longing for her
Beloved! She shall be gratified, for even now there is a knocking at
her temple gates. The chant is hushed, and a voice, gentle as the
lisping of a child, breathes the sweet entreaty, "Open to me, my
sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled; for my head is full of dew and
my locks of the drops of the night." (Cant. v. 2.) Yes, lovely Babe,
gladly will the temple-doors open to thee; for many a long and weary
mile did thy mother journey with thee beneath her heart!

Winter ruled the earth. Chill blew the breezes, and coldness was over
all nature. Shivering had the aged saint and Mary asked for shelter,
but the inns were filled, and none in Bethlehem would trouble to
receive them. Riches were not theirs, and all saw that the {566}
unknown mother's time was near; hence, fearing they might have to look
to the child, they shut her from their dwellings. The only place of
refuge her holy spouse could find for his charge was a cheerless
stable, hollowed from a rough, cold rock. The ox and the ass were
their only earthly companions; hay and straw formed the rude couch
upon which the mother brought forth her child at midnight. Jesus!
Saviour! she wraps thee scantily in swaddling-clothes, and lays thee
shivering in a manger. Well then may the dew and the drops of the
night hang heavy upon thy locks!

But, though in Bethlehem these unknown travellers were outcasts, God
did not desert them. The glimmerings of adoring angels' wings fell
upon the mother's eyes to comfort her heart, for there were angels
near in numbers. They hovered over and within the hut, making it ring
with the most blessed hymn that mortal or angelic ears had ever heard:
"Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace to men of good-will."

Instantly upon this knocking the church rises to open to her Beloved,
and now begins her joy. Now she will celebrate his birthday, and her
heart leaps high in bidding him welcome. Her torches, her sanctuary
lamps, the countless candles on her altars, all are lighted with the
speed of love; their shining shows her spouse that she was so full of
expectation, so confident of his coming, that she has already cast
away her weeds of mourning and desire, and has arrayed her charms in
her most precious robes. Evergreens and tapestry are twining and
glowing all about her--in her niches, upon her piers, her arcades, her
parapets, her cloister-galleries, her massive stalls, her carved and
fretted ceilings. Her altars and her sanctuaries have festoons and
garlands, and crowns of sweetest design, and veils and hangings of
choicest embroidery. She peals her bells and sweeps her fingers over
her organ-keys, and tunes her many instruments, to fill her temples
with the rapturous canticle of the day, "Gloria in excelsis Deo."

But let us circumscribe our views. As we may behold the joy of the
universal church in even her smallest division, let us see how, in the
good old Catholic times, the simplest villagers celebrated the first
day of the Incarnate Eternal!

The few rich men among them have sent stores of flowers and fruits
from their conservatories to deck the green branches gathered in the
forest. Pious ladies have brought in the various ornaments, which they
have been preparing for weeks, as an offering for their new-born
Saviour. The happy pastor and many of his spiritual flock have been
busy in the church four days, disposing the decorations with untiring
ingenuity and taste.

Now it is almost midnight. The skies are clear and studded with
twinkling stars. Ice is over all the streams, snow is over all the
streets and fields, and weighs down the trees. Stillness is upon the
the village, yet not the stillness of slumber. You can see that
something is transpiring which takes not place at other midnights; for
lights are glimmer through the cottage-windows, and, now and then,
cheerful forms are seen passing to and fro. They are all expecting,
and they shall not be delayed; for hark! suddenly a merry peal of
bells bursts over them; joyously it rings forth--now in soft, sweet
cadence, and now in swelling harmony. It pours along the streets and
fills the village dwellings. It echoes through the cloudless vault,
over the snowy fields and the glassy streams, reaching even the
scattered hamlets in the distance. Suddenly and joyously the music
bursts upon all:

  "Adeste fideles, laeti, triumphantes
  Venite, venite in Bethlehem."

And the cottage-doors are thrown open, and groups of merry children
sally forth gladly shouting, "Christmas, Christmas!"

{567}

Then the tapers are extinguished, and the villagers all hasten forth
with holy eagerness to see their Jesus cradled in the manger; and, as
they direct their steps toward the old church, they awaken the
midnight echoes with that sweet old carol:

  "Now the circling year have given
   The joyful season, when from heaven
   Life descended to the earth
   In the Babe who took his birth
        From our sweet Lady!

  "Behold him in the manger laid,
   Owned by the cattle of the shed,
   Who know their God meanest bands
   Enswathed by the tender hands
        Of our sweet Lady!

  "Now he smiles on Joseph blessed;
   Now he seeks his mother's breast;
   Now he sobs, and now he cries,
   All beneath the guardian eyes
        Of our sweet Lady!

  "Run, run, ye shepherds, haste and bring
   Your simple homage to our King!
   Ye heaven-called watchers, taste and see
   Our God, meek-seated on the knee
       Of our sweet Lady!"

Thus they stream along from every cottage, along every pathway toward
the church, men, women, and little children, singing and chatting
happily. Far off in the moonlit distance you see small parties
hastening over the white plains from their scattered homes to mingle
in the festival. How beautifully do they remind us of those happy
shepherds who left their flocks near the "Tower of Ader," and went
over to Bethlehem, to see the word that had come to pass!

The bells continue pealing out their music to the midnight, and the
church continues filling. Listen to the half-suppressed ejaculation of
joyous surprise as each new group enters the holy place and beholds
its charming decorations! Over every window's curve, and hanging down
by its sides, is a mighty wreath of evergreens. In front of every
hallowed niche lights are burning, and wreaths of foliage hang over
it. The pillars are all twined round and round, up to the very
ceiling, with ivy, holly, laurel, intermingled with those berries that
grow red in winter. But who shall describe the glories of the
sanctuary! The arch that rises over it flows with the fullest folds of
tapestry, white as snow, save where they are here and there
interwrought with flowers of rose-hued silk and thread of gold, and
intertwined with holly and laurel, and boughs of the orange-tree with
its golden clusters. On the altar-steps are vases filled with
evergreens, slender strings of ivy twisting around tall branches and
bending gracefully between them down even to the floor. The altar is
crowded with lighted candles, and along the intervals of the
candlesticks flow festoons of slender branches, leaves, and flowers. A
stole of flowers decorates the very crucifix; the tabernacle sparkles
in its richest veil.

Oh! in olden times even a village church was grand beyond description;
for then men took a pride in their religion. They loved to see God's
Bride in bridal splendor; they loved to see the Queen in regal
vesture; they loved to see the Sister of the Church in heaven with
something like heavenly glory around her. The rich man gave of his
abundance, the poor man gave of his labor, ladies wrought
embroidery--all in holy unison strained every nerve to make her
temples beautiful.

Now the church has filled with kneeling forms. The rich and the poor,
the lady and the servant, the laborers and they for whom they labor,
here kneel side by side, they are all equal here, for they are all
alike, are God's own children, the brethren of the Babe of Bethlehem.

The steeple-bells have ceased to peal, for not a single thought must
now wander outside. Eyes and ears and heart and soul and every feeling
are intent upon the grand occurrences within.

Presently blue clouds of sweet incense are seen floating toward the
sanctuary, and modestly there comes a youth swinging a silver censer;
a long procession of little acolytes, clad in snow-white surplices and
bearing lighted tapers, follow him slowly; a saintly looking priest,
in precious vestments, closes the holy array. His {568} youthful
attendants are chosen boys of blameless life and pleading aspect: and,
indeed, they look pure and innocent and cherub-like, as they dispose
themselves around the holy place, and kneel toward the altar.

Then amid half-suppressed, repentant cries for "mercy on us," swelling
forth from the choir, the psalm is said--the psalm of preparation, of
praise, of hope, of humble confidence: the confession is made; prayers
for pardon, lights and gracious hearing are repeated. Then the priest
ascends "unto the altar of God," and whispers prayers, speaking
rapturously of the "Child that is born to us, the Son that is given to
us." But look at hie countenance as he returns slowly to the middle of
the altar; you can see that he is full of some grand event--his soul,
his heart, his feelings, all hold jubilee. One more entreaty for mercy
repeated again and again with passionate earnestness, and he raises
his eyes and his arms as though about to ascend in ecstasy, and, like
one inspired, he breaks forth in the angelic hymn, "Gloria in excelsis
Deo." It is the signal of jubilee. Suddenly there is a burst of many
little bells, shaken by the hands of the surpliced children, ringing
out their silver music until the hymn is ended by the priest; the
organ's richest and fullest chords are struck, swelling forth in
harmony like that which the rivers made in Paradise when they sang
their first hymn of praise to him who set them flowing, and the full
choir of trained voices burst forth: "Et in terra pax hominibus."

Truly you think yourself at Bethlehem. It seems as though the Child
were just born--as though you heard the heavenly hosts singing their
grand anthem--saw the shepherds wondering and adoring--beheld the
Infant lying in the manger, a fair, radiant, smiling little Babe, with
an old saint beside it, leaning on his staff, and a comely virgin, in
a trance of motherly affection, kissing its bright forehead. So these
villagers seem to feel it all. A start of joy runs through the whole
assembly, a radiance lights up every feature; friends kiss each other,
fathers kiss their children, mothers kiss their little ones; a whisper
runs from soul to soul through all the church--"Pax hominibus."

Then follow collect, the epistle, the gradual, a gospel, all full of
the grand event. And then the choir's jubilee begins again, as the
anointed one at the altar intones "Credo in unum Deum." Who shall tell
the stirless reverence of each prostrate form, as all bow yet lower at
the words that still the mystery of the night! Softly the organ
warbles in its mellowest keys; from the richest voice in all the choir
sweetly flow the words "Et Homo factus est." Every mind reflects, and
every heart is melted.

Then comes the offertory; and all present, according to their various
means, make their offerings for those "who serve the altar," and for
the poor. While the priest raises in offering the paten with the Post
and the chalice with wine, the villagers also, kneeling, make an
offering of their homage to their new-born Redeemer; and mothers lift
their little ones to heaven in spirit, praying that they may advance
"in wisdom and age and grace with God and men," as did the Child of
Mary. Then follows the washing of the heads, with its appropriate
prayers; then, the secretas, the preface, the whispered prayers for
God's church, for friends and benefactors, for all the living
faithful.

The moment of consecration draws nigh. Books are laid aside, hands are
clasped upon the breast, every head is bent. The sweet voices in the
choir have been hushed; the organ's silvery tones, murmuring more and
more softly, have at length died away, awe-stricken by the silence
that fills God's house. Yes! silence fills it, for silence now seems a
something--a breathless, pulseless, but mighty spirit feeling all
this temple, as the cloud of God's glory once filled the tabernacle.
You think you could almost {569} most hear a spirit move, you feel as
though you were among the angels when they waited breathless to behold
the effect of the sublime utterance, "Let there be light." Bending low
in reverend humility, the priest in a whisper of awe speaks the
almighty words, "This is my body," "This is the chalice of my blood;"
the light breathing of that whisper is heard even in the bosom of the
Eternal Father, the golden gates of Paradise are thrown open, and God
"bows the heavens and comes down." He is here, this church is now the
hut of Bethlehem, this altar is the manger; for the Child is born upon
it as really as the Virgin-mother there brought him forth.

As when of old light was made, there was a music of the spheres, of
the sun and moon and all the stars and planets, singing their morning
hymn of gratitude, so is the stillness now also broken, so does the
choir, warbling in swelling glee, burst forth in grand climax,
"Hosanna in excelsis." And in the mean time priest and people united
utter to their new-born Saviour many rich and beautiful prayers for
the living, for the faithful departed, for themselves.

The villagers are absorbed in prayer; it seems as though their fervor
kept redoubling, as though the flames of holy love burned higher and
higher every instant. Well they may, for the moment is approaching in
which each heart will be a manger in which Jesus will be laid, each
breast a tabernacle in which love itself shall dwell. Already there is
a move among them; with modest gait, with clasped hands and downcast
eyes, they advance to the sanctuary, the mystic bread is given to them
line after line, and, bearing their God with them, they all return in
reverence to give thanks, to petition for good things. Serenity is in
their eyes and on their features, joy is in their hearts, rapture in
their souls, peace among their feelings, and Jesus within their bosoms
harmonizing all. O truly happy Christmas! O the bliss that now is
theirs, the comfort of this moment! Well may the chanters hymn: "O
Jesus, God! Great God! Good Pastor! Sweet Lamb! O Jesus, _my_ Jesus! O
Bread! O Manna! O Power! what dost thou not grant to man!"

Then praises and thanks are sung joyously by the priest, and his hand
is stretched in blessing from the altar. The Mass is over, and the
procession moves from the sanctuary, while the choir chants aloud,
"Praise the Lord all ye nations, praise him all ye people. Because his
mercy is confirmed upon us, and the truth of the Lord remaineth for
ever." (Ps. cxvi.)

The chant dies away, and for awhile not a sound is heard through all
the sacred building. No one stirs as yet; all remain some time to
return thanks, to allow the impression of the festival to sink deep
into their souls. At length they rise, and bowing lowly toward the
altar, they go forth. At the church-door hands are shaken, kisses
given, warm embraces are exchanged, and joy and happiness and all the
blessings of the Child's nativity are wished and wished again.

But follow them home from their midnight celebration. For a long time
the village slumbers not; lights glimmer through the cottage-windows,
and within groups are kneeling around a little home-made oratory, with
a little crib in the middle, and candles around it. This is of greater
importance than the gathering around the yule-fire or the decked tree.
Moreover, all did not go home when Mass was over. Go back to the
church, and behold those silent figures praying in every posture that
feeling can suggest. There, before that tabernacle, a mother prays the
divine Child for her own babe; a virgin prays for purity like to that
of the Virgin-mother; the child of misery seeks consolation from him
who was born in a stable; many repeat over and over again the canticle
of the angels, and all beg the blessings of him over whom the angels
sang it. At length these also are gone; the lights {570} are quenched
about the altar, all, save the silver lamp which is never
extinguished; all is still as was the stable when the shepherds had
adored and gone back to their flocks.

But the festival of our Saviour's birth is not over yet. "As the day
comes round in music and in light;" you again see the villagers
wending their way to the church; and a third time, when the sun is in
the mid-arch of heaven. Each time is witnessed the same sublime
celebration that we beheld at midnight; for three births of Christ are
celebrated. His birth from the Father before lime began; his birth
from the immaculate Virgin as a wailing babe at Bethlehem; his mystic
birth, by faith and by the sacrament of love, in the heart of each
humble adorer.

Such was Christmas in the happy olden times. Alas! that a blight
should ever have come upon it. Truly they have not done well to
despoil that village church of all its charming features. Well may the
church exclaim, weeping: "The keepers that go about the city found me;
they struck me, and wounded me: the keepers of the walls took my vail
from me." (Cant, v. 7.) Fondly do we trust she will soon again be
clothed in splendor. The pope that reigned when England fell away
grieved sadly for her fall. In his distress he put away the triple
crown; and even now his statue sits uncrowned, with downcast eyes, as
though his grief had hardened him to stone. But soon, we trust, he
will again lift up his eyes. Soon, we trust, will his successors
rejoiced to find the crown replaced, not by mortal, but by angel
hands. Shall we not hope and pray that our own dear land, also, will
form not the least brilliant jewel in that crown? One day this church
will again deck herself with the flowers she once wore, but which
rebellious hands toward to pieces, scattering the leaves around her.
Then shall we once again celebrate the good old Catholic Christmas
times, and celebrate them with the increased joy which is born of the
wanderer's returned. God granted it speedily!




MISCELLANY


_Spots on the Sun.--Science Review_.--We would draw the attention of
our scientific readers to a remarkable opinion and theory of Sir John
Herschel's with regard to the nature of those curious objects
discovered by Mr. Nasmyth on the surface of the sun, and generally
called, from their peculiar shape, "willow leaves." We believe Sir
John first propounded this theory in an article on the sun, published
in Good Words, but it does not seem to have been noticed by many
astronomers. However wild the hypothesis may appear, it has just
received a further sanction from its eminent author, by its
republication in his new book of Familiar Lectures, which we notice
elsewhere. Sir John says: "Nothing remains but to consider them (the
so-called willow leaves) as separate and independent sheets, flakes,
or scales, having some sort of solidity. And these flakes, be they
what they may, and whatever may be said about the dashing of meteoric
stones into the sun's atmosphere, etc., are evidently the immediate
sources of the solar light and heat by whatever mechanism for whatever
processes they may be enabled to develop, and, as it were, elaborate
these elements from the bosom of the non-luminous fluid in which they
appear to float. Looked at in this point of view, we cannot refuse to
regard them as organisms of some peculiar and amazing kind; and though
it would be too daring to speak of such organization as partaking of
the nature of life, yet we do know that vital action is competent to
develop both heat, light, and electricity." Strange and startling as
is such an explanation, yet scientific men will remember that when we
{571} knew as little about the cause of the black lines seen in the
spectrum of the sun as we now know about these appearances on the sun
itself, Sir John Herschel suggested, in 1833, that very explanation
which was the foundation of the memorable law announced by the German
philosopher, Kirchhoff, in 1859--a law now universally accepted as
affording a perfect solution to the long-standing puzzle of
Fraunhofer's lines.



_Simple Net for the Capture of Oceanic Animals,--Science Review_.--In
a paper read before the Microscopical Society of London on the fauna
of mid-ocean, Major S. R. Owen gives the following directions for the
preparation of a simple form of net for the above purpose, and which
maybe rigged out at a few hours' notice. A grommet should be made for
the mouth, to which three cords may be attached to connect it with the
towing-line; that line should be a good stout piece of stuff and
capable of bearing a great strain. To the grommet should be attached,
first, a bag, the upper part of which may be made of a thin canvas,
the lower part of strong jean, ending in a piece of close calico or
linen; the bottom must be left open, and tied round with a tape when
used; this will be found convenient for taking out the contents, and
by leaving it open and towing it so for a short time it can be
thoroughly washed. Over the whole an outer covering of the strongest
sail-cloth should be put, the upper part, in like manner, attached to
the grommet, the lower part left open, and a portion for a foot or
eighteen inches of the seam left to be coarsely laced up with a piece
of cord, the same being done for the bottom itself. If necessary, a
third covering may be put between these of any strong but rather
porous material; but this in its turn should be left open at the
bottom, and only tied when required for use. Its length should be so
adjusted when tied that the inner lining of calico may rest against
it, and be relieved from the strain. The outer sail-cloth should, in
like manner, be laced up to receive and support the whole.



_A New Magnesium Lamp_.--An ingenious form of magnesium lamp, the
invention of Mr. H. Larkin, and which was first exhibited at the Royal
Institution a couple of months since, was shown at the _soirees_ of
the British Association at Nottingham. Instead of the ordinary ribbon
or wire of the commoner forms of magnesium lamps, magnesium powder is
employed. Hence all machinery is dispensed with, the magnesium being
contained in a reservoir, from a hole in the bottom of which it falls
like sand from an hour-glass. The powder is allowed to fall upon the
flame of a small gas-jet, and by this it is inflamed, giving all its
usual illumination. In order that a sufficient quantity of powder may
be employed, and that the hole in the reservoir may be large enough to
allow of a regular flow, without waste of magnesium, the latter is
mixed with fine sand. The size of the aperture is regulated by a
stopcock. When it is desired to light the lamp, the gas is first
turned on, just sufficiently to produce a small jet at the mouth of
the tube, which small jet, being once kindled, may be allowed to burn
any convenient time, until the moment the magnesium light is required.
All that is then needed is to turn on the metallic powder, which
instantly descends and becomes ignited as it passes through the
burning gas. This action of turning on and off the metallic powder may
be repeated without putting out the gas, as often and as quickly as
desired; so that, in addition to the ordinary purpose to which lamps
are applied, an instant or an intermittent light of great brilliancy,
suitable for signals or for light-houses, may be very simply produced
with certainty of effect and without the smallest waste of metal. The
first evening an objection was made that the blue tone of the light
created a cold and somewhat ghastly effect. On the second occasion Mr.
Larkin remedied this by mixing with the magnesium a certain quantity
of nitrate of strontia.--_Journal of the Society of Arts_.



_An Artificial Eye for restoring Sight_.--An apparatus of this kind,
whose efficiency we much doubt, has been described by M. Blanchet, in
a paper in which he details the operation for its insertion under the
title of Helio-prothesis. The operation consists in puncturing the eye
in the direction of the antero-posterior axis with a narrow bistoury,
and introducing a piece of apparatus to which M. Blanchet gives the
name of "phosphore." The operation in most instances produces little
pain, and when the globe of the eye has undergone degeneration there
is no pain at all, and the "phosphore" apparatus is {572} introduced
without difficulty. The description of this contrivance is this: "It
consists of a shell of enamel, and of a tube closed at both its ends
by glasses, whose form varies according to circumstances." M. Blanchet
thus describes the operation: "The patient's head being supported by
an assistant, the upper eyelid is raised by an elevator, and the lower
one is depressed. The operator then punctures the eye with a narrow
bistoury, adapting the width of his incision to the diameter of the
'phosphore' tube which he intends to insert. The translucent humor
having escaped, the 'phosphore' apparatus is applied, and almost
immediately, or after a short time, the patient is partially restored
to sight!" Before introducing the apparatus it is necessary to
calculate the antero-posterior diameter of the eye, and if the lens
has cataract it must be removed. Inasmuch as the range of vision
depends on the quantity of the humor left behind, M. Blanchet
recommends the employment of spectacles of various kinds.--_Popular
Science Review._



_Action of Different Colored Lights on the Retina_.--It is known to
physiologists that when a ray of light falls upon the retina, the
impression it produces remains for a definite period, according to
calculation about the _third of a second_. It is this fact which is
used to explain why a burning brand, when twirled rapidly round, gives
the appearance of a ring of light. But till quite recently it had not
been shown whether the different colors of light had the same degree
of persistence upon the retina. The subject has quite lately been
taken up by the Abbe Laborde, who shows that, just as the prism
separates the colors at different angles, so the retina absorbs the
callers, or the impressions produced thereby, in different times. In
conducting his experiment to prove this, the abbe receives the
sunlight through an aperture in a shutter into a darkened chamber. The
aperture is about three millimetres wide by six high. In the course of
the beam and in the middle the chamber there is placed a disk of
metal, the circumference of which is pierced by apertures
corresponding to the aperture in the shutter. This disk is caused to
revolve by clockwork. Behind the disc is placed a plate of ground
glass to receive this spot of light. The disk being then caused to
revolve rapidly, the spot appears at first white, but as the
revolution become more rapid the borders of the spot and the colors
which successively appear are in their order of succession as follows:
blue, green, red, white, green, blue.--_Comptes Rendus_.



_The Origin of Diamonds._--a curious, and it seems to us very
improbable, theory of the origin of diamonds was put foreword by M.
Chancourtios in an essay published in the _Comptes Rendus_ for June
25th. The author tries to show in this that diamonds have been
produced by and incomplete oxidation of the carbides of hydrogen, in
pretty much the same fashion as the sulphur in the _Solfatara,_
described by Professor Ansted in one of our late numbers, results from
an incomplete oxidation of sulphuretted hydrogen, all of whose
hydrogen is converted into water, while only a part of the sulphur is
changed into sulfurous acid. It is by a similar process that petroleum
has given rise to bitumen, and this again two graphite. "If, then"
says the author, "a mixture of hydrocarbon gases and vapor of water be
submitted to slow oxidation, diamonds may possibly be obtained." It is
even possible, he observes, that the tubes which convey common
coal-gas along the streets of Paris may contain such artificial
diamonds in abundance.--_Popular Science Review_.



NEW PUBLICATIONS.


Ballads, Lyrics, and Hymns. By Alice Carey, 8vo., pp. 333. New York:
Hurd Houghton. 1866.

Literature knows no sex, but critics do, and in courtesy we must say
to Miss Carey, we think better of her than of her book; and while
judging what is before us purely on its aesthetic merits, we incline
to believe that the selections here compiled do not show her at her
best. This book might just possibly {573} have been good, only it is
not. It appears to consist of gatherings from the grist of a
respectable and old-established mill, whose brand is familiarly known
wherever mild magazines and sensation periodicals have penetrated. The
most prominent quality it demonstrates is the tireless industry--or
the well-oiled machinery--of the fair miller. The style throughout is
just of the kind to be the first in a "Poet's Corner;" best
characterized, perhaps, by the word "unexceptionable," as used by the
domestic critic, if one there be, of Frank Leslie or the Ledger.
Generally, there is nothing whenever to quarrel with--grammatically,
socially, theologically, or practically. We should not be in the least
surprised if Miss Carey's manuscripts even came in accurately
punctuated. The whole book is like the perfection of a gentleman's
toilet; every constituent part is so correctly "got up," that once out
of sight, we cannot recall a single thing beyond the impression of the
_tout ensemble_.

There is considerable thinking, without any notable novelties in
thought. The fact is, no one who has not tried can appreciate the
difficulty of finding something salient to fasten an opinion on. The
main impression of the serious and heavy parts of the volume on our
mind was that the authoress loved God, meant to be religious and
tender-hearted, and thought the world cold and the sectarians
narrow-minded: laudable conclusions all, which we rather agree with on
the whole, but which do not show cause why they should exist in such
splendid binding.

If this were all;  if the book consisted utterly, as it does mainly,
of versified unremarkableness, all were well enough. It would sell all
the same, and descend in its due course to the limbo of respectable
mediocrity, which cannot be damned because it never had a chance to be
saved. But there are gleams amid the commonplace that make it, to our
mind, one of the saddest books we ever opened--said with the
unfulfilled promise of a busy yet wasted life. While there is not, we
believe, a single true poem in her book, we do think Miss Carey might
once have written poetry. There are traces of talent, like the
abrasions on the high Alpine ridges where avalanches or glaciers went
by them that are long since melted into the valley below, and gone to
join the sea. We do not think Miss Carey ever had a very great supply
of poetic power--never so much as Phoebe Carey, who has enough poetry
in her to equip any ten of the other lady contributors whose versicles
pay as well as hers; but what there was has been sapped and drained
off as fast as it accumulated, in a thousand paltry rillets of verse
that at most can only be silver threads in the passing sunshine. Had
she ever been suffered to let her thoughts and fancies gather and
mingle, perhaps she could have written well. She has not only
considerable command of language, but some character: there has always
been something respectable about Miss Carey that set her apart,
somehow, from the other newspaper writers of miscellaneous verses, and
to it she probably owes the present distinction of being the only one
whose productions are thought worth making a book from. But the woman
has never had a chance. As fast as an idea budded, it was contracted
for in advance and plucked long before ripeness, for the greedy
children that will have their green fruit. If a fancy strayed into her
brain, it was not hers to do with as she liked. It must be carved and
served up in as many different styles as possible; made into a long
poem for one paper and a short poem for another, and dashed into a
third as a flavoring ingredient for a string of hired rhymes. Now, is
there not a strange pathos in the idea of making a life-long business
of doing that ill which one might do well, and which is only worth
existence when well done; of dribbling and frittering away every finer
impulse; of chipping the heart's crystals up into glaziers' diamonds;
of subsisting on oneself, Prometheus and vulture in one? And how
infinitely sadder with the consciousness all the while that if one
could but get a respite, this same work, wrought in freedom, might win
all that hope asks?

Consciously or unconsciously, this, we believe, is the discipline
through which Miss Carey has passed. We think so from the manner, and
from the places, in which we come upon the fragments of promise that
shine here and there. They are often repeated in other
lines--sometimes verbatim; they are not the substance but always the
sauce of the poem; they are never sustained or developed. Everything
goes to show that she has reached that fatal state of enervation when
the mind, from long desuetude, {574} and from never having a fair
chance to think out anything, he comes next to incapable of any
continued political thought at all. The exertion of developing a happy
idea into its best form is too much for the unused and enfeebled
imagination.

So much for the conjectural inside view of these verses, the actual
outside view remains. Whether it be a sad fact or simply a fact, there
is nothing to read twice in the book. It is not poetry, but it is a
piece of very good judgment on the part of the publisher--just what
they want. And if we understand their motives, we shall earn their
good will by saying that this is a safe, trustworthy, and entirely
harmless work, innocuous to families and schools, superbly bound,
finished, and printed, and fit, beyond almost any work we know of, for
a present from very affectionate young men to very amiable young
ladies.



BEETHOVEN'S LETTERS. (1790-1836.) From the collection of Dr. Ludwig
Nohl; also his Letters to the Archduke Rudolph, Cardinal-Archbishop of
Olmutz, from the collection of Dr. Ludwig Ritter von Kochel.
Translated by Lady Wallace; with a portrait and facsimile. 2 vols.,
12mo. Hurd & Houghton.

These letters of the illustrious _maestro_ are arranged under three
heads: Life's Joy a and Sorrows, Life's Mission, Life's Troubles and
Close. They are of quite a miscellaneous character, and refer to every
conceivable event of life, displaying much good humor and not a little
ill humor in their short, quick, impatient sentences. As a
letter-writer he is far inferior to Mozart, with whom the reader comes
at once into sympathy, and of whose letters very few indeed are
wanting in sentiments of universal interest. On the contrary, a very
large number of these letters of Beethoven will be read simply because
Beethoven wrote them, and will not bear a reperusal Yet they will, no
doubt, find a welcome place beside those of his great brother artist
on the table of every admirer of the grand music or these two grand
geniuses. His enthusiastic, and we may add, somewhat imaginative
editor and compiler, Dr. Nohl, is perhaps better qualified to form a
judgment upon the general tenor and worth of these letters than we
are, and we therefore quote the following from his preface to the
present work: "If not fettered by petty feelings, the reader will
quickly surmount the casual obstacles and stumbling-blocks which the
first perusal of these letters may seem to present, and quickly feel
himself transported at a single stride into a stream where a strange
roaring and rushing is heard, but above which loftier tones resound
with magic and exciting power. For a acute year life breathes in these
lines; and under-current runs through their apparently unconnected
import, uniting them as with and electric chain, and with firmer links
than any mere coherence of subjects could have effected. I experienced
this myself to the most remarkable degree when I first made the
attempt to arrange, in accordance with their period and substance, the
hundreds of individual pages bearing neither date nor address, and I
was soon convinced that a connected text (such as Mozart's letters
have, and ought to have) would be here entirely superfluous, as even
the best biographical commentary would be very dry work, interrupting
the electric current of the whole, and thus destroying its peculiar
effect."

The volumes are published in scholarly style, and present a very
readable and attractive page.


LONDON POEMS. By Robert Buchanan 12 mo, pp. 272. Alexander Strahan,
London and New-York.

The elegant dress of this volume, so characteristic of Mr. Strahan's
publications, is calculated to make one shy of saying anything
derogatory to its character; but we are held to say that we decidedly
object to Mr. Buchanan's poetry in any dress. The greater part of
these poems are to us positively repulsive. They are but little more
than rudely hand sketches of certain phases of low life in London,
immoral and irreligious in tone, and utterly wanting in that spiritual
expression which invests the true poet with the mantle of inspiration.
The poet may describe vice if he will, but let him not dare to excuse
it or throw a charm about it if he would not raised a storm of
indignation in the bosoms of the virtuous and the truthful. Poetry is
a divine art; the poet must discharge at once the high office of
teacher as well as psalmist, and every {575} line should bear the
impress of divine truth nobility, and purity. That which is false,
base, boorish, and obscene is none the less detestable for being put
in rhythm.



FREDERICK THE GREAT AND HIS COURT. An historical novel. By L.
Muehlbach. Translated from the German by Mrs. Chapman Coleman and
daughters. 12mo. New-York: D. Appleton & Co. 1866.

The rapidity with which the novels of Miss Muehlbach have risen into
popularity in this country is a pretty good indication of their merit.
They are free from the false sensationalism which furnishes the spice
of the lower school of modern fiction; and they treat of historical
subjects and characters with an honest intention to exhibit historical
truth, and not as a mere framework for the display of a trashy story.
Many of the scenes are drawn with a fidelity and an effectiveness
which show at the same time a close familiarity with the times and
persons with which the novel is concerned and a very considerable
literary skill; but the dialogues are not always well managed, the
diction being sometimes too trivial and sometimes too stilted. Despite
this minor defect, the book is full enough of interest: and our wonder
is, considering the great and long-established popularity of Miss
Muehlbach in Germany, that her writings were not translated into our
language long ago. It is a singular fact that the present work, and
some other historical novels from the same pen which D. Appleton & Co.
have now in press, were translated and first printed in the
Confederate States during the late rebellion.



THE HIGHER EDUCATION OF WOMEN.
By Emily Davies. 16mo, pp. 191. London
and New-York: Alexander Strahan. 1866.

This is a well-written plea for reform in the present system of female
education; not for a reform which would ignore the difference in the
character and duties of the two sexes, but one which would open to
women various callings for which nature has specially fitted them, but
which they are now shut out either by defective training or by the
prejudices of society. Miss Davies's little treatise is an appropriate
companion work for a volume of similar essays by Miss Parkes which we
noticed two or three months ago; and though both of them are more
applicable to the state of things in England than to the better
condition of women in our own country there is much in both which
deserves our serious consideration.



A GENERAL HISTORY OF THE CATHOLIC CHURCH,
from the commencement of the Christian Era until the present time. By
M. l'abbe J. E. Darras. Vol. IV. New-York: P. O'Shea. 1866.

The fourth volume of this highly esteemed work completes the
publication of the original history of M. Darras. It comprises the
last, and to us for many reasons the most interesting period of the
history of the church; that which begins with the rise of
Protestantism down to the pontificate of Gregory XVI. To this volume
is added as an appendix a very concise and valuable historical sketch
of the origin and progress of the Church in the United States by the
Rev. Dr. C. I. White, of Washington City. We have already warmly
commended this work to our readers. It will take its place, of course,
in all our colleges and literary societies, and become as familiar to
our American as it is already to all French students; but we wish for
it also a wide distribution in the family circle. There is no reason
why such useful and entertaining works as this should not be kept at
hand and under the eye of our youth at home. A good knowledge of the
church's life, labors, trials, and victories is necessary to every
Catholic in our day, both for an intelligent appreciation of his faith
as well as to be able to combat the attacks that faith receives
through misrepresentation of the facts of history, and the unblushing
falsehoods concerning the Papacy, which are so foul a blot upon the
pages of history and controversy written by Protestant and infidel
enemies of the church. The present work is the best history of the
church we possess in the English language. It is such a one as we have
needed a long time, and we again thank the enterprising publisher for
the boon he has thus conferred upon the Catholic public.

{576}


THE SUFFERINGS OF JESUS.
by Father Thomas of Jesus. Reprinted from the last London Edition. New
York: P O'Shea, 27 Barclay st. 1866.


This is a work composed by a great saint, and justly deserving of the
great reputation it has always enjoyed as one of the best of spiritual
books. It contains an inexhaustible mine of meditation, sufficient to
last a person during his whole life, and just as new and fresh after
the hundreds perusal as during the first. It is as a book for
meditation that it should be used, and for this purpose it cannot be
too highly recommended to religious communities or to devout persons
in the world who desire and need a guide and model for the practice of
meditation.


THE LIFE AND LIGHT OF MEN.
An essay. by John Young LL.D. Edin. Strahan.


Dr. Young was formerly a Presbyterian minister, but resigned his
position on account of his inability to believe the Presbyterian
doctrines, especially that of the vicarious atonement and imputed
righteousness of Christ. The present work is leveled against this
doctrine. The author has tolerably clear views of the Incarnation, and
some other Catholic doctrines. His learning appears to be
considerable, the tone of his mind very just and moderate, and his
intellectual and literary ability of no mean order. He is one instance
among a thousand others, of a noble, religious mind striving to rise
above the common Protestant orthodoxy without floating away into
rationalism. We recommend his book to our Calvinistic friends. What
the excellent author is yearning after is Catholic theology. This, and
this alone, would satisfy him, for it alone can satisfy any mind that
wishes to believe in the Christian revelation and at the same time the
rational.



THE LIFE OF ST. VINCENT DEPAUL, AND ITS LESSONS.
A lecture. By Rev. T. S. Preston, R. Coddington.

The publication of this lecture will gratify many who were not  able
to be present at its delivery. The orator gives a short account of the
life and great labors of the apostle of charity, and then shows the
difference between charity as a Christian virtue and simple, natural
philanthropy, both in principle and their means and plans of action.
In works of benevolence, that which the Christian saint is careless
about and avoids to the utmost of his power, is considered by the
world as of vital necessity to secure success, the approval and
applause of men. This truth is well brought out in the lecture, and is
one which it is necessary to keep before our minds in this puffing
age. The proceeds of the sale of the lecture is accredited to the
benefit of the conference of St. Vincent de Paul, attached to St.
Ann's Church in the city.




ALTE UND NEUR WELT. Benziger Bros. New York.

This is a Catholic monthly magazine in the German language, enriched
with copious illustrations. The type and paper are of very superior
quality, and the contents very various and, we should think,
well-chosen. The illustrations are by far the best which can be found
in any periodical published in America, and many of them equal to
those of the best European magazines. The work as a whole reflects the
greatest credit on its conductors, and deserves the most extensive
patronage from our numerous and intelligent German Catholic
population. We recommend it also to those who are studying the German
language, or interested in German literature. The illustrations alone
are worth the price of subscription, which is $4.00 a year.


BOOKS RECEIVED.

From D. & J. Sadlier & Co. New York. The denouncement; or, the Last
Baron of Crana, and The Boyne Water. By the Brothers Banim. 2 vols.
12mo, pp. 448 and 559; Parts 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35 and 36 of
D'Artaud's Lives of the Popes.


From Ticknor & Fields, Boston. How New York is Governed. By James
Parton, reprinted from the North American Review. Pamphlet.


From P. O'Shea, New York. The Purgatorian Manual; or, a Selection of
Prayers and Devotions with appropriate reflections for the use of the
members of the Purgatorian Society in the Diocese of New York, and
adapted for general use. By Rev. Thomas S. Preston, pastor of St.
Ann's and Chancellor of the Diocese. Approved by the most Rev. John
McCloskey, D.D., archbishop of New York, pp. 452; The Imitation of
Christ in Two Books, translated by Richard Challoner, D.D. 48mo, pp.
308; Instructions on the Commandments of God, and Holy Sacraments. By
St. Alphonsus Liguori. 48mo, pp. 288. The Spiritual Combat; or, the
Christian Defended against the Enemy of his Salvation. 48mo, pp. 256;
Little Office of the Blessed Virgin, in Latin and English. 12mo, pp.
178.



We have received an Oration delivered before the members of St. Mary's
Orphan Association of Nashville, Tenn., July 4th, 1866, by Rev. A. J.
Ryan, author of The Concord Banner, etc.



{577}

THE CATHOLIC WORLD


VOL. IV., NO. 23--FEBRUARY, 1867.



THE POPE AND THE REVOLUTION


BY JOHN HENRY NEWMAN, D.D.


  [This sermon is given to the world in consequence of its having been
  made the subject in the public prints of various reports and
  comments, which, though both friendly and fair to the author, as far
  as he has seen them, nevertheless, from the necessity of the case,
  have proceeded from information inexact in points of detail.

  It is now published from the copy written beforehand, and does not
  differ from the copy, as delivered, except in such corrections of a
  critical nature as are imperative when a composition, written
  _currente calamo_, has to be prepared for the press. There is one
  passage, however, which it has been found necessary to enlarge, with
  a view of expressing more exactly the sentiment which it contained,
  namely, the comparison made between Italian and English Catholics.

  The author submits the whole, as he does all his publications, to
  the judgment of Holy Church.]
  October 13, 1866.


  The church shone brightly in her youthful days,
    Ere the world on her smiled
  So now, an outcast, she would pour her rays
    Keen, free, and undefiled;
  Yet would I not that arm of force were mine,
  To thrust her from her awful ancient shrine.

  'Twas duty bound each convert-king to rear
    His mother from the dust;
  And pious was it to enrich, nor fear
    Christ for the rest to trust:
  And who shall dare make common or unclean
    What once has on the holy altar been?

  Dear Brothers! hence, while ye for ill prepare,
    Triumph Is still your own;
  Blest is a pilgrim church! yet shrink to share
    The curse of throwing down.
  So will we toll in our old place to stand,
  Watching, not dreading, the despoiler's hand.

        _Vid_. Lyra Apostolica.



SERMON.

This day, the feast of the Holy Rosary of the Blessed Virgin Mary, has
been specially devoted by our ecclesiastical superiors to be a day of
prayer for the sovereign pontiff, our holy father, Pope Pius the
Ninth.

His lordship, our bishop, has addressed a pastoral letter to his
clergy upon the subject, and at the end of it he says: "Than that
festival none can be more appropriate, as it is especially devoted to
celebrating the triumphs of the Holy See obtained by prayer. We
therefore propose and direct that on the festival of the Rosary, the
chief mass in each church and chapel of our diocese be celebrated with
as much solemnity as circumstances will allow of. And that after the
mass the psalm {578} _Miserere_ and the Litany of the Saints be sung
or recited. That the faithful be invited to offer one communion for
the Pope's intention. And that, where it can be done, one part at
least of the rosary be publicly said at some convenient time in the
church, for the same intention."

Then he adds: "In the sermon at the mass of the festival, it is our
wish that the preacher should instruct the faithful on their
obligations to the Holy See, and on the duty especially incumbent on
us at this time of praying for the Pope."

I. "Our obligations to the Holy See." What Catholic can doubt of our
obligations to the Holy See? especially what Catholic under the shadow
and teaching of St. Philip Neri can doubt those obligations, in both
senses of the word "obligation," the tie of duty and the tie of
gratitude?

1. For first as to duty. Our duty to the Holy See, to the chair of St.
Peter, is to be measured by what the church teaches us concerning that
Holy See and of him who sits in it. Now St. Peter, who first occupied
it, was the Vicar of Christ. You know well, my brethren, our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ, who suffered on the cross for us, thereby bought
for us the kingdom of heaven. "When thou hadst overcome the sting of
death," says the hymn, "thou didst open the kingdom of heaven to those
who believe." He opens, and he shuts; he gives grace, he withdraws it;
he judges, he pardons, he condemns. Accordingly, he speaks of himself
in the Apocalypse as "him who is the holy and the true, him that hath
the key of David (the key, that is, of the chosen king of the chosen
people), him that openeth and no man shutteth, that shutteth and no
man openeth." And what our Lord, the supreme judge, is in heaven, that
was St. Peter on earth; he had the keys of the kingdom, according to
the text, "Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church,
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give to
thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt bind
upon earth, shall be bound also in heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt
loose on earth, be loosed also in heaven."

Next, let it be considered, the kingdom which our Lord set up with St.
Peter at its head was decreed in the counsels of God to last to the
and of all things, according to the words I have just quoted, "The
gates of hell show not prevail against it." And again, "Behold I am
with you all days, even to the consummation of the world." And in the
words of the prophet Isaias, speaking of that divinely established
church, then in the future, "This is my covenant with them, My spirit
that is in thee, and my words which I have put in thy month, shall not
depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of
the mouth of thy seed's seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and for
ever." And the prophet Daniel says, "The God of heaven will set up a
kingdom that shall never be destroyed . . . and it shall break in
pieces and shall consume all those kingdoms (of the earth, which went
before it), and itself shall stand for ever."

That kingdom our Lord set up when he came on earth, and especially
after his resurrection; for we are told by St. Luke that this was his
gracious employment, when he visited the apostles from time to time,
during the forty days which intervened between Easter day and the day
of his ascension. "He showed himself alive to the apostles," says the
evangelist, "after his passion by many proofs, for forty days
appearing to them and speaking of the kingdom of God." And
accordingly, when at length he had ascended on high, and had sent down
"the promise of his Father," the Holy Ghost, upon his apostles, they
forthwith entered upon their high duties, and brought that kingdom or
church into shape, and supplied it with members, and enlarged it, and
carried it into all lands. As to St. Peter, he acted as the head of
the church,  according to the previous {579} words of Christ; and,
still according to his Lord's supreme will, he at length placed
himself in the see of Rome, where he was martyred. And what was then
done, in its substance cannot be undone. "God is not as a man that he
should lie, nor as the son of man, that he should change. Hath he said
then, and shall he not do? Hath he said then, and will he not fulfil?"
And, as St. Paul says, "The gifts and the calling of God are without
repentance."  His church, then, in all necessary matters, is as
unchangeable as he. Its framework, its polity, its ranks, its offices,
its creed, its privileges, the promises made to it, its fortunes in
the world, are ever what they have been.

Therefore, as it was in the world, but not _of_ the world, in the
apostles' times, so it is now; as it was "in honor and dishonor, in
evil report and good report, as chastised but not killed, as having
nothing and possessing all things," in the apostles' times, so it is
now; as then it taught the truth, so it does now; and as then it had
the sacraments of grace, so has it now; as then it had a hierarchy or
holy government of bishops, priests, and deacons, so has it now; and
as it had a head then, so must it have a head now. Who is that visible
head? who is the vicar of Christ? who has now the keys of the kingdom
of heaven, as St. Peter had then? Who is it who binds and looses on
earth, that our Lord may bind and loose in heaven? Who, I say, is the
successor to St. Peter, since a successor there must be, in his
sovereign authority over the church? It is he who sits in St. Peter's
chair; it is the Bishop of Rome. We all know _this_; it is part of our
_faith_; I am not proving it to you, my brethren. The visible headship
of the church, which was with St. Peter while he lived, has been
lodged ever since in his chair; the successors in his headship are the
successors in his chair, the continuous line of Bishops of Rome, or
Popes, as they are called, one after another, as years have rolled on,
one dying and another coming, down to this day, when we see Pius the
Ninth sustaining the weight of the glorious apostolate, and that for
twenty years past--a tremendous weight, a ministry involving momentous
duties, innumerable anxieties, and immense responsibilities, as it
ever has done.

And now, though I might say much more about the prerogatives of the
Holy Father, the visible head of the church, I have said more than
enough for the purpose which has led to my speaking about him at all.
I have said that, like St. Peter, he is the vicar of his Lord. He can
judge, and he can acquit; he can pardon, and he can condemn; he can
command, and he can permit; he can forbid, and he can punish. He has a
supreme jurisdiction over the people of God. He can stop the ordinary
course of sacramental mercies; he can excommunicate from the ordinary
grace of redemption; and he can remove again the ban which he has
inflicted. It is the rule of Christ's providence, that what his vicar
does in severity or in mercy upon earth, he himself confirms in
heaven. And in saying all this I have said enough for my purpose,
because that purpose is to define our obligations to him. That is the
point on which our bishop has fixed our attention; "our obligations to
the Holy See;" and what need I say more to measure our own duty to it
and to him who sits in it, than to say that, in his administration of
Christ's kingdom, in his religious acts, we must never oppose his
will, or dispute his word, or criticise his policy, or shrink from his
side? There are kings of the earth who have despotic authority, which
their subjects obey indeed and disown in their hearts; but we must
never murmur at that absolute rule which the sovereign pontiff has
over us, because it is given to him by Christ, and, in obeying him, we
are obeying his Lord. We must never suffer ourselves to doubt, that,
in his government of the church, he is guided by an intelligence more
than human. His yoke is the yoke of Christ, _he_ has the
responsibility {580} of his own acts, not we; and to his Lord must he
render account, not to us. Even in secular matters it is ever safe to
be on his side, dangerous to be on the side of his enemies. Our duty
is, not indeed to mix up Christ's vicar with this or that party of
men, because he in his high station is above all parties, but to look
at his acts, and to follow him whither he goeth, and never to desert
him, however we may be tried, but to defend him at all hazards, and
against all comers, as a son would a father, and us a wife a husband,
knowing that his cause is the cause of God. And so, as regards his
successors, if we live to see them; it is our duty to give _them_ in
like manner our dutiful allegiance and our unfeigned service, and to
follow them also whithersoever they go, having that same confidence
that each in his turn and in his own day will do God's work and will,
which we felt in their predecessors, now taken away to their eternal
reward.

2. And now let us consider our obligations to the sovereign pontiff in
the second sense, which is contained under the word "obligation." "In
the sermon in the mass," says the bishop, "it is our wish that the
preacher should instruct the faithful on their obligations to the Holy
See;" and certainly those obligations, that is, the claims of the Holy
See upon our gratitude, are very great. We in this country owe our
highest blessings to the see of St. Peter--to the succession of
bishops who have filled his apostolic chair. For first it was a Pope
who sent missionaries to this island in the beginning of the church,
when the island was yet in pagan darkness. Then again, when our
barbarous ancestors, the Saxons, crossed over from the continent and
overran the country, who but a Pope, St. Gregory the First, sent over
St. Augustine and his companions to convert them to Christianity? and
by God's grace they and their successors did the great work in the
course of a hundred years. From that time, twelve hundred years ago
our nation has ever been Christian. And then in the lawless times each
followed, and the break-up of the old world all over Europe, and the
formation of the new, it was the  Popes, humanly speaking, who saved
the religion of Christ from being utterly lost and coming to an and,
and not in England only, but on the continent; that is, our Lord made
use of that succession of his vicars to fulfil his gracious promise,
that his religion should never fail. The Pope and the bishops of the
church, acting together in that miserable time, rescued from
destruction all that makes up our present happiness, spiritual and
temporal. Without them the world would have relapsed into
barbarism--but God willed otherwise; and especially the Roman
pontiffs, the successors of St. Peter, the centre of Catholic unity,
the vicars of Christ, which primarily related to the Almighty Redeemer
himself: "I have a lead help upon one that is mighty, and I have
exalted one chosen quote of the people. I have found David my servant,
with my holy oil have I anointed him. For my hand shall help him, and
my arm shall strengthen him. The enemy shall have no advantage over
him, nor the son of iniquity have power to hurt him. I will put to
flight his enemies before his face, and them that hate him I will put
to flight. And my truth and my mercy shall be with him, and in my name
shall his horn be exalted. He shall cry out to me, Thou art my Father,
my God, and the support of my salvation. And I will make him my
first-born, high above the kings of the earth. I will keep my mercy
for him for ever, and my coveted shall be faithful to him."

And the Almighty did this in pity toward his people, and for the sake
of his religion, and by virtue of his promise, and for the merits of
the most precious blood of his own dearly beloved Son, Whom the Popes
represented. As Moses and Aaron, as Josue,  as {581} Samuel, as David,
were the leaders of the Lord's host in the old time, and carried on
the chosen people of Israel from age to age, in spite of their enemies
round about, so have the Popes from the beginning of the gospel, and
especially in those middle ages when anarchy prevailed, been faithful
servants of their Lord, watching and fighting against sin and
injustice and unbelief and ignorance, and spreading abroad far and
wide the knowledge of Christian truth.

Such they have been in every age, and such are the obligations which
mankind owes to them; and, if I am to pass on to speak of the present
pontiff, and of our own obligations to him, then I would have you
recollect, my brethren, that it is he who has taken the Catholics of
England out of their unformed state and made them a church. He it is
who has redressed a misfortune of nearly three hundred years'
standing. Twenty years ago we were a mere collection of individuals;
but Pope Pius has brought us together, has given us bishops, and
created out of us a body politic, which, please God, as time goes on,
will play an important part in Christendom, with a character, an
intellect, and a power of its own, with schools of its own, with a
definite influence in the counsels of the Holy Church Catholic, as
England had of old time.

This has been his great act toward our country; and then specially, as
to his great act toward us here, toward me. One of his first acts
after he was Pope was, in his great condescension,  to call me to
Rome; then, when I got there, he bade me send for my friends to be
with me; and he formed us into and oratory. And thus it came to pass
that, on my return to England, I was able to associate myself with
others who had not gone to Rome, till we were so many in number that
not only did we establish our own oratory here, whither the Pope had
specially sent us, but we found we could throw off from's a colony of
zealous and able priests into the metropolis, and establish there,
with the powers with which the Pope had furnished me, and the sanction
of the late cardinal, that oratory which has done and still does so
much good among the Catholics of London.

Such is the Pope now happily reigning in the chair of St. Peter; such
are our personal obligations to him; such has he been toward England,
such toward us, toward you, my brethren. Such he is in his benefits,
and, great as are the claims of those benefits upon us, great equally
are the claims on us of his personal character and of his many
virtues. He is one whom to see is to love; one who overcomes even
strangers, even enemies, by his very look and voice; whose presence
subdues, whose memory haunts, even the sturdy resolute mind of the
English Protestant. Such is the Holy Father of Christendom, the worthy
successor of a long and glorious line. Such is he; and great as he is
in office, and in his beneficent acts and virtuous life, as great is
he in the severity of his trials, in the complication of his duties,
and in the gravity of his perils--perils which are at this moment
closing him in on every side; and therefore it is, on account of the
crisis of the long-protracted troubles of his pontificate which seems
near at hand, that our bishop has set apart this day for special
solemnities, the feast of the Holy Rosary, and has directed us to
"instruct the faithful on their _obligations_ to the Holy See," and
not only so, but also "on the duty especially incumbent on us at this
time of _praying_ for the Pope."


II. This, then, is the second point to which I have to direct your
attention, my brethren--the duty of praying for the Holy Father; but,
before doing so, I must tell you what the Pope's long-protracted
troubles are about, and what the crisis is which seems approaching, I
will do it in as few words as I can.

More than a thousand years ago, nay, near upon fifteen hundred, began
that great struggle, which I spoke of {582} just now, between the old
and the new inhabitants of this part of the world. Whole populations
of barbarians overrun the whole face of the country, that is, of
England, France, Germany, Spain, Italy, and the re"t of Europe. They
were heathens, and they got the better of the Christians; and religion
seemed likely to fail together with that old Christian stock. But, as
I have said, the Pope and the bishops of the church took heart, and
set about converting the new-comers, as in a former age they had
converted those who now had come to misfortune; and, through God's
mercy, they succeeded. The Saxon English--Anglo-Saxons, as they are
called--are among those whom the Pope converted, as I said just now.
The new convert people, as you may suppose, were very grateful to the
Pope and bishops, and they showed their gratitude by giving them large
possessions, which were of great use, in the bad times that followed,
in maintaining the influence of Christianity in the world. Thus the
Catholic Church became rich and powerful. The bishops became princes,
and the Pope became a sovereign ruler, with a large extent of country
all his own. This state of things lasted for many hundred years; and
the Pope and bishops became richer and richer, more and more powerful,
until at length the Protestant revolt took place, three hundred years
ago, and ever since that time, in a temporal point of view, they have
become of less and less importance, and less and less prosperous.
Generation after generation the enemies of the church, on the other
hand, have become bolder and bolder, more powerful, and more
successful in their measures against the Catholic faith. By this time
the church has well-nigh lost all its wealth and all its power; its
bishops have been degraded from their high places in the world, and in
many countries have scarcely more, or not more, of weight or of
privilege than the ministers of the sects which have split off from
it. However, though the bishops lost, as time went on, their temporal
rank, the Pope did lose his; he has been an exception to the rule;
according to the providence of God, he has retained Rome, and the
territories around about Rome, far and wide, as his own possession
without let or hindrance. But now at length, by the operation of the
same causes which have destroyed the power of the bishops, the Holy
Father is in danger of losing his temporal possessions. For the last
hundred years he has had from time to time serious reverses, but he
recovered his ground. Six years ago he lost the greater part of his
dominions--, all but Rome and the country immediately about it,--and
now the worst of difficulties has occurred as regards the territories
which remain to him. His enemies have succeeded, as it would seem, in
persuading at least a large portion of his subjects to side with them.
This is a real and very trying difficulty. While his subjects are for
him, no one can have a word to say against his temporal rule; but who
can force a sovereign on people which deliberately rejects him? You
may attempt it for awhile, but at length the people, if they persist,
will get their way.

They give out then, that the Pope's government is behind the age--that
once indeed it was as good as other governments, but that now other
governments have got better, and his has not--that he can either keep
order within his territory, nor defend it from attacks from
without--that his police and his finances are in a bad state--that
his people are discontented within--that he does not show them how to
become rich--that he keeps them from improving their minds--that he
treats them as children--that he opens no career for young and
energetic minds, but condemns them to inactivity and sloth--that he is
an old man--that he is an ecclesiastic--that, considering his great
spiritual duties, he has no time left him for temporal concerns--and
that a bad rebellious government is a scandal to religion.

{583}

I have stated their arguments as fairly as I can, but you must not for
an instant suppose, my brethren, that I admit either their principles
or their facts. It is a simple paradox to say that ecclesiastical and
temporal power cannot lawfully, religiously, and usefully be joined
together. Look at what are called the middle ages--that is, the period
which intervenes between the old Roman empire and the modern world; as
I have said, the Pope and the bishops saved religion and civil order
from destruction in those tempestuous times--and they did so _by
means_ of the secular power which they possessed. And next, going on
to the principles which the Pope's enemies lay down as so very
certain, who will grant to them, who has any pretension to be a
religious man, that progress in temporal possessions is the greatest
of goods, and that everything else, however sacred, must give way
before it? On the contrary, health, long life, security, liberty,
knowledge, are certainly great goods, but the possession of heaven is
a far greater good than all of them together. With all the progress in
worldly happiness which we possibly could make, we could not make
ourselves immortal--death must come; that will be a time when riches
and worldly knowledge will avail us nothing, and true faith and divine
love and a past life of obedience will be all in all to us. If we were
driven to choose between the two, it would be a hundred times better
to be Lazarus in this world than to be Dives in the next.

However, the best answer to their arguments is contained in sacred
history, which supplies us with a very apposite and instructive lesson
on the subject, and to it I am now going to refer.

Now observe, in the first place, no Catholic maintains that that rule
of the Pope as a king, in Rome and its provinces, which men are now
hoping to take from him, is, strictly speaking, what is called a
theocracy, that is, a divine government. His government, indeed, in
spiritual matters, in the Catholic Church throughout the world, might
be called a theocracy, because he is the vicar of Christ, and has the
assistance of the Holy Ghost; but not such is his kingly rule in his
own dominions. On the other hand, the rule exercised over the chosen
people, the Israelites, by Moses, Josue, Gideon, Eli, and Samuel, was
a theocracy: God was the king of the Israelites, not Moses and the
rest--_they_ were but vicars or vicegerents of the Eternal Lord who
brought the nation out of Egypt. Now, when men object that the Pope's
government of his own states is not what it should be, and that
therefore he ought to lose them, because, forsooth, a religious rule
should be perfect or not at all, I take them at their word, if they
are Christians, and refer them to the state of things among the
Israelites after the time of Moses, during the very centuries when
they had God for their king. Was that a period of peace, prosperity,
and contentment? Is it an argument against the divine perfections,
that it was not such a period? Why is it, then, to be the condemnation
of the Popes, who are but men, that their rule is but parallel in its
characteristics to that of the King of Israel, who was God? He indeed
has his own all-wise purposes for what he does; he knows the end from
the beginning; he could have made his government as perfect and as
prosperous as might have been expected from the words of Moses
concerning it, as perfect and prosperous as, from the words of the
prophets, our anticipations might have been about the earthly reign of
the Messias. But this he did not do, because from the first he made
that perfection and that prosperity dependent upon the free will, upon
the cooperation of his people. Their loyal obedience to him was the
condition, expressly declared by him, of his fulfilling his promises.
He proposed to work out his purposes through them, and, when they
refused their share {584} in the work, everything went wrong. Now they
did refuse from the first; so that from the very first, he says of
them emphatically, they were a "stiff-necked people."  This was at the
beginning of their history; and close upon the end of it, St. Stephen,
inspired by the Holy Ghost, repeats the divine account of them: "You
stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, you always resist
the Holy Ghost; as your fathers did, so do you also." In consequence
of this obstinate disobedience, I say, God's promises were not
fulfilled to them. That long lapse of five or six hundred years,
during which God was their king, was in good part a time, not of
well-being, but of calamity.

Now, turning to the history of the papal monarchy for the last
thousand years, the Roman people have not certainly the guilt of the
Israelites, because they were not opposing the direct rule of' God;
and I would not attribute to them now a liability to the same dreadful
crimes which stain the annals of their an ancestors; but still, after
all they have been a singularly stiff-necked people in time past,  and
in consequence, there has been extreme confusion, I may say anarchy,
under the reign of the Popes; and the restless impatience of his rule
which exists in the Roman territory now is only what has shown itself
age after age in times past. The Roman people not seldom offered
bodily violence to their Popes, killed some Popes, wounded others,
drove others from the city. On one occasion they assaulted the Pope at
the very altar in St. Peter's, and he was obliged to take to flight in
his pontifical vestments. Another time they insulted the clergy of
Rome; at another, they attacked and robbed the pilgrims who brought
offerings from a distance to the shrine of St. Peter. Sometimes they
sided with the German emperors against the Pope; sometimes with other
enemies of his in Italy itself. As many as thirty-six Popes endured
this dreadful contest with their own subjects, till at last, in anger
and disgust with Rome and Italy, they took refuge in France, where
they remained for seventy years, during the reigns of eight of their
number.   [Footnote 170]

  [Footnote 170: I take these facts as I find them in Gibbon's
  History, the work which I have immediately at hand; but it would not
  be difficult to collect a multitude of such instances from the
  original historians of those times.]

That I may not be supposed to rest what I have said on insufficient
authorities, I will quote the words of that great saint, St. Bernard,
about the roman people, seven hundred years ago.

Writing to Pope Eugenius during the troubles of the day, he says:
"What shall I say of the people? why, that it _is_ the Roman people. I
could not more concisely or fully express what I think of your
subjects. What has been so notorious for ages as the wantonness and
haughtiness of the Romans? a race unaccustomed to peace, accustomed to
tumult; a race cruel and unmanageable up to this day, which knows not
to submit, unless when it is unable to make fight. . . . I know the
hardened heart of this people, but God is powerful even of these
stones to raise up children to Abraham. . . . When will you find for
me out of the whole of that populous city, who received you as Pope
without bribe or hope of bribe? And then especially are they wishing
to be masters, when they have professed to be servants. They promise
to be trustworthy, that they may have the opportunity of injuring
those who trust them. . . . They are wise for evil, but they are
ignorant for good. Odious to earth and heaven, they have assailed both
the one and the other; impious towards God, reckless toward things
sacred, factious among themselves, envious of their neighbors, inhuman
toward foreigners, . . . . they love none, and by none are loved. Too
impatient for submission, too helpless for rule; . . . importunate to
gain an end, restless till they gain it, ungrateful when they have
gained it. They have taught {585} their tongue to speak big words,
while their performances are scanty indeed." [Footnote 171]

    [Footnote 171:  St. Bernard is led to say this to the Pope in
    consequence of the troubles created in Rome by Arnald of Bresela.
    "Ab obitu Caelestini hoc anno invalescere coepit istiusmodi
    rebellio Romanorum adversus Pontficem, eodemque haeresis dicta
    Politicorum, sive Arnaldistarum. Ea erant tempora infelicissime,
    cum Romani ipsi, quorum fides in universo orbe jam a tempore
    Apostolorum annunciata semper fuit, resilientes modo a Pontifice,
    dominandi cupidine, ex filiis Petri et discipulis Christi, fiunt
    soboles et alumni pestilentissimi Arnaldi de Brixia. Verum, cum tu
    Romanos audis, ne putes omnes eadem insania percitos, nam
    complures ex nobilium Romanorum familiis, iis relictis, pro
    Pontifice rem ageoant, etc." Baron. Annal. in ann. 1144. 4.--_De
    Consid_. iv. 2.]


Thus I begin, and now let us continue I parallel between the
Israelites and the Romans.

I have said that, while the Israelites had God for their king, they
had a succession of great national disasters, arising indeed really
from their falling off from him; but this they would have been slow to
acknowledge. They fell into idolatry; then, in consequence, they fell
into the power of their enemies; then God in his mercy visited them,
and raised up for them a deliverer and ruler--a judge, as he was
called--who brought them to repentance, and then brought them out of
their troubles; however, when the judge died, they fell back into
idolatry, and then they fell under the power of their enemies again.
Thus for eight years they were in subjection to the king of
Mesopotamia; for eight years to the king of Moab; for twenty years to
the king of Canaan; for seven years to the Madianites; for eighteen
years to the Ammomites; and for forty years to the Philistines.
Afterward Eli, the high priest, became their judge, and then disorders
of another kind commenced. His sons, who were priests also, committed
grievous acts of impurity in the holy place, and in other ways caused
great scandal. In consequence a heavy judgment came upon the people;
they were beaten in battle by the Philistines, and the ark of God was
taken. Then Samuel was raised up, a holy prophet and a judge, and in
the time of his vigor all went well; but he became old, and then he
appointed his sons to take his place. They, however, were not like
him, and everything went wrong again. "His sons walked not in his
ways," says the sacred record, "but they turned aside after lucre, and
took bribes, and perverted judgment." This reduced the Israelites to
despair; they thought they never should have a good government while
things were as they were; and they came to the conclusion that they
had better not be governed by such men as Samuel, however holy he
might be, that public affairs ought to be put on an intelligible
footing, and be carried on upon system, which had never yet been done.
So they came to the conclusion that they had better have a king, like
the nations around them. They deliberately preferred the rule of man
to the rule of God. They did not like to repent and give up their
sins, as the true means of being prosperous; they thought it an easier
way to temporal prosperity to have a king like the nations than to
pray and live virtuously. And not only the common people, but even the
grave and venerable seniors of the nation took up this view of what
was expedient for them. "All the ancients of Israel, being assembled,
came to Samuel, . . . and they said to him . . . Make us a king to
judge us, as all nations have." Observe, my brethren, this is just
what the Roman people are saying now. They wish to throw off the
authority of the Pope, on the plea of the disorders which they
attribute to his government, and to join themselves to the rest of
Italy, and to have the King of Italy for their king. Some of them,
indeed, wish to be without any king at all; but, whether they wish to
have a king or no, at least they wish to get free from the Pope.

Now let us continue the parallel. When the prophet Samuel heard this
request urged from such a quarter, and supported by the people
generally, he was much moved. "The word was displeasing in the eyes of
Samuel," says the inspired writer, "that they should say, Give us a
king. And Samuel prayed to the Lord." {586} Almighty God answered him
by saying, "They have not rejected thee, but me;" and he bade the
prophet warn the people, what the king they sought after would be to
them when at length they had him. Samuel accordingly put before them
explicitly what treatment they would receive from him. "He will take
your sons," he said, "and will put them in his chariots; and he will
make them his horseman, and his running footmen to go before his
chariots. He will take the tenth of your corn and the revenue of your
vineyards. Your flocks also he will take, and you shall be his
servants." Then the narrative proceeds, "But the people would not hear
the voice of Samuel, and they said, Nay, but there shall be a king
over us. And we also will be like all nations, and our king shall
judge us, and go out before us, and fight our battles for us."

Now here the parallel I am drawing is very exact. It is happier, I
think, for the bulk of a people to belong to a small state which makes
little noise in the world than to a large one. At least in this day we
find small states, such an Holland, Belgium, and Switzerland, have
special and singular temporal advantages. And the Roman people, too,
under the sway of the Popes, at least have had a very easy time of it;
but, alas that people is not sensible of this, or does not allow
itself to keep it in mind. The Romans have not had those civil
inconveniences which fall so heavy on the members of a first-class
power. The pontifical government has been very gentle with them; but,
if once they were joined to the kingdom of Italy, they would at length
find what it is to attain temporal greatness. The words of Samuel to
the Israelites would be fulfilled in them to the letter. Heavy taxes
would be laid on them; their children would be torn from them for the
army; and they would incur the other penalties of an ambition which
prefers to have a share in a political adventure to being at the head
of Catholic citizenship. We cannot have all things to our wish in this
world; we must take our choice between this advantage and that;
perhaps the Roman people would like both to secure this world and the
next, if they could; perhaps, in seeking both, they may lose both; and
perhaps, when they have lost more than they have gained, they may wish
their old sovereign back again, as they have done in other centuries
before this, and may regret that they have caused such grievous
disturbance for what at length they find out is little worth it.

In truth, after all, the question which they have to determine is, as
i have intimated, not one of worldly prosperity and adversity, of
greatness or insignificance, of despotism or liberty, of position in
the world or in the church; but a question of spiritual life or death.
The sin of the Israelites was not that they desired good government,
but that they rejected God as their king. Their choosing to have "a
king like the nations" around them was, in matter of fact, the first
step in a series of acts which at length lead them to their rejection
of the Almighty as their God. When in spite of Samuel's remonstrances
they were obstinate, God let them have their way, and then in time
they became dissatisfied with their king for the very reasons which
the old prophet had set before them in vain. On Solomon's death, about
a hundred and twenty years after, the greater part of the nation broke
off from his son on the very plea of Solomon's tyranny, and chose a
new king, who at once established idolatry all through their country.

Now, I grant, to reject the Holy Father of course is not the sin of
the Israelites, for they rejected Almighty God himself: yet I wish I
was not forced to believe that a hatred of the Catholic religion is in
fact at the bottom of that revolutionary spirit which at present seems
so powerful in Rome. Progress, in the mouth of some people--of a great
many people--means apostasy. Not that I wouldn't deny that {587} there
are sincere Catholics so dissatisfied with things as they were in
Italy, as they are in Rome, that they are brought to think that no
social change can be for the worse. Nor as if I pretended to be able
to answer all the objections of those who take a political and secular
view of the subject. But here I have nothing to do with secular
politics. In a sacred place I have only to view the matter
religiously. It would ill become me, in my station in the church and
my imperfect knowledge of the facts of the case, to speak four or
against statesmen and governments, lines of policy or public acts, as
if I were invested with any particular mission to give my judgment, or
had any access to sources of special information. I have not here to
determine what may be politically more wise, or what may be socially
more advantageous, or what in a civil point of view would work more
happily, or what in an intellectual would tell better; my duty is to
lead you, my brethren, to look at what is happening, as the sacred
writers would now view it and describe it were they on earth now to do
so, and to attempt this by means of the light thrown upon present
occurrences by what they actually have written, whether in the Old
Testament or the New.

We must remove, I say, the veil off the face of events, as Scripture
enables us to do, and try to speak of them as Scripture interprets
them for us. Speaking then in the sanctuary, I say that theories and
schemes about government and administration, be a better or worse, and
the aims of mere statesmen and politicians, be they honest or be they
deceitful, these are not the determining causes of that series of
misfortunes under which the Holy See has so long been suffering. There
is something deeper at work than anything human. It is not any refusal
of the Pope to put his administration on a new footing, it is not any
craft or force of men high in public affairs, it is not any cowardice
or frenzy of the people, which is the sufficient explanation of the
present confusion. What it is our duty here to bear in mind is the
constant restless agency over the earth of that bad angel who was a
liar from the beginning, of whom Scripture speaks so much. The real
motive cause of the world's troubles is the abiding presence in it of
the apostate spirit, "The prince of the power of this air," as St.
Paul calls him, "The spirit that now worketh on the children of
unbelief."

Things would go on well enough but for him. He it is who perverts to
evil what is in itself good and right, sowing cockle amid the wheat.
Advance in knowledge, in science, in education, in the arts of life,
in domestic economy, in municipal administration, in the conduct of
public affairs, is all good and from God, and might be conducted in a
religious way; but the evil spirit, jealous of good, makes use of it
for a bad end. And much more able is he to turn to his account the
designs and measures of worldly politicians. He it is who spreads
suspicions and dislikes between class and class, between sovereigns
and subjects, who makes men confuse together things good and bad, who
inspires bigotry, party spirit, obstinacy, resentment, arrogance, and
self-will, and hinders things from righting themselves, finding their
level, and running smooth. His one purpose is so to match and arrange
and combine and direct the opinions and the measures of Catholics and
unbelievers, of Romans and foreigners, of sovereigns and popular
leaders--all that is good, all that is bad, all that is violent or
lukewarm in the good, all that is morally great and intellectually
persuasive in the bad--as to inflict the widest possible damage, and
utter ruin, if that were possible, on the church of God.

Doubtless in St. Paul's time, in the age of heathen persecution, the
persecutors had various good political arguments in behalf of their
cruelty. Mobs indeed, or local magistrates, might be purposely cruel
toward the Christians; but the great Roman government {588} at a
distance, the great rulers and wise lawyers of the day, acted from
views of large policy; they had reasons of state, as the Kings of the
earth have now; still our Lord and his apostles do not hesitate to
pass these by, and declare plainly that the persecution which they
sanctioned or commanded was the word, not of man, but of Satan. And
now in like manner we are not engaged in a mere conflict between
progress and reaction, modern ideas and new, philosophy and theology,
but in one scene of the never-ending conflict between the anointed
Mediator and the devil, the church and the world; and, in St. Paul's
words, "we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities and powers, against the world-rulers of this darkness,
against the spirits of wickedness in the high places."

Such is the apostle's judgment; and how, after giving it, does he
proceed? "Therefore," he says, "take unto you the armor of God, that
you may be able to resist in the evil day and to stand in all things
perfect. Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and
having on the breast-plate of justice, and your feet shod with the
preparation of the gospel of peace; in all things taking the shield of
faith, whereby you may be able to quench all the fiery darts of the
wicked. And take unto you the helmet of salvation and the sword of the
Spirit, which is the word of God." And then he concludes his
exhortation with words which most appositely bear upon the point
toward which all that I have been saying is directed--"praying at all
times with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, and watching
therein with all instance and supplication for all the saints, and for
me," that is, for the apostle himself, "that speech may be given me,
that I may open my mouth with confidence to make known the mystery of
the gospel."

Here, then, we are brought at length to the consideration of the duty
of prayer for our living apostle and bishop of bishops, the Pope. I
shall attempt to state distinctly what is to be the _object_ of our
prayers for him, and secondly, what the _spirit_ in which we should
pray, and so I shall bring my remarks on this great subject to and
end.

1. In order to ascertain the exact _object_ of our prayers at this
time, we must ascertain what is the _occasion_ of them. You know, my
brethren, and I have already observed, that the Holy Father has been
attacked in his temporal possessions again and again in these last
years, and we have all along been saying prayers daily in the mass in
his behalf. About six years ago the northern portion of his states
threw off his authority. Shortly after, a large foreign force,
uninvited, as it would scene, by his people at-large--robbers I will
call them--(this is not a political sentiment, but a historical
statement, for I never heard any one, whatever his politics, who
defendant their act in itself, but only on the plea of its supreme
expedience, of some state necessity, or some theory of patriotism)--a
force of sacrilegious robbers--broke into provinces nearer to Rome by
a sudden movement, and, without any right except that of the stronger,
got possession of them, and keeps them to this day.   [Footnote 172]
{589} Past outrages, such as these, are never to be forgotten; but
still they are not the occasion, nor do they give the matter, of our
present prayers. What that occasion, what that subject is, we seem to
learn from his lordship's letter to his clergy, in which our prayers
are required. After speaking of the Pope's being "stripped of part of
his dominions," and "deprive of all the rest, with the exception of
the marshes and deserts that surround the Roman capital," he fastens
our attention on the fact, that "now at last is the Pope to be left
standing alone, and standing face to face with those unscrupulous
adversaries, whose boast and whose vow to all the world is not to
leave to him one single foot of Italian ground except beneath their
sovereign sway." I understand, then, that the exact object of our
prayers is, that the territory still is should not be violently taken
him, as have been as larger portions of his dominions of which I have
already spoken.

  [Footnote 172: The following telegram in The Times of September
  13th, 1860, containing Victor Emmanuel's formal justification for
  his invasion and occupation of Umbria and the Marches in a time of
  peace, is a document for after-times:

  TURIN, Sept. 11, evening.

  The king received to-day a deputation from the inhabitants of Umbria
  and the Marches.

  His majesty granted the protection which the deputation solicited,
  and orders to have been given to the Sardinian troops to enter those
  provinces by the following proclamation:

  "Soldiers! You are about to enter the Marches and Umbria, in order
  to establish civil order in the towns now desolated by this rule,
  and to give to the people a liberty of expressing their own wishes.
  You will not fight against the armies of any of the powers, but will
  free those unhappy Italian provinces from the bands of foreign
  adventurers which infest them. You do not go to revenge injuries
  done to me and Italy, but to prevent the popular hatred from
  unloosing itself against the oppressors of the country.

  "By your example you will teach the people forgiveness of offenses,
  and Christian tolerance to the man compared the love of the Italian
  fatherland to Islamism.

  "At peace with all the great powers, and holding myself aloof from
  any provocation, I intend to read Central Italy of one continual
  cause of trouble and discord. I intend to respect the seat of the
  chief of the church, to whom I am ever ready to give, in accordance
  with the allied and friendly powers, all the guarantees of
  independence and security which his misguided advisors have made
  hope to obtain for him from the fanaticism of the wicked sect which
  conspires against my authority and against the liberties of the
  nation.

  "Soldiers! I am accused of ambition. Yes; i have one ambition, and
  it is to re-establish the principles of moral order in Italy, and
  preserve Europe from the continual dangers of revolution and war."

  The next day The Times, in a leading article, thus commented on the
  above:

  "Victor Emmanuel has in Garibaldi a most formidable competitor. . . .
  [Piedmont] must therefore, at whatever cost or risk, make herself
  once more mistress of the revolution. She must lead that she may not
  be forced to follow. She must revolutionize the Papal States, in
  order that she may put herself in a position to arrest dangerous
  revolutionary movement against Venetia. . . . These motives are
  amply sufficient to account for the decisive movement of Victor
  Emmanuel. He lives in revolutionary times, when self-preservation
  has superseded all other considerations, and it would be childish to
  apply to his situation the maxims of international law which are
  applicable to periods of tranquility.

  "These being the motives which have held Piedmont to draw the sword,
  we have next to see what are the grounds on which she justifies the
  step. These grounds are two--the extraordinary misrule and
  oppression of the Papal government, and the presence of large bands
  of foreign mercenaries, by which the country is oppressed and
  terrorized. The object is said to be to give the people an
  opportunity of expressing their own wishes and the re-establishment
  of civil order. The king promises to respect the seat of the chief
  of the church--Rome, we suppose, and it's immediate environs; but,
  while holding out this assurance, the manifesto speaks of the Pope
  and his advisers in terms of bitterness and acrimony unusual in the
  present age, even in a declaration of war. He will teach the people
  forgiveness of offenses, and Christian tolerance to the Pope and his
  general. He denounces the misguided advisors of the pontiff, and the
  fanaticism of the wicked sect which conspires against his authority
  and the liberties of the nation. This is harsh language, and is not
  inconsistently seconded by the advance into the States of the Church
  of an army of 50,000 men."

  It was the old fable of the Wolf and the Lamb.]

 [End footnote 172]

This too, I conceive, is what is meant by praying for the Holy See.
"The duty of every true child of Holy Church," says the bishop, "is to
offer continuous and humble prayer for the Father of Christendom, and
for the protection of the Holy See." By the Holy See we may understand
Rome, considered as the seat of pontifical government. We are to pray
for Rome, the see, or seat, or metropolis of St. Peter and his
successors. Further, we are to pray for Rome as the seat, not only of
his spiritual government, but of his temporal. We are to pray that he
may continue king of Rome; that his subjects may come to a better
mind; that instead of threatening and assailing him, or being too
cowardly to withstand those who do, they may defend and obey him;
that, instead of being the heartless tormentors of an old and
venerable man, they may pay a willing homage to the apostle of God;
that instead of needing to be kept down year after year by troops from
afar, as has been the case for so long a time, they may, "with a great
heart and a willing mind," form themselves into the glorious bodyguard
of a glorious master; that they may obliterate and expiate what is so
great a scandal to the world, so great an indignity to themselves, so
great a grief to their father and king, that foreigners are kinder to
him than his own flesh and blood; that now at least, though in the end
of days, they may reverse the past, and, after the ingratitude of
centuries, may unlearn the pattern of that rebellious people, who
began by rejecting their God and ended by crucifying their Redeemer.

2. So much for the _object_ of our prayers; secondly, as to the
_spirit_ in which we should pray. As we ever say in prayer, "Thy will
be done," so {590} we must say now. We do not absolutely know God's
will in this matter; we know indeed it is his will that we should ask;
we are not absolutely sure that it is his will that he should grant.
The very fact of our praying shows that we are uncertain about the
event. We pray when we are uncertain, not when we are certain. If we
were quite sure what God intended to do, whether to continue the
temporal power of the Pope or to end it, we should not pray. It is
quite true indeed that the event may _depend upon our prayer_, but by
such prayer is meant perseverance in prayer and union of prayers; and
we never can be certain that this condition of numbers and of fervor
has been sufficiently secured. We shall indeed gain our prayer if we
pray enough; but, since it is ever uncertain what is enough, it is
ever uncertain what will be the event. There are Eastern
superstitions, in which it is taught that, by means of a certain
number of religious acts, by sacrifices, prayers, penances, a man of
necessity extorts from God what he wishes to gain, so that he may rise
to supernatural greatness even against the will of God. Far be from us
such blasphemous thoughts! We pray to God, we address the Blessed
Virgin and the holy apostles, and the other guardians of Rome, to
defend the holy city; but we know the event lies absolutely in the
hands of the All wise, whose ways are not as our ways, whose thoughts
are not as our thoughts, and, unless we had been furnished with a
special revelation on the matter, to be simply confident or to predict
would be presumption. Such is Christian prayer; it implies hope and
fear. We are not certain we shall gain our petition, we are not
certain we shall not gain it. Were we certain that we should not, we
should give ourselves to resignation, not to prayer; were we certain
we should, we should employ ourselves, not in prayer, but in praise
and thanksgiving. While we pray, then, in behalf of the Pope's
temporal power, we contemplate both sides of the alternative his
retaining it and his losing it; and we prepare ourselves both for
thanksgiving and resignation as the event may B. I conclude by
considering each of these issues of his present difficulty.

(I.) First, as to the event of his retaining his temporal power. I
think this side of the alternative (humanly speaking) to be highly
probable. I should be very much surprised if in the event he did not
keep it. I think the Romans will not be able to do without him; it is
only a minority even now which is against him; the majority of his
subjects are not wicked, so much as cowardly and incapable. Even if
they renounced him now for awhile, they will change their minds and
wish for him again. They will find out that he is their real
greatness. Their city is a place of ruins, except so far as it is a
place shrines. It is the tomb and charnel-house of pagan impiety,
except so far as it is sanctified and quickened by the blood of
martyrs and the relics of saints. To inhabit it would be a penance,
were it not for the presence of religion. Babylon is gone, Memphis is
gone, Persepolis is gone; Rome would go, if the Pope went. Its very
life is the light of the sanctuary. It never could be a suitable
capital of a modern kingdom without a sweeping away of all that makes
it beautiful and venerable to the world at large. And then, when its
new rulers had made of it a trim and brilliant city, they would find
themselves on an healthy soil and a defenceless plain. But, in truth,
the tradition of ages and inveteracy of associations make such a vast
change in Rome impossible. All mankind are parties to the inviolable
union of the Pope and his city. His autonomy is a first principle in
European politics, whether among Catholics or Protestants; and where
can it be secured so well as in that city which has so long been the
seat of its exercise? Moreover, the desolateness of Rome is as
befitting to a kingdom which is not of this world as it is {591}
incompatible with a creation of modern political theories. It is the
religious centre of millions all over the earth, who care nothing for
the Romans who happen to live there, and much for the martyred
apostles who so long have lain buried there; and its claim to have an
integral place in the very idea of Catholicity is recognized not only
by Catholics, but by the whole world.

It is cheering to begin our prayers with these signs of God's
providence in our favor. He expressly encourages us to pray, for
before we have begun our petition, he has begun to fulfil it. And at
the same time, by beginning the work of mercy without us, he seems to
remind us of that usual course of his providence, namely, that he
means to finish it with us. Let us fear to be the cause of a triumph
being lost to the church, because we would not pray for it.

(2.) And now, lastly, to take the other side of the alternative. Let
us suppose that the Pope loses his temporal power, and returns to the
conation of St. Sylvester, St. Julius, St. Innocent, and other great
Popes of early times. Are we, therefore, to suppose that he and the
church will come to naught? God forbid! To say that the church can
fail, or the see of St. Peter can fail, is to deny the faithfulness of
Almighty God to his word. "Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I
build my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it."
To say that the church cannot live except in a particular way, is to
make it "subject to elements of the earth." The church is not the
creature of times and places, of temporal politics or popular caprice.
Our Lord maintains her by means of this world, but these means are
necessary to her only while he gives them; when he takes them away,
they are no longer necessary. He works by means, but he is not bound
to means. He has a thousand ways of maintaining her; he can support
her life, not by bread only, but by every word that proceedeth out of
his mouth. If he takes away one defence, he will give another instead.
We know nothing of the future: our duty is to direct our course
according to our day; not to give up of our own act the means which
God has given us to maintain his church withal, but not to lament over
their loss, when he has taken them away. Temporal power has been the
means of the church's independence for a very long period; but, as her
bishops have lost it a long while, and are not the less bishops still,
so would it be as regards her head, if he also lost his. The eternal
God is her refuge, and as he has delivered her out of so many perils
hitherto, so will he deliver her still. The glorious chapters of her
past history are but anticipations of other glorious chapters still to
come. See how it has been with her from the very beginning down to
this day. First, the heathen populations persecuted her children for
three centuries, but she did not come to an end. Then a flood of
heresies was poured out upon her, but still she did not come to an
end. Then the savage tribes of the north and east came down upon her
and overran her territory, but she did not come to an end. Next,
darkness of mind, ignorance, torpor, stupidity, reckless corruption,
fell upon the holy place, still she did not come to an end. Then the
craft and violence of her own strong and haughty children did their
worst against her, but still she did not come to an end. Then came a
time when the riches of the world flowed in upon her, and the pride of
life, and the refinements and the luxuries of human reason; and lulled
her rulers into an unfaithful security, till they thought their high
position in the world would never be lost to them, and almost fancied
that it was good to enjoy themselves here below; but still she did not
come to an end. And then came the so-called reformation, and the rise
of Protestantism, and men said that the church had disappeared and
they could not find her place. Yet, now three centuries after that
even, _has_, {592} my brethren, the Holy Church come to an end? has
Protestantism weakened her powers, terrible enemy as it seemed to be
when it arose? has Protestantism, that bitter, energetic enemy of the
Holy See, harmed the Holy See? Why, there never has been a time, since
the first age of the church when there has been such a succession of
holy Popes, as since the reformation. Protestantism had been a great
infliction on such as have succumbed to it; but it has even wrought
benefits for those whom it has failed to seduce. By the mercy of God
it has been turned into a spiritual gain to the members of Holy
Church.

Take again Italy, into which Protestantism has not entered, and
England, of which it has gained possession. Now I know well that, when
Catholics are good in Italy, they are very good; I would not deny that
they attain there to a height and a force of saintliness of which we
seem to have no specimens here. This, however, is the case of souls
whom neither the presence nor the absence of religious enemies would
affect for the better or the worse. Nor will I attempt the impossible
task of determining the amount of faith and obedience among Catholics
respectively in two countries so different from each other. But,
looking at Italian and English Catholics externally and in their
length and breadth, I may leave any Protestant to decide, in which of
the two there is at this moment a more demonstrative faith, a more
impressive religiousness, a more generous piety, a more steady
adherence to the cause of the Holy Father. The English are multiplying
religious buildings, decorating churches, endowing monasteries,
educating, preaching, and converting, and carrying off in the current
of their enthusiasm numbers even of those who are external to the
church; the Italian statesman, on the contrary, in all our bishop's
words, "imprison and exile the bishops and clergy, leave the flocks
without shepherds, confiscate the church's revenues, suppress the
monasteries and convents, incorporate ecclesiastics and religious in
the army, plunder the churches and monastic libraries, and exposed
religion herself, stripped in bleeding in every limb, the Catholic
religion in the person of her ministers, her sacraments, or most
devoted members, to be objects of profane and blasphemous ridiculed."
In so brave, intelligent, vigorous-minded a race as the Italians, and
in the nineteenth century not the sixteenth, and in the absence of any
formal protest of classes or places, the act of the rulers is the act
of the people. At the end of three centuries Protestant England
contains more Catholics who are loyal and energetic in word and deed
then Catholic Italy. So harmless has been the violence of the
reformation; it professed to eliminate from the church doctrinal
corruptions, and it has failed both in what it has done and in what it
has not done; it has bred infidels, to its confusion; and, to which
dismay, it has succeeded in purifying and strengthening catholic
communities.

It is with these thoughts then that, my brethern, with these feelings
of solemn expectation, of joyful confidence, that we now come for our
God and pray him to have mercy on his chosen servant, his own vicar,
in this hour of trial. We come to him, like the prophet Daniel, in
humiliation for our own sins and the sins of our kings, our princes,
our fathers, and our people in all parts of the church; and therefore
we say the _Miserere_ and the Litany of the Saints, as in the time of
fast. And we come before him in the right and glad spirit of soldiers
who know they are under the leading of an invincible king, and wait
with beating hearts to see what he is about to do; and therefore it is
that we adorn our sanctuary, bringing out our hangings and multiplying
our lights, as on a day of festival. We know well we are on the
winning side, and that the prayers of the poor and the weak and
despised can do more, when offered in a true spirit, then all the
wisdom and all the resources of the world. This seventh of October is
the very {593} anniversary of that day on which the prayers of St.
Pius, and the Holy Rosary said by thousands of the faithful at his
bidding, broke forever the domination of the Turks in the great battle
of Lepanto. God will give us what we ask, or he will give us something
better. In this spirit let us proceed with the holy rites which we
have begun--in the presence of innumerable witnesses, of God the judge
of all, of Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, of his mother Mary
our immaculate protectress, of all the angels of holy church, of all
the blessed saints, of apostles and evangelists, martyrs and
confessors, holy preachers, holy recluses, holy virgins, of holy
innocents taken away before actual sin, and of all other holy souls
who have been purified by suffering, and have already reached their
heavenly home.



From Chambers's Journal.


THE SOURCE OF LABOR.


Science has taught us that the processes going on around us are but
changes, not annihilations and creations. With the eye of knowledge we
see the candle slowly turning into invisible gases, nor doubt for an
instant that the matter of which the candle was composed is still
existing, ready to reappear in other forms. But this fact is true not
only of matter itself, but also of all the influences that work on
matter. We wind up the spring of a clock, and, for a whole week, the
labor thus stored up is slowly expended in keeping the clock going.
Or, again, we spend five minutes of hard labor in raising the hammer
of a pile-driver, which, in its fall, exerts all that accumulated
labor in a single instant. In these instances, we easily see that we
store up labor. Now, if we pat a dozen sovereigns in a purse, and none
of them be lost, we can take a dozen sovereigns out again. So in
labor, if no labor be lost, as science asserts--for the inertia of
matter, its very deadness, so to speak, which renders it incapable of
spontaneously producing work, also prevents its destroying work when
involved in it--we should be able to obtain back without deduction
all our invested labor when we please.

Imagine a mountain stream turning an overshot wheel. It thus falls
from a higher to a lower level. A certain amount of labor would be
required to raise the water from the lower level to the higher; just
this amount of labor the water gives out in its fall, and invests, as
it were, in the wheel. If, however, when arrived at the lower level,
the water were to demand of the wheel to be pumped up again, the
slightest trial would show that it would ask more than it could
obtain, though not more than it had given. The wheel, if questioned as
to the cause of its inability, must reply as others have done, that it
has shut up part of the labor in investments which it cannot realize.
The reason, as commonly stated, is, that friction has destroyed part
of the labor. The labor is not, however, destroyed. Science has shown
that heat and labor are connected; labor may be turned into heat, and
heat into labor. The labor absorbed by friction is but turned into
heat. If, however, we try to extract labor from the heat thus diffused
through the different parts of the water-wheel, and make it available,
we find ourselves quite at a loss. The heat gradually diffuses itself
through surrounding bodies, and, so far as we {594} are concerned, the
labor is wasted, though it still exist, like Cleopatra's pearl
dissolved in the cup of vinegar.

If no labor is lost, so neither is any created. The labor we exert is
but the expenditure of labor stored up in our frames, just as the
labor invested in the wound-up spring keeps the clock going. Whence,
then, does all this labor originally come? We see the waste--how is
compensation made? The answer is simple and easy to give. All the
labor done under the sun is really done by it. The light and heat
which the sun supplies are turned into labor by the organizations
which exist upon the earth. These organizations may be roughly divided
into two classes--the collectors and the expenders of the sun's labor.
The first merely collect the sun's labor, so as to make it available
for the other class; while, just as the steam-engine is the medium by
which the steam gives motion, so this second class is the medium by
which the sun's heat is turned into actual labor.

Still, the sun does not work only through organized labor: his mere
mechanical influence is very great. With the moon--the only second
post he deigns as to fill--he produces the tides by his attraction on
the sea. But for the friction of the earth and the sea, the tides,
once set in motion, would rise and fall without any further effort;
but the work done in overcoming the friction is, though due to the sun
and moon, not extracted from them, but by them from the earth. For it
would make a vast effort to cause the earth to cease rotating. All
this effort is, as it were, stored up in the revolving earth. as the
tidal waters, then, rub along the bed of the sea, or the waters on
which they rest and the adjacent coasts, this friction tends to make
the earth move faster or slower, according to the direction in which
the tidal flow is. The general effect is, however, that the friction
of the tides makes the earth revolve more slowly; in other words, that
part of the energy of rotation of the earth, so to speak, is consumed
in rubbing against the title waters. All the work, therefore, that the
tides do in undermining our cliffs and washing away our beaches, is
extracted by the sea and moon from the work stored up in the rotation
of the earth. The diminution of rotation, indeed, is so small as
scarcely to be perceived by the most refined observation, but the
reality of it is now generally recognized; and this process, too, will
apparently go on till the earth ceases to rotate on its axis, and
presents one face constantly to the sun.

Thus we see that the destruction of the land by the sea, so
interesting in a geological point of view, is partly due to the sun's
action. Not only is he the source of the light and the heat we enjoy,
but he aids in forming the vast sedimentary beds that form so large a
part of the crust of the earth, mixing the ingredients of our fields
and moulding our globe.

By heating the air, the sun produces winds, and some of the labor
costs expended is made use of by man in turning his windmills and
carrying his wares across the sea. But there is another expedient of
the sun's heat more immediately useful to man. By evaporating the sea
and other bodies of water, he loads the air with moisture, which, then
in contact with cold mountain-peaks or cold masses of air, loses its
heat, and, being condensed, falls as rain or snow. Thus the rivers are
replenished, which for a long time supplied the greater part of the
labor employed in manufacturers, though the invention of the
steam-engine is fast reducing relatively the value of this supply of
labor.

But vast as the sun's power thus exerted is, and useful as it is to
man, is surpassed in importance by his his labor exerted through
organized beings. The above named agents have one defect; on the
whole, they are incapable of being stored up to any great degree; we
must employ them as nature gives them to us. Organized existence,
however, possesses the power of storing up labor to a very high
degree. {595} The means it adopts are not mechanical, but chemical.
The formation of chemical compounds is attended with the giving out of
heat, which, as we have said before, is equivalent to labor, and if of
sufficient intensity, can by us be made available as labor, as in the
steam-engine. Now we take iron ore, consisting of iron in combination
with other substances. By means of great heat the iron is set free in
the smelting-furnace. The iron, then, in its change of form has, as it
were, taken in all this heat. If, now, we take this iron, and keeping
it from the influence of the air, reduce it to a very fine powder, and
then suddenly expose it to the air, by the force of natural affinity
it will absorb the oxygen of the air, and in so doing give out the
heat before required to set it free from the oxygen; and if the iron
be in small enough portions, so that the process is sufficiently
rapid, we may see the iron grow red hot with the heat thus disengaged.

Now, plants and trees, by the aid of the solar light and heat, remove
various substances, carbon especially, from what seem to be their more
natural combinations, and in other combinations store them up in their
structures. Take a young oak-tree with its first tender leaves; if
deprived of the sun's light and heat, its growth would be stayed, and
its life die out. But with the aid of the sun's rays, it absorbs
carbon from the gases in the air, each particle of carbon absorbed
being absorbed by the power of the sun, through the agency of the
plant; and with each particle of carbon stored up is also, as it were,
stored up the labor of the sun by which that particle was set free
from its former fetters. The sap of the plant thus enriched returns in
its course, and by some mysterious process is curdled into cells and
hardened into would. But the work by which all this was accomplished
lies hid in the wood, and not only is it there, but it is there in a
greatly condensed state. To form a little ring of wood round the tree,
not an eighth of an inch across it, took the sunshine of a long
summer, falling on the myriad leaves of the oak.

Lemuel Gulliver, at Laputa, was astonished by seeing a philosopher
aiming at extracting sunbeams from cucumbers. Had he but rightly
considered the thing he would have wondered at any one's troubling to
make a science of it. The thing has always been done. From Adam and
Eve in the garden of Eden eating sweet fruits, through the
onion-eating builders of the pyramids, down to the flesh-eating
myriads of our land, this process has always been going on. The active
life of reasoning man, and his limitless powers of invention, need for
their full development a vast supply of labor. By means of the
vegetable kingdom, the sun's work is stored up in a number of organic
substances. Man takes these into his system, and in the vessels and
fibres of his body they resume their original combinations, and the
labor of the sun is given out as muscular action and animal heat. To
allow a larger supply of labor for man's intellect to work with,
Providence created the herbivorous races. Some of these further
condense the work of the sun involved in plants, by taking these
plants into their systems, and storing up the work in them in their
flesh and fat, which, after some preparation, are fit to be received
into the frame of man, there, as the simpler vegetable substances, to
supply heat and labor. Others, extracting work from the vegetable
kingdom, just as man does, and mostly from parts of the vegetable
kingdom that are not suited to the organs of man, are valuable to man
as sources of labor, since they have no power to invent modes of
employing this labor to their own advantage. Man might have been
gifted with a vaster frame, and so with greater power of labor in
himself, but such a plan had been destitute of elasticity; and while
the savage would have basked in the sun in a more extended idleness,
the civilized man had still lacked means to execute his plans. {596}
So that good providence which formed man devised a further means for
supplying his wants. Instead of placing him at once on a new-formed
planet, it first let the sun spend its labor for countless ages upon
our world. Age by age, much of this labor was stored up in vast
vegetable growths. Accumulated in the abysses of the sea, or sunk to a
great depth by the collapse of supporting strata, the formations of a
later age pressed and compacted this mass of organic matter. The beds
thus formed were purified by water, and even by heat, and at last
raised to within the reach of man by subterranean movements. From this
reservoir of labor man now draws rapidly, driving away the frost of
today with the sunshine of a million years ago, and thrashing this
year's harvest with the power that came to our earth before corn grew
upon it.

Such are the processes by which the sun's power is collected and
stored up by the vegetable kingdom in a form sufficiently condensed to
be available for working the machinery of the bodies of men and
beasts, and also to assist man in vaster expenditures of labor. It is
most interesting to trace such processes, and not only interesting,
but also instructive, for it shows us in what direction we are to look
for our sources of labor, and will at once expose many common
delusions. One hears, perhaps, that something will be found to
supplant steam. Galvanism may be named; yet galvanism is generated by
certain decompositions--of metal, for instance--and this metal had
first to be prepared by the agency of coal, and in its decomposition
can give out no more labor than the coal before invested in it. It is
as if one should buy a steam-engine to pump up water to keep his
mill-wheel going. The source of all labor is the sun. We cannot
immediately make much use of his rays for the purposes of work; they
are not intense enough; they must be condensed. The vegetable world
alone at present seems capable of doing this; and its past results of
coal, peat, petroleum, etc., and present results of wood and food, are
ultimately all we have to look two.

To say that man will ever be dependent upon the vegetable world for
all his work may be considered bold, but there is certainly great
reason to believe it. The sun's labor being supplied in such a diluted
form, each small quantity continually supplied must be packed in a
very small space. Now, man can only subject matter to influences in
the mass. The little particle of carbon that the plant frees each
instant is beyond his ken. The machinery he could make would not be
fine enough; it would be like trying to tie an artery with the biggest
cable on board the Great Eastern. Organized existence possesses
machinery fine enough to effect these small results, and to avail
itself of these little installments of labor. At present, this
machinery is beyond our comprehension, and possibly will ever remain
so. Nature prefers that her children should keep out of the kitchen,
and not pry into her pots and pans, but eat in thankfulness the meal
she provides.

Some interesting results follow from what has been stated above. One
is, that we are consuming not only our present allowance of the sun's
labor, but also a great deal more, unless the formation of coal in our
age equals its consumption, which is not probable. Mother earth will
certainly, so far as we can see, some day be bankrupt. Such a
consummation is pointed to, however, in other quarters. The sun's
heat, unless miraculously replenished, must gradually be dissipated
through space. There are reasons for thinking that the planets must
ultimately fall into the sun. These things, however, possess to us no
practical physical interest. Such countless ages must elapse ere they
affect man's material condition upon the earth that we hardly can
gravely consider them as impending. The chief interest they excite is
moral. Like the man's hand that appeared to the revelling king, they
write, "Mene, Mene, Tekel, Upharsin" (weighed, measured, limited,
doomed) on our material world, and dimly point to some power that
stands, as it were, hidden from our view behind the screen of matter,
that shall make things new.



{597}


ORIGINAL.


POEM.

BY E. HOWARD.



  While wandering by the mountains
  And musing by the streams,
  I asked myself if ever thus
  My life would pass in dreams.

  I gathered the little pebbles
  The waves threw on the sand:
  The rippling waters seemed to say,
  "There is a better land!"

  And while thus my steps were straying,
  Above, in azure far,
  I saw a beacon's streaming light--
  The glorious evening star!

  My soul, enraptured, then exclaimed:
  "Hail, beauteous star of even!
  Wilt thou, while speeding into dawn,
  Bring me the will of heaven?"

  I watched it in its onward course,
  Until its golden glow
  Was lost behind the western clouds.
  And left me wrapped in woe.

  I struggled hard to free my soul
  From brooding thoughts of care.
  Till morning broke, when, with the star,
  These words fell on the air:

  "No more let earthly passion move.
  Nor wearied hopes bemoan,
  A life that has a God to love,
  A heaven to call its own!"

  The star had kindled hope
  And raised my soul in prayer;
  The clouds that rolled between
  Foretold a life of care.

  I bowed my head, and humbly knelt,
  Submissive to his will.
  Who, when the waves were troubled most,
  Said, "Peace!" and all was still.



{598}

ORIGINAL.


THE GODFREY FAMILY; OR, QUESTIONS OF THE DAY.



CHAPTER XVIII.

A PROPOSAL:
AND MORE THAN ONE.


The summons to London was on the business of cutting off the entail to
the estates as proposed at the beginning of the last chapter. Mr.
Godfrey, whose love for Hester certainly approached to dotage, had
decided to gratify his darling's wishes; and to avoid future
confusion, had decided to allow her to come of age at eighteen, and to
enter on the enjoyment of the estates he destined for her, subject to
an annuity for himself. To give the matter a semblance of justice, he
proposed to pension off the rest of the family in the same manner,
thus settling their claims to the property during his life, as after
his death. What was wanting to this plan was Eugene's acceptance of a
present annuity in the stead of his inheritance at death.

The proposal made to him was by no means a liberal one, considering
the wealth of the family and the expectations in which he had been
reared.

"Three thousand pounds a year for life, now, instead of fifteen
thousand in reversion to descend to my posterity; the proposal is
preposterous," said Eugene, "especially as I was always given to
understand that I might look to receive a sum equal to that on my
coming of age, which I shall do in three weeks' time."

"That promise was conditional, young man," said Mr. Godfrey, somewhat
sternly; "conditional at least by implication; could I have foreseen
that you would have disgraced my family, it would not have been made."

"Disgraced!" ejaculated Eugene.

"Brother," interposed Hester, anxious to avoid any expression of
excited feeling, "you have renounced the position my father ambitioned
for you; you cannot hold office under government; you cannot become a
member of Parliament; you cannot act as a magistrate;  [Footnote 173]
or take any useful part in the work of society. Surely three thousand
pounds a year will supply all your personal wants."

  [Footnote 173: At the time of which we write the civil disabilities
  for all dissenters from the English Establishment, and for all
  Catholics, were still in force in England.]

"You have assumed a great deal, my good sister; a great deal more than
you can prove, I think. If I understand this matter rightly, it these
yourself who are be to benefited by this arrangement. You want to
experimentalize, to found a new Utopia; surely I might do that at
least as well as a woman."

"No, for you believe not in the principle. Money in your hands, just
now, would sink; you might build churches or convents, but forward the
progression of the race you would not. A bare-footed Carmelite ranks
higher in your estimation that a man raised by talent and industry to
a position surrounded by means of enjoyment. Now, my father objects
conscientiously, and his immediate ancestors would also object to
appropriate the both of his property to a phantasm. He offers you a
maintenance superior to the property your theory upholds. Be
consistent; try your own principle of renunciation, of poverty, if you
so like to term an annuity of three thousand a year. The allotment
which will be termed mine is in my eyes, and in in my father's, an
investment for the good of society, of which I am but a directress.
Give to the world that which the world claims, {599} take the portion
you have chosen in which the world has no share--spirituality.
Conscientiously my father has strained a point to offer you so much,
for he looks upon the promotion of your views as injurious to the
human race."

There was a long pause, a long silence; then Eugene said, "I must take
time to consider; my signature would not be of any avail until I am of
age, and it wants three weeks to that time. In a month's time I will
give you an answer."

Eugene, after a vain attempt to see his mother, returned to the town
in which Euphrasie resided. He was now determined to have the
interview he had so long vainly sought for. On that interview greatly
depended his future determination.



He did not call on her at her mother's abode. He waylaid her as she
was returning home from giving her lessons; with a few earnest words
induced her to permit him to lead her into a secluded grove where
often he had mused on her perfections, and there, at length, he took
courage, and poured forth, as much by gesture as by words, his long
pent-up tale of love, so hidden out of reverence, a reverence which
now gave way to the anxiety of placing her in a more suitable position
than the one she at present occupied, although still falling short of
that which she was calculated to adorn.

Euphrasie listened with profound attention; certainly not coldly. She
fully appreciated the young man's devotion, she fully believed his
tale. Even tears filled her eyes as he proceeded; but she was long in
answering.

"May I take this silence for consent, dear Euphrasie?" said Eugene.

Euphrasie shook her head. "No, indeed, you may not, my kind friend,"
she said. "I am silent because I know not how to express my sense of
your worth, of your kindness, of your disinterestedness, in fitting
terms, and accompany my words with a refusal. What you propose can
never be. Another vocation is mine. Yet believe me that my gratitude,
my friendship, my esteem, are, and ever must remain, your own. I thank
you earnestly for the long forbearing and silent sympathy which I have
ever received from you."

"Your tones are solemn, Euphrasie. You are not one to act a part, and
say no when you mean yes. You have seen this proposal possible, you
have weighed it; is it indiscreet to ask in confidence your reasons?"

"Is not all explained by the words, another vocation is mine? May I
not recall to your memory the explanation I once gave at Durimond
Castle?"

"But, Euphrasie, in this country, where Catholics are barely
tolerated, you can scarcely be a nun."

"I think, indeed, that at present there seems little likelihood that I
shall be what the world calls a nun; but I am none the less certain
that I am called to serve God by following the three evangelical
counsels."

"But as a married woman, Euphrasie, surely you could serve God also.
Marriage in the Catholic Church is exalted to the dignity of a
sacrament, and I would respect your self-imposed duties not only of
devotion but of charity also. I would share the cares you now bestow
on my aunt's comfort, and--"

"I believe it, Eugene, but it cannot be. I dare not resist the voice
which forbids me to bind myself by human ties. We are Catholics,
Eugene; we know that a vocation is something real; that not to respond
to it is to endanger salvation, is to risk the abstraction of that
grace which is of all treasures the most valuable."

Eugene replied not. There was a long pause. Euphrasie was agitated
beyond her wont, and was glad to avail herself of a seat fixed beneath
the shade of a tree. Eugene rested his forehead against the tree.
Suddenly he seized her hand and pressed it to his lips, but he spoke
not. The warm tears were pouring down his {600} cheeks. Oh! it is
agonizing to behold a strong man weep. No woman at least can see it
unmoved; still less Euphrasie, who beneath an impassive exterior bore
a feeling, tender heart. Scarcely less affected than himself she took
his hand in both of hers, and faltered out: "Eugene, my friend, my
brother, the day will come when you will rejoice at this hour's
decision, and make it the subject of your earnest thanksgiving. No
Catholic can have witnessed your noble struggle for truth, your
disinterestedness, your magnanimity, without feeling that for you,
too, God has a noble mission in store. As yet you are scarcely
conscious of what you would lose were you to fetter yourself by human
ties. Your studies as yet have occupied the intellect somewhat
exclusively. Controversy was necessary while you were assuring
yourself of the grounds of faith, of the reasonableness of the
creature's trusting to the solemn promise of the Creator, of the
unerring infallibility of the church founded by Christ, and sustained
by his holy spirit. Your learned research, conducted in simplicity of
spirit, has led you to the temple of truth. You have entered, but as
yet its most wondrous teachings are to be unfolded, to be
contemplated, to be realized in practice. Your soul is too noble to
content itself with the things of earth; your heart needs pure,
exalted realities to love, and those it will find only here." (She
took from her bosom a small ivory crucifix, which she placed in his
hand as she spoke). "Everlasting love speaks to you from this cross,
my beloved friend. Leave other studies for awhile to contemplate its
lessons in all its bearings, and a divine rapture will fill your
inmost soul; you will live in him only who is life and light and love,
and your heart will need to pour itself out for him, through him, in
him. Suffering for Christ will become blissful, and your whole being
will shape itself to one aim, his will, whom to serve is to find the
truest happiness on earth, as it is also the only happiness in heaven!
Oh! dared I speak to you, Eugene, of what it is to love God, and to
feel his love for us within our souls, you would not need consolation
then. But God himself will speak to you and instruct you in his
wondrous love, and you will be happy beyond your utmost imagination."

Euphrasie spoke as one inspired; and it was so rarely that she made
any speech of considerable length, that the effect was greatly
increased. Again there was a long pause, Eugene gazed on the crucifix,
pressed it to his lips, then hit it in his bosom. At length he said:
"Euphrasie, I can but submit. I will do my best to follow the
beautiful course you have described for me. But ere I leave you, since
since leave you I must, may I ask one favor?"

Euphrasie signified assent.

"It is this, then: You have called me friend brother. May I hope,
then, for a brother's privilege, a friends affection? I will never
again asked for more, if you will promise me these. But let your
brother be of use to you, dear sister, confide to your friend your
plans, and give him the happiness of helping them forward. Let there
be no estrangement between us, Euphrasie."

"There shall be none, I promise you, save such as prudence demands.
Your nobleness, your disinterestedness, claim my admiration, and I
promise you, my brother, to inform you when i need your proferred aid.
But you must forgive me if, for a while at least, I converse with you
only through the medium of our mutual friend. Let our excited feelings
have time to subside into a more reasonable frame ere we meet again,
Eugene. And now may the holy Angels have you in their keeping. Adieu."

She was gone ere Eugene could reply. Hid among the foliage, he had not
the courage to follow her, and in spite of his resolves the remained
desolate.

What now were to him the chances of heirship, the thoughts of
transmitting his name to a long posterity? {601} At the end of the
month Eugene signed the deed which deprived him for all time of a fair
estate. An additional motive for his doing this was found in the
reflection that he had no right to be depriving his mother of her
private property. He returned the deed of gift to her as soon as he
received the proposed annuity. There were no bells rung, according to
the custom from immemorial ages, when the heir of the Godfrey family
came of age; there was no feasting, no rejoicing among the tenantry.
All was silence and gloom, it was as if the very air were hung with a
funeral pall. Mrs. Godfrey seemed stricken to the heart. But when the
transactions became known which disinherited Eugene and appropriated
an unfair proportion of the estate to the youngest sister, all the
family were roused. Vexed as they were at Eugene's religious
demonstrations they were not prepared to give Hester so exclusive a
preference. Mrs. Godfrey, especially, felt the transaction as most
bitterly unjust. She yearned for Eugene's presence, and it was not
permitted her. Scarcely could she tolerate the sight of Hester in the
house. Her melancholy increased. Alas! poor mother!





CHAPTER XIX

Hester was now made rich. Her doting father settled on her not only
the Yorkshire farms, but also other revenues, that she might be
provided with capital to carry into execution her philanthropic plans.
Hester was endowed with many brilliant qualities. She was, as it were,
"born to reign." She perfectly understood her own dignity, perfectly
realized her own power of intellect, was well aware that both her
father and his man of business were her tools, and she managed
accordingly with intuitive prudence, not permitting Mr. Godfrey to
perceive how entirely he obeyed her bidding. Under these circumstances
she might fairly hope for success. Large iron factories on the one
hand, and large cotton factories on the other, were erected on a scale
calculated to employ many hundred hands, and to bring into extensive
operation the new steam-power that then absorbed scientific attention.
Mr. Godfrey was delighted, for it brought him into frequent contact
with the most scientific men of the day. The operations necessarily
attracted public attention, and Mr. Godfrey as director of the
scientific operations, with Hester as deviser of a new scheme for
rendering the "populations" happy and progressive, were continually
besieged by a concourse of visitors, eager to understand the new
"idea."

Hester's arrangements were on a magnificent scale. She started on the
principle of mutual co-operation united to division of labor. Instead
of separate dwellings for her employes, she had large boarding-houses
built. These were provided with halls, refectories, baths,
lecture-rooms, reading-rooms, libraries, and, lastly, schools, which
in those days were rare for the laboring population. For since the
suppression of the monasteries and convents, the schools in which the
good religious had taught the children of England to love God and
their neighbor had been shut up, education had fallen to a fearfully
low standard in this sect-divided kingdom.

Hester was a severe disciplinarian, with little compassion for the
weakness of human nature. She intended her people should become
intellectual; and when she shortened the hours of labor, expressly to
give time to cultivate the mind, when she hired lecturers and bought
books, she felt herself aggrieved that these were not responded to.
Her people were well fed at a common table; they were well sheltered
and accommodated; why should they not be intellectualized? How
discouraged she felt when she found she was speaking in an unknown
tongue to {602} the adults among her operatives. They hardly
considered short hours a benefit when they were compelled to sit and
listen to subjects in which they took no interest. "A glass of ale
and, a pipe of 'backy would do a poor body far more good than all this
preaching, and 'tain't to save our souls either." There were other
difficulties in this commonwealth; the young men and women were on
different sides of the building, and certain rules were laid down to
secure good conduct, but these rules were very difficult to enforce,
and the dismissals for disorder became frequent. The operatives began
to call the place a jail. Hester would not yield, but she turned more
strenuously to the children. Here she had better success, and she
spent days and weeks in providing for the better education of these
little ones. "The elder ones are already formed," she argued, "but we
will give these young ones better tastes, better habits, and they will
become intelligent and happy."

M. de Villeneuve was a frequent visitor at these institutions, for the
character of Hester interested him greatly, and he was constantly
endeavoring to draw her attention to the motives that actuated her
people, and to the probabilities of their producing lasting results.

"Tell me," said he, "how is a knowledge of the material law to produce
happiness? We know that a steel knife cuts flesh; will that knowledge
reconcile one to the loss of his arm when the sturgeon has cut it off
in the most masterly manner?"

"No," said Hester, "but perhaps a knowledge of the material law might
have prevented the necessity of cutting off the arm at all. Much of
disease is caused by ignorance. To banish pain needs a wide
acquaintance with the whole range of laws which govern our being. To
know and practise one law and neglect another would but result in
pain."

"You will require a life of scientific research. I see; and after all,
as we all begin with ignorance and helplessness, we must suffer some
pain during our apprenticeship. For instance, you cannot teach an
infant to cut its teeth painlessly."

"But because we cannot do everything, shall we do nothing?"

"That were a sweeping conclusion; it is not necessary to go so far as
that. But might it not be wise to examine the principle of actions
when we attempt to regulate for others on a new system? Your exterior
arrangements our splendid; your laws rigidly moral; but will you
ensure their being kept? What motive do you propose?"

"I have expelled those who, after suitable remonstrance, would not
conform," said Hester.

"A very effective proceeding, my kind hostess, but it is just possible
that eventually such a practice might create a desert. The motive
power of perseverance comes from within. The desire must be in the
heart, the understanding must approve, the will must accept, the deed
must co-operate, and until you have secured this motive power, your
arrangements rest on an insecure basis. You cannot force men to choose
good; you cannot make them studious by providing a library, or moral
by denouncing the penalties of immorality. You must subdue passions,
excite tastes. Can mere knowledge of physics do this?"

"There is other knowledge besides mere physics--classical knowledge."

"And will classical knowledge do it? Will reading Virgil and Horace
tend to evolve moral power?"

"Why not? Knowledge is power!"

"Then why are so many of the educated sickly, unhappy and immoral?"

"Because they do not act upon their knowledge; they are idle and
dissipated and worthless. The frivolities of the young men 'de bon
ton' were always disgusting to me. But then they are not really
educated; they may have been to school, but they have learned nothing
useful, nothing of the material world."

{603}

"But" said M. de Villeneuve, "how does the knowledge of the material
world affect man's existence as a moral agent? The laws which regulate
materiality leave and impress of invariability upon them--a want of
power to change themselves, at any rate. They are obedient to a will
to which they appear insentient. This is true not only of inert,
stolid matter, not only of vegetable life, but of animals, even of
those wondrous developments of instinct which approach so near to
reason that they are scarcely distinguishable from it. The highest
mere animals are creatures of circumstance--circumstance ruled,
indeed, by appetite and instinct, but not by recognition of a higher
law, not by any consciousness of affinity to a higher state of
existence. Therefore, you can tame them by an appeal to their
appetites; you can rule them by providing for their animal natures;
you can subdue them if you bring to bear on them a force stronger than
their own. But, surely, we may assume that man is more than a mere
animal. He has inborn affinities to higher natures which force cannot
subdue, and which rise superior to animal temptations. These
affinities may be starved out, it is true, by not providing them with
their own fitting nutriment, which is not the food of the body. They
may be crushed or restrained in their development by overloading the
soul with extraneous objects; but in proportion as these powers are
starved out or crushed out, the man sinks, the animal rises. And the
_animal_ man is, I assure you, a very ferocious kind of beast, and
nonetheless so for having intelligence developed; rather is he
dangerous in proportion."

"You would not, then, developed intelligence?"

"On the contrary, I think it the highest and holiest task in which a
human being can be employed. I rejoice in all the plans that tend to
raise the race; I applaud your benevolence in forming these
establishments, although I feel that you are preparing for yourself a
disappointment."

"But why?"

"Because you have begun on the wrong principle. It is good that you
have begun at all to see the principle acknowledged that man is man,
and not a mere machine to win riches for the few; that principle
emanated from selfishness in the beginning, but selfishness will not
root out selfishness. I admire your idea principally because it proves
your own zeal, your own earnestness, your own capability of
sacrificing yourself for others; even the disappointment impending
will be fraught with good if it do not discourage you from seeking the
true principle, which I hope it will not do. Faith in man is easily
overset, because man can fall of himself, but of himself he cannot
rise."

"You believe, then, as I do, that a new era is dawning on mankind, and
that the laborer must be protected and enlightened?" said Hester.

"I do!" said M. de Villeneuve.

"Yet you do not believe that my schools and arrangements will make him
happier?"

"Will you forgive me if I say I do not?"

"You are an enigma; I cannot make you out," said Hester.

"How did man fall into the degraded state in which the masses are?"
said M. de Villeneuve. "We have proof of intelligence enough in the
founders of Babylon, of Nineveh, of Thebes, and of Egypt."

"Some men must have known something, I think," said Hester, "but they
seem to have kept their knowledge very carefully to themselves, and
made slaves of those to whom they did not impart it. Knowledge was
very much an affair of class or rank. The populace was brutish, if
accounts are true, and kept in order by sheer force."

"And when that force pressed too hardly, they fled and became the
founders of the savage life. Such is the probable course. And what
power, think you, elevated the mass, even to the extent in which we
see them now? for, debased as they may be, they are {604} far above
the races that did the same work in ancient times; nay, the laborers
of Europe are far above the slaves of Asia. What has caused the
difference?"

"The march of intellect," said Hester proudly.

"Supposing that granted for the sake of the argument, what caused 'the
march of intellect?' what gave the impetus to raise the 'toiler for
bread' in the scale of humanity?"

Hester could not answer. The comte continued:

"I believe it to be that very influence which 'the age' is seeking so
earnestly to destroy. Man's selfishness oppressed his fellows,
overpowered his faculties, laid them to sleep so effectually that the
rich and great were acknowledged by the crowd to be of another order,
of another scale of being, to be judged of by another standard, to be
weighed by another measure. The gospel came: to the poor it was
preached _par excellence_; it was a call of the Father to his
downtrodden children, an appeal to their hearts, their affections, a
loving invitation to them to come, as children of the most High God,
to claim their inheritance of lofty faculty, of high intuitions, of
exalted aspiration. The understanding enlightened through the heart
changed by slow degree's the face of nations; the slave disappeared
from the christianized lands, the leaven worked from the interior to
the exterior, life became protected, the rich and the poor, equal
before God, became equal before the law also; civilization of heart
produced civilization of manners among the masses. The greater
involved the lesser. Men's intellects were awakened, roused to action,
and then followed the old story over again; they forget how they had
obtained these gifts, and from whom, and they are applying them to
selfish purposes, to animal gratification. But liberty is the gift of
the gospel, liberty emanating from emancipation of the understanding
by means of the soul. If we would preserve the gift, we must observe
the conditions."

"Do you really think 'liberty' a good?" asked Hester.

"True liberty is one of the greatest of blessings," said the comte;
"but you will find it difficult to give 'true liberty' on earthly
grounds alone, it would so easily degenerate into license. Now the
repression of license by force is a restraint to which men unwillingly
submit, and easily engenders tyranny, so that, unless license is
restrained by the spiritual sense, liberty is in continual jeopardy;
it is difficult to believe it can be lasting."

"And you think the spiritual sense necessary to liberty?"

"I do; how else can lawlessness be restrained without force?"

"Surely intellectual enlightenment ought to suffice. Common-sense even
tells us that some restraint is necessary, that the moral law must be
observed."

"It may tell us so, but does it give the power to execute its
bidding?"

"It should do so."

"It should, and would, if man's being were in harmony. All laws,
physical, mental, and spiritual teach in different forms the same
truth; the material is a manifestation of the spiritual, of which the
intellect demonstrates the beauty and the necessity; but power to
develop the spiritual facility does not reside either in the intellect
or in matter, it belongs to a higher source, and without the will is
powerless. Therefore is it, I prophesy disappointment for you; for I
see no provision made to destroy selfishness, and promote a higher
life."

"There is none needed," interposed Mr. Godfrey somewhat abruptly; "we
teach what we know. As for mysticism and matters we guess at but do
not know, we leave the people free. If they need religion let them
choose one, or make one for themselves."

The asperity with which this was said closed the conversation for that
time.

{605}

Hester continued her plans, though less firm than before in the
conviction that the spread of intelligence would annihilate evil. She
watched the results with an anxiety intent on discovering the exact
truth. She tried more and more to enforce morality. She studied the
influences by which children are won to good behavior. She thought
love was the governing principle of the little folks, and that her
indulgence would excite love. Rewards were profusely given, and a
system of excitement acted upon. This produced certain effects in
calling forth intelligence, but the children became selfish and fond
of ease and dissipation in a manner she had not looked for.

With her young people she had scarcely better success. There was no
religious restraint, and their morals soon betokened that some
restraint was called for. Then, again, Mr. Godfrey's opinions were
pretty well known, and itinerant lecturers held forth on the
unreasonableness of the marriage tie, on the necessity of easy
divorce, and other topics of like nature that placed Hester in great
perplexity. It was not a subject in which she as a woman could
properly interfere, and her father shrugged his shoulders, and passed
them by with the remark, "These are not matters that can be interfered
with, they are altogether conventional."

What could Hester do? She was in great perplexity.



CHAPTER XX.

THE TRIALS OF LADY CONWAY.

Meantime we must return to Lady Conway. Time passed on and she became
the mother of a little girl, and after another interval of a little
boy also. At this latter event Sir Philip's joy was great. The bells
rang, bonfires blazed, every festive demonstration was called into
play to welcome the heir to the estate. All the father's affection
seemed showered upon him. The misunderstanding between himself and his
lady had never been thoroughly put to rights, for Alfred still
continued to keep awake in Sir Philip's mind the suspicions he had
aroused. Had Annie been of a meek and gentle temper, she might very
soon have convinced her husband how far she was as yet removed from
religion of any kind, although conscious of secret influences creeping
over her. But Annie thought herself aggrieved, and disdained
conciliatory measures; and by degrees, under the insidious influence
to which he was exposed, Sir Philip began to assume a high tone of
marital authority which gave his wife continual provocation and
rendered her situation almost unbearable. Daily he assumed more and
more the reins of domestic government, until at last it could scarcely
be said that the ordinary jurisdiction which a woman exercises over
her household belonged to Annie. She felt this keenly at first, but
the birth of her little girl came somewhat to reconcile her. She spent
much time in the nursery, and recreated herself with books. She tried
not to notice the arbitrary manner and haughty bearing of her husband,
for, high-spirited as she was, she thought it undignified to live in a
perpetual jangle. So, gradually, the married couple learned to live in
different ideal worlds, though they continued under one roof and to
society appeared as usual. But this did not suit Alfred Brookbank. His
hatred went deeper than this, and he set himself seriously about
attempting to destroy what little was left of domestic comfort. The
birth of the young heir soon furnished him with grounds. None were
more warm than he in offering his congratulations, and in making
continual inquiries after the well-being of this young scion of an
ancient race. Indeed, the interest he seemed to take in all that
affected Sir Philip's happiness was extreme. One would have said that
he lived but for the pleasure of serving him. Sir Philip, on the other
hand, became daily more wrapt up in this specious man, and daily
congratulated himself on having secured so invaluable a servant.

{606}

"Sir Philip," said Alfred one day, after meeting the infant in its
nurse's arms during a business walk over the grounds, "that is a
splendid boy! I need not ask a man of your wisdom if you have made
provision that he should be brought up a staunch and loyal upholder of
the Protestant interest."

"Time enough yet, my worthy friend," responded the baronet, "the child
is not six months old."

"But before six months more, Sir Philip, he will begin to receive
impressions, and early impressions are of immense importance. You
remember, doubtless, that when the treaty of marriage was on foot
between the ill-fated Charles I. and Henrietta of France, the question
was mooted respecting the education of the children, and it was
finally settled that for the first seven years they should remain
under the mother's influence, and afterward be brought up Protestant.
They result was that, in the long run, the early impressions
prevailed. Charles II. certainly received the Romish sacrament on his
death-bed, and his brother James sacrificed his crown to his papistry.
I imagine that the first impressions are almost indelible, and we
never know when first impressions are made."

"But all my people are Protestants," said Sir Philip.

"And has Lady Conway renounced her predilection for the papists?"
asked Alfred. Sir Phillip's brow lowered.

"Forgive me if I go too far," continued Alfred deprecatingly. "The
inroads made by these people who came to seek English hospitality on
being driven from their own homes, are too alarming. Awhile ago it
would have been an insult to suspect a well-bred person of such folly;
but when we see such talented young men as Eugene Godfrey led away, it
puts us on our guard against future encroachments. I for one should be
sorry to see the heir apparent of Sir Philip Conway an upholder of
bigotry, or in image worshiper."

"I would see them in his grave first," thundered out the baronet. "But
there is no fear; at least I see no immediate cause of apprehension.
But the matter shall be look to. My son shall be watched over, depend
upon it".

Sir Philip's mother was still living, and with her a sister of his,
and old maid, who was a little too much of the puritanical school to
suit her brother's taste. But now he thought these ladies might assist
his views. He paid them a visit, and in strict confidence laid his
difficulty before them. He was not satisfied, he said of Lady Conway's
opinions. She went to the English Church occasionally, but he did not
consider her a member of it at heart. He wanted his children to be
interviewed from the first with strict Protestant ideas. The little
girl was now two years old, and though the little boy was but a few
months old, there was no telling how soon impressions might be made,
so he intended to have a nursery governess of the right sort at once.
This the ladies undertook to look out for, and when found to accompany
the treasure themselves to the household. Annie's annoyance was
excessive. Neither the dowager Lady Conway nor her daughter was
intellectual or high-minded, and now that they came to take the
management of the nursery out of her hands, and place a stranger there
whose office was to watch herself in her intercourse with her own
children, their presence became unendurable. Mrs. Bedford, the new
governess, was in herself a quiet, unobtrusive person, faithful to her
duties, and of gentle manners; but she had been selected on account of
her unmitigated horror of popery, and it had been whispered to her
that Lady Conway was not a little tainted with its delusion, and this
made her more constrained in manner and less deferential than she
would otherwise have been.

{607}

It was in vain that any pleaded that she was quite capable of
directing her own nursery, that this new inmate was equally
unnecessary as unwelcome to her. Sir Philip was immovable; and to
prove how intent he was on having his own way, he dismissed the nurse,
who had attended both children most skillfully, merely because she had
not shown herself sufficiently respectful to the new-comer. The
children cried after their old friend, and the little girl clung to
her dress, to beg her not to leave her. It was useless. No one is more
obstinate than a fool in power. That wife and children were unhappy
was nothing to Sir Philip now. His will was law, and to his rule of
iron all must submit.

Some months after this they were sitting at table when the letters
were brought in. Among them came one directed to Annie. Sir Philip
opened it (it was now his custom to open his wife's letters), read it,
and handed it to her, with the words:

"Dear me, I am very sorry, I suppose you must go immediately." The
letter was from Hester. It stated that Mrs. Godfrey (who had been for
years out of health) had latterly become much worse, that she was
constantly asking for any, and the physicians said she must be humored
in every wish, that her reason, if not her life, depended on it. Annie
was therefore requested to come without delay.

"How soon can I have the carriage," inquired any of her liege Lord.

"As soon as you can get ready, of course," answered Sir Philip.

"And the children?" faltered Annie.

"Mrs. Bedford will take care of the children, and I shall be at home;
make yourself easy about them."

But Annie would have liked to take the children with her; they would
interest her mother at times, and in that large mansion could not be
in the way; but her heart seemed crushed, she dared not express her
thought, and she departed without remonstrance.

She found her mother even more depressed then she anticipated. Mrs.
Godfrey had ever been tenderly attached to her children. Their
happiness had been her fondest care, and a melancholy settled upon her
as she found her hopes disappointed. The haughty Adelaide seemed quite
changed from the time when she was a joyous girl at home. Annie,
though still affectionate to herself, seemed pining away under some
secret unhappiness. But the darling of her heart--her son, whom she
loved with the whole force of her character, in whom were united alike
joy and pride--why was he banished from her sight? That Mrs. Godfrey
was sorry for her son's Catholicity there was no doubt; certainly she
was mortified at this unexpected result of her fine intellectual
training; but the love she bore this her only son far overpowered both
sorrow and vexation, and she bitterly felt his prolonged absence, and
had often endeavored to shake Mr. Godfrey's determination in this
regard. Some little passages had even occurred between herself and her
husband on the subject. "She could not understand," she said, "why a
person should be persecuted for his religion. When Mr. Godfrey told
his children to think for themselves, did he mean that they were to
think as he did, on pain of expulsion? Was not Eugene good, dutiful,
noble, and generous? Why was he treated like a criminal? Had he been a
_roue_, like so many young men of his standing, it would have been
called 'sowing his wild oats,' and every allowance would have been
made for him. Why could they not treat this vagary as intellectual
wild oats, and give him time to recover?" Mr. Godfrey tried to pacify
her, but in vain; illness succeeded. "She must see her son," she said.

Mr. Godfrey was a little too resolute. He did not even give her
tidings of him when he summoned him to the lawyers. It was by sheer
accident that she discovered they had met; and when she discovered the
result of that meeting her indignation was terrible. She could not
bear to {608} have Hester in her sight. She would not accompany her
and Mr. Godfrey to Yorkshire. She stayed at home alone whole months.
Years past; Eugene went abroad, and in the disturbed state of the
continent his letters miscarried. It was long since she heard from
him. A paroxym ensued. Her mind became affected. Mr. Godfrey was sent
for. A gentleman experienced in diseases of the brain was invited to
reside in the house. But in vain. The malady increased, and her calls
for Eugene and for Annie became so frequent and so terrific that all
hope of keeping the matter a secret seemed at an end, and the doctor
insisted that the persons she called for should be sent for. Annie
came forthwith as we have seen, but Eugene's address was not known.

On entering the room where her mother set in company with two strange
nurses, Annie was struck with the wildness of her manner: her hair was
disordered and hung loose over her shoulders; it was far whiter than
when Annie had seen it last, and her eyes were restlessly looking
round the room. She sprang up at her daughter's entrance, threw
herself on her neck, and burst into tears, "O Annie, Annie! are you
come at last? I have a strange illness upon me; I do not know how to
bear myself; but yon will not let them hurt me, you will take care of
me."

Annie was not prepared for this greeting. She could only clasp her
mother's hands, caress her, make her sit down, and try to keep down
the swelling in her own throat. Suddenly Mrs. Godfrey broke from her,
and standing up laid her hand on Annie's shoulder, saying: "Where is
Eugene?"

"I do not know, my dear mother."

"Not know! Are you all leagued against me? What share in his
inheritance had you?"

Annie looked as she felt, surprised. She had heard of the transaction
only when it was over, but she answered soothingly, not wishing to
bring forward exciting ideas. But Mrs. Godfrey was not to be Sue; all
night she raved of Eugene; when Hester approached, she sprang from the
bed and attempted to strike her; Mr. Godfrey dared not trust himself
within her hearing. "Thief, traitor, knave, rascal, villain", and
other opprobrious epithets were bestowed on him and his fondling. The
doctor was not to be shaken in his opinion that the only hope lay in
finding Eugene and bringing him to her bedside. But where? They had no
clue; his lawyer only knew he was gone abroad and would probably not
return for months. In the hope that some one might be more successful,
they at length resolve, to Mr. Godfrey's intense vexation, to have
inserted in the London and local papers a notice to the effect that
"We are sorry to announce the serious and dangerous illness of the
Hon. Mrs. Godfrey, at Estcourt Hall. Should this meet the eye of her
eldest son, now on his travels, his family request him to return
without delay."

This advertisement luckily was pointed out to M. Bertolot very soon
after it appeared at Cambridge, and he hastened to forward it by a
courier to Eugene, who, traveling by post (those were not days of
railways), arrived at Estcourt Hall within three weeks after Annie had
taken up her residence there. The old butler who answered the ring at
the gate bowed a solemn but speechless welcome, and with a significant
gesture conducted him, not through the usual entrance-hall, but by a
side door, up-stairs, till he came to Annie's apartment, which
communicated with the sick-chamber. Here he wrapped, and on Annie's
appearance left the two together without a word.

Eugene entered and sat down. "What is the matter?" He said. But Annie
answered not; her looks were those of one too wretched to weep.

Eugene repeated his inquiry, and then she softly whispered: "O!
Eugene, she has gone out of her mind!" Eugene covered his face with
his hands. {609} It was a long time ere either could speak again. At
length Annie rose on tiptoe and opened the door communicating with the
invalid's apartments. His mother was lying quietly on the sofa,
muttering at intervals. Eugene approached and listened. He thought he
caught the sound of his own name. He went nearer and knelt beside her.
The sick woman knew it not, but her arm laid itself restlessly around
his neck, and as his hot tears fell on her cheek she kept repeating in
her sleep the words, "Eugene, my dear Eugene!" Singularly enough, when
she waked she evinced no surprise at finding him there. It was as
though she knew it intuitively, or had expected it. Perhaps it was the
prolongation of her dream. She did not greet him as a stranger, or
speak as if long months had passed since she saw him, for question him
as to his occupation or place of abode. She waked, but was as if still
dreaming of him. She found him there, where she had so long wished him
to be, quietly asked him to hand her a glass of water, took it from
him contentedly, returned the glass, kissed him as he bent over her,
and sank into along, tranquil sleep, from which she tranquilly and
apparently refreshed, but still taking Eugene's appearance as a matter
of course which called for no expression of surprise.

The physician now insisted on this state of contentment being left
undisturbed. He had long wished Mr. Godfrey and Hester out of the
house on account of the excitement they produced in his patient; he
now insisted that they should not be seen, heard, board named in the
sick-room; "in fact," he said to them, "if it were convenient, it
would be better you should retire from the house until Mrs. Godfrey
can herself be moved. A paroxysm now might kill her. Spare her that,
and I hope she will recover. This illness appears to have been
occasioned by mental anguish and evidently her son only has the power
to soothe her." Hester was deeply moved; Mr. Godfrey was angry, but he
hid his vexation. "He would wait a day or two," he said; "if Mrs.
Godfrey continued to improve, he would take Hester to Yorkshire, where
their presence was greatly needed."

He was, however, so much irritated that he would not see Eugene, in
spite of his entreaties conveyed by Annie. Meals were served up to him
and Hester in a separate room, and he now appeared only anxious to get
away. Hester was, however, almost heart-broken. She had not been
allowed to speak to Eugene; but the night before their departure,
after Mr. Godfrey had retired for the night, she sent a note to him
containing these words only:

"Come to my room, I am very unhappy.
Let me see you ere I go.
  "Your own sister,
     "HESTER."

"I thought you would not deny me, Eugene," she said, as the latter
entered her apartment; "you were ever kind and forgiving. Tell me,
first, have you any hopes of mother?"

"Indeed I have, dear sister, the greatest hopes."

"Do you call me 'dear sister'? You are not angry with me, then,
Eugene?"

"Not much more angry than I was the day you took my horse away when I
wanted to go hunting; do you remember it, Hester?"

"I do, but you would not speak to me then till mother reconciled us.
Dear mother! our childish quarrels always worried her. She was never
easy till she had set them right. Would we were children again,
Eugene, and our quarrels as easily adjusted." Hester was weeping as
she spoke.

"We may be, Hester, as soon as we so will it. Why should we lose the
simplicity, love, and truth that make childhood sweet?"

"Do you love me still, Eugene?"

"I do; nay, I admire you too, though I think you are mistaken."

"You are very good to say so. Now then, dear Eugene, I may tell you to
set our dear mother's mind at rest as soon at she can understand
reason. {610} You will tell her that, at least as for as I am
concerned, there shall be no injustice committed eventually. My father
gives me the control of his property now, which he has a right to do
if he so pleases; you have your allowance such as he promised you,
that is all right too; but tell my dear mother that, as far as it
depends on me, matters shall be made right at my father's death. It
would serve nothing, as you know, to moot the matter now, but I will
never rob you or any one. Tell my mother this, Eugene, and tell her to
restore to me her love."

"I will, my darling Hester. Now make yourself easy. Be sure my mother
loves you still, that I love you, that we all love you. Be easy, my
sister, my sweet sister." But Hester was weeping bitterly; the thought
of not being allowed to see her mother, to help nurse her, was almost
more than she could bear, and she very sorrowfully acquiesced in the
arrangement.



CHAPTER XXI.

PROGRESS AGAIN.

The estates in Yorkshire were indeed in need of the master's eye. One
of the clerks had absconded with a considerable sum of money; and this
touched Mr. Godfrey nearly: while Hester was more affected by the
discovery that the insidious doctrines of 'free love' were making
terrible inroads on the morality of the young people. She was the more
affected as she felt a natural repugnance to approach the subject. She
found the people legislating for themselves, and systematizing divorce
in what they deemed a manner consonant to nature. She was not prepared
for this development, and drew back in disgust. "Is there, then, no
remedy for this?" she asked of her father. "None but to legalize it, I
believe," he replied. "You know nothing of these things, child, and
had better not meddle with them. Legalizing divorce must take place
sooner or later, from causes you do not understand; nay, I do not
think the matter will stop there. As people become enlightened, and
live more according to the laws of nature, polygamy must be legalized
too;    [Footnote 174] it is the only way to prevent disorder. In
fact, but for the prejudice created by religion, it would have been
done long since in theory as it has ever been done in practice!"

  [Footnote 174: This plea is now used by intelligent men,
  non-Mormonites, to justify the existence of legalized polygamy in an
  American State. It is gravely asserted that only in Mormondom can
  the moral laws be enforced; that the practice in other states is the
  same without the sanction of the law, and that the absence of that
  sanction creates the disorders and night brawls of our streets.
  Order reigns in Utah!]

"Are you serious?"

"Perfectly so!"

"Then there must be something wrong, absolutely wrong. I can never be
brought to believe polygamy necessary; that must enslave a woman, and
I must protest against it."

"Protest as you will you will find nature too strong for your theory.
You have been so peculiarly brought up, Hester, by your poor mother,
that you know nothing, absolutely nothing, of the world's necessities,
and I begin to wish I had never let your eyes become unsealed. You are
a privileged one, and belonging to a privileged class; the majority of
the world are not so protected. But this is not a subject for you;
shut your eyes to these matters, and attended to the spread of
intelligence."

But it is not easy to shut one's eyes when once they have been opened.
Hester was stupefied. This came as a climax to the sorrow already
arising from her mother's illness, from her remorse in having partly
occasioned it. The woman's heart within her was beginning to make
itself felt. The occupations of the Yorkshire estate grew trite and
dull, until she had found a remedy for this grievance, a principal to
propose, a power with which to act. Mr. Godfrey was also gloomy from
his pecuniary loss through the embezzlement of the clerk, and matters
were assuming a very unpleasant appearance.

{611}

M. de Villeneuve called to pay them a parting visit, the illness of
his father called him to America.

"Shall you return to Europe?" said Mr. Godfrey.

"Yes; as soon as I can get away, I must return to take care of my
ward; and if I can possibly find a location for her order, take her to
America with me."

"Your ward? Her order?"

"Did you not know that Euphrasie de Meglior is my ward, that her
father increased her to my care the night before he died? That which
has kept me in Europe so long as been the hope of assisting her to
regain her estates and to establish yourself. Fortunately for my peace
of mind, I have been able partially to succeed in both. A part, though
but a small part, of the estate has been rescued; and Madame de
Meglior is already returned to France. Euphrasie thinks herself still
more fortunate. Four of the ladies of the continent where she was
educated have found shelter in England. They have met, and by the age
of friends have wherewith to establish themselves. They have taken a
house at------, about ten miles from this, and have already commenced
community life, two Euphrasie's great content."

"And Euphrasie did not return with her mother to France?"

"No. She resigned her right to the estate during madame's life."

"And what will she live on?"

"The poor Clares support themselves by their work."

Hester looked surprised, almost shocked. M. de Villeneuve continued:

"During my absence I have deputed warm friends to look after them,
and, as I said, my object is finally to transplant them to America.
But I must not forget to inquire after Mrs. Godfrey, of whose health I
hear such sad accounts. I do not wonder to perceive you are dejected,
every one must sympathize in your anxiety. But tell me, how was it
that Mrs. Godfrey, so lofty-minded, so motherly a woman, so full of
magnetism, if I may be allowed the expression, could bring herself to
patronize this materialistic scheme of education? Her loving heart
must have felt intuitively that systems, exterior expressions which
lack the vital principle, cannot regenerate the earth."

"I do not know that my mother ever did patronize my plans. She has
never been well enough to come to Yorkshire since they were started."

"No! Then you missed the benefit of her fine intuitive reasonings, and
of the results of her experience. Believe me, Miss Hester, applauding
as I do, perforce, the zeal which animates you, I am constrained to
tell you, you must necessarily fail. You appeal but to the selfish
passions; you will be startled one day at the demoralization that will
be manifested."

"I am beginning to feel this already," said Hester. "I want some power
that as yet I do not find."

Mr. Godfrey rose impatiently and went to the window, scarcely out of
earshot, but far enough away to decline any share in the conversation.
He was always displeased when his "best policy" principle was called
in question, though just now his pocket was suffering from that cause.

"You will find out soon the sanction you require," said M. de
Villeneuve. "Every real unperverted natural law is the material symbol
of a higher supernatural law, to which it is essentially related. It
is the disunion of these two laws in your mind that now perplexes you;
but you are too sincere in your search for truth not to perceive their
relative bearings at last."

"Truth! what is truth?" said Hester.

"Truth is the harmony of all things as they exist in God; as love is
their manifestation," said M. de Villeneuve. "The simplicity of ideas,
their order, beauty, harmony, find expression in the created world;
but the ideas themselves {612} are immaterial or spiritual, and have a
relative spiritual expression in the soul. You have taken one and left
the other, hence the failure. Missing the idea itself, you necessarily
fail in power, for spiritual power is needed to develop truly even the
material type. And, moreover, you cannot understand the type until you
possess the idea."

"Something is wanted, that is certain," said Hester; "but if all
virtue is typified in some material existence, tell me where is the
type of purity?"

"Where but in the virgin-mother," responded the comte. "In the mother
of him who died to obtain for man that power over sin which had
escaped him. The world lies the victim of its own self-will: it needs
a high ideal of purity and of sanctifying love, and this it finds in
Mary; it needs the power to work out this ideal, and this it finds in
Jesus. The progression of man is dearer to Mary than ever it can be to
you, for she is our mother, and the mother of our Redeemer; but
progression consists in sanctifying the individual, in destroying that
overweening empire of sense which overlies the spiritual faculty, and
which is fatal to woman in every sense, even in this world. Did you
never observe how the progression of ancient times ever riveted
woman's chains? From Egypt to Greece, from Greece to Rome, as luxury
increased the degradation of the majority of women followed. The
temples of the gods were filled with thousands of women enacting
scenes of horror under the name of worship. This affords a key to the
disorders that always accompanied ancient civilization, for woman is
the mother of the race, the peculiar impersonation of the affections,
and in her maternity the representative of that self-sacrificing
principle which forgets self in care for the welfare of her children.
Where woman is not cognizant of her true office, where her spiritual
affinities remain undeveloped, the race can get no further than
materialism, and that sensuous gratification which contains already
within itself the germ of decay, No For it is of earth, earthy. But
the divine instinct of religion, when proclaiming the 'grace to rise'
one for us by the cross on which the God-man died, raised Mary on the
altars of his church, for the special protection of all that is holy
and aspirative to in womanhood. And since that blessed time Christian
women have been respected as virgins and as mothers; as beings formed
to foster virtue and watch over the spiritual education of the of the
members of Christ's body. Mary acts wonderfully through her daughters.
Christian queens converted their husbands, and with them their
subjects throughout Europe; Christian matrons have given that tone to
society which now, even in this age of heresy, respect security in
theory, though it throws it off in practice. All that is pure, all
that is lovely, all that is harmonious and holy invests the shrine of
Mary, and from her influence proceeds the charm that represses vice,
converts the heart to goodness as its chief happiness, and gives power
to the individual to do those works of penance, of violence to self,
which win the kingdom of heaven; a kingdom which commences here, in
our own hearts, when we once enter into the harmonies of the religious
teachings of nature and of revelation."

Hester started to her feet. "Is this the office of Mary?" she
exclaimed.

M. de Villeneuve assented by a gesture.

"True or not true," said Hester, "this explanation does not in the
least savor of ignorance and superstition it is beautiful poetry!"

"And is not poetry the highest truth?" said the comte.

"No," said Mr. Godfrey, coming forward with a frown on his
countenance. "No! I wonder you religious people can never keep within
your proper bounds. I, who have traveled in France, in Belgium, and in
Italy, and seen the painted dolls and gaudy dressed-up images, protest
against your giving a poetic or philosophic dress to this idolatry or
mariolatry. When I {613} take Hester abroad, she will see with me that
this worship is nothing but the rankest superstition."

"But I thought you said there was always a meaning under every myth.
Pop, may not this be the meeting of 'Mary'"?

"Mary is no myth," said the Comte de Villeneuve, "she is a real, holy,
pure, and loving woman, to be loved with a personal affection!"

"Beware!" said Mr. Godfrey, "our family has suffered enough already
from these fantastic dreams. Eugene's Catholicity has driven his
mother crazy. If my Hester were to succumb, it would be even worse
with me. Let us make a truce with religion, I see it will produce no
other fruits than to set people buy the ears."

"As you will. I am leaving for America, can I bear a greeting from you
to my father?"

"Tell him to inspire his son with a little of his common sense. In a
twenty years' intercourse he never mentioned the word religion in my
family."

"You must forgive me, Mr. Godfrey," said the comte rising. "I thought
to console your daughter; she is much changed since I saw her last."

Hester was much changed, but never so much as now. She longed to thank
the comte, to unsay her father's rude words, but she dared not. She
dared not anger Mr. Godfrey. Nor was it necessary: her eyes had
kindled, her countenance had glowed, and the comte felt that his words
had not been thrown away, that Hester had received a revelation, and
he departed consoled.

It was a new study that Hester now entered upon. Woman as she was in
the olden time: in Greece and Rome; in Egypt and Abyssinia; in Persia
and India. Woman as she is everywhere where Christianity is not known,
where the mothership of Mary is ignored. The facts presented to her
were appalling, and none the less so that Mr. Godfrey was so peevish
when addressed on this subject. He felt intuitively that the more
Hester knew of this, the more she would shrink from materialism; and
if she abandoned him, if she adopted Catholicity, he would have lost
his last hope. He began to tire of "perfectibility" and "progress,"
the more that they seemed to detach his only joy from his side.

Yet with an old man's obstinacy he would not yield. Hester continued
her system, but now it was to watch more closely its results, to
penetrate the secret workings of the heart. She wanted to speak of
higher motive than self, but she knew not how. She only knew, and
daily she knew it more, that some high controlling power was wanting
which could speak to the heart and regulate the inward spirit: "Was
that power God?" "And Mary, was she a real manifestation of the power
of God residing in a woman's frame?"

Hester now wished this might be true.



CHAPTER XXII.

THE CONSOLATIONS OF RELIGION.

After a few weeks spent in the company of Eugene and Annie, Mrs.
Godfrey rallied somewhat, and the physicians prescribed change of air.
Her insanity had somewhat subsided, but she was now dull and stupid,
utterly unlike her former self, and her illness had affected her limbs
also so that she was obliged to be wheeled in a chaise-longue from one
place to another.

The place chosen for their new abode was a lone house within half a
mile of the sea-coast, the road to which lay in a beautiful valley
between two hills of considerable elevation. On the highest of these
was a light-house, which gave warning of the perilous nature of the
coast, while the neat little white dwellings of the coast-guardsmen,
at the foot of the hill, betokened that this was a locality famed for
smuggling excursions. Mrs. Godfrey was often laid on a couch placed on
wheels, and drawn by hand to the beach on the sea-shore. The murmur
{614} of the waves seemed to soothe her; and though she spoke very
little, she seemed by slow degrees to be recovering her faculties, and
now and then listened to the subjects discussed by her children,
Eugene and Annie, who were seldom away from her, and who took work or
study to the seaside, that they might while away the long hours of
attendance. After a little time they observed that when the weather
was pleasant an old blind woman was often led from one of the cottages
to a pleasant seat beneath the cliff, and that the two or three
children who played near her seemed to regard her with equal reverence
and affection.

The old woman knitted in the sunshine, now and then interrupting her
work to tell her beads or relate short stories to the young ones. In
the evening a tidy young woman, of most pleasing appearance, would
come to lead the blind woman home. This happened so often that the
faces became familiar, and Mrs. Godfrey began to watch for them as for
interesting objects, and at length she also began to wish to form
their acquaintance. One afternoon she had her chaise-longue wheeled up
to the side of the blind woman, and kindly inquired after her health.

"I am well, madam. Thanks for your inquiry," was the reply.

"And is this your daughter?" asked Annie, pointing to the young woman
who was just come to lead her home.

"She is my son's wife, thanks be to God, and sure no daughter of my
own could be better to me, who am but a burden to them all."

"Don't talk of burden, mother dear," said the young woman. "Sure, what
should we do without you? Don't you teach the children their prayers
and their catechism, and without you shouldn't we be almost like the
heathens in this land of--" She paused and colored.

"Heresy," suggested Eugene, as if concluding the sentence for her.

"No offence, sir, I hope," courtesied the woman.

Eugene took up the old woman's beads which had fallen to the ground,
reverently touched the cross with his lips, and restored them to her.
"No offence at all," said he. "This is a land of heresy and of
infidelity, and it cheers us to find out now and then one who
continues faithful to the truth. Where do you live?"

"In the white cottage yonder, sir."

"And your husband belongs to the coast-guard?"

"He does, sir."

"And is he a Catholic also?"

"Glory be to God, he is!" said the old woman.

"But how do you manage? Can you ever go to mass?"

"Not often, sir."

"Is there any priest near here?"

"None that I know of nearer than Arundel Castle. The Duke of Norfolk
has a private chaplain, they say." This was all that could be drawn
from the parties on that subject. They evidently feared to compromise
some one by speaking more plainly.

After this day Mrs. Godfrey seemed attracted to the poor blind old
woman. She had always been benevolent, though she seldom took a strong
personal interest in the object of her bounty, and beyond relieving
physical want had little idea of doing good. Now a new idea had taken
possession of her, she appeared to feel reverence for the cheerful
sufferer, and treated her with a proportionate respect and sympathy.

"Is your husband long dead," she asked.

"May God rest his soul! He has been dead these ten years."

"And how long have you been blind?"

"Nearly as long, praise be to God! I took the fever immediately after,
and the disease fell into my eyes, and when I recovered I was blind."

"Do you praise God, my good woman, for making you blind?"

{615}

"And why not, my lady? Sure 'tis he that knows best what is good for
us, and what is most for his own his honor and glory."

"But how can his honor and glory be promoted by your being blind?"
asked Mrs. Godfrey, as a dim recollection of Euphrasie crossed her
mind.

"Faith, then, and its little we know of such matters, and less that we
can tell. But we are sure that God created us himself, and wishes for
our love and service; and often when things go well with us we forget
him, and love ourselves and our friends so much that we neglect to
serve him; then he sends sorrow to recall us to himself, and for this
we should bless him."

"But has not God commanded us to love our neighbor?"

"Yes, my lady; but it must be with a holy love that we love our
neighbor, because he is the creature of God, the child of the same
Father. Many our kind from a dislike to feel pain or to witness pain,
but this is not the true worship required by God, who says we must
love him with all our heart, with all our soul, with all our strength.
This real love submits in all things to his holy will, because it
gives 'self' into his keeping."

"But if you could see you might read of God, and learn to love him
better?"

"I never could read, my lady," was the reply.

"Then where did you get your knowledge?" asked Annie.

"The priest taught me my catechism, my lady and every Sunday and
holiday he explained it, and for many a long year I never missed the
lesson. Then we often had instructions at Mass, and he taught us the
rosary and the way of the cross. Ah! it is not the good father's fault
if the children of his congregation do not know their religion."

"And you never went to school?"

"To none other than the school of poverty which our Lord founded and
blessed," said the old woman. "Oftentimes we had scarcely potatoes
enough to eat, though we little ones tried to work as well as the big
ones; but labor was worth very little at that time, and afterward my
father took sick and lay for a long time helpless. We had hard times
of it in my young days."

"And did your mother take it very much to heart?"

"No, not very much. She grieved when my father died, though she hoped
and believed he was happy, and would smile through her tears while she
told us so. But for the rest, we all knew that it was not fine clothes
or dainty food that would make us happy: we knew that we should have
as much of both as it was God's will to send us, and we tried not to
wish for more. When we were cold and hungry mother would gather us
round her, and talk of that solemn midnight at Bethlehem when, under
the clear frosty sky, the angels came to the shepherds, singing songs
of glory, because the Lord of heaven and earth lay poor and helpless
in the stable at Bethlehem. Then she would tell us of the long, dreary
flight into Egypt, when Mary and Joseph begged hospitality by the way,
because they loved poverty, for it made them more immediately
dependent upon God. Then she showed us the poverty of Nazareth, and of
the time of his ministry, who had not where to lay his head; and we
became not only reconciled to poverty, we tried to love it for his
sake, who became poor for our sakes. So you see, my lady, we could not
be unhappy even when sorrow was upon us."

"Twas a sublime philosophy," said Annie.

"Rather say a glorious religion, Annie!" said Eugene. "Well might the
boast of the gospel be that it was preached unto the poor."

Conversations like these brought a new train of ideas to the minds of
both mother and daughter. Patience, meekness, and humility were
embodied before them, bringing with them such childlike confidence in
the providence of God that they could but feel such religion to be
indeed reality.

{616}





CHAPTER XXIII.

CONTROVERSY ON IMPORTANT POINTS.

"Brother," said Annie, "I begin to perceive that it is of necessity
that philosophy divides itself into two branches, the exoteric and
esoteric. The human mind evidently needs considerable preparation to
be able t comprehend the higher ideas that lie hidden under first
teachings. It is not so much the teachings that are separate as that
the mind must pass through a given process to arrive at the meaning.
Every form of matter seems a metaphor, involving a spiritual idea, and
many minds seem powerless to penetrate to this; they necessarily
remain content with the material explanation."

"And yet you blame religion for presenting defined dogmas, practical
methods, and real precepts to her children, forgetting that this is
the necessary preparation to higher truth, and that every mind must
begin at the beginning?"

"I blame only trivial and childish practices; I reject only untenable
doctrines."

"As for example?"

"The idea that a good God will plunge us into hell!"

"Have you ever reflected on what God is, Annie?"

"No! how should we know aught of such a being?"

"Chiefly by revelation, but also somewhat by observation."

"Give me your idea on the subject, Eugene."

"God is light, power, and love. He created intelligent beings, that he
might impart to them a degree of these attributes, and in their degree
call upon them to participate in the joys they impart. The unvarying
law impressed on material agencies, whether endowed with vitality or
not, did not (in all reverence be it spoken) content the love of God;
the enforced obedience of the material world to the attractions acting
upon it, and the instincts animating the various races of the verified
matter, though beautiful, though glorious evidence of power, wisdom,
and benevolence, did not call forth a consciousness of creatureship,
could not render to the creator a free-will offering of warm,
outpouring, grateful love. This the Creator desired. It is his
pleasure to desire to be loved; and he created the human soul for the
satisfying of this desire; he rendered it free, and endowed it with
the faculty of loving, that it may freely offer the purest love to
himself."

"Go on; how do you reconcile this with hell?"

"God is pure, holy, incapable of defilement, change, or division. His
essential being penetrates all space, comes in contact, literally,
with all material and spiritual existence. Now, God created the human
soul like unto himself, with affinities to himself, and in proportion
as that likeness continues or is restored, light, love, and power
exist in that soul. The absence of these constitutes disease, which
will result in spiritual death. They are absent in the wicked, and the
divine rays entering that soul cause pain, even as the rays of the sun
cause pain when they enter the eye of the body after it has become
diseased."

"But eternally?"

"The soul preserves its identity and consciousness eternally, though
it undergoes spiritual death. If by an act of volition it has lost
light, love, and power, it has not lost immortality, and the divine
rays, penetrating this wreck of life, necessarily fill it with terror
and dismay when all affinity for purity and holiness are destroyed.
The spirit of love, culturing the spirit of hate, must produce pain,
discord, rage; and as the strife is now unequal and hate is impotent,
it creates despair also. We see this on a minor scale on earth. The
French revolution {617} brought prominently before us men whose
spiritual faculties seemed already dead--men given up to a reprobate
sense, who appeared utterly beyond conversion, and who were styled by
the vulgar incarnate demons; yet these are immortal beings who will
carry their dispositions beyond the grave. Should you like hereafter
to come in contact with such?"

Annie shuddered. She thought of Alfred Brookbank, whose mere entrance
into the room had often caused her blood to curdle.

Eugene continued: "Remember, sister, that evil means cutting ourselves
off voluntarily from God, and thereby subjecting ourselves to become
the prey of our own passions, of our own selfishness, which when once
loosed may lead to every kind of excess. Good, on the contrary, is
living in God, adoring his will, admiring his perfections, loving his
law. While on earth the choice of good and evil is before us; and what
repugnances to perfect action or to perfect dispositions we find
difficult to overcome in this our fallen state will be overcome for us
if we pray in a sincere, in a co-operative spirit, or rather we shall
receive power to overcome all evil and to accomplish all good if only
in simplicity of heart we turn to him who is faithful to fulfil all
promises; for he has said, 'Ask and you shell receive' all graces
necessary to form in you the true spiritual life. If we choose to
neglect this means appointed by God, we have no right to complain of
the result."

"I will pray," whispered Annie.

"I, too," said Mrs. Godfrey, who was for the most part a silent
listener in these discussions. "Strange it is, Eugene, that you should
be teaching the principles which I ought to have instilled into you
from youth upward."

"Why, you were not a Catholic, mother!" said Eugene.

"No! but I had many opportunities of becoming instructed, had I been
willing; but I was worldly; I cared for none of these things; I did
not think the time would come when I should consider sorrow and
sickness a blessing: without that fearful malady and these paralyzed
limbs I might have died in ignorance of all that it most concerns me
to know. I have lived without God; dare I hope, Eugene, he will accept
my tardy return to him now?"

"The grace that is working in your heart to make you wish that return
is an evidence of his love for yon, dear mother; only continue to
respond to it, and all will be well."

. . . . .

"Brother," said Annie, on another occasion, "the accounts that we have
of the ancients soon after the deluge seem to denote that they were a
race of wondrous power. The mere history we have of the building of
the city of Babylon, its wondrous walls, its bricks so well cemented
by bitumen that they seemed imperishable; its six hundred and
seventy-six squares, so planned that they preserved the ventilation of
the city in perfect order; its provision for water; its hanging
gardens and palaces--to read of such cities as this and Nineveh and
many others, one imagines a fairy tale in hand instead of realities.
Then, I presume, the raising of those immense blocks of stone which go
to form the Pyramids would puzzle our modern engineers, as would many
things in that land of wonders, Egypt. Conceive a modern traveller
losing his way among the ruins of ancient temples that strew the site
where Thebes once stood, passing the night in the rude hut of a
Bedouin or Copt erected amid these ruins, and in the morning seated
upon a fallen pillar, making his meditation on 'Progression.' All
ancient, very ancient history, is instinct with power. What does this
mean?"

"That probably the knowledge that Adam imparted to his descendants was
greater than that which we now possess, or the intellectual faculties
may have been stronger before passion and egotism again corrupted the
race."

{618}

"You think the earlier men really possessed higher intellectual
facilities than we have now?"

"I think their works would warrant the assumption. Beside, it is
reasonable to suppose that Adam was created perfect according to his
nature, that it was endowed with the highest spiritual and
intellectual faculties, capable not only of understanding the material
creation in its laws of attraction, in the relationships of matter to
matter, but also of comprehending the type enfolded in each material
manifestation; the spiritual co-relationship existing between such
manifestation and the idea it represents. This spiritual faculty was
overborne by sin, impurity deluged the world, and a material deluge
destroyed the race. But to Noah, doubtless, the mental organization as
well as the spiritual power descended; hence immediately after the
deluge we see mighty works which betoken that high creative intellect
which inspire modern imitators with mute wonder."

"Then you think sin was absolutely a destroying power?"

"I do, even from the first. The intellectual faculties, when used as
the mere servant of the selfish passions, shrink and cannot receive
their full expansion, cannot perceive spiritual relationships, cannot
perceive man's moral relationships, each one to his fellow. Indulgence
of the passions, inordinately pursued, of itself cripples the
intellect and takes away the desire of intellectual culture;
selfishness, on the other hand, shuts up the fountains of knowledge,
in order to retain the material power that knowledge gives for selfish
purposes. Both these causes were in operation to cause that inequality
of fortune which finally wrought the 'castes' among mankind. The
knowing ones kept the knowledge transmitted from Noah downward in
their own exclusive possession, which the majority submitted to at
first in order more freely to indulge their passions, and afterward
because they could not help themselves, having (under the influence of
passion) fallen out of the intellectual sphere. Laws compelling by
force certain restraints became necessary, and soon labor was
performed by force also, and most of the laborers became slaves. These
laws, in their action, usually touched only the governed, that is,
those who had let the intellectual power slip from them. The governors
had, almost universally, power to trample on the common law when
applied to themselves; it was only when they came in contact with each
other, and intruded on each other's privileges, that they were called
to account. I speak not of the theory, but of the practice; there was
one law for the rich, another for the poor, throughout all ages. What
was called civilization, before the coming of Christ, did not touch
the poor, the enslaved; the down-trodden slaves had little chance of
justice or of mercy. What was meant by liberty applied only to the
freemen; the want of remembering this leads many two mistakes in
comparing the civilization of ancient and modern times. The gospel
preached to the poor taught them to repress the empire of the
passions, thus slowly but surely causing that rise of intellect in the
masses which has swept slavery from Europe, and from all countries
where the laborer has followed even imperfectly this first requisite,
the doing which has enabled him to cultivate his intellect
sufficiently to compete with those in possession of power. A people
enslaved my passion easily succumb to external force, as a virtuous
people, however poor, have an innate power of preserving external
freedom. The external depends on the internal. One is a manifestation
of the other; almost a consequence."

"Then," said Annie, "if I have understood you aright, man was
originally in direct communication with his Creator. Sin not only
destroyed this communication, which was the source of all knowledge
and happiness, it impaired the faculties through which that
communication is held."

"Yes," said Eugene.

{619}

"And as temporal happiness is but the reflex of spiritual happiness,
the necessary result of order in the spiritual relationship, it
follows that the spiritual order must be restored before the natural
order can yield the happiness it is calculated to produce. This, then,
is the redemption, penance, violence to flesh, and to self will,
before the restoration can take place; these being the necessary
medicine to heal the soul's diseases. Those who refuse the medicine
perish."

"You surprise me, sister," said Eugene; "you are apt at
understanding."

"You forget that long since the enigma was propounded to us. I am but
just getting my ideas into form. You will tell me if I have drawn
correct inferences. Man, by the fall, lost not only actual knowledge
and actual means of knowledge, but he lost empire over the animal
world, and, worse than all, over himself; he became a slave to his own
appetites and passions, and to his own self-will. From this state no
effort of his own could rescue him. The Redeemer came to offer him
means of rescue, to enable him to re-establish spiritual
communication, to bring man again into such actual relationship with
God that he shall look up to him, practically as well as
theoretically, as the highest metaphysical teacher; as the source of
real power and light to the understanding; the restorer of all things
to their pristine harmony. Is this so?"

"It is."

"And naturally this restoration must begin by the healing of the
disorders of the soul. The first impulses of grace create desire for
goodness, purity, and truth; but the old man is still within, and can
only be subdued by violence done to ourselves. 'The kingdom of heaven
suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force.' This is why the
saints welcome mortification and suffering, looking on them as tools
with which to subdue themselves, with which they may be enabled to
offer themselves a living sacrifice to God. This is why what men call
'progress' is repugnant to sanctity--progress meaning increased
facilities for indulging the passions; facilities which, as we advance
in sanctity, we learn to dispense with more and more. This is what
Euphrasie meant when she puzzled us at her first coming."

"Indeed, sister, I believe it is."

"And her non-appreciation of human learning must have arisen from the
intense pleasure she felt in personal, absolute dependence upon God.
She did not want to know the material intermediate sequences; of all
things, she preferred feeling they came to her directly from her
Father's hand."

"I presume this was the case."

"Then, too, if I understood her aright, the soul, purified by prayer,
mortification, and good works, becomes by the grace of God detached
from the things of this world; it seeks its rest only in God, and then
it begins to regain some of the sublime spiritual privileges it had
lost. Even on earth it may hold communication with the glorified
spirits in heaven, while these glorified spirits themselves, blessed
with the beatific vision, drink in sensations of beauty, harmony, and
delight, such as exist only in God, and of which we cannot form the
slightest conception."

Eugene could only press his sister's hand in silence. She continued:

"It is this union of spiritual natures with our struggling existence,
this interest taken by the saints in glory in the members of the
church militant on earth, that you term the 'communion of saints,' is
it not, Eugene?"

"Yes, Annie."

"And men have dared to call the recognition of this divine union, of
this sacred bond of love, idolatry! It is the true conquest over
death! the earnest of our own loving immortality! How absurd to call
so beautiful a demonstration of the effect of divine charity
'idolatry'!"

"As absurd," said Eugene, "as to believe that God, in providing means
to redeem men from the death of sin, should not watch over those
means, and preserve them intact from man's defilement."

{620}

"Yes," interposed Mrs. Godfrey, "it is wonderful that men who believe
in revelation should not see, _prima facie_, that the same miraculous
interposition which produced the revelation would, as if of necessity,
watch over and protect that revelation." Then suddenly becoming very
earnest, she said: "Eugene, I am drawing near my end, I feel it every
day more. You must bring me a priest, if, indeed, one so worthless as
I can become a member of the church of Christ. O my God! it scarcely
seems possible that a life of worldliness should be followed by an
eternity of bliss! But I will hope against my feelings of justice! The
blood of Jesus is powerful to save. O my God! accept it; it was shed
for me in pity and in mercy."

"And for me, too," said Annie. "I must be a Catholic also."

"But have you considered the cost, Annie? Your husband! your
children!"

"I have weighed everything, and am resolved."

"I think feet, O my God!" said the sick woman. "O eternal justice! I
offer thee my children's faith, my children's courage, in union with
the precious blood of thy Son, to atone for my own shortcomings. Oh!
bless these my children--give them grace to persevere!"

There was a solemn pause. Than she added: "Annie, there is suffering
in store for you, but you will accept it. Eugene will be to a friend,
a protector, a guide. I made my will before this malady came on. I
dare not change it now, lest it should be disputed. I left to Eugene
all that I have to leave, but he will provide for you, if provision is
needed; and you, Annie, will confide in him when you need a friend."

"I will, dear mother," faltered Annie. "Surely, we have always loved
each other."

Eugene threw his arm around his sister's waist, and kneeling by his
mother's side, solemnly pledged himself self to watch over his sister
and care for her.



TO BE CONTINUED.



ORIGINAL.


PARDON.


"Many sins are forgiven her, because she hath loved much."


  Love may, then, hope to quite refund
    What sin hath ta'en away?
  Poor heart! thou hast a debt beyond
    Thy straitened means to pay.

  My sins in number far excel
    The sands beside the sea.
  Lord! if thou wilt, I pay thee well.
    Then lend thy heart to me.



{621}



From Chamber's Journal.


SEA-SIDE FLOWERS.


Visitors to the sea-shore love to wander along the beach in search of
the beauteous shells of scallop or cowry, left by the retiring tide,
and delight to trace their exquisite design and structure; or,
scrambling over the shiny rocks, covered with treacherous algae, will
appear into the little pools, fringed with crimson and purple weed,
inhabited by various anemones, gray shrimps, and darting fish, in
hopes of discovering some new treasure to capture, and carry off in
triumph for the aquarium at home; but how few care to examine the
modest beauty of the many sea-side flowers blooming on regarded at
their very feet; nay, their very existence often unknown, or looked
upon as common weeds, devoid of all beauty or interest. Many a lover
of wildflowers and country beauty will pause in the fields and lanes,
and even dusty roads that skirt the shore--especially if they be on
the southern coasts of England--where the brier and hawthorn hedges
are tangled with luscious honeysuckle, and the primroses cluster in
masses; where the wild hyacinth peeps from amidst the nettles, and the
speedwell opens its "angel's eyes" of loveliest azure; but as they
approached the sea-beach, the proverb of its sterility,

  "Barren as the sand on the sea-sure,"

is felt, and not is expected or looked four but the rich harvest of
the ocean's wondrous things cast on the shingle, or left in the pools
beyond. The immediate banks and links of the sea-side are usually
treeless, and, to non-observant eyes, dreary wastes; but not a spot on
this wide world is without its interest and beauty, and delightful it
is, when rambling along the sandy beach, listening to the music of the
waves on the pebbly shore, to find how many lovely blossoms are
scattered even here, ornamenting the rugged sides of the chalky cliff
or rock, weaving a flowery tapestry over the sloping links, and
binding together with interlaced roots the loose substance of many a
sand-bank.

Unlike the country meadows, where the loveliest blossoms appear with
the earliest sunshine of the year, the fairest sea-side flowers are to
be gathered during the summer and autumn months; though even in
spring, the turf which enamels the links, down often to the water's
edge, will be found decked with an occasional early blossom,

  "As if the rainbows of the first fresh spring
  Had blossomed where they fell."

While, at all seasons of the year, here as elsewhere,

  "Daisies with their pinky lashes"

raise their glad faces to the sun:

  "On waste and woodland, rock and plain.
    Its bumble buds unheeded rise;
  The rose has but a summer reign--
    The daisy never dies."

The first gleam of spring sunshine is, however, reflected not only by
the silver daisy, but by that "sunflower of the spring," the golden
dandelion, which glitters as early as April on the sandy, grassy
slope, familiar to all, and common everywhere. The leaves of the
dandelion grow from the root; they are deeply cut and notched, and
from this have gained their name, which we English have corrupted from
the French _dent-de-lion_. The Scotch call the dandelion the hawkweed
gowan. The leaves are much eaten on the continent for salad, and a
medicine is extracted from the root. Every one is familiar {622} with
the downy ball that succeeds the flower:

  "The dandelion with globe of down,
  The school-boy's clock in every town.
  Which the truant puff's amain,
  To conjure lost hours back again."

When Linnaeus proposed the use of what he termed a floral clock, which
was to consist of plants which opened and closed their blossoms at
particular hours of the day, the dandelion was one of the flowers
selected, because its petals open at six; the hawkweed was another--it
opens at seven; the succory at eight, the celandine and marigold at
nine, and so on, the closing of the blossoms marking the corresponding
hours in the afternoon. Nor is this the effect of light on the plants,
because, when placed in a dark room, the flowers are found to open and
close their petals at the same times.

In the month of May many sea-side blossoms appear; but in June they
burst forth in such wild profusion that we are at a loss to know which
to gather first:

  "For who would sing the flowers of Jane,
  Though from gray morn to blazing noon.
  From blazing noon to dewy eve.
  The chaplet of his song he weave,
  Would find his summer daylight fail,
  And leave half told the pleasing tale."

We must only attempt to pluck such as are most common, and most likely
to attract attention.

Many a sea-side cliff is adorned with the handsome pale-yellow
clusters of the sea-cabbage, which flowers from May until the late
autumnal months, and is very ornamental, hanging in tufts from the
crevices of the chalky heights. It grows from one to two feet high,
has woody stems, and leaves a deep green, tinged with purple and
yellow. It is very common on the Dover cliffs, where it is gathered,
and sold to be boiled and eaten. From it spring our numerous varieties
of cabbage; and this reminds me how very greatly we are indebted to
our sea-side plants for many of our most valuable vegetables: the
fresh crisp celery, the dainty asparagus, the beet, and sea-kale, in
addition to the cabbage, are all derived from our salt-marshes, and,
under careful cultivation, have become what they are.

The rest-harrow, which we gather in the cornfield, may also be found
adorning many a green patch on on the chalky cliff-side or sandy bank
near the sea. Its woody thorns are more abundant and stronger than
when when flourishing in richer soil. Its leaves are numerous and
small, its butterfly-shaped blossoms usually a purple-rose color, but
sometimes almost white. Near the sea-side, I have often found the
little see-pearl-wort, which requires close observation to detect it.
It grows upright, has tiny, delicate leaves, and flower-cups tinged
with a reddish-purple color.

Very common in the sand is the sea-rocket, a smooth, glaucous plant,
with pretty lilac-pink flowers, which often mixes its blossoms with
the white petals of the scurvy-grass.

But June flowers press upon us: here we have plentiful at Dover and
many other sea-side places the viper's bugloss, certainly one of the
handsomest wild-flowers, either of the neglected field or beach that
we have. It is a magnificent plant, sometimes attaining the height of
three feet, its rich purple blossoms, with their long bright-red
stamens, often extending half-way down the stems. It is peculiar for
the variety of tints it exhibits in its flowers, the buds being a rosy
red, but expanded blossom a rich purple, which gradually assumes a
deep blue. Sometimes it is found white. The stems and leaves are
covered with bristles and brownish warts, or tubercles. Its name is
taken from the resemblance the seeds bear to a viper's head, and its
spotted stem to the snake's skin; and in olden times the plant was
supposed to heal the bite of a viper. It flourishes best on a chalky
bill or sandy waste ground:

  "Here the blue bugloss paints the sterile soil,"

and rears its rich spike of closely sent flowers with a stately air.
Though its foliage is coarse, its blossom is very beautiful; not easy,
however, together, for bees are ever hovering around it; {623}

  "Flying solicitous from flower to flower,
    Tasting each sweet that dwells
    Within its scented valves";

and oft tearing their delicate wings among the thick, hairy prickles.
The common kidney-vetch flourishes luxuriantly by the sea-shore,
decking the heights with its handsome yellow flowers from May to
September. It crowds its blossoms into flower-cups, thickly covered
with down; and two such tufts or beads usually grow at the top of each
stem. It is as common a flower on the continent as with us, though it
varies in color--owing, Linnaeus tells us, to the nature of the soil.
The French call it _barbe de Jupiter_, Jupiter's beard. We also give
it the names of lady's-fingers and lambtoe. Clare tells us:

  "The yellow lambtoe I have often got,
  Sweet creeping o'er the banks in sunny time."

Daring June, the common pellitory of the wall spreads over many a
rocky spot, sometimes trailing its stems over the surface, and at
others rising erect, a foot high. Its leaves grow up the hairy stalk,
and are mixed with the small purple-red flowers that lie closely
against the stem. The white ox-eye, though loving best to bow in
beauty midst the waving grass of the meadow, may yet be found straying
near the coast; and very beautiful are its large solitary
flower-heads, with their rich golden centre and pure white ray.

Several thistles are to be found flourishing by the sea-coast,
blooming from June to September. Perhaps the most familiar is the
common sow-thistle, growing on almost every waste place, and greatly
relished by rabbits, on account of the milky juices it contains. Its
leagues are deeply notched, the lobes turned backward, its flowers
yellow. The milk-thistle is easily recognized by its large leaves
veined with white, and deep purple flowers. It is a prickly plant,
often growing as high as four or five feet. Though common in England,
it is rare in Scotland, and, I have red, is only to be found on the
rocky cliffs near Dumbarton Castle, where tradition tells it was
planted by Mary, Queen of Scots. The star-thistle may occasionally be
found among the wild blossoms of the sea-side, growing on cliff-tops,
or green patches of the beach. It has hard woody spines, standing out
from the flower-cup only, and in this differs from the other thistles;
which are usually covered with sharp bristles, and seem defiantly to
announce:

  "I am sir Thistle, the surly,
    The rough and the rude and the burly;
      I doubt if you'll find
      My touch quite to your mind,
  Whether late be your visit or early."

July comes laden with a host of fair blossoms of her own, as numerous
as those of June:

  "Bright gems of earth, In which perchance we see
  What Eden was, what Paradise may be."

Perhaps one of the most attractive, as well as one of the first in
beauty, and blooming down almost to the water's edge, is the
yellow-horned poppy, scattering its crumpled golden blossoms with
every passing breeze on the surrounding sea-weed. Its stems and leaves
are a delicate blue-green, wearing the bloom that is called glaucous,
from which its botanical name is taken. It is hairy, and its peculiar,
curved, horn-like pods are often half a foot long. It is a showy,
handsome plant, but smells badly, and is said to be poisonous. Quite
as pretty, and far less harmful, is the sea-convolvulus, trailing its
rose-colored bells with yellow rays, and dark-green succulent leaves,
in clusters on the sandy links, where it presents a succession of
delicate, short-lived flowers; and equally common but less showy, are
the green blossoms and thick wavy leaves of the sea-beet (_Beta
maritima_), which, when cultivated, we often recognize as a useful
vegetable. I have often gathered near the sea the hound's-tongue,
easily recognized by its dark purple-red blossoms, and strong smell of
mice. Its soft downy leaves are supposed to resemble in form the
tongue of a dog, and from this it derives its Greek and common name.
It is a tall plant, often growing two feet hi. Its foliage is a dull
green, its flowers a rich claret color.

{624}

On the sandy downs and in the rock-crevices down even to the shore,

  "Flourishing so gay and wildly free,
  Upon the salt-marsh by the roaring sea,"

are the pink and white heads of the sea-pink, or well-known thrift, so
often used as a bordering in our flower-gardens, but here hanging in
little tufts from the rocks, thriving where little nourishment can be
afforded, and thus well meriting its name. Its leaves grow from the
root, and mostly resemble coarse grass. Its flowers form round heads
of lilac-pink blossoms, and crown downy stalks, some four inches high.
There, too, is

  "The sea-lavender, which lacks perfume,"

and is a species of everlasting, retaining its color and form long
after being gathered. Its spike of blue-lilac flowers is very
handsome. There are several species of sea-lavender; and in August we
have the delicate, lilac-blue blossoms and bluish-green foliage of the
upright-spiked sea-lavender, so often gathered to deck the winter
vase. It is smaller both in leaf and flower than the former species.

Growing down, even amid the sand, we may now gather the compact head
of the tall eryngo, or sea-holly, which has blue blossoms, in shape
resembling the thistle's; and firm prickly leaves, beautifully veined,
and adorned with that pale sea-green bloom so common in our sea-side
plants. It grows about a foot high, and is stiff and rigid.

One of the purest-tinted blue flowers that we have may be found
flourishing by the sea. It is the narrow-leaved pale flax, a sweet,
delicate, fragile blossom, that drops its petals as we gather it. It
is a tall plant, with a solitary flower on each stem, and small
alternate leaves, adorning each to the root. Its stem is tough and
fibrous, like all its species. The flax cultivated for commerce is a
pretty pale-blue bell, erect and fragile, dancing and trembling with
the faintest whisper of the passing breeze. Mrs. Howitt well describes
it:

  "Oh! the goodly flax-flower!
    It groweth on the hill;
  And be the breeze awake or asleep
    It never standeth still!
  It seemeth all astir with life,
    As if it loved to thrive,
  As if it had a merry heart
    Within its stem alive."

How pretty are the little sendworts now in blossom, especially the
sea-pimpernel, or sea-side sandwort, which blooms in shining, glossy
patches only a few inches high. Its clustering white flowers are
almost hidden by the sick, crowding, succulent leaves. There are ten
species of sandwort. Perhaps the commonest of all is the sea-spurry
sandwort, which hangs its little blossoms in trailing tufts from the
cliff-sides.

In this month also we may gather the white-rayed flowers of the
sea-side feverfew, which often grows far down on the beach. Its
blossoms are the size of a daisy, its stems tick, its leaves stalky,
its growth low. And now also, decking the size of the banks, is the
perfoliate yellowwort with its bright yellow flowers, and pale
sea-green leaves, which grow in couplets, joining at the base, the
stalk passing through them. The plant grows about a foot high, is not
uncommon, and to be found in flourishing abundance on the Kentish
coast.

Fringing the summit of the tall sea-cliffs, and clothing with its
clusters of yellowish-white flowers and fleshy sea-green leaves the
many crevices on the steep sides of the rocks, we may see the
samphire, so plentiful on the southern shores, and especially at
Dover, where it is gathered during May 4 pickle. That there is danger
to the gatherer we may infer from Shakespeare's mention in King Lear,
whence the scene is laid near Dover:

        "Half-way down
 Hangs one that gathers samphire: dreadful trade!"

{625}

Several kinds of sea southern wood are now showing their green
flowers; the saltwort and funny-looking, jointed-branched, leafless
glasswort are to be gathered now, both so useful for the soda they
contain.

There is a species of nightshade often to be found flourishing on our
see beaches, with blossoms shaped like the potato-flower, but white,
and followed by black berries, highly poisonous.

These are also the dwarf-centaury and dwarf-tufted centaury, neither
growing beyond a few inches in height, both possessing light-green
stems and clusters of rose-colored blossoms.

The buck's-horn plantain is common on the sea-shore. It derives its
name from the peculiar cutting of its leaves.

Very common on the rocky bank is the wild mignonette. Though lacking
the sweet fragrance of the garden species, its pale greenish-yellow
spikes are very ornamental. The sea-side pea grows on the links and
banks of our beaches, but is uncommon. Its butterfly shaped blossoms
remind one of the sweet-pea of the garden:

  "Where swelling peas on leafy stalks are seen,
  Mixed flowers of red and azure shine between."

During the great famine of 1555, it is said that thousands of families
subsisted on the seeds contained in the pods of the sea-side pea.

Near the beach, I have often gathered the knot-grass, so named from
the knottiness of its stem, and to be found flourishing everywhere:

      "By the lone quiet grave,
  In the wild hedgerow, the knot-grass is seen,
      Down in the rural lane,
      Or on the verdant plain,
  Everywhere humble, and everywhere green."

Shakespeare has called it "the hindering knot-grass," on account of
the obstacles its trailing, tangled stems offer to the husbandman.
Milton speaks of it as

 "The knot grass, dew besprent."

It is familiar to almost every eye, forming little green patches even
between stones of our streets, its tiny pale-pink blossoms growing so
closely to the stem as to be half hidden among the leaves. Its seeds
and young buds afford a store of food for birds; and it is said that
swine and sheep love to feed upon it. Milton tells us,

      "The chewing flocks
  Had ta'en their supper of that savory herb,
  The knot-grass."

It bears little resemblance to a grass but this reminds me that among
our sea-side plants the grasses are perhaps the most interesting, as
well as useful and important, and are often of great service by their
spreading mass of tough underground stems offering a strong resistance
to the inroads of the sea. Several of the shores of England are so
protected; and the greater part of the coast of Holland, being
composed of dikes, owes its security to the powerful obstacles the
peculiar growth of these grasses affords. Thus we see

  "The commonest things may ofttimes be
  Those of the greatest utility.
  How many uses hath grass which groweth,
  Wheresoever the wild wind bloweth."

Useful as the sea-side grasses are, however, we have not space in this
short paper to take more than a passing glance at them, remarking that
the two most deserving of notice for their value in sea-resistance are
the sea-wheat grass and the sea-reed.

I have often seen flourishing near the sea-coast the rich clusters of
the ragwort (_Senecio Jacoboea_), bright as the golden sunbeam, waving
its tall blossoms in the breeze, and emitting a strong smell of honey.
It opens its flowers first in July, but often,

  "Coming like an after-thought,
  When other flowers are vainly sought,"

lingers on until Christmas; and when cold winds and wintry snows have
withered every other flower, this remains,

  "A token to the wintry earth that beauty liveth still".

Very pretty is the yellow carpet spread on the dry bank by the yellow
bed-straw, with its mass of tiny blossoms and slender thready leaves
of brilliant green. Its flowers, like those of the ragwort just
mentioned, also smell sweetly of honey. In the Hebrides, a
reddish-brown dye is extracted from its roots.

{626}

In September, we see the tall, handsome golden-rod, not only in our
woods and hedgeways, but also on the sea-side cliff, somewhat stunted
in growth, but still beautiful with its crowded clusters of golden
blossoms, over which butterflies, moths, and bees hover incessantly,
in spite of its

  "Florets wrapped in silky down,
    To guard it from the bee."

In the days of Queen Elizabeth it was sold in the London markets by
herb-dealers. It was supposed to cure wounds.

Then also the Michaelmas daisy, or sea-starwort, opens its pale lilac
petals, and continues to blossom until other flowers have nearly all
faded away:

  "And the solo Lawson which can glad the eye
  Is yon pale starwort nodding to the wind."

It often grows as high as three feet; its leaves are smooth, a sickly
green in color, and very succulent. At this time we shall also find
the marsh-mallow. It is a medicinal plant, containing a quantity of
starchy mucilage, which is formed into a paste, and taken as a cure
for coughs. Its flowers are a pretty rose-tint; its leaves soft,
downy, and very thick. It grows about two feet high, and is altogether
an attractive, handsome plant, the more more valued,

  "Because a fair flower that illumines the scene
      When the tempest of winter is near;
  'Mid the frowns of adversity, cheerful of mien,
  And gay, when all is dark and serene".

Such are a few of the sea-side blossoms to be gathered on our coasts.
Let my reader, next summer, take a ramble along the beach, and hunt
for themselves, when they may discover a host of fresh beauties rising
on all sides, creeping over the loose sand, topping the rocky heights,
or decking the grassy slopes--

  "As though some gentle angel,
    Commissioned love to bear,
  Had wandered o'er the greensward,
    And left her footprints there."

Let not the humblest, most neglected flower be discarded, for each
bears its own little mine of beauty, front with instruction, and the
promptings of pure and holy thoughts, that lead the mind from "nature
up to nature's God."

      "Nature never did betray
  The heart that loved her; 'tis her privilege
  Through all the years of this our life to lead
  From joy to joy; for she can so inform
  The mind that is within us, so impress
  With quietness and beauty, and so feed
  With lofty thoughts, that neither evil tongues,
  Rash judgments, nor the sneers of selfish men,
  Nor greetings where no kindness is, nor all
  The dreary intercourse of daily life,
  Shall e're prevail against us, or disturb
  Our cheerful face, that all that we behold
  Is full of blessings."



ORIGINAL.


ON THE REQUEST OF THE DAUGHTER OF HERODIAS.


  "I will that forthwith thou give me
  in a dish the head of John the Baptist."


  Fie, silly child! Thou askest more
  Than Herod doth engage to grant--
    As time hath truly shown.
  That head, enshrouded in its gore,
  Would be a price exorbitant
    For all of Herod's throne.



{627}

ORIGINAL.


THE CHURCH AND MONARCHY.


Mr. Bancroft, the learned and philosophical historian of the United
states, in one of his volumes devoted to the history of the American
Revolution, makes the remark that "Catholics are in general inclined
to monarchy, and Protestants to republicanism." This is a very common
opinion with non-Catholic American writers, and a large portion of the
American people honestly fear that the rapid spread of catholicity in
this country is pregnant with danger to our republican institutions.
Dr. England, late bishop of Charleston, one of the most illustrious
Catholic prelates the country has ever had, maintained, on the
contrary, with great earnestness and force, that the church does not
favor monarchy, but does favor republicanism. What is the fact in the
case? The question is not doctrinal, but historical, and relates to
Catholics and Protestants, rather than and Protestantism.

It should be observed before entering into any investigation of the
historical facts in the case, that in the Catholic mind theology is
superior to politics; and no intelligent Catholic ever consents or can
consent to have his religion tried by a political standard. The
church, the Catholic holds, represents what is supreme, eternal,
universal, and immutable in human affairs, and that political
principle or system which conflicts with her, is by that fact alone
condemned as false; for it conflicts with the eternal, universal, and
immutable principles of the divine government, or the truth and
constitution of things. Religion is for every one who believes in any
at all the supreme law, and in case of conflict between religion and
politics, politics, not religion, must give way.

Well grounded in his faith, sure of his church, the Catholic has never
any dread of historical facts, and can always, so far as his religion
is concerned, enter upon historical investigations with perfect
freedom and impartiality of mind. He has no fear of consequences. Let
the historical fact turn out as it may, it can never warrant any
conclusions unfavorable to his religion. If the fact should place his
politics in conflict with his religion, he knows they are so far
untenable, and that he must modify or change them. The historian of
the United States is deeply penetrated with a sense of the
independence and supremacy of moral or spiritual truth, and with a
justice rare in non-Catholic writers, attributes much of the
corruption of French society in the last century to the subjection of
the church to the state. Most non-Catholic writers, however, consider
what is called Gallicanism as far more favorable to society than what
they call Ultramontanism; and in doing so, prove that they really,
consciously or unconsciously, assume the supremacy of the political
order, not of the religious. But in this they grossly err, and make
the greater yield to the less; for not only is religion in the nature
of things superior to politics, but one is always more certain of the
truth of his religion than he is or can be of the wisdom and soundness
of his politics.

The church teaches the divine system of the universe, asserts and
maintains the great catholic principles from which proceeds all life,
whether religious or political, and without which there can be neither
church nor state; but it is well known that she prescribes no
particular constitution of the state or form of civil government, for
no {628} particular constitution or form is or can be catholic, or
adapted alike to the wants and interests of all nations. Whatever is
catholic in politics, that is, universally true and obligatory, is
included in theology; what is particular, special, temporary, or
variable, the church leaves to each political community to determine
and manage for itself according to its own wisdom and prudence.

Every statesman worthy at all of the name knows that the same form of
government is not fitted alike to the wants and interests of all
nations, nor even of the same nation through all possible stages of
its existence; and hence there is and can be no catholic form of
government, and therefore the church, as catholic, can enjoin no
particular form as universally obligatory upon Catholics. Were she to
do so she would attempt to make the particular universal, and thus war
against the truth and the real constitution of things, and belie her
own catholicity. The principles of government, of all government, are
catholic, and lie in the moral or spiritual order, as do all real
principles. These the church teaches and insists on always and
everywhere with all her divine authority and energy; but their
practical application, saving the principles themselves, she leaves to
the wisdom and prudence of each political community. The principles
being universal, eternal, and unalterable, are within the province of
the Catholic theologian; the practical application of the principles,
which varies, and must vary, according to time and place, according to
the special wants and interests of each political community, are
within the province of the statesman.

Such being the law in the case, it is evident that the church does and
can prescribe no particular form of civil government, and Catholics
are free to be monarchists, aristocrats, or democrats, according to
their own judgment as statesmen. They are as free to differ among
themselves as to forms of government as other men are, and do differ
more or less among themselves, without thereby ceasing to be sound
Catholics. Mr. Bancroft, however, does not even pretend that the
church requires her children to be monarchists, and he more then once
insinuates that her principles, as Bishop England maintains, tend to
republicanism, the contrary of what is done by most non-Catholic
writers.

To determine what is the fact we must define our terms. _Monarchy_ and
_republic_ are terms often vaguely and loosely used. All governments
that have at their head a king or Emperor are usually called, by even
respectable writers, monarchies, and those that have not are usually
called republics, whether democratic like ancient Athens, aristocratic
like Venice prior to her suppression by General Bonaparte, or
representative like the United States. But this distinction is not
philosophical or exact. All governments, properly speaking, in which
the sovereignty is held to rest in the people or political community,
and the king or emperor holds from the community and represents the
the majority of the state, are Republican, as was Imperial Rome or is
Imperial France; all governments, on the other in which the
sovereignty vests not in the political community, but in the
individual and is held as a personal right, or as a private estate,
are in principal monarchical. This is, in reality, the radical
distinction between republicanism and monarchy, and between
civilization and barbarism, and it is so the terms should be
understood.

The key to modern history is the struggle between these two political
systems, or between Roman civilization and German barbarism, and
subsequently to Charlemagne, were especially between feudalism and
Roman imperialism. In this struggle the sympathies and influences of
church have been on the side against barbarism and feudalism, and in
favor of the Roman system, and therefore on the side of republicanism,
Rome, theoretically and in name, {629} remained a republic under the
emperor from Augustus to Augustulus. However arbitrary or despotic
some of the Caesars may have been and certainly were in practice, in
principle they were elective, and held their power from the political
community. The army had always the faculty of bestowing the military
title of Imperator or emperor, and all the powers aggregated to it, as
the tribunitial, the pontifical, the consular, etc., were expressly
conferred on Augustus by the senate and people of Rome. The
sovereignty vested in the political community never in the person of
the emperor. The emperor represented the state, but never was himself
the state. In principle Roman imperialism was republican, not in the
strict or absolute sense monarchical at all.

The barbarian system brought from the forests of Germany was in its
principle wholly different. Under it power was a personal right, and
not, as under Roman imperialism, a trust from the community. With the
barbarians there were tribes, nations, confederations, but no
commonwealth, no republic, no civil community, no political people, no
state. Republic, _res publica_, Scipio says, in the _Republica_ of
Cicero, cited by St. Augustine in his _De Civitate Dei_, means _res
populi_; and he adds, that by people is to be understood not every
association of the multitude, but a legal association for the common
weal. "Non esse omnem coetum multitudinis, sed coetum juris condensu
et utilitatis communione sociatum."  [Footnote 175] In this sense
there was no people, no _res populi,_ or affairs of the people, under
the barbarian system, nor even under the feudal system to which, with
some Roman ideas it gave birth after Charlemagne. Absolute monarchy,
which alone is properly monarchy, according to Bishop England, did not
exist among the barbarians in its full development; but it existed in
germ, for its germ is in the barbarian chieftainship, in the fact that
with the barbarians power is personal, not political, a right or
privilege, not a trust, and every feudal noble developed is an
absolute monarch.

  [Footnote 175: Apud St. Augustine, tom. vii. 75. B.]

These two systems after the conquest occupied the same soil. What
remained of the old Roman population continued, except in politics, to
be governed by the Roman law, _lex Romanorum_, and the barbarians by
the _lex barbarorum_, or their own laws and usages. But as much as
they despised the conquered race, the barbarians borrowed and
assimilated many Roman ideas. The ministers of the barbarian kings or
chiefs were for a long time either Romans or men trained in the Roman
schools, for the barbarians had no schools of their own, and the old
schools of the empire were at no time wholly broken up, and continued
their old course of studies with greater or less success till
superseded by modern universities. The story told us of finding a copy
of the Civil or Roman Law at Amalfi, in the eleventh century, a fable
in the sense commonly received, indicates that the distinction between
barbarian and Roman in that century was beginning to be effaced, and
that the Roman Law, as digested or codified by the lawyers of
Justinian, was beginning to become the common law in the West as it
long had been in the East, and still is in all the western nations
formed within the limits of the old Roman empire, unless England be an
exception. There was commenced, even before the downfall of Rome, a
process of assimilation of Roman ideas and manners by the barbarians,
which went on with greater force and rapidity in proportion as the
barbarians were brought into the communion of the church. This process
is still going on, and has gone furthest in France and our own
country.

The barbarian chiefs sought to unite in themselves all the powers that
had been aggregated to the Roman emperor, and to hold them not from
the political community, but in their own personal right, which, had
they {630} succeeded, would have made them monarchs in the fall and
absolute sense of the term. Charlemagne tried to revive and
re-establish Roman imperialism, but his attempt was premature; the
populations of the empire were in his time not sufficiently Romanized
to enable him to succeed. He failed, and his failure resulted in the
establishment of feudalism--the chief elements of which were brought
from Germany. The Roman element, through the influence of the church
and the old population of the empire, had from the close of the fifth
century to the opening of the ninth acquired great strength, but not
enough to become predominant. The Germanic or barbarian elements,
re-enforced as they were by the barbarians outside of both the church
and the empire, were too strong for it, and the empire of Charlemagne
was hardly formed before it fell to pieces. But barbarism did not
remain alone in feudalism, and Roman principles, to some extent, were
incorporated into feudal Europe, and the Roman law was applied,
wherever it could be, to the tenure of power, its rights and
obligations; to the regulation, forfeiture, and transmission of fiefs,
and to the administration of justice between man and man, as we apply
the Common Law in our own country. But the constitution of the feudal
society was essentially anti-Roman and at war with the principles of
the Civil or Roman Law. Hence commenced a struggle between the feudal
law and the civil--feudalism seeking to retain its social
organization based on distinctions of class, privileges, and
corporations; and the civil law, based on the principle of the
equality of all men by the natural law, seeking to eliminate the
feudal elements from society, and to restore the Roman constitution,
which makes power a trust derived from the community, instead of a
personal right or privilege held independently of the community.

In this struggle the church has always sympathized with the Romanizing
tendencies. It was under the patronage of the Pope that Charlemagne
sought to revive Imperial Rome, and to re-establish in substance the
Roman constitution of society; but his generous efforts ended only in
the systematization and confirmation of feudalism. The Franconian and
especially the Swabian in emperors attempted to renew the work of
Charlemagne, but were opposed and defeated by the church, not because
she had any sympathy with feudalism, but because these emperors
undertook to unite with the civil and military powers held by the
Roman emperors the pontifical power, which before the conversion of
the empire they also held. This she could not tolerate, for by the
Christian law the Imperial power and the pontifical are separated, and
the temporal authority, as such, has no competency in spirituals. The
Popes, in their long and severe struggles with the German emperors, or
emperors of the holy Roman empire, as they styled themselves, did not
struggle to preserve feudalism, but the independence of the church,
threatened by the Imperial assumption of the pontifical authority held
by the emperors of pagan Rome. This is the real meaning of those
struggles which have been so strangely misapprehended, and so grossly
misrepresented by the majority of historians, as Voigt and Leo, both
Protestants, have conclusively shown. St. Gregory VII., who is the
best representative of the church in that long war, did not struggle
to establish a theocracy as so many foolishly repeat, nor to obtain
for the church or clergy a single particle of civil power, but to
maintain the spiritual independence of the church, or her independent
and supreme authority over all her children in things spiritual,
against the Emperor, who claimed, indirectly at least, supreme
authority in spirituals as well as in temporal's. For the same reason
Gregory IX. And Innocent IV. Opposed Frederic II., the last and
greatest of the Hohenstaufen, the Ward in his childhood of Innocent
III. {631} Frederic undertook to revise Roman imperialism against
mediaeval feudalism, but unhappily he remembered that the pagan
Emperor was Pontifex Maximus, as well as Imperator. Had he simply
labored to substitute the Roman constitution of society for the feudal
without seeking to subject the church to the empire, he might have
been opposed by all those Catholics, whether lay or cleric, whose
interests were identified with feudalism, but not by the church
herself; at least nothing indicates that she would have opposed him,
for her sympathies were not and have never been with the feudal
constitution of society.

In the subsequent struggles between the two systems, the church, as
far as I have discovered, has uniformly sympathized with kings and
kaisers only so far as they simply asserted the republican principles
of the Roman constitution against feudalism, and has uniformly opposed
them, whenever they claimed or attempted to exercise pontifical
authority, or to make the temporal supreme over the spiritual, that is
to say, to subject conscience to the state. But in this she has been
on the side of liberty in its largest and truest sense. Liberty, as
commonly understood, or as it enters into the life, the thought, and
conscience of modern Christian nations, is certainly of Greek and
Roman, not barbarian origin, enlarged and purified by Christianity.
The pagan republic united in the sovereign people both the pontifical
and imperial powers as they were in the pagan emperors, and hence
subjected the individual, both exteriorly and interiorly, to the
state, and left him no rights which he could assert before the
republic. The Christian republic adds to the liberty of the state, the
liberty of the individual, and so far restricts the power of the state
over individuals. This personal or individual freedom, unknown in the
Graeco-Roman republic, Guizot and many others tell us was introduced
by the German invaders of the Roman empire. They assign it a barbarian
origin; but I am unable to agree with them, because I cannot find that
the German barbarians ever had it. The barbarian, as the feudal,
individual freedom was the freedom of the chief or noble, not the
freedom of all men, or of all individuals irrespective of class or
caste. This universal individual freedom, asserted and in a measure
secured by the Christian republic, could not be a development of a
barbarian idea, or come by way of logical deduction from the barbarian
individual freedom, for it rests on a different basis, and is
different in kind. The only ancient people with whom I can find any
distinct traces of it are the Hebrew people. It is plainly asserted in
the laws of Moses for the Jewish people. Christianity asserts it for
all, both Jews and Gentiles, in that noble maxim. We must obey God
rather than men. Every martyr to the Christian faith asserted it, in
choosing rather to be put to death in the most frightful and
excruciating forms than to yield up the freedom of conscience at the
command of the civil authority, and the church shows that she approves
it by preserving the relics of martyrs, and proposing them to the
perpetual veneration of the faithful. The martyr witnesses alike to
faith and the freedom of conscience.

To this individual freedom, as the right of manhood, the real enemy is
the feudal society, which is founded on privilege; and where then
should the church be found but on the side of those who asserted
Graeco-Roman civilization as enlarged, purified, and invigorated by
Christianity against the barbarian elements retained by the feudal
society? It was her place as the friend of liberty and civilization.
There can be no question that since the beginning of the fifteenth
century the interests of humanity, liberty, religion, have been with
the kings and people, as against the feudal nobility. It is owing to
this fact, not to any partiality for monarchy, even in its
representative sense, that the church has supported the monarchs in
their struggle against feudal privileges and corporations.

{632}

But it is said that she has favored Roman imperialism not only against
feudalism, but also against democracy. This is partially true, but she
has done so for the very reason that in the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries she opposed the German emperors, because everywhere, except
in the United States, it seeks to unite in the republic or state,
after the manner of the pagan republic, both the imperial and the
pontifical powers. In the United States this has not been done; our
republic recognizes its own incompetency in spirituals, protects all
religions not _contra bonos mores_, and establishes none; and here the
church has never opposed republicanism or democracy. In Europe she has
done so, not always, but generally since the French revolution assumed
to itself pontifical authority. In the beginning of the French
revolution, while it was confined to the correction of abuses, the
redress of grievances, and the extension and confirmation of civil
liberty, the Pope, Pius VI., the cardinals, prelates, and people of
Rome, encouraged it; and the Pope censured it only when it transcended
the civil order, made a new distribution of dioceses, enacted a civil
constitution for the clergy, and sought to separate the Gallican
Church from the Catholic Church, precisely as the Popes had previously
censured Henry IV., Frederic Barbarossa, Frederic II., Louis of
Bavaria, and others. She opposes to-day European democrats, not
because they are democrats, but because they claim for the people the
pontifical power, and seek to put them in the place of the church,
nay, in the place of God The more advanced among them utter the words,
people-pontiff and people-God, as well as people-king, and your German
democrats assert almost to a man humanity as the supreme God. She
opposes them not because they make deadly war on monarchy and
aristocracy, and assert the sovereignty, under God, of the people, but
because the war against catholic truth, the great eternal, universal,
and immutable principles of the divine government, which lie at the
basis of all  government and indeed of society itself, and of which
she is the divinely appointed guardian in human affairs. If she
supports the European governments against them, it is not because
those governments are monarchical or aristocratic in their
constitution, but because they represent, however imperfectly, the
interests of humanity, social order, civilization, without which there
is and can be no real progress. She cannot oppose them because they
seek to establish democratic government unless they seek to do so by
unlawful or unjust means, because she prescribes for the faithful no
particular form of civil government, and cannot do it, because no
particular form is or can be Catholic. She offers no opposition to
American democracy.

The church opposes, by her principles, however, what is called
Absolutism, or what is commonly understood by Oriental despotism, that
is, monarchy as understood by Bishop England, under which the monarch
is held to be the absolute owner of the soil and the people of the
nation, and may dispose of either at his pleasure. This is evident
from the fact that when she speaks officially of the state generally,
without referring to any particular state, she calls it _republica_,
the republic; especially is this the case when she speaks of the civil
society in distinction from the ecclesiastical society. Our present
Holy Father, in his much miss apprehended and grossly misrepresented
Encyclical of December 8, 1864, calls the civil community _republica_,
or commonwealth. St. Augustine denies that God has given to man the
lordship of man. He gave man the lordship or dominion over irrational
creations, but not of the rational made in his own image, "Rationalem
factum ad maginem suam noluit nisi irrationabilibus, dominari: non
hominem homini, sed hominem {633} pecori. Inde primi justi pastores
pecorum magis quam reges hominum constituti sunt."  [Footnote 176]
Hence he denies that the master has the lordship of his servants or
slaves, and admits slavery only as a punishment, as does the civil law
itself. For the same reason we may conclude against despotism. If the
master has not the absolute lordship of his servants, far less can a
king have the absolute lordship of a whole nation. St. Gregory the
great cites St. Augustine with approbation, so also, if my memory
serves me, does St. Gregory VII., the famous Hildebrand, who tells the
princes of his time that they hold their power from violence, wrong,
Satan.

  [Footnote 176: De Civit. Dei. Opera, tom. vii. 900.]

Catholic writers of the highest authority St. Augustine, St. Thomas,
Bellarmin, and Suarez, whom to cite is to cite nearly the whole body
of Catholic theologians, follow in the main the political philosophy
of Greece and Rome as set forth by Plato, Aristotle, and Cicero; and
there is no doubt that, while vesting sovereignty in the community, or
the people politically associated, they generally incline to monarchy,
tempered by a mixture of aristocracy and democracy, as does Aristotle
himself. But the monarchy they favor is always the representative
monarchy, the Roman, not the feudal or the oriental. The prince or
king, according to them, holds his power from the people or community,
_jure humano_, not _jure divino_, and holds it as a trust, not as a
personal and indefeasible right. It is amissible; the king may forfeit
it, and be deprived of it. St. Augustine asserts, and Suarez after
him, the inherent right of the people or political society to change
their magistrates and even their form of government; and the Popes, on
more occasions than one in the middle ages, not only excommunicated
princes, but declared them by a sovereign judgment deprived of their
crowns, which proves, if nothing else, that kings and kaisers are held
by the church to be responsible to the nation for the manner in which
they use their trusts, for the Popes never declared a forfeiture
except on the ground that it was incurred by a violation of the civil
constitution.

There were numerous republics in Europe before the reformation, as
Venice, Genoa, Florence, the Swiss Cantons, and many others, not to
speak of the Lombard municipalities, the Hanse towns, and the Flemish
or Belgian communes, all of which sprang up during Catholic times, and
were founded and sustained by a Catholic population. Nearly all of
them have now disappeared, and some of them almost within our own
memory; but I am not aware that there is a single republic in Europe
founded and sustained by Protestants, unless the United Dutch
Provinces, now a monarchical state, be a partial exception. The fact
that Catholics as a body are wedded to monarchy is therefore not
susceptible of very satisfactory proof, not even if we take monarchy
only as representing the majesty of the people, in which sense it is
republican in principle.

Protestantism is in itself negative, and neither favors nor disfavors
any form of government; but the reformation resulted, wherever it
prevailed in Europe, in uniting what the church from the first had
struggled to keep separate, the pontifical and the imperial or royal
powers, and also in maintaining the feudal monarchy instead of the
Roman or representative monarchy. In every nation that accepted the
reformation the feudal monarchy was retained, and still subsists. The
crown in them all is an estate, as in England, and in some of them is,
in fact, the only estate recognized by the constitution. The elector
of Saxony, the landgrave of Hesse, the margrave of Brandenburg, the
kings of Sweden, of Denmark, and of England and Scotland, became each
in his own dominions supreme pontiff, and united in his own person the
supreme civil and ecclesiastical powers. The same in principle {634}
became the fact in the Protestant Netherlands and the Protestant
cantons of Switzerland; and though some Protestant European states
tolerate dissent from the state religion, there is not one that
recognizes the freedom of religion, or that does not subject religion
to the civil power. The political sense of the reformation was the
union of the imperial and pontifical powers in the political
sovereign, and the maintenance of the feudal monarchy and nobility, or
the constitution of society on feudal principles. Nothing, then, is or
can be further from the fact than that Protestants generally incline
to republicanism, except the pretense that Protestantism emancipates
the mind and establishes religious liberty.

No doubt, the feudal monarchy and nobility struggled in all Europe to
maintain themselves against the Greco-Roman system represented by the
Civil Law and favored by the theologians of the church and her supreme
pontiffs. So far as the struggle was against the feudal nobility, or,
as I may term it, the system of privilege, the church, the kings, and
the people have in their general action been on the same side; and
hence in France, where the struggle was the best defined, the great
nobles were the first to embrace the reformation; they came very near
detaching the kingdom itself from the church, during the wars of the
Ligue, and were prevented only by the conversion, interested or
sincere, of Henri Quatre. Henry saw clearly enough that monarchy could
not struggled successfully in France against the feudal nobility
without the support of the church and the people. Richelieu and
Mazarin saw the same, and destroyed what remained of the feudal
nobility as a political power. They, no doubt, did it in the interest
and for the time to the advantage of monarchy. Louis XIV. concentrated
in himself all the powers of the state, and could say "_L'etat, c'est
moi_--I am the state," and tried hard to grasp the pontifical power,
and to be able to say, "_L'eglise, c'est moi_--I am the church;" but
failed. Always did and do kings and emperors, whether Catholic or
non-Catholic, seek to enlarge their power and to gain to themselves
the supreme control not only of civil but also of ecclesiastical
affairs, and courtiers, whether lay or cleric, are always but too
ready to sustain absolute monarchy. Warring against the system of
privilege, for national unity against the disintegrating tendencies of
feudalism, monarchy threatens in the seventeen and eighteenth
centuries to become absolute in all Europe, but it met with permanent
success in no state that did not adopt the reformation, and ceased to
be Catholic.

I hold that Roman constitution, as modified and amended by
Christianity, is far better for society and more in accordance with
religion and liberty, then the feudal constitution, which is
essentially barbaric. If we look at Europe as it really was during the
long struggle hardly yet ended, we shall see that it was impossible to
break up the feudal constitution of society without for the moment
giving to the kings and undue power, which in its turn would need to
be resisted. But in all countries that remained Catholic, monarchy was
always treated as representative by the theologians, and the
republican doctrines that subsequent to the reformation found
advocates in Protestant states were borrowed either from the agents or
from Catholic writers--for the most part, probably, from the mediaeval
monks, of whom modern liberals know so little and against whom they
say so much. It was only in those countries where the reformation was
followed and religion subjected to the state that the feudal monarchy
developed into the oriental. England under Henry VIII., Edward VI.,
Elizabeth Tudor, and James and Charles Stuart, had lost nearly all its
old liberties, and nearly all power was centred in the crown. The
resistance offered to Charles I. was {635} not to gain new but to
recover old liberties, with some new and stronger guaranties. The
Protestant princes of northern Germany governed as absolutely as any
oriental despot. The movement toward republicanism started in the
south, not in the north, in Catholic not in Protestant states. The
fact is patent and undeniable, explain it as you will.

I admit that Catholic princes, as well as Protestant, sought to grasp
the pontifical power, and to subject the church in their respective
dominions to their own authority, but they never fully succeeded. The
civil power claimed in France more than belonged to it; but while it
impeded the free movements of the Gallican Church, it never succeeded
in absolutely enslaving it. Louis XIV., or even Napoleon the First,
never succeeded in making himself the head of the Gallican Church; and
the Constitutional church created by the Revolution, and which, like
the Church of England, was absolutely dependent on the civil power,
has long since disappeared and left no trace behind. In Spain,
Portugal, Naples, Tuscany, Austria, attempts to subject religion to
the state have not been wanting, but, though doing great harm to both
the ecclesiastical and the civil society, they have never been
completely successful. It is only in Protestant states that they have
fully succeeded, or rather, I should say, in non-Catholic states, for
the church is as much a slave in Russia as in Great Britain.

Bossuet, courtier and high-toned monarchist as he was, and as much as
he consented to yield to the king, never admitted the competency of
the king in scriptuals strictly so called; and if he yielded to the
king on the question of the regalia, it was only on the ground of an
original concession from the head of the church to the kings of
France, or the immemorial custom of the kingdom, not as an inherent
right of the civil power. He went too far in the Four Articles of 1682
to meet the approbation of Innocent XI., but he did not fall into
heresy or schism. And it may be alleged in his defence, that if he had
not gone thus far the court would most likely have gone further, and
have actually separated the Gallican Church from the Holy See.

Bossuet was unquestionably a monarchist and something of a courtier,
though he appears to have had always the best interests of religion at
heart; and we can hardly say that he did not take the best means
possible in his time of promoting them. As one of the preceptors of
the Dauphin, father of the Duke of Burgundy, of whom Fenelon was the
principal preceptor, he taught the political system acceptable to the
king; but he impressed on his pupil as much as possible under that
system a sense of his responsibility, his duty to regard his power as
a high trust from God to be exercised without fear or favor for the
good of the people committed to his charge. Fenelon went further, and
hinted that the nation had not abdicated its original rights, and
still retained the right to be consulted in the management of its
affairs; and he was dismissed from his preceptorship, forbidden to
appear at court, and exiled to his diocese, while every possible
effort, in which it is to be regretted that Bossuet took a prominent
part, to degrade him as a man and a theologian, and to procure his
condemnation as a heretic, was made by the French court. But heretic
he was not; he simply erred in the use of language which, though it
had been used by canonized saints, was susceptible of an heretical
sense. The Congregation condemned the language, not the man, nor his
real doctrine. He retracted the language, not the doctrine, and
edified the world by his submission.

There is hardly any doctrine further removed from every form of
republicanism than that of the divine right of kings, defended by
James I. of England in his Remonstrance for the Divine Right of Kings
and the Independency of their Crowns, written in reply to a speech of
the {636} celebrated Cardinal Duperron in the States-General of France
in 1614--the last time the States-General were convoked till convoked
by the unhappy Louis XVI. at Versailles, in May, 1789. In that work, a
copy of the original edition of which, as well as of "his majestie's
speech in the Star-chamber," now lies before me, their kingship
immediately from God, and are accountable to him alone for the use
they made of their power. He denies their accountability alike to the
Pope and the people. This was and really is the doctrine, if not of
all Protestants, at least of the Anglican Church and of all Protestant
courts; but it is not and never was a Catholic doctrine. The utmost
length in the same direction that any Catholic writer of note, except
Bossuet, ever went, so far as I can find, is that the king, supposing
him to be elected by the people, does, when so elected, reign _de jure
divino_ or by divine right; but Suarez   [Footnote 177] refutes them,
and maintains that the royal power emanates from the community, and is
exercised, _formaliter_, by human right, _de jure humano_, and thus
asserts the real republican principle. Balmes, in his great work on
the Influence of Catholicity and Protestantism on European
Civilization compared, cites an instance of a Spanish monk who in the
time of Philip II. ventured one day to preach the irresponsibility of
the king, but was compelled by the Inquisition to retract his doctrine
publicly, in the very pulpit from which he had preached it.

  [Footnote 177: De Legibus, lib. iii., cap. 3 and 4, i.]

He who has studied somewhat profoundly the internal political history
of the so-called Latin nations of Europe, will find that they have
had, from very early times, a strong tendency to republicanism, and
even to democracy, and that the tendency has been checked never by the
church, but by the kings and feudal nobility. The doctrines of 1789
were no novelty in France even in the thirteenth century, and they
were preached very distinctly and very boldly in the Ligue when the
nation was threatened with a non-Catholic or Huguenot king, even by
Jesuits. The great Dominican and Franciscan orders have never shown
any strong attachment to monarchy in any form, and have rarely been
the courtiers or flatterers of power. That the sad effects of the old
French revolution produced a reaction in many Catholic minds, as well
as in many Protestant minds, in favor of monarchy, is very true; and
perhaps the most influential portion of European Catholics, living as
they do in the midst of a revolution that makes war on the church, on
civil order, on society, on civilization itself, cling to the royal
authority as the lesser evil and as their only security, under God,
for the future of religion.  And it is not strange that they should.
But this, whether wise or otherwise, is only accidental, and no people
will be more loyal republicans than Catholics, when the republic gives
them security for life and property, and more than all, for the free
and full exercise of their religion as Catholics, as is the case in
the United States.

The republic of the United States, we are told, was founded by
Protestants, and it is only the United States that can give the
slightest coloring to the pretense that Protestants are inclined to
republicanism. But, closely examined, the fact gives less coloring
than is commonly supposed. The republic of the United States can
hardly be said to be founded either by Catholics or Protestants: it
was founded by Providence, not by men. The Puritans, the most disposed
to republicanism of any of the original colonists, were dissenters
from the Church of England, and the principles on which they dissented
were in the main those which they had borrowed or inherited from
Catholic tradition. They objected to the Church of England that she
allowed the king to be both king and pontiff, and subjected religion
to the civil power. In this they only followed the example of the
Popes. They {637} with the Popes denied the competency of the civil
power in spirituals. This was the principle of their dissent, as it
has recently been the principle of the separation of the Free Kirk in
Scotland from the national church. As the king was the head of the
Church of England, making it a royal church, they were naturally led
to defend their dissent on republican principles. M. Guizot seems to
regard the English revolution, which made Cromwell Lord Protector of
the realm, as primarily political; but with all due respect to so
great an authority, I venture to say that it was primarily religious,
that its first movement was a protest against the authority of the
king or parliament to ordain anything in religion not prescribed by
the word of God. I state the principle universally, without taking
notice of the matters accidentally associated with it, and so stated
it is a Catholic principle, always asserted and insisted on by the
Popes. It was primarily to carry out this principle, and to regain the
civil liberties lost by the nation through the reformation, but not
forgotten, that they resisted the king, and made a republican
revolution, which very few foresaw or desired. The Puritans who
settled in the wilds of America brought with them the ideas and
principles they had adopted before leaving England, and if they had
republican tendencies, they were hardly republicans.

Mr. Bancroft, in Volume IX. of his History of the United States, just
published, shows very clearly that at the beginning of their disputes
with the mother country the colonists were not generally republican in
the ordinary sense of the word, but attached to monarchy after the
English fashion, and also that the struggle in the minds of the
colonists was long and severe before they reluctantly abandoned
monarchy and accepted republicanism. The American revolution did not
originate in any desire to suppress monarchy as it existed in Great
Britain and establish republicanism, but to resist the encroachments
of the mother country on their rights as British colonists, or rather,
as British subjects. The rights of man they asserted had been derived
from the civil law, for the most part through medium of the common
law, and the writings, if not of Catholic theologians, at least of
Catholic lawyers. They held as republicans not from Protestantism, but
chiefly from Greece and Rome. Moreover, a monarchical government was
impracticable, and there really was no alternative for the American
people but republican government or colonial dependence. In the main
our institutions were the growth of the country, and were very little
influenced by the political theories of the colonists or the political
wisdom and sagacity of American statesmen. Hence they are more
strictly the work of Providence than of human foresight or human
intelligence and will. It is therefore that their permanence and
growth are to be counted on. They have their root in the soil, and are
adapted to both the soil and the climate. They are of American origin
and growth.

Religious liberty is not, as I have shown, of Protestant origin. Most
of the colonists held the Catholic principle of the incompetency of
the civil power in spirituals, but the greater part of them held that
the civil power is bound to recognize and to provide for the support
by appropriate legislation of the true religion, and that only. Yet as
they were not agreed among themselves as to which is the true
religion, or what is the true sense of the revealed word, and having
no authoritative interpreter recognized as such by all, and no one
sect being strong enough to establish itself and to suppress the
others, there was no course practicable but to protect all religions
not _contra banos mores_, and leave each individual free before the
law to choose his own religion and to worship God according to the
dictates of his own conscience. This was of absolute necessity in our
case if we were to form a political community and carry on civil
government at all.

{638}

I do not claim that Catholics founded civil and religious liberty in
the United States, nor do I deny that so far as men had a hand in
founding them, they were founded by Protestants, but I do contend that
our Protestant ancestors acted in regard to them on Catholic rather
than on Protestant principles. We have so often heard civil and
religious liberty spoken of as the result of the reformation that many
people really believe it, and many good honest American citizens are
really afraid that the rapid increase of Catholicity in the country
threatens ruin to our free institutions. But the only liberty
Protestantism, as such, has ever yet favored, is the liberty of the
civil power to control the ecclesiastical. There is no danger to any
other liberty from the spread of Catholicity. There is a great
difference between accepting and sustaining a democratic government
where it already legally exists, and laboring to introduce it in
opposition to the established and to the habits, customs, and usages
of the people where it does not exist. And even if Catholics in other
countries had a preference for the monarchical form, they would not
dream of introducing it here, and would be led by their own
conservative principles, if here, to oppose it, since nothing in their
religion requires them, as a Catholic duty, to support one particular
form of government rather than another.

Protestantism affords in its principles no basis for either civil or
religious liberty. Its great doctrine, that which it opposes as a
religion to the church, is the absolute moral and spiritual inability
of man, or the total moral and spiritual depravity of human nature, by
the fall. This is the central principle of the reformation, from which
all its distinctive doctrines radiate. This doctrine denies all
natural liberty and all natural virtue, and hence the reformation
maintains justification without works, by faith alone, in which man is
passive, not active, and that all the works of unbelievers or the
unregenerate are sins. Man is impotent for good, and does not and
cannot even by grace concur with grace. All his thoughts and deeds our
only evil, and that continually, and even the regenerate continue to
sin after regeneration as before, only God does not impute there seems
to them, but for his dear Son's seek turns away his eyes from them,
and imputes to them the righteousness of Christ, and with it covers
their iniquities. There is no ground on which to assert the natural
rights of man, for the fall has deprived man of all his natural
rights; and for republican equality the Reformation phones at best the
aristocracy of grace, of the elect, as was taught by Wickliffe, and
attempted to be realized by Calvin in Geneva, and by the Puritans in
New England, who confined the elective franchise and eligibility to
the saints, which is repugnant to both civil and religious liberty for
all men.

It is time that our historians and popular writers should reflect a
little on what they are saying, when they assert that the reformation
emancipated the mind and prepared the way for civil and religious
freedom. This has become a sort of cant, and Catholics here it
repeated so often that some of them almost think that it cannot be
without some foundation, and therefore that there must be something
uncatholic in civil and religious liberty. It is all a mistake, and
illusion, or a delusion. The principles of the reformation, as far as
principles it had, were and are in direct conflict with them, and
whatever progress either has made has been not buy it, but in spite of
it, by means and influences it began its career by repudiating. The
man reared in the bosom of the reformation has no conception of real
religious, civil, or mental liberty till he is converted to the
Catholic faith, and enters as a freeman into the Catholic Church.

I have dwelt at length on this subject for the sake of historical
truth, and also to quiet the fears of my non-Catholic countrymen that
the spread {639} of the church in our country will endanger our
republican or democratic system of government. That system of
government is quite as acceptable to Catholics as it is to
Protestants, and accords far better with Catholic principles then with
the principles of the reformation. The church does not make our system
of government obligatory on all nations; she directly enjoins it
nowhere, because no one system is adapted alike to all nations; and
each nation, under God, is free to adapt its political institutions to
its own wants, taste, and genius; but she is satisfied with it here,
and requires her children to be loyal to it. It is here the law, and
as such I supported it. I might not support a similar system for Great
Britain, France, or Russia; because, though it fits us, it might not
fit equally well the British, the French, or the Russians, or as well
as the systems they already have fit them. My coat may not fit my
neighbor, and my neighbor's coat may not fit me. I am neither as a
Catholic nor as a statesman a political propagandist. But I love my
own country with an affection I was unconscious of as a Protestant,
and Americans bred up Catholics will always be found to be among our
most ardent patriots, and our most stanch defenders of both civil and
religious freedom.

The mistake is that people are too ready to make a religion of their
politics, and to seek to make the system of government they happen to
be enamored  of for themselves a universal system, and to look upon
all nations that do not accept it, or not blessed with it, as deprived
of the advantages of civil society. They make their system the
standard by which all institutions, all men and nations, are to be
tried. They become political bigots, and will tolerate no political
theories but their own. Hence, the American people are apt to suppose
there is no political freedom where our system of government does not
prevail; and to conclude because the church recognizes the legitimacy
in other forms of governments in other countries, and does not preach
a crusade against them, that she is the enemy of free institutions and
social progress. All this is wrong. Religion is one and catholic, and
obligatory upon all alike; political systems, save in the great
ethical principles which underlie them, are particular, national, and
are obligatory only on the nation that adopts them. There are catholic
principles of government, but no catholic or universal form of
government. Our government is best for us, but that does not prove
that in political matters we are wiser or better than other civilized
nations, or that we have the right to set ourselves up as the model
nation of the world. Other nations may not be wholly forsaken by
Providence. Non-Catholic Americans cry out against the church that she
is anti-republican; but if we were monarchists we should cry out as
did the monarchical party in the sixteenth century, that she is
anti-monarchical and hostile to the independence of kings. Let us
learn that she may in one age or country support one form of civil
constitution, and without inconsistency support a different system in
another.



{640}


From All the Year Round.


"DEO OPT. MAX"

  Art thou drowsy, dull, indifferent,
    Folder of the hands,
  Dreaming o'er the silent falling
    Of life's measured sands?

  Living without aim or motion,
    Save thyself to please,
  Careless as the beasts that perish,
    Sitting at thine ease?

  Not for thee the mighty message
    Rings in startling tone;
  Vainly would its peeling accents
  Strike through hearts of stone.

  Sounding o'er the clash and clatter
    Of this earth's vain din,
  Unto you, that live in earnest,
    And that work to win,

  Thus it speaks: "Aspirants, toilers
    For some lofty gain,
  See ye spend not strength and spirits,
    Hope and faith, in vain!

  "All that soars past self is noble--
    Every upward aim--
  Make it nobler yet--the noblest!
    And immortal fame!

  "Let not good or great content ye--
    Higher and still higher,
  Only for the best, the greatest,
    Labor and aspire!

  "Spurning all that's partial, doubtful,
    All your vigor bend
  (Worthiest aim and worthiest effort)
    To a perfect end!

  "Thus have all true saints before ye,
    All true heroes striven,
  Reaching for the best, the highest,
    Beyond earth to heaven."



{641}

Translated from the French.



ROBERT; OR, THE INFLUENCE OF A GOOD MOTHER.



CHAPTER FIRST.


  "Although young on the earth,
  I am already alone.
   . . . . .
  And when I ask myself
    Where are those I love?
  I look at the green turf."
                 LAMARTINE.


THE ORPHAN.

The traveler who passes through the village of the baths of Mount
Dore, situated at the base of the mountain of Angle, will find that
between the mountains the little streams of Dore and Dogne unites, and
take the name of the river Dordogne. In looking at the course of this
new-born River, he will see to the left of the mountain of Ecorchade,
thus named for its ruggedness and its deep ravines. This mountain
crumbles away each day under the powerful hand of time, and its
volcanic wrecks move the valley with strange sounds, which the echo
takes up and wafts to the most distant spots. On the other side of the
valley, to the right of the mountain, and in front of Ecorchade, is
another mountain, the round top of which is covered with verdure and
with wood. Its base is formed of basaltic columns of black, white, and
gray rocks of different shapes and sizes, which stand there like a
troop of phantoms. Near the base, and in one of the fissures of this
mass of rocks, piled up by some giant hand, there was, about
twenty-five years ago, a little house, constructed, one might imagine,
by the spirit of the mountain, to serve as a refuge for travellers
when the furious children of the tempest were unchained. Hidden by the
abrupt flanks of the mountain, and masked in the spring and summer by
the dense foliage of trees centuries old, this retreat suddenly became
visible to mortal eye. But the chief interest attached to it is, that
for twelve years it was inhabited by a high-bred lady, who chose this
secluded spot, and placed herself, one might say, on the first step of
this gigantic ladder, which seemed by degrees to draw her nearer to
heaven, and away from the vain pursuits of earth. She came unattended,
carrying in her arms an infant several months old. This child, her
son, was the object of her most tender care, and was the only thing
that was to endear her to this savage solitude. From whence came this
person, who was she, and what were her resources for living? No one
knew. Her real name even was to remain a mystery for all, even for
those eager and pitiless people who are always ready to unravel the
causes of secret sorrow, and who rejoice when they can see tears and
suffering. Such people are like a species of wasp that only approach
to sting you most cruelly. The people of the valley had on many
occasions tried to stop this young woman and capture her confidence by
testimonials of friendship and feigned sensibility, but they had seen
their insidious advances repulsed with such coldness that, deceived
and disappointed, they were obliged to put an end to their efforts.
Finally, when all curiosity had subsided and given place to the most
complete indifference, they learned in some way that she called
herself Madame Dormeuil, and her little boy Robert. There was one
person, however, who had received the intimate confidence of Madame
Dormeuil, and that was the cure of the village, and from time to time
he was seen directing his steps toward the solitary abode, where more
than one indiscreet eye had wished to penetrate. At the time this
story opens it is {642} night, one of those glorious nights of the
month of May, nights full of sweet mysteries and soft perfumes, nights
the nightingale resounds in harmonious cadences. It is the hour of
silence and repose for humanity; but still a dim light shone through
one of the windows of this isolated house. As the hours of the night
advanced, when all nature slept, even the smallest insect under the
humid leaves of the rose, hard necessity constrained even the inmates
of this house to sleep, but alas! It proved a funeral awakening. The
tender mother, who, during the infancy of her child, had tasted in
this modest asylum moments of happiness, pure and chaste, such as our
only given to maternal love, closed her eyes, and breathed out her
last sigh, with no one here but her little son. In vain he calls his
dear mother, her voice can reply to him no more. Poor child! what will
become of him? for he has no one in the wide world to love and protect
him; and in the bitterness of his grief he sobs and cries, "Dead!
dead! I have no mother now!" and takes her hand, but it is cold and
stiff, and no longer sensible to the soft pressure of his. The
unaccustomed silence of those lips, that never parted but to speak
tenderly to him, is more than he can bear, but suddenly his face
recovers its habitual serenity, and a smile lights up his pallid
cheeks. What means this sudden change, this almost instantaneous
forgetfulness of sorrow, which drives in an instant the tears of love?
But do not blame him; it is not forgetfulness, but remembrance--the
remembrance of his mother's last words--her last adieu, her last
sublime expression of a love which cannot be extinguished, even by the
cold shadow of death, for it re-lives in heaven. "My child," said his
mother to him on that day, "I have loved you much, but I must leave
you. I am going to live with the angels, but I will watch over you. Be
wise, honest, laborious; love God with all your heart, and others as
yourself, and he will bless you. Do not grieve for my loss, for I will
still be useful to you in heaven. I will pray there for you. Take
courage, and always remember, when you are in trouble, to raise your
thoughts to the eternal throne, and consolation will not be denied
you." These were the words which Robert remember, and which stopped so
suddenly the violence of his grief. This was why he almost thought his
mother was not dead; this was why he felt no fear, though alone; with
these sweet thoughts forever present, he fancied her eyes would reopen
and smile upon him. He knelt in prayed with fervor, seeming to solicit
some special manifestation, and his attitude told that he mentally
invoked of his mother and the Protector of children what he knew to be
good for them; and his prayer, no doubt, was favorably received, for
it his imagination he saw the home of the saints. "My mother!" cried
the child, transported with joy, "is it thee? Oh! speak, I pray thee,
speak to thy Robert!" But the celestial vision faded, and he saw
nothing but the thousands of little globes of light, the sparkling
fire of which dazzled his eyes. Thus maternal influence, even from the
tomb, comes as a gentle authority to this pious orphan. We will see
him in each important event, and in each critical phase of his life
invoking this mysterious and beneficent power that presides over him
from heaven, in the presence of his mother. It is already under the
generous impulse of this belief that he is consoled and strengthens,
and returns to the funeral chamber, and calls again upon prayer and
reflection.

Robert had never played with children. Always with his mother, whom he
passionately loved, and who conversed with him as she would have done
with an older person, he had acquired a seriousness of conversation
and a precocity of judgment which made him, though still a child in
years, almost a man in his intelligence and good sense. Child of
solitude, wild flower of the mountain, he was {643} entirely ignorant
of the habits of cities and of society, but he possessed an instinct
which took the place of large experience in human nature. He was what
God had made him, good and generous, loving the beautiful with the
fervent adoration which characterizes great souls, and feeling a deep
repugnance for even the appearance of evil. These inestimable gifts
God in his wisdom has seen fit to endow to certain souls.

Robert was not more than twelve years of age, but he could read and
write well. Possessed of a good memory, he had retained the many
recitations made him by his mother in geography and sacred and profane
history. His course of reading had not been extensive, for his mother
had but few books; but she had been to him the living book from which
he had gained all he knew, and which developed the qualities of the
heart and Christian virtues which, later in life, shone so brilliantly
in him. Robert was often absorbed in thinking over his past life, so
rich in delicious memories. He remembered that his mother had spoken
to him of Paris with an emotion which betrayed itself in her trembling
voice. She was born there, she had told him, and had passed a part of
her youth there. He remembered perfectly that, each time his mother
referred to the subject, she exercised upon him a charm which entirely
captivated his attention. If by her glowing descriptions of Madame
Dormeuil had any intention of exciting in her son the wish to go to
that city, she completely succeeded, for, notwithstanding his tender
years, the words of his mother had filled him with an ardent desire to
see the place predestined to be the most beautiful and most wonderful
city ever built by the hands of man. This desire taking hold of him,
he naturally thinks of the means of satisfying it, if the unfortunate
circumstances in which he finds himself will forget. Moved by the
strong wish, which was not weekend when obstacles presented
themselves, Robert tried to get things ready to start. Opening a
closet where he had often seen his mother put things she intended for
him, the first object that met his eyes was a package, tied, and
bearing this inscription, "For my son when he is twenty-one years of
age." Under this was another paper, folded double, but not tied. He
opened this, looking at the words which were written at the top: "My
last requests." "When I shall be no more, my son," said Madame
Dormeuil (and unfortunately the hour of death approaches very near)
"quit this mountain where thou hast been a happy child, and go to
Paris, where thou wast born. God and my love will conduct thee there,
but constantly place thyself under his protection. Work; make thyself
beloved, by thy sweetness and perseverance and good conduct. A voice
within said to me one day, that happiness crowned all virtuous
efforts, and this prediction of my heart will be realized, and thy
mother will rejoice in heaven when she sees it descend on thee. Thou
wilt find in a purse some crown pieces; it is all that I possess.
Start soon, walk the short roads, have courage. Avoid bad children,
seek the old and the wise. Pray to God fervently, and he will never
abandon the good who walk in his presence and keep in their hearts the
counsels of a mother. Adieu, my child, my dear and much loved Robert I
will meet you in a better world than that in which I leave you, my
poor little one, and then we will never part again."

Robert covered with kisses and with tears the words traced by the
failing hand of his mother; then, when he was a little calmed, it made
him happy to know that she had conceived a plan which was precisely
the same he had thought of, and that she was solicitous for him to go.
The rest of the night passed slowly enough to the young orphan. At
daybreak he came down from the mountain and knocked at the door of the
rectory. The virtuous and worthy cure, who preached to the inhabitants
of the village of Bains, received him with the utmost kindness, for he
had known him long and well, and had already initiated him into the
{644} mysteries of our divine religion, and from his pure and touching
morals he had been led to give him his first communion. When he saw
the poor child in such distress he could scarcely utter a word, so
much did he feel for his bleeding heart, either could he ask him the
questions he knew he ought relative to his leaving the isolated place
in which he had lived, nor could Robert have answered them so full was
he of emotion; but he said to him in a paternal tone and full of
interest: "Let us see, my child, what is to be done with your effects.
Don't you think that you should leave the place, now that you are
alone? What do you intend to do? Have you formed any project? If you
have confidence in me, tell me your ideas, speak to me openly, and all
that I can possibly do for you I will with pleasure I have no
occupation but to do good to others, to console them in their sorrows,
and take them by the hand with a need assistance." "Thank you, good
cure," replied Robert, with sweetness and respect. "I desire to obey
the wishes of my mother, who tells me to go to Paris. See what she
says to me--this dear, good mother--before she dies," holding to him
with the trembling hand the precious paper containing the
interpretation of his mothers wishes. He then said: "Is it not a
sacred duty I owe my mother, that of accomplishing her last request?"
"Yes, my dear child, but you are very young to make so long a journey
on foot to Paris. Do you know any one there?" "No, sir; but my mother
said I must go, and no matter how I get there I must do it." "Your
resolution is praiseworthy my child, yet it seems to me that you
should reflect a little, before undertaking what seems so much for
you. But if you really must attempt it, I will give you a letter to a
friend of mine, who is now cure of the Church of Saint-Germain
l'Auxerrois. This recommendation, I hope, will be of great assistance
to you, for my friend is a man of rare virtues and inexhaustible
charity Place your cell under his protection, and I do not doubt but
you will soon be out of embarrassment. I think you should sell your
furniture, the proceeds would in large your funds very much. But, my
child, your extreme youth frightens me. I am afraid you will never get
to Paris." "Oh! be tranquil, good father. I trust so much to God as my
guide that I know I shall arrived without accident, and with but
little fatigue." "Go, my child, I have no longer any objection; and
since you desire it so much, I will do all I can to facilitate your
project. While I am gone refresh yourself; take something to eat, it
will strengthen your body, which cannot but be feeble under the
sufferings of your soul.  Do you hear, my child? I want you to take
some nourishment, if it is only a little you will feel better after
it. I will return directly," and, looking kindly at him, the venerable
cure went out, to see which of his parishioners would purchase the
furniture belonging to the orphan.


CHAPTER II.

  "Still  an hour of suffering,
    Still a sad farewell".

. . . . .

THE FAREWELL.


The cure was a all time absent, and when he return had no good news
for Robert; his errand had been ineffectual. "My child," said he, "my
wishes for disposing of your furniture have been in vain, but do not
be discouraged. Let us go and pay the last mark of respect to your
mother, and then we will speak of other things." Robert followed him,
and on the way told him of the package of papers he had found in the
closet, the contents of which he was not to know until he had attained
his majority.

"I advise you, my child, to leave me the package to take care of. If
you should lose it, it would be an irreplaceable loss, and might be
attended with {645} serious results. You need fear no accident on my
part, for, if God should call me to him, before we meet again, I will
put it in safe hands; for instance, if it please you, to the Notary of
Besse, a small town about two leagues from here. It might be a long
time before you would return, but the grave of your mother will draw
you here, and I know you are too good a son to forget it. I am sure,
then, of seeing you sometimes if God wills it, for it is the Supreme
Arbiter who decides the length of our days." They had come by this
time to the house, the door of which was opened by a woman who had
been sent there by the cure to "lay" out the mother of the poor
orphan. Her body was then enclosed in the coffin, and the _cortege_
took the way which led to the churchyard, where rest at last the king
and his subjects, the rich and the poor. Oh! what courage it requires
to bear up under the sorrows of this last sad walk, above all when the
earth receives the remains of a cherished mother. How each sound that
fell on the coffin bruised this poor child's heart! And were it not
for the consoling hope, the firm belief, that his mother was in
heaven, his life would be one of despair; but he believed what she
told him before she died, that she would rest on the bosom of God, and
that she would watch over him with the same love and the same
solicitude of which she had given him so many proofs during her life.
He was the last to leave this new grave, which hid from his sight
forever the only being he ever loved, and which was watered with
filial tears. "Oh!" he exclaimed, "if I can only put a stone over my
good mother, it will be a consolation to know, when I visit the spot
where I leave my heart, that it is marked by the love of a son." Full
of this idea he revealed it afterward to the good cure, who took an
interest in it, and listened, with tears in his eyes, while the child
cultures the cost of a simple so. "But, my child," he said sadly, "all
simple as it may be, it will still be too dear for your feeble
resources. Wait for executing this pious wish until you have more to
spare. I cannot promise you that it will be a new one, but I will
place a wooden cross on your mother's grave." Robert, although
saddened at the non-success of his project, felt the wisdom of the
advice which was given him. He resigned it for the present, hoping
that a more prosperous time would come, when miserable pecuniary
considerations need not stop him in the accomplishment of what he felt
was a filial duty. Then after having thanked the pastor, and told him
how grateful he was to him for his paternal care and loving advice, he
asked his permission to pass another night in the house where he first
remembered the light of day. "Go, my child," said the cure, moved by
his touching resolution, "go if you feel strong enough: solitude
raises the soul and purifies its approach to the Creator. Sometimes
remember the consoling words of our divine Saviour, 'Blessed are they
who mourn, for they shall be comforted.' It is time for you to go. May
God in the silence of your solitary night visit your desolate soul,
and with his paternal hand wipe away your tears. To-morrow morning I
will see you, and we will arrange about your affairs."

The courageous child, for he was courageous to put himself face to
face with so many dear remembrances, wished to visit once more the
haunts of his infant joys, where his mother had guided his tottering
steps, and, later, where she had explained to him the wonders of
nature in the presence of these wonders. Yes, he wished to see them
all again, and engrave them in an ineffaceable manner upon his memory.
They were all dear to his heart, all filled with thoughts of his
mother, and the most tender caresses had been exchanged there between
them. He recalled the dreams of those days when his head rested on his
mother's bosom, and he felt himself {646} bathed in love and
happiness; he recalled the charm of that intercourse, when two hearts
are bound in sweetest sympathy; and it was for this purpose that he
wandered over the mountain, stopping at each loved spot, until he
reached the highest plateau. There he sat down, but not before looking
around him, for, for the first time in his life, he felt a little
timid and frightened. The magic beauty of his surroundings was not
new, he had seen it all often before, had contemplated it a thousand
times, but a sort of unquiet terror seizes him, and betrays itself in
tears. It seems but a day since he bounded and frolicked gayly in the
same places, under the eye of his mother, and now what a strange and
sorrowful change! He is alone; his strength and courage all gone. He
seems so small and insignificant by the side of these masses of rocks,
so gigantic and imposing, which look at him as though they would crush
him. Little by little he becomes reassured; he thinks he hears above
him chords of infinite sweetness; these ravishing sounds seem to come
from the sky; it is a choir of angels, who chant the notes of some
sweet melody. The child is transported with delight: he listens; his
soul is strengthened, he is not deceived. From among those harmonious
voices he discovers one well known to him, the sound of which makes
him happy. He knows it is his mother's, and she calls tenderly to him:
"Robert, what do you believe? am I not always with you? Look, my
child, and admire this grand picture, radiant with waves of gold and
purple from the declining sun. Look in wonder at what God has done for
you." These words transformed Robert. He is transported with a new
emotion, and, prostrating himself on his knees, cries, "O God! O God!
how wonderful art thou, how grand are thy works!" After he had
satisfied his soul with the enchanting scene, he went to all the spots
where he had sat with his mother, and gave them each a long and
sorrowful look, and then bade farewell to them. "Farewell, dear
mountain, farewell beautiful valley. I gaze at you perhaps for the
last time. And, shady wood, where I have so often slept, watched by my
tender mother, you who have protected me from the two great heat of
the sun, farewell also. I must leave you now, and I know not if I
shall ever gaze upon your glories again. I would I could pass my life
in your deep shades, and hear you whisper unceasingly the cherished
name of my mother. But it cannot be; and now farewell. And thou,
beautiful and fertile Limagne, that I see shining in the distance, I
salute thee, and will soon traverse light green fields. Be hospitable
to the poor little orphan, and made by smiling aspect and fresh
verdure be a happy presage for me." He stood some moments silent and
immovable, lost in regrets, and then returned to the house. During the
night involuntary fear filled his mind. When the rays of the moon
penetrated his chamber and the stars shed their soft light, he felt
revived, and waited for the vision of the preceding night, but it came
not, and his lips quivered, and at last sleep came to close his
eyelids and repair the strength of his body and mind. The next day the
cure found him somewhat consoled, at least more calm than before he
slept. Together they made an inventory of his modest furniture, which
was worth about fifty pounds. In one of the drawers they found a small
medallion containing the portrait of a gentleman. The face was
handsome and expressive, though a little hard. It was easy to see that
it was a person of high rank; and if the good cure had been less
preoccupied and had examined closely the face, he would, perhaps, have
been struck by the resemblance which existed between the features of
the child and those of the miniature. He would have concluded beyond
doubt that it was his father. But he simply handed it to Robert,
saying almost mechanically, "It is necessary to preserve this with
care." The {647} examination being concluded, he said to him: "My
child, I have not found any purchasers for this furniture, and may not
for some time. I will give you, however, what I suppose to be its
value, and if I should get more for it shall be glad to remit it to
you; by thus doing I will have time to look about, and can, perhaps,
dispose of it two more advantage." The poor child knew not how to
reply to this kindness, but he said, "All that you have done is right,
my dear father, you are too good to take so much trouble for me, and I
thank you with all my heart." Again the cure closed the door and took
Robert's hand. He burst into sobs at the idea of being separated from
all which reminded him of his mother, but he baked him to have
courage. "Courage, my child. I know you suffer in leaving a spot
sacred to your mother's memory; it is but a natural feeling but you
cannot stay. Leave all to my care, accomplish the wish of your mother,
go to Paris, and if the blessing of an old man, a blessing which calls
down that of God, can inspire you with resolution and confidence in
the future, I give you mine, and made it make you happy." In saying
these words he had laid his hands on the head of the child, who was
kneeling before him.

Robert past several days with the kind father, where he gained
strength and courage; and one morning at sunrise, with a small bundle
of his shoulder and a stick in his hand, set out, accompanied by the
good cure, who had wished to render less painful by his presence the
first steps of this sad journey. He had sent a letter to his friend
the cure in Paris, in which he enclosed the fifty pounds, not thinking
it prudent that Robert should carry it with him. A half league from
the village, on the route to Claremont, the excellent man embraced the
child, pointed to heaven, and bade him farewell!


CHAPTER III.

  "We may know by a child's actions
  If his motives are pure and right."
                   Proverbs.

As long as it was possible, Robert followed, with burning eyes, the
charitable man who had comforted him in his severe affliction. Several
times he turned to see if the mountain had yet disappeared, on which
he had passed so many happy days. At last the charm was broken, it was
no longer visible, and tears chased each other down his checks, but he
walked on quickly, saying, "My mother wishes it." His mind was so
occupied that he walked on without looking at the road which ran ahead
of his thoughts and his regrets, until, involuntarily raising his eyes
to the scene before him, he stops in the extremity of his surprise;
his eyes refuse to believe their evidence; they wander from object to
object without knowing why, without being able to explain the mystery
which plunges him into a sort of stupor, and he believes himself under
the dominion of a feverish and fantastic dream. He raises his hand to
see if he is asleep, but he is wide awake, and laughs at his
simplicity. It is easy for us to understand this. He recognizes no
longer men, things, or even nature. All that he left behind him was
different from what was before and around him. He was in a new world,
on strange ground, and everything which was presented to his sight
caused him an undefinable sensation. Was there not enough to surprise
him? These large fields, these plains of vendure, these yellow
harvests, were to him a new spectacle, strange, singular, sometimes
even monotonous to the eye of a little mountaineer, habituated to the
fantastic forms of the rock and the sombre and imposing verdure of the
woods which covered the sides of his native mountain. Where are the
great heaps of volcanic rocks among which he had been reared and which
were so familiar to his eyes? All had {648} disappeared, and it seemed
to him that, without transition he had passed from severe and grand
nature to simple and gay, rich with flowers and fruits and corn white
and golden. It was the contrast which frightened him, and made him
think he had been transported by some invisible hand a thousand
leagues from his home. Like a bird slightly wounded which flies to the
parent nest and seeks shelter under the warm wings of its mother, so
Robert, restless and inquiet, longs for the maternal arms in which he
can hide his fears. He feels his loneliness; the road seems longer at
every step, and he cannot see the end of it. He invokes through his
mother the blessing of God, and his fears are dissipated, and strength
and hope are given him to hasten on. With the versatility which is the
happy accompaniment of childhood, he put a sweet security in place of
the most foolish fears. And now he was brave again. This transition of
sentiment, this quick changing of the most lively sorrow into a kind
of gayety, is natural to youth. They have extremes of joy and sorrow,
and, without being prepared for either, we see them pass suddenly from
one to the other. Happy, happy childhood! Robert was now full of a new
sentiment, and the birds fluttered round him and sang their merriest
songs; the long, low murmur of the insects was delightful to his ears.
Why should he be sad when all nature was so joyous? A universal hymn
of gratitude and love is being sung by all that exist, by everything
that breathes, in honor of our divine Creator; and, no matter how many
the sorrows and desolations of man, calmness comes to his heart, in
the sweet perfume of joy, the suave harmony and gracious gayety that
fill all nature under the life-giving influence of a beautiful summer
morning. As we are all, sooner or later, initiated into the sufferings
of life, we must feel for others and pour what balm we can into every
wounded heart. Robert walked on until he came to an inn where he asked
to pass the night. His fresh, open face, his gentleness, and the title
of Orphan, gained for him the heart and good graces of his hostess.
She asked him whither he was going and if he wished to go. He told
her, and that it was his mother's wish, and, of course, if hers, his,
that he should go to Paris. The next morning he started off,
overwhelmed with the caresses of this woman, for she was a mother, and
felt a tear moisten her cheek, as she saw this little boy take up his
bundle and resolutely pursue his way, and she prayed God to take care
of him. Robert felt his mother's loss hourly when fatigue weakened his
limbs and hunger made him cry, but he saw her with the eyes of faith
in heaven. Yes; believe me, dear little children who have lost your
mothers! turn to heaven, and there you will see them looking at you
with eyes of love, and saying to you: "Be good, my darlings, and when
you are asleep I will visit you, and kiss your pure and innocent
foreheads." Yes; look to heaven, and I promise you you will see your
mothers there, if you are good. It was this which recalled to Robert's
heart each day the remembrance of his mother and filled his eyes with
tears. It carried also to his heart a secret encouragement and gave
him strength.

As he walked on he left behind him Clermont, Rion, Aigueperse, and
Grannot. Some leagues before this he had bid good-by to the beautiful
district of Limagne, which had charmed him by its sea of verdure, it's
deep golden foliage, and its rich and fertile plains. This was the
first canton of France which was considered worthy of a particular
description, and it was of this part of l'Auvergne that Apollo Lidoine
said: "It is so beautiful that strangers who go there cannot leave it,
and there have even then instances of persons forgetting their own
country when there." It was of this country, so favored by heaven,
that King Childebert said, "that before dying he desired but one {649}
thing, and that was to see beautiful Limagne d'Auvergne, which is the
masterpiece of nature, and a scene of enchantment." We cannot say that
Robert shared in their opinion, but it is certain that he passed it
with regret, although he was drawn by so strange of feeling toward
Paris, the object of his hope and his ambition. He walked to St.
Pourcain, Moulins, and all the small places, and rested a day when
overfatigued. Great was his delight when he reached Fontainebleau,
which royal residence had witnessed the first abdication of the
emperor. All was still in motion at this place, and more than one old
soldier twisted his mustache, and with a fierce and martial air walked
on the edge of this great forest, weeping for the liberty of his
emperor, his god, his idol. It was with delight that our young hero,
the child of the woods and solitude, sought the fresh shades, which
recalled to him, by a striking similarity, his cherished mountain
home; and the immense piles of irregular rocks attested that this
place, too, had been the theatre of some great convulsion of nature.
At mid-day, when the sun sheds his fiercest rays, when the tired
flowers lean on their stems, when the birds hide under the leaves,
when all nature seeks repose, the better to enjoy the freshness of the
evening, Robert, too, followed the example, and lay down and slept at
the foot of a huge chestnut-tree many centuries old; the vast shade of
which form and impenetrable cover from the heat of the sun. He awoke
refreshed, rose, and ventured into one of the long alleys or walks to
which a sign conducted him. For several hours he wandered about lost
in this tangled maze and looking in vain for an opening. But he was a
patient child, and obstacles did not stop him, neither was he
discouraged by his unfruitful efforts; on the contrary, he redoubled
his ardor, and finally reached a clear space, in the center of which
was a fountain ordered by rose-beds. Four paths diverged from it, and
of such great length were they that it fatigued the eye to look at
them. In exploring in turn each of these paths, Robert found in one of
them a sign pointing out to strangers the various labyrinths of the
forest. He had nothing else for a guide, but thought if he could only
find his way to the palace again, there must be some one there who
could tell him how to go; so he followed the path which he thought
might be right, and it was, and led him into the avenue which wound
round by the palace. When he got right in front of the principal and
only truly royal edifice of France, or rather of Napoleon, he stopped
and wondered at the vast aspect of this assemblage of buildings,
producing an effect at once imposing and majestic. Nothing like this
had ever entered his imagination, and the most lively astonishment
shone on his face, and his eyes burned with the fire of intelligence
and pleasure. A few steps from him was an old soldier who was entirely
absorbed in contemplating the building, and who looked worn and sad.
He, too, was in a sort of ecstasy, but he gazed in silence and seemed
lost to all around him. His expression was of one in anguish, and his
eyes rested with a strange fixedness upon the steps of honor. He waits
and watches as if hoping to see some one whom he ardently loves
appear; but his hope is deceived, and two tears trickle slowly down
his dark cheeks, scarred and burned by the fires of a hundred battles.
At this moment when marks of supreme sorrow told so eloquently of his
sufferings, Robert turned, and seeing his tears he was deeply moved at
this testimony of profound sorrow, and, eagerly approaching the
soldier, said to him in a touching voice: "Why do you cry, sir? Have
yon also lost your mother? I fear you have." Robert had never wept but
for one sorrow, and that we all know, and in happy ignorance of the
other misfortunes of life he thought all wept {650} for the same
thing; and in his great loss he looked to older persons to console
him, which proved how tender, delicate, and generous are the
sentiments that live in the hearts of children. Their young souls are
mirrors have to which we should only give pure, chaste, and pious
images to reflect and show them good examples, that without effort
vice might be crushed out, and the world left an Eden of purity.

Hearing so touchingly compassionate a voice, the old soldier turned
and looked at the child, while tears glistened in his eyes. "No," said
he in a coarse tone, "it is not for my mother that I weep, it is for
my emperor." "And who is it that is your emperor?" "Alas! I have no
father, and have just lost my mother," he said sighing. "Was your
emperor good, and did you love him so much that you weep or him? I
shall never forget my mother, she was so sweet and good to her little
son. But tell me, sir, tell me of your emperor. My mother said I
should always love those who were good, and I want to love him too."
The old fellow twisted his mustache, and growled some words between
his teeth, looking alternately at the palace and the child, who smiled
at him with an expression so gentle that it moved the soldier's heart.
You could see he was the victim of an emotion he vainly sought to
conceal. "Wonderful!" cried he, vanquished by the magical eyes of
Robert. "You are a good child, and speak to my heart when you tell me
that you love my emperor. But who does not love him, except those
cowards! those scoundrels! those traitors! But stop, I have said
enough." He saw that Robert was a little frightened, for his ears had
only been accustomed to the caressing voice of his mother. "Do you see
that staircase? My emperor descended by it to embrace the eagles of
his flag, the victorious eagles which have made him immortal, and
which led his way to glory. Yes, the embraced them, and wept because
he could not embrace all his old soldiers had not betrayed him and
would have followed him to the end of the world. And some of his old
guard still live. Oh! if they had only sent me with him into the loan
island of his misfortunes, if I could be with him there, I should be
content. But since I cannot, I must go to Paris and see what is doing
there. See, my child, you are going there too, and I believe you said
you had neither father nor mother. Have you any relatives?" "No," said
Robert. "Why, then, are you going to Paris if you have no friends
there?" "My mother said I must go, and I'm going." "I don't wish to be
too curious, but tell me from whence you come?" "From the village of
Mount Dore, eight leagues from Clermont." "Pretty walk for such little
legs, I think; but as we are both going to Paris, and you have no
father or mother to protect you, and I and a poor old soldier, I will
take care of you, for you have moved my heart by your gentle words,
and we will travel together, so that the walk will be shorter for
both." "Oh! how delightful," said Robert; "and then you can tell me
about your emperor. I know I can walk fast enough in hearing you talk
about one whom you love so much." "Yes, my boy," he replied, "I could
speak forever of my emperor; but it must be when we are alone, for his
glorious name, which once made kings and conscripts alike tremble, is
now called usurper, and is forbidden to be pronounced. A thousand
thunders! the thought enrages me; and if I had his traitorous subjects
I would strangle them, or my name is not Cyprien Hardy." This
conversation was held with furious gestures on the one side and great
astonishment on the other, until they came to the modest inn where
Robert had left his bundle. The child in his new friend, the old
soldier, who justified the name, made a frugal repast, and continue
{651} their journey. On the way Robert related the history of the
twelve years he had passed on his cherished mountain with his beloved
mother, which simple recital gained him the lasting friendship of his
companion, whom Robert looked upon as a friend provided for him by
that kind Providence who watches over orphans. He bore the fatigue of
the journey well, and was in perfect health when they reached that
magnificent chaos called Paris. The old soldier is, then, the second
friend that God has given our little hero. And how strange it was that
these two were isolated beings should meet in such a place, before the
grand palace of kings--the one a man of resolute energy, who carried
on his bold forehead great scars of glory, but who shed tears of
despair at the fall of his well-beloved chief, in whom he had found
parents, country, family; the other a charming youth, representing
brilliant promises for the future, young, beautiful, and full of
ambition. Cyprien Hardy was one of those true French hearts to whom
the name of patriot was not a vain word. He was moved like many others
when dangers threatened the republic and the when powerful allies
audaciously invaded its territory. He was one of the first to take up
arms, having entered the army as a volunteer at twenty-one. Some years
later he served in the first regiment of the soldiers of the guard,
after having made the memorable campaigns of Italy, Egypt, and
Germany, always following the "Little Corporal," always the first in
battle, and always respected. Dangers made him smile; his courage was
inexhaustible. One thing alone could move him, and that was the voice
of his chief. This electrified him, and made him forget all but noble
actions. He had always loved Napoleon, and this affection increased
with the fortunes of the great man whose word or look transformed
soldiers into heroes. It was in the forts of Moscow that his emperor
had given him the "Cross of Honor," for a wound which he received from
a cannon ball while waving his flag. In this disastrous retreat the
brave soldier, dying with cold, fatigue, and hunger, preserved his
heroic exaltation and his confidence in and love for his emperor; and
if he ever grumbled, it was only because he could not kill every
Cossack that he laid his eyes upon. His courage and energy never
diminished, and he believed so implicitly in his emperor that he
thought good fortune must return. But it had gone forever. His heart
revolted at the thought; and he swore that the author of this infamous
treason should repent, and this was why he was going to Paris to see
if he could find any of his old companions.



TO BE CONTINUED.




ONE MOMENT.

  A trooping forth of buried griefs like ghosts,--
  Temptations gathering swift in serried hosts,--
  Of angel guardians a glittering band,--
  God watching all--shall we desert or stand?



{652}




PROBLEMS OF THE AGE.  [Footnote 178]

  [Footnote 178: erratum: In the last number, p. 524, 2d col. 12th
  line, for "created in sanctity and justice," read "constituted."]

(CONCLUDED)


XII.

THE MYSTERY OF REDEMPTION.

The next article of the creed, in order, is that which expresses the
Mystery of Redemption: "Crucifixus etiam pro nobis, sub Pontio Pilato,
passus, et sepultus est." "Who was also crucified for us under Pontius
Pilate, who suffered, and was buried." The redemption implies the
incarnation, and is based on it. The incarnation having been already
treated of, in immediate connection with the Trinity, we have only to
proceed with the exposition of the doctrine of satisfaction for sin
and restoration to grace through the sufferings and death of the
Divine Redeemer.

It is no part of the Catholic doctrine that it was necessary for the
second person of the Trinity to take upon himself human nature and
suffer an infinite penalty, in order that God might be able to pardon
sin without violating his justice. All Catholic theologians, from St.
Augustine down, teach that God is free to show mercy and to pardon,
according to his own good pleasure. The reason and end of the
incarnation has been shown already to be something far above this
order of ideas. The incarnation does not of itself, however, imply
suffering or death. We have to inquire, then, why it was that in point
of fact the incarnate Word was manifested as a suffering Redeemer; and
why his death on the cross was constituted the meritorious cause of
the remission of sin and restoration of grace.

The church has never made any formal definition of her doctrine on
this point, and it is well known various have been the theories
regarding it maintained at different times. We shall endeavor to
present a view which appears to us adequate and intelligible; without,
however, claiming for it any certainty beyond that of the reasons on
which it is based.

The original gift of grace not having been due to Adam, or to any one
of his ordinary descendents, injustice, the restoration of that gift,
when lost, was not due. Aside from the incarnation, there was no
imperative reason why Adam and his race should not have been left in
the state to which they were reduced by the original transgression.
God, having determined to accomplish the incarnation in the human
race, owed it to himself to complete this determination, in spite of
all the sins which he foresaw would be committed by men. The foreseen
merits of Christ furnished an adequate motive for conferring any
degree of grace upon any or all men, he might seek to be fitting and
necessary for the fulfillment of his eternal purposes. It was not
necessary, however, that the Son of God should suffer or die in order
to merit grace for mankind. By the define decree, indeed, the shedding
of his blood and his death was made the special meritorious act in
view of which remission of sins and grace are conferred. But all the
acts of his life had the same intrinsic worth and excellence, which
was simply infinite on account of the divine principle of imputability
to which they must be referred. There must have been some reasons,
therefore, of fitness, on account of which it was determined that
Jesus Christ should suffer death for the human race.

{653}

We may find one of these reasons in the law of suffering and death
which God had imposed, out of a motive of pure love, on the whole
human race. This law was, indeed, promulgated under the form of a
penalty, but in its substance it was a real blessing. The way to
heaven through the path of penance and by the gate of death is a sure
and safer way then the one in which Adam was first placed; it is one,
also, affording higher and more extensive scope for virtue, heroism,
and merit. It was, therefore, fitting that the chief and prince of the
human race should go before  his brethren in this way of sufferings.
"For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all
things, who brought many sons to glory, to perfect, by suffering, the
author of their salvation." [Footnote 179] As a particular consequence
of this general law, heroes, patriots, reformers, prophets, and
saints, have always been especially exposed to suffering and to
violent modes of death. They have been obliged to sacrifice themselves
to their own fidelity to conscience and to that sacred cause to which
they have been devoted. And this sacrifice of life has consecrated
their memories in the hearts of their fellow-men more than any other
acts of intellectual or moral virtue, however brilliant. It was
fitting, therefore, that the Saint of saints, the Saviour of the
world, should not exempt himself from the peril of death, to which the
very character of his mission exposed him.

  [Footnote 179: Heb, II. 10.]

Another reason for the suffering of the Divine Mediator, is found in
the manifestation thereby made of the love of God in Christ to the
human race. There is no need of dwelling on this, or of noticing other
reasons of a similar kind which have been so frequently and so fully
developed by others.

We pass on, therefore, to the consideration of the final and highest
reason for the death of Jesus Christ, the expiation of sin.

The true and only possible notion of expiation or satisfaction is that
which apprehends it as a compensation for the failure to perform some
obligatory act, by performing another act of at least equal value in
the place of it. Every noble soul, when conscious of having been
delinquent, desires to repair the injury which has been done, as well
as to redeem its own honor, by some act which shall, if possible, far
exceed the one which it failed to perform. The same principle impels
those who have a high sense of honor to make reparation tor the
delinquencies of others with whom they are closely related in the same
family, the same society, or the same nation. Now, the human race has
been delinquent in making a proper return to God for the infinite boon
of grace. The fall of man and the innumerable sins of the individuals
of the human race have deprived Almighty God of a tribute of glory
which was due to him, and have brought ignominy upon mankind as a
race. Although, therefore, Almighty God might provide for the
glorification of the elect who are to share with the Incarnate Word in
his divine privileges, by an act of pure mercy; it is far more
glorious both to God and man that a superabundant satisfaction should
be made for the injury which has been done to the Creator by the
marring of his creation, and a superabundant expiation accomplished of
the disgrace which man has incurred. It was, therefore, an act of
divine wisdom and love in God to determine that this satisfaction and
expiation should be made by the second person of the Trinity in his
human nature. The Incarnate Word, being truly man, identified with the
human race, and its chief, necessarily made its honor and its disgrace
his own. Although he could redeem his brethren without any cost to
himself, his solicitude for their honor and glory would not permit him
to do it. He desired that they should enter heaven on the most
honorable terms, without any of the humiliation of the delinquency of
the race attaching to them, but, on the contrary with the {654}
exulting consciousness that every stain of dishonor had been effaced.
Therefore, as their king and chief, he fulfilled the most sublime work
of obedience to the divine love which was possible; he made the most
perfect possible oblation to God, as an equivalent for his boon of
grace which had been abused by sin. In lieu of that glory which God
would have received from the perfect obedience of Adam and all his
posterity, and that glory which would have been also reflected upon
the human race, he substituted the infinitely greater glory of his own
obedience unto death, even the death of the cross. By this obedience
Jesus Christ merited for the human race the concession of a new grant
of grace, more perfect than the first, by virtue of which not only the
original sin which is common to all men was made remissible to each
individual, but all actual sins were made also pardonable on certain
conditions.

That this statement completely exhausts the true idea of the
satisfaction of Christ, we will not pretend to affirm. It appears to
us, however, sufficient to give a clear and definite meaning to the
language of Scripture and the fathers, and to include all that
Catholic faith requires a Christian to believe.

Jesus Christ having merited by his death the right of conferring grace
without stint or limit upon mankind, and all the grace given after the
fall and before the redemption having been bestowed in the foresight
of his death, every spiritual blessing enjoyed by men is referred to
the death of Jesus Christ as its cause and source. Strictly speaking,
it is only the meritorious cause. By giving himself up to die, he
merited the right to communicate the grace contained in the
incarnation to men, notwithstanding the failure of the father and head
of the race to fulfil the probation on which the transmission of the
grace to his descendants depended. He merited also the right to renew
this grace in those individuals who should lose it after having once
received it, as often as these, without regard to the number or
grievousness of their sins, or the frequency of their lapses. It is,
however, the Holy Spirit; dwelling in the Incarnate Word in the
plenitude of  his being, and communicating to his human nature the
fulness grace, not for itself alone, but for all men; which is the
ultimate and efficient cause of all spiritual life. It is the grace of
the Holy Spirit which actually removes all guilt and stain of sin from
the soul, and constitutes it in the state of justice and sanctity. The
Holy Spirit is, therefore, the efficient cause of justification. The
formal cause is the personal sanctity of each individual. That is,
this personal sanctity is that which makes each one worthy of the
complacency of God, of fellowship with him, and of everlasting life.
The work of the incarnation and redemption must, therefore, produce
its results and attain its consummation through the Holy Spirit as the
sanctifier of the human race. Consequently, the creed, after finishing
it's expression of the Catholic faith so far as the person of Christ
is concerned, proceeds to enunciate it as regards the person and
operation of the Holy Spirit, is sent by Christ to complete his work.
The articles containing this enunciation complete the creed, and bring
man to his final destination.



XII.

THE CATHOLIC CHURCH, AS THE INSTRUMENT OF
THE SANCTIFICATION OF THE HUMAN RACE.


The next articles of the creed are: "Et in Spiritum Sanctum, Dominum
et Vivificantem, qui ex Patre Filioque procedit, qui cum Patre et
Filio simul adoratur et conglorificatur, qui locutus est per
prophetas; et in unam sanctam, Catholicam et apostolicam ecclesiam;
confiteor unum baptisma in remissionem peccatorum." "And in the Holy
Ghost, the Lord and Lifegiver, who proceedeth from the Father and the
Son, {655} who with the Father and the Son together is worshipped and
glorified, who spake by the prophets; I confess one baptism for the
remission of sins."

The relation of the Holy Spirit to the Father and the Son in the
Trinity has been already considered. The temporal mission of the Holy
Spirit as the consummation of the divine work _ad extra_ is exercised
through the Catholic Church; and, therefore, the article concerning
the church follows immediately in the creed the one concerning the
Holy Spirit.   [Footnote 180]

  [Footnote 180: Vid. Archbishop Manning's Mission of the Holy Ghost.]

The organic unity of the Catholic Church follows necessarily from the
principles laid down in the foregoing essays. It is an immediate
consequence of the unity of the race, and of the incarnation, which
are two distinct facts, but which have one principle. The order of
regeneration must follow the order of generation. Mankind exist
essentially as a race; as a race they received the original gift of
supernatural grace; as a race they lost it. All human life and
development is generic. The redemption of mankind must, therefore,
re-establish the generic relations which were disturbed by the fall.
Jesus Christ, the second Adam, must become the head of a redeemed and
regenerated race of men, organized in a supernatural society.
Continuity and perpetuity of life are, therefore, the essential notes
of the divine society, or human race regenerated, in which true
spiritual life is communicated to the individual. The sole possession
of these notes demonstrates the divine authority of the Catholic
Church.  [Footnote 181] The continuity of life, embracing integrity of
doctrine and law and the faculty of conferring grace, descended from
the patriarchal church through the Jewish, with the increment added by
the immediate intervention of the divine Lord of the world in person,
to the Catholic Church.

  [Footnote 181: Vid. Leo, Univ. Hist., vol. I. Lacordaire's
  Conferences, and the Works of Dr. Brownson, passim.]

The Catholic Church is, therefore, the human race, in the highest
sense. In early times, one nation after another broke away from the
unity of the race, carrying a fragment of the integral, ideal humanity
with it. Integrity, continuity, and perpetuity of life were,
therefore, rendered for them impossible. The same phenomena are
exhibited at the present time in all nations and societies outside of
the Catholic Church. Partial and temporary developments only can be
made of that integral, universal, perpetual life, whose seat is in the
bosom of the church, and which is sufficient to vivify the whole human
race, if the impediments were removed. The proof, _a posteriori_, or
by induction, of the Catholic Church, must be sought for in those
works which treat professedly of the subject. Our object is merely to
show the conformity of the idea of the Catholic Church with the idea
of reason, by deduction from primary, ontological principles. The
attributes of the church follow so immediately from its primary note,
as the human race restored to unity in the fellowship of God in
Christ, that they require no special elucidation; especially as this
particular branch of theology has been so repeatedly and so amply
treated by authors.

In regard to special dogmas of the church, most of those which present
any great difficulty to the understanding have already been discussed
in the former part of this essay; and the remainder find an easy
explication from the same principles.

The doctrine of the sacraments is explicated from the principle that
the church is the instrument of sanctification. The sacraments are the
particular acts by which the church communicates the spiritual
vitality which resides in her to individuals. They have an outward,
sensible form, because the nature of man is corporeal, and all human
acts are composed of a synthesis of the sensible and the spiritual.
They contain an inward, spiritual grace, because the nature of {656}
man is spiritual, and receives life only from a spiritual principle.
The only one of  the sacraments which presents any special difficulty
to the understanding is the holy eucharist; on account of  the mystery
of transubstantiation which is included in it's essence. The ground of
this difficulty, which lies in crude, philosophical notions, and is,
therefore, purely a spectre of the imagination, has been already
removed by the doctrine we Have laid down respecting the nature of
substance and the proper conception of space and extension. The senses
transmit to the soul nothing more than the impressions of the
phenomena, which the soul, by an intellectual judgment, refers to a
real, intelligible substance, or active force, as their productive
cause. The substance itself is not sensible, but intelligible; is not
seen as an essence by the eye, but concluded by a judgment of the
mind. By divine revelation it is disclosed to us, that the substance
of bread and wine is the eucharist is succeeded by the substance of
the body and blood of Jesus Christ; the phenomena or sensible effects
of the former substance still continuing to be produced in an
extraordinary manner. There is a mystery here it is true; but it is
only the mystery which belongs to the inscrutable nature of the
essence of matter as active force, and the mode in which this active
force produces various sensible phenomena. The definitions of the
church do not furnish a complete explanation of the Catholic dogma,
which is left to theologians; and even theologians do not precisely
coincide in their conceptions or expressions. All we can do then,
after stating the Catholic dogma, is to give the explanation which
appears to be the most probable, according to the judgment of the best
authors and the most weighty intrinsic reasons. This is enough,
however, for our purpose; for all that is required is to furnish a
conception which is, on the one band, theologically tenable, and, on
the other, rationally intelligible.

We may separate the synthetic judgment pronounced by the church, in
the definition of the dogma, into four analytic judgments. First, the
absence of the substance of bread and wine after the consecration.
Second, the presence of the substance of the body of Christ. Third,
the absence of the natural phenomenon of the body of Christ. Fourth,
the presence of the natural phenomenon of bread and wine. In order to
reconstruct these elements of the church's dogmatic judgment into a
more perfect synthesis, it it is necessary to analyze further these
separate propositions. There are three principle, distinct conceptions
contained in them: the conception of substance; the conception of
presence, or relation in space; and the conception of phenomena, or,
to use the precise term employed by the schoolmen, of _accidents_.
There is, also, the conception of the mode in which the phenomena of
bread and wine subsists out of relation to their proper productive
substances, or, the conception of the immediate, efficient cause to
which they must be referred. These first three conceptions have been
sufficiently analyzed in a former part of this treatise. The absence
of the substance of bread and wine after consecration may be
explained, in accordance with the conception of substance, by
annihilation, removal, or identification with the substance of the
body of Christ. The senses cannot take cognizance of its presence
before consecration, it being there office merely to report phenomena;
they cannot, consequently, take cognizance of its absence. They are
not, therefore, deceived in reporting the phenomena as unchanged after
the consecration, since they really remain unchanged; nor is the mind
qualified to pronounce on the report of the senses, that the substance
is unchanged, by an intellectual judgment; since the judgment which
would otherwise be validly made is superseded by a divine judgment,
made known through revelation, that in this instance the substance has
been {657} changed for another by the creative power of God. The
simplest mode of conceiving the effect of consecration on the
substances of the bread and wine is to suppose their annihilation. St.
Thomas, however, denies that they are annihilated, because the
terminus of annihilation is nothing, whereas the terminus of the act
of transubstantiation is the body of Christ. In plain words, the
argument is: if the substances were annihilated, the effect of
consecration would be properly expressed by saying that they are
reduced to nothing, whereas the language of the church is, that they
are converted into the body and blood of Christ. The same argument
applies to the notion of their removal elsewhere. Nevertheless, since
they are not supposed to be annihilated or removed simply for the sake
of getting rid of them, and their destruction or removal is not the
end or final term of the act of divine power, but only its proximate
term, in order to the substitution of the body of Christ, this
argument is not decisive. It is proper to say that the substance of
bread is changed into the body of Christ, if the body of Christ is
substituted for it; The natural phenomena which formerly indicated the
presence of the one substance remaining the same, and indicating the
presence of the other substance instead of that of the former
substance.

Another explanation is based on the notion of one generic substance
individualized in all distinct, material existences. According to this
explanation, the bread and wine, being deprived of their individual
existence, are not thereby destroyed; but, as it were, withdrawn into
the generic substance, which is identical with the substance
individualized in the body of Christ; and therefore properly said to
be converted into the substance of his body. We are unable to
understand how the notion on which this explanation is based, which
appears to require us to accept the realism of William de Champeaux
and the schoolmen, can be made intelligible; and, therefore, prefer
the former, which, we believe, is the one more commonly adopted.

The presence of the body of Christ, without its natural phenomena, and
under the phenomena of bread and wine; which presents usually much the
greatest difficulty to the understanding, is really capable of a much
more easy and certain explanation. It is present not by its extension,
but by its pure substance, or _vis activa_, that is, as Perrone says,
_per modum spiritas_, after the manner of spirit. Spirit, as all
Catholic philosophers teach, is related to objects in space, by the
application of its intrinsic force to them. The presence of the body
of Christ in the eucharist is, therefore, the application of its _vis
activa_; which is, indeed, finite, but, by virtue of its supreme
excellence in the created order, through the hypostatic union,
commensurate with the whole created universe and all its particular
parts. The body of Christ, therefore, while it is circumscribed as to
its extension; and, according to the ordinary sense of the word, is
present only in one place; is, in a different but real sense, present
everywhere where the species of the eucharist are present. These
species or phenomena of bread and wine in the eucharist, are the signs
indicating its presence by its substantial force or _vis activa_. They
may be produced, as every one will admit they can be, by the immediate
act of God; or, by the _vis activa_ of the body of Christ; which, as a
perfect body containing eminently all the perfection of inferior
material substances, can produce their proper effects. The body and
blood of Christ contain substantially and essentially the virtue of
bread and wine, and, being in hypostatic union with the divine nature,
may be capable of producing the phenomena and effects proceeding
naturally from this virtue in many places at once. It appears to us
more in accordance with the language of Scripture and the church to
make this latter supposition. We sum up, there fore, the explanation
of the mystery {658} which appears to us the most probable and
rational, in this short formula. By the effect of the divine power,
exercised through the act of consecrating the eucharist; the sensible
phenomena, indicating before the act the presence of the _vis activa_,
of bread and wine, cease to indicate it; and indicate instead of it,
the presence of the _vis activa_ of the body and blood of Christ, The
language of the definition pronounced by the church is thus exactly
verified. There is a change of substance, without any change of
phenomena. There is a transition of the substance of the bread and
wine; which ceases either altogether as a distinct existence, or, at
least, as the cause of the phenomena; in order to give way to the
substance of the body of Christ; which is properly called a
transubstantiation.

The mystery still remains, and must remain, incomprehensible by the
human understanding, however clear the explanation of the difficulties
which beset it may be made. Neither the senses nor the intellect can
perceive the presence of Jesus Christ in the eucharist. It is believed
by an act of faith in the word of Jesus Christ. The mode of this
substantial presence and of its action on the soul is, moreover, but
dimly apprehended; because substance itself, as a _vis activa_, and
the mode of its activity, are impenetrable to reason. The rational
argument respecting the dogma of faith, therefore, merely proves that
it is not contrary to reason; and that it is partially intelligible by
analogy with other known truths and facts. We thus understand that the
presence f Jesus Christ in the species of the eucharist is _possible_.
And, the revelation of its reality once made, we see also its fitness.
It is most fitting and congruous that Jesus Christ should unite
himself in the most perfect manner which is consistent with the
condition of man in this life, with his human brethren; and that this
union should be manifested to the senses. This is accomplished in the
eucharist in such a way that the intellect, the imagination, or the
heart of man, cannot conceive or desire anything more perfect and
admirable.   [Footnote 182]

  [Footnote 182:  _Vide_ F. Dalgairn's on the Holy Communion for a
  more complete elucidation of the philosophy of substance and accidents.]

We shall simply note with the greatest brevity the remaining doctrines
whose consideration falls under the present head.

The absolute necessity of grace for works worthy of eternal life, and
the inability of man to perform them by his natural strength, is
explained by the supernatural principle of which we have already given
exposition.

The merit of good works is explained by the doctrine of probation; and
the distinction between this kind of merit and the merits of Christ,
as well as their natural relation and harmony, is obvious from the
exposition which has been made of the latter.

The Catholic doctrine respecting the Blessed Virgin and the Saints is
explained by the doctrine already laid down of the glorification and
deification of human nature through the incarnation.

The whole exterior and visible _cultus_ of Catholic worship is
explained by the doctrine, of sensible things as signs and
representations of the invisible, and of the essentially corporeal
constitution of man. These, and all other particulars of Catholic
doctrine, are contained in the universal or Catholic idea, which
shines by its own light, and proves itself by its sublimity,
integrity, symmetry, and correspondence with all the analogies of the
natural world.


XIV.

 THE FINAL DESTINATION OF ANGELS AND MEN;
 CONDITION OF THE UNREGENERATE IN THE  FUTURE LIFE;
 ETERNITY OF THE PENALTY OF SIN;
 STATE OF FINAL THE  BEATITUDE.


The closing articles of the creed are: "Expecto resurrectionem
mortuorun et vitam venturi saeculi, Amen." "I look for the
resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world of come, Amen."

{659}

Thus, the creation, which proceeds from God as first cause, is shown
to have returned to him as final cause. This is especially
accomplished in the beatification of the elect; and consequently it is
the glory and blessedness of heaven which is immediately and
explicitly affirmed in the creed. The entire creed, however, implies,
what the Catholic church in her exposition of the creed teaches
dogmatically, that only a portion of the angelic hierarchy and the
human race attain heaven. The doctrine of hell, or the place and state
of those who are excluded from heaven, is, therefore, the necessary
correlate of the doctrine of heaven. So far as the human race is
concerned, we have to consider, first, what is the condition in
eternity of those who are subject to the consequences of original sin
only.

It follows from the doctrine already laid down, namely, that the state
to which man is reduced by original sin, is entitively the same with
that in which consists the state of pure nature; that the condition of
this class of human beings in eternity is the same that it would be if
they had never been constituted in the order of the supernatural. They
are destitute of supernatural beatitude, but attain to all the
felicity of which they are capable in the natural order. They are
elevated in the due course of nature to that integrity and perfection
of soul and body which, in the case of Adam, was anticipated by a
gratuitous gift. Their felicity consists in a perfect exemption from
an liability to sin, in the complete evolution of their natural
capacities, and in the possession of the proper object of their
intelligence and will, that is, in the knowledge and fruition of the
works of God, and of God himself by abstractive contemplation. This
last expression needs some explanation in order to show its conformity
with the doctrine we have laid down at the beginning of these essays
respecting the primitive intuition of reason. We have there affirmed
that the original intuition of reason is the intuition of that idea
which is afterward demonstrated by reflection to be identical with the
being of God. Some, rejecting this doctrine of the idea, object to it
that it leads to a confusion of the act of intelligence constitutive
of rational nature with the act proper only to beatified nature, that
is, the intuitive vision of God. Others, who accept it, endeavor to
rebut this objection, and to show the distinction between the
knowledge of God derived from rational intuition and that which is
communicated by the light of glory. But in doing this they make the
first to be only the inchoation of the second, and the second the
completion or full evolution of the first. It would follow, then, that
a rational creature cannot attain to the proper object of his
intelligence and will, consequently cannot attain perfect felicity,
without the beatific vision. We cannot admit either that the objection
is a valid one or that the explanation which is made in order to do
away with it is sufficient. We venture, therefore, to suggest another.

It is real and concrete being, not possible and abstract being, which
is the intelligible object of reason. Reason, however, does not, by an
intrinsic, perceptive power, actively elicit the intuition of its
intelligible object. In other words, it is not by its virtue as
intelligence that real being, or the intelligible, becomes
intelligible to it. The intelligible has the precedence and the
superiority in the act of intelligence. The presence of the object
makes the subject intelligent in the first act, and this first act is
one in which the creative spirit is the agent and the created spirit
the terminus of the act. The original, immediate contact of the
intellect with real, concrete being, that is, with God, is, therefore,
a contact in which the soul is passive, because this contact precedes
and is the cause of its activity. It is only by reflection, or bending
backward upon itself, that the intellect can have distinct
self-consciousness and elicit thought. When it does so, it takes
always the affirmation of real, necessary being, by which {660} God
created it rational, as the first and absolute elements of its
thoughts. But this affirmation, as soon as it enters into reflection,
and becomes an element of the spontaneous activity of the soul,
becomes _abstract_. It is not a pure abstraction, or an act which
terminates on the abstract or possible as its ultimate object, but an
abstraction formed from the concrete object as apprehended by the
passive intelligence, or an abstract conception of the concrete idea.
It would require too much time to develop this statement fully. But it
is plain at a single glance that it is justified by the facts of
consciousness. All our judgments respecting necessary and universal
truth are abstract. The judgment respecting necessary cause, that
respecting the infinite and the eternal, that respecting ideal space
and time, those which respect mathematical relations, and those which
form the data of logic, are all of this kind. There is no direct,
immediate intuition of God as the infinite, concrete, personal truth,
to be found in our consciousness; as we have previously proved in our
demonstration of the being of God. The necessity of using the term
_intuition_ in reference to our apprehension of the idea is,
therefore, an unfortunate one, and gives rise to a confusion of the
act in which we conclude the existence and attributes of God by a
rational, deductive judgment, with the act in which the soul
immediately beholds him by an intellectual vision. Intuition and
vision are, strictly speaking identical. Experience teaches us that
our first distinct vision is the vision of sensible objects, and that
we refer constantly to this as the standard of clear vision, since
there is nothing which appears to us equally clear and distinct. By
the aid of our perception of the sensible, we attain to the perception
of ourselves as existing, thinking spirit, and of other spirits like
our own. But we never attain a similar intuition of God by the mere
exercise of our intellective activity. It is of the essence of a
created spirit that its active intuition or intellective vision is
limited to finite objects as its immediate terminus, commensurate to
its finite visual power. It sees God only mediately, as his being and
attributes are reflected and imaged in finite things, and therefore
its highest contemplation of God is merely abstractive. The natural
felicity of created spirits is, therefore, at its maximum, when they
attain the most perfect exercise of their faculties in this mode of
action which is connatural to them. It is the fruition of God
mediately through his creation.

We now proceed to show that the Catholic doctrine permits us to
believe that this perfect felicity which is possible without
supernatural grace is actually conceded to those who die in original
sin only. It is reasonable to believe that any felicity which those
souls can attain, consistently with their position as liable to the
eternal consequences of original sin, will be actually attained by
them. For God has created them for good; and to what end as he made
them capable of this felicity, unless it be that they may possess and
enjoy it? We shall quote from a treatise written in the seventeenth
century by F. Maria Gabrielli, in defense of the doctrine of Cardinal
Sfondrati, a very thorough summary of the opinions of the theologians
on this point: [Footnote 183]

    [Footnote 183: Dispunctio Notarum, 40 etc, Colon. 1699.]

"Joseph Maria de Requesens [Footnote 184] enumerates in his little
book on the state of infants many theologians of great name who
concede to these infants a certain kind of imperfect natural
beatitude.

  [Footnote 184: de Statu Parvui. Rom. 1684.]

He says that Richard (of St. Victor) teaches that these children will
have more goods and greater joy in their possession than sinners have
who possess created goods in this life. Lyra says, that according to
the opinion of all doctors they will enjoy a happier life than would
be naturally possible in this present world. Almost in the same way
speak Origen, Marsilius, St. Buonaventure, Cajetan, and others {661}
cited by Cornelius a Lapide, who all teach that children dying without
baptism lead a happier life than those who are living on the earth.
Lessius writes, that although they may be said to be damned because
eternally deprived of the celestial glory for which they were created,
it is nevertheless credible that their state is far happier and more
joyful than that of any mortal man in this life. Salmeron says, these
children will rise again through Christ and above this natural order,
where they will daily advance in the knowledge of the works of God and
of separate substances, _will have angelic visits_, and will be like
our rustics living in the country, so that as they are in a medium
between glory and punishment, they will also occupy an intermediate
place.  Suarez says, that children will remain in their natural good
and will be content with their lot; and, together with Marsilius as
quoted by Azor, he describes to them a _knowledge and love of God
above all things_, and the other natural virtues. Didacus Ruiz, a
theologian of extensive reading, lays down this conclusion: Great
mercy will be mingled with the punishment of infants dying in original
sin, although not a diminution of the punishment of loss, since that
is incapable of diminution; yet in the remission of death which was
the punishment directly do to original sin, and would naturally have
endured to eternity, so that in spite of this infants will be
resuscitated at the day of judgment nevermore to die, endowed with
supernatural incorruptibility and impassibility, and they will also
supernaturally receive accidental, infused sciences, and will be
liberated from all pain, sadness, sickness, temptations, and personal
sins, which are naturally wont to arise from original sin.
Consequently, they are liberated from the punishment of hell which
they might have incurred. Albert (the Great), Alexander (de Hales),
and St. Thomas agree with this doctrine. Suarez shows that these
children obtain some benefit, in a certain way, from the merits of
Christ; and says that it pertains to the glory of Christ that he
should be adored and acknowledged as prince and supreme judge on the
day of universal judgment even by infants who died without grace. He
also considers it more probable that they will understand that they
have done neither good nor evil, and therefore receive neither glory
nor pain of sense, and also that they are deprived of glory on account
of sin (that is, original). He adds the reason of this, to wit, that
they may understand the benefit which they received, first in Adam and
afterward in Christ, and on this account may worship and adore him.
Martinonus adds: when even the demons love God in a certain way even
more than themselves as the common good of all, according to St.
Thomas, why shall not these children love Christ as their benefactor
and the author of their resurrection, and of the benefits which they
receive with it through Christ, who is the destroyer of corporeal as
well as spiritual death? He cites also what Suarez says, that although
one who should speak of the bodies of infants in the same way as of
the other damned would say nothing improbable, since St. Thomas speaks
of all indifferently, nevertheless since those bodies will have a
greater perfection and some gifts or benefits which are not at all due
to nature, therefore, in regard to these gifts, Christ may be said to
be their model. The same Martinonus subjoins: although those words of
the apostle, "In Christ all shall be made alive," Suarez affirms, must
be properly and principally understood of the predestined,
nevertheless they can probably be applied to a certain extent to these
children, inasmuch as they will have in their risen bodies a certain
special conformity and relation to Christ, which will be much less and
more imperfect in the damned than in the predestined. Nicholas de Lyra
affirms that "infants dying without baptism do not endure any sensible
punishment, but have a more delightful {662} life than can be had in
this present life, _according to all the doctors_,  [Footnote 185] who
speak concerning those who die in original sin alone."

  [Footnote 185: This is true of the great majority, but not of all.]

Those who die in actual sin, and the fallen angels, although in the
same state of existence with those who die in original gin only, that
is, in the Infernum, or sphere below the supernatural sphere of the
elect angels and men, have to undergo a punishment corresponding to
their individual demerits. This truth, which is clearly revealed in
the Holy Scriptures and defined by the church,  is confirmed by the
analogies of this present life. The transgressions of law is punished
in this world in accordance with the sense of justice which is
universal among men. There is no reason, therefore, for supposing that
the same principle of retribution is not continued in the future life.
Moreover, there is positive proof from reason that it must continue.
There has never been a more absurd doctrine broached than that of the
Universalists. To suppose that all men are saved on account of the
merits of Christ without regard to their moral state or personal
merits, is most unreasonable; and subversive of the moral order as
well as destructive of the idea of a state of probation. It is equally
absurd to imagine that the mere fact of death can make any change in
the state of the soul, or that separation from the body causes the
soul to make a mechanical rebound from a state of sin to a state of
holiness. The soul can be made happy only from its own intrinsic
principles, and not by a mere arbitrary appointment of God, or a
bestowal of extrinsic means of enjoyment. Sin brings its own
punishment, and the state of sin is in itself a state of misery. Plato
and other heathen sages taught the doctrine of future punishment, Mr.
Alger, who has written the most elaborate work on the subject of the
history of the doctrine of a future life which has appeared in recent
times, has fully proved the universality of the doctrine of future
punishment. Other rationalistic writers of ability have also of late
years seen the impossibility of removing this doctrine from the
teaching of Christianity and from universal tradition. We have already
fully proved that God does not deprive any of his rational creatures
of the felicity which is proper to their nature by his own act. It
follows from this that it is the creature himself who is the author of
his own misery. Existence is in itself a good, a boon conceded from
love by the Creator. So far as this good is turned into an evil, it is
by a voluntary perversion of the gift of a benevolent sovereign by the
subject himself.  The punishment which he must undergo in eternity is,
therefore, the necessary consequence of his own acts, together with
such positive penalties as are required by the ends of justice and the
universal good. This doctrine, which is the doctrine of the Catholic
Church, based on the clear evidence of Scripture and ecclesiastical
tradition,  [Footnote 186] is also the doctrine of calm, unbiased
reason, and of the common sense of mankind. The probation of the
Angels having been finished with their first trial, and the probation
of men ending for individuals at death, and for mankind generically at
the day of judgment, the epic of grace is closed for ever with the
completion of this present cycle of providence; and consequently the
state of all angels and men is fixed for eternity. Hell is, therefore,
an eternal state out of which there is no possibility of transition
into heaven.

  [Footnote 186: It is now considered by the best authorities as fully
  proved that Origen and St. Gregory Nyssen, who have been so often
  cited by the advocates of the doctrine of universal salvation, did
  not teach anything contrary to the Catholic doctrine of eternal
  punishment.]

Heaven, or life everlasting, is the eternal state of supreme,
supernatural beatitude, to which the elect angels and men are elevated
by the grace of God, and in which they participate in the {663}
glorified and the deific state of the Incarnate Word, through and
ineffable fellowship with the three persons of the Blessed Trinity.

Man being integrally composed by the union of soul and body, and his
corporeal nature being hypostatically United with the divine nature in
the person of the Word, the resurrection of the body must necessarily
precede his complete glorification. The only difficulty which the
doctrine of the resurrection of the body presents to the understanding
relates to the principal of identity between the earthly and celestial
body. This principle of identity, or unity and continuity of life,
must be the same with that which constitutes the unity of the body in
all the stages of its natural growth; and through all the changes of
its material particles, from the instant of its conception to its
disintegration by death. It is the soul which is the form of the body,
its vivifying principle. The soul and body have an innate
correspondence with each other, not only in the generic sense, but in
the sense of an individual aptitude of each separate soul for its own
body, and each separate body for its own soul. The soul and body act
and react upon each other perpetually while the development of both is
going on, producing a specific type in each individual which is a
modification of the generic type of manhood. The determination of the
active force of the soul to the production of this type remains with
it after the separation from the body. At the resurrection, it forms
anew its own proper body in accordance with this type which is the
product of the conjoint action of the soul and body during the earthly
life. There is, therefore, the same continuity and identity between
the earthly body and the celestial body that there is between the body
of the embryo and that of the full-grown man. The celestial body is
the same that it would have been if there had been no death
intervening between the two corporeal states, but a transformation of
the earthly body into the celestial perfection and glorification of
its proper type. If this is not all which is included in the
definition of the church respecting the identity of the body in the
two states, we must believe, in addition to what has been stated
already, that there is a material monad which forms the nucleus of the
corporeal organization and is a physical principle of identity. This
physical principle must contain virtually the whole body, as the germ
does the plant; it must be preserved when the body is disintegrated;
and reunited to the soul at the resurrection, in order to become the
physical germ from which the celestial body is developed.

The natural beatitude of the glorified angels and saints, which is
only a more exalted grade of that felicity which is accorded to the
inferior intelligent creation, need not be specially noticed. It is
the essential and supreme beatitude consisting in the clear, intuitive
vision of God, which is the principal subject of the divine revelation
proposed by the creed as the object of faith.

The possibility of this divine vision will not be called in question
by any who are properly speaking theists and rationalists, and with
others we have nothing to do at present. Much less will it be
questioned by any class of believers in the divine inspiration of the
Scriptures. We have not, then, the task of laboring to show the
intrinsic reasonableness and credibility of the doctrine, but merely
of setting forth that which can be made intelligible respecting the
_relation between our present state in which we are unable to see God,
and the future state in which we may be enabled to see him_. The
examination of this relation includes that of the means and method by
which the soul is elevated to an immediate intuition of that which
constitutes the divine essence and personality. It requires a
statement which shall show what is the nexus between the act which
constitutes the soul in the power to exercise {664} intelligence, and
that which constitutes it in the power to behold God immediately. It
may be said, that the essence of the soul is transformed or enlarged
in such a way that it becomes able, _per se_, to see God as it now
perceives the creation. But this would be equivalent to the creation
of a new essence with a new personality; which would destroy the
identity of the subject who is supposed to be elevated to this new
grade of existence. Moreover, according to the doctrine we have laid
down, that supernatural grace elevates the soul _super omnem naturam
creatam atque creabilem_, the supposition is impossible. We cannot go
over again the principles already discussed, but merely endeavored to
state such a theory of the mode of the beatific vision as shall be in
harmony with these principles. We, therefore, dismiss this first
supposition without further discussion. Another supposition may be
made, that the complete evolution of the idea of God which the soul
possesses in the present state in an obvolute manner bring it to that
relation _vis-a-vis_ two God as its intelligible object, which
corresponds to the relation of the visual faculty to the visible,
material object. We cannot accept this supposition any more than the
other. It contradicts the principles we have previously laid down, and
the generally accepted maxims of Catholic theology respecting the
supernatural quality of the power conceded by God to the creature of
beholding his intimate essence, just as palpably as the first one. We
do not deny that the reason of man is to a great degree in a obvolute
condition in this life, and that it is capable of evolution in another
and higher life. In this higher life the soul may be capable of
perceiving immediately the essence of things, and spiritual
substances, after the mode of intelligence which is proper to the
angels. But the angels themselves, according to Catholic theology,
though created at the summit of the intelligent order, with the
complete exercise of intelligence in the highest possible grade, have
no natural power to see God immediately; and their natural knowledge
of him, though very perfect, is merely abstractive contemplation like
that of men. The power of seeing spiritual substances, and the perfect
evolution of the idea of God in the soul, therefore, do not give the
intuition of the essence of God which constitutes the beatific vision.
The beatific vision is supernatural, by means of immediate light
communicated by God to the intelligence, called by theologians _lumen
gloriae_, the light of glory. By means of this light the intelligence
perceives God by an active intuition, or a clear, distinct act of
reflective consciousness, as immediately present to it in the creative
act, the cause of its existence, the source of its active power, the
light of its reason, in whom it lives in moves and as it's being. God
presents himself to the intelligence immediately in his concrete
being, as the visible world is presented to the eye by the light of
the sun. This is not accomplished by the creation of any new essential
faculty in the soul or the addition of anything to its substance. The
very same intelligent, thinking principle, or subject, which in this
present state of existence of firms to itself the existence of God by
and intellectual judgment, behold him in the beatific state by an
intuitive vision. It must be, then, by a concurrence of God with the
same faculties of the mind by which we think and reason and perceive,
and our self-conscious, in our natural mode of rational activity, that
the intelligence is raised to this higher power of supernatural
intuition. That act which constitutes it rational in the natural
order, must be the basis and substratum of its supernatural tuition of
the divine essence. It has already been proved that a created spirit
cannot be constituted rational in the first instance by the beatific
vision of God; that is, cannot have an essence whose intrinsic,
necessary act is a clear intuition of the divine essence, like that
{665} act in which God has the eternal, necessary intelligence of
himself. The created spirit must first be constituted a rational,
intelligent subject, before it can be capable of a supernatural
illumination. It must be extrinsicated from God, made a distinct,
thinking substance, and constituted in its own finite, rational
activity; before there can be any subject, or really existing, active
force, with which God can concur; with which he can unite himself, and
to which he can communicate the power of looking back upon himself by
a distinct intuition. The created spirit must be, therefore, in a
certain sense, self-subsisting, or containing in itself its own
rational principle. It must have its own separate self-consciousness
as a thinking substance, containing within itself all the necessary
principles of thought. The necessary, the universal, the eternal, or,
in a word, the idea, cannot be contained in a created spirit in its
concrete being, but only in an abstract form, any image, or a created
word. This is identical with the intelligence itself; it is what
constitutes its intellective force and principle of activity. In man,
as we have already seen, this intellective activity needs the
concurrence of exterior, sensible objects, acting on it through the
senses and occasioning perceptions and reflections, before it can
attain distinct reflective consciousness of itself, and evolve its own
ideal formula. This reflective consciousness cannot go back of the
soul itself, where it finds the abstractive idea passively received
from concrete being. The contact of being, or of God who is alone
being, gives the apprehension of being to the soul by creating it. The
creative act, and the being who produces the creative act, are
unperceived by the soul, and lie back of its existence, which is the
terminus of the creative act. The soul's separate activity begins at
the terminus of God's activity, and is projected forward to its own
proper terminus. Its natural activity would never bring it face to
face with its creator, God, or enable it to contemplate him in any
other way than it is now able to do so, by the vividly apprehended
demonstration of his being from its own first principles and exterior
works of his hand. In order that the soul, in its reflexive acts, may
see God continually and clearly, it is necessary that he should unite
himself in a new and ineffable manner to its substance and its
faculties, and concur with them in such a way that they can look
beyond their natural limit of vision into the infinitude of the being
of God which surrounds the creation like an ocean on every side. The
soul, which is, so to speak, projected from God by creation, must
receive a movement of return, which does not arrest itself at the mere
fact of self-consciousness, but brings the soul to a consciousness of
God as immediately and personally producing its self-consciousness.
This act is most perfect in the human soul of Jesus Christ, the
Incarnate Word. The personality of the human and divine natures in him
being one, there is but one Ego. The human soul, therefore, terminates
its act of self-consciousness, not upon itself, as its own
_subsistentia_, but upon the divine Ego or person. It is conscious of
itself as a distinct substance, but not a substance completed and
brought to distinct subsistence in itself. Its consciousness
terminates in the divine person, and is referred to it, so that Jesus
Christ, in every human act, affirms himself by self-consciousness as
both God and man in one person. The union of glorified spirits to God
is similar to this hypostatic union, though not so perfect, and not
implying personal identity. The nature and mode of this union of the
created spirit with God, by which it is glorified, beatified, and even
deified--as the doctors of the church fear not to affirm, in
accordance with the declaration of the Holy Scripture--is impenetrable
to the human understanding. The Indian philosophers, having retained a
confused idea of it from the primitive revelation, have expressed this
idea in their sublime mysticism with all the superb imagery of their
luxuriant imaginations. With {666} them, it is an absorption of all
individual souls in the infinite fount of being. Nearly all their
language may, however, be adopted, in a good sense, as expressing the
Christian dogma, if clear, philosophical conceptions are substituted
for their obscure and unscientific notions of the creative act.
Without these clear conceptions and definitions, it is impossible to
escape money into pantheism. The language of Christian mystic writers,
even, is liable to misapprehension as expressing the pantheistic
notion of the identity of God and the creatures, unless their terms
are properly explained. In point of fact, Eckhart did give expression
to some propositions which implied pantheism and were condemned by the
Holy See. The mystic writers continually affirm that the soul is made
_una res cum Deo_, and becomes God by participation. By this, however,
they do not mean that the soul loses its distinct substance or becomes
identified with the divine nature. They intend to signify and
ineffable union between the soul and God, in which, each remaining
distinct in its own proper essence, God communicates his own
knowledge, sanctity, glory, and beatitude to the soul; and admits it
into the Fellowship of the Blessed Trinity. This is the vanishing
point of all theology, and of all sciences, beyond which even the most
illuminated eye cannot penetrate. The return of all things which
proceed from God as first cause to God as final cause, consummated in
this beatific union, solves all the problems of time; there remains
only the problem of eternity, which eternity alone can solve.




ORIGINAL.


MY AUNT'S WORK-BOX.


  Sure, such a mess was never seen
  Of white and brown and black and green!
  Not Noah's Ark, Pandora's box,
     Such dire confusion e'er displayed
  Here's wool, shorn from the fleecy flocks
     That o'er Circassian Meadows strayed,
  With spools of cotton, every number;
  Buttons and studs, and other lumber;
  Needles of every size and kind,
    The blunts and sharps, the coarse and fine;
  White linen, recent wounds to bind;
    And rows of pins in order to shine.
  Lo! Thimbles, for each finger fit,
  And yarn too darn with or to knitt.
  Here's sewing-silk of every hue
  From brilliant red to modest blue;
  And floss, with which the maiden traces,
    With all the painter's art and skill,
  Flowers, landscapes, birds, and human faces,
    The verdant field or purling rill.
  Here every sort of thread is seen,
  The jolly ball and languid skein;
  And here's the ivory thing that shapes
  Small eyelet-holes in caps and capes.

{667}

  Look at that pair of rusty tweezers!
  They must blame their many years.
  Dear! what a tiny pair of scissors!
  Sure, they're the twins of those huge shears.
  Here's lots of crewel, which I mean
  To use, someday, to work the screen.
  Here are pin-cushions and emery bags,
  Small shreds of lace and other rags,
  Linen, calico, and crape,
  And hanks of twine and bits of tape.
  In short, here's every earthly thing
  That thrifty wife could wish, I ween;
  But I've not time to say or sing
  The treasures of this magazine.




Original.

HOW MY AUNT PILCHER FOUND THE CATHOLIC CHURCH.


Perhaps you don't know my aunt, Patients Pilcher? Very likely not. i
know her very well, and am going to tell you something about her. She
is my  mother's sister, and was born in the town of Squankum, Vermont,
where she lived until she was over thirty years old--she says,
twenty-five, but that don't matter--when she came to New York to see
Uncle George. Well, Aunt Pilcher was mightily pleased and surprised
when she saw New York; and as she knew every house, barn, and fence,
and every lane and field in Squankum, and to whom they belonged, she
thought she must find out as much about New York. She had no sooner
taken off her bonnet and shawl when she got to our house--I say _our_,
because I live with Uncle George since mother died--than she wanted
to put them on again and go out "and see the places, and find out
where people lived, and git introduced," as she said, adding that she
would "hev to begin directly, or she would never git through."

My Aunt Pilcher is a very tall, thin woman, with a very cold face, as
I found out on the first day she came to our house, when she bent over
and kissed me. She thought I wiped off her kiss, and said "Oh, fie!"
but it wasn't that, it was the cold. As I was saying, she wanted to
see all of New York, and I believe she has, too, by this time; but she
soon got disgusted with what she called "the offishness of the
Yorkers." "You don't know anybody," said she, "and nobody 'pears to
want to know you." She never tired, however, of seeing the many
beautiful buildings in the city, and among them all the churches seem
to her to be the most attractive and the most worthy of her close
investigation.

"I'm gittin 'most ashamed of our wooden meetin'-house to Squankum,"
said she, one day, after returning from a visit to Trinity Church; "we
used to be kinder proud of it, though, when some of the folks down to
Rattlebog came over to spend Sabbath with us; 'cause ye know what a
mis'able little country skule-house of a place they've got over there.
Then, ye've got sich a lot o' churches, my! I'm 'most afeered never
see them all, or I'll forgit abeout the first ones afore I git
through."

"What sort of churches have you seen, aunty?" I asked.

{668}

"Oh! I've seen white-marbled ones and brown-stun ones, and a sort o'
speckled mixed ones like Washin'ton cake, ye know, a streak o' jelly
and a streak o' cake. Then agin, I've seen all kinds o' styles;
Grecian, Beshantem, Gothys, high-steepled style, low-steepled style,
and no-steepled style. But I haint seeing a green winder-shutter one
like ours to Squankum yit. I s'pose the taste in architectur here in
York don't run that 'a way."

But I was not thinking of the outside of the churches when I asked her
the question, but of their inside. The truth was that Uncle George and
I had been two or three times to see Mass and Vespers in the Catholic
Church, and I was so full of all I had seen and heard there that I was
nearly dying to talk with some one about it. But Uncle George had told
me that he thought Aunt Jane--that is, Uncle George's sister who keeps
house for him and me--might possibly disapprove of our going again if
I happened to mention it, and so I took care to say nothing about it.
I was very anxious to find out if Aunt Pilcher had seeing a Catholic
Church, so I asked her if she happened to see any boys in the churches
she had been to.

"Boys!" said she. "Why boys? Of course boys. Shouldn't boys go to
meetin' as well as girls?"

"But boys dressed up," said I.

"Dressed up! Laws yes, in their best Sunday-go-to-meetin', as they ort
to be."

"In long red coats, perhaps, down to their heels," I suggested, in
spite of Uncle George's frown; "with nice white lace jackets over that
again, and carrying torch-lights and censers, and going up and down
and all around?" I added, eager to describe all I had seen.

"Why! what's come to the boy?" exclaimed Aunt Pilcher, raising up her
hands in astonishment. "He ain't right," meaning in my head."'

"Oh! yes, he is!" said Uncle George, "that's the way the Catholics go
on in their churches, and I suppose that Fred must have seen it
somewhere."

"Catholics!" ejaculated Aunt Pilcher, in a tone of horror, and half
looking over her shoulder as if some ghost of one might come in at the
sound of the word. "Ye don't mean them papists and other Jesuits that
call themselves Catholics! It's enough to make a body hate the name."

"That won't do, you know, sister Pilcher," said Uncle George, "because
it is in the Apostles' Creed."

"I know it," returned Aunt Pilcher, "but I'd like to know what the
Holy Catholic Church in the Apostles' Creed has got to do with them
ignorant idolaters, the Catholics, the Roman papists, I mean?"

"It's the same name, that's all," said Uncle George, with a sly
twinkle in his eye; "and they say it's the same thing."

"Which in course is nonsense!" ejaculated my aunt.

"Oh! of course it is," rejoined Uncle George. "We are the real and
true Catholic Church, and if some one wanted to come to our true and
real Holy Catholic Church we would just tell him to ask for the
Catholic church and anybody would show him."

"Well, they ort to, that's all I got to say," said Aunt Pilcher
doubtfully.

"Certainly," continued Uncle George, "and I've no doubt now, sister
Pilcher, that if you were to go out and ask people in the street here
to point you to a Catholic church that they would show you our
Protestant churches directly."

Aunt Pilcher looked very hard at Uncle George, as if she feared he
might be making game of her; but he looked so solemn and sedate that
she didn't suspect, but I did, and I got a crick in the back of my
neck trying to keep from laughing. She seemed to think that she was
bantered by my uncle, and said:

"Well, I never sot eout to do a thing yit that I didn't do it, and I'm
going to do _that_."

"Hurrah! Aunt Pilcher," I shouted, "I would too, if I were you." And
that confirmed her in her engagement, {669} for the very next morning
she put on her bonnet and shawl, and hung her reticule on her arm,
without which she never went out of doors, and off she started. She
was gone all day and did not return until tea-time, appearing
completely fagged out and exhausted. She was not in the best of humors
either, to judge of the way she pulled off her out-door additions to
her ordinary dress, and bade me "carry them things up-stairs, for
people dead a'most and starved can't always be expected to wait on
theirselves." But not a word did she say about the object of her long
day's journey. I was all curiosity to know where, she had been and
what she had seen; and when we had nearly got through tea, that is,
Uncle George, Aunt Jane, Aunt Pilcher, I, and Bub Thompson, who had
come to play with me in the afternoon, and said he smelt short-cake,
and wondered whether Aunt Jane could make it nice, and so got invited
to try them--then I could stand it no longer, and said I, "See
anything nice to-day, Aunt Pilcher?"

"I didn't particularly _see_ anything, my dear, but I heered something
I shan't forgit, I can tell you, if hearin' a thing a hundred and
ninety-nine times over is enough to' make a body remember it."

"What did you hear, aunt?" asked everybody at once.

"Hear!" exclaimed she. "These Yorkers never knows anything if a body
asks them a perlite question abeout who lives in any house, or which
is the way to somewhere; but to-day I do think they was all possessed,
for everybody 'peared to know only one church, when, dear knows, they
ort to know their own churches, I should think, and not be a'
directin' everybody everlastin'ly to St. Peter's."

"How was that, aunt?" asked every one again.

"Well," said she, "I told you what I was goin' eout for, and I went.
Neow I always do things in order: commence at the beginnin', I say,
and then ye'll know when ye git to the eend. So I went clean deown to
the battery, and then I turns reound and comes up. Not wishin' to ask
questions of people _too_ fur off (for these Yorkers don't know where
anythin' is ef it ain't right deown under their nose), I walked on
till I got pretty near Trinity Church, belongin' to the Episcopals,
and says I to a knowledgable lookin' man, says I, 'Couldn't ye pint me
eout, neow, a Catholic church?' 'I can't precisely pint ye to it,'
says he, which I thort was queer, with a Christian church right afore
his eyes, 'but I can tell you where one is: in Barclay street, right
up Broadway, ma'am, Saint Peter's church,' and off he went like a
shot. These Yorkers air in _sich_ a hurry, they won't stop to hear a
body eout. Well, on I walks, and I saw another church, Saint Paul's in
Broadway, similarly belongin' to the Episcopals; and this time I got
straight in front of it. The folks 'peared to be in sich an orful
hurry jist here that I thort somebody must be dead; or somebody's
house had ketch't afire, and I couldn't git eout the first word afore
the person I spoke to was a whole block off, and I got kind o'
bewildered like. At last, I tried a lady--for I give the men folks
up--and says I to her:

"'Is this a meetin'-house of the Holy Catholic Church, ma'am?'

"'No, ma'am,' says she rather short, 'ef you want to go there, you had
better go deown Barclay street, next street above, St. Peter's on the
left,' and off she went. Well; I goes deown Barclay street, jist to
see this St. Peter's, and do you believe, I found eout it was one of
them papist churches.'

"That was rather strange," interrupted Uncle George.

"I thort it was a leetle so myself," said Aunt Pilcher, "and I began
to conceit people took me for a papist or a Jesuit, so I made up my
mind to say so to once; and on I walks agin till I come to Broome
street, deown which I went till I found a nice look-in' church, and
says I to a minister-lookin' gentleman, says I:

{670}

"'I'm not a Jesuit, sir.'

"'Glad to hear it, ma'am,' says he, 'there are concealed Jesuits all
over.'

"'I'm a Protestant,' says I, 'pre-haps you can show me a meetin'-house
that believes in the Holy Catholic Church; is that one there?'

"I am grieved,' says he, 'that anybody should wish to know anythin'
abeout the Catholic Church, and I hope you have no intention of goin'
to sich a place of abomination.'

"He didn't 'pear to know my mean-in', so says I, 'I mean the _real_
Catholic Church.'

"'Ma'am,' says he, 'real or unreal, it is always the same thing;
always was and always will be. That is a Baptist church, ma'am, before
you, and not a Catholic mass house. There is one of them, called St.
Peter's, in Barclay street, I believe,' and off he walked without
sayin' another word. 'Patience,' says I to myself, 'be true to your
name,' for, to tell the truth, I was gettin' a leetle bit flustrated.
I walks on, turnin' corners and reound and reound, and at last I got
into a street called Bedford street. There I saw a meetin'-house with
a sign over the door tellin' it was a Methodist. Says I to a man that
was jist then sweepin reound the door--thinkin' to begin right this
time--says 'I:

"'My Christian friend, the apostles believed in the Holy Catholic
Church.'

'"Not a bit of it,' says he.

"'Oh! yes,' says I, 'they did; it is in the Apostles' Creed.'

"'Is it?' says he.

"'Yes, it is, and what's more, you ort to know it,' says I, gettin'
bothered with sich ignorance.

"'None o' yer impudence,' says he.

"'Why, good lands!' says I, almost swearin', 'they believe in the Holy
Catholic Church in this meetin'-house, don't they?'

"'No, they don't, and don't want to,' says he, and slammed the door in
my face. Then I wanders reound and seen lots of churches, but I didn't
see anybody, to speak to till I got ever so fur off in the Fifth
avenue, where I saw a handsome brick church with a tall steeple, and
there I saw some people goin' in. I asked what was goin' on, and they
said it was a prayer--meetin". I should liked to have jined in a York
prayer-meetin', but I wasn't in a fit state jist then--in sich a
twitter as I was--so I ups and speaks to a young lady who looked like
a Sabbath school teacher, and says I:

"'The real Catholic Church in the Apostles' Creed is where the gospil
is preached.' She kinder opened her eyes at me, and says she:

"'The gospil is preached here, ma'am; but this is not a Catholic
church; this is a Presbyterian church.'

"'But,' says I agin,' where the gospil is preached is the true
Catholic Church.'

"'I guess not,' says she, 'the gospil is not preached in the Catholic
Church.'

"'Well, ma'am,' says I, feelin' considerably riled, 'I guess I larnt
my catechism, not afore you was born, but abeout the same time, I
should say; and I'm jist lookin' for somebody else that knows it, and
if anybody in York knows what and where the Holy Catholic Church is;'
and do you believe she actually turned 'reound to another gal and said
I was crazy, and had run away from a 'sylum. I went away disgusted and
tried agin, one plase and another. I even tried the Washin'ton cake
church in the Fourth avenue, but not a soul would own up to what they
ort to believe. You wouldn't get papists sendin' you to their St.
Peter's, I'll be bound, if you asked them for a Protestant church."

"Of course not," said Uncle George, "and what conclusion have you come
to, sister Pilcher?"

"I've come to the conclusion," said Aunt Pilcher, "that these Yorkers
don't know the Apostles' Creed."

"I should say," said Bub Thompson, "that those folks you 'saw didn't
believe it."

{671}

"Boy!" exclaimed Aunt Pilcher, with an awful expression of
countenance, "speak when you air spoken to."

"How is it when you're spoken about?" asked Bub; "'cause I'm a
Catholic, a papist as you say, and you've been speaking about my
church."

"My! I never!" ejaculated Aunt Pilcher, looking first at one and then
at another for explanation.

"Sister Pilcher," said Uncle George, "the truth is, it is no use for
us Protestants to call ourselves Catholics, for we are not. You see
how everybody denied it. Of course you could never get a Protestant to
own to the name of  'Catholic,' either here in New York or anywhere
else, any more than you could persuade any one to give us the name;
and it seems to me that where the name is, and always has been, the
reality is likely to be. As for your experiment to-day, it is just
what would have happened thirteen hundred years ago; for I read in a
book that Bub Thompson's father lent me, that St. Augustine said,
speaking about the sects that tried to call themselves 'Catholics' in
his time: 'The very name of _Catholic_ detains me in the Catholic
Church, which that church has alone, and not without cause, obtained
among so many heretics, in such a way as that while all heretics wish
to be called Catholics, nevertheless not one of them will dare to
point out his basilica or house to a stranger inquiring for a place of
Catholic worship."  [Footnote 187]

  [Footnote 187: Epist. contra Manich. I. 5, 6.]

"Well! sakes alive! live and larn," exclaimed Aunt Pilcher, "but it's
enough to make a body think they never knowed anythin' when they find
oat some things!"




Translated from Le Contemporain.

A PORTRAIT OF FRA ANGELICO.

BY EDMOND LAFONDE.


At dawn of a summer's day in the year of grace 1453, a Dominican monk
set out from his convent of Santa Maria sopra Minerva, at Rome. He was
an old man, but the brightness of youth still shown in his aged
countenance, attributable, perhaps, to the shadowless sanctity of his
life, and the purity of a soul which had never known wrinkles. He
walked slowly in his dress of white woolen covered with a black
scapular, his shaven head bared to the sun, his eyes cast down, and
his hands employed in rolling the beads of the Rosary of St. Dominic.
He traversed the square of the Pantheon, and was going to cross the
bridge of St. Angelo, when, in passing the prison of the Tor di Nona,
he saw coming out of it a funeral cortege; a condemned person, led to
death in the usual place of execution, the piazza della Bocca Verita.
A man nearly forty years of age, of noble and proud figure, but
seemingly worn out by vice or grief; his costume curious, and wholly
oriental; clothed in red silk, with a turban ornamented with gold and
ermine. A Franciscan accompanied him, but endeavored in vain to direct
his thoughts to heaven, and make him kiss the crucifix, from which he
turned away his lips in discussed. The crowd that followed, becoming
infuriated, exhorted him to penitence, crying out, "Amico, pensa a
salvar l'anima." "My friend, think of saving thy soul."

{672}

As soon as the Franciscans saw a brother priest, he called to him,
saying: "Ah! Fra Giovanni, in the name of the holy friendship which
united our two glorious patriarchs, St. Dominic and St. Francis, come
to my aid. You see this unhappy man. He is one of the Greeks just come
from Italy, since the taking of Constantinople. His name is
Argyropoulos. He has murdered a Roman woman; is doomed to die, and
will not reconcile himself with God. He is not merely schismatical,
but pagan. Try if you can be more successful than I." At a sign from
the chief of the guard the _cortege_ stopped--for in Rome, since the
earliest age, pontifical justice does not wish to kill the soul, and
makes every effort to save it while sacrificing the guilty body. Fra
Giovanni tried to speak to the Greek, but was met with repulse and
blasphemy. With tears rolling down his cheeks he whispered a few words
to the Franciscan, who, elevating his voice, thus addressed the chief
of the guard: "This son of St. Dominic," he said, "is Fra Giovanni of
Fiesole, the favorite painter of his holiness. He is going to the
Vatican, and will ask the Holy Father a delay of one day, in order to
try once more to induce the sinner to repent." The people applauded,
and the captain of the guard declared himself willing to assume the
responsibility of suspending the execution while awaiting a new order
from the sovereign pontiff. The condemned man, who remained apparently
immovable during this debate, was re-conducted into the prison of Tor
di Nona, where still later were to be enclosed the guilty family of
Cenci, and the Franciscan entered with him. The crowd remained a long
time before the door, losing none of its interest or curiosity. Fra
Giovanni again pursued his way to the Vatican, his soul, so calm
ordinarily, deeply agitated and troubled by the unfortunate event.
Arrived at the square of St. Peter, he kneeled by the obelisk which
contains a piece of the true cross; then passing the guards, who were
daily accustomed to see him, entered without difficulty into the
pontifical palace. He repaired immediately to the new chapel, which
Pope Nicholas V. had just finished, and charged him to decorate; for
it is time to say that Fra Giovanni was the painter-monk of Fiesole,
whose purity of genius and sanctity of life had surnamed him Beato
(blessed) or Fra Angelico (the angelical brother), under which latter
name he is most generally known, and which is equally appropriate to
his beauty of soul and to his works. The great Pope Nicholas V., who
had known him at Florence, and watched the budding of these marvellous
products of his pencil in the convent of St. Mark, had just called him
to Rome, where Eugene IV. had already bid him come, to enthrone in his
own person Christian art in the Vatican. Nicholas V. had built in his
palace a small chapel, in which he desired the painter-monk to retrace
for him the story of St. Lawrence and St. Stephen, reuniting them in
the same poetical commemoration; as had been the custom of the
faithful to invoke them, since their bones had lain united outside the
walls in the ancient basilica of St. Lawrence. This chapel being very
small is lighted by a single arched window; happily it has been
preserved, and is one of the sanctuaries where the friends of
Christian art love to make a pilgrimage. Below the window is now
placed the altar which formerly faced it. On the three other sides Fra
Angelico has painted two series of compositions, one above the other;
in the arches of the upper part is represented, in six compartments,
the history of St. Stephen, and in the lower that of St. Lawrence. On
entering the chapel Fra Angelico fell on his knees to pray God to
guide his pencil, then commenced to paint the scene where St. Stephen
was led to martyrdom. He there represented an enraged Jew, who
conducts the saint outside of Jerusalem, while others pushed and
pursued him with stones in their hands. While painting the violence of
the Jews Fra Angelico {673} thought deeply of the Greek whose
execution he had arrested, and awaited with pious impatience the
arrival of the Pope, who never failed daily to visit the works of his
favorite painter. The Dominican interrupted his work now and then to
rest, reposing his mind with prayer and singing occasionally a stanza
of Dante, who was then for mystical painters an unfailing source of
religious inspiration. He recited the exquisite passage where Dante
paints the glorious martyrdom of St. Stephen:

  "Poi vidi genti accese in fuoco d'ira
  Con pietre un giovinetto ancider, forte
  Gridando a se pur; Martira, martira, ect."

"Then I saw an excited and angry crowd, stoning and forcing onward a
young man, with loud cries of 'Kill him, kill him!' And him I saw bent
to the earth by the weight of death, but with eyes uplifted and turned
to heaven; in the midst of the terrible struggle praying the sovereign
God to forgive his enemies, with an expression so beautiful as to
command pity and respect."

At last the door of the chapel opened and the Pope entered. Nicholas
V. was old, but more bent by sorrow than age. In his youth he was
called the poor student of Sarzana, and had passed his life in the
society of saints and literary men. Become sovereign pontiff, he
encouraged piety, science, art, and letters; laid the foundation of
St. Peter's, embellished Rome, and merited truly to give his name to
the fifteenth century as Leo X., gave his to the sixteenth. During the
Council of Florence he had known Fra Angelico, and soon perceived that
the soul of the Dominican artist was worth far more than his pencil.
Pope Eugene IV. had thus judged him when he wished to name this holy
religious Archbishop of Florence. Fra Angelico, seized with fear on
learning the intentions of the pontiff, besought to be spared so great
a weight. His vocation, he said, was not to govern, but stated at the
same time he could recommend a brother of his order far more worthy
than he of such a dignity. Eugene IV. listened to his suggestion and
named for archbishop the monk who was afterward to be St. Antonine.
When Nicholas V. entered the chapel he appeared so unhappy that Fra
Angelico, in kneeling to implore his blessing, could not forbear
asking the cause of his sadness; if some recent misfortune had not
befallen him. "O my son," replied the Pope, "the misfortune which has
happened me is the catastrophe long since foretold, but not the less
bitter to all Christian hearts, the taking of Constantinople by the
Turks! My dreams, even, are troubled, for since I have been Pope the
principal aim of my pontificate has been the pacification of
Christianity, so as to unite and direct all our forces in a crusade
against the Turks. But the unfortunate Greeks have upset all my
projects in their hatred of the papacy, preferring the turban to the
tiara. They have broken the peace of Florence, ill received the
assistance of the Latins, and now their capital is no longer for Jesus
Christ, but Mahomet. Ah! Fra Giovanni, can any one in the world be
more wretched than I? Were it not that I fear a failure of duty, I
would renounce the pontifical dignity, to become again Master Thomas
of Sarzana. Then, one day gave me more true happiness than I have
since enjoyed in a whole year." The Pope shed tears abundantly.
[Footnote 188]

  [Footnote 188: See this scene in Muratori, volume 25th, page 286.
  The taking of Constantinople was a mortal blow to Nicholas V. From
  that day he was never seen to smile.]

Fra Giovanni deeply commiserated him, and replied in a voice choked
with emotion: "Most Holy Father, let us resign ourselves to the will
of God. Bear your cross as did he of whom you are the vicar; I wish I
were the good Cyrenean to aid you. Let us contemplate the images of
the two martyrs I am to paint on the walls of the chapel, and, like
them, let us learn to suffer." "You are right, Fra Giovanni. Your soul
and talent are truly consolatory, and I love to come here and open my
heart, charged as it is with incurable anguish." {674} Just then
twelve o'clock struck. The Pope knelt down to recite the Angelus, and
dried the tears which since St. Peter so often had reddened the eyes
of the sovereign pontiffs. At this moment a prelate came to announce
that the dinner of his holiness was ready. "My son," said the Pope,
"do not leave me in this hour of affliction. I beg you to dine at my
table." "Holy Father," replied the humble monk, "without the
permission of the prior I dare not do so. I must dine with my
community." "But, my son, I can dispense with this obligation. Come,
come!" The Dominican dined, therefore, _tete-a-tete_ with the Pope,
but in silence, and with eyes cast down, as if he had been in his own
refectory. It was not a day of abstinence, and meat was served on the
Pope's table, but the monk refused to partake of it, "Fra Giovanni,"
said Nicholas, "you exhaust yourself with this painting, and I perhaps
urge you too closely to finish it. You have worked hard to day, and
should strengthen yourself anew by eating some meat." "Holy Father, I
can not without the permission of the prior." The Pope smiled, but
could not help admiring the innocent scruples of the pious monk. "My
son," said he, "do you not think the authority of the sovereign
pontiff greater than the permission of your prior? For to-day I
dispense with the rule of St. Dominic, and order you to eat all that
is offered you."  [Footnote 189]

  [Footnote 189: This scene, which so well portrays the virtue of Fra
  Angelico, is related by Vasari and Fra Leandro Alberti; De Viris
  Illustribus Ordinis Predicatorum, libri sex.]

The Dominican obeyed in silence, but his mind seemed preoccupied. He
thought unceasingly of the poor guilty Greek whose execution he had
suspended, but he dared not speak of him to the Pope. Nicholas V.
perceived his distraction and asked him of what he was thinking. Then
Fra Angelico related to him the story of Argyropoulos, and added:
"Holy Father, with justice your government has condemned this unhappy
man to be executed, but I know your holiness desires not the death of
his soul, and I have hoped your mercy would grant him the delay of a
day that he may still have time to repent." "My son, I thank you for
having acted thus. I accord you not only one day,  but several if
necessary." Nicholas V. then wrote an order suspending the execution,
and gave it to Beato, who full of joy, asked permission to retire
without finishing his repast. He obtained it, and in haste quitted the
Vatican. After passing the bridge of St. Angelo, he was strongly
tempted to stop at the prison of Tor di Nona; but he considered his
duty to his convent, where doubtless his absence from dinner had
occasioned surprise. When he entered the cloister of Santa Maria sopra
Minerva, the brothers had left the refectory, so the prior exacted of
the dilatory monk a penance, which consisted of eating his dinner in a
kneeling posture. The Beato, without saying a word to excuse himself,
knelt down and simply made a sign he would rather not eat. The prior
then ordered him to explain his absence. "My Father," said he, "I am
guilty; mea culpa. His Holiness wished me to dine with him, and
obliged me to eat meat without your permission." The prior admired the
simplicity and obedience of the blessed one, but said nothing to
disturb his humility. The habit of obedience was so natural to him
that all orders for his art were received through his spiritual
superior; and when any work was requested of him, his friends were
referred to the prior, as nothing could be done without his consent.
He refused to stipulate a price for his works, and distributed all
they bought him to the poor and unfortunate. "He loved the poor during
his life," said Vasari, "As tenderly as his soul now loves the heaven
where he enjoys the glory of the blessed." If he loved the poor, Fra
Angelico better loved souls; he obtained from the prior permission to
go immediately to the prison. He ran thither with the wings of
charity, and showed the order from the Pope which delayed the
execution. He gained {675} admittance to what is now called the
prisoner's cell, now that so many of our ancient abbeys are
transformed into houses of detention. Argyropoulos presented himself,
grave and sad, clothed always in his red dress and white turban, which
gave him an air of majesty quite oriental. He was seated on a straw
bed, but his attitude was King Solomon enthroned. The Dominican, with
his white robe and angelical figure, resembled one of the beautiful
lilies he so often painted in the hands of the angel of the
annunciation; one of the lilies of the field, of which the Saviour
himself has said, "Not Solomon in all his glory could be arrayed like
one of these." Fra Angelico, without saying anything at first, stopped
at the entrance, and, kneeling, prayed God to cure this ulcerated
soul. A ray of light, which shone obliquely through the only window,
illuminated his bared and shaven head, and gave him the anticipated
crown of glory of the blessed. The Greek contemplated with
astonishment this luminous apparition, and thought he dreamed again
the dream of the patriarch Jacob, who saw angels ascend and descend a
mysterious ladder. Having strengthened himself by prayer, Fra Angelico
approached the prisoner, and said in a voice truly angelical: "My
brother!" But the charm to which Argyropoulos had given himself up at
the vision of the blessed one was broken by the sound of his voice; he
saw in him only a Catholic monk, and thus a being he detested. "I am
not thy brother, we have nothing in common, and I hate the religion of
the Azymites."  [Footnote 190]

  [Footnote 190: A name that the Greeks gave the Catholics on account
  of the discussion on the _unleavened_ bread as material of the
  eucharist.]

"My brother, you and I are Christians, although fifteen years ago you
have separated the Greek and Latin churches, which the Council of
Florence so happily united."

"No! As our great Duke Notaras said, there is no peace between us. I
would rather see the turban of Mahomet at Constantinople than the
tiara of the Pope."

"O my brother, can you say so? If you are not Catholic, are you not
Christian?"

"No, I am so no longer. I do not believe in God; and besides, if there
is a God, I have committed crimes too great for him to pardon. I am
pagan and of the school of Plato; I prefer Jupiter to Jehovah, Plato
to the Scripture, and the gods of Homer to the Saints of
Christianity."

"Why, my brother, you have gone backward two thousand years, to
breathe what Dante calls the fetid air of paganism, 'Il puzzo del
paganes mo.'"

Fra Angelico tried in vain to move this heart, as hardened and
desperate as that of Judas; during three days he fasted, prayed, and
begged the prayers of his fraternity, offered himself to God as a
victim to save this soul, and employed against his own body the
instruments of penance. But God did not grant him the grace he sought.
Every morning, while painting at the Vatican, he rendered an account
to the Pope of his unsuccessful efforts, and recommended the Greek to
the pontifical prayers. The three days expired; again he solicited a
still longer delay of the execution. "Holy Father," said he, "a
residence in prison seems to exasperate this unhappy man; perhaps I
might obtain a better hearing if I could take him out and let him
breathe the fresh air." "I can refuse you nothing, Fra Giovanni. Bring
him to see this chapel, I am sure your painting will do his soul some
good." "I will bring him to-morrow, since your Holiness permits me,
and at the same time solicit your daily visit, as I am certain his
meeting the vicar of Jesus Christ will have more effect on him than my
pictures." Nicholas V. promised to do so, and wrote an order to place
the captive at liberty for one day, and at the responsibility of Fra
Giovanni. It was a touching spectacle to see the Pope and the monk so
generously united in their {676} efforts to convert this paganized
schismatic.

The next morning Fra Angelico ran to the prison, brought out the
Greek, and proposed to him to see his pictures, without mentioning the
Pope. Argyropoulos, who rather prided himself on his knowledge of art
as well as of literature, willingly accepted the invitation. The fresh
air and the glorious Roman sun softened his mood, hitherto so
ferocious, and gave him an air almost of serenity. Fra Angelico,
transported with joy, conducted his future neophyte to the Vatican,
and introduced him to the chapel, praying God to work in him the same
miracle which he had granted to St. Methodius, whose painting of the
Last Judgment, on the walls of a palace belonging to the King of
Bulgaria, had not only converted the king, but as many of his subjects
as looked upon it. The Greek was deeply affected by these admirable
pictures, and took upon himself to explain them lengthily. To show his
artistic knowledge, he criticised the executioners who stoned St.
Stephen, and thought their countenances lacked sufficient energy. The
painter monk humbly accepted the criticism, which was not wanting in
justice. A competent judge has said that the character of Fra Angelico
was so formed of a love amounting to ecstasy that he never could
familiarize himself with dramatic scenes where hateful and violent
passions had the ascendency. In the painting of the life of St.
Lawrence, the Beato begged the Greek to particularly observe the
prison window where the martyr was converting a man on his knees, who
afterward became St. Hippolytus. "In painting this scene of conversion
I thought of you, my brother," he said, in a voice so sweet and tender
it would have touched a heart of marble; but Argyropoulos turned away
his eyes, and pretended not to hear him. Fra Angelico's heart was
grieved, and he felt his only hope was in the sovereign pontiff. He
had not long to wait for him. Nicholas V. entered into the chapel,
with a dignity tempered by an ineffable tenderness. The Beato knelt
down--his forehead in the dust--to kiss the feet of His Holiness. The
sight of the Pope always caused him transports of joy, equal to those
of St. Joseph of Cupertino, who went into ecstasy whenever in the
presence of the vicar of Jesus Christ. But a contrary effect was
visible in the mind of the pagan of Constantinople. At the sight of
the pontiff he reassumed all his dignity. "On your knees, my brother,
on your knees!" in vain said Beato to him, while pulling his dress.
"Never," cried the Greek, "never will I bend the knee before the idol
of the Azymites--before a priest who wished our submission at the
Council of Florence." Angelico sighed in the dust at the obstinacy of
this pagan, but the Pope, calm and dignified, began to converse in
Greek with Argyropoulos, who, captivated instantaneously by this
graciousness, replied by a verse of Homer. "My son," said Nicholas V.,
"I also will cite you a passage from Homer. In the second book of the
Iliad, the prudent Ulysses cries out: 'All Greeks cannot reign, too
many chiefs would do harm; let us have but one sovereign, but a single
king, him to whom the prudent Saturn entrusted the sceptre and the
laws to govern us:

  [Greek text]

Thus, my son, God wished in his church but one chief, one flock, and
one shepherd." At these words the Greek grew angry and replied in
harsh terms. "My son," said the Pope to him with tenderness, "I
forgive you, I pity your blindness, and I will continue to pray God to
enlighten you."

Nicholas V. withdrew.

Argyropoulos, mortified at his own conduct, returned to Fra Angelico,
and again commenced to eulogize the pictures. "My paintings are worth
nothing," cried the monk, bursting into tears, "since they have failed
to convert you. I am unworthy the name of preacher, since all my
teaching has not succeeded, {677} and I have brought you before the
holy father, only to hear you outrage the dignity of God's
representative on earth." The remembrance of this scene completely
overcame the tender and pious soul of Fra Angelico. He became pale and
weak, sank on his white robe like a lily on its stalk, and fell on the
pavement as one dead, according to Dante:

  "E cadi, come corpo morte cade."

The Greek, seized with pity and astonishment, tried vainly to restore
him. He thought he had killed him, and this man, whose hands were
already bloodstained, imagined he had committed another murder. He
hated himself when he saw this angel extended at his feet. He knelt
before him, rubbed his hands in his own, and threw in his face the
water in the vase which was used in his painting. "Father, father,"
cried he, "come back to life, and I swear to do all you wish." The
Angelico opened his beautiful eyes, languishing and moist with tears.
"My brother," said he, "you restore me to life, but again you will
give me to death if you forget your promise. Now we must leave the
chapel; it is time, according to my duty, that I take you back to
prison." Notwithstanding his pallor and feebleness Fra Angelico
insisted on leaving the Vatican immediately, and returned home leaning
on the shoulder of Argyropoulos. He said nothing until they reached
the prison of Tor di Nona. But there again, alone with him, the
angelical monk knelt before the prisoner, and reproached him for his
conduct toward the Pope with that sweetness he never lost, and which
so greatly astonished his biographer Vasari.  [Footnote 191]

  [Footnote 191: "Never," said he, "could one surprise him in an angry
  moment. This seemed to me incredible: Il che e grandissima cosa e mi
  pare impossibile a credere."]

This touching kindness greatly affected the Greek, who had been
already so deeply moved by the fainting of Beato. He began to
comprehend the love with which this pious monk was inflamed for the
salvation of his soul. "My brother," said the Dominican to him, while
joining his hands, "you have restored me to life, but in promising to
do as I wish, and I only desire to save you. You must discharge your
conscience of its weight of sin--you must confess." "But I cannot
believe in the necessity of confession, or in its divine institution."
"O my brother, if you could contemplate your poor soul in its mirror
of truth, it would appear so shaded and sullied. Your soul is bound in
cords ruder than those that chained your body when they led you to
execution. But confession would deliver you from all." "Let me see
this with my eyes, or I can never believe it." A sudden inspiration
came to the mind of the angelical painter. "My brother, we will speak
again of this. I am hurried to finish a picture; would you be pleased
I should paint it with you by my side, that I might every morning
distract your thoughts and keep you company?" "Oh! yes, my father, I
should be most happy, for you are very good to the poor prisoner." The
Beato obtained permission from Nicholas V. to suspend for some days
his work at the Vatican, and from the next morning he installed
himself in the prison, accompanied by his pupil Benozzo Bozzoli, who
brought with him an easel, some brushes, and a box of colors. After a
fervent prayer, he placed on the easel a small panel of wood, upon
which he commenced to paint rapidly, and without retouching, according
to his custom; he never perfected his paintings, leaving them
according to his first impression, believing, as he said, so God
wished them. "His art," says M. de Moutalembert, "was so beautiful in
his eyes, and so sacred, that he respected its productions as the
fruits of an inspiration much higher than his own intention." He
commenced by painting, as a foundation for his picture, some trees,
which rose near a house of simple appearance, and a modest church,
decorated by a portico supported by four pillars in Florentine style.
In a court grown over with herbs and studded here and there with {678}
flowers, he grouped five personages. At the right our Saviour, clothed
in a blue robe and draped in a red mantle, is seen in profile; a large
nimbus of gold encircles his tender and majestic countenance, his
golden hair falls on his shoulders. The Saviour has an attitude of
command, and extends his arm and hand which holds a golden rod. He
accomplished one of the greatest acts of his mercy, he institutes the
sacrament of penance, he gives to his apostles the power to remit
sins: one can almost hear him repeat the words which he addresses to
Peter, that he may transmit them to the entire Christian priesthood:
"Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and
whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven."
[Footnote 192]

  [Footnote 192: In the convent of St. Mark at Florence, the Beato has
  painted the grand scene of Calvary, where he represents St. Benedict
  holding in his hand the rod of penitence.]

The painter monk put into action these words of Christ. He painted a
priest in Florentine costume; a red cap encircled with ermine and a
blue dalmatic, which hung in graceful folds; his figure is youthful,
and expression benignant. This priest approaches a sinner in a red
dress, and turbaned with a cap of gold and ermine. The sinner is bound
with cords which are passed several times around his body. The priest
approaches him with ineffable compassion. With what care, what
delicacy, what respect, what love, he unties the cord with his white
and pure hands! With what grace and dignity he fills his office of
priest and confessor! The seven capital sins are figured by seven
demons chased from his body by absolution, and who are making every
effort to re-enter it. Rage and impatience are depicted on the faces
of these servants of Satan, and their attitudes are as various as
strange. One of them still threatens the sinner with his iron trident.
In the second part, Fra Angelico represents a person in a green robe
and turban, who expresses, by figure and gesture, his admiration at
the sight of this miracle of divine mercy, which is called the
institution of confession. Near this man, and right against the
Saviour, is a second personage, of whom the face only is seen. His
head is bared, and his angelical features seem to recall those of the
Beato, such as they are sculptured on his tombstone at Santa Maria
sopra Minerva. The Greek had followed with curiosity and profound
interest all the details of this picture, accomplished in three days
under his own inspection. He had admired the piety of the Angelico,
who, according to his custom, had not dared to paint the head of the
Saviour but on bended knees. Contrary to his usual manner, he had only
lightly sketched the face of the sinner bound with the cord. It was on
the third day that he suddenly finished it. But how express the
surprise and emotion of Argyropoulos, when he perceived that, under
the pencil of the painter-monk, this face became his own portrait! The
blessed one had painted his gray beard, his noble profile, and
expressed in his face at the same time the grief of being restrained
by sin and the hope of a speedy deliverance. Argyropoulos, in the
midst of the picture, had truly an expression of contrition in the
intensity of his regard. "It is I," cried the Greek, "it is I indeed!"
And he burst into tears. The divine touch of grace had vanquished him
at last. "My father, my father, untie me also, deliver me from the
bonds of many sins." The Angelico seized him in his arms, and in
transports of joy pressed him to his breast, then begged him to kneel
with him and render thanks to God. He passed several days in
explaining to him Catholic truths; then he received the acknowledgment
of his faults, baptized him conditionally at St. Jean de Latran, in
the baptistry of Constantine.  [Footnote 193]

  [Footnote 193: The author has here fallen into a mistake; the
  sacraments of the Greek Church are never reiterated conditionally.
 --Ed. CATHOLIC WORLD.]

{679}

The eve of this great day he had enjoined him, as penance, to go to
the Vatican, throw himself at the feet of the Pope, and ask pardon on
his knees for the invective he had cast on the holy father in the
chapel. Nicholas V. received him kindly, and said: "My son, Jesus
Christ has pardoned you, and I could not do otherwise than he of whom
I am vicar; I absolve you, not only for what you have said against me,
but the crimes committed against society. I grant you full and entire
pardon from the punishment you have merited, in the hope that your new
life will atone for the past." The Greek prostrated himself with
gratitude, and kissed his feet; then showed the picture from which he
would never part. The Pope admired it, and said to the painter-monk:
"Your pencil has worked another miracle of conversion." The humble
artist replied that only to God must be given the glory, and recited
the verse of David: "Non nobis, Domine, non nobis, sed nomini tuo da
gloriam." This was the device of the Templars, and we have seen it in
Venice engraved on the wall of the old palace Vendramini. "Most holy
father," said the Greek. "I know with what goodness your Holiness has
received my compatriots, Theodore Gaza, George of Trebizond,
Calchondylos, and Gemistos Plethon, who after the taking of
Constantinople took refuge on a Venetian galley, and have come to
Italy, bringing with them the precious manuscripts of the ancient
Greek authors and fathers of the Greek Church, which but for them
would have been burned by the infidels. They have been most happy to
repay your hospitality by enriching the library of the Vatican with
these literary treasures." "It is true," said Nicholas V. "Thanks to
their and other conquests, we have become able to reunite in the
Vatican nearly five thousand manuscripts; it is, we believe, the
richest collection made since the dispersion of the Alexandrian
library. But I still have one gap to fill, and I have promised a
reward of fifty thousand ducats to him who will bring me the gospel of
St. Matthew in the original language." "O holy father, how can I
express my happiness! I possess this manuscript, which I brought from
Constantinople. After having committed the crime by which I merited
death, I hid this book in a place in the Roman campagna, where I could
easily find it again. To thank your Holiness for all your goodness, I
am only too happy to offer you the gospel of St. Matthew," Nicholas V.
was delighted, he who ever thanked God for the taste given him from
his youth for literature, and the faculties necessary for its
successful cultivation. On the receipt of the manuscript the Pope paid
to the Greek the fifty thousand ducats, who, finding himself possessed
of so great a fortune, resolved to go to Venice, and engage in
commerce with one of his compatriots. He quitted Rome with regret to
leave Fra Angelico, but returned at Easter to confess to the saviour
of his soul, as he called him, and receive the communion from his
hands in the church of Santa Maria sopra Minerva. The mass said by the
Beato inspired him with great devotion, and he was happy to receive
from such pure hands the body and blood of Jesus Christ. The year that
followed 1455, the Greek appeared at the same epoch, carrying ever
with him, in a casket of cedar, the precious painting which had been
the determining cause of his conversion,   [Footnote 194] and which,
he never ceased to contemplate with love and, gratitude, repeating
what Vasari said of another picture of the Beato: "I can affirm I
never contemplate this work that it does not appear new to me, and I
am never satisfied gazing upon it."

  [Footnote 194: This picture on wood is painted _a tempera_ and
  enriched with gold. It is twenty-seven centimetres high, and
  twenty-three broad. After various vicissitudes it was carried from
  Rome to Venice, from Florence to Turin, and finally found an asylum
  in Paris, in the celebrated Pourtales gallery. To-day it is in
  possession of him who relates the story, according to a traditional
  account received by him at Rome.]

{680}

Scarcely landed at Rome, Argyropoulos hastened, according to his
custom, to the convent of Santa Maria sopra Minerva and asked for Fra
Angelico. At this name grief overshadowed the countenance of the
brother porter, who replied: "Alas! signor, the blessed one has gone
from earth and left us to sorrow. His death was as angelical as his
life." The prior, who appeared, confirmed the sad news and gave the
details to the heart-broken Greek. The holy father said he was so
impatient to enjoy his beautiful chapel that he hurried continually
our blessed brother to finish his work; and he, ever willing to be
sacrificed to duty, and believing he worked for God in serving this
vicar, would not even interrupt his work during the fever season,
which is always more pernicious at the Vatican than elsewhere. His
health was lost by it entirely, he languished, and died at last of
malaria. Argyropoulos shed tears and asked to pray by the tomb of his
friend. It is still seen at the left of the church choir, a simple
tombstone encased vertically in the wall; the painter-monk is rudely
sculptured in bas-relief in his Dominican robe, with hands joined, his
head uplifted, and mouth partly opened as in prayer, as he was in
life, as he was particularly in death. I have often contemplated this
sepulchral stone, and recalled the verse of Dante, which could so well
have described the heart of Argyropoulos:

  "Come, perche di lor memoria sia,
  Sovr' a sepoiti le tombe terragne
  Porton segnato quel ch'elli eran pria;
  Onde li molte volte siripiagne.
  Por la pun ura della rimenbranza
  Che solo a pii da della calcagne."

"As to preserve the memory of the dead, the tombs given them on earth
bear the impress of their features as they were in life, so each time
one weeps over them the pious heart is pierced with the remembrance."
"Nicholas V.," said the prior to the Greek, "was inconsolable at the
death of his painter and friend, and survived him but a few weeks. It
is this great Pope who has erected this monument to Fra Angelico, and
who composed the epitaph you can read on this stone:

  "'Hic jacet ven. Pictor.
    Fr. Jo. de Flor.  Ord. P.
    MCCCCLV.
  Non mihi sit laudi quod eram velut alter Apelles.
  Sed quod lucra tuis omnia Christe dabam
  Altera nam terris opera extant, altera caelo;
  Urbs me Joannem flos tulit Etruriae.'"

"Here lies the venerable painter.  [Footnote 195] Brother John, of
Florence, of the order of Brother Preachers; 1455. Let me not be
praised because I have painted as another Apelles, but because I have
given all I made to the poor. O Christ! I have worked for heaven at
the same time as for earth. I am called John, the town which is the
flower of Etruria was my country."

  [Footnote 195: We must remark this title of venerable given the
  Angelico immediately after his death, and which justifies the
  popular canonization which has surnamed him in Italy, Il Beato.]

Argyropoulos remained long kneeling by the tomb, then on rising said
to the prior: "Tell me exactly the day of his death; for me it will
ever be an anniversary to be celebrated with prayers and tears." "It
was the 18th of last March," replied the prior, "that the blessed one
went to heaven, there to contemplate the true models of the dear and
holy pictures which, with so much love, he painted on earth."




ORIGINAL.


"I  AM   THE   WAY."

  "I am the way."  I well believe thy word;
  The truth of it is plain enough to see.
  For never was there yet a man, O Lord,
  So roughly trodden under foot like thee!



{681}

ORIGINAL.

CHRISTINE.   [Footnote 196]

  [Footnote 196: Christine, and other Poems. By George H. Miles
  New-York: Lawrence Kehoe.]


The writer of the present remarks made his first acquaintance with the
volume under consideration during the magic season of Indian summer,
and perused many of its pages beneath the shade of sycamores by the
side of a woodland streamlet, ever and anon lifting his eyes from the
book to scan the many-colored foliage of trees mellowed by the
distance and draped in luminous haze. He took it up a second time when
driven into the house by equinoctial storms, and a third when the
trees had doffed their painted leaves and stood as black and cold as
the iron woods we read of in the Scandinavian Edda. But whether
in-doors or out, by waterside or fireside, he always found Christine
and her sisters the same genial and charming companions.

Who does not prefer the sunny side of a landscape to the dark one? Are
not coins and medals more pleasing when viewed on the side bearing the
principal legend and inscription? Juicy fruit, whether plum, peach, or
apple--does not the eye dwell with more pleasure upon the side which
is tinted with the finest blush and which glows with the rosiest
bloom? The same may be said of a pigeon's neck, a maiden's cheek; and
why not of a volume of poems? Let us, therefore, fix our eyes upon the
bright points, the beauties; and as every human production _must_ have
its imperfections, let us, when we discover these last, pass them over
lightly and almost in silence. The poet, when he composed his book,
hoped that its perusal would add to our enjoyment, and expected to
accomplish this, not by means of its defects, but by reason of its
many excellences.

Many, many such excellences belong to Christine. Open the book,
reader, and as if by magic you will find yourself transported some
eight hundred years backward in the world's history, and will fly on
fancy's wings from the age of steam-cars and telegraphs to that of
chivalry and the crusades. You will find yourself now in the
south-east of France, now in Savoy, gazing in succession at the Rhone,
the Isere, the Alps, Pilate's Peak, and the Grande Chartreuse, and, in
short, wandering over that romantic land so dear to all true lovers of
poetry, and so renowned of old for

   "Dance, Provencal song, and sun-burnt mirth."

The story is founded on one of those old devotional legends of the
early church, many of which have afforded such fine subjects both to
the painter and poet. Were I to enumerate one-tenth part of the fine
specimens of pictorial art which have been founded on such subjects, I
should soon swell out the list to a sufficient number to constitute a
good-sized picture-gallery. I will only allude, in passing, to a few
masterpieces, most of which are familiar, even to the untravelled
reader, from engravings, copies, and written descriptions. Among the
most noted are the St. Cecilia by Raphael, the Vision of Constantine
by the same artist, the the Assumption of the Virgin by Murillo, the
Marriage of St. Catharine by the same, the Archangel Michael by Guido,
and St. Patronilla by Guercino. These two last have been copied in
mosaic to adorn the interior of St. Peter's. Of poems of this nature
might be cited as among the best, Dryden's Ode to St. Cecilia, the
Virgin Martyr by Massenger, the Golden Legend by Longfellow, and the
Eve of St. Agnes by Keats.

{682}

Christine, I think, may fairly be catalogued among the same sainted
sisterhood.

These traditions and legends of an earlier and more credulous age may
be likened to the eggs, beautifully spotted and fantastically marked,
which some delighted school-boy finds in spring-time, after hours of
climbing and nest-hunting. Such eggs, curious in themselves, and
brooded over by genius, often break forth into winged and musical
poems, which afterward soar high above the nests and the tree-tops in
which they were first cradled. Such is the case with the one now under
consideration. In a new world, in a land which was not then even
dreamed to be in existence, it arises lark-like, soaring and singing
toward "heaven's gate." Let us watch it for a few moments, reader, and
listen to its matin melody; my word for it, we shall be none the
worse, either in heart or head, for having done so.

I shall not mar the beauties of this radiant little poem by attempting
a cold and prosaic outline; this would, indeed, be to offer a dingy
silhouette in place of a picture glowing with all the colors of a
Tintoretto. Instead of this, I say, let the volume speak for itself;
procure it, read it aloud to your friend; there is music sleeping in
the book, awaken it to the sound of your own voice, and even though
you may be a Protestant of the strictest school, you will find here
nothing to offend, nothing to call forth a word of disapprobation,
with one proviso, however, and that is that you read it as the
title-page directs. Remember always that it is supposed to be "A song
by a Troubadour."

A troubadour? And what was a troubadour? And what were his mainsprings
of action? Hear an answer in the language of one of the most gifted of
their number.

  "A Dien mon ame, ma vie au roi,
  Mon coeur aux dames, l'honneur pour moi!"

This, interpreted into tamer and more prosaic language, means that his
ruling principles of action were religion, loyalty, gallantry, and
honor; in other words, his soul, his life, his heart belonged
respectively to God, to the king, to the ladies, and only his honor he
reserved to himself. Such was his creed, such was the disinterested
and noble spirit which animated him, and which breathed through all
his lays, his vire-lays, his morning songs, his serenades, his
sonnets, his idyls, his villanercas, his madrigals, and his canzonets.
In this spirit acted the enthusiastic Rudel, who became enamored of
the Countess of Tripoli from the reports which he heard of the
hospitable manner in which she treated the Crusaders, and who, without
having ever seen her, actually started of on a long voyage to visit
the object of his admiration. Who has not heard of Blondel, and of the
romantic incident by which he discovered the lion-hearted Richard
while imprisoned in the castle of Lovenstein?

But in addition to the above-mentioned motive principles, the
troubadour was influenced by another sentiment, which had a powerful
effect on all the feelings and actions of his life. This was an
intense and romantic veneration for the Virgin Mary. In fact, with
little variation the following words, which we find in another poem in
the same volume, entitled "Raphael Sanzio," might with equal propriety
be attributed to one of the troubadours.

 --"Her whose colors I have worn since first
  I dreamed of beauty in the chestnut shades
  Of Umbria--Her for whom my best of life
  Has been one labor--_Her, the Nazareth maid,
  Who gave to heaven a queen, to man a God,
  To God a mother_."

Such, then, was the troubadour. His birthplace was Provence. It was
there, in fact, that during the darkness of the Middle Ages the muse
relit her torch which had long been extinguished. Many years before
Dante's great poem rose like a sun--never again to set--the
troubadours, those morning-stars of poesy, "sang together and shouted
for joy." The troubadour preceded the Saxon bard, the Anglo-Norman
minstrel, and the German minnesinger. There were held those curious
courts of love where {683} queens and noble ladies often presided, and
there were exhibited, on green and flowery meadows, those poetical
contests, those festive jousts and tournaments, the idea of which
seems to have been caught from the neighboring Saracens of Spain. The
cross and the crescent both added something to the great result, the
one contributing the deep and earnest glow of devotion, the other the
pomp and circumstance of chivalry.

Of all these circumstances our poet has, with exquisite tact and
skill, availed himself. Christine herself, when only ten years old,
had accompanied her father to the Holy Land. This throws an oriental
richness around her whole bearing and manner of thinking:

  "Sooth thou art fair,
  O ladye dear,
    Yet one may see
  The shadow of the East in thee;
    Tinting to a riper flush
    The faint vermilion of thy blush;
    Deepening in thy dark-brown hair
    Till sunshine sleeps in starlight there."

The gray charger which plays so conspicuous a part in the action was
born under the palm-trees of Palestine, and his name, Caliph, would
seem to indicate an Arabian descent. By this subtle link the
connection between Provencal and Arabic poesy seems delicately to be
hinted at. The fact that the main poem concludes in sonnet-form, if
accidental, is curious; if brought about by design, is a happy
thought, inasmuch as the sonnet derived its birth in Provence, and
also from the fact that, from the number of its lines (twice _seven_),
and the collocation of its rhymes, it is instinct with Christian
symbolism.

The song itself, or story of Christine, is divided into five cantos or
sub-songs, which, like the five acts of some romantic melodrama,
arrest the attention from the start, and conduct the reader by five
stages of increasing interest to the jubilant conclusion.

This main picture, as it may be called, has hanging on each side of it
a smaller lateral one, one of which is a kind of _prelude_ and the
other the _finale_ to the whole performance. This reminds us of some
of those works of art by the older masters, in which a smaller
side-picture may be seen to the right and left of the main
representation. These appendages, though apparently slight and worded
with extreme conciseness, are artistically conceived and add greatly
to the general effect. They are also in fine keeping with the time and
spirit of the legend itself, reminding us of one of those
triple-arched emblazoned windows so often seen in old Gothic edifices.
But the chief advantage derived from such an arrangement is, that the
two smaller or lateral pieces serve as links to connect the more
confined interests of the story with that grandest event in history,
namely the Crusades, and thus to impart to the whole a breadth and
grandeur of design which the size of the poem scarcely led us to
expect. In the prelude we are presented with a view of the troubadour
himself, who is supposed to sing the song, and not only himself, but
his lady love, together with Richard of the Lion Heart, his queen, and
all his chivalry. These last are at the time gazing over the blue
Mediterranean, on which, in the distance, King Philip of France is
seen sailing homeward with his receding vessels. The finale exhibits
the arrival of a fleet under English banners. In both, a glimpse is
caught of the troubadour who sings the song; in the one case, before
he commences his romaunt, in the other, as he retires unnoticed and
unthanked by the English monarch.

In the midst of so many beauties and artistic excellences, it is with
reluctance that I notice two little circumstances which some might
consider as slight blemishes. Caliph, the charger above alluded to, is
spoken of as "the gallant gray." This expression sounds almost too
trite and commonplace to find a place in so original a poem. Even if
the color were preserved, I should {684} prefer some more novel and
striking form of words. But would not pure _white_ be a hue more
suitable in itself, and also form a finer contrast with the
_coal-black_ steed which is ridden by the Goblin Horseman of Pilate's
Mount? The last personage forms the evil, as Christine forms the
_good_, principle of the poem. By placing one upon a white and the
other on a black horse, the antagonism would be brought out in bolder
relief, and we should be reminded of the fine allegory in Plato's
Phaedra, where the chariot of Psyche is represented as drawn by two
steeds of opposite colors, under the guidance of Reason, who is the
charioteer.

The other--a trifle scarcely worthy of mention--is this: For the
expression "Santo sudario" I should like to see substituted
"Veronica," not so much on account of its effect upon the ear, as on
account of those subtle trains of associated ideas which either lead
us _off from_ or _on_ to poetical ground, as the case may be.

In justice to the author I must add that of these supposed blemishes I
am doubtful, whereas of the beauties above alluded to I feel perfectly
certain. It is much more easy to suggest alterations when a work is
finished than by one's own effort to finish a perfect work. As a
whole, there is a youthful fire and glow about the poem which cannot
fail to render it captivating to the young, and a devotional and
earnest tone of feeling which must be extremely acceptable to those
more advanced. Reserving the "other poems" which accompany it for a
future article, I shall conclude my remarks by a short extract taken
almost at random from the third song:

  "They are coming from this castle,
    A bevy of bright-eyed girls,
  Some with their long locks braided,
    Some with loose golden curls.
  Merrily 'mid the meadows
    They win their wilful way;
  Winding through sun and shadow,
    Rivulets at play.
  Brows with white rosebuds blowing,
    Necks with white pearl intertwined,
  Gowns whose white folds imprison
    Wafts of the wandering wind.
  The boughs of the charmed woodland
    Sing to the vision sweet,
  The daisies that couch in the clover
    Nod to their twinkling feet
  They see Christine by the river,
    And, deeming the bridegroom near.
  They wave her a dewy rose-wreath
    Fresh plucked from her dark-brown hair.
  Hand in hand tripping to meet her
    Bird-like they carol their joy,
  Wedding soft Provencal numbers
    To a dulcet old strain of Savoy."

How trippingly and buoyantly do these verses gallopade adown the
jocund page, as if one of the blithest of the old masters of the "gaya
scientia." had been thrown by Merlin into an enchanted sleep, and,
awaking from his slumber of eight centuries, was even now pouring into
verse one of the freshest of his matin visions. And that bevy of
dancing maidens! long may they continue to bound in tiptoe jollity
adown the salient page. The glad creatures are as yet ignorant of the
fact that Christine's noble lover is lying in a death-like a swoon,
and that Christine herself has just had an interview with the fearful
demon who wishes to bear her off in triumph. Each one of them seems to
be a kind of Provencal Minnehaha, and may be compared to one of those
merry waterfalls which come tumbling down the mountain-side, leaping
in joy from rock to rock, and quite heedless of the black precipices
which surround them.

But enough. As Cleopatra's barge of old went sailing down the river
Cydnus, with burnished hull and perfumed sails, and silver oars rowing
in unison with dulcet flutes, so ever and anon, at long intervals, is
launched into the world some rare poem, which moves sailing down the
river of time, to the admiration of all beholders. It behooves us,
when such an apparition heaves in sight, whether it be poem or vessel,
to be on the lookout and not to miss the pleasure of saluting it with
our heartiest cheers.



{685}

ORIGINAL.

GENIUS IN A PARISIAN ATTIC  [Footnote 197]

   [Footnote 197: In a private letter received from a member of the
   Guerin family--one whose name is held in gentle reverence by all
   the readers of Eugenie's Journal--we are asked if it would be
   possible to interest devout souls in America in the reconstruction
   of the little church of Andillac. We would gladly answer this
   question in the affirmative, for the restoration of Eugenie's
   parish church would be a monument that even her humility could not
   reject.

  The smallest sums for this purpose will be gratefully received and
  forwarded to Andillac by Miss E. P. Cary, Cambridge, Mass., or
  Office of THE CATHOLIC WORLD, 145 Nassau Street, New-York.]



In a former article   [Footnote 198] we traced the course of Maurice
de Guerin's career at La Chenaie; and left him in Paris, bewildered by
the rush and whirl of such a city, one day to become so familiar to
him. We will now let his journal and letters exhibit the curious
change through which he passed in turning from the fair Utopian dreams
of Lamennais to the work-day experiences of an unsuccessful author.

  [Footnote 198: See article in THE CATHOLIC WORLD of June, 1866,
  entitled: Two Pictures of Life in France before 1848.]

To do this fully we must retrace our steps to Le Val, the asylum
thrown open to him by Hippolyte de la Morvonnais when he left
Ploermel. Guerin's record of that peaceful sojourn in Brittany is as
distinct from our popular ideas of French life as Eugenie's sketches
of Rayssac and Le Cayla. The brother and sister have successfully
proved that all Frenchmen are not deceitful and unbelieving, nor all
Frenchwomen vain and perfidious. Surely no young man in any country
ever met with influences more sound and elevating than Maurice found
in the society of Eugenie and Mimin; of Louise de Bayne, Madame de la
Morvonnais, and Caroline de Gervain; or with friends more enduring
than Hippolyte, Paul Quemper, Marzan, Trebutien, and D'Aurevilly.

There is in France an undercurrent of domestic life as pure and fresh
as the superficial existence in her great  cities is shallow and
turbid. Indeed, the more familiar one becomes with French life and
manners, the more one appreciates the truth of the _mot_ of a certain
cardinal: "There is no purgatory for Frenchmen; they go straight to
heaven or hell." But we will no longer detain the reader, by moral
reflections, from the perusal of the selections we have made from
Guerin's writings.

LE VAL, Dec. 7th, 1833.

After a year of perfect calm, but for interior tempests for which I
must not blame the solitude that has unfolded me in such silent peace
that any soul less unquiet than mine would have slumbered deliciously
therein; after a year, I say, of absolute tranquillity, Fate, who had
let me enter the holy house to rest awhile, smote on the door to call
me forth again; for she had not gone on her way, but had sat waiting
on the threshold till I should gather strength to resume the journey.
"You have tarried long enough," she said; "Come." And she took me by
the hand and tramped on like the poor women you meet in the road,
leading a tired, lagging child. But what folly it is to complain; are
there no troubles in the world but mine to weep for? I will say
henceforth to the fountain of my tears, "Dry up," and to the Lord,
"Lord, heed not my complaints," whenever I am tempted to invoke God
and my tears in my own behalf; for suffering is good for me, who can
merit nothing in heaven by my actions, and, like all weak souls, can
earn nothing there except through the virtue of suffering. Such souls
have no wings to raise them up to heaven, and the Lord, who would fain
possess them, sends help. He lays them on a pile of thorns, and
kindles the fire of grief; the consuming {686} wood mounts up to
heaven like a white vapor, or like the doves that used to spring
upward from the dying flames of a martyr's stake. This is the soul
which has completed its sacrifice, and grown light enough in the fire
of tribulation to rise to heaven like a smoke. The wood is heavy and
immovable; set fire to it, and a part of itself will ascend to the
clouds.

8th.--Yesterday the west wind blew furiously. I watched the shaken
ocean, but to me its sublime disorder was far from equalling the
spectacle of a calm blue sea, and yet why say that one is not equal to
the other? Who can measure these two sublimities and say that the
second surpasses the first? Let us only say: "My soul delights rather
in serenity than in a storm."

Yesterday there was a great battle fought in the watery plains. On
came the bounding waves, like innumerable hordes of Tartar cavalry
galloping to and fro on the plains of Asia--on to the chain of granite
islets that bar the entrance to the bay. There we saw billows upon
billows rushing to the assault, flinging themselves wildly against the
rocky masses with hideous clamor, tearing along to leap over the black
heads of the rocks. The boldest or lightest sprang over with a great
outcry; the others dashed themselves with sluggish awkwardness against
the ledges, throwing up great showers of dazzling foam, and then drew
off growling, like dogs beaten back by a traveller's staff.

We watched the great struggle from the top of a cliff, where we could
hardly keep our feet against the whirling wind. The awful tumult of
the sea, the rushing boisterous, waves, the swift but silent passing
of the clouds, the sea-birds floating in the sky, balancing their
slender bodies on wide-arched wings; all this accumulation of wild,
resounding harmonies, converging in the souls of two beings five feet
(French) high, planted on the crest of a cliff, shaken like two leaves
by the energy of the wind, and not more apparent on this immensity
than two birds perched on a clod of earth. Oh! it was something
strange and wonderful, one of those moments of sublime agitation and
deep revery combined, when the soul and nature rear themselves in
majesty before each other.

From this height we clambered down into a gorge which opens a marine
retreat, such as the ancients could have described to peaceful waves
that rock themselves to sleep there murmuring, while their frantic
brethren lash the rocks, and wrestle among themselves. Huge blocks of
gray granite, embossed with white lichens, are thrown in disorder on
the slant of the hill which has hollowed out an inlet for this cove.
They look, so strangely are they tossed about, half tipping toward the
slope, as if a giant had amused himself with hauling them from the
height above, and they had been checked by some obstacle, some a few
feet from the point of departure, and others half way down; and yet
they seem to have paused, not stopped, in their course, or rather they
appear to be still rolling. The sound of the winds and waves pouring
into this echoing recess makes glorious harmony. We stood there a long
time, leaning on our walking-sticks, looking and listening and
wondering.

9th.--The moon was shining with a few stars when the bell called us to
mass. I especially enjoy this mass, celebrated in the early morning
between the last rays of starlight and the first beams of the rising
sun.

In the evening Hippolyte and I wandered along the coast, for we wished
to see what the ocean is like at the close of a calm, gray December
day. Mist veiled the distance, but left space enough to suggest
infinity. We stationed ourselves on a point where a tidesman's hut
stands, and leaned against the wall. To the right a wood, spreading
over the slope of the coast, stretched its thin, naked branches out
into the pale light with a faint, sighing sound. Far away to our left
the tower of Ebihens vanished into the {687} mist, and then appeared
again with a faint gleam upon its brow, as some furtive ray of
twilight succeeded in eluding the clouds. The sound of the sea was
calm and dreamy, as on the fairest days, but with a more plaintive
tone. We followed this sound as it swelled along the shore, and only
taking breath when the waves that had poured it forth gave place to
another. I believe it is from the deep, grave tone of the advancing
wave as it unfurls itself, and from the shrill, pebbly sound of the
retreating wave, gritting against the shells and sand, that the
marvellous voice of the sea is created. But why dissect such music? I
could say nothing worth hearing on the subject, for I am no adept at
analysis, so we'll go back to sentiment.

The shadows thickened around us, but we never thought of going away,
for as the earth grew still, and the night unveiled its mysteries,
grander grew the harmony of the sea. Like those statues set on
promontories by the ancients, we stood immovable, fascinated and spell
bound by the beauty of the ocean and the night, giving no sign of life
except to look up when we heard the whistling wings of the wild duck
overhead.

The thread of my wandering fortunes led me to a solitary headland in
Brittany to dream away an autumn evening, there for several hours
those interior sounds were hushed that never have been still since the
first tempest arose in my breast. There a sweet, heavenly melancholy
stole into my heart with the ocean chords, and my soul wandered in a
paradise of revery. Oh! when I shall have left Le Val and poured my
parting tears into the bosom of your friendship; when I shall be in
Paris where there is neither vale nor ocean, nor any soul like yours;
when I shall wander alone with my sadness and with an almost
despairing heart; what tears I shall shed over the memory of our
evenings; for happiness is a fine, gentle rain that sinks into the
soul, and then gushes forth in torrents of tears.

21st.--For several days the weather has done its worst. The rain falls
and the wind blows in gusts till it seems as if everything would be
torn to pieces by the storm. These three nights I have started up wide
awake as the gale swept by at midnight, besieging the house so
furiously that everything in-doors shook and trembled. I spring up in
my bed white, and listen to the hurricane, while a thousand thoughts
that swept, some on the surface, others deep down in my soul, start
into shuddering wakefulness.

All the sounds of nature; the winds, those awful breathings from an
unknown mouth, rouse up the innumerable instruments in the plains or
on the mountains, hidden in the hollow of valleys or massed among the
forests; the waters with their marvellous scale of tone, ranging from
the tinkling of a fountain through moss, to the wondrous harmonies of
the ocean; thunder, the voice of that sea that floats above us; the
rustling of dry leaves beneath a human foot or before a whirling
breeze; in short, for I must stop short in enumerating innumerable
sounds, this continual emission of tone, the floating rumor of the
elements, dilates my thoughts into strange reveries, and throws me
into unutterable amazement. The voice of nature has taken such hold
upon me that I can hardly free myself from its perpetual influence,
and in vain I try to turn a deaf ear. But to wake at midnight amid the
cries of the storm, to be assailed in the darkness by a wild,
tumultuous harmony, overthrowing night's peaceful empire, is something
incomparable among strange impressions. It is ecstasy in the midst of
terror.

CAEN, 24th January.

I have been wandering along the streets of this city by the dim light
of the street lamps. What did I see? Black phantoms of steeples and
churches, whose outline I could barely trace. The mystery of night,
which enveloped them without limiting their dimensions {688} like dear
daylight, added to their impressive influence, and filled me with an
emotion that was worth more, I believe, than forms. My thoughts soared
up to heaven with the never-ending spires, and wandered awe-struck
through naves that were mournful as sepulchres. That was all. The
streets were crowded, but what is a crowd by night, or even, by day?
At night I enjoy more the sound of the wind, and in the daytime those
grand assemblies, now silent and now rocking and roaring, called
forests. Besides, I met several of that class of men who always put me
to flight; students strutting along in gown and cap, and wearing in
every feature a nameless expression that reduces me to rout and
discomfiture. Oh! my dear journal, my gentle friend, how I felt that I
loved thee, as I worked my way out of the multitude. And here I am
with thee now, though the night is far advanced and I am half dead
with fatigue; all alone with thee, telling thee my griefs, and letting
thee peacefully into my secrets. Can I recall often enough those
memories all steeped in tears, that will ever dwell incorruptible
within my soul? Kind Hippolyte and his exquisite Marie! I bade her
farewell; she answered me in a few words of touching kindness. I
stammered out a few words more, and was running down the steps
thinking that she had not come beyond the threshold, and that all was
over; when I heard another farewell coming to me from above, and,
looking up, saw her leaning over the balustrade. I answered very
softly, for her voice had taken away the little strength I had to keep
back my tears.

  MAURICE   DE   GUERIN   TO
  M.  H.   DE   LA MORVONNAIS.

  PARIS, Feb. 1st, 1834

You thought you would receive news of me by the end of this week. Your
calculation has proved false, and you are feeling impatient, and
thinking that I am neglectful, and that the tumult of Paris has dulled
my ear to the sweet, lovely voice of friendship that sings unceasingly
in the depths of my soul. Imagine no such thing, my dear friend. God
knows that since I came to Paris I have listened to nothing but the
two farewells that I heard on that black Thursday evening, one from
her whom you must let me call your sweet Marie, who, as I went
down-stairs thinking that everything was at an end, leaned over the
balustrade to say good-by once more; and the other from you, on the
steps of the carriage, uttered half aloud as you clasped my hand. I
hear these two voices incessantly, and never fail to listen to them,
while all other sounds pass by as if they were not.

I did not see Quemper until two days after my arrival, Tuesday
morning, when I surprised him in bed, dreaming, between sleeping and
waking, of music, dancing, fresh garlands of young maidens, and all
the other vague and enchanting images that float through the
imagination long after the magic of a ball has passed away. Our friend
had spent the night at one of those radiant entertainments, whose
brilliancy his pen, fresh as if dipped in a dew-drop, depicts with
such sparkling charm. All of a sudden my pale and melancholy visage
appeared to put these fair dreams to flight; but though it must have
looked among them much like one of those crows that we used to see
flying among flocks of white sea-gulls, he embraced me with all the
cordiality that you remember in him. I sat down by his bedside, and
the vivacity of our first greetings having effervesced, a long and
charming conversation gradually unrolled itself, of which this is the
substance: remember that he was the speaker and that I interrupted him
very seldom, so anxious was I to gather up all his instructions.

The most difficult task to accomplish at the beginning of the career
which we have chosen _is to get published_, to bring one's name before
the public; {689} and he mentioned the names of several young men who
had been vainly knocking at the gates of journals for several years
past. We are already far advanced, since two are thrown open to us,
Catholic France and the European Review. Booksellers have no faith in
the unknown, and would refuse obstinately to have a masterpiece
printed if it were the first attempt of its author, while if they have
seen his name ever so little in reviews and journals they would prove
facile and accommodating. Therefore we must devote our whole strength
to making our names known through magazines and papers.

But in order to write acceptably for this sort of publication one must
adapt one's self to its habits, speak its language, and become all
things to all men--in matters of style merely, you understand. Let us
strive, then, to catch their ways, as the saying is, and to throw our
thoughts into the conventional mould, until we shall have attained to
such independence of pen as will leave us free to clothe our thoughts
after our own fashion. There is no use in disguising the fact that as
long as we serve under an editing committee (I dwell upon this point
because it is an important one, and Quemper insisted upon it very
strongly), we must, to a certain degree, renounce the habits of style
peculiar to ourselves, and adopt those of the journal; so that, while
preserving our individuality, we may blend and combine it with customs
foreign to our nature. It is hard for men like us, with characteristic
traits of their own, proud and independent of the fashions they have
railed at and disdained; it is hard for such men to muffle themselves
in the livery of the day, to follow instead of leading, to copy
instead of designing; but necessity with her iron nail stands before
us. Finally, the committee of the European Review refused an article
of Cazales himself because it was in Germanic form.

As to the Review, we must share the editing of it thus: Each number
should contain a leading article purely philosophical, an article of a
high order of literary criticism, and an article, artistic or
imaginative, of a light character fitted to relax the mind after
reading the first two. You, Duquesnel, and I could share the labor and
play into each other's hands, so that each number should have as often
as possible three articles from us, conceived in the manner that I
have just indicated; only remember that you must leave the light
article for me, because I know nothing of philosophy or criticism.

. . . . .

And now let me tell what my present position is. I have hired a little
room at twenty francs a month, near my cousin. He could not take me
into his own family; my friend, Lefebvre, could not accommodate me
either; and besides, the fact is that one must be alone and quite
independent if one would work well; it is better to have a house of
one's own. I take my meals at my cousin's; in short, I am in a very
tolerable position, and one that will allow me to try my fortune for
three months to come, and I hope much longer.

Add to this a most charming perspective, from which I hope much for
the advancement of my fortunes and the maintenance of my courage. At
the end of this month Quemper is going to change his lodgings. He has
in view, still, in the rue des Petits-Augustins, an apartment
consisting of three rooms, two bed-chambers and a parlor. He proposes
that I should take one of these rooms, which would cost me twenty
francs, like the one I have at present, and that we should share the
parlor. You may imagine that I accepted the plan with both hands,
especially because it will be so delightful to live with such a
friend. We have already laid out a life of uninterrupted happiness not
to be described, a sort of Le Val for us two in the midst of Paris.
{690} Can discouragement seize upon me there? and if it comes, cannot
we put it to flight? Quemper has drawn up a rule of life for me, and
given lessons in a double economy of which I knew nothing--that of
time and money; in short, as he says, he will pilot me through life
and Paris, two paths where I lose myself completely, though I number
twenty-three years of life and eight years of Paris. I begin to
believe that in spite of myself or any evil genius, I shall accomplish
something.

If I turn to the source of all these blessings, I find you, my dear
friend, who by your exhortations and generous reproaches, sowed in my
soul the first germs of the courage that I feel stirring within me
now. You urged me to come to Paris when I was contemplating a cowardly
retreat; you bound me in that ripe sheaf of friendship with yourself,
Quemper, and Duquesnel, an endless blessing from which, perhaps, all
the success of my life will grow; to you I owe two months of beautiful
impressions and pure happiness. You let me look upon Le Val as a
second Le Cayla, love it with the affection that belongs to one's
birthplace, for it was the June of my second birth; weep for it in
momenta of sadness, and sing of its charms when I am glad.

My cousin's little girl is nine months old; she is charming, can stand
alone already, without walking of course, has an enchanting smile; in
short, would be a companion angel for Marie. When her tongue is
loosed, I will teach her all the little words that her baby sister in
Le Val can say, "_Bon jour, ma, a tantot, le v'la lia_" and I will
swing her in a napkin; in short, I will do everything I can to make
her another Marie, her faithful and bewitching likeness.

I have not yet written to my sister. I shall do so this evening with
exhortations and entreaties. How happy it would make me to see a firm
friendship grow up between Madame de La Morvonnais and Eugenie! those
two souls so formed for mutual understanding, and to draw forth the
wealth of sweetness from each other's souls.

Offer my homage to her who will, I hope, soon call my sister friend,
and win the same title from her; as it is between you and me, my dear
friend. Countless kisses to Marie. Don't forget me, I beg, when you
write to Mordreux and St. Malo. Love to Duquesnel and Francois.

At the time the following idyl was written, the pernicious style of
literature which it satirizes was confined to France. To-day, when our
bookstores teem with works of the same class, we fear that the
allegory may meet with less favor among American readers than it would
have aroused thirty years ago.

  MAURICE   DE   GUERIN   TO
  M.   H.   DE   LA MORVONNAIS.

  PARIS, February, 1834.

I fear me much that the month of May will bring us snow-balls instead
of roses.

When I left you, dear friend, your solitude was just ready to burst
forth into flowers and verdure. The reddening fruit walls in your
garden, and the little chilly shrubs that love the sun, were trusting
their tender foliage, in all confidence, to the benign and gentle
winter, smiling upon them with the grace of spring. The wood that
stretches over your sloping shore, dipping almost into the sea, wore
that look of life and gladness that trees put on as spring-time draws
near. The sticky, oval buds of the Indian chestnut, glistened in the
sun; beech buds, sharp and slim, pricked themselves up with pert
vivacity, even the small round oak buds were beginning to gather in
bunches at the end of the branches, and yet the oak leaves out later
than other forest-trees. We saw the young shoots of undergrowth
blushing with the red tint that colors them at the awakening of
vegetation, as if blood were purling through their veins instead of
sap. The grass, pushing its way up through the bed of dead leaves and
withered vegetation, thrown over {691} it in autumn, was bordering the
paths, and spreading a velvet carpet in every glade, decked with the
enamel of a thousand Easter buds and daisies. Everything was gay in
preparation for the great feast of nature. Oh! if nightingale,
swallow, oriole, and sparrow knew all this, how they would bestir
themselves to fly _dulcesque revisere nidos_. It may be that their
European brothers have sent messengers to tell them that everything is
ready for their reception, woods, groves, hedge, and bush; that seeds
and berries will come early; that, morning and evening, the gnats are
whirling in myriads in the beams of the rising and setting sun; that
all is lovely here, and they must hurry home to enjoy the glorious
festival. I don't know that our domestic birds have paid this
attention to their travelled brethren, but at least they have given
themselves up to joy and harmony in awaiting their return. Do you
remember, Hippolyte, how the blackbirds whistle, the gay, sweet warble
of the thrush, or the twitter of some wren perched on the top of a
wall, used to beguile us from our study, tempting us forth to pleasant
rambles?

Such was your Thebaid, as you call it, the day before I left you, full
of warmth and animation, vivid with rising sap and the labor of
vegetation. To-day I will wager that the eruption of leaves and
flowers is far advanced, that the birds are hopping about in search of
moss, twigs, stray feathers, and bits of down, and that you are
wandering in spring revery under the first shade of your chestnut
trees. But, my friend, are you slumbering serenely on these fair
promises? Does it never occur to you that this may be all a stratagem
of winter, and that the old despot may have manoeuvred, merely to draw
out verdure and blossom, and kill them with his baleful breath? Do you
never fear that thus the acme may be reached of our delusions? What if
this balmy, perfumed air turned to a north wind; if a black, sharp
cold condensed all this living sap, this fecundity now gushing through
the veins of nature; if the frost crystallized your woods and their
tender leaflets; if your little eddying brooks were to clasp in ice
the flower, stems, and stalks of herbs that grow upon their beds and
borders; if, instead of nightingales and singing-birds from southern
shores, you should see triangles of long-necked geese and swans
pouring down from the north, and files of those ducks that we used to
hear cutting the clouds with whistling wings on December evenings; if
the exterminator, winter, were to kill in one night all these
first-born of the year; in short, if your Thebaid were to turn into a
Siberia, what would become of your dreams of plenty, fruits, and
flowers, soft siestas under the shade of a tree, songs on the
sea-shore, and of that whole existence, nourished upon sunlight,
gentle breezes, and sweet odors, that you lead in your dear
wilderness?

If you had power over nature, I should say to you: "Give your gardens
and woods and birds a lesson of wisdom. Bid those buds that I saw
gaping in the sunshine to hold back well in their envelope the leaves
entrusted to their care, scare them with the rigors that may surprise
them; the brightest sun is a deceiver. Put them on their guard against
the wiles of a fair day, teach them to be austere, and tell them the
thousand tales you know of flowers that have crumbled into dust
because they heeded the lures of a passing breeze or of a glowing
sunbeam. Tell them that, if perchance a few be saved amid the general
havoc, they will one day bear shrivelled, meagre, tasteless fruit that
no fair hand shall ever gather, and that shall wither on the branch or
fall a prey to the vile appetite of insects. Tell them that their thin
and pallid foliage shall draw disdain upon them from the panting
traveller, the young maidens, and the winged musicians that take
refuge under their shade to rest or dance or sing. Men will take them
for useless cumberers of the earth, and one day {692} perhaps the axe
will be laid at their root." As to the birds, the best advice you can
give them is, to leave their brothers in exile until the first day of
true spring shines. It is better to bear banishment a little longer
than come home to find their country the wretched slave of winter. Let
your birds beware how they recall their brethren or begin to build
their own nests. The brood would not prosper; the poor mothers would
shiver on their eggs, and the bitter cold, stealing under their wings,
would kill the chicks in the shell, despite the warmth of the maternal
bosom. Oh! if you had, power over nature, what a discourse I would
send you for your Thebaid, to save it from the seductions of this
perfidious spring whose perils I know so well.

Do you take all this seriously, my friend? I fear not, and that you
will dismiss it with a smile, as the prattle of a child. I even fear
that you may regard my letter as very eccentric, and say to yourself:
"What nonsense is this? Talking of woods and flowers to a hermit;
wandering on into homilies addressed to birds and flowers, when he is
writing from Paris, and not one word of what is stirring in the world!
He deserves in punishment that I should send him an essay upon the
dramas and romances of last year!" My friend, restrain your wrath, and
contain yourself long enough to hear, my reasons.

Horace said: "At Rome I prate of Tiber, and at Tiber I prate of Rome."
Don't imagine that my taste is light and changeable as the wind, and
thus explain to yourself my long tirades on your solitude. When I was
in your Thebaid, did I ever speak regretfully of the joys of Paris?
Did I not, on the contrary, say always that a city life is repugnant
to my taste, and that I care not at all for any pleasures to be
enjoyed here? Don't you remember how the little rough huts of your
tidesmen used to excite my envy, and that I used to have dreams of
hollowing out a cool, dark grotto in the heart of a rock in one of
your creeks, and letting my life glide away in the contemplation of
the vast ocean, like a sea-god? If you recall all this, you'll easily
understand why in Paris I talk of the country and forget Paris.
Indeed, you will see that it cannot be otherwise; for having said to
the fields, as you know,

  "Le corps s'en va, mals le cocur vous demeure,"  [Footnote 199]

my discourse must turn on them, and I can only live in this mad
tornado of Paris as not belonging to it.

  [Footnote 199: Froissart (manuscript note).]

If you know me well, these reasons will more than suffice to make you
understand the beginning of my letter. But will you be able to resist
the perpetual impulse that makes you look for mysteries in the
clearest things, so insatiable is your taste for divining? No; you
will look under the natural sense of my words, and think you have
surprised a sly meaning, crouching like a serpent under flowers,
beneath my sentences, which breathe only sweet images of spring. I'm
not afraid of your discovering some political allusion in them, for
you are too solitary, and hold yourself too much aloof from such
things for that idea to occur to you. But, if your eyes turn from the
arena of politics, they will settle on the noble field of literary
doctrines; and because lately the combat has grown hot, and the noise
of the melee is resounding far and wide, you will fancy that I am a
passionate spectator of the struggle, amusing myself with winding the
opposing party in subtle mocking allegories. Let me tell you that this
interpretation, or any similar one given to my idyl on the precocious
spring, misses its aim; that my idyl veils no satire; and that if it
seems to you the least in the world insidious or guileful, 'tis only
because you've breathed your own malice upon the innocent thing. I
repeat, it conies merely to discourse with you about nature; and what
can be more natural? Know that never has a ray of sunlight shone
directly {693} into the room where I live; I receive it only by
repercussion. Toward noon the sun strikes some garret windows opposite
that send across to me a few pale reflections, without warmth or
cheerfulness, like the rays of a lamp; and even this vague,
languishing light vanishes in a quarter of an hour. These are the
beams that gladden my eyes, accustomed to the broad overflowing
liberality of a southern sky. A narrow, sombre court-yard, where
there's not a blade of grass growing in the cracks of the pavement,
nor a flower-pot on a window-sill to smile upon me--this is the
horizon to which I am reduced; I, who so many, many times have scaled
with you your rocks and downs and sea-cliffs, whence our eyes embraced
the divine expanse of ocean, the marvellous indentures of your coast,
and the wide fields all green with wheat and flax. And now that I've
fallen from these fair heights into a hole that hardly admits the
light of day, do you suppose I shall not try to live over again these
charms in imagination, or that I shall talk to you of anything but
yourself and your solitude? And you, you cynical recluse, would
envenom these sweet, innocent recollections, and find some apologue or
another in the images of nature among which I seek recreation? But as
I have every reason to suppose that you are not attending to me, and
are still working to disentangle the metaphors, let us see if
perchance malice can make anything out of my precocious spring, and to
what allusion it can be turned.

Interested as you are in literary matters, and attentive to the
disturbances that have risen tip lately among our authors, I am sure
that it will not be long before the _facile literature_ comes to your
mind. Then you will think you have the clew, and with that thread
you'll plunge into the labyrinth of my supposed allegory, hoping to
emerge maliciously triumphant and content. I allow that, without any
extraordinary flights, imagination might pass from the buds, opening
prematurely on the faith of a brilliant winter sun, to this young
literature, which has burst into blossom before its time, and
innocently exposed itself to the returns of frost that I predict to
your woods and groves. But, my friend, will you, who rejoice so
ardently at sight of an almond-tree in flower, will you reproach
severely these trusting souls that have opened in the broad-day light
and displayed with touching faith their treasures to the graces of
heaven? Blame rather the burning sun of our day, and the atmosphere
all charged with fatal heat, which have hastened this development and
perhaps reduced the harvest of our age to a few ears.

And the trees whose blossoms are only born to die, and those that bear
bitter fruits which no one will ever pluck, or will gather only to
throw away--ah! you'll not have much trouble in seeing in them the
emblems of the many authors who have appeared once and vanished for
ever; the many authors whose books, distasteful to a few grave judges,
are welcomed by seekers after novelty and romance readers; and who,
having filled these vain souls with vain ideas, often sink into the
well of oblivion with hands relaxed by the lethargy that comes from
dull satiety.

Will you have it that the trees shunned by travellers, young maidens,
and birds figure those renowned books, worthy of their fame as works
of art, which do not contain a grain of the hidden manna, nor one of
the sweet, beneficent thoughts that nourish the soul and relax it
after fatigue?--books that maidenly hands dare not touch, and that put
to flight everything fresh and innocent--a thought to make one die of
shame and grief! Will you have it so? I yield the point with good
grace, for in truth my thoughts bear your interpretation as well as if
I had really hidden it therein, and I will follow you no further in
your suspicious investigations, feeling sure that my test will not
suffer violence from you, {694} and that you will go on to the end
without losing your way.

What conclusion do you draw from all this? First, that, resolved to
enter the lists, I am preparing in secret my lance and chariot, and
kindling my wrath. But are my peaceful inclinations unknown to you, or
the weakness of my arm and my very doubtful courage? I a combatant!
Just remember that the least tumult scares and routs me like a flying
prey, and that my strength bravely suffices to drag me out of danger;
so how could it drag me in?

In the second place, you will suppose that I am nursing an aversion
for the new school and calling out for a classical reform. M. Nisard,
of course, does not wish the new school to perish, but to amend its
ways; and it is with that belief, and, I dare to say, on that
condition, that I pray ardently for the success of the campaign he is
about to open. The Catholic faith would never allow me to sympathize
entirely with a sceptical and fatalist literature, that sets no value
upon morality. But, on the other hand, the same faith makes me feel a
certain interest in it; for is not this disorderly, frantic new school
a truant from our fold?

No, dear friend, I am not a prey to devouring anger; but I must groan
in solitude over the wanderings of this literature, which has
forgotten the home and the teaching of its father, and has so
hopelessly lost itself, until the last and most terrible romance, in
that style, would now be its own history. Amid these sighs there come
to me a few reflections upon the cause of the evil and the means to
remedy it; and that is what I meant to announce to you in this
incoherent letter, in which I beg you to see only a whimsical prelude
of my imagination, turning, as it always does, toward you.

  MAURICE   DE   GUERIN   TO
  M. H.  DE  LA MORVONNAIS,
  AU VAL SAINT POTAN.

  AU PARC, July 9th, 1834.

I wrote to you  on leaving Paris a short letter, of which I begged you
not to take any notice. To-day, dear Hippolyte, when I have all
possible leisure, and the untroubled peace of the country is around
me, I resume our talk with every intention of carrying my confidence
to the utmost limits; that is, to the point where I shall begin to
fear that my chattering bores you.

I announced to you a complete account of my affairs and my position
during these five months past. Now I am going to begin and you must
listen. You know what my hopes were when I left Le Val; I felt a
decided taste for literary life, the profession of a journalist smiled
upon me, and I was hugging some bright phantom or other of the future
that had sprung up in my imagination; and in spite of the distrust
that you know I mingled with my love, I had given myself up to this
dream with intense ardor. For, let me tell you, _en passant_, that I
throw myself impetuously into every new project that can modify my
existence; and whether a walk is proposed to me for the next day, or
whether I am told, "To-morrow your destiny is to be completely
altered," I feel equally excited, and rush to meet the two events with
equal impatience. A strange activity of thought possesses me, and I
shake myself and champ my bit because time prevents me from seizing at
a bound what I am already devouring with my eyes. You may imagine
that, with a soul subject to such ardent cravings, I reached Paris
full of enthusiasm and seized the journalist's pen with a quiver of
delight. But, as usual, my enthusiasm did not last long, and
difficulties, personal as well as external, made themselves felt. I
saw the entrance to the journals bolted and barred by that selfishness
which guards the gates of everyplace against the approach of poor
young fellows who come to Paris full of innocent hopes. Catholic
France alone admitted me within its circle; but this journal,
notwithstanding the good-will of its directors, could not satisfy my
needs. My articles were favorably received, {695} but the narrow frame
of the journal cut me off from frequent contributions, and in four
months I had only appeared four times.

In the mean time expenses were not behindhand, and, although I lived
in a very small way, my expenditure was large in comparison to my
resources. I was exhausting fruitlessly time and money, my own
patience and my father's. For several months I persisted in this
disposition, holding my ground against adverse fortune in order to
save appearances and not yield the field without making fight. But at
last everything went so badly that I had to decide promptly upon a
plan suggested by the extremity of the ease. If I had been alone, I
don't know what would have become of me in my utter failure of
strength and courage; but God, as if for my preservation, has placed
around my wavering soul friends who prop and sustain it, restoring me
to myself with touching solicitude. I went to Paul, and laid before
him the whole story of my painful position. I proposed to him the
terrible enigma of my destiny and asked him for a solution. Without an
effort he untied the Gordian knot with these words: "If you leave
Paris, the future will slip through your hands. Do not let go your
hold at any cost. Make your father feel that this concerns your whole
life, that our last effort may save everything, and a first refusal
may ruin everything." And thereupon we set to work to compute article
by article all the necessities to be satisfied, all the debts to be
paid, all the most threatening possibilities of the future; and the
whole account, amounting to the sum of twelve hundred francs, I sent
to my father, with a petition written by my cousin in order to give it
more weight.

At the end of a fortnight my father returned it with his approbation
and a gift of the sum I had asked. What happiness it was to go in
search of Paul that I might thank him, triumph with him, overwhelm him
with joy for my joy; for I knew his kindness too well to doubt that he
would share all my transports. I was not mistaken; his rejoicings over
my success were sweeter to me than my own, and I had the inestimable
pleasure of seeing it communicated to my other friends, Francois,
Elic, etc. How delightful it is to receive such proofs of pure,
heartfelt sympathy! In short, my dear Hippolyte, here I am launched
upon the waves, provisioned with money and courage, and walking with
assured step to meet the future; I feel as if a light were guiding me,
and as if I were advancing toward an unknown goal. For the present
this is what I mean to do: I shall spend the end of August and the
whole of September at the College Stanislas, where I shall have a
class during vacation: when the term begins, I shall establish myself
in the college if there is a place for me; if not, I can have quite an
advantageous situation at my cousin's, by helping him to keep his
little _pension d'eleves_. This is an abridged history of these last
five months; it gives only a superficial view, but you are well enough
acquainted with my inner life to understand the course of my thoughts
during the time. Here I am at rest, dreaming of the future, giving
myself up to the pleasures of friendship and conversation, and
drinking in the country-life and all the dear idleness that one can
never fully enjoy except in the fields. Our solitude is so profound
that we do not even know the result of the elections. Another
ignorance, harder to bear, is concerning all that is going on among
our friends and affairs in Paris. I know nothing more than when I left
them, and it is a very long time also since I heard from my sister.

Pray, present my respectful compliments to Madame Morvonnais, and my
remembrances at Mordreux and Saint-Malo. I am going to write to
Amedee. Ask Marie, who can answer me now, if she remembers M. Guerin,
who sends her a thousand kisses.


  TO M. H.  DE LA MORVONNAIS.
  PARIS, Sept. 21st, 1834.

I have just  received your manuscript, my dear friend, and the letter
{696} it enclosed; it has only this moment arrived, and I write before
reading, that my despatch may be ready for Paul, who leaves day after
to-morrow in the morning. You are to possess this inestimable treasure
of friendship, freshness of soul, and warmth of heart. He will rest
from his busy, devoted life in the fair sanctuary of peace and
friendship, of which you are the priest; he will bathe in the current
of those easy, limpid days that murmur beneath your roof. What an
interruption and vacuum in my life will be between his departure and
the day of his return with the other brothers! What will become of me
in my _ennui_. Tomorrow evening we shall have our farewell _soiree_.
Do you know what evenings we have now and then? We meet at dinner-time
and have a cosy dinner, intimate talks, long wandering walks under the
chestnut-trees of the Tuileries, through the perfume of
orange-blossoms and flower-beds in the gleams of the setting sun.
These talks come and go between Paris and Le Val, from one friend to
another, from present to future, from melancholy to the liver,
philosophy to poetry, weak sadness to firm and manly resolutions, from
one thing in life to another. To paint these conversations for you
would be like trying to render with a style the colors of twilight,
the vague nonchalance of the breezes, or, a still more difficult task,
what comes more softly shaded to our hearts. Tomorrow will be the
farewell evening, the close of these melodious evenings. How many
things come to an end under our eyes! I will not speak of my own
affairs; Paul will tell you where I stand, and how my hopes ebb and
flow, rising to the chair of rhetoric of Juilly, and falling to a
little schoolroom. He will tell you about my firm resolutions and the
manly efforts of my will to seize the empire of my soul. It would be a
long story to relate the history of my interior revolutions, changes
of government, civil wars, anarchy, despotism, gleams of liberty.
These are annals that write themselves in rude characters upon the
soul and in wrinkles on the brow. Sometimes I feel that I _can no
more_, like an old empire. O my charming hermit, my sea-swan, my
poet-philosopher, how shall I express the jumble there is in my soul
at this moment of pleasure and pain, the pell-mell of joyful and sad
tears that rush from my eyes and roll over each other down my cheeks?
I see you in my soul; I see Paul's departure and embrace him in
farewell; I see Le Val, your meeting, the charm of your life, the
isolation of mine, and my longings after my dear Brittany. My friend,
sometimes the soul wanders out of sight, and is restless and troubled
like the sea.

  MAURICE   DE   GUERIN
  TO   M. H. DE LA MORVONNAIS.

  PARIS, Oct. 19th, 1834.

At last, my dear friend, I can be with you, I can open my heart and
confide my soul to you; a doubtful privilege, perhaps you think, but
unluckily I cannot keep it to myself. Today, then, this gray Sunday, a
calm day, a day of decline quite suited to the fall of leaves and the
emigration of souls, my busy life, heated with action, pauses to
recover its strength, and resume its confidential intercourse so long
interrupted; to give itself up to the genius of autumn and lend its
ear to the memories whose rustling we hear so distinctly on certain
days; and, all laden with impressions, reminiscences, and autumnal
melodies, to retire into some lonely corner far from chances of
interruption, and pour itself out to you. But I have left behind me
the mystery that I wish to unveil to you: _My busy life, heated with
action_. What! I a man of action! Some potent voice must have bade me
take up my bed and walk! The day after Paul left me I was to go to
Versailles, where I had reason to hope I could have a place as teacher
in an institution. I went to Versailles, and this was what I found:
four hours of teaching {697} every day, _des salles d'etudes_,
recreations, walks with the pupils, and a salary of 400 francs.    The
position I had hoped for in the College Stanislas having failed me
also, there remained only my last plan, that of going to my cousin's.
But, as if to complete and crown the lesson that she was resolved to
give me, fortune decreed that my cousin should all of a sudden be
absolutely without scholars.  Thus for a time was I trampled beneath
the feet of destiny.  Then indeed I had time to write to you, I had a
superabundance of leisure. To punish me for my sins--me, so long a
rebel against the ancient condemnation to labor, God took from me the
possibility of doing anything. He turned aside and removed from my
reach all working tools at the moment when my hands were eager for
them. Leisure on every side, far stretching, never ending, condemned
to bury myself in unlimited leisure as in a doleful desert.  Why did I
not write to you when my whole life lay before me at my own disposal?
My friend, I had nothing to tell but misfortunes, and my recital would
only have grieved you.  I preferred waiting for the wind to blow away
these black days and clear my atmosphere. The tempest was short; the
sky of my little world is tinged anew in the east, and it is by the
light of its first gleams that I write to you.  The professor of the
fifth class at Stanislas asked leave of absence for a month; I have
taken his place and shall have 100 francs for the work. I am looking
for private lessons and have found several. Classes and recitations
occupy my day from half-past seven in the morning until half-past nine
in the evening; I sleep at my cousin's, the college dinner serves me
for breakfast, and in the evening I get a dinner for twenty-four sous
like a _debutant_.   Such has been my life for the last three weeks; a
sudden revolution in my existence, an abrupt transition from careless
revery to breathless action.  An urgent pressure, a little reason, a
few grains of irritating self-love, supply fresh strength to my soul,
which is exhausted at the first tug. However, I must say that in the
deepest and most hidden recesses of my being, in the sanctuary of the
will, lives a resolution, that is, I believe, firm and steady, to
sacrifice half my existence to external things, in order to insure
repose to the inner man; and therefore I have decided to prepare
myself for the _agregation_ (corresponds to the expression, master of
arts). I have explained to you the facts, accidents, and external
circumstances; let us go deeper. Latin, Greek, and all the bustle of
laborious life, absorb a certain portion of my thoughts; but it is
that floating and least, valuable portion which, without regret, I let
flutter in the wind like the fringe of a cloak. These are the waves
that break upon he beach; the sand drinks them in, men gather their
spoils, the sea tosses them to any one who wants them. Thus, as I tell
you, my mind near its shores is occupied by the cares and duties of
active life; but far out at sea nothing touches it, nothing passes
over it, nothing is lost from its waves, except by the continual
evaporation of my intelligence drawn up by some unknown star.

It will soon be a year since from the heights of Crehen I hailed Le
Val, lying all golden on the hillside beneath the beautiful autumn
sun. Dear anniversary, full of gentle melancholy like the season that
brings it. Every morning, on the way to college, I cross the Tuileries
where the ground is covered with the heaps of autumn leaves, the wind
sighs through the branches as in a desert, and, like the ring-doves
that build their nests in ancient chestnut-trees, a few of the poems
of solitude flutter about in these city groves. Sometimes the murmur
of a breeze among the boughs recalls to me the sound of the sea, and I
pause to possess myself of the delusion, and isolate myself with it
from the whole world: these are the waves, I am walking along the
shore with you, wandering over headlands in the evening twilight; I am
sitting on La {698} _Roche-Alain_. Then when I feel the illusion is
fading away, I resume my walk, all full of emotion, all full of you,
and cry like the _Young Bard_: "Good God, give us back the sea!"


  MAURICE   DE   GUERIN
  TO   M.   H.   DE   LA MORVONNAIS.

  PARIS, Dec. 5th, 1835.

Your impatience to know how I dispose of my time, and all the turnings
of the roads I am following, that you may go with me in thought,
roused in me a very delightful feeling, and one that does not easily
find expression in words. But your idea of my life is quite too
elevated; you attribute to it a dignity with which it is not invested
when you speak of my sufferings and the courage with which I bear
them. No, my dear Hippolyte, my lot is not so beautiful as you would
make it out. The difficulties of my life consist in a few material
fatigues, to which the body easily becomes hardened, even deriving a
certain strength from contending with them; and in the distaste for a
profession which is conquering my antipathy through the slow but
irresistible action of habit, which tames the wildest spirits, and
reduces them to complete submission almost without their knowledge,
everything becomes deadened, everything dissolves insensibly. The
firmest revolutions yield each day something to the progress of the
hours. All rebellions are absorbed again by degrees into the common
soul. All things lie upon a declivity which opposes itself to
continued ascent. I have chosen my course in life; I come and go in
the leading-strings of habit, keeping my mind in the middle of the
road, restraining it carefully from those thoughts that would draw it
aside, and mar the blessed monotony which lends something to the
pettiest existence. Being reduced to this state, I have no need of
courage. I required, of course, some resolution to arrive at it, but
it was not worth much and was borrowed from circumstances.

These are the principal features of my day: I set forth on foot at
seven o'clock to give a lesson in the neighborhood; then I go to the
College Stanislas; at the other end of Paris, and remain there until
six in the evening. That leaves me an hour and a half to dine and
retrace my steps again to the further extremity of Paris, where my
last lesson awaits me, which ends at half past eight. My liberty
claims possession of the night. Custom having worn away the asperities
of this life, only one defect remains, but a capital one; and that is
the difficulty of using the fragments of time that are left to me
after using the larger portions for studies that are to raise me above
my present condition. How to make the cares of self-subsistence agree
with these exacting labors seems to me an insoluble problem in Paris.
But time is so fertile in good advice, and sometimes unties knots so
easily that would have defied a sword, that I await its solution in
patience. You wish me to compose, to unveil the gifts which you think
I possess. My friend, why interrupt the course of a wise resolution
and mar a work that is so slow of formation and so costly? Let the
waters flow in their natural hidden course, following their tranquil
destinies in a narrow, nameless bed. My mind is a domestic animal, and
shuns adventure; that of the literary life is especially repugnant to
its humor, and excites its contempt, speaking without the least
self-sufficiency. I see delusion in the career, both in its essence
and in the prize we seek, charged often with the venom of a secret
ridicule. Looking at life with the naked eye, in the severe,
monotonous expanse she presents to some of us, seems to me more
conformable to the interest of the mind, and more in accordance with
the laws of wisdom, than unceasingly applying one's eyes to the prism
of art and poetry. Before I embrace art and poetry, I wish to have
them demonstrated with an eternal solemnity and certainty, like {699}
God. They are two doubtful phantoms, and wear a perfidious gravity
that conceals a mocking laugh. That laugh I will not bear.



  MAURICE
  TO MLLE. EUGENIE DE GUERIN.

  PARIS, Feb. 9th, 1836.

I saw Madame ------ (name illegible) day before yesterday. She is to
leave Paris in a fortnight, and offered very obligingly to take charge
of my commissions to Gaillae. I shall profit by her kindness to send
you what you ask, the velvet neck-ribbons, the net for your hair (but,
pray, why have you adopted this very ugly coiffure?) and the albe that
Mimi asked me to send her. I hope the little articles I send will suit
you both and fulfil your expectations exactly. But why be afraid of
being indiscreet in drawing upon my purse a little? Think, dear
friends, that I am your treasurer here, and that I wish you to
consider me as such. If you had reminded me sooner of the cloaks, you
would have had them now. I would gladly have deferred getting one for
myself until next year, and should not now be regretting the fact that
my shoulders are well covered, while I know that cold and damp air are
penetrating to yours as you go to Andillac. I am quite provoked with
myself for not having thought of it. Am I not very ungracious, never
beforehand with any idea, but waiting to be urged out of what looks
like indifference? Are you annoyed with me for this, and could you
ever judge me by mere external signs? Never, I am sure. You have too
much penetration to deceive yourselves for a moment about my
affection, when it is most hidden or most ungainly.

I am glad to know that the union which has been so long uncertain is
at last secured. I have no doubt that all the conditions of happiness
will be found in it, if only health can be added to them.

The lime of papa's journey is drawing near. From a distance it is
difficult to judge his course correctly; the moment itself must have
arrived before one can appreciate it truly.

I am trying to find out at this moment what I may count upon in the
future for the accomplishment of my dearest hopes.


The last sentences in this letter refer to Guerin's marriage with
Mlle. de Gervain, which is so fully described in Eugenie's letters
from Paris that it needs no comment here. Then followed a few months
of tranquil success, a lingering illness at Le Cayla, a happy
death-bed; and our story ends, as all true stories must end, in a
graveyard. By the gateway of that old cemetery of Andillac, where
Eugenie sunned herself one day sitting on a tombstone, while waiting
for her turn to go to confession, is a white marble obelisk surmounted
by a cross. Caroline placed it there as her last gift to her husband,
and it bears these words:

  Here rests my friend
  Who was my husband
  Only eight months. Farewell.
  Pierre George Maurice
  De Guerin du Cayla.
  Born August 4th, 1810,
  Died at Le Cayla
  July 19th, 1839.

Close by stands the little church whose chief ornament is a delicately
wrought statue of the Blessed Virgin, presented by Queen Marie Amelie
at Eugenie's petition. The belfry is crumbling to decay, and the
tottering porch under which the dove of Le Cayla passed so often
appeals pitifully to those who have a zeal for the preservation of
God's house.



A record has been made of Eugenie's daily life by one who had hourly
opportunities of watching her actions, and we cannot refrain from
laying it before our readers. Nothing concerning the sister of Maurice
can be inappropriate in an article devoted to him, and it will be well
to see how holy and regular a life may be led in the world without
singularity or narrowness.

{700}

"She rose at six in the morning when she was not ill. After dressing
she made a vocal or mental prayer, and never failed when she was in a
town to hear mass at the nearest altar. At Le Cayla, after saying her
morning prayer, she went into her father's room, either to wait upon
him, or to carry his breakfast in and read to him while he took it. At
nine o'clock she went back to her room and followed mass spiritually.
If her father was well and did not need her assistance, she occupied
herself with reading and writing or with sewing, of which she was very
fond (fairy in hands as she was in soul); or in superintending the
household, which she directed with exquisite taste and intelligence.
At noon she went to her room and said the Angelus; then came dinner.
When it was over, if the weather was good, she took a walk with her
father, or sometimes made a visit in a village if there was any
invalid to see or any afflicted person to console. If she resumed
reading on her return, she took up her knitting also and knitted while
she read, not admitting even the shadow of idle hours. At three she
went to her room, where she generally read the Visit to the Blessed
Sacrament by St. Alphonsus Liguori, or the life of that day's saint.
This ended, she wrote until five o'clock if her father did not call
her to be with him. At five she said her rosary and meditated until
supper time. At seven she talked with the rest of the family, but
never left off working. After supper she went into the kitchen for
evening prayers with the servants or to teach the catechism to some
little ignorant child, as often happened during the vineyard times.
The rest of the evening passed in working, and at ten o'clock she went
to bed, after reading the subject of meditation for the next day, in
order to sleep upon some good thought. And, finally, it should be
added that every month she prepared herself for death and chose some
saint whom she loved best that she might imitate his virtues. Every
week she went to communion, and even oftener during the last years of
her life, when her failing health would allow her to go to the church,
which was at some distance from Le Cayla."

The hour of release came at last for her too, after a lingering
illness of which we possess few details. After receiving the last
sacraments, she gave a key to her sister, saying: "In that drawer you
will find some papers which you will burn; they are all vanity." She
died in 1848 on the last day of the beautiful month of Mary, which she
and Mimin had always observed with such tender devotion in the
_chambrette_.

  "All was ended now, the hope and the fear and the sorrow,
  All the aching of heart, the restless unsatisfied longing,
  All the dull, deep pain, and constant anguish of patience."

The dear old father survived "his angel, his second self and much
more," only six months. Grembert died in 1850. Three graves now
surround Maurice's, and on one of them, which is already regarded with
veneration by the country people, is a wooden cross, bearing a
circular medallion that encloses a virginal crown with these few
words:

  "Eugenie de Guerin, died May 31st, 1843."

"Soft as the opals of the east at dawn, and sad as the gleams that die
away so quickly in the twilight, she will be, for those who read her,
the Aurora of her brother's day; but an Aurora who has tears too! May
these tears fertilize the grave over which she wept, and make the
flower of glory spring up rarer than ever now for poets! The
materialism of our times has thickened the earth, so hard to break at
all times. We know there is a flower that pierces the snow, but one
that can penetrate the mind of an age devoted to matter is harder to
find." (Jules Barbey d'Aurevilly's unpublished notice of Mademoiselle
de Guerin.)



{701}



From The Month.

SYRACUSE AND AETNA.


Tourists bent on the ascent of AEtna leave Catania at the end of the
long straight street which terminates in the Piazza Giorni. The ascent
begins at once. On both sides of the road luxuriant groves of orange,
citron, almond, and carouba trees alternate with vineyards and
cornfields rich in the promise of future crops. Yet all are growing on
the lava, and lava meets you at every turn: the walls, festooned with
the "Bourgainviller," the passion-flower, and beautiful yellow roses,
are still of lava; so are the pretty villas and the _riant_
farm-houses and the lodges in the vineyards--all are built of it. The
streets through the villages are paved with it. There is a sort of
allegorical beauty and poetical justice in the way in which the great
common enemy has been, as it were, conquered and subdued--at least for
a time--and forced to repair the terrible mischief it has wrought. As
the road ascends higher and higher, the vegetation diminishes, and you
come at last to a wild waste of rock sprinkled with broom and dwarf
oak. A twelve-miles' drive brought our travellers to Nicolosi, where
their first visit was paid to the kind old professor and geologist,
Dr. Gemmellaro, from whom every kind of assistance is obtained for the
ascent of the mountain, which is, as it were, both his child and his
home. He is a most good-natured and agreeable old man, whose whole
life has been devoted to this one great interest, and whose greatest
pleasure seems to be to make others share in the knowledge which he
himself possesses. His house a museum of curiosities, and contains a
carefully arranged collection of all the geological phenomena of the
mountain. Among other things, he showed the party a ptarmigan which
had been "caught sitting" by the lava stream, and had been instantly
petrified, like Lot's wife! the bird preserving its shape perfectly.
The village of Nicolosi is composed of low houses built up and down a
long straggling street, with a fine church in the centre. Horse-races
were going on the day of our travellers' arrival, and causing immense
excitement among the people, who were all in the street in holiday
attire. The horses ran, as at the carnival in the Corso, without
riders, and were excited to a pitch of madness by the shouts of their
starters and the _bandeleros_ stuck in their sides. After watching the
races for some little time, our travellers  returned to the kind
professor's, who had seen the guides required for their ascent of
AEtna, but who advised them to delay their expedition for two or three
days to allow of a greater melting, of the snow, the season being
backward, and to procure the requisite number of mules for so large a
party. It was also necessary to send some one beforehand to clear out
the snow from the Casa Inglese, the small house of refuge which the
professor had built on the  summit  of the mountain, at the base of
the principal cone, and where travellers rest while waiting for the
sunrise, or before commencing the last portion of the ascent to the
crater. He is very anxious to have this house better built and
provided with more comforts, and tried to enlist the interest of  our
travellers with the English Government in its behalf. Having arranged
everything with him, our party retraced their steps to Catania, having
decided to visit Syracuse first, and take AEtna on their return.

{702}

The following morning, consequently, at half-past three, they started
for Syracuse, so as to arrive there before the great heat of the day,
and also in time for mass. A long marshy plain occupied the whole of
the first stage; after which the road wound through limestone rocks
and rich cultivation, till they reached the picturesque village of
Lentini. The lake of Lentini is the largest in Sicily, famous for its
wild fowl, but also for its malaria. There is a beautiful view of the
little town, with its wooded cliffs and deep ravines, from the
Capuchin convent above. The scenery increases in beauty as you
approach Syracuse, the road descending into deep glens full of ilex,
myrtle, oleander, and a variety of aromatic shrubs, and rising again
over rocky hills scented with thyme and every kind of wild flower.
From hence comes the delicious Hybla honey, which rivals that of Mount
Hymettus. Over the wide downs which stretch seaward, the picturesque
town of Augusta was seen, perched on the edge of the broad sandy bay.

Our travellers had excellent horses; so that it was not more than
half-pas ten when they reached the gates of Syracuse and found
themselves in the comfortable little hotel near the port. One of the
party started off at once to find a mass; but the good people of
Syracuse are very early in their habits, and the lady wandered half
over the city before she found what she sought in the beautiful little
church of St. Philip, where there happened to be on that day the
exposition of the blessed sacrament, and in consequence masses all the
morning. On her return she found that the vicar-general had been
kindly sent by the archbishop to show her the curiosities of the
place. He first took them to the temple of Diana, now converted into a
private residence, and of which nothing remains to be seen but some
very ancient Doric columns. From thence they proceeded to the
world-famed fountain of Arethusa. The spring rises from an arch in the
rock, and is protected by a bastion, which defends it from the sea.
The papyrus grows here in great luxuriance, and the party gathered
some as a specimen, having first duly drank the anciently sacred
water. Resuming their carriages, their kind guide now conducted them
outside the town to the interesting church and crypt of San Marzian,
the first church of Sicily, built on the spot where St. Paul preached
during his three days' stay in Syracuse. It is a simple, massive
building, of the shape of a Greek cross, and contains the episcopal
chair of St. Marzian. Here also is the tomb of the saint, who was the
proto-martyr of Sicily. Near the tomb is the rude stone altar where
St. Paul said mass. A column of gray granite is shown as that to which
St. Marzian was attached for the scourging previous to his execution:
it is tinged with his blood. The crypt, however, is the most sacred
spot. Here came the apostles St. Peter and St. Paul, with the
evangelists St. Mark and St. Luke, on their successive visits to the
holy bishop, St. Marzian; where also the local tradition affirms that
St. Mark was martyred. The curious font now in the cathedral was found
in this crypt, and was probably used for the baptism of many of the
early Pagan converts. Adjoining is the place of St. Marzian's
martyrdom. The church itself is built over the site of an ancient
temple of Bacchus. Leading out of a side door is the entrance to the
catacombs, which are more extensive than even those of Naples or Rome,
and abound in Christian emblems: crosses, palm-branches, the dove, and
other Catholic symbols, are rudely carved on all the vaults and
niches, with here and there an early fresco of the Blessed Virgin and
Child, or a Greek inscription.

From the catacombs our travellers crossed the plain, thickly studded
with ancient columns, sarcophagi, and remains of Greek and Roman
buildings, till they came to the little church of St. Nicolo.
Underneath is a reservoir with an aqueduct, leading to the great
amphitheatre; the principal monument left of Roman work in Syracuse,
and {703} still in perfect preservation. Recent excavations have
cleared the space, so that the seats and arena are clearly visible.
From the amphitheatre, a five-minutes' walk leads to the Latomia del
Paradiso--a quarry containing in its further recesses the famous Ear
of Dionysius. This cavern was excavated by the tyrant for a prison,
and so constructed that the faintest whisper could be heard in the
chamber above, where he sat listening to the conversation of his
victims. It is to be supposed that the listener, according to the
proverb, rarely heard any good of himself. It is a wonderfully
picturesque spot; the sides of the quarry being lined with fruit-trees
and ferns and flowering shrubs, mingled with masses of fallen rock and
fragments of ancient masonry. Pistols were fired off by the guides to
let the party hear the full force of the echo, which is tremendous.
Round a deep spring at the further end of the cavern grew the most
beautiful maiden-hair fern. Close by is the Greek theatre, the largest
in Sicily, hollowed out of the rock, and capable of containing more
than 20,000 spectators.

Returning home to luncheon, the ladies visited on their way the
Sisters of Charity of St. Vincent de Paul, who are lodged in one of
the fine old mediaeval palaces of Syracuse, with beautifully carved
windows and doorways. But it is very much out of repair, and very
inconvenient for their large orphanage. There are only six or seven
sisters here. Their superior is a charming person, and only another
proof, if one were needed in that wonderful religious order, of the
way in which energy, zeal, and, above all, a burning charity can
triumph over the sufferings entailed by a delicate frame and sickly
constitution.

After luncheon our travellers started again to meet Monsignor B------
at the cathedral. It is built on the site of an ancient temple of
Minerva, but has been ruined by modern church-wardenship and
whitewash. There are two fine side chapels, however; one dedicated to
the Blessed Sacrament, the other to St. Lucia, in which, is exposed a
large silver figure of the saint of great antiquity. The font, of
which notice has been taken above, is of marble, supported by seven
fine bronze lions. There is a beautiful renaissance doorway leading to
the sacristy. A beautiful benediction service with litany was being
sung; after which the relics and treasures were examined, which
include a beautiful chalice of amber, cut out of one piece, and a
pastoral ring of great size and value. In the Place, or court of the
cathedral, are fourteen fine columns of Cipollino marble, supposed to
have formed part of the ancient temple of Ceres. Opposite the north
door of the cathedral is the museum, containing all the antiquities
lately discovered in Syracuse and its neighborhood. The finest is a
beautiful torso, a Venus of the best date of Greek art. There are also
some very fine cameos and medals. The day was closed by a sweetly sung
benediction at the orphanage of the Sisters of Charity.

The next morning, after a daybreak mass at the cathedral, one of the
party breakfasted with the archbishop, who afterward showed her his
palace and gardens, which are very fine. In the latter grew the
largest citrons she had ever seen, very nearly equalling the gigantic
oranges at Jaffa. Adjoining his garden-wall is a convent of
Benedictine nuns, which was likewise visited. The good-natured prefect
then insisted on taking the whole party in his carriages to the
Franciscan convent of St. Lucia outside the town. There is an
interesting Norman church attached to it, raised over the site of the
saint's martyrdom; and a granite column is shown as that to which she
was fastened on the occasion. Her tomb is cut in the rock at the back
of the altar, underneath which is a fine statue of the saint by
Bernini.

From this spot a narrow lane, traversing vineyards fenced by stone
walls, leads to the convent of Sta. Maria di Gesu, in front of which
is a fine stone {704} cross. Passing by an aqueduct in very tolerable
preservation, and by a succession of old tombs cut in the cliff, our
party arrived at the Capuchin convent--a fortified building, with
fosse and drawbridge and machicolated battlements. A little gate at
the side led them into the Latomie, or quarries, from whence the stone
was taken to build the city. Here is one of the most beautiful spots
in the neighborhood of Syracuse. It is a vast pit, about a hundred
feet in depth; and of many acres in extent, planted with oranges,
citrons, pomegranates, figs, and cypresses, with an undergrowth of
roses, arums, acanthus, ferns, and creepers of every kind, and overrun
with ivy and wild vine. The whole is walled in by lofty gray cliffs
hung with creepers; and from the midst of this wilderness of beautiful
and almost rank vegetation rise two tall insulated masses of rock,
with an ancient flight of steps cut in the side of one of them, but
now inaccessible. The cliffs are hollowed into vast halls or caverns,
in one of which the prefect told our travellers that he had given a
_fete_ to Prince Alfred on his first visit to Syracuse. The kind old
monk who had been their escort brought them fruit, bread, and wine in
this deliciously cool retreat, and sat a long time talking of the Holy
Land, where he had been, and which he was delighted to find was
equally well known and appreciated by his guests. Here and there,
embedded in the rocks, are traces of ancient sepultures; and one or
two Protestant epitaphs on the cliffs prove that the quarries have,
even in late days, been used for purposes of burial. Leaving this
beautiful spot with great regret, and acceding to the request of the
good old monk that they would first pray with him for a few minutes in
the church for a blessing on the Holy Land Mission, our travellers
visited one or two more of the antiquities in the neighborhood,
including the recently excavated baths of Diana, full of beautiful
marbles and mosaics; the sepulchral road, the perpendicular sides of
which are lined, with niches for cinerary urns; the tombs of
Archimedes and Timoleon, and other interesting remains of Greek and
Roman times; after which they returned once more to the city and to
the museum, where the collection of natural history had yet to be
seen, which contains everything most interesting of the kind in
Sicily, and also the library. The latter contains priceless treasures,
of which the most remarkable are--a rare copy of the gospel of St.
John, of the twelfth century; a Koran on paper, of 1199, brought from
Egypt by Lord Nelson, and given by him to the Cavalier Landolina, who
was the real founder of the library; a very fine block-book, a replica
of one of those in the Wilton library; and many beautifully
illuminated martyrologies and missals.

Nothing can be kinder or more hospitable than the residents of
Syracuse. The visit of our travellers was necessarily too limited in
point of time to enable them to profit by it; but every one offered
their carriage and horses, and put their palaces, not figuratively,
but actually _a leur disposition_. There are still some beautiful
medieval palaces in the town, especially the Palazzo Montalto, with
its pointed windows and dog-tooth mouldings. It bears also some
curious Gothic inscriptions, like the houses at Avila, and with the
date 1397.

A charming boating excursion was made by one or two of the party from
Syracuse to the fountain of Cyane, up the river Anapus, the only spot
in Europe where the papyrus still grows wild. Nothing remains of the
temple of Jupiter Olympus, which one visits by the way, but two broken
columns. But there is a lovely sketch a little further on of a ruined
bridge, with a date-palm overhanging the stream, and a foreground of
magnificent tangled vegetation of reeds, sugar-cane, acanthus, iris,
and every kind of aquatic plants, and which the slow progress of one's
boat through the weeds enables one fully to enjoy. The Anapus {705}
leads into the Cyane, which is a far clearer stream, but very narrow.
Here the papyrus grows luxuriantly among flags and castor-oil plants.
It was sent from Egypt by Ptolemy to King Hieron II., and has
flourished ever since. Struggling up the narrow stream and through the
choking mass of vegetation, which threatened to  close the passage
altogether, our travellers' boat at last arrived at a beautiful
circular basin, fringed with papyrus and purple iris; the water, very
deep, was clear as crystal, and swarming with fish. This was known in
old times as the famous "dark-blue spring," converted  by heathen
mythology into a nymph; and an annual festival was  held  here in
honor of Ceres. Now it is utterly deserted, save by  an  occasional
traveller  or sportsman seeking food for  his   gun from   the
multitude  of   snipes and wild fowl which resort to  its  banks and
make their nests in its undisturbed arid reedy shores.  That same
evening our travellers returned to Catania, charmed  with  their
expedition, and full of gratitude for all the kindness which had been
showered upon them.

The following morning found  one of   the party very early at the
convent of her old friends the Benedictines, where the superior
received her with his usual fatherly kindness, and presented her, as a
surprise, with the deed   of   affiliation   to   their   order, which
he had obtained for her from Monte Casino;  together with   a picture
of the saint and the miraculous medal or cross of St. Benedict, with
its mysterious letters, _C.S.S.M.L._ (Crux sacra sit mihi lux), a
medal always given by St. Vincent de Paul to his Sisters of  Charity,
as  a  defence in the many perils of their daily lives. Once more the
traveller heard that glorious music, which, beautiful at all times, is
so especially thrilling at the benediction   service.    The organ
begins with a low, sweet, wailing sound, which those beautiful and
cultivated voices respond:  and then  bursts into thunder, expressing,
as  far as mortal instrument can, the glorious majesty of God. It was
the feast of St. Monica--that saint so dear to every widowed mother's
heart; and the fact, in connection with the English stranger, had not
been forgotten by the kind abbate, who came up and whispered to her as
she knelt before mass: "My child, the prayers and communions of the
community this day will be offered up for _you_, that you may follow
in the steps of St. Monica, and finally reap her reward."

Returning at seven to the hotel, the whole  party  started  once  more
for Nicolosi, on   their way to  undertake the more formidable ascent
of AEtna. Arriving, after a four hours' drive, at the house of their
old friend Professor Gemmellaro, they found he had kindly made every
arrangement for their start; and after about an hour's delay in
settling the pack-saddles, packing up provisions for the night, and
arranging everything with the guides, they mounted their mules and
began the ascent. For some miles they passed through a tract of lava,
sprinkled here and there with broom and heather, till they reached a
cattle-shed, called Casa di Rinazzi, where they came to a picturesque
wood of dwarf oak looking like the outskirts of an English park. From
thence to Casa del Bosco the road is both easy and pleasant, and our
travellers began to think that the difficulties of the ascent (to
people who had crossed, as they had done, the Lebanon in deep snow)
would be comparatively trifling. They soon, however, discovered their
mistake. At the Casa del Bosco they stopped to rest their mules and
make some tea, while the guides advised them to put on as much
additional clothing as they could for the coming cold. The peasants
were at work round them collecting the snow in reservoirs close to the
cavern called the Grotta delle Capre--that snow so invaluable to the
dwellers in the plain, and the sole substitute for ice to the
inhabitants of Catania.

{706}

But here the real toil of the ascent begins. It is only nine miles
from hence to the summit; but those nine miles are terribly severe,
not only from their steepness, but from the nature of the ground,
composed of a black loose ash, interspersed with sharply pointed lava
rocks, on which you tread and stumble, and seem to recede two steps
for every one you take. As you ascend higher the snow conceals the
inequalities of the ground, but does not make them the less fatiguing.
The cold, too, increases every instant, and our travellers regretted
that they had not followed their guides' advice and brought both
overstockings and gloves. After toiling up in this manner for two
hours, they came to a pile of lava which marks the distance halfway
between the Casa del Bosco and the Casa Inglese. The snow here
increased in depth--the rarefaction of the air became painfully
intense; while the clouds of sulphur from the eruption, which still
continued on the opposite side of the mountain, driven in their faces
by the wind, made some of the party so sick that they could scarcely
proceed. The cold, too, became well-nigh intolerable. The mule of one
of the ladies sank in a snowdrift, rolled and fell some way down the
precipice, compelling her to continue the journey on foot; but her
feet and hands were so numbed and so nearly on the verge of being
frostbitten, that it was with the utmost difficulty she could go on.
At last the Casa Inglese was reached. It is a low stone house, built
on what is called the Piano del Lago, a small ledge of frozen water,
10,000 feet above the sea. In spite of the orders of the professor, it
was still half full of snow when they arrived; and this had to be
cleared out, and made into what the children call "snow men," before
the frozen travellers could enter and endeavor to make a fire with the
wood they had brought with them. The guides cautioned those who were
still on their mules to descend very gently, as, in the semi-frozen
state they were in, the least, jerk or slip might occasion a broken
limb. One of the party was lifted off her horse at last and laid on
some rugs by the fire, which for a long time resisted all efforts to
light; and then her limbs had to be rubbed with snow to restore some
kind of animation. When this object was attained, the overpowering
smoke--for there was no chimney or fireplace--made the remedy almost
worse than the disease. All this time they had been well-nigh deafened
by the detonations from the mountain, which, at regular intervals,
sounded like artillery practice on a large scale. Everything they had
brought with them was frozen, including the milk they had got at
Nicolosi, and of which they were obliged to break the bottle before
they could melt any for their tea. After a time, the younger portion
of the travellers lay down to rest on some straw arranged in wooden
shelves or layers round the inner room, one at the top of the other,
after the manner of pears and apples in a kitchen-garden house in
England. A French geologist and two other professors had joined their
party, and of course had no other place to go to; but the appearance
of the company, roosting in this way on the shelves, was comical in
the extreme.

At three o'clock, however, every one rose, and commenced the ascent of
the cone, so as to reach the top by sunrise. The distance is short,
but intensely steep; it is like going up the side of a house; and the
difficulty is heightened by the loose ashes in which you sink at every
step, and the hot fumes of sulphurous vapor which pour out of the
sides of the cone. Only a portion of our travellers persevered to the
top; the others being reluctantly compelled by faintness and violent
sickness to retrace their steps. On reaching the crater, they at first
saw nothing but a deep yawning chasm, full of smoke, which kept
pouring out in their faces. The eruption, which one of the party had
{707} seen in perfection two months before, was some miles off, and
had burst out of a new crater on the Taormina side of the mountain.
But with the dawning light the whole magnificent scene was revealed to
them. It has been so admirably and accurately described by Mr.
Gladstone, that any attempt at a fresh description could be but a poor
repetition of his words. Sufficient, then, is it to say that the view
at sunrise repaid all the sufferings of the ascent. AEtna, unlike
other mountains, stands alone, rising straight from the plain, with no
rivals to dispute her height, or intercept any portion of the glorious
view below. The whole of Sicily is stretched out at your feet, the
hills below looking like the raised parts of a map for the blind. Not
only is the panorama unequalled in magnificence, but there are
atmospherical phenomena in it which belong to AEtna alone. As the sun
rises over the Calabrian coast, a perfect and distinct image of the
cone is reflected--as on the sheet of a magic-lantern--on the horizon
below, gradually sinking lower and lower as the sun becomes brighter,
and finally disappearing altogether. As it was early in the season,
the snow extended over the whole of the so-called desert region, while
the wood below seemed to encircle the mountain as with a green belt,
which added to the beautiful effect of the whole. Tired and exhausted,
and yet delighted, our travellers descended the cone, and rejoined
their companions at the Casa Inglese, who had been compelled to
content themselves with seeing the sun rise from a green hillock just
below the house. They determined on their way home to diverge a little
from the straight route, in order to visit the Val del Bove, that
weird and ghost-like chasm which had struck them so much when looking
down upon it from the height of the cone. Floundering in the snow,
which was a good deal deeper on that side of the mountain, their mules
continually sinking and struggling up again, breaking their
saddle-girths in the effort, and consequently landing their riders
continually on the soft snow, the party arrived at last on the edge of
this magnificent amphitheatre. It is of vast size, enclosed by
precipices 3,000 feet in height, and filled with gigantic rocks, of
wonderfully strange and fantastic shapes, standing out separately,
like beasts--hence its name. The perfect silence of the spot reminds
one of some Egyptian city of the dead. Smoke, explosion, dripping ice,
or rushing torrents characterize the other extinct craters in this
wonderful mountain; but in this one all is still and silent as the
grave. It is stern as the curse of Kehama, and as if the lava had been
cast up in these wonderful shapes in some extraordinary convulsion of
nature, and then had been petrified as it rose. Our travellers
lingered long, looking over the edge of the precipice, vainly wishing
to be able to descend into the enchanted valley, and at last
reluctantly turned their muels' heads in the direction of Nicolosi.
The descent was intensely fatiguing, from the continual jerking and
slipping of their beasts; and they arrived more dead than alive at the
kind professor's house, after being more than eight hours in the
saddle. A few hours later found them once more in the burning sunshine
of Catania, where the thermometer in the shade, was 86 deg., while it had
been 27 deg. on the mountain, a difference in one day of 59 deg. degrees of
temperature. But no difficulties should discourage the traveller from
attempting the ascent of AEtna, which is worth coming the whole way
from England for itself alone. A few days later saw our party on the
deck of the Vatican steamer, _en route_ for Naples, carrying away with
them recollections of enjoyment and kindness such as will ever
associate piety in their minds with pleasant thoughts and grateful
memories.



{708}

From The Dublin University Magazine.

THE FIRST SIEGE  OF LIMERICK.


JAMES'S FAREWELL.

The fight at the Boyne was over; the English, Dutch, Danish, and
French allies resting, or preparing to rest, as well as the ground
near the Pass of Duleek would allow, and their defeated but not
dispirited foemen marching wearily in the summer night toward Dublin.
James accompanied by Sarsfield's horse was already far in the van, and
in due time he reached the castle. We can scarcely fancy a more false
or uncomfortable position than that in which James now stood, when,
calling together his council, the lord mayor, and other notables, he
addressed them for the last time. An ill-disposed historian might have
invented this speech for him if no memory of the one really delivered
had survived. "My dear and loyal Irish subjects, I believe I ought not
to have risked the disastrous battle of yesterday against the advice
of my judicious officers. After the fighting was determined on, I
unhappily did much to discourage the undisciplined fellows who so well
exhibited their loyalty and bravery at the Boyne. We are beaten, I am
sorry to say, and I am getting away as fast as I can to place hundreds
of miles between myself and the cannons and muskets of my callous
relative. Make as good terms, my poor people, with William as he will
grant you. I. can do no more for you than leave you my blessing, to
which you are heartily welcome. Adieu!"

There is an ill-natured tradition still afloat that in his greeting to
Lady Tyrconnell he alluded to the agility of the Irish in running away
from the field, and was in return complimented by that lady for having
outstripped such very fleet runners. The anecdote bears every mark of
a lie about it. The orderly retreat at the Boyne was nothing like a
dastardly flight, and James's disposition would have been worse than
his ill-wishers have ever represented it, had he cracked that bitter
jest on his loyal supporters. We prefer the following sketch of the
final interview from the pen of a writer whose Williamite leanings,
though strong, are regulated by calm judgment and generous feelings:

  "In the cold grey of the winter's morning it were hard to imagine a
  drearier or less inviting spectacle than this group of loyalists
  presented. While they were waiting thus, James, a man of punctuality
  to the last, was employed in paying and discharging his menial
  servants, previously to his taking final leave of his Irish capital.
  At last however the door opened, and James followed by two or three
  gentlemen and officers, including Colonel Luttrell who kept garrison
  as governor of the city, entered the apartment. . . . There was that
  in the fallen condition of the king, in the very magnitude of his
  misfortunes, which lent a mournful dignity to his presence, and
  which in spite of the petulance which occasionally broke from him,
  impressed the few disappointed, and well-nigh ruined followers of
  his cause who stood before him with feelings of melancholy respect.

 "'Gentlemen,' said the king after a brief pause, 'it hath pleased the
 Almighty Disposer of events to give the victory to our enemies. . . .
 The enemy will be in possession of this city at least before many
 days are passed. . . . Matters being so, we must needs shift for
 ourselves as best we may. Above all we do command you, we do implore
 of you, gentlemen, in your several stations, and principally you,
 Colonel Luttrell, as governor of this our city, to prevent all undue
 severities, all angry reprisals, all violences .... upon the
 suspected within its walls. We do earnestly intreat of you all to
 remember that this is our city, and they our subjects; protect it and
 them as long as it shall seem wise to occupy this town for us. This
 is our last command, our parting request.'"

{709}

The poor king was overcome during his speech by the part his own
daughters were acting in the bitter drama then in progress. However,
that does not excuse the reference to the want of capacity or courage
which he was pleased to discover among his Irish supporters. For from
the beginning they appeared more interested in his success than he did
himself.


WILLIAM IN DUBLIN.

But the speech came to an end, and the king departed, and conflicting
and varying hopes and fears agitated the citizens, as the Irish troops
marched in with drums beating and colors flying, and again quitted the
city, and proceeded to Limerick, and so on till the arrival of the
Duke of Ormond and the Dutch guards on Thursday.

The king rode in from the camp at Finglass on the next Sunday,
attended divine service in St. Patrick's cathedral, and returned to
the camp in time for dinner. On the 7th of the month he issued a
proclamation from which a few extracts are here presented:

  "WILLIAM, R.

  "As it hath pleased Almighty God to bless our arms in this kingdom
  with a late victory, . . . . we hold it reasonable to think of
  mercy, and to have compassion on those whom we judge to have been
  seduced. Wherefore we do hereby declare, we shall take into our
  royal protection all poor labourers, common souldiers, country
  farmers, plough-men, and cottiers whatsoever: as also all citizens,
  trades-men, towns-men, and artificers, who either remained at home,
  or having fled from their dwellings, shall return by the first of
  August. . . We do also promise to secure them in their goods, their
  stocks of' cattel, and all their chattels personal whatever, willing
  and requiring them to come in, . . and to preserve the harvest of
  grass and corn for the supply of the winter."

Those who held from Protestant landlords were to pay their rent as
usual, but tenants of Roman Catholics should hand their money to
commissioners appointed to receive it. The term REBELS is applied in
the proclamation to all in arms for King James, a proof that privy
councillors dating from the royal camp at Finglass, 7th July, 1690,
were determined to hold the adherents of James sternly to their
constitutional position.

Devoted partisan as was our chaplain,  [Footnote 200] he was sometimes
blessed with kindly feelings toward his master's foes. He thus
continues after copying the proclamation:

  "This declaration was published in the camp two days after, and had
  it been punctually observed according to the intent of it, we had
  had fewer enemies at this day by at least 20,000. For though the
  king was punctual in his observance of it, some officers and
  soldiers were apt to neglect the king's honour, and the honour of
  our country and religion, when it stood in competition with their
  own profit and advantage."

    [Footnote 200: Rev. George Story, chaplain in King William's army.]


DOUGLAS'S SLOW JOURNEY TO ATHLONE.

On the 9th of July, William divided his forces, sending one portion
under General L. G. Douglas to force the pass at Athlone, himself
conducting the rest toward Limerick. Douglas did not tire his soldiers
with rapid marches. The first night they bivouacked at Chapel
_Issard_, which place a citizen of Dublin will reach easily on foot in
an hour. The second night they encamped at _Manouth_ (May-nooth?), but
here we must quote our historian.

  "Friday we encamped at _Glencurry_ (Clon-curry?) about five miles
  further, and we had not got this length till we begun to plunder,
  though the general gave strict orders to the contrary. Saturday the
  12th, we marched to _Glenard_ (Clonard) bridge, and here we staid
  all Sunday. The soldiers went abroad and took several things from
  the Irish, who had staid upon the king's declaration, and frequent
  complaints came already to the general'; but plundering went on
  still, especially among the northern men who are very dexterous at
  that sport. . . At _Mullingar_ several of the Irish came in for
  protections, though when they had them they were of little force to
  secure their goods or themselves.".

{710}

General Douglas and his soldiers arrived before Athlone, which our
authority locates fifty miles north of Dublin, though it happens to be
nearly due west, on the 17th, having marched out of Chapelizod on the
9th (six and a quarter miles per day). Not a whit fatigued or daunted,
they summoned stout old Colonel Grace to surrender. Story says he
fired a pistol at the herald, to show the value he set on his request.
We must pronounce the old warrior a recreant, unless the charge was
mere powder, or the muzzle pointed upward, which we opine was the
case. Colonel Grace expressed at the same time his determination to
eat his old boots rather than capitulate; hence the application of
_Boot-eater_ to stout defenders of fortresses. So besiegers and
besieged fired guns long and short, wide and small bores, at each
other till the 25th, when General Douglas, hearing that Sarsfield was
coming to the relief of the place, raised the siege, and marched
southward to meet the main army near Limerick. Mr. Story says that
about three or four hundred men were lost between Dublin and Limerick,
of which number thirty only were slain before Athlone, say three men
and three quarters of a man each day. Very indifferent gunners were
those behind the walls of Athlone if this statement be true, Our
observant author makes curious mistakes in topographical matters at
times. In this portion of' his narrative he mentions the Shannon as
falling into the sea beyond Knoc Patrick. Every child exercised on the
map of Ireland, is able to lay finger on Cnoc-Patrick in Mayo, seventy
miles or so north of the Shannon's mouth.

After laying the deaths of the three or four hundred men missing to
sickness, hard marching, six and a quarter miles per diem, surprises
by Rapparees, and sundry other disadvantages, he cracks a gentle joke
by way of cheering up his reader's spirits. "W e killed," says he,
"and took prisoners a great many thousands, but more of' these had had
four feet than two." Having brought this division of the army safe
through the "Golden Vale," let us see what the other portion under the
immediate attention of the king were about.


HOW WILLIAM ENFORCED DISCIPLINE:

On the 9th of the month, William encamped at Crumlin, and the next
night between the Ness  [Footnote 201] and Rathcoole. It was well for
the inhabitants of the line of march that the king commanded in
person.

  [Footnote 201: Naas was anciently the seat of the kings of North
  Leinster. The word means a fair or a commemoration. Rathcoole
  implies a lonely fortress.]

  "Little hapned remarkable except the king's great care to keep the
  souldiers from plundering, and every night it was given out in
  orders that on pain of death no man should go beyond the line in the
  camp, or take violently to the least value from Protestant or
  Papist. The 11th the army marched to _Kill-Kullen_, Bridge, the king
  this morning passing by the _Ness_ saw a souldier robbing a poor
  woman, which enraged his majesty so much, that he beat him with his
  cane, and gave orders that he and several others guilty of the like
  disobedience should be executed on the Monday following. People were
  so wicked as (to) put a bad construction on this action of the
  king's, but it had so good an effect upon that part of the army,
  that the country was secured from any violence done by the souldiers
  during that whole march. Two of the sufferers were _Iniskillin_
  dragoons."

Had General Douglas acted thus the worthy chaplain would not have had
to record so much cruelty and injustice inflicted upon the harmless
country people.

Story takes occasion, on Colonel Eppingar's proceeding with a party of
1,000 horse and dragoons  [Footnote 202] to Wexford, to inform his
English readers about the people in the south of the county.

    [Footnote 202: In 1660, Marshal Brissae, fancying or feigning
    dragons to be in the habit of spouting fire out of their mouths,
    get the muzzles of short muskets adorned with the effigies of
    these monsters, and therewith armed some troops of horse. The
    early dragoons discharged the duties of infantry and cavalry. The
    Scots Grays formed in 1683 were the earliest British dragoons.]

  "Hereabouts were the first English planted in Ireland. They were a
  colony of west-countrymen, and retain their old English tone and
  customs to this day. I am credibly informed that every day about one
  or two o'clock in summer, they go to bed, the whole country round;
  nay, the very hens fly up and the sheep go to fold as orderly as it
  were night."  [Footnote 203]

    [Footnote 203: The people of "the barony" are the descendants of a
    Flemish colony who had settled in Wales at the invitation of Henry
    I. Beans were the favorite crop, and dry bean-stalks furnished
    their chief fuel. If the gossip of the inhabitants of the northern
    part of the county could be credited, the barony of Forth formerly
    furnished priests for all Ireland.]

{711}

Good Mr. Story was as fond of a bit of picturesque or romantic hearsay
as Herodotus himself. The well-to-do farmers really indulged in a
siesta, but as to the degeneracy of manners among the hens and sheep
we are altogether incredulous. Some time before the _Ninety-Eight_,
household and village councils were held for a month in a townland of
the barony to decide whether a farmer, to whom a legacy had been left
in Dublin, should relinquish his right to it, or encounter the risks
of the journey to the city. At last it was decided that prayers were
to be solemnly offered up for his safety in all the neighboring
churches and chapels, and then let him in God's name brave the perils
of the way.

A good deal of irresolution prevailed at this time in William's
proceedings. Ill news came rife across the water, and at one time he
retraced his route even as far as Chapelizod with the intention of
crossing to England. There, however, he received tidings which
reassured him, and he returned to the camp at Golden Bridge, which he
reached on the 2d of August. On the 8th General Douglas arrived, and
on the 9th the united forces approached the Irish stronghold.


INTERIOR OF THE IRISH COUNCILS.

The Irish and French chiefs who had collected to Limerick after the
day at the Boyne were far from being of the same opinions or
aspirations. According to Colonel O'Kelly, Tyrconnell desired nothing
more than to give up Limerick and all the other garrisons to King
William, and Count de Lauzun was more anxious to get back to that
centre of delights, the city of Paris, than co-operate in the defence
of their present hold, which, he said, required only a smart discharge
of roasted apples to be made listen to terms.


THE PARLEY BEFORE THE FIGHT.

Limerick, now apparently devoted to destruction, consisted of an
island within two arms of the Shannon, and a smaller area outside
called the Irish-town, both portions being connected by Ball's-bridge.
King's Island was and is connected with the Clare side of the river by
'I'homond-bridge, and contains a legacy left by King John in the shape
of a castle. William's people set to work forming batteries and
trenches as well as the balls coming from the ramparts of' Irish-town
would allow them, and the moment they were ready they proceeded to
exchange iron and leaden compliments with the folk behind the
parapets.

Hostilities, however, did not really begin till some civil
communications had taken place on both sides. A herald-trumpeter,
blowing his instrument and displaying his white flag, entered the city
with a polite request to the authorities to surrender the place.
Monsieur Boiselieu, chief in command, calling the Duke of Berwick and
Major-General Sarsfield to council, indited a politely expressed
letter to Sir Robert Southwell, secretary of state, in which was
implied some wonder at the request, and a determination on his part,
and that of his officers and soldiers, to gain the good opinion of the
Prince of Orange by defending the city against his forces while
defence was feasible. On the return of the trumpeter firing began, the
king inspecting the hot business from Cromwell's fort.

Story says that a Frenchman, escaping into the city the day the enemy
sat down before it, gave accurate information to Sarsfield of the
complete economy of the English camp, and of a battering-train, tin
boats, wagons of biscuits; etc., approaching William's camp from
Dublin. {712} Part of the sequel is given in his own words:

  "Monday the 11th in the morning, came one _Manus O'Brien_ a
  substantial country gentleman to the camp, and gave notice that
  _Sarsfield_ in the night had passed the river with a body of horse,
  and designed something extraordinary. . . . . The messenger that
  brought the news was not much taken notice of at first, most people
  looking on it as a dream. A great officer however called him aside,
  and after some indifferent questions, askt him about a prey of
  cattel in such a place, which the gentleman complained of
  afterwards, saying he was sorry to see general officers mind cattel
  more than the king's honour. But after he met with some acquaintance
  he was brought to the king, who, to prevent the worst, gave orders
  that a party of five hundred horse should be made ready, and march
  to meet the guns. . . . Where the fault lay, I am no competent
  judge, but it certainly was one or two of the clock in the morning
  before the party marched, which they then did very softly till about
  an hour after they saw------"

What shall be told farther on.

SARSFIELD'S GREAT FEAT.

  "From Limerick that day bould Sarsfield dashed away,
  Until he came to Cullen where their artillery lay;
  The Lord cleared up the firmament, the moon and stars shone bright,
  And for the Battle of the Boyne be had revenge that night."

Poor John Banim inserted these stirring lines in his romance of the
Boyne Water as belonging to an old ballad; we suspect them to have
been his own composition. Whoever might have given Sarsfield
information--a rapparee was as likely as the Frenchman mentioned by
the chaplain--he crossed Thomond-bridge at the head of five hundred
horse on Sunday night as soon as it was sufficiently dark, and the
party moved up as noiselessly as they could along the western bank of
the Shannon to Killaloe, or _Killalow_, as Rev. Mr. Story spells it.
There they crossed the river and penetrated among the Tipperary
mountains, over which the Keeper and the "Mother of Mountains" towered
in pride. Among the hills they spent the rest of the night and the
whole of the next day, being kept aware of the movements of the convoy
which meantime was working its slow way along the Cashel road. Toward
evening Sarsfield and a few who were most in his confidence, lying
among the dry grass and fern of the hill-pass since called
Lacken-na-Gapple (_Lagan-na-Capal_, "Hollow of the Horses"), were
inspecting the last stage of the convoy. At that hour the train had
passed the village of Cullen, and were about taking their rest on and
about the road leading up to the grassy platform on which stood the
old fortalice of Ballyneedy. This was about five miles from the
mountain pass where the Jacobite general was on the watch. He waited
as patiently as he could till the sun had sunk some time behind the
Galteigh mountains, and the watch-fires began to glimmer from the
encampment.

The watch-word that night among the wearied men and their sentinels
was SARSFIELD, an ill-omened coincidence. How the party conspiring
their destruction found it out is not so very apparent; but when the
officers were asleep in the waste castle, and the soldiers by their
wagons, Sarsfield's men sang out the password to the sentinel placed
in advance of the village, to the sentinels in the village, and to the
sentinels immediately in advance of the unconscious groups. There the
commander thundered out "Sarsfield is the word, and Sarsfield is the
man." Deafening shouts came from the rushing horsemen, and of the
awakened slumberers some were slain gallantly resisting, a few
escaped, and a few others got quarter. The spoils consisted or eight
pieces of heavy battering-cannon, five mortars with their carriages, a
hundred and fifty-three wagons of ammunition, twelve carts loaded with
biscuit, eighteen tin boats for the passage of rivers, and all the
cart and cavalry horses.

The commander, wisely judging that troops were at the moment marching
from Limerick to interrupt his plans, had the cannons charged to the
mouth and set in the earth, muzzle downward. {713} These he surrounded
with the wagons and their contents, and skifully laid trains of powder
were not neglected. The successful party then withdrawing to a safe
distance--they needed a wide berth, taking the quantity of powder into
account--set fire at once to the lines of powder, and at one and the
same moment all the contents of the great guns and the
ammunition-carts were ignited. There was an intolerable blaze, a roar
and its reverberations; accompanied by a blowing up in the air of
pieces of metal and blazing wood, and the combined effect was sublime
and terrible beyond conception. The darkest recesses of the mountain
glens were lighted up as in the summer noon, and the shock was felt
for many miles in every direction. Sir John Lanier, who was hastening
when too late to protect the convoy, saw the blaze and heard the
terrible explosion at several miles distance, and comprehended the
terrible disaster in a moment. The concussion was perceptible even in
William's camp at a distance of about thirteen miles, and it is
probable that the general who had "_askt_" Manus O'Brien about the
prey of cartel, felt (to use a provincialism) very lewd of himself.
Sir John Lanier directed his squadron of five hundred horse to the
left to intercept the Irish party, but it was not his fortune to meet
with them, and Sarsfield recrossed the Shannon without the loss of a
man.

The Rev. Mr. Story relates that no one was made prisoner at Ballyneedy
"only a lieutenant of Colonel Earle's, who being sick in a house hard
by, was stripped and brought to Sarsfield, who used him very civilly."

While the Irish chief is snatching a short relaxation after his
successful sortie, and all within the walls are filled with a
momentary joy for the signal benefit, let us introduce a slight sketch
of the career of the brave Earl of Lucan, whose memory is still held
in love and veneration by the great mass of the Irish people, and of
whom no disrespectful word is ever pronounced by the descendants of
the brave men against whom he often waged battle.


SARSFIELD'S CAREER.

The first of the name known in Ireland was Thomas Sarsfield,
standard-bearer to King Henry II. In the reign of Charles I., Patrick,
the then representative of the family, married Anne, daughter of
Ruaighre (Roger) O'Moore, and their children were William and the
subject of our sketch Patrick, who succeeded to the estate on the
death of his brother. "He had received his education in one of the
French military colleges, and saw some early campaigns in the armies
of Louis XIV. His first commission was that of ensign in the regiment
of Monmouth in France, after which he obtained a lieutenancy in the
Royal Guards of England." He commanded for James in one of those
skirmishes which took place with William's Dutch troops on their march
from Torquay. At the commencement of the Irish campaigns his estates
produced L2,000 annual revenue, so that it did not inconvenience him
much to raise a. company of horse. We shall not here touch on his
achievements during the war in Ireland, as these have found, or will
naturally find their places in the course of our narrative. On
arriving in Paris after the treaty of Limerick, "he was received with
kindness and distinction by the ex-king of England and Louis XIV."

  "The former appointed him colonel of his body guards, and his most
  Christian majesty bestowed on him the rank of lieutenant-general in
  the French armies. He might have obtained a marshal's staff had his
  life been spared. He fought under Luxembourg at Steenkirk in 1692, .
  . . . and on the 29th of July, 1693, a little more than one year and
  a half after his voluntary banishment from his own country, he was
  killed in the command of a division at the great battle of Landen.
  It was a soldier's death on a glorious and memorable field.

{714}

  "There are few names more worthy to be inscribed in the roll of
  honour than that of Patrick Sarsfield, who may be quoted as a type
  of loyalty and patriotic devotion. In the annals of Irish history he
  stands as a parallel to Pierre du Terrail, Chevalier de Bayard in
  those of France, and may be equally accounted 'Sans peur et sans
  reproche,' the fearless and irreproachable knight; in his public
  actions firm and consistent; in his private character amiable and
  unblemished. . . . (At the end of the war) William III. would gladly
  have won his services, and offered to confirm him in his rank and
  property; but he listened to no overtures, and left his native
  country attended by thousands of that gallant body, who, under the
  title of the Irish Brigade, filled the continent of Europe with
  their renown."  [Footnote 204]

    [Footnote 204: "Patrick Sarsfield, Earl of Lucan, a Biography;"
    Dublin University Magazine for November, 1853; the writer, John
    William Cole, Esq., formerly captain in the Royal Fusiliers. Mary,
    sister of the earl, was married to Colonel Rossiter, County
    Wexford, and to a lineal descendant of theirs, the gentleman just
    mentioned, we are indebted for the only life of Sarsfield yet
    given to the world. He could find but scant materials, though it
    is supposed they might be made available if the living
    representative of an old family of the Pale would take the trouble
    of a search among the archives of his house. Mary Sarsfield's
    great granddaughter was the wife of Lieutenant (afterward colonel)
    James Cockburn, who was on the personal staff of General Wolfe on
    the memorable day at Quebec. His portrait (to the right of General
    Moncton's) was introduced by West into his picture of the "Death
    of Wolfe." He afterward commanded the Thirty-fifth in the American
    war of Independence. Colonel Cockburn's daughter, Margaret,
    married Thomas Cole, Esq., of Callan, in the county of Kilkenny,
    major in the King's Fencibles. Our authority the issue of this
    marriage could not resist the martial impulses of his race; so he
    smelled powder along with Rev. R. Gleig at Washington and New
    Orleans and elsewhere. Since he laid aside the "spurtle blade and
    dog-skin wallet," he has usefully employed his leisure hours in
    literary composition of a healthful character. We suspect the
    papers in the University Magazine on ancient military tactics
    illustrated by plans of battles to be his. Among his other
    productions are biographies of General Vallancey, Tyrone Power,
    and other Irish theatrical celebrities.]

In his Military Memoirs of the Irish Nation, Mathew O'Connor speaks
thus of his military qualifications:

  "As a partisan and for a desultory warfare, he possessed admirable
  qualifications; brave, patient, vigilant, rapid, indefatigable,
  ardent, adventurous, and enterprising; the foremost in encounter,
  the last in retreat. He harassed his enemy by sudden, unexpected,
  and generally irresistible attacks, inspiring his troops with the
  same ardour and contempt of danger with which his own soul was
  animated. . . . No general was ever more beloved by his troops."


A SIEGE INCIDENT OR TWO.

Whatever William might have felt on being made acquainted with the
loss of his cannon and ammunition, he said very little on the subject.
He was one of those whose fixed purpose is not to be set aside for
defeat or check. With his battering-train augmented by two great guns
and a mortar from Waterford, he continued to pound the walls day after
day. The trenches were relieved at midnight till the following unlucky
mistake occurred, all the particulars of which are not very
intelligible to civilians:

  "Monday 18th August at night the trenches were relieved by
  Lieut.-General Douglas, My Lord _Sydney_, and Count _Nassau_, as
  major-generals, and Brigadeer _Stuart_. We made our approaches
  towards the fort outside the wall, and Lieut.-General _Douglas's_
  and Brigadeer _Stuart's_ regiments were posted towards the right. It
  was dark when they went on, and they did not perceive the enemy to
  be so near them as they really were. [What brought the enemy outside
  their walls?] for there was at that time scarce twenty yards
  distance between them. They were ordered to lye down upon their arms
  which they did, and a great part, both of the officers and soldiers,
  fell asleep. The enemy perceived this, and attacked them, which
  presently put them into a confusion, and several of them gave
  ground, but presently recovered themselves and fired, but did not
  know at what. The _Danes_ to the left took our own men for the enemy
  sallying, and so fired upon them; they believed the Danes to be the
  Irish; and so returned the compliment. The Irish fired upon both,
  and they at one another. This confusion lasted nigh two hours, in
  which several men were killed; nor did the king or any body else
  know what to make of it. At last our men found their mistake, and
  the Irish were beat in, crying 'quarter' and 'murder' as they used
  to do. After this his majesty ordered the trenches to be relieved in
  the day, and our men marched always in and out in the very face of
  their cannon."

If truth lies in a well, it is a pity she should make choice of a
muddy one, where her contours and lineaments are so admirably
confused. Hear another version by John Banim, the novelist, from what,
if any, authority we know not:

  "While day after day the battering, at this one point continued, the
  garrison made a midnight sortie upon the besiegers. Taken by
  surprise, and thrown into such confusion as to be unable to discern
  friend from foe, they attacked each other, and the Irish {715}
  having retreated unperceived, so continued until the morning light
  showed them their mistake and the shocking havoc that resulted from
  it."

Our chaplain did not much relish that classic and severe style of
composition which critics assigned to a great historical work.
Moreover he was ever as ready as Homer to introduce a gossiping or
traditional episode, and repose his pen from the dry or terrible
details of the main course of events.

On the 19th of the month King William had another providential escape.
He was riding slowly up toward Cromwell's fort, when, as he was
entering a gap, an officer stayed him about some business. Within a
second or two after the pause of the horse's feet, a cannon-ball swept
through the spot where he and his horse would have been but for the
interruption.

All this time the people within the walls were in ill-condition, their
diet consisting of beans, or very coarse bread, and the enemy's
mortars throwing bombs and carcasses among them with little
interruption. These things disturbed them much, as Mr. Story says, for
they had not seen the like before. The round or oval iron carcasses
which flashed forth through it's holes a fierce and inextinguishable
fire for some eight or ten minutes was nearly as terrible as the bomb.
Still they doggedly held on, and made no complaint; Sarsfield's energy
and hopeful spirits kept up their courage. The chaplain relates with a
sort of remorseful feeling how his party and himself enjoyed the
burning of a part of the town one night by the bombs and red-hot
balls, "which made me reflect upon our profession of soldiery not to
be overcharged with good nature."


HOW LIMERICK AS ASSAILED AND DEFENDED.

By the 27th of the month, a twelve yards breach being made in the wall
of Irishtown, and William looking on from Cromwell's fort, the
grenadiers, supported on either side by Dutch, Danes, and
Brandenburghers, on hearing a signal of three cannon-shots, sprang out
of their trenches, and cheering loudly, dashed forward to the glacis.
[Footnote 205] They were hotly received from the covered way, whose
occupants mounting the banquette, and resting their muskets on the
edge of the glacis, poured a shower of balls among them; and the guns
on the ramparts, great and small, volleying fast and fiercely, made
wide lanes among the brave fellows. However, the guns from Cromwell's
fort, enfilading the ramparts, soon silenced the engines of death
stationed there, and the grenadiers, undaunted by the thinning of
their ranks, gained the glacis, sprang into the covered way, and after
a terrible struggle forced the defenders from that post, from their
trenches in the ditch, and over the breach into the city.

  [Footnote 205: For the behoof of young renders not conversant with
  the outworks of besieged towns, a few explanatory words are given.
  Outside the strong walls is a wide and deep, dry ditch. The sloping
  side from which the wall rises is the scarp, the opposite slope is
  the counterscarp, its upper line meeting with the platform called
  the covered way. This covered way is about thirty feet wide, its
  outward boundary being the face of the glacis or sloping plane, this
  last so situated that men marching along it to attack the fortress
  are in the direct range of the guns. The level of the glacis is
  higher than that of the covered way by seven or eight feet. The
  defenders standing on a small terrace called the banquette at the
  base of the glacis, and resting their muskets on its edge, can fire
  on the advancing foe.]

The guns on the ramparts to the right of the breach being silenced,
the firing from the Danes and Dutch on the flanks of the storming
party did considerable damage to those on the ramparts and in the
ditch, but the guns of a fort constructed in King's Island opened on
the foreigners, killed many, and afforded some relief to the
defenders. While these were mowing each other down at a distance, the
grenadiers, driving their opponents across the breach, cheered
lustily, and flung in their hand-grenades, whose bursting and
destructive iron shower were ill calculated to recall the
self-possession of the fugitives. But the pikes and bayonets of their
follows in shelter, now levelled full at their breasts, were {716} as
much to be dreaded as what they expected from behind. Over the breach
and inward dashed Lord Drogheda's grenadiers, but a battery snugly
placed in front of the yawning breach on stones, timber, earth, and
other stuff, all at once belched out a storm of grape upon them, and
after struggling for some time, a second discharge sent them back over
the ruins and into the ditch.

But no dastard feeling was to be found among the survivors.
Re-enforced by new comrades who had yet done nothing, they returned
once more to the assault, flung their grenades, and cleared the
tumbled masses of lime and stone. Undaunted by the havoc made among
them by a fresh discharge, they rushed on the battery, effectually
silenced it, and now looked on the capture of the town as certain. But
here they were met by fresh and untired foes, who being kept to that
moment in inaction by Sarsfield, now rushed on from either side, and a
dreadful struggle commenced, the badly armed defenders showering
volleys of stones where more effective weapons were not at command,
the mere townsmen and their wives and daughters mingling fiercely in
the desperate fray. Those who had pushed on the furthest were slain to
a man, neither asking nor receiving quarter, and the others, after
effecting everything in the power of energy and dauntless courage,
were for the second time driven forth from the rescued city.

  "From the walls and every place (we quote our chaplain) they so
  pestered us on the counterscarp (properly the covered way), that
  after nigh three hours resisting bullets, stones (broken bottles
  from the very women who boldly stood in the breach, and were nearer
  our men than their own), and whatever ways could be thought on to
  destroy us, our ammunition being spent, it was judged safest to
  return to our trenches. When the work was at the hottest, the
  _Brandenburgh_ regiment, who behaved themselves very well, were got
  upon the black battery, where the enemie's powder hapned to take
  fire, and blew up a great many of them, the men, faggots, stones,
  and whatnot, flying into the air with a most terrible noise."

In some Jacobite memoirs mention is made of a sortie made by Sarsfield
and his driving the wearied assaulters to their camp, and their
rescuing many of the enemy from an hospital which had taken fire. The
exploit is overlooked by the chaplain, who thus concludes his short
account of the day:

  "The king stood nigh _Cromwell's_ fort all the time, and the
  business being over, he went to his camp very much concerned, as
  indeed was the whole army, for you might have seen a mixture of
  anger and sorrow in every bodie's countenance."

William thus disappointed of bringing the Irish issue to a conclusion,
and his presence being much needed in England, drew off his forces,
and he himself made little delay till he set sail from Waterford to
make matters in London comfortable, and keep a sharp lookout on the
unfriendly proceedings of his bitter foeman, Louis XIV.

In September Count Solmes, who was left in command after William's
departure, went to England, and Ginckell succeeded to his office. A
better choice could not have been made; he established his
head-quarters at Kilkenny.


TYRCONNELL'S POLICY.

Tyrconnell, who all along was no better than a drag on his party, who
desired peace in order to secure his own estates, and who was accused
of holding secret correspondence with William, sailed to France soon
after the siege of Limerick. Previous to his departure he appointed
the young Duke of Berwick commander-in-chief; giving him twelve
councillors to aid him with their advice. Some of these were men after
Tyrconnell's own heart, such as in our own days are called
_Cawtholics_ by their own party. Sarsfield happened to be among them,
because, if he were not, Tyrconnell's arrangements would have been
little regarded by the men of heart and head among the loyalists.
Count O'Kelly declares that Tyrconnell's reasons for repairing to the
presence of Kings Louis and James were to nullify tile {717} effect
that the gallant defence of Limerick might have made upon their minds.
He would so twist and remould circumstances as to show that there was
not a shadow of hope for ultimate success. James appears to have long
entertained the notion of recovering England by losing Ireland, hence
his enduring patronage of Tyrconnell. Berwick was influenced, of
course, by what he knew were the cherished wishes of his father and
his father's favorite, and by his inaction, and want of cordial
co-operation with Sarsfield and the others, who, like him, were in
earnest, did all that in him lay to make General Ginckell's task easy.
On more than one occasion the Irish party were about deposing the
young duke, but he managed by a show of compliance to still retain his
power.

In September of this year the brave soldier but faithless adherent,
Lord Churchill, afterward Duke of Marborough, took Cork, which the
Duke of Berwick had previously advised the brave M. Elligot to burn,
and then retire to Kerry, as its defence seemed hopeless. He rather
chose to hold it out for five days. The Duke of Grafton, a natural son
of Charles II., and who bequeathed his name to the Bond street of
Dublin, commanding the navy, perished at the siege, fighting against
his uncle's supporters. Marlborough next marched against Kinsale,
which he entered without opposition, but the new fort commanded by Sir
Edmund Scott held out for twenty days.


THE RAPPAREES: UNCOMFORTABLE WINTER QUARTERS, 1690.

Those patriotic and troublesome light-armed irregulars, the rapparees,
continued during the decline and fall of the year 1690 to do the
English in Leinster and Munster much mischief by unexpectedly visiting
places supplied with provisions, either cattle or corn, and carrying
off all they could seize. So General Ginckell finding himself
straitened, conceived the idea of effecting a settlement in Kerry,
from which Limerick obtained much provender. With this object he
directed Lieutenant-General Douglas to march on Sligo, and take it if
possible, at all events to move down the west bank of the Shannon, and
co-operate with Colonel Richard Brewer, then at Mullingar, in attempts
to pass the river at Jamestown and Lanesboro' above, and Banagher
below Athlone. While the attention of King James's generals would be
drawn to these proceedings in the north and east, Major-General Tettau
would quietly proceed from Cork into Kerry, and take possession of
that ancient "kingdom," seconded in his expedition if necessary by
forces from Clonmel under the brave Ginckell himself. The advance was
really made, and skirmishes and attacks of forts ensued, and after
all, the English forces were withdrawn, leaving matters pretty much as
before, except the damage mutually inflicted. Some desultory
encounters took place on the east bank of the Shannon between portions
of the hostile forces, and the rapparees improved every opportunity of
despoiling the English foe, and collecting munitions into their boggy
or hilly retreats. There are sufficient materials for a dozen romances
in the adventures of Maccabe, Grace, O'Higgins, O'Callaghan,
O'Kavanagh, the White Sergeant, Galloping Hogan. The last-named worthy
indeed figures in the two standard romances of the Jacobite wars which
we are happy to possess. It may be supposed that the deeds of these
heroes smelt unsavorily in the nostrils of our chaplain, who thus
descanted both in sorrow and anger on their proceedings. He prefaced
his remarks with an expression of Lord Baltimore to King James I.,
namely, that "the Irish were a wicked people, and had been as wickedly
dealt withal," and conscientiously adds, "I make no application of the
expression to ourselves, the most people that have been in that
country know how to do it."

{718}

One expedition of some moment was made by Colonel Foulkes into an
island in the Bog of Allen. This was connected by two toghers or
causeways to two points on the dry land, one of them being furnished
with twelve trenches. These the brave colonel, who brought three
field-pieces along with him, was obliged to fill up one after the
other. When he arrived he found Colonel Piper, who had approached by
the other causeway. The rapparee garrison had all carefully retreated
into the woods when they became aware of their danger, leaving, as Mr.
Story says, "only some little things for the invaders."

Of course no quarter was ever extended to the poor rapparees. However,
the usual forbearance was exhibited by the regular forces on both
sides toward each other. Opposite Lanesboro, on the other side of the
Shannon, were posted three regiments of Irish, with the duty of
watching the English on the east bank, during some days in December;
and (in Mr. Story's words) "then little hapned of moment only some
small firings, and sometimes they made truces, Colonel _Clifford_ and
the other Irish officers drinking healths over to our men, and those
on the other side returning the compliment."

It never entered the mind of the warlike chaplain to throw a halo of
interest round one of his rapparee chiefs, though some were perhaps
more worthy of the name of hero than Redmond O'Hanlon or Rob Roy. They
were contemporaries of his, and were directing their chief energies to
bring his master's rule in Ireland to an end. So it was against nature
that he could see in them anything but "thieves, robbers, tories, and
bogg-trotters."

The most distinguished of the heads of these free companies was
Anthony O'Carroll, named _Fadh_ from his great height. After the first
siege of Limerick he fixed his head-quarters at Nenagh, and
_discomforted_ the English and their allies from that period to the
beginning of the second siege. Though he or any of his followers if
taken prisoners would be hung according to the laws of war, without
mercy, he observed a different demeanor to his captives. Those who had
money ransomed themselves; others were kept as prisoners. When he
found himself crowded by his foes after the day at Aughrim, he set
fire to the town, and brought his garrison of 500 men safe to Limerick
Mr. Story says that he was able to collect 2,000 men to his banner at
any moment while he ruled at Nenagh.



ORIGINAL.

NEW PUBLICATIONS.

SERMONS PREACHED AT THE CHURCH OF
ST. PAUL, THE APOSTLE, NEW YORK,
during the years 1865 and 1866. 12mo,
pp. 440. New York: Lawrence Kehoe.

The new volume of Sermons by the Paulist Fathers, which Mr. Kehoe has
just issued in a very neat and tasteful shape, derives a special
interest from the fact that it contains several of the hitherto
unpublished discourses of the Rev. Francis A. Baker. In the earnest,
vigorous, affectionate sermons on Penance, on the miracle of Pardon,
on the power of the Holy Ghost as exemplified in good Christians, and
on the duty of Thankfulness, it is easy to recognize the impulses of
that beautiful soul which has now gone to its reward. We have spoken
before of the characteristics of Father Baker's preaching. Here is an
extract, taken at random from the first of the four discourses which
we have mentioned:

  "Do you know, my brethren, what it is that consoles the priest in
  his labors in the confessional? Why does he shut himself in that
  dark closet for hours? Ah! I will tell you, Like Elias in the cave
  of Horeb, he is watching for the manifestation of God; and as the
  prophet found the power of God, not in {719} the tempest or the
  earthquake, but in the still small voice, so the priest finds the
  greatest work of God, the most beautiful, that which consoles him
  for every sacrifice; not in the works of nature, not in sensible
  things, however great; but in the still small voice of the
  trembling, self-accusing soul, that has really come to shake off the
  slavery of sin, and to claim once more, through the blood of Christ,
  the glorious liberty of the children of God. Beautiful is the earth
  and sky, and glorious is the jewelled city of God; but if I may say
  what I think, I do not believe in all God's universe there is a work
  so stupendous, so grand, so beautiful, as the conversion of a
  sinner.

  "Well, then, does St. Augustine say, that to convert a sinner is a
  greater work than to create heaven and earth. Well do the saints cry
  out, Glory and empire for ever to Jesus Christ, who has loved us and
  washed us from our sins in his own blood! Well do the angels in
  heaven rejoice over one sinner that does penance. It is a thing for
  heaven and earth to wonder at. But, my brethren, it does not speak
  well for us that we think so little of it. It shows that we have
  very imperfect ideas of the evil of sin, a very inadequate
  remembrance of what Christ has done and suffered for us, a very
  insufficient conception of the conversion that is required of us. It
  seems to me that some men imagine that God pardons sin in much the
  same way that a good-natured parent overlooks the slight offences of
  a child who owns his fault. Whereas, in fact, God is a holy God, who
  tries the reins and hearts, who demands of us, as the condition of
  preserving his favor, that we love him with all our mind and
  strength and heart. When I see a man who has recently been to
  confession, and who has had grievous sins to confess; when I see him
  no more thoughtful than before, no more watchful over himself, no
  more grateful to God; when I see him forget all about it, and take
  it as a matter of course, I fear that he has come away as he went;
  that no angel has smiled on his penance, no saint rejoiced over it;
  that no droop of the precious Blood has fallen on his heart. Surely
  if he had been pardoned he would think more of it. Let it not be so
  with us, my brethren. Have we been forgiven a deadly sin, then from
  reprobates and castaways we have become children of God. How sweet
  it is to receive any grace from God! To look on the sky and earth,
  and think that he has made it, to look on ourselves and think that
  we have come from his hands, fills us with delight.

  "But to have sinned and to be pardoned, to have sinned and to be
  washed in the precious Blood, and then to belong to the family of
  God. To have tasted of the heavenly gift, and the powers of the
  world to come. To have the love of God, and the peace of God, once
  more to renew these dark and stubborn hearts. Where is our gratitude
  for favors such as those? Magdalene hath loved much because she was
  much forgiven. When is our love and our zeal proportionate to the
  pardon which we have received from God? Go, pardoned sinner--sin no
  more. Go, and ponder deeply the graces yon have received. Go, and by
  your life show what great things he has done for you. Once in
  darkness, but now light in the Lord, walk as children of light,
  living with St. Paul in the faith of the Son of God, who hath loved
  you and given himself for you."

The same fervent spirit and the same vein of practical exhortation
which we see so admirably combined in the passages which we have
cited, are conspicuous in many other pages from the anonymous hands
which have contributed to the authorship of this volume. The Paulist
Fathers have little to do in their book with controversy; and not a
great deal with dogma, except in so far as it has a direct practical
relation to the duties of every-day life. They seem, in this
collection of sermons, to care more for exhorting than expounding;
more for arousing sinners to the comprehension and performance of what
the church requires of them, than for setting forth the church's
sacred attributes. As discourses addressed to ordinary congregations,
made up of people of the common run who are burdened with the common
imperfections of average humanity, we know of few specimens of pulpit
literature which we rate higher. And they have also the great and
unfortunately rather rare merit of being very impressive and effective
when read in the retirement of the closet.

   J. R. G. H.


LYDIA, A TALE OF THE SECOND CENTURY.

Translated from the German of Hermann Geiger, of Munich. 12mo, pp.
275. Philadelphia: Eugene Cummiskey. 1867.

We are inclined to believe that the now world-renowned tales of
Fabiola and Callista have prompted the composition of this beautiful
story. The heroine is a young Christian of Smyrna, named Seraphica,
who is cast into prison and condemned to death for her faith. A
terrible earthquake, most powerfully depicted by the author, sunders
the walls of her prison, and she is liberated; but learning that her
{720} mother was carried off to Athens as a slave, she follows her
thither. The captain of the vessel in which she embarks seizes her and
makes a present of her as a slave to a wealthy Athenian lady named
Metella, who names her Lydia from the place of her birth. In the
service of this lady, who is a pious heathen, the Christian slave
passes several years, exhibiting in her life many traits of that
heroic patience, humility, love of suffering, and divine charity which
were inspired by her holy faith; and which is beautifully contrasted
with the pure, natural virtue of her heathen mistress.

Her Christian patience is rewarded at last by the conversion of
Metella and her son. Freed from slavery, she goes to Rome to seek her
mother, who she finds has in the mean time suffered martyrdom, and
returns to Metella to become her bosom friend and companion.

We could scarcely wish anything added to the plot of this charming
tale, but the impression made upon us during its perusal was that the
different descriptions, scenes, and tableaux were wanting in a proper
connecting link, being presented to us rather, as it would appear, for
their own sake, than as necessarily united with, or dependent upon,
the life and fortunes of the characters of the story. The translator
has fallen into a common fault from a desire to be too literal; the
intermingling of the historical present with the past. We have not
observed it in any instance without feeling that it detracted very
much from the force and beauty of the description. The volume does the
enterprising publisher the highest credit, its typography and binding
lacking in nothing that we could desire for elegance and taste. We
predict and wish for it a wide circulation.


HISTORY OF A MOUTHFUL OF BREAD.
By Jean Mace. Translated from the French by Mr. Alfred Gatty.
New-York: American News Company, 121 Nassau-street.

This is a very popular work on the branch of physiology which relates
to the organs and processes of nutrition. It is written in a pleasing,
lively style, and with the express purpose of being readable by
intelligent children. Excepting the absurd notion that the globules of
the blood are animalculae, and the grovelling definition of the body
as a digestive tube served by organs, we see nothing worthy of censure
in the book, which, otherwise, imparts valuable information respecting
the merely physical facts of animal life.


Goodrich's PICTORIAL HISTORIES OF
GREECE AND THE UNITED STATES,
and
CHILD'S PICTORIAL HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES.
New editions. Philadelphia: Butler & Co. 1867.

These new and improved editions of very popular and well-written
histories are very suitable for elementary instruction. We have
examined the history of Greece with some attention, and find it an
excellent epitome. The illustrations are remarkably good.


LAWRENCE KEHOE, New-York, has in press, and will soon publish, Lady
Herbert's new work, which has just appeared in London, entitled Three
Phases of Christian Love--namely, Life of St. Monica, Life of
Victorine de Galard, Life of Venerable Mere Devos.


BOOKS RECEIVED.

From AMERICAN NEWS COMPANY, New York. The New Gospel of Peace,
according to St. Benjamin. 1 vol, 12mo, pp. 343; price $2. Alderman
Rooney at the Cable Banquet. Pamphlet illustrated; price 50 cts. Olive
Logan's Christmas Story. Pamphlet; price 50 cts.

From LEE & Shepard, Boston, Mass. Oliver Optic's Magazine for Boys and
Girls. No. 1, pp. 12; price 5 cts.

From the OFFICE OF THE AVE MARIA, Notre Dame, Indiana. The Ave Maria
Almanac for 1867. Illustrated, pp. 32; price 20 cts.

From HURD & HOUGHTON New York. The Riverside Magazine for Young
People. No. 1, pp. 48; price 25 cts. Lalla Rookh, by Thomas Moore. 1
vol. 12mo, pp. 332. Illustrated; price $1.50.

From P. O'SHEA, New York. The Rosa Mystica; or, Mary of Nazareth, the
Lily of the House of David. By Marie Josephine. 1 vol. 12mo, pp. 290;
price $2. Spirit of St. Francis de Sales. 1 vol. 12mo, pp. 372; price
$2. The Manual of the Immaculate Conception, a collection of prayers
for general use. Compiled from authentic sources. Published with
approbation of the Most Rev. J. McCloskey, D.D., pp. 1122.

From John Murphy & Co., Baltimore. The Southern Poems of the War.
Collected and arranged by Miss Emily V. Mason. 1 vol. 12mo, pp. 456;
price $1.50. Good Thoughts for Priest and People; or, Short
Meditations for every Day in the Year, etc., etc. By Rev. Theodore
Noethen, pastor of Holy Cross, Albany, N. Y. 1 vol. 12mo, pp. 383;
price $2.

From KELLY & PIET, Baltimore, Md. Sermons Delivered during the Second
Plenary Council of Baltimore, October, 1866. And Pastoral Letter of
the Hierarchy of the United States, together with the Papal Rescript
and Letters of Convocation. A complete list of dignitaries and
officers of the Council; and an introductory notice, with plates. 1
vol. 12mo, pp. 244; price $3.

From BENZIGER BROTHERS, New York and Cincinnati. School Recreations;
or, The Catholic Teacher's Companion. Compiled for the use of Catholic
Schools, with approbation of Archbishop Purcell. l vol 12mo, pp. 94.



{721}


THE CATHOLIC WORLD.

VOL. IV., NO. 24.--MARCH, 1867.


ORIGINAL.

THE CATHOLIC CEREMONIAL.

BY REV. M. O'CONNOR, S. J.

Outside the Catholic Church there is a general opinion that we
Catholics make all devotion to consist in the performance of a certain
routine of ceremonies, and are entire strangers to what is called
vital religion. These ceremonies to which we are supposed to attach
such excessive, or rather such superstitious value, are looked on by
those outside the church as an unnecessary and worse than useless
display, or as an empty pageant. Our love of them is set down as one
of the damning ingredients in that bug-bear which they have conjured
up, and designated by the name of "Popery." We, on the contrary, look
upon our ceremonial as one of the most beautiful things in the church,
one of those that most clearly mark the finger of God, and operate
most efficaciously in the work of true vital religion.

The point, therefore, is a most important one, and well deserving our
most serious consideration. To understand it rightly, let us consider
the principles on which ceremonial is based, and its
practical-working.

It has been admitted by all nations, that worship is due to the deity;
that worship needs an external and a public expression. Not only the
people of God under the old and new dispensations have admitted this,
but the Turk and the Pagan of every shade have admitted and acted on
it. Many have erred egregiously, and have had recourse to disgusting
and execrable. means to put it in practice; but the feeling itself is
universal, and, therefore, may be enumerated among the first
promptings of reason.

Its necessity is based on our relation to God; and on our own nature.
God, as in himself infinitely perfect, as our creator, our ruler, and
provider is entitled to our acknowledgment of his perfections and of
his dominion over us, to thanks for benefits conferred, to
supplication for their continuance. We owe him this duty not merely as
beings having souls, but as that which we are--beings, having a body
and soul--as men. The feelings of the soul, especially if earnest,
cannot be pent up in it. They need expression. When strong and earnest
they flow over into the body, they express themselves in bodily
action. Man, as such, acts with the body and the soul. Moreover, we
owe God worship not merely as individuals, {722} but as society. God
made society and all that gives it charms. He is the author of the
bonds that hold it together; he gave us those faculties that force us
into it; the wants that in it alone are satisfied; and the powers that
contribute to their satisfaction. Society, as well as the individual
man, is one of those beautiful and bountiful works that call forth our
admiration and demand our gratitude. Society can recognize and thank
its author only by external and common public worship. The internal
feeling needs something to lean on, as it were, to give itself
strength and almost to give itself an existence. The internal act, is,
of course, the soul of true worship, but, like the soul itself of man,
it needs a body in which it may become incarnate to fill the end of
its being. Without this it has neither life nor power. It needs this
to give itself intensity.

The external act becomes as it were a depository in which the soul
lays what is produced at one moment, while it is adding more and more.
As the iron receives in deposit the powers of each of the circles of
the magnetic wire that turn and turn again around it, and is ready to
discharge their combined force at any moment, so the external act
catches as it were the fire of the internal emotion, holds it until
that of another is added, and enables the soul to seize again the
power of those that have vanished and resume its work with redoubled
vigor. Thus going on from faith to faith, from worship to worship,
from virtue to virtue, all these rise higher and higher, strike their
roots deeper and deeper, until the internal feeling becomes
intensified and strong and as worthy of the great object to which it
is directed as it can be in a mere creature.

The ceremonial is nothing else but this external expression of inward
worship. It is an expression that gives it consistency and strength.
It intensifies and preserves it. It transmits it from one to another,
and to succeeding generations. In it society expresses itself. The
individual man has his own organs of expression. The organ of the
Christian body is the minister of the church. Through him she acts as
a body; she expresses herself as a unit. On this account she very
properly regulates minutely, how he shall discharge this duty. This
gives his actions a meaning and a value over and above, and to some
degree independent of, the value they possess, as expressions of his
own individual devotion.

Worship does not consist, properly speaking, in receiving instruction.
This is, of course, a good thing, but it is only a means to an end. It
is like the ladder to ascend, or the scaffolding used in the erection
of a building. To receive it with respect and other dispositions due
to the word of God, may imply faith in him, and submission to him;
but, properly speaking, in as far as it is mere instruction or
information, it is not worship. Worship is our submission to God, a
performance of the duty we owe him. As far as instruction shows us
how, and leads us to do this in a proper manner, it is good, but in
itself--as a mere expansion of the mind, or the storing of it with
knowledge, it is not worship. In paying worship, we must act, not
merely be acted upon; we must do, not merely hear. For this, the
ceremonial affords most useful aid; not, of course, as far as it is a
mechanical movement, which if it stop there would be useless, but
inasmuch as it is the instrument of the inmost soul. Light and
instruction must precede to give it significance, but when life has
thus been breathed into it, it becomes itself an action, a practice of
virtue, a discharge of the highest virtues, which are those that have
God himself for their immediate object.

This ceremonial consists of the words that are used, and the acts that
are performed. Words, said or sung, are a part of it, but only a part.
Many acts often express the feelings more effectually. These are
sometimes {723} more or less natural; at other times they may be said
to be conventional. But though arbitrary as words themselves, when
they receive a determined meaning, they become capable of effectually
and powerfully expressing the internal feelings of the individual and
of society. Kneeling or standing erect, raising up or clasping the
hands or striking the breast, an uplifted glance to heaven or a
reverent bowing of the head, will express adoration, reverence,
sorrow, or supplication as well and often better than words. When you
walk in a procession with torch in hand, accompanying the blessed
sacrament, or to honor some other mystery of religion, you are
professing your faith in it as effectually, and impressing that faith
in your soul, perhaps, more deeply than when you recite the creed,
just as the citizen expresses forcibly his political principles by
analogous acts. These, of course in particular cases, may be acts of
hypocrisy or hollow pageant, just as words may be a lie or an empty
sound, but this takes nothing from their intrinsic appropriateness.
Nay, acts of this kind would seem to draw the soul into what is
intended to accompany them and be expressed by them more powerfully
than words.

Some of the acts of this worship have, in themselves, a power and
efficacy apart from any impression they may produce on the beholder.
Such is the case in all the sacraments. The sacred rite, duly
performed may be compared to the spark, which, however powerless of
itself, when falling on the proper material, awakens a great power of
nature, that will rend mountains, and hurl into shapeless masses, the
proudest works of man. The sacred rite has been chosen by omnipotence,
as his agent and instrument, and its power has only the limits which
omnipotence has been pleased to assign. It is the same thing in the
celebration of mass. The words of Christ, pronounced by his minister,
effect a great change. For he who first took bread and said, "This is
my body," and by his infinite power made true what he said, addressing
his apostles, added. "Do this"--yes, even this, great as it is--"in
commemoration of me." And they "do" it, and by doing it, "show forth
his death until he come." The effect follows by the power of God, no
matter who is present, no matter who is instructed or edified, even
though no heart beat more in unison than did the hearts of the Jews,
who stood by while the great offering was made on Calvary. But other
parts of the ceremonial, which, though not of equal importance, occupy
more time, realize their end only when they express our feelings of
reverence, or give them strength and light. Many are directed to aid
the priest alone, in the proper performance of his high duties. Many,
while they have this object also, are likewise directed to instruct,
and become expressions of the devotion of the people. The ceremonial,
therefore, first of all makes provision for the priest. It is
important for himself and for the people that he be a worthy minister
of Christ; that he discharge the duty of offering up the holy
sacrifice with all the reverence, the humility, the fervor which so
great an act demands. The ceremonies become a means of his doing this.
In performing them properly he exercises all these virtues. The church
makes him descend to the foot of the altar, and there acknowledging
himself a sinner before God and the heavenly court, express by words
and acts his sorrow, demand pardon before venturing to ascend the
altar on which is to be laid the holy of holies. He then ascends with
trembling step, and having again silently prayed for forgiveness, he
intones the noble hymn,"_Gloria in Excelsis Deo_." Whether the voices
of the choir take up its thrilling notes and make the vault resound
with a call to give glory to God on high or he continue it in a
subdued tone, every word he utters, every motion he is called on to
make, enables him to express more and more {724} earnestly his desire
for God's honor, his homage to Christ, "alone holy, alone Lord, alone
most high."

Prepared by this introduction and having admonished the people to turn
to God, he pours out in simple but touching words his supplications
for our various wants. He then reads choice extracts from the sacred
volume conveying the most important teachings of our holy religion. I
will not stop to describe to you the ceremonies at the offertory, nor
speak of the sublime "Preface" preparatory to the most sacred part of
the sacrifice. Having prayed for all conditions of the church, having
appealed to the blessed in heaven with whom the church on earth is in
communion, he approaches the solemn act of consecration. Every word he
utters, every glance, every motion, is directed to fill him with awe,
with reverence, to express a demand, an act of homage, of gratitude or
of invocation; and when the sacred words are pronounced, and he stands
before the incarnate God truly present, though not visible to corporal
eyes, with profound inclination he expresses his adoration, while the
victim is raised up, that all present may, like him, kneel down and
adore. And so all through the holy sacrifice.

While these lessons are taught and put in practice by the priest, the
people, before whom they are performed, learn from them to cherish
similar dispositions, and to unite their spirit in the expression of
his devotion. It is the same thing with all the ceremonies, which,
like those alluded to, are expressive of the feelings we should
entertain for God. They frequently express them more forcibly than
words could. Even ordinary feelings often become too strong for
language and seek expression in some action. The fond mother would
find words too tame to express the love she bears her child. She hugs
it to her bosom, and impresses warm kisses on its face. We meet a
long-lost friend. Words would not express all we feel. We clasp him in
our arms, and press him to our heart. The model of repentance, the
prodigal, when he meets his father, forgets a part of the discourse he
had resolved to pronounce, and folded in his father's arms, expresses
his sorrow more forcibly in silent tears and heart breaking sobs, and
is forgiven. Even anger, which cannot find an adequate expression in
the most impassioned language, seeks to manifest itself in the
uplifted clenched fist, if it cannot gain its object by striking a
blow. Do not tell me, then, that all this action in the church
ceremonial is mummery. It is often a higher expression of devotion
than words would afford.

If yon wish to test this, look at a devout congregation of Catholics
kneeling before the altar. The organ that had lifted up their hearts
when singing the "Glory to God in the highest" is silent, or a few low
notes are heard that make the silence of the congregation more
sensible. No voice, scarcely a breath, is heard, when the priest,
having raised his eyes to heaven, is now inclined over the sacred
elements. Thousands are kneeling around in awe. A slight stroke of the
bell announces that the act is done. The priest prostrates himself in
silent adoration, and then elevates the consecrated host. Every head
is bowed in the presence of a God. Will anyone who has witnessed that
scene, who has tried to enter into the feelings of that congregation,
please tell me the words, or write out the speech, that would have
expressed so powerfully their reverence, their adoration, their
gratitude, and their love? Yes, ceremonies are a noble expression of
our highest feelings. They are even more; for they intensify them,
embalm them, and preserve them from evaporating. They communicate them
and spread them abroad, and transmit them from generation to
generation.

All this is a consequence of human nature, and this is so true that it
is made an objection to our system. It is said that we build too much
on human nature. But if worship be made for man it must accord with
his nature {725}--not, indeed, with that which is corrupt in it, but
with his nature as it came from God. Now, this need, this power, this
efficacy of the expression of feeling by outward ceremony, is no
effect of the fall: it is in the very nature of man. Hence we have
recourse to it in everything else. What is the shake of the hand when
we meet a friend, or the salute, or the banquet to which we invite
him, but a ceremony to express friendship or esteem? Look at our
processions and various political demonstrations. What are they but
ceremonies in which political or other feelings seek expression--an
expression which we know will strengthen them, deepen them,
communicate them to others by creating and giving force to what may be
called a contagions influence? What are our national and party airs;
our national and party festivals, but expressions of a similar
character looking forward to similar results?

In these things, as I said in the beginning, the feelings of the soul
seek an embodiment, that will give them consistency and duration.

No matter what the external manifestation be, even though it be merely
conventional, when it expresses a feeling, it becomes an instrument
for all these purposes. It becomes, as it were, a permanent part of a
structure, to which another stone is added as often as the act is
repeated, until the building grows up in solid beauty that defies the
ravages of time. This is the case with our political or social
sentiments, because it grows out of our very nature. Why then should
it not be the case, or rather is it not evidently the case, with those
also which are connected with religion? These external rites not only
express and intensify the interior feelings, but let philosophers
explain it as they may, they become as it were a depository in which
they may be laid by to be recalled almost at pleasure, nay, even to be
drawn out by others who wish to acquire them.

Look at that piece of bunting hanging from a flag-staff and flying
before the breeze. What is it? A first glance will tell you that it is
a piece of stuff purchased for a trifle a few days ago from the
merchant, on whose shelves it lay unnoticed and uncared for, except as
far as it was capable of producing some day a few dollars for its
owner. But now it has received a new destiny. It bears the national
symbols, and it is the flag of the country. And, oh! what a change has
taken place! It recalls the glories of the past, the hopes of the
future; it is the symbol of the majesty of the nation. The patriot
heart warms in beholding it; the warrior-breast is bared to do it
honor. Through a hail of fire he stands by it or bears it on, and will
see unmoved a thousand of his companions strewed o'er the battle-field
while this yet floats before the breeze. And, when victory has crowned
his efforts, he salutes it as the genius that nerved his right arm
during the contest. Though torn almost to tatters, he bedews it with
his tears of joy. It is his pride in life. He looks forward to descend
in honor into the grave wrapped in its folds.

Wherever that flag is raised, one glance leads us to behold the genius
of our country standing up before us with all her claims to our
devotion and our love. Let it receive but the slightest insult, and a
thrill vibrates throughout the land, every heart is wounded, every
hand is ready to be raised in its defence. Yet it is, after all, but a
piece of bunting, worth so many cents per yard. But by becoming a
symbol, by being the object of a rite, it has become the depositary of
the enthusiasm of the nation. It is made capable of evoking this, of
quickening and communicating it, whenever it is unfurled.

Look at our national airs: what are they? The scientific musician will
find little in them that is soul-stirring; but the feelings of our
fathers are deposited in them. They were the tunes in which we
expressed our gladness in days of triumph, by which we were aroused on
the national holiday, in which we sung our joy on all {726} important
occasions. Our love of home, of kindred, of fatherland, has been
embalmed in them; and when they fall on our ears, all these dear and
stirring feelings, as if buried in their notes, are sent forth, now
unlocked, and again take possession of our souls. They thus arouse the
warrior and the patriot, calling out all the feelings that cluster
around what is most dear.

The Swiss soldier in foreign lands was so vividly recalled to the
memories of home, by the airs to which he listened in childhood, and
the recollection of his native mountains, and the associations revived
by them, had such power, that a special disease, called
"home-sickness" was frequently the result. As this proved fatal to
many, the playing or singing of such tunes was forbidden in Swiss
regiments in foreign service. And who does not know the stirring
effect produced on certain occasions, when Yankee Doodle or Patrick's
Day has been struck up, no matter what musical professors may say of
their artistic merits.

In a similar manner our feelings of devotion are consigned to some
homely religious tune. They are first expressed in it. They cling
around it. They become identified with it. They are recalled vividly
when we hear it again. They all come back in their original freshness,
with accumulated force. They are transmitted to others, and thus we
inherit the treasure of the devotional feeling of preceding
generations.

Though _our_ being supplied with music by great artists, who are
constantly changing, if not improving their compositions, deprives us
in a great measure of the advantages that might arise from this
source, we can feel it at times, in what is allowed to retain this
traditional force. Who is there that does not feel the devotion so
often experienced in assisting at the benediction of the blessed
sacrament, or on other occasions renewed by the tones of the Tantum
Ergo or other familiar tunes, when the performers do not destroy, or
at least smother the old airs by their exquisiteness? Where the songs
of the church are in more general use, the intonation of the Miserere
or the Stabat Mater or the Pange Lingua and many other tunes is like
the opening up of a flood-gate, through which feelings of devotion
rush as it were in a torrent and take possession of a whole
congregation.

What is said of songs may be applied to other rites. The feelings of
the past are deposited in them; they express them, they arouse them,
they communicate them. This occurs, though they may be chosen
arbitrarily. What more arbitrary, generally speaking, than the meaning
attached to words? The word "home," for example, for all that is in
the sound, might as well have been adapted to signify anything else of
the most different character. Yet now having received a definite
meaning, it recalls uniformly a whole definite series of ideas and
feelings. So it is with a rite--say that of anointing with oil, that
of sprinkling with water, burning incense, the use of candles, or the
making of the sign of the cross. Many rites were established primarily
for this purpose, others had their origin in necessity or convenience
or usage; but the church, anxious to make even these things a source
of edification and an instrument of devotion, gave them a meaning,
attached to them a lesson which they reproduce forever after. Even
those which have a certain intrinsic fitness to signify what they are
established for, derive their chief efficacy in this respect from
their having been chosen for the purpose, or having gradually received
a social meaning, well understood in the Christian family. These have
the additional advantage of speaking out, as it were, a whole
instruction at a glance. The moment you look at one of these acts, a
lesson is presented which could scarcely be communicated in many
words, and in performing them the heart says more, and that more
simply and more effectually, than it could in a long discourse.

{727}

I have referred to the flag of the country; of its being raised, and
how a look at it, or a salute, powerfully expresses at once the most
important emotions and lively enthusiasm. Well, we do the same through
the Christian's glorious standard, which is the sacred symbol of the
cross. Be it of wood or of the most precious metal--be it the
production of the most unskilful or the most cunning workman--it is
for us the symbol of man's redemption, and around it cluster our most
tender feelings of veneration and love. It is placed over our altars,
over our churches; it hangs in our rooms; where Catholic feelings can
save it from insult, it is raised up in the highways, and is made to
meet our eyes wherever we turn. We impress its form on our persons
whenever we call on God in prayer, whenever we find ourselves exposed
to temptation or danger. In that one act the faith, the hope, the love
of the church for Christ and Christ crucified, are all expressed. All
these feelings are imbedded in it. All are called out again whenever
that sign is made. What we have heard of him from the pulpit, what we
have read in our private study, what has occurred, to our own minds in
meditation, is all brought before us with the accompanying sentiments
and feelings as soon as that sacred symbol presents itself to our
eyes. All are a wakened, are revived, and seized again at its glance.
No wonder, then, that the Catholic loves the cross; that he loves to
prostrate himself in adoration before it; that he looks to it when he
seeks consolation in suffering, support in affliction, light in his
difficulties, purity of spirit in his joys. Do not tell me that it is
of lifeless wood or of metal, that it is but the work of the
craftsman, Oh! this is like stopping the soldier in battle, to direct
his attention to the price per yard of his flag, or to the name and
address of the store where it was bought, while he is advancing
enthusiastically under its inspiration against his country's foes.
Yes; who does not know that it is of wood or metal? but to me it is
the symbol of my Saviour's love. As such, I love it; as such all my
most sacred feelings cling around it: I impress kisses on it; I bathe
it with my tears. And when, on Good Friday, the priest after bringing
before us the whole scene of Calvary, having led us, in the service,
to look on the death of Christ' as the great turning-point in the
world's history, having shown us the woes of the past that were there
to find a remedy, and the blessings for the future that were thence to
spring forth, holds up the crucifix before the prostrate multitude,
and sings out, in a solemn tone, "Ecce lignum Crucis," "Behold the
wood of the cross on which did hang the salvation of the world," will
we not all send up our whole souls in the deacon's answer, crying out,
with him, "Venite adoremus," "Come, let us adore"? And when the priest
looses his shoes, and on bare feet approaches the sacred symbol of
redemption, that he may kneel down and kiss it with fondness, on the
anniversary of the day on which the tragic scene was enacted; who is
there that will not vie with him in kneeling and pressing the sacred
symbol to his lips?

The same thing can be applied in different degrees to the various
rites throughout the year, when succeeding festivals bring before us
the other great mysteries of religion, or when we are called on to
express the ordinary feelings of Christian devotion. He who has
studied the simple devotions of the rosary, or the way of the cross,
will be astonished at the mine of devotion, of enlightened piety
contained in them, and at the treasures that are drawn from them by
faithful souls, simple and unpretending as they are, and puerile as
they appear to the self-sufficient.

But these acts and exercises intended to express and nourish our
Christian feelings, can only be appreciated where there is faith. It
is only into {728} hearts animated by faith that they can enter. It is
only in such they can be aroused. A certain amount of instruction is
even necessary to understand the conventional meaning of many. This
instruction and training is received by the Catholic almost with his
mother's milk. As he learns the meaning of words, which is still more
arbitrary, and acquires a practical skill in the use of language,
notwithstanding its complicated laws, so he learns the meaning of the
ceremonial, and is initiated into its use. With clasped hands the
child kneels before the crucifix, and imprints kisses on it. Little by
little he learns the history of him whose figure is nailed to that
cross, and knowledge grows in him with reverence and love. He goes to
the church, and is struck with what he beholds. He catches reverence
from those around, and infuses it into his own imitation of their mode
of acting. As he learns more and more of what is there done, this
reverence becomes more and more enlightened, and he grows up a devout
and enlightened Christian, performing the acts expressive of worship
with the same ease and intelligence with which he uses the ordinary
expressions of social life. The looker-on who is without faith or
instruction, who has no sympathy, and wishes to have no sympathy, with
him, thinks his acts a mummery, if he do not give them a harsher name.
Such a person may be compared to one who has no ear for music, to whom
the enthusiasm of those who are aroused by a beautiful composition is
incomprehensible; or to one who listens to an eloquent discourse in a
tongue which he does not, and cares not to understand; or he is like
Michol, who laughs at David dancing before the ark, because she has no
sympathy with his jubilant gratitude. The Catholic ceremonial is made
for Catholics. If it enable them to express and strengthen their
reverence, it answers its purpose. Those who have no such feelings to
be awakened cannot be surprised if it strike them without producing
emotion. The ceremonial is useful, not only as an expression of
feeling, it is eminently instructive and educational, if I may use the
expression, by instilling and developing both the knowledge and the
devotion it is intended to express. While it teaches, it leads to act
in accordance with the teaching; properly performed it is itself such
action. It thus instils truth into the mind, and shapes the heart in
accordance with it, which is the highest aim of the best education.

Some are pleased to look upon the mass of our people as very ignorant
in matters of religion. If by this it be meant to say, that all are
not experts in quoting texts of scripture; that they know nothing of
many controversies that appear of great importance to our separated
brethren; that they do not understand the meaning of many phrases that
have become households words amongst them, though, sometimes, I fear,
passing round without any very, definite meaning, I am willing to
acknowledge the charge. But if it be meant to say that they are
ignorant of those great facts and truths of religion which it is
necessary or important for men to know, I repudiate it most solemnly.
Nay, I contend that there is a better knowledge of these amongst many
or most Catholics who can neither read nor write, if they have only
followed in the paths where the church led them, than amongst many of
our opponents who are considered learned theologians; and this they
owe chiefly to this very ceremonial of which I am treating. They may
know nothing of Greek particles, or of many other things good enough
and useful in their place, but which God has not required anyone to
learn; but they know that the incarnate God died for the salvation of
man. They know the mystery of the Trinity, which is implied in that of
the incarnation. They know the sinful character of man, their need of
such a Redeemer. They are led to thank him, to love him, to {729} obey
him. They know his sufferings, one by one; they are familiar with his
thorns and his nails; they have pondered over his wounds and mangled
flesh; they penetrate into the side pierced for their love. He who
knows even this much is not ignorant. Yet all this, and, much more, is
familiar to every one accustomed to look with faith on the crucifix.
He sees in the face of the crucified One patience, resignation,
compassion for sinners, love even for his enemies. He sees the
consequences of sin, and he beholds their remedy. Looking on this, the
Catholic finds support in his trials or afflictions and moderation in
his joy. Show me the volume he could ponder over and learn as much.
All that he heard at his mother's knee and from the preacher's lips is
brought before him in a single glance at his crucifix. All is brought
up again when he makes the sign of the cross. Yet the cross, so
fraught with instruction and moving appeals, is that which is
presented to him a thousand times in the rites of the church, inasmuch
as it is the great pervading principle that must animate all his
devotion and all his actions. It is brought before him, not in a cold
way, merely teaching him a lesson. He is taught to know and to
believe; he is led to adore and to confide; he is brought to invoke
through it all the graces of which he stands in need. All this is done
every time that he makes the sign of the cross, pronouncing the
blessed words, "In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost."

While many of your learned expounders of scripture are comparing text
with text on these subjects, trying to remove, but scarcely removing
the doubts which they know to exist among their hearers, which they
feel, perhaps, rising up in their own breasts, or what is worse while
they are proposing theories in a Christian pulpit which make nought
the cross of Christ and the mystery of redemption as ever taught in
the Christian family, the poor Catholic, on whom they look with
contempt, is making his starting point what others are but trying to
prove, and while signing himself with the cross, believing, adoring,
penetrating into the depths of the love of the incarnate God, and
endeavoring to shape his own soul into conformity with its teachings.
And you call him ignorant. Indeed, a pure though simple faith, among
these people enables them to see the great truths of religion with a
clearness that supplies frequently an apt reply to difficulties that
seem very embarrassing to their opponents.

Yet, this is the first lesson that the Catholic child learns at his
mother's knee, As he goes on, he learns more and more of God's works
of mercy toward man, of his institutions for our salvation and our
sanctification, and all he learns he sees reproduced in a glance in
the ceremonial of the church, which speaks to him in accents more and
more eloquent, as his knowledge expands and his heart is brought more
fully into conformity with God's holy teachings. In the liturgy and
the various other rites of the church, she has enshrined all the great
dogmas of religion. There she teaches them, there she keeps them
beyond the reach of the innovator. The priest himself, the bishop, and
the pope, there see them inculcated, and from thence, as from a rich
treasury, draw them out to present them to the faithful. This teaching
by rites in use from the beginning of the church, addresses itself to
all with power, for in it they find the teaching of the saints and the
sages of by-gone ages, and feel themselves breathing the same
atmosphere with them. The martyrs, who bore testimony to their faith
with their blood, the apostolic men, who by their preaching, their
labors, and their prayers, brought nations to the knowledge of Christ,
the holy confessors and virgins, who, in frail vessels, showed forth
his power in every age, practised these same rites, and were therefore
animated by the same faith. The church, throughout the whole world,
uses them, and therefore believes as we do. What {730} more powerful
for bringing home to each one the faith of the universal, everlasting
church!

There is great security for the faith of a Catholic in his receiving
it through the teaching of a pastor in communion with the church of
the whole world, and sanctioned by its highest authority; but I would
venture to say that there is something even more solemn in this voice
of the ceremonial, which is a voice of the living and the dead--of
the church of the Catacombs, and of the church of this day--throughout
the world. With all the force which this gives, leaning as the church
does upon Christ, who died to sanctify her in truth, we are taught the
great dogmas of the Trinity and the Incarnation; of the death and
resurrection of Jesus Christ; the plan and means of the redemption,
the need in which we stand of divine grace, and the means of obtaining
it. We are taught the character of the great Christian oblation, the
nature and effects of the sacraments, as well as the dispositions they
require, and the duties they impose.

Far be it from me to undervalue the oral teaching of the ministry.
That found in the ceremonial presupposes it, and is based on it. Both
are, as they should be, combined in the ministrations of the church;
but the ceremonial fixes the oral teaching. It gives the Christian
system a body, as it were, in which it enables it to prolong its life
beyond the moments of the passing voice. When once embodied in a rite,
the impressions of oral instruction, which otherwise so easily pass
away, live for ever. They are seized in their whole entirety at a
glance; they are brought down to the comprehension of the lowest; they
are put forth with a majesty that the highest may admire. Men are
taught there, and, what is most important they are led to act on the
teaching, and thus conform their hearts as well as their minds, to the
holy dogmas of faith, which is the best and most useful way of
imparting Christian instruction. But I will be told that this
teaching, however useful for those who understand it, is lost for the
great mass of the people, as the language used is a dead one, which
few understand. But, in the first place, it is not lost, even though
the clergy alone should understand it. Is it not an important thing
that the clergy themselves should have something to keep alive
powerfully, amongst them the one, universal and everlasting faith?
Will not all the faithful find strength in their strength, and light
in their light? If they are kept right, the truth spread abroad by
them will easily he preserved pure among the masses of the people.
Almost all heresies--be it said to our shame--either had their source
in the sanctuary, or could not have succeeded if they had not found
support there. And is it not a great thing that he who would become a
prevaricator, must first brand himself as unfaithful, must cease to
minister today, all he did yesterday, and thus give public notice, as
it were, that he seeks to devour the flock which he had undertaken to
feed; that instead of keeping the deposit which was the first duty of
his office, as dispenser of the mysteries of God, he is substituting
some new-fangled theory of his own, palming it off as an institution
of heaven? Luther can establish a new system only by ceasing to say
mass. The church of Cranmer is not at ease until it has formed for
itself a new liturgy. The Greeks and other orientals by preserving
their ancient rites and ceremonies, have preserved almost all their
ancient dogmas, and to re-enter the church have little else to do but
to submit to the authority of its supreme pastor. But apart from this,
the ceremonial itself speaks to all the people in a language which all
understand. The rites are themselves a language easily learned, and
speaking with silent eloquence to men of every tongue. They are to
some extent what the learned have been so long looking for, a
universal language. In fact, when the priest raises up the host, the
Irishman and the German, the Greek and the Armenian, see the presence
of Christ {731} preached to them, and they kneel down and adore. When
the water is poured on the head of the child that is baptized, men of
every clime know that the regenerating rite is being performed. The
rite once properly explained ever after expresses to them better than
any combination of words, the internal change that is effected in the
soul. Then, it must be remembered that the main thing in the public
service is what is _done_, not what is _said_. Every moderately
instructed Catholic is fully aware of what there takes place, and with
this knowledge he can assist, not only devoutly but intelligently,
though he may not understand or even hear one word.

The great source of mistake, in this connection, with our separated
brethren, arises from the fact that they go to church merely to hear
instruction, or to have words put into their mouths, in which to
address Almighty God. The Catholic also often goes for instruction,
and this he receives in the language which he understands. But he goes
for what is even more important--he goes to take a part in the great
act that is performed in God's holy temple. He knows the nature and
ends of this, and the dispositions required of him, and as I said
before, he can perform his part though he may not even hear, much less
understand one word that is pronounced. I will suppose a case of the
surrender of a large army. The vanquished soldiers march to the place
appointed. They lay down their arms, they lower their flag. The
victorious general, with his warriors, stands, by and receives them. A
speech perhaps is made. But all who are present take an intelligent
part in the Proceedings, though many may not hear one word that is
uttered. So it is with the great action at mass. I will not have
recourse to the common reply, that all that the priest says at the
altar is translated and published; that any one who desires may read
and know for himself; for though the fact be true, it is not the true
solution of the difficulty. I have no hesitation in saying that in
assisting at the most solemn part of the celebration of the divine
mysteries, it is best not to attend to the particular prayers recited
by the priest, whether one hear them or not whether he be or be not
capable of understanding them. It is better to assist with an
enlightened faith in the action that is performed, and then give full
play to such sentiments as this faith will awaken in each individual
soul. This is evidently the view of the church. For this reason, after
the offertory, that is, when the most important portion begins, the
priest is made to recite almost all his part of the liturgy in a low
tone, so that those present cannot hear him even if they be capable of
understanding what he says. Among the Greeks a curtain is drawn across
the sanctuary, so that they cannot even see him, but merely know by
some signals, if I may so call them, given from time to time, in what
part of the sacred act he is engaged.

The church, by, this evidently tells us, that by an assistance in
faith, each one yielding to the promptings of his own devotion will
derive more profit than by following the priest's words. Indeed, the
parts of the priest and people in this sacred act are so essentially
different, that it is scarcely to be expected that the same prayers
should be best for both. While the church has minutely arranged the
rites and prayers used by him who offers the sacrifice, she is
satisfied with awakening the faith and enlightening the devotion of
others who assist: and then leaving it to their enlightened faith what
each shall say to God on such occasions. She acts like the master of
the house, who prepares the banquet, where each guest finds abundance
of everything agreeable to the palate, and nourishing to the body.
With great care he has prescribed the parts of those who are occupied
in preparing or serving it up, so that all present may receive
substantial proofs of his interest; but when, this is done, he {732}
leaves the invited to partake of what is prepared, as their own tastes
will prompt. It is thus that the Catholic system, which is accused of
tying men down to a performance of mere routine, is that which really
gives more scope to individual liberty in public worship, while public
decorum and dignity are effectually secured by an established ritual.
With your extempore prayers, he who utters them has indeed full scope
for his feeling and his fancy, but he is liable also to their
vagaries, and his hearers are at his mercy. As he weeps or rejoices,
all must weep or rejoice, or he becomes to them a hindrance. Their
hearts move or try to move, not as the spirit, but as the leader
willeth, and not unfrequently may he lend them into paths from which
their instincts will recoil. They, whose whole time is engaged in
following a prescribed liturgy, must ever go on in the same groove.
Whatever be the feelings or the wants or the temper of mind of each
individual habitually or at the moment, the same unchanging road is
chalked out for all. What they hear may be beautiful, but it may be
far from being the best suited for many at that moment. Hence disgust
or cold indifference is sure to follow, of which beautiful forms may
be only a pompous covering. Amongst Catholics on the other hand, while
the church to secure order and truth and public decorum, has carefully
regulated every word and act of the priest, and presents in the
celebration of the divine mysteries the most powerful incentive to
faith and devotion in all its bearings, she leaves each one else who
is present to assist as his own wants and dispositions may prompt.

The ingenious zeal of pious men has provided helps for all in manuals
of various kinds, and each one will select what he finds best suited
for himself. He will use it or interrupt its use, or drop it
altogether as experience will show him to be most useful in his own
case. When it is not done through apathy or listlessness, he may find
it better to dispense with them all, being satisfied with a look, with
vivid faith, and such other interior acts as a faithful soul will soon
learn to perform with alacrity. Knowing what he himself is, and who is
before him, he will not be at a loss what to say. At one time he will
weep over his sins; at another he will give thanks to God; at another
he will lay open his wants, or ask pardon for his transgressions.
Where can he do any of these things more effectually than in the
presence of him who died for our sins, and to procure for us every
blessing.

And many, in fact, thus assist in silent prayer, but with more
intelligent and true devotion, though they neither use a book nor hear
a word, than others who are pondering over most beautiful manuals.

The danger of cold formality from the steady use of prescribed forms,
and nothing else, is so thoroughly realized by the church, and this
fear is so fully justified by her experience that the priest himself
is warned over and over against it. The remedy that is given him, is
the practice of what might be called private individual prayer. All
spiritual writers tell him that if he be not fond of this, if
especially he be not careful to renew his spirit by it, in immediate
preparation for the exercise of his sacred functions, they will
degenerate into mere formalism. With this private preparation he will
prepare and carry into them a proper spirit and will then find them a
heavenly manna, having every sweet taste; without this, he will be but
as the conduit pipe, carrying to others the refreshing waters, but
retaining himself' none of the effects of their invigorating powers.

These remarks apply to the most sacred and most important part of' the
mass. If the church do not wish us even to hear them, much less
require us to understand them, if she be right in believing that we
may thus assist most advantageously, it is a matter of no consequence
what language the priest uses in addressing the Almighty {733} God,
for he understands him, and that is enough. The rites he performs give
all the instruction of admonition that is useful at that moment, and
this instruction does not disturb our individual devotion. On the
contrary, whatever turn it may take, it enlivens, supports, and
directs it.

As to the first parts of the mass, to which these remarks are not so
applicable, the "Gospels," which vary at every festival, are required
to be read at least on festivals in their own language, and explained
by each pastor to his people. The "Collects," are known to be all
substantially supplications for grace, to which, therefore, we may
heartily answer, _Amen_, though we do not understand each word. Little
else remains but the "Kyrie," the "Gloria," and the "Credo," and these
like the "Pater Noster," and a few other things sung by the priest,
might be easily learned, so as to be understood by any diligent
person. Indeed, I may say it is the wish of the church that all should
learn them. She would be glad that all would take a part in singing
them, as the people do in many countries. The study of Latin required
for this is not much; for all that I have referred to might be
contained in two or three pages, and is not beyond the reach of
anyone, not even of those who cannot read. Many such learn it by
heart, and understand what they have learned. Doing so would be but a
light task in view of the many advantages gained. All might then join
in the public chants of the church and be gainers in spiritual life,
even if they did not discourse equally elegant music; or, if our
apathy compels the church to let our parts be discharged, as it were,
by deputies in the choir, we would assist and join in the beautiful
sentiments which are expressed, and not merely sit inactive to receive
the sweet impressions of their melodies.

But though this would better accord with the spirit of the church, if
these parts also through our own apathy are unintelligible, the
intrinsic character of the act for which we are preparing will suggest
pious sentiments that will enable us to pass the time with substantial
profit to our souls.

But, be it that there is some little disadvantage in having the mass
in a dead language, what I have said, I think, abundantly proves at
least that it is not very great. Look, on the other hand, at the
immense advantages gained by keeping it uniform and without change,
which implies keeping it in the language in which it was first
established. By this, uniformity and steadiness is secured in the
faith. The faith of every nation embalmed, as I said before, in the
liturgy, is before the eyes of the universal church; it is transmitted
untarnished from generation to generation. This uniform and steady
liturgy becomes as an anchor to which every church is moored. As long
as it clings to this, it is safe. And can anyone who knows the value
of faith, of that faith for which legions of martyrs shed their blood,
deem the little loss that is sustained, if any, by our Latin liturgy,
not well compensated by the stability of faith which it secures. For
this reason, though the world in the apostolic days was even more
divided in language than it is now, yet in those times, as we know
from all antiquity, the liturgy was celebrated only in three
languages--the three languages of the cross. These are, the Hebrew,
in its cognate dialects, which are but branches of the one Semitic
tongue, as a homage to the ancient dispensation; the Greek, which was
the language of the civilization of that age, and that adopted in the
New Testament; and the Latin, which was the language of the people
whose capital was to be the seat of the government of the Church of
the New Dispensation. In these three languages was written the
inscription over the bloody sacrifice on Calvary; in these, and in no
others from the beginning, was the unbloody one offered to God by the
church. No others having been adopted was a clear proof that in the
apostolic {734} view it was not deemed necessary that all should
understand the language used in the sacred mysteries; and, when even
these ceased to be popular languages anywhere, what had always been
the condition of the great number became the condition of all.

In after ages a few exceptions, and only a few, were permitted or
rather tolerated. The liturgy was allowed to be celebrated in one
other language in Asia, the Armenian; in two in Africa, the Coptic and
the Ethiopic; and in one in Europe, the Slavonic. No others were used.
But these were exceptional cases--they occurred at a later period, and
under peculiar circumstances, showing rather the sufferance than the
genuine spirit of the church, while she cordially adopted from the
beginning, and ever clung to the three languages of the cross.

It is both beautiful and useful to the Catholic to assist at the
divine offices in the same language, and in the main, with the same
rites, in which they have been performed for eighteen hundred years.
They seem like the voice of the martyrs, the confessors, the saints
who have lived through these eighteen centuries. They echo their faith
and their devotion. We feel that in them we are breathing the life of
a church now and ever spread throughout the whole world, everywhere
offering to God one sacrifice of praise.

A dignitary of the Protestant Episcopal Church in this country has
lately written an angry letter against those of his brethren who are
called "Ritualists," because they are anxious to introduce into their
church many Catholic, or, as he calls them, "Romish" ceremonies. His
ground of complaint is that behind these ceremonies stand the
doctrines of the Catholic Church. "Their course," he says, "means
return to what the reformation cast out with indignation." "It means
Romanism in all its strength and substance," and he enumerates the
various doctrines which it implies, which he considers abominations. I
do not wish to pronounce an opinion on the extent to which his remarks
are justifiable in their application to the parties against whom he
writes; but he is certainly right in believing that behind the
Catholic ritual stands Catholic doctrine, which is nothing else but
Christian doctrine; and as the reformation "cast out" many of the
rites in use in the Christian family from the beginning, with them it
"cast out" a great portion of the Christian dogma. The good man's
charge will only make those who preserve the dogma see more clearly
the value of the rites in which it is enshrined, and cling more
tenaciously to dogmas thus shown to be coeval with Christianity.

Every rite has thus a lesson, and becomes an act of devotion. The
cross above our churches and our altars, continually reappearing in
all our ceremonies, impresses on us the incarnation, death, and
atonement of Christ crucified, as the great central point of all
religion. To this we are constantly brought back in every prayer which
concludes by asking what we demand, through Jesus Christ, the familiar
closing of which, the "_per omnia saecula saeculorum_," known to every
child, calls forth from all, the heartfelt _Amen_! To this, and to
what should accompany it, the Catholic is constantly directed by the
ceremonial. The church bell, signed with the cross, and anointed with
oil, which is a symbol of Christ, swings in the tower, and as his
messenger, calls us in his name to his house--now, ringing out with
joy, when some great mystery is to be commemorated--now, in deep
solemn notes, to pray for one of his departed members. Three times
every day it summons us to the recital of the Angelus, in which we
commemorate the great mystery of the incarnation, and invoke the
merits of the Saviour's death, and ask the benefit of his
resurrection. If we enter the {735} church, the font at the door, from
which we take a drop of blessed water to sprinkle our foreheads, is
itself a sermon on the purity with which we should approach, and bids
us cleanse our souls before we come near to him in prayer. The burning
lamp speaks to us of him who is the light of the world, now dwelling
on the altar, as well as of the constant fire of devotion, and pure
adoration, due to the present God. The priest whom you see at the
altar, clad in those quaint old vestments, tells you at a glance that
you are in the presence of a worship that has come down from the
remotest ages. The burning lights on the altar, which have now become
an emblem of gladness, speak to you of the catacombs, in which our
fathers took refuge, and preserved for us the sacred deposit, at the
cost of property, of liberty, and of life.

Like old heirlooms, with their quaint old forms and their several
indentations, these vestments and rites tell at the same time of their
real antiquity and of the many vicissitudes through which they have
passed. They are not like those imitations of the antique in use
amongst some of our friends got up by studying ancient drawings and
descriptions, having all the inconvenience without anything of the
venerable character of what is truly ancient. With us they are
inherited through uninterrupted use from the beginning. Whatever
changes have occurred in minor details, only render them more
venerable, for if on the one hand we are brought back to ancient days,
these are marks of the many ages through which they have passed.
Everything in the rites of the church is fraught with instruction,
with devotion. It enables you to know, and what is better, to
practice--for while it teaches, it leads you to love and adore. Do you
wish to know the efficacy of that ceremonial? Look at those who have
been nursed under its training. See the all-pervading influence of
religion, that exists among them. Long and powerful discourses may
make men skilful talkers and ardent partisans. Those who have been
reared under a divinely inspired ritual have religion deeply engraven
on their hearts. It takes possession and enters into the whole nature
of the man; and even when he gives way to the allurements of iniquity,
it retains its hold on him. This may indeed make him appear, and be,
an inconsistent object of pity or of scorn. But, happy inconsistency!
For if he will not be consistent in good, far better that he be
inconsistent or not consistent in evil. He would otherwise become a
monster. The links by which he is yet bound to what is good, may one
day draw him within the pale of that mercy to which no sinner appealed
in vain, before which no sinner is too great to be pardoned.

To the Catholic, in every position, the ceremonial is light and
nourishment--a plentiful source of vigor and life.



{736}

From Le Correspondant.

MADAME DE SWETCHINE.

BY REV. FATHER LACORDAIRE.


Many times already have I rendered to illustrious Catholics who have
died in our day, a funeral and a pious homage. In turn, General
Drouot, Daniel O'Connell, and Frederic Ozanam have heard my voice
above their tomb, a voice far below that which their glory merited,
but which, nevertheless, holds from a sincere admiration the right to
praise them. To-day, after these familiar names for which praise can
do nothing, I pronounce another name, a name which may appear almost
unknown, perhaps even that of a foreigner, which, however, belongs to
the nation of the great minds of our age. A superior writer, Madame de
Swetchine published nothing; a conversationalist of the first order,
the fame of her salon never penetrated beyond that circle which,
though not public, is more than privacy; a woman of antique faith and
of active piety, she neither founded nor presided over any orders; and
yet, for more than forty years she swayed an empire, to which the
Count de Maistre submitted, before which Madame de Stael inclined, and
which retained around her, even to her last days, admirers accustomed
to act on public opinion, but still more accustomed to enlighten their
own by hers. To the Count de Maistre succeeded M. de Bonald. The Abbe
Frayssinous, M. Cuvier, to these M. de Montalembert, the Count de
Falloux, Prince Albert de Broglie, and many others, a younger
generation, but not less submissive to the ascendency of a soul where
virtue served genius.

Why should we be silent? Why not tell the living what they have lost
in the dead? While a man lives, modesty should guard all his actions,
and friendship itself should be restrained by it; but death has this
of admirable; that it restores to memory as to judgment all its
liberty. In taking away those from whom it strikes the double rock of
weakness and envy, it permits those who have seen to lift the veil,
those who have received to acknowledge the benefit, those who have
loved to pour forth their affection. Even the obscurity of merit adds
to the desire of making it known; and if this merit was illustrious,
being all hidden, it is almost a religious duty to draw it forth from
the tomb, and to render it before men the honor it has before God. So
I hope I shall be pardoned these few pages; but did I not, yet I
should still write them. I owe them to a friendship which began in the
shadows and perils of my youth, and which since, through all the
vicissitudes of a quarter of a century, never ceased to open to me
perspectives of honor so difficult to recognize in the confused and
agitated times when faith itself is troubled by earthly events, and
seeks a route worthy of its mission.

Madame Sophie Jeanne de Swetchine was born in Russia, on the 4th
December, 1782. Her family name was Soymonoff. She had a sister who
married the Prince de Gagarin, a former Russian ambassador at Rome;
she herself was united at the age of seventeen to General de
Swetchine, Military Governor of St. Petersburg. She belonged by birth
to the Greek religion, but her education had abandoned her to the
scepticism of the eighteenth century, and {737} according to the
natural course of things, she would have died an unbeliever or a
schismatic in the depth of some half-oriental estate. God willed it
otherwise, and hence arises from the first the lively interest
attached to her life. For a Christian, a soul's predestination, and
the mysterious ways by which God conducts it to its end without
infringing its liberty, are a spectacle that has above all others an
inexhaustible charm. The secrets of grace and free will, so intimate
in our own hearts, are less enlightened in a history which is not our
own; and the communion of saints which makes us all, believing and
loving, one in a single light and a single goodness, gives us, in the
account of a difficult conversion, the feeling of a conquest in which
we ourselves have shared.

The young Sophie de Soymonoff was then a Greek and an unbeliever. She
had been beguiled from her birth by the illusions of rationalism, and
the snares of the most singular fortune which error ever had; for the
Greek religion has this trait solely its own, that it presents a much
restricted and very firm negation to the true faith, under an
authority cut loose from its base; yet which, however, preserves all
the rest with a profound respect for antiquity. In seeing this exact
episcopal succession, this unaltered symbol, this inviolable
discipline, these sacraments which Rome herself recognizes, we ask if
an error, respecting so long and so well the limits which it traced
when it first arose, does not seem like those rocks which an irruption
has thrown from their foundations and which remain immovable under the
eye and the action of ages? Whilst in the West, Protestantism is
unable to create either dogmas or discipline or hierarchy, and floats
as a wandering cloud from mind to mind, the East, on the contrary,
sees produced the fixity of error. Here dissolution, there
petrifaction; and between the two the truth which is immutable without
being inert, progressive without being subject to change. However
surprising may be this contrast, it is not difficult to account for
it, if we consider, on the one hand, the difference of nature between
the eastern man and the western; and on the other, the diversity of
the political destiny assigned them. The eastern man contemplates and
adores, while his rival, less happy in contemplation, is more so in
acting. Thus the one has created generous institutions, under which he
has from age to age extended his empire, while the other has passed
from servitude to servitude, incapable of seating himself in the shade
of a regular authority, and of developing in a free atmosphere either
the evil or the good which, he has conceived. Hence in Europe error
takes a character of life which conducts it to its most extreme
logical consequences, at the same time that it wears at Constantinople
a character of death, which leaves it what it was, by impotence, not
by virtue.

Nevertheless, it is easy for a vulgar intelligence to be deceived,
especially where family and national traditions give to error the
reflex of patriotism, and when an absolute government, the jealous
guardian of a religion of which it is the head, suffers no emanations
of the truth to reach the soul. Sophie de Soymonoff was born a
prisoner in an empire of seventy millions of souls. She was six
hundred leagues from St. Peter's, and a thousand years from the true
faith. But, however vigilant despotism may be, however thick its
dungeon walls, God remains ever near, and he draws therefrom, when he
wills, the instruments which his Providence uses to preserve for man
the share which he assigns him in all his works. At an age when Madame
de Swetchine could not yet sound either the poverty of the Greek
schism or the abyss of unbelief, a man of God came to her. He was not
a priest, but an ambassador of a king despoiled of the greater part of
his possessions, shut up in an island of the Mediterranean, and who,
in sending to St. Petersburg a {738} representative of his
misfortunes, thought not that he sent there a _charge d'affaires_ of
divine grace, marked with the seal of the elect. Count Joseph de
Maistre, tor he it was, detested with all his soul the two Colossuses
of his day, the French revolution and the French empire, because in
the one he saw the oppression of European nationalities; and the
other, because he thought he saw it imprinted forever with an
anti-Christian spirit. But he loved France, because, though it was the
seat of the revolution and of the empire, he discerned there an
indestructible faith, the faith of Clovis, of Charlemagne, and of St.
Louis, and I know not what predestination that ravished his judgment,
and rendered him the prophet of that very country which he esteemed so
culpable and yet so great. Born in Savoy, in the country of St.
Francis de Sales, and of Jean Jacques Rousseau, he was French like
them in his genius, but even more so by his faith and his heart, which
had but two pulsations, one for the church, the other for France;
generous mortal who silenced his antipathies by his convictions, in
whom blindness did not extinguish the light, and who, like
Philoctetes, wounded by the arrows of Hercules, could be separated
from Greece, neither in his accusations nor in his affections. Madame
de Swetchine soon met this extraordinary man in the saloons of St.
Petersburg, and it was the first great event of her life. A positive
spirit, but amiable, as his posthumous correspondence proves, M. de
Maistre loved conversation. He did not love it as a throne from which
his genius could display its brilliancy, but as a free and delicate
interchange of thoughts, in which grace unites with intelligence,
taste with boldness, freedom with reserve, bringing together in an
hour all times and all gifts; and forming a bond of union between men
who are pleased with sentiments of kindness and esteem. Generous focus
of cultivated minds of all countries, conversation is the last asylum
of human liberty. It speaks when the tribune is silent; it supplies
the place of books when books are not to be had; it gives currency to
thoughts which despotism persecutes; finally, it warms, and agitates;
it moves, and is, where it can live, the principle and the
all-powerful echo of public opinion. It is not astonishing then that
great men find in it a pleasure which is for them like the
accomplishment of a duty. So long as society converses it is safe.

It did not look much as if the Count de Maistre could find at St.
Petersburg an aliment for this noble want of his heart. The Russian is
endowed with facility of expression, a quickness of apprehension, and
it is no flattery disrobed of justice which has named him the
Frenchman of the North. But he is closed up as soon as he comes into
the world; deprived of all political liberty, he has not even in his
religion room for his breast to expand, and the Christ he adores
appears to him only under the sceptre of his masters and behind their
implacable majesty. A fortress encloses at St. Petersburg the temple
where sleep the Czars, and, once dead, their people cannot even freely
visit their ashes. Fear, suspicion, doubt, all the shades of
inquietude dwell in the Russian, and are translated on his brow by a
calm which nothing destroys, on his lips by a reserve which nothing
dissipates. To converse it is necessary to be open; and to open one's
self, one must possess his life, his goods, his honor, his liberty.
When therefore the Count de Maistre entered St. Petersburg, he might
say that he entered the capital of silence, and that his genius would
be there only a monologue.

He was deceived. I knew Madame de Swetchine only during the last
twenty-five years of her life; and she was fifty when I first rested
my eyes on her benevolent countenance. Doubtless age had ripened her
art of thinking and speaking, but it is impossible that she should not
have had something of it in that young outburst which early announced
to others, and to herself, the treasure which was carried in her
bosom. Certain it is that M. de Maistre had soon discovered it. In
{739} the midst of that society of great lords and diplomatists, he
discovered a young woman who bore in her language the marks of
superiority, and whose conversation, springing from a source still
purer than the mind, touched with remarkable tact the frontiers of
liberty, without ever passing beyond them. Confidence is an
irrepressible want of our poor heart; it cannot live alone; it opens
itself unconsciously, and when life's experience has revealed the
peril of abandoning it to itself, it becomes wiser but no fonder of
reserve, and counts it a supreme happiness to meet with security in
the intercourse of society. Less happy, however, than the greater part
of men, the man of genius has need also of a certain elevation in the
minds that come in contact with his own; and, though the crowd has its
charm and its power, were it only in hearing him who rules, yet it is
in the shock of two intelligences, each worthy of the other, that
conversation has its highest flight, and reaches the last fibres of
our being, and reveals to it the eternal pleasure of minds speaking
with minds. Demosthenes discoursing before the Athenians, Cicero
pleading in the Forum or the Senate of Rome, did not make, as perhaps
some may think, a monologue: the multitude responded, and their
eloquence was the fruit of a great soul heard by a great people. There
is no solitary eloquence, and every orator has a double genius, his
own and that of the age that hears him.

Madame de Stael, who was the first conversationalist of her time, said
she was unhappy because of the universal mediocrity, and yet she
conversed at Paris among the people the most prompt in the world to
speak, and the most confiding: what would she have said at St.
Petersburg? M. de Maistre was there, but he was there with a
Frenchwoman, born in Russia, who would one day, recognizing the
mistake of her birth, live and die in her true country, the country of
an incorruptible faith, and of a liberty which had only an eclipse,
because conversation has always sustained it. Louis XIV. conversed at
Marseilles without suspecting that conversation would kill his
despotism. In the East, the destined seat of absolute power, the
prince does not converse; he gives his order, and is silent.

It is impossible for two souls to meet each other in a conversation
which mutually pleases them, without having religion, sooner or later,
enter into their discourse. Religion is the interior vestment of the
soul. There are some who tear this vestment to tatters; there are
others who soil it; but there are a few who despoil themselves of it
all save some shred, and this shred, such as it is, is sufficient to
prevent them from appearing absolutely destitute of divinity. Madame
de Swetchine was an unbeliever, and, she had behind her, and beyond
her unbelief, the Greek schism. The Count de Maistre was a Catholic,
not only by faith, but by direct mental intuition. He was at that
point where a man can say, so obvious was the truth to him: I believe
not, I see. What were the talks of these two souls on a subject in
regard to which they had nothing in common, except their genius? What
did they say from 1803 to 1810, from the day when they met for the
first time, to that on which one of them bent before the other, owned
herself vanquished, and, on the bosom of friendship, sighed the last
sigh of error? Doubtless God alone knows. God alone knows the
stratagems which suspended for seven years the efficacy of an
eloquence sustained by divine grace, and disputed with it, step by
step, the victim and the victory. However, two immortal books of the
Count de Maistre: Soirees de Saint Petersbourg, and the book Du Pape,
may give us the secret of that controversy lost to the memory of man,
but which we shall one day find in that of God.

It is manifest that the wife of the Governor of St. Petersburg opposed
from the first to the ambassador of Sardinia all the negations of the
eighteenth century, those shadows which Voltaire had invested with all
{740} the transparency of his mocking spirit, and around which Jean
Jacques Rousseau had thrown the poetry of his melancholy imagination.
Doubt, which in all men is a profound abyss, is still more so in the
heart of woman. Nature cannot be denied with impunity, and the nature
of woman is to believe, for it is her vocation to love. Happily Madame
de Swetchine was strong and sincere; she could follow with her mind's
eye her friend's thought, and penetrate, little by little, as she
became accustomed to it, into those regions of truth where mockery had
not left even a trace, and where imagination raised not a single
cloud. Laughter ceases as we ascend nearer to God, and so also do
tears without cause; the intellect becomes serious, and the heart
contented.

When the Count de Maistre had dispelled the phantoms, did Madame de
Swetchine see at a glance the whole reality of Christianity, or did
the Greek Church interpose itself, as a half-light between a doubt
which was no more, and a faith which was not yet? In considering the
slowness of her progress it is natural to believe, and the Count de
Maistre's correspondence confirms it, that the neophyte took the
longest route, and that she did not give herself up to any sudden
illumination. It was then the book Du Pape which succeeded to the
Soirees de Saint Petersbourg. M. de Maistre had dictated it with one
eye on Russia and the other on France. Not that there was any relation
between the two countries in the point of view of religion. France,
since God had made her the eldest daughter of the church, had not been
for a single day a traitor to the sacred unity of her mother; and from
the battle-fields of Tolbiac to the scaffolds of the Reign of Terror,
she held herself faithful on the only and immovable rock where God had
sealed in this world the mystery of truth. But if is true that she was
withdrawn from the public law of Europe, which during several
centuries had accorded a political supremacy to the Roman pontiff and
that she had derived from this sort of resistance, I know not what of
personal independence, which without detracting from her theological
submission, had given her in certain matters a more apparent reserve.
Yet if Louis XIV. had not taken it into his head to establish as a
maxim what was only a national instinct, regulated by a profound
faith, the sentiments of France would never have assumed in the eyes
of Christendom the doubtful coloring which after the ruins of the
revolution struck the genius of the Count de Maistre and inspired him
with the book, Du Pape. He saw in Russia the immense fall of the Greek
Church, caused by this single point of infidelity to St. Peter, and
without fearing for France what no one feared for her, he erected to
the papacy that beautiful and proud, statue, which posterity will ever
regard with honor, even though they should accuse the artist of having
known the past less well than the future.

_Thou art Peter, and on this rock I build my church, and the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it_. These simple words, regarded in
the gospel and in history, taught Madame de Swetchine that the Greek
Church, although preserving the traditions of episcopal authority, was
detached from the centre of unity, and consequently from the throne
itself of life. After this it was easy to recognize its effects in the
spiritual miseries she had under her eyes. The clergy are not the
whole church; they are only a portion of it. The church is the
assemblage of all souls who know God, and do not consciously reject
either the words he has given the world, or the authority which he has
founded to preserve and propagate his words and his grace. Though a
visible body in the faithful exteriorly marked with his seal, she yet
embraces under the eyes of God, who penetrates and judges all
consciences, a multitude unknown to herself, in whom invincible
ignorance {741} creates good faith, and who live unknowingly the truth
of which she is the depositary. This is the church. As to the clergy,
all is said in these words of our Lord ascending to heaven: _Go and
teach all nations, baptizing them and teaching them to keep my
commandments._ The clergy are the apostolate of the church; they are
the venerated summit of faith, the army of souls called by God to
spread the only law which is infallible, the only force which conquers
the flesh, the only unction which gives humility. "_Who hears you
hears me_," our Lord has said: "_who despises you despises me_." All
may and must befall the clergy, hate, exile, torture, death; there is
but one thing which they cannot and should not merit, contempt. When
Christ suffered in the judgment hall under the blows of the vilest
executioners, when he bore his cross from Jerusalem to Calvary, when
he was raised on it in the face of the whole world, there was against
him from heaven to earth, from Satan to man, a hate deeper and broader
than the ocean. But respect survived; and Pilate in washing his hands,
the centurion in beholding the cross, the virgins in weeping, the sun
in hiding its light, were the revelations of a conscience greater than
the punishment, and which held the astonished universe in expectation
and awe. Now, by a judgment of God, which is the chastisement of a
fault of centuries, the Greek clergy are despised. They are despised
not only by the unbeliever but by the believer; they are despised by
the penitent whose confessions they hear, by the purified Christians
to whom they give the body and blood of their God. This contempt is
striking and universal; the pope or Greek priest bears it on his
forehead as an avenging sign, and even the kiss of the Czar confirms
and enlarges it.

Placed between this spectacle and the vision of the Count de Maistre,
the whole light came to Madame de Swetchine, and then commenced for
her the second struggle, the struggle of the truth against the holiest
affections of the heart. Truth is, no doubt, the great country of the
mind; it is father, mother, brother, sister, and native land; but man
has on earth another family and another country, the better he is the
more he loves them, and virtue; in so far as it is human, makes them
the cherished centre of all that is good, amiable, and generous. To
these ties already so strong, religion adds its divine influence, and
from the same table to the same altar man leads his happiness, and
there attaches by a single chain time and eternity. What a blow is
that when some day, by an evidence which leaves no possible retreat,
the daughter shall see God standing between her and her mother,
between her and her husband, between her and her native country, and
there shall be said to her in the same voice which Abraham heard: "_Go
out from, thy land and thy kindred, and from the house of thy father,
and come to the land which I shall show thee_." There are some, it is
true, who think this voice should never be heard, but for three
thousand years, since Abraham, it has commanded and been obeyed. God
is stronger than man, and man is great enough to sacrifice to truth
more than himself.

Madame de Swetchine had not only to fear the rending of her heart, she
had before her an intolerance which the opposition of our century had
only irritated. The Emperor Nicholas did not yet reign, but the
conversion of a Russian soul to the Catholic Church was none the less
an act of high treason, which exposed her to the severities of the
morrow, if she escaped the inattention of the evening. After having
endured this stormy situation for six or seven years, Madame de
Swetchine turned her eyes toward France, and obtained from the Emperor
Alexander, a generous prince, himself agitated by an unknown
inspiration, the permission to live there. France received her in 1818
at the age of thirty-four, in the plenitude of her faculties ripened
by a long intercourse with men and events.

{742}

It is not without a purpose that God draws to himself' a creature
condemned to error by all the ties of family and country, and
transports her far away to a foreign capital in the midst of a new
people. Much less so is it when this grace falls on a choice
intelligence, placed in the first ranks of society, and who unites in
herself all the gifts of nature, and all those of the world. Paris
since 1750 had been the centre of the European mind. It had by half a
century's crusade against Christ, drawn the nations from those old
certainties to which they owed their existence. An unheard of
revolution had been the chastisement of this fault, a chastisement so
much the more remarkable, as France had invoked just principles,
conformed to its ancient traditions, and as it was the defect of a
superior light to restrain herself, that she had traversed everything
with a devastating impetuosity. She had remained faithful only to her
sword, and still after twenty-five years of victory, worthy of her
happiest days, she had just succumbed by excess in the battlefield,
and twice the foreigner had soiled with his presence that superb city,
the mistress, by the ascendency of her intelligence, of the modern
world. It was there on the day after its reverses, that Providence
conducted Madame de Swetchine. The question was to know if France,
aware of the need she had of God to reconstruct her, would hear the
voice of her misfortunes; if recalled to her ancient kings, and
reconciled in her old temples, she would, consent to be again
Christian in order to give her liberty the sanction of the faith which
had always guided and always served her.

Few minds in either camp discerned this relation of Christianity with
the institutions of a liberally governed people. The example of
England, where the church had always supported the commons, said but
little to the publicists who were the most charmed with her
Parliament. Madame de Swetchine herself had had in the author of
Considerations sur la France, a master who saw plainly the vices of
the French revolution, but who without betraying civil and political
liberty, did not well comprehend, perhaps, either all its necessity or
all its future. Happily she had lived under absolute power; she had
had under her eyes for nearly forty years a Christian Church in a
servile land, and this lesson could not be lost on a mind as true as
hers. The evils of liberty are great among a people who do not know
how to measure it, who at every moment refuse it by jealousy, or go
beyond it through inexperience. But these evils, great as they may be,
belong to the apprenticeship of liberty and not to its essence; they
still leave it daylight, space, and life, a resource for the feeble, a
hope for the vanquished, and above all the sacred emulation of good
against evil. Under despotism good and evil sleep on the same pillow;
souls are invaded by a dull degeneracy because they have no longer a
struggle to sustain, and Christianity itself, a protected victim,
expiates in unspeakable humiliations the benefits of its peace. Madame
de Swetchine saw this. Her great heart was full of this when she
entered Paris, and amid the roar of tempests she knelt, for the first
time in her life, at altars combated, but esteemed. It is necessary to
have suffered for liberty of faith to know its price. It is necessary
to have passed under the gibbets of schism, to be able fully to know
what it is to breathe the atmosphere of truth. How often have I seen
Madame de Swetchine's eyes fill with tears at the thought that she was
in a Catholic country! How often has she been inwardly moved at seeing
a good priest, a good religious, a good brother of the Christian
Schools, in a word, our Lord's image on a sincere brow or in a
virtuous life! Ah! this it is which here we never lose. We {743} can
dishonor I know not how many human and even divine things; but in the
shipwreck Christ remains visible to us in many who worthily love and
serve him.

The life of Madame de Swetchine during the forty years she passed in
our midst was one continual thanksgiving. More than once under a reign
of persecution, like that of the Emperor Nicholas, she had fears for
the security of her sojourn in France. Once, notwithstanding her great
age, she believed it necessary not to leave it to the zeal even of her
most tried friends, and rushed to St. Petersburg to implore the
forgetfulness of the Czar. God still saved her. She had acquired such
a prestige, that it might be said that she represented at Paris the
honor and intelligence of Russia, and this, it is probable, was what,
in the most difficult times, saved her from being recalled.

This dependence which she still had on her country, because her
estates there might be held to answer for her personal conduct,
imposed on her an extreme prudence in a saloon which was frequented by
her compatriots and by men of all ranks and all opinions. But this
reserve, which she had acquired as a habit in her own country,
detracted nothing from the grace and sincerity of her discourse;
whether she was silent or whether she expressed her thoughts,
according to the degree of confidence inspired by those present, she
never betrayed it; and in her silence even, she seized things on the
side which remained accessible, and gave them clearness enough, to
instruct without displeasing. An exquisite naturalness covered her
speech, though tact and unexpectedness were its most usual
characteristics. When she met Madame de Stael for the first time, each
knew the other without being told; and happening to be placed at
opposite corners of a large hall, they observed each other with
curiosity. Madame de Stael, accustomed to homage, waited for Madame de
Swetchine to come to her. Seeing she did not, she all at once crossed
the long space which separated them, stopped before her, and said in a
lively and caressing tone: "Do you know, Madame, that I am much hurt
by your coldness toward me?" "Madame," was the reply, "it is for the
king to salute first." This remark can give some idea of the ingenuous
and submissive style of Madame de Swetchine's conversation. Different
from Madame de Stael, who disserted rather than conversed, Madame de
Swetchine raised her voice but slightly, and had no accent of
domination; she waited her time without impatience, without caring for
success, always more happy to please than ambitious to dazzle. An
inexhaustible interest in those whom she had once loved, gave to her
intimacy a sweet and maternal character. Her genius was approached as
a focus of light, no doubt, but with a filial disposition which
endeared its brilliancy, which was the fruit of a goodness as manifest
as was her intellectual superiority. Introduced into the highest
French society by the Duchesse de Duras and the Marquise de Montcalm,
sisters of the Duc de Richelieu, she was not long in making felt
around her that attraction which is produced in society by
acknowledged eminence of character. What she had been when young at
St. Petersburg in her husband's salons, she was in the heart of
France; but what at St. Petersburg was only a conquest of suffrages
and of admiration, became at Paris an apostolate.

When a soul passes to God's side, that is to say, to the side of
Christianity, the only expression here below of the divine life, she
can find nowhere else the principles and motives of her actions. All
in her proceeds from the sacred height and returns to it, Madame de
Swetchine lived in the world, but was not of it; she was held to it
only by its good--only to make her protest for God, and to serve him;
an admirable office in which the world assumes all its grandeur; in
which fallen under the strokes of a mind that {744} knows what it is
worth, it arises and occupies with him every instant of thought and
every vibration of the heart. He who is disabused by the simple
experience of life, despises the world, while he who is disabused by
light from on High esteems it. Being then no longer in the world for
the world, Madame de Swetchine was more than ever there for God; she
followed his course with all-powerful interest, attentive to seize
whatever might remove or approach her to the principle of all life. M.
de Maistre was no more. A different school from his was forming;
Madame de Swetchine saw unfold its first germs, and she surrounded
with her counsels and her affection the young representatives of an
idea which her recollections, perhaps, would have repulsed, but which
the freedom of her mind rendered her capable of judging, for this was
the character as the temper of her genius. In a time of intellectual
dependence, in which parties bore away everything in their train,
Madame de Swetchine made no engagement, and submitted to no
attraction; she isolated every question from the noise around her, and
placed it in the silence of eternity. Thus was one sure after having
heard all that was said, to encounter on crossing her threshold
something which had not been heard, an original view of the truth; and
even when she was mistaken, a proof that her thought did not belong to
herself alone, because she sought it in God.

It was after the failure of L' Avenir that I first saw her. I
approached the borders of her soul as a seaweed broken by the waves,
and I remember yet, after twenty-five years, how she placed her light
and strength at the service of a young man unknown to her. Her
counsels sustained me both against despondeney and exaltation. One day
when she thought she noticed in my words a doubt or lassitude, she
said to me with a singular accent, the simple words: "Take care." She
was wonderful in discovering the point to which one inclined, and
where it was necessary to bear assistance. The measure of her thought
was so perfect, the freedom of her judgment so remarkable, that I was
long in comprehending to whom and to what she was devoted. Where in
others I should have known in advance what was to be said, here I was
almost always ignorant, and nowhere did I feel myself more out of the
world. This charm from above was not diffused over me alone. Other
minds, my predecessors or my contemporaries, felt its action, and it
is impossible to say for how many souls this single soul was a lamp.
Not only the day, at fixed hours, not only the evening until midnight,
but at almost every moment, confidence sought her with an importunity
which was never complained of. Thus was formed around a foreigner I
know not what country, which was of all times and of all lands, for it
was the truth which was its ground, its atmosphere, its light, and its
motion.

Nature, it is evident, could not suffice of itself to feed this
inexhaustible conversation. It was nourished by an assiduous reading
of all that was remarkable which appeared in Europe. No book, as no
man, escaped her ardent curiosity. After the example of the Count de
Maistre, who inspired the taste, Madame de Swetchine pencil-marked
every page which struck her, and in her first leisure hour between two
conversations she engraved on a light leaf of brass the thought which
had illumined hers. She added her own reflections with the rapidity of
a first glance, and this triple commerce with books, men, and herself,
which was never interrupted, gave to her intelligence a spring which
was never exhausted. What, however, in the midst of the contradictions
of her century were the principles which guided her, and of which she
shed around her the unfailing clearness? In recalling my recollections
of her, I should say they were Our Lord the life of heaven and earth;
the Catholic Church, the only society of the mind, because it alone
possesses the foundation of faith and the {745} inspiration of
charity; Rome, the centre of the world, because she is the centre of
the church; the human family progressive on a basis that does not
change; civil and political liberty, the daughter of Christianity;
commerce, industry, science, all grand things, but under things
grander still, honor and justice; all man's toil powerless to diminish
poverty without virtue; France, a people loved by God--its revolution
a vengeance and a mercy, a germ under ruins; philosophy, as old as
man, the vestibule of Christianity when not as yet enlightened by
faith, and its crown when faith has transformed it; reason, the inborn
light whence philosophy proceeds, and which Christianity perfects; the
future, an uncertain abyss, but in which God is ever found; error, a
crime sometimes, a weakness oftener; tolerance, an homage to the
truth, a proof of faith; force, which is next to impotency; authority,
an ascendency which has its source in antiquity and in right;
property, the union of man with the earth by labor, the first liberty
of the world, without which no other subsists; liberty the guaranty of
right against whatever is not right. These, if my memory is faithful,
are the sound which at every hour and under every touch was given
forth by that harmonious lyre which we now hear no more. A constant
simplicity in an equal elevation, a goodness which came from Christ,
gave to her doctrines, apart from their merit as truth, a personal
influence. In hearing her this double charm might be resisted, but she
could not be hated or despised; she could not but be loved, and
inspire the desire to become better. Happy mouth, which for forty
years made not an enemy to God, but which poured into a multitude of
wounded or languishing hearts the germ of the resurrection and the
rapture of life.

Yet, perhaps I deceive those who read me. They may persuade themselves
that the friend of the Count de Maistre and of so many eminent
Christians won their friendship only by the merit of a superior
intelligence. That would be much, but in Madame de Swetchine it was
not all. Intellect, when it comes from God, is inseparable from
charity. Madame de Swetchine loved the poor. Like Frederic Ozanam,
another blessing of Providence that we have lost, she knew how to
forget science in presence of misfortune, and her lips, accustomed to
things profound, had only divine things in the face of suffering and
death. In entering her dwelling this might not be believed. Pictures
by the great masters, dazzling candelabras, precious vases, books
enclosed under crystals richly encased, flowers and drapery, all
suggested the idea of costly magnificence hardly compatible with the
secret love of the unfortunate. But, as I have said, Madame de
Swetchine had in all things, even in duty, a point of view which was
her own. Persuaded that she owed it to her family and to her country,
to represent them worthily in the capital of a great people, she had
the art of being simple in the midst of a splendor which she
considered necessary, and to find economy in unseen privations. Long
before her death, for example, she had no carriage. She walked with
scrupulous exactness to the offices of St. Thomas of Aquina, her
parish church, although she had a private chapel, and though her age
as well as her infirmities would permit her to remain at home or go
out only in a carriage.

One day her secret escaped her, Troubled, I imagine by something she
had read, or some discourse which I had made her, she asked me with a
kind of anxiety if I believed that in giving a sixth part of her
income to the poor, she accomplished the precept of almsgiving.
Another time, when some early vegetables were served at her table, at
which I appeared surprised: "What would you?" she said to me; "there
are people who raise these for us; would it not be ungrateful for
those who can, not to recompense them for their labor?" This remark
opened to me a new order of ideas. I understood that riches should not
be {746} used simply to support those who cannot gain their own living
whether from want of strength or want of work, but that they should
also, according to their amount, be used to protect all the honest
developments of human toil. It is thus that in the beautiful days of
Venice, Genoa, Florence, and of Pisa, so many Christian merchants
raised immortal monuments to their country, and that at Rome so many
cardinals have built palaces. Magnificence is a virtue, says St.
Thomas Aquinas, when it is regulated by reason, and very different
from luxury, which is vanity and ruin.

At Madame de Swetchine's house was seen a mute, whom she had adopted
as if in return for the gift of speech, which she had received in so
eminent a degree. It was her custom to associate the care of the poor
with the happy events of her life. Each of them recalled a happiness
which he represented. She visited them on fixed days; she herself
carried them assistance, and above fill the light of her presence.
This intercourse kept alive in her the memory of the man, so quick to
be effaced from those who have not the memory of God. She continued it
even to the last days of her life; and when already the breath was
uncertain and trembling on her lips, she asked for accounts of her
poor. I saw, when we were seated around the sad couch of this
beautiful light, her dear mute watching from an adjoining chamber, a
vigilant sentinel of a life which had given her so much of itself, and
which was fading away between friendship remaining faithful, and
poverty remaining grateful.

Shall I speak, after the poor, of that beloved chapel, where the
former unbeliever of St. Petersburg opened her heart before the God of
her maturity? It was there, above all, that she lived, and there that
she had gathered into a narrow space all that taste and riches could
do to express and satisfy her love. Charming and pious sanctuary! you
could not contain many souls, but there was one which sufficed to fill
you, and which you filled also. Now you are no more. Death has
despoiled the seats where so many friends came to pray; where prayer
was so sweet, and peace so profound. We shall see you no more, nor
your images, nor your precious stones, nor the tabernacle where at the
side of the Lord reposed the virtue all entire of our friend. You had
her last thought; it was of you she murmured at the moment eternity
seized and carried her before God. Can I, then, better end than with
you? For whom should I still ask a remembrance, a tear, an admiration?

For several years Madame de Swetchine had had preludes of her end. The
consequences of a fall had left on her face a serious hurt which at
intervals and without warning, rendered speaking very painful. This
pain did not arrest the rapture of her communications. She remained
what she had ever been, the mistress of herself, and occupied with
all, winning hearts as in the days of her youth, when the Count de
Maistre sent her his portrait with these words, written by his own
hand:

  "Docile a l'appel plein de grace
    De l'amitie qui vous attend,
  Volez, image, et prenez place
    Ou l'original se plait tant."

Happier than this great man who saw only the first dawning of Sophie
de Soymonoff, we have enjoyed her perfect day; he formed her for us,
and happier herself than her master, she could, by the clearness of a
tempered reason, bring to her age a judgment in which hope surpassed
fear, and which best indicated the true route to minds desirous of
knowing and serving it. But at last we had to lose her. Every star
below fades, every treasure vanishes, every soul is recalled. God did
not spare his servant the agonies of death, but he left her to
surmount them the influence which she had acquired over all things by
seventy-five years of combat. Seated in her parlor to the last hour,
she continued to receive those whom she loved, to speak {747} to them
of themselves, and of the future, to foresee all, and to animate all.
Her reclining figure raised itself to smile, she kept the accent and
the thread of her thought, and her eyes with their serenity still
brightened the touching scene in which we disputed for her with God. A
last shock took her from us on the 10th September, 1857, at six
o'clock in the morning, having a few days before received the viaticum
and the unction of eternal life.

Alas! dear and illustrious lady. I cannot attach to your name the
glory of those Roman women whom St. Jerome has immortalized, and yet
you were of their race: you were of the race of those women who
followed Christ through all the stations of his pilgrimage, who
watched him as he died, who embalmed him in his tomb, and who were the
first to salute him on the morning of his resurrection. You believed
all and saw all. Born in schism, brought up in unbelief, God sent you
to open your eyes, one of the rarest minds of this century; his hand
touched your eyelids, and the sight which your country refused you,
came to you from foreign skies. A Christian, you aspired to the
liberty of Christ; conquered for, God through the language of France,
you wished to live under the French speech, and quitting a country you
always loved, you came among us with the modesty of a disciple and of
an exile. But you brought us more than we gave you. The light of your
soul illumined the land which received you, and for forty years you
were for us the sweetest echo of the gospel, and the surest road to
honor. No failure annoyed you, no success ensnared you; you were ever
the same, because truth and justice do not change. Ah! doubtless your
mission was to do us good in our pale West, but you had another
mission, I believe; you were near us as an advance guard of the
conversion of the East. Daughter of Greece! God wished to show us in
your person, as he already had in several of your compatriots, what
will, one day, be that old church of our first fathers in the faith,
when, brought back from a fatal separation, she shall receive from the
might of St. Peter that emission of unity which she formerly sent us
from Jerusalem and Antioch, and of which we guard for her with
fidelity the precious deposit. Yes, we trust the love which you
preserved for your country; trust the presentiments of your
Evangelist, the great Count de Maistre; trust in the long hopes of the
Latin Church, and its constant respect for Christian Greece. Yes,
sooner or later, the East will bend before the West, as a brother
before a brother. St. Sophia will hear resound again in the two
languages the symbol which has not ceased to unite us. Liberty of
conscience, acquired by the human race, will no longer permit error to
guard itself by persecution. Veils will fall; the obscure victims of
political fear shake off their chains; all minds from one end of
Europe to the other will follow the inclination of nature and grace;
and if there remain, as there must, unbelievers and Protestants, at
least there will remain no longer a nation crucified for error. In
those days, dear and noble friend whom we have lost, and live here to
weep--in those days, you will raise a little your cold stone at
Montmartre, you will breathe an instant the air in which you lived,
and recognizing at once the balm of your first and of your second
country, you will bless God who called you before others, and to whom
you responded with that faith without stain which enlightened us
ourselves, and by that unconquerable hope which sustained us against
all the failures of a century so fruitful in lapses and abortions.



{748}

ORIGINAL.

THE CRY.

  I sail on an ocean at midnight.
    With darkness above and below;
  And never a star in the heaven
    To pilot me where I would go.

  Fierce tempests that roar in the midnight,
    The tempests both cruel and strong,
  Are driving me hither and thither;
    What wonder if I should go wrong?

  Many thousands of others are sailing,
    Like me, o'er this tempest-vexed sea,
  All bound for the very same haven,
    All bound to the same land with me.

  But some to the leftward are sailing.
    Whilst others they steer to the right;
  I oft hear the voice of the captains
    Who hail me aloud through the night.

  Each one, though so diversely sailing,
    Calls out to me, "You are astray!
  For this is the course you should steer by
    To enter the kingdom of day.

  "See, yonder the light shineth clearly,
    Right full on the way that we go."
  But which is the right and the true way,
    Oh! tell me, for how can I know.

  I look where they're pointing before them,
    But never a star do I see;
  Where they tell me the beacon is shining
    Is nothing but darkness to me.

  My soul is athirst with its longing
    To rest on the beautiful shore.
  Where is felt not the surge of the billows.
    Where the tempest is heard nevermore:

{749}

  Where the gardens of amaranth blossom,
    And meadows of green asphodel
  Fill the air with a fragrance immortal;
    Where the satisfied voyagers dwell

  Who have passed o'er this ocean before me,
    And rest with the holy of old,
  In the city whose walls are of jasper.
    And roofs of the finest of gold.

  O Lord of the wonderful city!
    O King of the kingdom of day!
  Let the light of thy truth shine out clearly
    To pilot me safe on my way!


THE ANSWER.

  I hear thee, my child, in the darkness;
    I know where thou wishest to be:
  But why in a pilotless vessel
    Didst venture alone on this sea?

  Thy way is in doubt and in darkness.
    Because thou dost voyage alone,
  Rejecting the old Ship of safety.
    To choose a frail bark of thine own.

  That vessel is sailing beside thee.
    Its course the great Pilot controls.
  The tempest will ne'er overcome it--
    It never will wreck on the shoals.

  Who sail in this old Ship of safety,
    Know nothing of doubt or of strife.
  How can they with him who commands it--
    The Way, and the Truth, and the Life?

  And all through the mist and the darkness
    Faith shows a mysterious way,
  O'er which sails the good ship of Peter
    Straight on to the kingdom of day!

A.Y.



{750}


ORIGINAL.

THE GODFREY FAMILY; OR, QUESTIONS OF THE DAY.

CHAPTER XXIV.

DEATH OF MRS. GODFREY.

A missive soon brought M. Bertolot to the trio. He came as secretly as
possible, and departed in the same way; not so secretly, however, as
to prevent his visit being shortly made known to Alfred Brookbank,
who, with the view of making a final breach between Sir Philip and his
wife, had set spies to watch the movements of the party. He discovered
from the jealousy of the neighbors the intimacy at the Irish cottage,
and surmised the attraction which produced these visits, but could
make no use of this surmise until his agent recognized in M. Bertolot
the French priest who had accompanied the countess to England. The
secrecy of the visit told its purport. Alfred now informed Sir Philip,
as if he had just made the discovery, that Annie had been in Eugene's
company all the time she had been away; that Catholics were their only
society, and that a priest visited them in secret, adding that there
could be no rational doubt that Lady Conway and her mother were both
Catholics.

Sir Philip's indignation was excessive. Without taking time to
consider the matter at all, he ordered his carriage and drove
post-haste to Estcourt Hall, to which place the family were now
summoned in consequence of the increasing weakness of Mrs. Godfrey.

Mrs. Godfrey had been brought there by short stages, and had arrived
the night before. Mr. Godfrey and Hester were there to meet her, and
to Hester's great joy she was once more pressed lovingly to her
mother's heart, who was more than happy to see her children united
again in affection. Adelaide was hourly expected; and when Sir Philip
made his appearance he was supposed to come in obedience to a similar
summons. Mr. Godfrey received him; but Sir Philip's agitation was such
that he made no answer to the customary greeting. He looked round the
room, and seeing they were alone, he said in a choking voice:

"Is Lady Conway here?"

"She is; she arrived last night."

"And her brother Eugene?"

"Is here also."

"And have they been together all this time? O Mr. Godfrey, how you
have deceived me!"

Mr. Godfrey was puzzled. He was constitutionally timid, and certainly
was just now in no mood for quarrelling; so he said quietly: "Why, has
any harm come of it?"

"Harm! What can be greater harm than that Annie and her mother should
both of them be papists?"

"Is it that which frightens you? Be composed, my dear friend; put such
thoughts from your mind; Annie has too much sense for that. And my
poor wife, she has been a little weak in the head lately, it is true,
but she is not given that way in the least degree; besides, I greatly
fear she cannot live long; her strength is less than I could have
imagined. Come, and see her."

But Sir Philip was absorbed in one idea. "I tell you," said he, "that
the mischief is already done; that your wife and mine have both been
on their knees to a priest, and that the secrets of both families are
already on the way to Rome."

"Impossible!" said Mr. Godfrey.

{751}

"Try," said Sir Philip; "ask the question; if they dare deny it, I
will produce the proofs."

Mr. Godfrey laid his hand on the bell-rope. A servant appeared.
"Request Mr. Eugene to come to me immediately." The man bowed and
disappeared. Eugene soon entered. The door was carefully closed. Sir
Philip could scarcely keep himself from springing on him; but Mr.
Godfrey stood between them, and said in a hollow voice: "Eugene,
answer without circumlocution or disguise, say yes or no, are your
mother and sister Annie Catholics?"

"They are."

Mr. Godfrey pointed to the door; he could not speak. Eugene left the
room. The two strong men trembled with impotent rage.

"A curse has fallen upon the house," muttered Mr. Godfrey at length,
as he paced the room. "Who could have dreamed of this?"

"Mr. Godfrey," said Sir Philip, in tones of thunder, "you will tell
your daughter that she never again will enter my doors. Prepare what
settlements you please, send them to my lawyer; anything in reason I
will consent to, but see her again I will not."

He quitted the house, nor did he ever see his injured wife again.

Scarcely had Sir Philip's carriage driven away when another drove up,
containing Adelaide, the young Dowager Duchess of Durimont. She
entered the house in a scarcely less agitated state than Sir Philip
had left it in; but her excitement proceeded altogether from a
different cause. Among Adelaide's numerous faults, want of affection
for her mother certainly did not form one. On the contrary, she was
accustomed not only to love but to reverence her mother as a very
superior woman. Through the sunshine of youth, while enjoying the
warmth of a mother's fondness and protection, Adelaide's affections
had strengthened without that sentimentality of expression which Mrs.
Godfrey would have taught her to repress had she seen it manifested,
but they were none the less deep or tender for having hitherto found
no occasion, of great display. On the first intimation she had
received of her mother's illness, Adelaide had hastened at once to
Estcourt Hall, and was with difficulty persuaded by Mr. Godfrey to
retire. He feared that Adelaide's presence would but increase the
excitement under which Mrs. Godfrey labored, and as the doctor's
opinion was to that effect also, Adelaide was compelled, however
reluctantly, to yield. They gave her no clew whatever as to the cause
of her mother's malady, and though she had a general idea of some
unworthy transaction in which Eugene was wronged and Hester enriched,
she did not enter into particulars, nor mentally connect the facts
with her mother's illness. The only effect it had upon her was to
estrange her from Hester, and in a slighter degree from her father
also.

When she heard that Eugene and Annie were summoned to her mother's
side, again she endeavored to share their cares; but Mr. Godfrey was
fearful of suffering too great intercourse between Adelaide and
Eugene, and used his utmost endeavors to dissuade her. He insisted
that the physicians absolutely ordered that none should approach her
save those she asked for. The father dreaded the judgment of the
daughter when she should know the cause of her mother's trouble. He
was accustomed to be looked up to by his children, and shrank from
incurring the disapproval of this one in particular; for Adelaide had
ever been considered the most talented and the most intellectual of
the family. He had a sort of consciousness that to the mother's
influence in veiling his foibles from his children's eyes, he owed
much of that reverence with which they habitually approached him; and
he could but feel that he had made but a poor return for a life of
devotedness, when he refused to yield to the first {752} important
demand she had ever made him, and that in favor of his own son.

But now Eugene had written to Adelaide to say her mother was calm, and
would welcome her. Adelaide entered her father's house pale and
trembling, an attendant supporting her.

"Is she still alive?" she whispered, as she saw her father; then, as
if fearful he would still oppose her seeing Mrs. Godfrey's, she
refused by a gesture to enter the sitting-room, but made her way at
once up the broad staircase to the room her mother had ever been wont
to occupy. She opened the door, and flinging herself on her knees by
the side of the bed, took the pale hand, and, as she kissed it, said,
with streaming eyes: "Ah! dear mother, why was I not permitted to come
to you before?"

"And who forbade you, my love?"

"My father said the doctors--"

Mrs. Godfrey looked at her husband, who had followed Adelaide into the
room; there was surprise and sorrow, but no anger on her countenance.
She pressed Adelaide's hand and whispered, "Perhaps he was right, I
was unconscious and delirious a long while, my poor child; but now you
will stay with me the little time that I remain on earth."

"You feel better to-day, my dear mother," said Annie, hopefully.

"I do, but it cannot last; we must not deceive ourselves. I am glad to
see my dear Adelaide, but I cannot talk to her yet."

The effort of saying even so much exhausted her; she lay back, and
they watched long hours in silence by her pillow.

Day after day passed away, the loving children surrounding her, and
Mr. Godfrey sharing their watch. All traces of excitement had gone, in
the solemnity of that watch. Mrs. Godfrey seemed so thoroughly in
peace, that that peace seemed to pass into the circle of hearts
surrounding her. She became, however, perceptibly weaker everyday. Ten
days after Adelaide's arrival she whispered to her one morning: "Tell
your father I wish to speak to him."

Adelaide summoned her father. Whatever were the words spoken, they
appeared to distress him very much. He gazed at his wife as though in
a stupor. She held his hand and faintly whispered, "My last wishes,
can you refuse them?" "No," said he, half choked, "he shall be sent
for;" and he left her to seek Eugene. That evening a stranger was
ushered by Eugene, as it were by stealth, into his mother's room.
Annie alone was present. The last sacraments of the church were
administered, and the stranger priest passed down the back staircase
so secretly that none knew of or suspected his visit save those
present and Mr. Godfrey, who had insisted on such secrecy being
observed.

Adelaide had at length gathered all the facts concerning her brother
being disinherited, and the effect the transaction had produced on
Mrs. Godfrey's mind. A great feeling of repulsion for Hester was the
consequence, and her manner soon betrayed symptoms of the feelings
that swayed her.

"I can never again call her sister," she whispered, half-aloud, one
day, in her meditation, by her mother's side; Mrs. Godfrey's eyes
opened. "My children, love one another," she said. "Love, for he loved
even sinners; forgive, for he forgave those who crucified him." She
sank to sleep after pronouncing these words, and when the watchers
bent over her to see what prolonged that sleep to so unusual a time,
they found that the sweet purified spirit had already winged its way
to the mansions of the blessed.

Of all the mourners there, perhaps the grief of Adelaide was the most
violent. The feelings of Annie and Eugene were tempered by the hope
that their mother was now happier than she had ever been before.
Hester's were modified by the deep meditation in which she was plunged
by the fact that her mother had received full insight into that faith
of which she had caught but a glimpse, and of which {753} she so
earnestly desired to know more. But she dared not question Eugene or
Annie, for fear of angering her father and her mother! "O mother, pray
for me!" was in her heart, and checked the outward demonstration of'
her grief.

They were standing round the coffin, those four children, whom she had
brought so faithfully through the cares and dangers of childhood! No
pride of station had withdrawn her from fulfilling her nursery duties;
no sloth, no command of riches had caused her to delegate to hireling
hands the cultivation of their infant minds; riches to them had been
as an accessory, not, as too often happens, causing a withdrawal of
maternal offices. How had they requited her? Oh! happy they who can
stand by the bier of those to whom they are bound by duty or by love,
and feel no remorse for duty oft neglected.

Adelaide was standing on one side at the head of the coffin, rapt in
grief, Eugene and Annie were on the other side. Hester at the foot
absorbed in intense thought, but tearless and as it seemed to Adelaide
not paying homage in her thoughts to that dear mother. "Was she even
then dwelling on her own wild schemes?" The thought maddened Adelaide,
and forgetting the self-control for which she was usually so
remarkable, she in the overmastering impulse of the moment seized
Hester's arm, led her to the head of the coffin, and, pointing to the
sweet pale face before them, said in a frenzied tone, regardless of
the presence of Mr. Godfrey, who just then entered the room: "And did
you dare to wring the heart of that most noble woman? Was it for you,
whom she loved so dearly, to crush her loving spirit, and then stand
by so calmly contemplating her remains? How my heart loathes you!"

"Hush! hush! dear sister," said Eugene tenderly, as he disengaged her
clasp from Hester, who fell nearly fainting into her father's arms.
"Hush! Adelaide, hush! she bade us love each other; you have
misconceived this matter. Come with me, I will explain it"--and he
took her to another apartment, and tried to make her understand
Hester's intentions of ultimately settling all according to equity,
while Mr. Godfrey and Annie did their best, to restore Hester to her
usual equanimity.

Mr. Godfrey was so much moved by this affront put upon his darling
that he forgot his intention of keeping Mrs. Godfrey's change of
religion secret, and in the evening he called Adelaide to his private
study, and there explained that the delusions under which her dear
mother had labored had no particular reference to Hester, but were
caused by religion. "In fact,'" said; Mr. Godfrey, "what she wanted
the day you came to summon me to her, was a Catholic priest. Of course
I refused her nothing; the priest came that night, but secretly, out
of respect to the reputation of the family."

"Was my mother a Catholic?"

"She became one latterly."

"And was it for her religion that you persecuted her?"

"Persecuted her! Why, Adelaide, how dare you apply such words to your
father? Your mother was never persecuted; even when out of her mind
she had everything she asked for, and as I tell you, a Catholic priest
attended her the other evening. Persecuted, indeed!"

Adelaide cared not to pursue a theme which brought her out as her
father's accuser, though the impression still remained on her mind
that injustice had occasioned the illness and subsequent death of her
mother, and this prevented her from recalling the offending words.

The father and daughter parted somewhat coldly that evening, nor were
matters much mended by the family consultation held shortly afterward
as to what was to become of Annie. Sir Philip's message was now first
delivered to her, as Alfred Brookbank had arrived as his agent, with
offers of settlement for Mr. Godfrey's approbation.

{754}

"And is Annie not to see her own children again?" asked the duchess,
as she gazed on the speechless, the agonized face of her sister.

"So says Sir Philip."

"But have you reasoned with him on the subject? Have you protested
against such a monstrous piece of tyranny?"

"It were useless, may it please your grace," interposed the soft low
tones of Alfred Brookbank, who was secretly gloating in the agony of
his victim. "It were perfectly useless. Sir Philip's hatred of
papistry--"

"Please to speak with more respect of the Holy Catholic Church, Mr.
Brookbank," interrupted the duchess.

"I beg pardon; I knew not that your grace--"

"It matters not what you knew," haughtily rejoined the duchess. "It
behoves every man of common sense, or of common education, to speak
respectfully of a faith which for so many centuries has formed the
religion not only of the commonalty but of the heroes of the race. The
names of Alfred the Great and Charlemagne, of Copernicus and Michael
Angelo, with countless others, may weigh a little perhaps against the
opinion of so enlightened an individual as Sir Philip Conway."

The withering sarcasm of tone with which this was uttered made Mr.
Godfrey bite his lips. He felt at once that he had not lowered her
mother in Adelaide's estimation by informing her of that mother's
becoming a Catholic; and he began to wonder which would be the next
seceder from rationalistic principle. "A curse is fallen upon our
house," he again muttered between his teeth.

The conference was necessarily a painful one; but it was with
indescribable surprise and emotion that the assembled family heard Mr.
Godfrey propose that Annie should take refuge in the convent in which
dwelt her friend Euphrasie.

"Why, papa;" whispered Hester, "have you changed your opinion of
convents? You used to call them sinks of iniquity. Why do you wish to
imprison Annie in one?"

"Hush, my dear," answered her father, in the lowest possible whisper,
"all convents are not alike. I happen to know the antecedents of the
superioress and of several of the nuns in this one; they are all
ladies of high birth, and are altogether above suspicion. They are
austere fanatics, that is all. Annie will take no vows, and there she
will see the extent of the folly to which religious enthusiasm lays us
open. If a twelvemonth's residence among the poor Clares does not set
her brain in order, then she is irrecoverably lost to us--we may set
her down as incurably insane."

While this little dialogue was going on, Eugene and Adelaide, jointly
and severally, were urging Annie to make a home with one or other of
themselves, each promising to do the utmost to regain for her the
custody of her children; but Annie, while she mournfully thanked them
for their kindness, decided that, at least till she had taken time for
reflection, she would abide by her father's advice, that is, provided
the sisterhood would consent to receive her.

After vainly endeavoring to shake her resolution, the duchess resolved
on accompanying her to the north to see whether suitable arrangements
could be made for her comfort.



CHAPTER XXV.

THE JOURNEY--THE CONVENT.

It was well for Annie that the care of a sister watched over her
during that sad journey, for sometimes her mind seemed almost to have
lost its balance, and she would weep frantically over the loss of her
little ones, as one who would not be comforted; then with a sudden
revolution of feeling she would stop, and say, "Thy will be done, O
Lord," and would begin to say her beads, as Eugene had taught her,
with most edifying resignation. After awhile the thought of her little
ones would make her weep anew, and again the thought of God would
check her tears.

{755}

These alternations were for Annie alone, however. Adelaide felt
unmitigated disgust at the barbarity which could sever a loving mother
from her infants.

"As if those babes were safer with that bigoted, soft-pated Mrs.
Bedford than with my intellectual, high-minded sister!" she thought.
Certainly the duchess's horror of Catholicity had wonderfully abated
of late. There was little said at first between the sisters on that
three days' journey. But once or twice the exclamation on Adelaide's
lips, "My mother a Catholic!" showed which direction her thoughts were
taking. Once, when Annie was a little calmer than usual, she suddenly
asked her: "What made my mother desire to be a Catholic, Annie?"

"The grace of God, as I humbly hope," answered her sister.

"The grace of God! What do you mean by that, Annie?"

"I mean the special provision with which God deigns to bless every
human soul that desires it with knowledge and love of himself. Adam
had this grace conferred on him at his creation. He lost it, not only
for himself, but for us also. But Christ has repurchased it for all
who come to him. My mother heard this voice pleading within her for a
higher life. She listened and obeyed. This is what theologians call
co-operation with grace. The grace of God needs man's co-operation to
be efficacious, because God will not compel the human will. He desires
free service."

"Ah, yes," said the duchess, "all other were a mockery. Nature is
bound by stern, inevitable law; that is easily seen: but intelligent
love must have freedom for its sphere of action, or it ceases to be
the love of intelligence; that, too, I comprehend. I thought your
words intended to convey some mysterious action of God on the soul not
given to all men."

"All do not correspond with it, by a large majority, I fear," said
Annie.

"And think you God speaks to all alike?" asked Adelaide.

"Theologians say that a grace corresponded to merits another,"
answered Annie, "and that one rejected or unused often loses that
grace, so slighted. This, at least, we know: God loves us all, and
places at our option higher degrees of spiritual attainment than we
oftentimes profit by."

"God! What is God?" murmured Adelaide. "Truly a _Deus absconditus_ for
man."

"'He who followeth me walketh not in darkness,' said the Man-God,"
replied Annie. "God was a hidden God for the nations of olden time,
perhaps; but for us, Adelaide, he is God manifested in the flesh! and
to as many as receive him gives he power to become 'sons of God.'"

Where was Adelaide's sharpness at repartee as of old? She meditated
now instead of replying; and Annie solaced her own sorrows by praying
for her sister's conversion. It was in something like tranquillity of
spirit that, she reached the district in which the convent was
situated.

The next day the duchess accompanied her sister to the dwelling of the
sisterhood. They found it even poorer than they had anticipated. When
it had been first contemplated, Eugene had handed over a well-filled
purse to M. Bertolot with strict injunction to, procure everything
needful; but Eugene's idea of what was needed differed from that of
the superioress. "We did not take vows of poverty," she said, "to live
with every elegance like ladies. The spirit of our holy father, St.
Francis, as also that of our beloved mother and foundress, St. Clare,
requires the utmost plainness and poverty compatible with existence."
Eugene's large offering was refused, and when he on his part refused
to replace it in his pocket, it was distributed among the sick poor.

{756}

Euphrasie received her friends with open arms, and conducted them to
the superioress with love and respect. Many of the sisterhood had now
gathered together, and even postulants were not wanting. The
superioress greeted the ladies with calm dignity, and entered with
much feeling into the account given to Euphrasie in her presence of
Mrs. Godfrey's conversion and happy death.

"And am I to understand, dear ladies," said the superioress, "that you
also share these blessed dispositions?"

"Annie is a Catholic," answered the duchess, "and a persecuted one.
Sir Philip has shut the doors on the mother of his children because
she has embraced Catholicity."

Euphrasie, by a sudden impulse, rose and knelt by Annie's side;
kissing her hands and bathing them with her tears. "Now, God be
praised for all his mercies!" she said: "How shall we welcome you,
dear martyr, for his sake?"

Annie could only reply by returning Euphrasie's caresses and
affection. She placed her arm round her friend, and compelled her to
sit by her side.

"Will you ask the reverend mother to let me stay with you awhile, dear
Euphrasie?" she said.

"What! Here? here in the convent? in this poor place?" replied
Euphrasie. "You who have been, cradled in luxury and reared in
abundance? You know not what you ask, dear friend; it is impossible."

Annie looked at the superioress; she read more promise there. "Dear
reverend mother," she said, "Almighty God has seen how unfit I am as
yet to train my beloved children in the narrow path of mortification
and of humiliation, trodden by our Divine Master. He has sent me to
learn it of you. Will you accept me as your disciple in Jesus Christ?
At least, I can promise you reverence and submission."

"You are welcome, most welcome, my daughter," said the superioress,
"and may Almighty God, in his own good time, restore your children to
you, to be brought up in the faith and love of Christ."

"Thank you, dear mother; and if you and the dear sisters will assist
me by your prayers, doubtless he will. He has but sent me here to
school awhile, that I may be able to teach them rightly. I stand as
yet but on the threshold of the church; I have looked in and seen her
glories, but selfish and worldly as I have been from childhood, I
scarce know how to share in her unworldly triumphs."

"Dear cousin," said Euphrasie, "you must not defame yourself. You were
ever kind and generous, and now your humility will surely bring you a
blessing. We will try to make you happy here."

"Indeed, yes," said the superioress, "it is a great consolation to us
to receive you. Your heart, so long accustomed to the incredulity of
the age, needs rest--such rest as is produced by dwelling on the love
of Christ for us. After a while it will become for you a necessity to
reciprocate that love, by pouring yourself out as it were in deeds of
charity and kindness for the pure love of him who died for you. Once
accustomed to converse familiarly with him, you will no longer regard
him as divided from yourself, but as one same self with you, so that
with St. Paul you may be able to exclaim, '_I_ live now, not _I_, but
Christ liveth in me.' Yes, my dear daughter, from him you may hope all
things for your children as well as for yourself. Detach yourself from
this world, seek Christ crucified, that you may repose surely in his
love."

Adelaide listened and wondered. She looked around at the bare walls,
the uncarpeted floor, the plain deal tables, and the common
rush-chairs. "Is the rest of the house like this?" she asked of
herself: "and am I to leave Annie here?"

Begging the superioress to excuse her for an instant, she drew Annie
apart, and urged upon her that it was useless for her to subject
herself to such privations as these.

{757}

"Come home with me, dear Annie, I beg of you."

"Nay, sister, think not so meanly of me, as to deem that I cannot
endure for a few weeks or months, privations which these dear ladies
suffer always."

"Oh! they are nuns, you know."

"But that does not alter, their nature, and once, they were in the
world, rich, titled, honored. I would learn of them what has given
them power thus to trample the world beneath their feet. Leave me for
a while, my sister; if I find the life too hard for me, I will come to
you."

"You promise?"

"I do, believe me, Adelaide."

And with this promise Adelaide was obliged to be content. She prepared
to wend her way homewards. As she rose for that purpose, the
superioress said: "Your grace will have a solitary journey. May I
venture to offer you a book to beguile the tedium of the way?"
Adelaide smilingly assented, and on getting in her carriage, Euphrasie
placed into her hands Avrillon's meditations for every day in Lent.
Absorbed at first in her own thoughts, Adelaide, heeded the book but
little: but after a while, to relieve ennui, she began its perusal,
and was soon astonished at the interest it excited within her breast.


CHAPTER XXVI.

On the morning of Annie and Adelaide's departure for the convent, Mr.
Godfrey had ordered breakfast for himself in his library, and had
summoned Hester to attend him, on the pretext of not feeling well, but
in reality to avoid a parting scene with his children. Hester, on the
other hand, dreaded nothing more than they should depart without
farewell; she had keenly felt Adelaide's words beside her mother's
coffin, but in despite of her efforts could not effect an interview
which should dispel the ill-feeling that oppressed her. Her father's
jealousy of her holding any private intercourse with the rest of the
family on the one hand, and the coldness of Adelaide on the other,
seemed to present insurmountable obstacles. At length she heard the
carriage draw up, and the voices departing; hastily she quitted the
breakfast table, and rushed into the hall. The travellers were already
there; she approached Annie with tears in her eyes. Annie was too sad
herself to be angry just then, she imprinted on her sister's forehead
the silent kiss her gesture pleaded for; but Adelaide went forward and
seated herself in the carriage, waving her hand for a general adieu,
and Hester fell back weeping on her brother's shoulder as the vehicle
drove away from the door.

"O Eugene! I had no hand in this; tell me at least that you believe
me," sobbed the poor girl.

"I do believe you, and so will Adelaide after a time; take comfort,
Hester."

"I cannot, with them all against me. Oh! who could ever dream our love
for each other could melt away to this?"

"It is not, melted a way, dear sister, only obscured; it will one day
return warmer and brighter than ever."

"Then you, you will write to me, you will not cast me off?"

"Never, never will I cast you off! never cease to love you!"

"Then, Eugene, you will help me also; I want to read, to know the
cause of these unhappy divisions."

"And my father?"

"O Eugene! that is the misery my father must not know. Eugene, I love
my father; there can be nothing wrong in that, he has only me now. We
cannot help that; but I must be true to him, I cannot break his heart.
He must not know we correspond or that I read your books, or that I am
thinking on the subjects he hates so much. He need not know it; I am a
woman now, I have a right to my {758} freedom. If I conceal my
thought, it is out of love to him; you know well how it would pain him
were he to suspect I read a work that treats on religion."

"Our correspondence must be secret; then?"

"I fear it must; at least till my father gets over this miserable
prejudice. You can write and send to me under cover to Norah, my
little maid. I will send her to you presently for some books, and now
good-by, my father will be wanting me. Pray for us both, Eugene."

Mr. Godfrey was considerably unhinged by the change that had taken
place in his family, and he watched Hester closely. She had truly said
she was now his last hope. That she was dejected at her mother's death
could not surprise him or any one, but that her sprightliness had
altogether departed, that her energy was depressed, her color faded,
and her appetite gone, were sources of great anxiety. Again he took
her to Yorkshire, to endeavor to reinspire her with interest in the
promotion of the "March of Intellect."

Hester did not feel justified in withdrawing her interest or exertions
from the institutions which she had raised and fostered; but it must
be confessed that these institutions were gradually assuming the
character of mere money-making factories. Mr. Godfrey, dissatisfied
with certain losses, had engaged a man of business to overlook the
whole concern, and in addition to a stipulated sum, this person was to
receive a certain percentage of the profits. This rendered him
particularly sharp-sighted as to doing matters economically; that is,
with the fewest number of hands, at the lowest rate of wages, and
oftentimes employing children in lieu of adults.

"This is altogether, foreign to our first idea," said Hester, "and I
do not approve of it at all."

"It cannot be helped, my dear; no enterprise that will not pay can be
proceeded with in the long run."

"But these children shut up in the close rooms at eight or ten years
of age, for such long hours! it will numb every faculty they possess."

"If their parents are willing to permit it, I do not see what we have
to do with it."

"O father! ignorant people often sell their children, without knowing
the harm they do; but this cannot be the way in which the world is to
improve."

"You were not satisfied with the results of your new plan, which did
not make money. I have put the matter into Mr. Fisher's hands for a
while, because, I know that in his hands, if money is to be made, it
will be made: his talent for business is unrivalled."

"Money is not the principle of progression."

"Nothing can be done without it, at any rate."

These discussions annoyed Mr. Godfrey the more because he felt the
inconsistency between the past idea and the present practice. On the
other hand, Hester was not in possession of the principle she was
seeking; that was acknowledged with regret on her part, though she by
no means gave up the search, and still less rested contented with the
inferior motive of placing all development, all future improvement on
the mere basis of money-making.

Among Mr. Godfrey's friends, one of the most intimate, because the
most scientific after the fashion of this world's science, was a Mr.
Spencer--a gentleman whose works had already acquired for him a great
share of reputation, and who was gradually acquiring great influence
over Mr. Godfrey. He was a man of about five-and-thirty years of age,
being some twelve years older than our Hester, whom he greatly
admired, notwithstanding that he found her mind a little difficult to
understand. Perhaps he liked her the better that she puzzled him, that
she took different views from him. Certain it is that he haunted her
society whenever he could find an excuse, and Mr. Godfrey seemed
particularly well pleased to find them together, as he {759} hoped
that interviews with such a learned man would dissipate any tendency
to religion, especially the Catholic religion, that Hester might be
fostering in consequence of the proclivities of her mother and of the
rest of the family in that direction.

. . . . .

'Twas autumn, a walk through the woods had brought the trio together,
and together they returned to the house; the gusty and fitful wind
scattering in their path the tinted leaves that fell like showers from
the trees beneath which they were passing. Wild clouds were hurrying
through space, as if summoned suddenly to assist at some tempestuous
commotion, and though many miles distant was the sea, the roar of
waves was heard beating on the far-off shore; every sign betokened
that a storm was at hand. The pedestrians hurried to the house, and
scarcely had they reached it, than impulsively they went to the window
to gaze in mute amazement at the scene. A sudden wind was uprooting
trees, unroofing houses, and carrying off all things before it. An old
barn long doomed to be pulled down, which was but awaiting hands to
perform the work, suddenly reeled like a drunken man, and in a few
moments more fell to the ground with a great crash. The servant girls
screamed in the hall, "the men went in for shelter, they must be
crushed to death!" The door was opened that the serving-men might rush
to the rescue, but the wind swept like a tornado through the hall,
tiles were rattling from the house-top, bricks tumbling from the
chimneys. To leave the house was impossible, none could stand against
such a blast. A large boarded roof that was being prepared by the
carpenters was carried off the scaffold, and after being for some time
balanced in the air as if it were a paper kite, fell at length with a
loud splash into the lake some quarter of a mile distant from the spot
whence it was first uplifted. The scene was at once terrific and
sublime, and but for the screams and sobs of the girls, who feared to
have some father, brother, or friend buried beneath the fallen
building, Hester could have enjoyed the spectacle; but she was
occupied in endeavoring to soothe the panic-stricken tremblers, and
for consolation what could she say? She could but stand by and
sympathize, and utter words of hope, meaningless because unfelt. It
was a relief when the storm abated to find that all the men had been
able to quit the building at the first creaking of the rafters, and by
crawling on all fours had reached a place where they lay safely till
the storm had passed--all save one, and he was protected by the manner
in which the beams fell over him, they being prevented from falling
perpendicularly by some obstacles, and formed a sloping defensive
shelter for the young man who happened to find himself in that
particular corner, from which, when the storm abated, he was
extricated by his companions, with no other injury suffered than the
alarm endured for several hours; and in this alarm he had many
sharers, for few of the neighbours could rest in peace until he was
drawn forth unhurt.

A feeling of relief pervaded the party as with closed shutters, drawn
curtains, and every appurtenance of comfort, they drew round the
bright coal fire, which shed a glowing, cheering warmth throughout the
apartment--while the rain which had succeeded to this storm of wind
was pattering against the windows, enhancing the comfort within by a
sense of dreariness without.

"How remorseless is nature!" said Mr. Spence, as at length the silence
which had pervaded the three friends became almost painful; "decay,
change, transition, pain, with transient gleams of beauty, as if to
render the surrounding gloom more painful still, and no escape: how
remorseless is nature!"

"All things have their bright side, I believe," she said, "even so
terrible a storm as to-day's. It is good to feel a grand sensation
sometimes, it stirs up the very depths of one's being."

{760}

"How would it have been if those men had been crushed to death, or
worse, hopelessly maimed for life?"

"That did not happen. Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof."

"But similar events often do happen. The battle-field, the pestilence,
man's evil passions, or the remorseless sea tossing man's feeble bark
in sport against the rocks, cause many a grand sensation that is not
good. See in that newly settled swamp the settler's wife surprised
amid her household drudgeries with a startling shriek, and, hurrying
to the water's edge, to find a rattlesnake coiled round her prattler's
leg, inflicting the painful sting that causes the innocent child to
expire in torture: do you call that good?"

"It does not follow that there is no good because we see it not! The
design of the creation may involve a hidden good to be evolved out of
what seems evil."

"And meantime the longer we pursue our researches, the more we become
convinced that an all-pervading inexorable law governs events by
necessary connection; that there is no resisting the force of this
law, no disarming it. All that we can do is to study it, and take what
comfort we can individually by an intelligent application of it to
ourselves."

"And our neighbor's happiness is to tell for nothing?"

"You will do no good by forcing any system on men for which they are
not prepared," said Mr. Spence. "Ideas remain inoperative when the
civilization or intelligence to which it is addressed is unequal to
its realization; practice does not depend on theories, but on
development, on individual assimilation of the principles, if I may be
permitted to use this word. For instance, moral theories are ever the
same. The Hindoo, the Chinaman, the follower of Zoroaster and the
transcribers of the precepts of Menu, declare with the Jew and the
Christian, that the law is to be honest, virtuous, heedful of others'
pleasure or good, to seek justice, love mercy, reverence age, and
submit to all lawful authority, etc.--each precept requiring a willing
obedience; yet where are the fruits to be found?"

"But do men believe these precepts to be the rule of right?"

"Theoretically they are not disputed, but practically man is made by
the external objects that surround him. Give society a system below
its advancement, it rises superior to it; give it one above it, it
does not come up to it. This is observable in nations. Among the lower
order of French Catholics there is less of bigotry and civilization,
with more of the real charity enjoined by religion, than among the
lower order of Scotch Protestants, despite the theory of their
theology.   [Footnote 206] Again, the Swedes and the inhabitants of
some of the Swiss Cantons are less civilized than the French, and
therefore it avails them little that they three centuries ago adopted
a creed to which the force of habit and the influence of tradition now
oblige them to cling. Whoever has travelled in these countries will
see how little the inhabitants have benefited by their religion, while
in France you will see an illiberal religion accompanied by liberal
views, and a creed full of superstitions professed by a people among
whom superstition is comparatively rare."  [Footnote 206]

  [Footnote 206: See Buckle's Civilization in England.  Vol i. pages
  191-193, from which above is extracted. (There are two references
  and only one footnote on this page.--Transcriber)]

"That would rather go to prove Catholicity to be better than
Protestanism," said Hester; "at least, if liberal views and tolerant
actions be a proof of the advancement of society."

Mr. Godfrey bit his lips, and Mr. Spence, suddenly mindful of certain
proceedings in his friend's family not exactly of the tolerative
description, hastily essayed to cover his mistake:

"Practically," he said, "men's religious demonstrations are a thing
apart from their theory, and are governed by the character of
individual mental development, rather than (what they are assumed to
be) a power governing development."

{761}

"I think that proposition illogical. If religion acts at all, it must
act according to its character as a power. Granting that with many it
is a dead letter, without any action, yet with those it does
influence, its action must be the legitimate result of its doctrine;
and if the civilization resulting from Catholicity is superior, is not
that the superior agency?"

"You forget how the guardians of the Catholic faith have ever
persecuted science; that proves them intolerant."

"Not necessarily. The guardians of a faith, amid a crude, undeveloped
people, may well be jealous of novel notions, dispersed out of their
connexion amid an unthinking, unreflecting populace. If the object is
to raise people from the phase of their present existence to a higher
phase, our late experiments have shown that it needs caution in
disturbing present moral influences. The mass are not philosophers;
they will not travel the whole round of a series to trace the whole
chain of what you call the necessary connection. Were I to begin my
experiment again I should take the highest motive then active on the
mind, and try to build higher on that. The first results of science
are usually destructive, and therefore not fit for the masses;
something must be built up again ere we present it to them. As it is,
these masses seem only to amuse themselves by hurling the stones of
the ruined theory at the world and at each other, destroying much, but
advancing nothing good."

"But philosophy must not be controlled. Science must not be impeded in
its onward march; the hopes of ultimate civilization lie in free
investigation. The evil is transient--the good permanent."

"Yet you admit that a system may be in advance of a people?"

"Yes, and forerunners are martyrs, sacrificed to the ignorance, to the
inaptitude of the age in which they live; yet there is a sort of
necessity for their existence, the law for which is not as yet
discovered. Future ages will probably be more enlightened on this
head. All that we know is, that there is a law for all evolutions, a
practical principle--if we could only trace it--to which every
action, every development may be referred. Statistical tables show us
that even crime follows method. In a given number of people in a given
state of civilization there will be a certain percentage of murders, a
certain percentage of thefts, robberies, and the like; nay, a certain
average number of suicides. You may verify these facts by comparing
the statistical tables of large cities such as London and Paris,
[Footnote 207] for a definite series of years.

  [Footnote 207: See Buckle's Civilization in England. Vol. i. page 17
  _et seq._ ]

"And through what agency is this effected?" asked Hester, in
amazement.

"Nay, that I can scarcely answer save in general terms. The cause of
law, the cause of evolution, the cause of everything is utterly
unknown. The most we can do is to observe phenomena, to class them,
and then note the sequences which form necessary connection together;
in this way we discover the law, but beyond that science can affirm
nothing. The cause we can know nothing, and affirm nothing of, save
its bare existence as the incomprehensible cause of all phenomena. The
sole possible predication is merely that he, or more properly it, is."

"Why, surely the cause is God," said Hester, who, new as she was to a
personal recognition of God's rights to her own devotion, had never
dreamed of doubting, that "absolute intelligence" ruled "as cause."

"God," said Mr. Spence, "is too indefined a term for science, or
rather there are ideas connected with the term which we cannot
scientifically apply to the unknowable. We cannot affirm of this
unknowable that he is either matter or mind; because this would be to
degrade him, by representing him in terms of our finite and human
conceptions. Matter and mind are in fact but phenomena of which the
unknowable is the unknown cause. {762} He is of a far higher nature
than matter or mind, for he is the common cause of both. Of this
nature we can form no idea whatever. We cannot attribute to the
unknowable _reason_; since that would represent him as finite, for all
reasoning is limitation. We cannot affirm of him either justice or
mercy; because these are words borrowed from the human, and to express
the unknown in such terms is anthropomorphism and blasphemy. Such a
religion is but one grade higher than the ancient theologies that
represent God with hands and feet and other human members."

"Stay," said Hester, "I cannot admit all your assumptions. That the
cause is the great I Am, of whose essential being we know nothing, is
doubtless true, as also that finitude cannot comprehend infinitude:
but that it is wrong or blasphemous to speak of him in the language of
earth, I cannot see. We know the expression is inadequate, that it is
metaphorical, an application of the less to signify the greater, but
it is the only voice we have, and the degree of worship depends on the
spirit of reverence which prompts the utterance, as the freedom from
idolatry must depend on the spirit of appreciative love and submission
with which that worship is offered.

"But," said Mr. Spence, "all theologies set out with the great truth,
that the deity is incomprehensible. But they immediately contradict
and stultify themselves by proceeding to assign him attributes. In
this way all religions become suicidal as well as irreligious. The
only true religion is to worship God as the unknown and forever
unknowable. True religion and science agree in this, that the cause of
all phenomena is the unknown. Science, in affirming the cause to be
material or mental, becomes unscientific, just as religion, by
pretending to reveal his nature or attributes, becomes irreligious."

"Pardon me," said Hester, "I think you are begging the question.
Because we know nothing of the interior being of God, it does not
follow that we may not discover the relationships which he wishes to
establish between himself and ourselves, and to the manifestations of
these relationships we may in all reverence and with consistency
assign attributes. Within himself God is the great I Am, unknown and
unknowable to us. Reason, justice, mercy, probably find there, no
exercise. Their exercise is outside in creation; for all creation is
outside God, an expression of his power, as of every other attribute
justly assigned him. Creation itself is limited: man's expression more
so yet: but we do not therefore believe in the limitation of the
deity. We cannot conceive infinity, still less express it; still the
idea exists, and our minds invest the deity with it in reverential
awe, not in blasphemy."

"You have given the modern theology assuming God to be a spirit and a
creative spirit; and assuming also that the creation is a work of his
design. You do not perceive that you make God the author of evil as
well as good, and that you assume matter was created. Now, the
eternity of matter would be no greater enigma than the eternity of
mind; and we do not know whether the cause be 'matter or mind.' It is
unknown, as it is also unknowable."

"Why this is sheer Atheism," said the startled Hester.

"Not so! This doctrine is neither Atheism nor Theism. It is merely the
highest and last formula, at once, of science and religion, ceasing to
represent the unknowable in any conceptions of human thought, and thus
leaving free scope for worship, which (worship) is not assertion, but
humility and transcendent wonder."

"Nay," said Hester; "religion, as far as I can make it out, consists
in acknowledging the relationships which God has established: first,
between himself and man, and secondly, between man and man. Religion,
if true, is a manifestation or revelation if not of God's essential
nature, yet of his will {763} in man's regard. The discrepancies
between our conceptions of what is evil and evil itself may explain
your difficulty about God being the author of evil. It may be that
mere change, mere transition, is not evil, even when accompanied by
some pain. I read yesterday that the only real evil was, a voluntary
act on the part of a rational creature, performed contrary to the
known will of God."

"That is so evidently a theological subtlety," said Mr. Spence,
"science deigns it no reply."

"And yet," said Hester, "your last and highest formula, which refuses
to represent the unknowable in any conception of human thought, bows
down in worship and transcendent wonder to the 'cause' which makes
murder, suicide, and every species of human wickedness result from 'A
Law'!

"Because we believe that ultimately that law will evolve good. It
appears a fact now thoroughly established, that all the organisms we
are acquainted with, have been evolved by a gradual process rather
than produced by a series of special creations, as has been so long
the theory. And the evolution tends upward; that is, to produce new
and more complicated organisms as time speeds on. This must in the end
evolve higher good."

"Do you mean that the lesser is ever producing the greater; and that
in the aggregation of insentient matter life is evolved?"

"Does not the infant grow into the man by the aggregation of
insentient matter assimilated into his being in the shape of food?"

"Yes, but life was there already; character and power, expansion and
development it receives, but no new function."

"That is not so certain; or rather it is certain that evolution
constantly manifests changes, which can only be accounted for on the
ground of a great universal law, a law ever producing diversity of
phenomena in unity of operation."

"But I do not see that it explains anything of the ultimate cause."

"Have I not already said that the cause is unknown and unknowable?"



CHAPTER XXVI.

MODERN PHILOSOPHY,--
THE SOUL WITHOUT GOD.

  Eternity and space! Remorseless law!
    Without a voice or tone of love to man,
  Without a sign to soften into awe
    The terrors of necessity's dark plan.
      Oh! what a wail of dark despair
      Rent the unblest, unhallowed air,
  As through the spheres the last dark utterance ran--
  There is no God! no deity for man!
  The glowing thoughts that thrill man's frame,
  And bid him glorious kindred claim.
  With all of brilliancy divine
  That through the dazzling circles shine;
  The thoughts unspeakable that swell
    The heaving breast to ecstasy,
  And cast their sweet and mystic spell
    Until, attuned to harmony,
  The winged soul is borne throughout all space
  To read the symbols of celestial grace;
  Tracing the wondrous lore from sky to sky,
  Inflamed by consciousness of Deity
  Though veiled, yet present still, and still
  "Educing good from seeming ill"--
  That thought is quenched in deepest night!
  Vanished each ray of holy light!
  The winged soul, all tempest-tost,
    Rushes in vain throughout all space;
  Amid dark waves of horror lost
    No sign appears, her course to trace
  In speechless agony, alone,
      Finding rest--never!
  The wearied spirit hurries on
      Wandering forever!
  All, all is lost! a dark despair
  Fills up the void, the tainted air.
  A Upas tree with poisoning shade
  Monopolizes every glade;
  And shadows flit and utter: "Woe!
  Remorseless nature rules below."

  . . . . . .

  Throughout all space-no rest--
        No ray
  By which the human heart is blest;
        No day
  Breaks th' interminable gloom
        Around--
  A foul, dark, loathsome tomb!
        A burial ground!
          Without a star
        To light th' abyss!
          Stern, elemental war!
            No bliss!

  The evolution of a vast decay:
  Its beauty transient, as the fleeting ray
  That gilds the clouds on fitful April's day.
  Eternity! Immensity!
  All unillumined lie,
  No trace of high design
  Doth through their glimpses shine:
    Destruction and decay
    Repeated day by day--
  Music forgets to joy the earth,
  Beauty to give the flowerets birth,
  Banished all providence, banished for ever--
  What from the fainting heart sorrow shall sever?
{764}
  One charnel-house is the all-teeming earth;
  That Fetid Vapor rising sickly bright
  To which foul rottenness is giving birth,
  Is now man's _only_ source of mental light!
  And shadows flit around and utter, "Woe!
  Remorseless nature rules _Alone_ below!"

  . . . . . .

Such were our heroine's reflections.

Poor Hester! With no settled principle, with no defined religion, it
was little wonder that the gloomy speculations of a conceited science
should overpower her imagination, and that she should become
melancholy and dispirited. Indeed, it became evident that the false
philosophies, the exposition of which she was constantly called upon
to hear, and from which her heart recoiled, even when she could find
no reply to its specious reasonings, were preying on her health, and
the gentleman who had acted as medical attendant to Mrs. Godfrey, now
warned her father that Hester must be looked to, unless he would see
her also fall into despondency.

Not that Hester believed in a theory which contradicted her instincts,
annihilated for her the use of a faculty. No; but the very enunciation
of such dogmas oppressed her, seemed to spread a snare for her, raised
doubts of disturbance, at the very moment she was seeking to gain from
works her brother had lent her the peace of mind she so much needed.
In spite of herself her mind recurred to the theory which tormented
her, and which she saw was favored by her father. "And yet," mused she
in sadness, "can high ideas spring from the evolutions of matter? Is
matter creative? This panting after justice that I feel, the love of
order, beauty, moral harmony, for which so willingly I'd give my ease,
my leisure, my exertions, nay, to forward the permanency of which I
should esteem my life well bestowed, does that proceed from blind
necessity, from evolution of organic life, itself unconscious of the
boon conferred? Impossible! Idea is as real as is the brain: and there
were mighty minds in days of old, who left examples men have not yet
equalled. He who died upon the cross, and left twelve laboring
unlettered men to propagate his most unselfish lore, was he evolved
from matter's slow progression? And the men who roused the souls and
waked the intellects of poverty, who preached the gospel to those
lowly ones who live a life of toil and weariness, who kindled thoughts
that raised them high above the tyrant's might to claim their heirship
as the sons of God, inheritors of freedom, justice, truth, which
naught save their own act can rob them of, were they evolved from
rottenness? And if they were, why since that time, two thousand years
ago, have there no nobler souls than these appeared, who could show
finer instincts, higher views? Why, amid the luxury of Roman proud
patrician life, did there spring up so suddenly a class who conquered
by defeat, and laid foundations among the lowly of the earth cemented
by their blood, that to this day proclaim their origin to be something
different from the world's natural influences--a class whose leaders
sought renunciation rather than gratification of the senses; who wore
the chains themselves to free the slave, faced death to solace the
plague-stricken, and abjured riches to feed the hungry with their
stores? Why, among this class alone of all the earth's various
classes, is woman honored, and protected alike in her virginity, her
maternity, and her widowhood? Why, here alone, are we taught passion
is to subject itself to the great idea of good, and why here alone is
found that power is given to act on the idea?--that hundreds and
thousands borne above this earth by that idea, have lived a life such
as the poets deem belongs to angels only, justice and truth their path
illumining, and love divine inspired by heaven (so deemed by them at
least) infusing love of all humanity, to bear them nobly through the
world's rebuffs and contradictions, toil and want? That so empowered,
by no exterior means, they walk superior to earthly types, to earthly
influence, erect {765} as sons of God, though meanly clad; their
sorrow only, that amidst this earth good does not reign supreme, that
passion's sway so oft usurps that power to quell high thoughts and
sink their brethren's souls to misery. No! no! it cannot be that all
those glorious acts of heroism, which bore witness to a higher
existence than that lived by the majority of men, an existence which
realized that truth and love could bring down heaven to dwell upon the
earth, amid all untoward exterior appliances, that a power exists
independently of exterior surroundings, a happiness independently of
materialisms--it cannot be that those acts were evolved from the
polluted state of society in which they were performed, but which they
tended to amend, and to guide into a new channel. I do believe in
justice, truth, and love, as motive powers, irrespectively of selfish
gratification to myself. I do believe in a state of being in which
they reign; and as I am not a creator, I must believe in a higher
ideal of this justice, truth, and love, than the one in my own mind,
as also that from that higher ideal my own is derived, for the greater
cannot derive from the less: nor can a newly formed organism, whether
evolved or created, originate."

Thus mused Hester as she pondered over the lives of the saints which
Eugene had sent her, and as she read that book of books--the gospel.
Yet she dared not confess even to herself the impression she received.
Her father! that source of dread was ever in her thought.

Meantime that father was uneasy at the evident disturbance in Hester's
mind. Once or twice he had observed a light in her room at late hours
of the night, and yielding to his uneasiness he had softly turned the
handle and opened the door; books were on the table, but the light was
very low, and Hester! could he believe his eyes? Hester was on her
knees, so absorbed as neither to perceive his entrance nor exit. He
closed the door as silently as he had opened it, and turned to think.
What did this mean? Verily, wonders were heaped upon him! What should
he do? That very day Mr. Spence had proposed for Hester's hand,
because of her supposed freedom from superstition, What was to be
done?


CHAPTER XXVII.

A CHANGE OF SCENE.
THE SISTERS.

Adelaide was wondrously desolate on her return home. Her noble
mansion, rcplete with elegance, what was it worth to her now? The
famed Pantheon, for which a splendid gallery had been built, she never
entered. The thought of it seemed to sicken her. Company wearied her,
solitude distracted her. Miss Fairfield, the daughter of a decayed
noble family, who acted as humble companion to her grace, was quite at
a loss. What could be the matter with the lady? The poor humble lady
companion did her best, her efforts were altogether unheeded. The
duchess remained for the most part plunged in a profound reverie.

Adelaide was reviewing the past; comparing characters; examining
principles. She had not loved the duke, but none the less his death
had proved a loss to her. Rich as she was, powerful as she was, she
was neither so rich nor so powerful as she had been while he lived.
But there was a bitterer feeling far than this. It was, that she had
never been an object of love to him, or to any one. She had coveted
honor, power, wealth. She had these; but there were times when she
would have given them all for the consciousness of having been loved
as Ellen had been. She was jealous of the affections now laid in the
grave, and would ask herself whether, had she been the one whom the
duke had seen first, had they met ere his affections were engrossed,
would he have loved her as he had loved the injured one? "I had youth,
beauty, and intellect," thought she; "why should he not have loved me
as he did that orphan girl?" {766} Strange that these thoughts should
come upon her now; but only now had she compelled herself to
acknowledge the great depth of feeling as well as the power of
intellect which the duke had possessed.

Until she had read the mystery of the "Passion" in Avrillon, she had
not understood the profound heavings of a contrite heart, which she
had "mocked at" when he lay dying. Her eyes were beginning to open
now; the world to wear a new aspect, although as yet a cloudy mist
hovered over her higher visions; for she understood not the yearning
of her own heart.

She was in this softened mood when she received a letter from her
father. Six months had elapsed since her mother's death, and Mr.
Godfrey complained that he could not yet rouse Hester to become
anything like her usual self. He had taken her to Yorkshire, but she
no longer cared to interest herself in "progression;" she had been
disgusted at some scenes of immorality, and had voted that
intellectual improvement without the observance of the moral law was a
failure. "In fact," said Mr. Godfrey, "she is absorbed in discovering
a 'new principle,' and more than once I have found her on her knees,
bathed in tears. What can this mean? Has she also been tampered with?
I am uneasy: I am coming next week to pay you a visit, and shall bring
her with me. Help me to rouse her from her melancholy, and above all
to banish fanaticism, if it is that disease which has taken hold of
her."

Adelaide was not altogether reconciled to Hester, in spite of Eugene's
explanation; but the moment that she realized from this letter that a
restraint was likely to be put upon her sister's freedom of thought,
the images of her mother and Annie rose before her, and she determined
to use such influence as she could to prevent "persecution." "It is
but a mistaken method after all," pondered she, "persecution can only
tend to engender obstinacy, and rouse the pride of our natures. If
Hester has any tendency to Catholicity, it can only be combated by
reason, by showing its absurdity. My father will have to bring out his
learned friends, and we will have the arguments of both sides plainly
propounded. It will be an excitement, if nothing else. What was it
that disgusted Hester with her 'march of intellect' scheme? She is not
fickle-minded naturally; there is something fermenting in her mind
which must be worked out. I am curious to see the termination; and if
Hester makes a friend of me, she shall have freedom to think, and
freedom too to act according to her conscience. There shall be no more
persecution in the family."

Ah! Adelaide, you have learnt a lesson then from sorrow; it was not
thus the proud young duchess reasoned when at the zenith of her power.

Adelaide received her visitor most kindly, and soon made Hester feel
at home, though there was a sedateness, almost a melancholy, about
her, quite foreign to her previous deportment. Mr. Godfrey fidgeted
concerning her in a manner quite unusual with him, and seemed to make
it his principal occupation to provide her with interest and
amusement.

One morning, to the surprise of the sisters, as they were sitting
together Mr. Godfrey entered, accompanied by the rector and his lady.
Adelaide had certainly done the indispensable before, in receiving and
returning a formal call with these parties, but nothing like intimacy
had existed. Adelaide was so rarely at church, that the reverend
doctor and lady did not feel encouraged to push themselves into her
society. However, Mr. Godfrey now insinuated that his youngest
daughter had taken a religious turn, and that he hoped from the
doctor's reputation for learning that he would be able to give that
turn a right direction, since unfortunately some developments in his
family in religions matters had not been satisfactory.

{767}

Dr. Lowell had looked somewhat askance on hearing this, as Mr.
Godfrey's latitudinarian opinions and Eugene's Catholicity were both
pretty well known, and had immediately enquired if Hester were a
Catholic also. On receiving a decided negative he complied, though
with some hesitation of manner. Controversy was not to the reverend
gentleman's taste, and but that his wife offered to accompany him, and
do her share of the talking, he would probably have backed out; but
the lady possessing at once more earnestness of character and more
confidence in her power of suasion than her husband, was anxious not
to lose this opportunity of setting forth the value of Protestantism,
and thus preserving Miss Hester Godfrey from following the pernicious
examples set by Eugene and Lady Conway.

With these dispositions Dr. and Mrs. Lowell were ushered into the
presence of the duchess and her sister, not altogether at ease at
finding themselves in such aristocratic society. Adelaide received
them with her usual quiet dignity, and turned the conversation to
flowers, paintings, sculpture, literature, everything, in fact, save
the topic which they came to discuss. At length, turning to Mr.
Godfrey, she asked if he had introduced Dr. Lowell to the Pantheon.

"No, indeed," said Mr. Godfrey, laughing, "the doctor is more anxious
about another subject just now; he is desirous of restoring his
church, which has fallen out of repair."

"Indeed," said Adelaide, "then I must have the pleasure of assisting
him," and she placed a well-filled purse before the doctor.

"Your grace is very good;" said the reverend gentleman. But Adelaide
had risen to seek a volume of engravings on church architecture, which
she placed in the lady's hand, telling her, as she presented it, that
she presumed it would interest her, and might give her a hint or two
to the style of embellishment suitable.

The doctor now took courage. "I am glad to see your grace so much
interested in our church," he said. "I feared--" but here he stopped.
Adelaide waited, perhaps a little maliciously, for the conclusion of
the sentence. but it came not.

"May I ask what you fear, Dr. Lowell?" she said.

But as the answer did not seem quite ready, the lady of the reverend
gentleman took up the word. "Your grace will pardon us," she said,
"but as we have so seldom the pleasure of seeing you at church, the
doctor feared that its reparation would not interest you so much as
your kind acts now prove that it does."

Adelaide bowed, but replied simply by turning to an engraving. "I
think it was in this style our church was originally built," she said;
"do you propose to restore it in any way similar to the primitive
idea?"

"I think not," said the doctor, "we only intend thoroughly to repair
and cleanse it, unless, indeed, your grace desires your own pew
altered."

"Oh! I will leave that matter to Miss Fairfield, she goes to church
every Sunday, I believe, and I wish she should be made as comfortable
as possible. If you will be kind enough to consult with her in this
matter, I will agree to any arrangement she may make." And the duchess
rang the bell; to request the attendance of the lady named.

"But," said the doctor, unwilling to lose the opportunity that seemed
now to open, "I cannot believe that one so kind, so considerate, can
be indifferent to matters of religion."

By this time Adelaide was amused, so she answered with a quiet smile:
"It does not follow that one is indifferent to religion, because one
does not consult the statute-book to find it. Great as is my reverence
for English kings, queens, parliaments and prime-ministers, it is not
to them I should go to learn religion."

{768}

The rector stared; his wife was equally confounded. The latter spoke
first. "It is to church we were inviting you grace, to hear the word
of God."

"The word of the preacher you mean, expounding what is termed the word
of God, according to act of Parliament, and varying according as Henry
VIII., Edward VI., Elizabeth, James, William, Anne, or the Georges
have dictated. You must excuse me, Dr. Lowell, I am a loyal subject,
and as such duly uphold church and state, and you will ever find me
willing to assist your wishes; but to take my religion by act of
parliament home to my heart, to regulate my private motives, and unite
my being to God, is quite another affair. Ah! in good time, here comes
Miss Fairfield. My dear Lucy," continued the duchess, "Dr. Lowell
wishes the advantage of your good taste in rearranging his church; I
give you _carte blanche_ to act in my name on the subject. I must also
beg your kind offices in entertaining him and his lady this morning.
They will like to visit the hot-houses, the conservatories, the
gardens, perhaps, also the picture gallery and the hall of sculpture.
Dr. Lowell, Mrs. Lowell, I hope at my return from my drive I shall
still find you here; you will favor me with your company to dinner."

Adelaide swept from the room like a queen who had issued commands none
dared to gainsay, carrying off Hester with her.

Mr. Godfrey accompanied the rector and his lady on their tour through
the house, but neither he nor anyone of the parties made the slightest
allusion to Adelaide's remarks respecting the state religion; nor was
the subject ever broached by them in her presence again. The dinner
passed off pleasantly enough, and in the evening the carriage of the
duchess conveyed the married pair to their homes, they feeling
themselves honored by the gracious reception which on the whole they
had experienced.

Mr. Godfrey could not but perceive from this attempt that it would be
useless for him to attempt giving any direction to a religious
movement, should such be the subject that occupied his daughter's
mind; though in truth she was habitually so silent now, it was
difficult for him to discover what did interest her. Suddenly he took
it into his head he would like to go to London, and he asked Adelaide
if she would not open her town house, and, go too.

"Certainly, if you wish it, father. It might amuse Hester also, for as
yet Hester has never gone through the campaign of a London season."

But on their arrival in town Hester did not seem in any way eager to
launch forth into the great world of fashion; its frivolities
disgusted her, some of the fashions shocked her, particularly the ball
dresses of some of her young compeers. She could not reconcile her
native modesty to do the like, and was soon voted a prude by the
exclusives of _bon ton_. However, as she made no effort to shine, and
had "no success" in attracting the attentions of the gentlemen, she
was soon forgiven and most times overlooked.

But this latter fact she did not even perceive; she was living within
herself for the most part just now, and looking for a principle when
she took a glance outside. It was not perhaps at Mayfair, among the
sons and daughters of dissipation, that she might expect to find it.
The only thing that was remarkable about her was her propensity to
take a walk before breakfast; this in London was unusual, and but that
the duchess imperiously forbade her household to comment on the
subject, and jealously contrived to conceal the matter from Mr.
Godfrey, threatening dismissal to anyone who spoke to him about it, it
would have been a never-ending topic of discussion. Hester was
accompanied in these walks by her little maid, Norah, but Norah could
never be brought to tell where they had been. "Sure 'twas sometimes
this way and sometimes that, and how should she know the names of all
those fine London streets?"

{769}

Mr. Godfrey was not often up on her return, so did not perceive that
she had been absent. One day, however, when Hester came in later than
usual, Adelaide met her in the hall, took her bonnet and clock from
her, and whispered that Mr. Godfrey was already in the breakfast-room.

Hester entered; but she found Mr. Godfrey so busy unfolding the
newspaper that he did not perceive her entrance. She passed behind him
ere he was aware, and impressed a kiss on his forehead; it was her
usual morning's greeting.

"Ha! Hester, so you're up at last. I have a letter on your account."

"A letter for me?"

"No! yet one that you must answer; the great philosopher of the day is
smitten with the charms of the fair vestal; he asked me ere we left
Yorkshire if her heart was free."

"And what did you answer him?"

"That I did not know, but would enquire; this letter is a sort of
reproachful remonstrance for not having fulfilled my promise."

Hester smiled, and Adelaide enquired who the gentleman was.

"A man," said Hester, "who thinks we have evolved into human beings
from worms or bats or lower creatures still. By-the-by, father, he
never told us why so many lower creatures remain unevolved."

"You piece of mischief, be serious; what answer shall I give him?"

"That I don't like his pedigree: I am looking higher than worms for my
forefathers."

"But seriously, Hester--"

"But seriously, father, he says the character of the ancestry often
reappears in the posterity, even after the lapse of many generations;
and as he may have had, a tiger, a hyena, or even a boa-constrictor in
his genealogical tree, I do not feel well inclined to trust myself to
his keeping."

"Is that the new philosophy?" said Adelaide; "the vicious propensities
of so many of the race are then accounted for, they are but beasts of
prey in tailor's clothes."

"And yourselves, ladies?" said Mr. Godfrey.

"Oh!" said Adelaide, hastily, "please do not put us into the same
category, Hester and I are well content with the old story. We are
daughters of men and women, created in the good old style; reigning
over the brutes by special privilege, and claiming no sort of kindred
with them whatever."

"And Mr. Spence, Hester--"

"Mr. Spence, father, must seek a mate among his kindred, I am of
another order of beings."

"Is that your final answer?"

"It is."

"You will revoke it, Hester; I will tell him to come and plead for
himself."

"It will be useless; I shall tell him as I tell you, that I do not
like his pedigree."

"Is that your only objection?"

"It is sufficient for a lady to give one objection, I think,
especially when that one is insuperable."

Mr. Godfrey seemed disappointed, but he made no reply: the entrance of
Miss Fairfield to pour out the coffee summoned the party to the
breakfast table.

Mr. Godfrey took up the newspaper, and sipped his coffee in silence;
it was his habit to read in company when annoyed. Suddenly, however,
he laid the paper down. "De Villeneuve dead," he said, "my first, my
earliest friend!" He rose and went to the window, but shortly
afterward he left the room, evidently overpowered with the sudden
news. Adelaide took up the paper. "It is the father, the old marquis,
and his eldest son, drowned on Lake--in a sudden squall of wind. Why,
Hester, our old acquaintance now succeeds to the property and title."

"Was not the elder brother married?"

"The paper says not; or at least it says he was a widower and
childless, and that the estates now devolve on the second, the
youngest son, the one who was in England last year."

{770}

"Yes, and it says that he was about to start for England again when
this event detained him, and that he is expected shortly; why, it is
three months ago since the old marquis died."

"It's strange the news did not reach us before, but what business can
our M. de Villeneuve have in England now?"

"There is some talk of his coming over to take the 'Poor Clares' back
with him. He was Euphrasie's guardian, and I know he wished to get her
and the community established in America. It was that wish that took
him back, to see what arrangements could be effected."

"But will they go?"

"Nay, that I know nothing about; I suppose he talked with them on the
matter ere he made his plans."

By this time the breakfast table was cleared, and the sisters were
alone together, and Adelaide suddenly turned the conversation into
another channel. "Hester," she said, "you must make me your friend;
you know that you are pursuing a path of difficulty. You are my
father's idol, have you thought what it will be to break his heart?"

"O Adelaide! forbear; I have thought of that, and the thought is
nearly killing me, but I must on in spite of myself."

"It is true, then?"

"What is true?"

"That you go to mass every morning, and weep yourself to sleep every
night, my poor, dear sister!"

"How did you discover this?"

"Your attendant showed your pillow to Lucy Fairfield, it was no longer
fit to use; and Lucy followed you more than once, and saw you enter
the Bavarian Ambassador's chapel in Warwick street."

"But she did not tell my father?"

"No, I have threatened with dismissal anyone who makes a remark on the
subject; meantime tell me, are you a Catholic?"

"No! but I must see the end of this. Adelaide, out of Christianity
there is no 'power;' and 'power' it is that we want to effect good.
Science is taking the form of Atheism more and more. It represses
rather than elevates. The masses are awakening to consciousness of
possessing a right to intellectual culture under influences that will
finally subject them even more to tyranny; for when man seeks only
sensuous gratification by his science, he must eventually fall under
the empire of the appetites, and then barbarism results. Is not this
the history of all anterior civilization? Our modern rise has been the
gradual growth of intellect evolved under the restraining influence of
religion; and though men have very imperfectly submitted to these
restraints, they have produced immense fruit among the masses. Even
indirectly, the consciousness of the possession of soul, of immortal
power, has elevated the ideal, and the laborer assumes a legitimate
place in humanity. And woman, Adelaide, what is woman out of
Christianity? What was she in Pagan Greece and Rome; what will she be,
again if Christianity is abolished? I see but three phases for her.
The Turkish harem, the Mormon polygamy, or that worse than either
state, which consigns an immense number of our sex to debasement utter
and desperate."

"There is too much truth in this. But, Hester, be cautious; I will not
hinder you, rather will I help you, and study with you, but you are
not yet a Catholic. I must then say again, be cautions: I dare not
think on the result of my father's knowing your present study!"

"Indeed it has troubled me more than a little. O Adelaide! why should
there be such a prejudice against any one form of religion?"

"I cannot answer that, still less can I tell why men of science should
hate it so supremely; but it is so, and you know, dear Hester, that
the shock of your conversion might occasion a terrible convulsion in
my father. Let us proceed quietly, until the result is decided. Have
you ever considered {771} what is the first step to take in the
investigation of truth?"

"I am inclined to think the process must be a moral one, as well as an
intellectual one. I heard a preacher say lately: 'Souls who would come
to Christ, must first be gathered to the Baptist!'"

Adelaide hid her face in her hands, "There is a deep meaning in that,"
she said. "Hester, I too have my secret. Do you remember the Catholic
priest whom I ordered to quit the house as soon as the duke was dead?
His visage haunts me, he looked up from his prayers at my words, and
his face seemed so full of pity, pity for me, that I half relented;
but matters had gone too far. Well, I wrote to Eugene lately to
inquire about him, and Eugene says he is at H---- on a mission, among
the poor Irish laborers, and that young Henry, the duke's son, is with
him. The mother too, the Ellen of the duke's romance, lives in the
neighborhood. I have an intense desire to pay the place a visit; had
you not come, I should have gone alone; now will you go with me?"

"Willingly; you are, then, in communication with Eugene?"

"Slightly; I dare not tell him all that is in my thoughts, lest I
should raise false hopes. I have not faith, but I feel it would be a
great gift."

"So great that it would be worth any sacrifice; but Catholics say it
is a supernatural gift, and that it must come from God."

"And Eugene insists that the presence of sin blinds the soul; by
obscuring the spiritual faculty, thus hindering the reception of
faith."

"If so," said Hester, "we must do what we can to get clear of sin,
even at the price of confession."

"It is therefor I intend to see the abbe, to make reparation. I will
not voluntarily put an obstacle to the reception of God's gifts. If
grace comes, it shall find me ready to receive it."

Hester looked at Adelaide in surprise. The haughty duchess had
disappeared; another spirit so gentle looked from those eyes, that
Hester could only throw herself into her sister's arms and weep.

TO BE CONTINUED



ORIGINAL.

ON THE CURE OF BARTIMEUS.

  "Bartimeus, the blind man,
  sat by the wayside begging.
  And they say to him:
  Be of better comfort:
  arise, He calleth thee."


  Out of the windows of my mind----
    From my heart's idly open door,
    My gaze the wide world wanders o'er,
  And yet, alas! how blind, how blind!

  My sight of things divine how dim!
    Though there be not a single day
    But Jesus passeth by the way;
  All else I see, but blind to him.

  Though rich, I seek the beggar's mite----
    His beauty only do I prize;
    And all is darkness to my eyes
  Whilst he is hidden from my sight.

  I hear a voice within my soul----
    "Arise, of better comfort be,
    And come: the Master calleth thee----
  Thy faith shall also make thee whole."


{772}


From the Dublin Review.

ORIGEN AT CAESAREA.

Origenis Libri contra Celsum (inter Opera omnia). Ed. Migne.1857.


In concluding our survey of the character and work of Origen, it will
be useful to recall the leading dates in the chronology of his life to
the date of his exodus from Alexandria. Born in or about 186, he
became the head of the Catechetical school at the age of eighteen:
About 211 he visited Rome. From that year till 231, he labored at
Alexandria, with no other interruptions than short journeys into
Arabia, to Caesarea, and into Greece. In 231 he left Alexandria never
to return, and thenceforward the chief place of his residence was
Caesarea of Palestine. In the fourth or fifth year of his sojourn
there (235), Maximin's persecution compelled him to flee to Caesarea
of Cappadocia. Returning to the other Caesarea in 238, he remained
there for about eleven years, that is, until the commencement of the
Decian persecution. During these years, however, he made another
journey into Greece, and two more into Arabia. After the cessation of
the persecution he lived a short time in Jerusalem, and thence removed
to Tyre, where he died in 253, or 254, in the sixty-ninth year of his
age. The chief divisions of his life after attaining manhood are
therefore the following:

  1. The twenty years (211-231) of his Alexandrian teaching.
  2. The twenty years (231-251) of his life at Caesarea.
  3. The three or four years from the end of the Decian persecution
    (251) till his death (254.)

In our present essay we shall be concerned chiefly with the second of
these periods. It was the time of Origen's most active and dignified
labor. He was now not so much the teacher of disciples as the teacher
of teachers and the doctor of the whole East. The church was, on the
whole, at peace, her numbers were increasing, her organization
developing, and her doctrines becoming daily more and more a subject
of inquiry to intellects, friendly and hostile. We have before taken
notice (Dublin Review, April, 1866, p. 401) how Caesarea was an
important centre, political, literary, and religious; and here Origen
spent the twenty years of which we now speak, in intercourse with such
bishops as S. Alexander, S. Theoctistus, and Firmilian, in training
such pupils as Gregory Thaumaturgus, in preaching such homilies as
those on Isaiah, Ezechiel, and the Canticles, in writing such
apologies as the Contra Celsum, and in carrying through such an
enterprise as the Hexapla. It is to this period that we must refer the
emphatic testimony of S. Vincent of Lerins. "It is impossible," says
he, "to tell how Origen was loved, esteemed, and admired by every one.
All that made any profession of piety hastened to him from the ends of
the world. There was no Christian who did not respect him as a
prophet, no philosopher who did not honor him as a master." The word
piety ([Greek text]) is worth noticing, because something much more
wide and broad was meant by it then than now; indeed, the original
word would be better translated religion or religiousness. The term,
prophet, is also worthy of being remarked; a prophet means one who is
at once teacher of the most exalted class and an ascetic who has
perfectly trampled this world under his feet. Finally, the
philosophers looked to him as their {773} master, though he professed
to teach no philosophy but Christianity, and quoted the Hebrew
scriptures instead of Plato and Aristotle when men came to him with
difficulties about the soul, the logos, and the creator.

In the present article, therefore, we shall be concerned with his
Caesarean life; and as it is impossible to compress within moderate
limits all that might be said of the literary productions of this
exceedingly rich period of his labors, we shall confine ourselves
chiefly to the consideration of the great work Contra Celsum. First,
however, let us take a glance at the events of the twenty years, for
they are not void of events which give us a notion of the man.

Since his principal charge at Caesarea was to preach the Word of God
to the people, perhaps the largest part of his extant writings has
come to consist of the homilies that he delivered in the discharge of
this honorable duty. It was the bishop himself who, as a rule,
preached in the church, and no priest was substituted whose learning
and piety were not beyond all question. We have before quoted the
strong words in which Eusebius has handed down the opinion of Origen
held by S. Theoctistus, bishop of Caesarea. On the Sunday, therefore,
as we learn from himself, on festivals, and sometimes, it would seem,
on Fridays or other week-days, he stood forth from among the clergy
with all the weight of his bishop's mandate and of his own character,
to interpret and comment on the Holy Scriptures. It would be
interesting to be able to picture to ourselves that church at Caesarea
in which the great light of the east spoke, Sunday after Sunday, to
the mingled Greek and barbarian Christians of the capital of
Palestine. It would probably be a building designed and founded for
the purpose. Yet it cannot have been grand or sumptuous, or in any way
resembling. a heathen temple, for Origen himself allows that the
Christians had no "temples." 'What it was inside we can better guess.
We know from Origen's own hints that there existed in it the usual
distinctions of position for the various ranks of faithful and of
clergy that are so well known from writers of a century later. We may
therefore conclude that the chancel or altar part was clearly
separated from the rest of the interior, and perhaps elevated above
it; that the altar itself stood at some distance from the eastern
wall, and that round the apsis behind it ran the [Greek text] or
presbyters' bench. Here, in the centre, stood the chair of the bishop,
and here he sat during the sacred liturgy in the midst of his priests,
all in a semicircle of lofty seats. The deacons and inferior clergy
occupied the rest of the sanctuary, which was separated by a railing
from the nave. In the nave, immediately outside the rails, stood the
_ambo_ or reading-desk, sometimes called the choir, for here clustered
the singers and readers whose place it was to intone the less solemn
parts of the liturgy. Hangings, more or less magnificent, according to
circumstances, suspended above the rails, were closed during the canon
of the mass; and shut out the holies from the sight of the people.
Over the altar was the canopy, on four pillars, and upon the altar a
linen cloth; and the chair of the bishop was usually covered with
suitable drapery. When the bishop preached, he stood or sat forward,
probably in front of the altar, but within the chancel-rails; it was a
very unusual thing to preach from the _ambo_, though S. John
Chrysostom is recorded to have done so in Sancta Sophia, in order to
be better heard by the people. Origen, therefore, would preach from
the sanctuary on the Lord's-day; bishop, priests, clergy, and people,
in their places to hear him; the pontiff in his flat mitre with the
_infulae_ of the high priesthood; the priests in the linen chasubles
that came down and covered them on every side; the deacons and others
in their various tunics and albs; the singers and readers with the
diptychs and books of chant laid {774} ready open on the desk of the
_ambo_; the faithful in the nave, men on one side and women on the
other; the virgins and the widows in their seats apart; the various
orders of penitents in the nave or in the narthex, and the band of
listening catechumens in front of the "royal gates" (of the nave) that
they hoped soon to be allowed to enter. His hearers would be of all
degrees of fervor, and of many different ranks; they might include
Greek philosophers and poor _vernae_ or house slaves, patricians of
Roman burghs, and Syrian porters; doubtless the bulk of them were the
poor and the lowly of Caesarea. He had to say a word to all, and he
found means to say it, in the word of Holy Scripture. He had, by this
time, dispensed himself from previously writing his discourses; and
hence many of those that have come down to us are the shorthand
reports that were taken down as he spoke, and afterward corrected by
himself. The text or subject of the discourse was that portion of
Scripture which had just been recited by the reader, or part of it;
though sometimes we find that he had a text given him by the bishop or
by the presbytery, and that occasionally he selected a particular
subject at the desire of "some of the brethren." He held his own copy
of the Scripture in his hand; for we find him comparing it with the
version just used by the reader. His discourses were not set pieces of
eloquence; they were true homilies, that is, familiar and easy
addresses, almost seeming to have developed themselves out of an
earlier style of dialogue between priest and people. They have all the
abruptness, all the questionings and answerings, all the explanations
of terms and sentences, and all the appreciation of difficulties that
suggest rather the catechist with his class than the preacher with his
auditory. We miss the poetry and fine fancy of Clement, but we gain in
orderly and connected development. One is certainly tempted to think
that more artistic and ornamental treatment might have been expected
from the son of Leonides and the teacher of rhetoric. But Origen tells
us more than once that he studiously avoids worldly and profane
eloquence. His reason seems not far to seek. Rhetoric was the main
profession of the pagan teachers that abounded in every town of the
empire; and S. Augustin's expression, that rhetoric meant the art of
telling lies, was not exaggerated. Rhetoric in those days did not mean
the sound and immortal precepts of Aristotle, but the vain heaping
together of empty words. It was the necessity of protesting against
this that has undoubtedly given much of their ruggedness to the
homilies of Origen. His watchword was, edification; his rule and law,
as he expressly says, was, not completeness of exposition, not parade
of words, but the benefit of those who listened. Because he was a
speaker, he rejected tedious and minute disquisitions, which were more
suitable for "the leisure of a writer." Because he was a speaker of
the truth, he avoided, even to austerity, the imitation of profane and
perverted art. He was rich in matter, and poured forth a stream of
doctrine, of exhortation, of reproof. His name and character did the
rest. A word from Origen had more weight than a treatise from an
unknown mouth. We have no record of how his audience took his
discourses, save what is implied in the general testimony to his
prodigious reputation. But, on the other hand, he presents us with a
few facts about his audience. We learn that some were readier to look
after the adorning of the church than the beautifying of their own
souls. It appears that it was difficult to get an audience together on
common week-days, and that they were somewhat remiss in assembling
even on festivals, though he speaks of a few as "constant attendants"
on the preaching. Those who did come to church, too often came not so
much to hear God's word, as because it was a festival, and because it
was pleasant to have a holiday. And {775} some escaped the sermon
altogether by going out immediately after the reading: "Why do you
complain of not knowing this and not knowing that," he says, "when you
never wait for the conference, and never interrogate your priests?"
Moreover, many who were present at the discourse in body, were far
away in spirit, for "they sat apart in the corners of the Lord's house
and occupied themselves with profane confabulation." He did not preach
to an immaculate audience: there were many who were Christians in
name, Pagans in life; many who turned the house of prayer into a den
of thieves; many who preferred the agora, the law courts, the farm,
before the church; and many who could provide pedagogues, masters,
books, money, and time, that their children might learn the liberal
arts, but who failed to see that something of the same diligence and
sacrifice was necessary on their own parts if they wished to become
true disciples of the word of God. But from all this it would be wrong
to infer that Origen's hearers were worse than others in their
circumstances. Doubtless they listened with reverence both to his
teaching and to his rebukes. Perhaps even they applauded him by
acclamation; such a thing was not unknown a century or so later. It
would be little to Origen's taste to have his audience waving their
garments and rocking their bodies in ecstasy or calling out
"orthodox!" as they did to S. Cyril, of Alexandria, or "Thou art the
thirteenth apostle!" as the excitable Constantinopolitans did to S.
Chrysostom; like S. Jerome, he preferred "to excite the grief of the
people rather than their applause, and his commendation was their
tears." S. Vincent, of Lerins, two centuries after Origen's preaching
at Caesarea, speaks of the way in which his "eloquence" affected
himself. If his audience were as well satisfied, they must have
listened to him with great pleasure and profit. "His discourse," says
S. Vincent, in the Commonitorium, "was pleasant to the fancy, sweet as
milk, to the taste; it seems to me that there issued from his mouth
honey rather than words. Nothing so hard to believe, but his powers of
controversy made it plain; nothing so difficult to practise, but his
persuasiveness rendered it easy. Tell me not that he did nothing but
argue, There has never been a teacher who has used so many examples
out of the Holy Writ." The homilies of Origen did not pass away with
the voice that delivered them. Till he was sixty years old he had
generally written them out beforehand. After that time the shorthand
writers beside him caught every word as it fell, and so the discourses
became a treasury for ever. Fortune and time have indeed destroyed far
the greater part of the "thousand and more tractates" which S. Jerome
says he delivered in the church, and of what remain some only exist in
abbreviated Latin translations. But though their letter is diminished,
their spirit pervades the whole field of patristic exposition, and
many of the greatest of the Greek and Latin fathers have not hesitated
over and over again to use at length the exact words of Origen. And so
the sentences first uttered in the church of Caesarea have become the
public property of the church universal, and while Caesarea is a ruin
and its library scattered to dust, the living word and spirit of him
who spoke there, speaks still in cities far greater, and to auditories
far more wide; for every pulpit utters his thoughts, and Christian
people, though they may not know it, are everywhere "edified" by that
which was first the offspring of' his intellect.

Origen had been laboring at Caesarea for barely four years when one of
those interruptions occurred that he had already become familiar with
at Alexandria. The Emperor Maximin (235), a barbarian giant, whose
unchecked propensities for cruelty and blood seem to have driven him
absolutely mad before the end of his three years' reign, followed up
the murder of his {776} benefactor Alexander Severus by a series of
horrors, in which were involved both pagans and Christians alike. Any
man of name, character, or wealth, in any part of the world that could
be reached by a Roman cohort, was liable to confiscation, torture, and
death in order to appease his frantic suspicions. Caesarea was an
important Roman post, and as no one in Caesarea was better known than
the head of the Christian school, we soon find that Origen is marked
out for a victim. He escaped, however, by a prompt flight, and reached
the other Caesarea, of Cappadocia, the see of his friend Firmilian. He
had no sooner arrived there than the capricious persecution fell upon
the city of his refuge, under the auspices of Serenianus the governor,
"a dire and bitter persecutor," as he is called by Firmilian. In these
straits he managed to lie hid for two years in the house of a lady
called Juliana--a house, indeed, to which he was attracted by other
considerations beside that of safety; for this lady was the heiress of
the whole library of Symmachus the Ebionite, one of those learned
translators of the Hebrew Scriptures whom Origen incorporated in the
Hexapla. He himself mentions with great satisfaction the advantages
which his biblical labors derived from the opportunities he enjoyed in
his Cappadocian retirement. We are also indebted to this period for
two, not the least interesting, of his works. Maximin's informers seem
to have contrived to implicate the good Christian Ambrose in some
trouble. That Ambrose was a man of wealth we have seen, and he was
undoubtedly, also, in some considerable charge or employment which
necessitated his journeying frequently from one Roman city to another.
Whether this persecution caught him at Alexandria or Caesarea, or
elsewhere, is uncertain; but he had received notice of his danger and
was preparing to place himself in security when the insurrection of
the Gordians broke out in Syria and Asia, and in the confusion and
trouble that ensued he became the prisoner of Maximin's troops, and
was immediately sent, or destined to be sent, to Germany, where the
emperor had just concluded a triumphant campaign. The news of the
danger of his zealous friend and patron drew from Origen the letter
that we know now as the Exhortatio ad Martyrium. It was accompanied by
another, the De Oratione, which he had perhaps already composed. These
two works, into an examination of which we cannot enter, show more of
the interior spirit of their writer than anything else that has
reached us. When a history of the early methods of prayer comes to be
written, the treatise on prayer will have to be thoroughly examined.
The Exhortation to Martyrdom is full of the true Adamantine vehemence
and piety. Though addressed to Ambrose, it is really, and would be
accepted as a general call to the Church of Palestine to stand fast
and do manfully in the dangerous times on which they had fallen. The
name of Protectetus, a priest of Caesarea, which is associated with
that of Ambrose in the dedication, as he was also in danger of death,
felicitously localizes it, and we may look upon it as a homily,
delivered in writing and from a distance, and on a new and stirring
subject, to that church which he had been accustomed to edify with his
words during the three or four years preceding. We unwillingly omit to
enter upon it at large. At Maximin's death (238) he returned to his
own Caesarea. After this, his literary enterprises, completed and
undertaken, come thick and frequent. Among other works we meet with
the commentaries on Ezechiel and Isaiah, on S. Matthew and S. Luke, on
Daniel and the twelve minor prophets, and on several of the epistles
of S. Paul. It is to this time also that belongs the celebrated
exposition of the Canticle of Canticles, of which S. Jerome has said,
that whereas in his other works he surpassed all other men, so in this
he surpassed himself. But little of the original has come down to us,
and the translation {777} of Rufinus is too free and abridged to
enable us to understand how this high praise was deserved.

About the same period he made a second journey into Greece. What
occasion brought him to Athens we are not informed. We find, however,
that he thought very highly of the Athenian Church. In his reply to
Celsus, speaking of the influence and weight that Christians were
everywhere acquiring, he instances the Church at Athens, and boasts
that the assembly of the Athenian people was only a tumultuous mob in
comparison with the congregation of the Athenian Christians. Since
Athens was even then the central light of the whole world, we may
perhaps conclude that Origen's journey thither was caused by some
phase of the conflict between Philosophy and the Gospel with which he
had been all his life so familiar. On his return to Caesarea he wrote
the answer to Celsus, with which we shall concern ourselves presently.
It was written during the reign of Philip the Arabian. We are told by
Eusebius that Origen wrote a letter to this emperor. What this letter
can have been about is somewhat of a puzzle in history. Eusebius, to
be sure, a couple of chapters before he mentions the letter, relates a
story, rather coldly, about Philip's coming to the church (at Antioch)
one Easter time as a Christian, and his seating himself among the
penitents when the bishop (S. Babylas) refused to admit him on any
other terms. S. Babylas might well reject him and place him among the
penitents, for his career, which commenced, as that of most of the
Roman emperors, with the murder of his predecessor, the young Gordian,
had been anything but innocent. Certain it is, however, that the story
was current of Philip's being a Christian. Even if he were not, which
seems the more probable, there is no improbability that he may have
questioned such a man as Origen about Christianity. It must be
recollected, moreover, that this Emperor Philip was by birth an
Arabian, being a native of Bostra. He was the son of a robber-chief,
and we are first introduced to him as taking an important part in the
campaign of Gordian in which the Persians were driven out of
Mesopotamia. The important Roman city of Bostra, though not within the
boundaries of Arabia, was sufficiently near them to be considered the
metropolis of the upper part of Arabia, as Petra was of the middle.
Philip, therefore, was evidently nothing more than a powerful Bedouin
Sheik, such as may be seen at this very day in the countries of which
he was a native, and had succeeded his father in the possession of
wide influence over the predatory tribes that ranged over all
Palestine, Syria, and Arabia, except the actual spots occupied by a
Roman military force. His character is significantly illustrated by
the incident that raised him to the purple. When Gordian's army was in
Mesopotamia, his dangerous captain of Free Lances took care to have
the whole of the commissariat supplies intercepted, and thus caused
the mutiny which, terminated in Gordian's death. Such a feat was easy
and natural to a chief whose wild horsemen commanded every part of the
great Syrian desert that lay between Mesopotamia and the Roman
stations off the Mediterranean coast. But what is more to our purpose
is, that Origen was frequently at Bostra, and was there at the very
time of Gordian's campaign and Philip's accession. Bearing in mind the
extent to which the name of Origen was known among the pagan men of
letters, as well as among the Christian churches, it seems impossible
but that Philip must have heard him mentioned. Only let us grant that
the emperor had a leaning to Christianity, even though in no better
spirit than that of an eclectic, and the occasion of Origen's letter
becomes clear. The mention of the Syrian desert reminds us of another
celebrated name. Palmyra, or Tadmor of the Wilderness, was, at the
time of which we write, almost in the zenith of her beauty, though it
was not till {778} twenty years afterward that her splendor culminated
and collapsed under Zenobia and Longinus. Origen knew the great
philosopher, who had been his auditor at Alexandria, and whom he had
most probably met again at Athens. It is quite possible that Longinus
may have become the guest of Zenobia before Origen left Caesarea for
the last time, and, therefore, during the time he was so familiar with
the Arabian Church. We know that he had more than a mere acquaintance
with the author of the Treatise on the Sublime, and, perhaps, there
were no two minds of the age more fitted to grapple with each other.
Of their mutual influence we have no certain traces, but it may be
noted that amongst the lost works of Longinus there is a treatise,
[Greek text]. Can it have had any relation to that of Origen under the
same name?

It was at Caesarea, between the years 243 and the breaking out of the
Decian persecution in 249, that was written the famous Contra Celsum.
It is justly considered the masterpiece of its author. Ostensibly an
answer to the gainsayings of a heathen philosopher, it really takes
up, with the calmest scientific precision, the position that
Christianity is so true and hangs together with such completeness of
moral beauty, that the barkings of Gentile learning cannot confute it,
nor the violence of Gentile hatred stop its inevitable march. With no
rhetorical passion, with profound learning, with a knowledge of Holy
Scripture truly worthy of Adamantins, with frequent passages of noble
and profound eloquence, the Christian doctor builds up the monument of
the faith he loved and taught; and the work that has come down to us
through all those ages since it was written, has been recognized for
fifteen hundred years as one of those great, complete, finished
productions that are only given to the world by the pen of a genius.
Eusebius, his biographer, speaks of it as containing the refutation of
all that has been asserted, and, "by pre-occupation," of all that
could ever be asserted on certain vital matters of controversy. S.
Basil and S. Gregory Nazianzen strung together a series of favorite
passages mainly from it and called their work Philocalia, "love for
the beautiful." S. Jerome, whose praise cannot be suspected of
partiality, puts him by the side of two other great apologists his
successors, and exclaims that to read them makes him think himself the
merest tyro, and shrivels up all his learning to a sort of a dreamy
remembrance of what he was taught as a boy. Bishop Bull takes the
Contra Celsum as the touchstone of Origen's dogmatic teaching; "he
meant it for the public," he says, "he wrote it thoughtfully and of
set purpose, and he wrote it when he was more than sixty years of age,
full of knowledge and experience."

It must have been about the time when Marcus Aurelius was engaged in
persecuting the church (160-180) that a certain eclectic Platonist
philosopher called Celsus, in order to contribute his share to the
good work, wrote an uncompromising attack on Christianity, and called
it by the title of The True Word; or, The Word of Truth. We have
called him an eclectic Platonist; but, in fact, it is very much
disputed among the learned what sect of philosophers he honored with
his allegiance. Some call him a Stoic, others an Epicurean, and this
latter opinion is the common traditional one; and what would seem to
settle the question, Epicurean is the epithet given to him by Origen
himself. That Origen, when he took up The Word of' Truth to refute it,
thought he was going to refute an Epicurean, is quite evident; but it
is no less evident that he had not read many sentences of the work
itself before he began to doubt and more than doubt whether the name
of Epicurean was a true description of its author. In one place he is
amazed to hear "an Epicurean say such things," in another he charges
him with artfully concealing his Epicurism for a purpose, and in a
third he {779} supposes that if he ever was an Epicurean he has
renounced its tenets and betaken himself to something more sound and
sensible. What made Origen hesitate to state plainly that he was no
follower of Epicurus seems to have been the broad tradition that had
attached the epithet to the name of Celsus, thereby identifying the
writer of The Word of Truth with the writer of a certain work against
magic, well known to literary men, which was beyond all doubt from the
pen of an Epicurean Celsus. This latter was also probably the same as
the Celsus to whom the scoffer Lucian dedicated his Alexander, in
which he shows up that impostor's tricks and sham magic; and Lucian,
in his dedication, alludes to the works against magic, just as Origen
does. As Lucian died some years before Origen was born, the works
against magic must have been very widely known, and their author must
have been accepted as _the_ Celsus, and as he was certainly an
Epicurean, that designation fastened itself also upon the other
Celsus, the author of The Word of Truth, who had not had the advantage
of an admiring Lucian to fix his proper title in the memory of the
literary world. But an Epicurean he certainly was not. One proof is
quite sufficient. The subject of magic was a decisive test of a true
Epicurean. Not believing in Providence and professing, in fact, a sort
of philosophic atheism, he considered that gods and demons never
interfered in the concerns of the earth and the human race. Human and
mundane atoms, as they got created by a species of accident and came
together fortuitously, so they continued to blunder against each other
in various ways, and thus caused what men foolishly called the cosmos,
or order of the universe; whilst the divine nature of the immortals,
serene on Olympus

  Semota a nostris rebus, sejunctaque longe,
  Jam privata dolore omni, privata periclis,
  Ipsa suis pollens opibus, nil indiga nostri,
  Nec bene pro meritis capitur nec tangitur ira.

     Lucretius, de Rerum Naturta, I. 50.

The Epicurian, therefore, laughed alike at the notion of benevolent
god and malignant demon, at providence and at magic, and crowned
himself with flowers and drank and sinned, if his means allowed it,
under the soothing persuasion that "to-morrow" he was "to die." When,
therefore, we find that the author of The Word of Truth not only
attributes miracles to AEsculapius, Aristeas, and others, and magic to
Christ, but also considers that this world and its various parts are
committed to the custody of demons, whom it is, therefore, proper to
propitate by worship and sacrifice, we need no other evidence that he
was no follower of Epicurus.

On the other hand, a prominent belief in the agencies of unseen powers
was a mark of the Platonist of the day. Whatever Plato may have
thought of the inferior gods and demons (and on some occasions, as in
the Timaeus, he speaks of them with considerable levity), the
followers, who revived his doctrine in the first centuries after
Christ, gave them a very large share of their attention. A creator or
first father of all things was a Platonic dogma, and man and matter
must have in some way come from him; but in order to bridge over the
interval between two such extremes as God and matter, recourse was had
to an immense army of intermediate beings, of which the highest was so
dignified as to be little more than an abstraction, and the lowest
shaded off into a species of superior animal. It is this, multitude of
good and bad demons that makes its appearance in modified shape and
number in Platonist and Gnostic cosmogonies, and which is so puzzling
to follow through all its fantastic intermarriages and combinations.
When Celsus must have been writing, that is, about the time S. Clement
of Alexandria began to teach, the spirit of Plato was abroad, not only
at Alexandria but at Athens and in Rome. Theurgy was openly professed
by the most reputable teachers; their enemies called it sorcery; but
whatever it was, it meant some intimate communion with {780} the
invisible world. A writer; therefore, who puts the moon and stars
under the guardianship of heavenly powers, who pathetically defends
the case of the demons and deprecates their being deprived of the
gratification they derive from the "smell" of a sacrifice, and who
attributes supernatural powers to friends and enemies--calling them in
the one ease miracles, in the latter, magic--is evidently closer to
Saceas and Porphyry than to Epicurus and Democritus. Celsus, however,
though he says all this, cannot be called a real Platonist or
Neo-Platonist. He came in the early days of a revival, and his
philosophic pallium hung rather loosely about him; he was not above
following a new leader on an occasion, provided he saw his way to a
new stroke against the Christians. It must be admitted that he shows a
fair share or learning, some acuteness, and some acquaintance with a
variety of different peoples and customs. On the other hand, he is
occasionally guilty of the most absurd and transparent sophisms, his
conceit is unbounded, and his tone generally sneering and often very
offensive.

It was this philosopher then, Eclectic, Platonist, and man of the
world, whose Word of Truth seemed to the pious and indefatigable
Ambrose to be so dangerous and damaging that no time ought to be lost
in answering it. With this view, he attacked Origen on the subject,
and by dint of prayers and representations made him take in hand its
refutation. Origen was by no means eager to undertake the work; and we
can partly enter into his objections. The book of Celsus was not a new
one: it had been in the hands of the reading world and in the centres
of learning, such as Athens, Antioch, Caesarea, and Alexandria, for at
least sixty years, and it is to be supposed that answers to its most
important objections were common enough in the Christian schools,
though, perhaps it was itself ignored. Then, it was not the sort of
book that could do the faithful any harm, for they could not read it,
or, if they did, they distrusted it even where they could not refute
it. It was too late in the day for an open-mouthed pagan to have any
chance against the gospel of Christ. The dangerous people were those
who, like the heretics, came with the elements of this world disguised
under the sheep's clothing of Christianity; but an honest wolf only
lost his trouble; and so Origen, whilst promising to comply with the
wishes of his friend, plainly says that what he has undertaken to
overthrow, he cannot conceive as having the least effect in shaking
the orthodoxy of a single faithful man. "That man," he says, "would be
little to my taste, whose faith would be in danger of shipwreck from
the words of this Celsus, who has not now even the advantage of being
alive; and I do not know what I should think of one who required a
book to be written before he could meet his accusations. And, yet,
because there might possibly be some professing believers who find
Celsus's writings a stumbling-block, and would be proportionally
comforted by anything in the shape of a writing that undertook to
crush him, I have resolved to take in hand the refutation of the work
you have sent me." The expressions, "a book to be written,"
"writings," and "hand-writing," are noticeable, for they show clearly
enough, what has not been much observed, that Origen's chief objection
to answering Celsus was that Celsus was already answered in the oral
teachings of the church. In this also we have the explanation of the
contempt in which he seems to hold his antagonist--a temper which is
seldom advisable either in war or polemics. But Celsus had been, and
was daily being answered, and the only question was, whether it was
worth while to put formally on paper what every Christian catechist
had by heart. Was it not better to imitate the majestic silence of
Jesus Christ, who spoke no word, but let his life speak for him? "I
dare affirm," he says, "that the defence you ask me to write will be
swamped and disappear before that other defence of {781} facts and the
power of Jesus, which none but the blind can fail to see." And he
adds, that it is not for the faithful he writes, but for those who
have not tasted the faith of Christ, or for those weak believers who,
in the apostle's phrase, must be kindly taken up.

And yet Ambrose seems to have been quite right in insisting that
Origen should answer the book of Celsus. Its arguments might be stale,
and its influence small, but there it was, a formal written record of
some of the ugliest things that could be said against Christianity and
its founder. What seemed more becoming, than that the foremost
Christian doctor of his day should take in hand, at a time when
external peace and internal growth seemed to warrant it, to give a
formal, written answer to an attack that was a standing piece of
impertinence, even if it did no harm? Besides, some harm it must have
done, at least in the shape of keeping well-meaning pagans from the
truth; and though Origen is always more fond of working for the
spiritual welfare of his own household than of direct proselytizing,
yet Ambrose, as a convert, knew what prejudice was, and what was the
importance of a work from the pen of a Christian doctor who had the
ear of the Gentile world. And Ambrose, moreover, was perfectly aware,
as was everyone except the Adamantine himself, that even if the
refutation embraced only the common topics that were handled daily in
the Christian instructions, yet the result would be as far above the
ordinary catechetical lesson as the master was above the ordinary
catechist. Perhaps he hardly knew, as we know, that his instances
would produce a master-piece of polemical writing, from which all ages
have borrowed, and in which the immense knowledge of Scripture, the
beautiful and tender piety, and the sustained eloquence of expression
were unrivalled until, perhaps, Bossuet wrote his Histoire
Universelle.

It is by no means our intention to give a detailed analysis of this
wonderful work: it is described at great length in easily accessible
authors. But it will be interesting to seize on some of its most
salient characters, and thus to throw what light may be possible upon
the subject of our discussion. And the first remark that occurs seems
to be a contradiction of Origen's own statement. The Contra Celsum was
written more for the faithful than for the philosophers, and was less
aimed at the dead and gone Celsus than at the living children of the
church. It may be true that it was not meant precisely to confirm
tottering faith or to prop up consciences that the objections of
Celsus had shaken; but its effect would naturally be to encourage the
devout Christian by showing him how much could be said for his
profession, and exposing to scorn with irresistible logic the best
that could be said by his gainsayers. If Origen had not had in view
the same audience as that to which he preached on Sundays and Fridays,
he would hardly have dealt so abundantly in the citations from Holy
Scripture which are such a marked. feature of the work, and he would
not have cared to expand as he does the bare polemical branch into the
flowers and fruit of homiletic exhortation. But the faithful were
always his first thought, and the ground-color of all he has written
is warm and outspoken piety. He knew much about pagan philosophy and
worldly science, but when Porphyry (quoted by Eusebius) says that
Plato was never out of his hands, we can only say that Plato is never
mentioned in his writings save where an adversary or an error-compels
him. A far truer picture of himself is given in his own words to his
favorite pupil, Gregory Thaumaturgus. "You have talents," he says,
"that might make you a perfect Roman lawyer, or a leader of any of the
fashionable sects of Greek philosophy; but the wish of my heart is,
dear lord and my most honored son Gregory, that you make Christianity
your last end" ([Greek text]--alluding to the _summum bonum_ of the
stoics), "and that you {782} use Greek philosophy and all its
attendant sciences as handmaids to the Holy Scriptures, and as the
means ([Greek text],) toward Christianity." This was written, of
course, long after Gregory had become a Christian, and, indeed, about
the very time that the Contra Celsum would be in progress. Not a
little, therefore, in the work which would seem to beg the question,
as against an enemy, becomes an eloquent development, as toward those
who already believed. And this remark will be found not unimportant in
explaining more passages than one.

The attack of Celsus is that of a clever, well-informed, travelled
man. It is to be feared that we cannot call him a well-meaning one.
The extra-ordinary impudence of one or two of the leading sophisms and
a general tone of rancor and rabidness, very different from the
politeness of Numenius and Porphyry, seem to force the conclusion that
we are dealing with a man who ought to have known better but whose
heart had been hardened by the world and the flesh. He goes over a
large variety of topics, is not at all remarkable for order (as his
opponent complains), and repeats himself more than once. Several
German writers have published accurate accounts of his philosophic
tenets, as far as they can be ascertained. For the present, in order
to arrive at some definite knowledge of the sort of people who opposed
Christianity from the time of S. Clement to the Decian persecution, we
shall present Celsus in a few of the chief characters that he assumes
in his onslaught on Christianity. For he is very many-sided in his
anxiety to get at all the vulnerable points of his enemy, and perhaps
it might be said that his memory is not so good as a polemic's memory
ought to be, and that he contradicts himself once or twice. At any
rate he acts with some success more parts than one.

The Scoffer was a character in which Celsus had the advantage of a few
recent traditions. Perhaps the thorough pagan scoffer, who really
laughed at Christianity because he believed it deserved to be laughed
at, was rather out of date. But Lucian (and he may have known Lucian)
could have let him see how a man of genius may scoff impartially at
religion in all its shapes. Celsus was not a scoffer of this latter
sort. Either he was really too conscientious, or else he instinctively
hated Christ more than Zeus, and therefore tried to ridicule and crush
the former, while he waived hostilities against the latter. The
scoffer, as impersonated by him, is a decent, lawfearing citizen, who
is quietly engaged in doing his duty to society and making what he can
out of the queer problem called Life, when suddenly a man that calls
himself a Christian bursts in upon his calm existence with the
intelligence that he must believe in a person called Christ, or expect
to burn everlastingly. Of course, the first thing the amazed Gentile
does is to think the man mad. His second, and more charitable idea,
which is the result of some little inquiry and of a comparison of
notes with other amazed acquaintances at the bath and the theatre, is,
that the obtrusive person is an adherent of a new and peculiar sect of
philosophers. He, therefore, resolves to examine the tenets of these
philosophers with the serene impartiality of one who sets small store
by any tenets of philosophy. He finds that their doctrines are not
new, but most of them quite old--the immortality of the soul and a
future life, a rather strait-laced verbal morality, and so on; ideas
which many respectable philosophers have held, and do hold. But is
there any reason in the world for making such a parade, and noise,
merely because another philosopher, called Christ, has chosen to teach
them also? How impertinent, absurd, and unpleasant it is for these
people, instead of keeping their doctrines to the schools, to force
them with threats upon practical men! Of course, practical men and
good citizens do not regard them. If the gods do interfere in the
concerns of the earth {783} (a doctrine which Celsus, in his character
of scoffer, is inclined to waive rather than to admit), why all this
indispensable dogmatism about a Son of God? Let it be enough that we
do admit that there is a God, who in some way is supreme; as sensible
people you can demand nothing more. We call him Zeus; you call him the
Most High, Sabaoth, Adonai, or what else you please, just as the
Egyptians call him Ammon, and the Scythians, Pappaeus. Doubtless you
talk of miracles; so do all these new-fangled sects, but they mean in
reality Egyptian magic. You appeal, moreover, to your intellectual
teaching; we know about that also: no sect is good for much in these
days which does not hang on to the skirts of Plato. Besides, what is
this we hear about disputes among yourselves? This makes the absurdity
of the thing better still! The Jews say the Messiah is to come; the
Christians declare he has come. Pray, which are we to believe? On what
side are we solemnly to arrange ourselves in this momentous dispute
about a donkey's shadow? Why, here we have a squadron of bats--or an
army of ants swarming from their nest--or a congress of frogs in
solemn session on the banks of their ditch--or a knot of worms
assembled in full ecclesia in a corner of their native mud, in hot
controversy which of the lot are the wickedest. We are the ones, they
keep saying, to whom God has foreshown and announced all things; he
has left the whole universe, the broad heavens, and the earth, to look
after themselves, and makes his laws for us alone; to us alone he
sends his heralds, and us he will never cease to prompt and to provide
for, that we may be united with him for ever. He is God; and we are
next to him, as being his sons and like him in all things. We are
lords of all things, earth, water, air, and stars; on our account is
everything, and all is ordained to minister to us. If some of us sin,
God will come, or he will send the Son, to burn up the wicked, that
the rest may live with him eternally. One could listen to worms and
frogs going on in this fashion with more composure than to you Jews
and Christians.

It is not Origen's object to prove directly the importance of
Christianity. He says that it was no barbarous system of doctrine, and
challenges any philosopher, fresh from the teachings and the schools
of Greece, to come and examine it. "He will not only pronounce it
true," he says, "but he will work it up into a logical system, and
will be able to supply it with a complete demonstration, even to a
Greek. But I must also add this: our doctrine has a certain method of
demonstration peculiar to itself, and far more divine than any that
the Greeks have in their schools. It is that which the apostle calls
the demonstration of spirit and of power; of spirit, that is, by
prophecies, which abundantly prove our whole system, especially those
parts of it which concern Christ; of power, by the miracles which can
be shown to have taken place among us, and traces of which still
remain among those who live according to the will of the Word." And as
Christianity was now well known to the whole world, to scoff at it
either for its insignificance or its absurdity seemed very foolish: it
was a standing fact, and challenged examination. This is partly taken
for granted partly incidentally expressed throughout the reply. But
the impudent scurrility of the passage about the bats, frogs, and
worms, rouses Origen's indignation. "The Jews and the Christians," he
says, "because they hold dogmas which Celsus does not approve, and
which he does not seem to be very well acquainted with, are worms and
ants, are they? The peculiar opinions in which the Jews and Christians
differ from other men, are not unknown to the world. If a man,
therefore, feels inclined to call a part of his fellow-men worms and
ants, I will show him whom to call so. The men who have lost the true
knowledge of God, whose religion is all a sham--the worshipping {784}
brute beasts and graven stocks, and lifeless matter--creatures whose
beauty should have led them to glorify and adore their Creator--these
are the worms and ants. But those who, led on by reason, have risen
above stocks and stones, above silver and gold, and everything
material; who have risen above this whole created universe unto him
that made all things; who have confided themselves wholly to him; who
recognize him almighty over every creature, seeing every thought and
hearing every prayer; who send up their prayers to him only, doing all
that they do as though he saw it, and speaking all their words that
none may be displeasing to him who heareth them all--these, surely,
are _men_; nay, if it were possible, more than men. They may have,
been worms once, but shall not such religion ([Greek text]) as this,
that no trials can shake, no danger, not even death itself, destroy,
no persuasiveness of words overcome, be their shelter against such
jibes for the future? What! shall they who restrain the appetites that
make men soft and yielding as wax--and restrain them because they know
that by continence alone they can obtain familiarity with God
[Footnote 208]--shall they be called the brothers of worms and the
kindred of ants and the near neighbors of frogs? Forbid it Justice!
glorious Justice, that gives social rights to fellow-men, that guards
the equitable, the humane, and the kind--forbid that such men as these
should be likened to birds of night! Call those worms of the slime,
who wallow in lust--the common herd of men, who do evil and call it
right--but surely not those who have been taught that their bodies,
inhabited by the light of reason and the grace of the omnipotent Lord,
are the temples of the God whom they adore.'" It is a subject that
warms him, and he pursues it at some length. He does not imitate the
scurrility and abusiveness of his adversary, though he must have been
sorely tempted sometimes, to say some plain things about paganism.
Celsus shows all the liveliness of language of a man who carries on a
personal quarrel. He is not above calling his enemies "drunken" and
"blear-eyed;" he hardly takes the trouble to mention that they are
irrational fools; and for a specimen of his more fanciful bad language
the passage quoted above will suffice. Origen sometimes complains of
this, as well he may. He says that Celsus "scolds like an old woman,"
that he shouts calumny like the lowest of a street-mob, and, as a sort
of climax, that he reminds him of a couple of "women slanging each
other in the street." But the scoffer and the reviler is after all not
our philosopher's favorite _role_. Perhaps he will show better as the
man of intellect.

  [Footnote 208: The expression of the contemporary Platonists.]

The man of intellect has a face of severely classic mould, whereon
sits normally a thoughtful frown, as though he were ever asking
himself the reason of things, varied by a pitying smile when he finds
it necessary to recognize the existence of a non-intellectual being.
His hands are very white, his pallium neat, his hair scented, and his
whole appearance bespeaks him to be on the most distant terms with the
profane multitude. When Christianity first had the bad taste to talk
to him of penance and hell-fire, he did not deign to speak, but only
scowled disgust; but in a century or two he began to see he must say
something for his own credit. He therefore began to utter lofty
sentences and to employ his smile of pity, though the early look of
disgust was so very deeply printed on his countenance that it never
afterward left him. This is the sum of his case:--"This foolish system
called Christianity makes some little noise, it is true. But a
philosopher has only to glance at it, to despise it. I have read and
examined the books and writings of the sect; I have conversed with its
learned men, and I find that it is essentially low, grovelling, and
vulgar. It repudiates wisdom altogether; it formally forbids the
educated, the learned, and the wise to be numbered among its {785}
members. On the other hand, it energetically recruits its ranks from
among the uneducated, the weak-headed, and the imbecile. These are the
sort of men the Christian teachers declare to be most acceptable to
their God, thus showing clearly that they have neither the ability nor
the wish to make converts of any but the feeble-minded, common people,
and country boors, slaves, women, and children. They are wary; they
are like the quacks and cheap-jacks of the agora, who take care not to
obtrude themselves upon those who could find them out, but show off
before the children in the streets and the loitering house-slaves and
an admiring mob of any fools they can collect. They are mean and
underhand. You shall see, in a private house, your slave, your weaver,
your sandal-maker, or your cloth-carder--a fellow wholly without
education or manners, and silent enough before his master and his
betters--the moment he finds himself alone with the children and the
women, beginning to hold forth in marvellous style. Parents and
preceptors are no longer to be obeyed, but he is to be believed
implicitly; they are mad and doting, immersed in fatuous trifles, and
incapable of seeing or doing what is really good, he alone can impart
the secret of virtue; let the children believe him, and they will be
happy themselves and bring a blessing on the house. Meanwhile, let
father or tutor make his appearance, he mostly gets frightened and
stops; but if he be a determined one, he just whispers in parting,
that children of spirit should not submit to parental tyranny; that he
has much to explain which the presence of others will not allow him to
utter; that he cannot bear the sight of the folly and ignorance of
such corrupted and lost men, who moreover are seeking every pretext
for punishing him; finally, that if the dear children want to hear
more, they must come, with the women and as many of their companions
as they know of, into the women's apartment, or into the carding-room
or the leather-shop--and so he contrives to get hold of them."

Perhaps there was nothing in Christianity that disgusted the
philosophers so much as the fact that it went out after the poor, the
lowly, and the sinful, and offered them a share in all that it could
teach or promise. That the common herd had no need and no right to
philosophy was an accepted tenet with the new Platonists. The passage
just quoted is interesting; through its transparent misrepresentation
we can see the poor man and the slave, in the second century, in the
actual process not only of having the gospel preached to them, but
also actively preaching it as well as they could to others. The
sophism of Celsus, that Christians prefer fools and sinners for
converts, therefore they must be all a foolish and wicked set, must
have been stale, we may hope, by the time Origen undertook to answer
it. He enters into the whole accusation, however, and refutes, almost
word for word, the whole of what we have just given and more to the
same purpose.

But the intellectual objector has something positive to say, as well
as something negative. He announces, therefore, with almost ridiculous
solemnity, that he will have pity on these poor Christians, and tell
them how they are to obtain union with God, what masters they are to
follow, and what heroes they are to imitate; in short, he will provide
them with a theology, a gospel, and an assemblage of saints. For the
saints, they are our grand Grecian heroes--Hercules, Orpheus,
AEsculapius, and the rest, from Anaxarchus, who encouraged the tyrant
who was having him bruised in a mortar to "pound away on the mortal
coil of Anaxarchus," to Epictetus, who made a cheerful remark when his
master broke his leg. For the gospel, it is the most powerful teaching
of the divine and immortal Plato; and for the theology, it is the
following sentence from the Timaeus: "To discover the maker and the
father of the universe is a hard {786} thing; to make them known to
others, when discovered, is impossible." This last doctrine he is
afraid the wretched Christians will not be able to take in. They are
such a poor frightened set that the sublimity of Platonic dictum
scares them into their holes; they are such a body-loving race that
they must have a God with a body, and be able to see him with the eyes
of their flesh, which all philosophers pronounce to be impossible.
Origen, in his reply, first of all disposes of these two sneers: "The
Christians a timid set! when, rather than renounce a syllable of their
Christianity, they are prepared to suffer torture and death in its
worst shapes! The Christians a body-loving race! when they are readier
to lay down their bodies for piety's sake than a philosopher is to put
off his pallium! and when the injunction to be dead to sense and
living to soul lies upon the very surface of their teaching! But let
it pass. We must speak to Plato's theology." Here is the answer, as
terse as an epigram, as luminous as the sunlight. "Plato, when he said
God was hard to find, impossible to impart, said a sublime and a
wonderful thing; but our Scriptures give a message from God to man
that changes all the facts, and it is this: God the Word was with God
in the beginning, and the _Word was made flesh_. It is not only hard
for man to find God; it is impossible for him to seek him at all, or
to find him in an elevated order ([Greek text]) unless he whom he
seeks assist him. The knowledge of God is indeed far above man's
nature; but God, out of his kindness and _philanthropy_" (Origen's
usual expression when speaking of the incarnation), "through his
wonderful and godlike grace, has willed that his knowledge appear unto
those whom he foresees will live worthily of it, and whose piety will
be firm even against death itself, though they who know not what piety
is may jeer and ridicule. God, I think, seeing the arrogance and the
insolence of those who, with all their boasted philosophical knowledge
of the divine nature, are idol-ridden and temple-ridden and
mystery-ridden as much as the most ignorant of the mob, has chosen the
foolish things of this world, the poor, simple Christians, whose life
is purer than the lives of most philosophers, to put to the blush
those wise men who can unblushingly treat a lifeless thing as a god or
the likeness of a god. Surely the man of sense must laugh to see the
philosopher, after all his sublime talk about God and things divine,
go and ogle his idol and pray to it, or think there is some being
behind it that requires prayer to be offered up with such a ritual as
that. But the Christian knows that God is everywhere; no image limits
his vision, no temple bounds his power, for the whole world is his
temple; and his servant, therefore, shutting the eyes of his body,
raising on high the eyes of his soul--transcending all this world,
piercing the concave of heaven itself, out of the world and above the
heavens--makes his prayer to God: no sordid or grovelling prayer, for
he has learnt from Jesus to ask for nothing little or sensible, but he
prays only for what is great and really divine--for such things as
lead to that blessedness which is in him, through his son, the Word,
who is God." He has no wish to disparage Plato; Plato has spoken very
beautifully, but the Christian Scriptures have not only beauty; but
they have, what is much more important, plain morality and the divine
virtue of changing the heart. The "ambassadors of the truth" propose
to themselves to convert the whole world, the clever and the dull, the
Greek and the barbarian; not a rustic, not a poor unlettered simpleton
will they consent to abandon. Of what use is Plato in such a work as
this? His brilliant and polished periods may possibly be of use to the
few literary men that can understand them; but in the art of
attracting the attention of the rude populace he is outdone even by
Epictetus. But the Scripture has something in it that not even
Epictetus can show. Its doctrines may possibly in certain cases seem
to repeat the teachings of Grecian philosophy; but {787} it has the
power of making men act on those doctrines, which never a Greek
philosopher yet could boast of. And now as to the heroes and
philosophers, the fathers and saints of paganism. "Let us see what
leaders Celsus wishes us to follow, to the end that we may not be
without ancient and reverend models of heroism. He sends us to
God-imbued poets, as he calls them, the sages, and the philosophers,
whom he indicates in a general way, without naming particular names.
He sends us, also, to Hercules, AEsculapius, and the rest, to learn
heroism from their brave contempt of death, not unfittingly rewarded
by the myth that has deified them. Where he does not mention names it
is hard to refute him. Had he named his divine poet or sage, I should
have tried to show him to be a blind guide; but since he has not done
so, I must content myself with appealing to what everyone knows of the
divine poets as a body, and asking whether they can be compared for a
moment to Moses, for instance; to the prophets of the creator of all
things; above all, to him who has shone forth on all the race of man,
and announced to all the true way in which God would be served; who,
as far as lay in him, has willed that none should be ignorant of his
secret teachings, but, in his super-abounding philanthropy, has both
given to the learned a _theology_ that can raise their souls above all
things here below, and yet at the same time condescends to the weak
intellect of the untaught man, of the simple woman, and the household
slave--himself assisting them to lead a better life, each in his
degree, according to the teachings about God that _every one of them_
has been enabled to share. He mentions Hercules. Has he forgotten the
ugly story about that hero's base servitude to Omphale. It would take
some persuading to make us pay divine honors to the ruffian that
seized the poor farmer's ox by main force, and devoured it before his
eyes, whilst the owner cursed him, and he seemed to enjoy the curses
as much as the meal itself; whence is derived the edifying custom of
accompanying his sacrifices by a rite of powerful execrations. He
mentions AEsculapius. I have already dealt with AEsculapius: he was a
clever doctor, but he did nothing very extraordinary. He puts up
Orpheus. Of course, Celsus is aware that Orpheus wrote about the gods
far more impiously and fabulously than Homer ever did. Now, he
considers, with Plato, that Homer's poems are unfit to be permitted in
the model republic; so that it is perfectly evident that he introduces
Orpheus here for the sole purpose of defaming us and disparaging
Jesus. Poor Anaxarchus in his mortar undoubtedly affords a great
example of fortitude; but as this happens to be the solitary fact that
is known about Anaxarchus, it would be difficult to make him a model
hero and absurd to make him a god. Then, as to Epictetus: there is no
need of depreciating him; it is enough to say, that his words and
deeds are not worthy of the most distant comparison with the words and
deeds of one whom Celsus despises; for the sayings of Jesus _convert_
the wise and the simple. Celsus asks: 'What did your God say in his
sufferings, like to this?' I answer that his patience and his bravery
in his scourgings and his thousand ignominies were better shown by his
_silence_ than by any word ever uttered by suffering Greek. But he did
speak." And then he touches on some of the words of Jesus in his
agony. It is to us like a new revelation of the gospel, like a new
Epiphany, to read the comparison of the life of Jesus with the lives
of the best and noblest of antiquity. It brings vividly to our
imagination the brilliancy of the dawn of that day of Christ Jesus
(into whose light we are baptized, and in which we live with little
appreciation), when we can call back again the shades of paganism, and
watch the gross darkness as it lifts and moves slowly off before the
sun of justice. We can realize something of the feelings of earnest
hearts as they came within the reach of that light, and share a little
in the {788} excitement of a conflict wherein the victor overcame,
not, like Perseus, by displaying the horrors of a Gorgon's head, but
by unveiling, philosophically, artistically, enthusiastically, the
charms of a "theology" upon whose beauty and truth there were no
drawbacks, and in whose abysses of gladdening hope there were resting
places for every want and wish of a human heart. Origen lets the light
in upon the poor heroes and purblind sages of a Cimmerian night, and
he forgets the scoffings of wretched philosophy, as he expiates on the
love, the kindness, the philanthropy, the condescending grace of the
Word, who is God. We cannot follow him far. The intellectual objector
has much to say about the unreasonableness of faith; and the Christian
doctor vindicates scientific theology, whilst he shows how the crowd
of men must simply believe or be without any teaching whatever. He
says deep and pregnant things about faith, science, and wisdom, that
would bear fruit if reproduced in an age like ours. Then he enters at
great length into the critical objections of the man of intellect
against the life and actions of Jesus, more especially against the
great corner-stone of faith, the resurrection. And throughout the
whole of his demonstrations on intellectual grounds, he is fond of
calling attention to two grand arguments of fact, that no amount of
subtlety can explain away, and that the dullest wit cannot help
seeing: first; that Christianity has changed and reformed men's morals
in a way totally unexampled; second, that such a system of dogma and
morality can never by any possibility have been the product of human
thought, especially seeing what sort of men have propagated and
professed it, "not many wise, not many noble;" therefore its origin is
divine, and its author is the great creator of whom Plato spoke in
stammering words, and whom all philosophy has sought.

Celsus, after having laughed at Christianity, and argued against it,
and having sometimes laughed argumentatively, and at other times
argued by a laugh, appears toward the end of his book in the entirely
new character of the citizen, or patriotic opponent of impious
innovations. He defends the old faith in the gods and the myths, the
old sacrifices, in a word, the old civilization, from the awful
radicalism of a sect that were upsetting the very foundations of
social order, and endangering what little religion the common people
could be got to practise. "All this private association and
sectarianism is clearly against the law of the empire. They repudiate
temples, they despise statutes, they mock at the offerings of incense
and the sacrifices of living things; and they tell decent temple-goers
and frequenters of the sanctuaries that they are doing an abomination
and worshipping devils. Now, the proper, sensible, and right thing is,
that each nation preserve its own customs and laws. One people has
found the advantage of one set of institutions, another of another;
let each keep what is once established by due and competent authority.
The Jews are perfectly right in being tenacious of their particular
laws." (This is cool, in one who had just been abusing the Jews with
all his powers of ridicule and logic--but then he is now speaking in a
different character.) "Besides, there is another and a deeper reason
for this. It is probable that in the beginning of things the diverse
parts of the earth were committed to diverse powers and dominations to
be presided over and governed according to their pleasure; it must
therefore be wrong to attack those institutions which they have
established from the beginning in their several prefectures. It seems,
indeed, perfectly certain that there is nothing in the world that is
not given in charge to some demon. Man himself, the moment he enters
the prison of his body, passes under the power of the keepers of this
prison-house. Nay, the Egyptians, who are unexceptionable {789}
authorities here, tell us that to look after the various parts of a
man's body, there are told off no less than six-and-thirty demons or
aerial powers (some say more); and they even mention their names, as
Chnoumen, Chnachoumen, Cnat, Sieat, and others, by invoking whom you
obtain health in your various limbs. Certainly, therefore, if a man
prefer health to sickness, and happiness to misery, there is no reason
why he should not deliver himself from evil by propitiating these
beings who have him in charge. One or two things, therefore; either
the Christians must live in this world and worship those who rule this
world, or they must abjure marriage, never have children, take no part
in the affairs of men, in fact depart from the earth altogether, and
leave no seed behind them. If they are to share in the goods, and to
be protected from the evils of this world, then it is both
unreasonable and ungrateful not to render tribute to the guardians of
what they enjoy and the powers from whom they have so much to fear."
The proud and fastidious philosopher has fallen low. What an interval
between the grand sentences of Plato and the humiliating confessions
of the apologist of idol-worship! And yet both extremes must be duly
considered, before we can realize the Paganism of the Neo-Platonic
revival. The demonology of Zoroaster, which was the practical religion
of the whole East, had encountered the Platonic philosophy and
engrafted itself upon it; and the sages of such Greek cities as
Caesarea found themselves seriously defending the devil-worship of the
wandering Arabs that roved over the plains of Syria and Asia, ignoring
the centres of civilization that Alexander's conquest had erected in
their midst."

The first part of the objectors patriotic appeal on behalf of
established "institutions" is easily disposed of. The argument,
carried to its lawful lengths, becomes ridiculous. "The Scythian law
kills all the old men; the Persian law sanctions incest; the Crimeans
sacrifice strangers to Diana; in one part of Africa they immolate
their children to Saturn. One national law makes hanging a virtue,
another commends death by fire. Some nations reckon it pious to
worship crocodiles, others pay divine honors to cows, others again
make gods of goats, and one people adores what another eats. This is
making religion, not a truth, but a whim and a fancy. This is making
piety, holiness, and righteousness, affairs of opinion, and not
ascertainable, fixed realities. Suppose some one were to get up and
say the same of temperance, prudence, justice, or fortitude, would he
not be considered an imbecile? The truth is, there are two sorts of
laws; the unwritten law of Nature, of which the author is God, and the
written law of the state. If the state-law is not at variance with
God's law, it ought to be kept and to be preferred before the laws of
strangers; but if it oppose the law of God, it must be trampled upon,
even though danger, ignominy, and death be the consequence." Thus much
for the sentiment of nationality, and the common and obvious reasons,
as Origen calls them, that will make plain men repudiate it. But the
demon-theory and the alleged distribution of things to the aerial
powers, leads to a deeper and more serious question. Knowing,
therefore, that his book will fall into the hands of some who will be
inclined to examine such questions to the bottom, he undertakes to
speak more at length on the matter. This gives him an opportunity of
showing, by the history of the dispersion of Babel, how it is that we
find such diversity of peoples in different parts of the earth. Their
dispersion was a punishment; the ministers of this punishment are the
wicked spirits, acting as the instruments of God. One nation alone
remained in God's favor, and even it had to be punished through the
"princes" or spirits of other nations. Of God's mysterious dealings
with this nation, and of the redemption that was to come {790} through
it to all the other nations, he says he cannot speak out, an account
of the _disciplina arcani_, which forbade the Christian teacher to
enter into explicit details about the evil spirits, and this far the
sake of not affording encouragement to idolatry.

The time had now come when all the nations were called to the one
saviour, the one lawgiver Jesus Christ, who "issuing a master and a
teacher from the midst of the Jews, feeds with the word of his
teaching the universal world." For punishment, therefore, were the
peoples of the earth delivered to demons; for salvation they must all
return to the law of God, through Jesus. Then, as usual, the Christian
doctor lays down the grand principle that withers with its first
breath all this base and futile service of devils. "The Lord our God
do we adore, and him only do we serve." If demons punish men, or if
angels rule this lower world, it is by his supreme will that they act.
"God, therefore, the one Supreme Lord of all--him we must conciliate
and make propitious, by religion and all virtue. Is not this simple?
Is it not reasonable? Bethink you for one moment. There are two men,
of whom one devotes himself entirely to the Almighty God, the other
busies himself in searching out the names of the demons, their powers
and their deeds, the rhymes that raise them, the plants that please
them, the magic gems and the wizard characters that will elicit their
answers; which of these two, think you, will be most pleasing to the
Lord of All? But little wisdom is required to see that the former, in
his simplicity and trust, will be accepted of the Almighty God and his
familiars; whilst he who for the sake of his health and his comfort
and his base and mean wants, deals, in demon-worship and magic, will
be rejected as evil and impious, and be left to the tender mercies of
the devils he invokes, to the confusion and despair of diabolical
suggestions, and to infinite evils. For Celsus himself owns that these
demons are wicked, that they are covetous of blood, of the savour and
smoke of a sacrifice and of the singing that evokes them; let their
worshipper, then, beware lest they prove slippery in their faith to
him, and lest the adorer of yesterday be abandoned or ruined in favor
of the more ample offerings of blood and of burnt odors that are
brought by the adorer of today. And let not Celsus accuse us of
ingratitude. We know perfectly well what true gratitude is, and to
whom we ought to be grateful for all that we possess; and we fear not
to be ungrateful to the demons, our adversaries and our enemies; but
we fear to be ungrateful to him with whose benefits we are laden,
whose workmanship we are, whose Providence has placed us in our varied
lots in life, and at whose hands we look for life eternal when this
life shall be ended. And we have a symbol of this our thankfulness; it
is the bread that we call the Bread of thanksgiving--the Eucharistic
Bread." This last sentence would read commonplace to the infidel or
the catechumen that might fall upon this answer of Origen to Celsus.
They could not know what the faithful Christian knew, and what the
writer himself knew and must have felt to his innermost heart, that
these passing words were a veil that covered nothing less than the
Tabernacle of the Blessed Sacrament. The great central mystery, for
well-known reasons, does not meet the eye in the pages of Origen, save
in suggestive passages like this; but we Christians of today can
pierce the mystery because we have its key, and can respond with our
Catholic sympathies to a Catholic voice that speaks to us in veiled
accents across the expanse of sixteen centuries. "For our
citizenship," he concludes, "we are no rebels or traitors. You say,
quoting the words of an ancient--

  'King there is but one,
  whom Saturn's son hath established,'

We say with you, King there is but one; but in the place of Saturn's
son' {791} we put him who 'raiseth up kings and deposeth them,' and
'who provideth a wise ruler in his season upon the earth.' The kingly
power is from God, and by God's will we obey it; would that all
believed this as we do! You exhort us to enter the imperial armies and
fight for the state. But no men serve their country as the Christians
do. They are taught to use heavenly arms in behalf of their rulers,
and to pray to heaven for 'kings and all those who are in high
places;' and their prayers, their mortifications, and their
self-restraint are of more avail than many soldiers set in array of
battle. And beyond all this, they teach their countrymen the worship
of the Lord of All, and there is no earthly city so little and mean
but they can promise its citizens a heavenly city with God. You exhort
us to enter the magistracy and protect our country's laws and
religion. We have in every city an organization that is to us a second
_patria_, created by the word of God, governed by those who are
powerful in word and sound in work; excuse us if we concern ourselves
mainly with the magistracy of the church. The ambitious we reject;
those whose modesty makes them refuse the solicitude of the church of
God, these we compel to accept it. The presidents of God's state are
called by God's will to rule, and they must not defile their hands
with the ministry of human laws. Not that a Christian refuses his
share of public burdens; but he prefers to reserve himself for burdens
and for a service of a diviner and more necessary sort, wherein is
concerned the salvation of men. The Christian magistrate has a charge
over all men; of those that are within, that they live better every
day; of those that are without, that they may be numbered among those
who act and speak the things of God-service. Serving God in very
truth, instructing whom he may, he lives full of the divine word and
law, and so he is able to lead to the Lord of All every one that is
converted and wishes to live in his holy law, through the divine Son
of God that is in him, his word, his wisdom, his truth, and his
righteousness."

With this description of the Christian bishop, we conclude our remarks
on Origen. It will doubtless have occurred to most of our readers that
we have too completely ignored the charges of heterodoxy that have so
often been made against the name of Origen. But we do not admit that
Origen was unsound in faith, much less that he was formerly heretical.
Although not unprepared to justify this conviction, we cannot do more
at present than invoke the authority of a new and important
contribution to the Origen controversy, which was notified in our last
number.  [Footnote 209] Professor Vincenzi, it is confessed by
competent and impartial critics, has totally dissipated the notion
that Origen denied the eternity of punishment. As to the other
accusations, he goes through them one by one and confutes them,
without admitting anything whatever in the genuine works of Origen to
be theologically unsound, "excepting a few points on which the fathers
of his age were as doubtful and uncertain as himself, since the Church
had not then defined them."  [Footnote 210] Thirdly, he undertakes to
prove that S. Jerome was completely mistaken, through no fault of his,
with regard to the merits of a controversy in which he played so
memorable a part; and, lastly, he maintains that Origen was never
condemned by Pope or council, discussing especially the alleged
condemnation by the fifth general council. Under shelter, then, of the
authority of a work that comes to us with the approval of the Roman
censorship, and which on two separate occasions has been warmly
praised in the Civilta, we cannot be wrong in waiving, at least, all
discussion, in articles like the present, on the alleged errors of
Origen. What has been said, though it has left the greater {792} part
of his work unconsidered, may perhaps have served to draw attention to
one who is in some respects the greatest of the Greek fathers. He did
not live long after the completion of the Contra Celsum. As he had
been the faith's champion from his orphaned boyhood to his old age, so
he merited at least to suffer as a martyr for the Truth he had served
so long. His tortures in the Decian persecution did not immediately
cause his death, but they hastened it. He died at Tyre in 253 or 254.
The cities where he taught are now mere names. Alexandria is a modern
Turkish town, Caesarea is a heap of broken columns and ruined piers,
Athens is the capital of a pitiful nation of mongrel Hellenes, Bostra
and Petra are tombs in the deserts of Arabia. But two things are not
likely to grow less in their greatness or to lose the vividness of
their importance, the faith of Christ and what Origen has done for it.
In another region of the world, and in cities with names that are
different, yet with histories as grand as belonged to the cities of
the East, unbelief seems to be bringing back a condition of mind, to
encounter which the Catholic writer will have to put himself into the
circumstances of those ancient giants who met and overthrew scientific
paganism in the second and third centuries. Faith, and what is faith,
and why men must believe, occupied Clement and Origen. The same
questions are occupying the thought of our own day; and many a hint
may be gathered and many a suggestive argument started, by those who
will take the Alexandrian stand-point and look at faith as it is
looked at in the polemical works of the great Alexandrian school.

  [Footnote 209: In S. Gregorii Nysseni et Origenis scripta et
  doctrinam nova recension, per Aloysium Vincenzi. 4 vols. Romae
  1865.]

  [Footnote 210: "Dummodo tamen nonnulla exceperis, quae pariter apud
  Patres coaevos adhuc dubia manebant et incerta; quippe nondum ab
  Ecclesia definita."--_Vincenzi_, ii. 524.]



ORIGINAL.

THE TALE OF A TOMBSTONE.

BY D. O'C. TOWNLEY.

It is quite true to say, that the American makes a mistake who, in his
European tour, leaves Ireland out in the cold unvisited. He at least
fails to make an acquaintance which could not prove otherwise than
interesting, and possibly to find a burying-place where, if he had
them, he might dispose of his superfluous prejudices bearing upon that
island and its people--prejudices for the most part begotten of
ill-directed reading or formed with the hasty conclusions of a very
limited experience.

If a politician, he cannot fail to learn, ere he travels many miles,
whether in Connaught or in Ulster, what he ought _not_ to do with a
people having a desire to see them prosperous and contented. If a
historian, he may find food for a chapter unwritten by Hume and
Smollet, or even by the more impartial Macaulay; a chapter which may
throw some light upon the cause, ever obscurely and often untruthfully
given, whose effect is that spirit of retrogression which hovers over
the unhappy island and lays its blighting hand upon every acre from
Cork to the Giant's Causeway. If he be a painter, a poet, or a
novelist, he may find in Ireland and her people an Eldorado with mines
as inexhaustible as the ore is rich. If a tourist merely, even such a
one as does London in a fortnight, Paris in a week, and the Rhine on
the fastest steamer upon that ancient river--that brilliant soul who
takes his sleep o' moonlit nights, and on the days which follow, sits
yawning over dinner till the shadows fall, and the storied head. {793}
lands have been passed unseen--even such as he, stupid or _blase_, as
the case may be, may find in Ireland something to awake to momentary
energy, at least, his sleeping thought and action.

Approaching the fall of 18--, having done the continental celebrities
the year before, and having been in England since early in the month
of May, I concluded, before returning to New York, that I should pay a
flying visit to the emerald cradle of that prolific race, which is, in
the language of the stump, when it suits the orators to say so, the
bone and sinew of these States; the great level which uproots our
forests; the great spade which hollows our canals; the huge pick and
shovel and barrow, that lay our iron roads over mountain and morass;
and the mighty polling power which develops the peculiarities of
legislators, contributes most generously to the revenue of the excise,
and to the sustenance of the many good and bad people whose business
of life it is to get this truly erratic people into all manner of
trouble, including jails, and out of it.

With no prejudices against the Irish people, and some
clear-sightedness as to the causes of their proverbial discontent,
unthriftiness, and frequent turbulence, I went quite ready to sorrow
or be glad, just as either mood was suggested by my surroundings;
neither to sneer at their emotional enthusiasm nor to turn disgusted
from their hilarious mirth.

Crossing from Holyhead to Dublin, I remained in that city for a few
days, then visited the south and west, leaving the industrious north
to finish off with. But as the purpose of this sketch is not to retail
either impressions of the country or its people, or all the personal
experiences of my journey, I must proceed to the narration of the
single incident, the object of this writing, referring the reader, if
his appetite lean in the direction, to the pencillings of Mr. Willis
or the much more truthful story-telling of Mrs. Hall. My immediate
purpose is gained if I have in a slight degree awakened the reader's
interest for that which follows, and if he understands that I had now
almost reached that period which I had set down for the close of my
tour and my return home.

Of the month I had set apart for Ireland--the _bonne bouche_, or, if
you like the Celtic better, the "_doch an durhas_" of my feast--I had
but one week left when I found myself at Warrenpoint, a pleasant
watering place on the margin of the bay of Carlingford, going
northward to Belfast. Here I had been two days, rather longer than I
had proposed to remain, but the season and the place at this time of
the year are especially attractive. So near Ireland's' highest
mountain as I then was, it occurred to me how discreditable the
confession would be that I had not seen it save in the purple
distance, and I concluded to do myself the honor of a near
acquaintance--sit upon its topmost ridge, and rifle a sprig of heather
from its venerable crown as a relic of the nearest spot to heaven on
the Isle of Saints.

"No," said mine host, "your honor must never say good-by to Ireland
until you see her only living monarch who has not emigrated or been
transported to a penal colony!"

Slieve Donard, the king in question, was but twelve miles distant, or
rather the village nestling at its foot. The road to Newcastle, the
name this village bears, was one of peculiar beauty all the way, and I
chose, to me, the most enjoyable of all ways of reaching it--I
determined to walk there. So, about eight o'clock on a beautiful
autumn morning, the dew still upon the grass and glistening upon the
rustling leaves of the beeches in a grove of which my rustic hotel lay
shadowed, armed with a stout blackthorn, a book in either pocket, and
a light breakfast in its appropriate department, I set out upon my
journey; accomplished it most enjoyably, arriving with but a {794}
faint remembrance that I had eaten any breakfast whatever, and just in
time for the _table d'hote_ at Brady's.

The hotel was full with the motley occupants peculiar, there as
elsewhere, to hotels by the seaside in the bathing season. Among the
guests were reverend gentlemen assorted in the nicest manner, lean
kine and fat; the good-natured parish priest and the more
sanctimonious and exclusive curate of the orthodox persuasion; surly
country squires who had rushed down to please their wives and the
girls--"what did they want with salt water?" the city shopkeeper and
his prim property, exulting in evidence of _ton_ in every word and
movement. Even the eye-glassed, red, and wiry-whiskered Cockney could
be seen and heard, possibly attracted there by the reputation of the
"Hirish girls for fine hiyes and hintellects," or probably from a
peculiar horror, for private reasons, of other watering places nearer
home, where landlords were less generous and accommodating, being more
experienced. These, and such as these, with a few who came to see
rather than to be seen, made up the guests at Brady's.

After dinner I joined a party of the class last mentioned who purposed
devoting the rest of the afternoon to an excursion upon the mountain,
ascending as high at least as would enable them to enjoy a scene
pronounced by travellers to be one of the finest in a land praised
alike in song and story for its scenic beauty. The unmingled enjoyment
of that ascent--for the labor of the journey was a pleasure too--is
one of the most pleasant of the many happy memories which I owe to the
"Isle of Tears." The landscape which unrolled itself like a scroll as
we ascended was of remarkable beauty. Rich with all the gorgeous
coloring of the season was spread out as far as the eye could reach
the unshorn wealth of corn-field and of meadow. Here and there a clump
of beech or chestnut sheltered, half hidden among the foliage, the
snow-white walls of a farm house. Liliputian figures crept stealthily
along through lane and over pasture, more like the tiny figures in a
Flemish painting than men and cattle at their labor. The rock-bound
bay was alive with its freight of toy-like fishing-boats, whose white
sails borrowed the golden hues of evening as the sun stole down toward
the heathery forehead of Slieve Donard. The whole scene, embraced from
an altitude of fourteen hundred feet, is again before me, and I revel
for a moment, whilst the illusion lasts, in the unspeakable emotion
which was born of it.

But as I set out to tell a story whose theatre is not the mountain but
the valley underneath, I must e'en come down again to supper and to
prose, leaving, however reluctantly, Slieve Donard and its poetry
behind me.

Leaving Newcastle with that regret which all must feel who leave it at
such a season, I started next morning after breakfast for
Castlewellan, where I intended taking the coach for Newry, having
ordered my luggage to be forwarded there from my hotel at the Point.

Castlewellan is but four miles distant, and the journey thither was
said to be one of the most enjoyable walks in this romantic region.

The road, for the entire distance, is one uninterrupted ascent toward
the summit of one of the lesser hills on which the village stands,
affording from every point--unless when now and then a jutting
mountain crag overhangs the path, and for a moment, intercepts the
vision--a view of the broad expanse of sea, the valley widening as you
rise--each footstep of the ascent adding some new beauty of form and
color, light and shadow to the scene.

Half way upon my journey I sat down to rest for a minute or two by the
road side and lighted a cigar. Under its soothing influence and that
of the scene beneath me, I dropped into one of those blissful reveries
in which we sometimes forget our earthliness for a while, our souls
absorbed in ecstatic {795} contemplation of the wondrous beauty, yet
still more wondrous mystery, of the Creator's handiwork.

I had been thus but a short time indeed when the sound of approaching
footsteps broke in upon my thought, followed by the customary
salutation, "God save you, sir, 'tis a heavenly morning that we have."

Replying in the country phraseology, "God save you kindly," I raised
my eyes to see the passing figure of a stooped old man, with a spade
upon his shoulder, moving slowly onward 'neath his weight of years and
in my direction. Always fond of a companion, when wandering in this
way, being usually fortunate enough to meet with those to whom the
scenes around me were familiar, and from whom I often learned much
indeed that was new and interesting, I arose to resume my walk.
Strongly impressed by the venerable form of the old peasant, as I
deemed him, and thus attracted, I joined him, making some casual
remarks about the appearance of the country, which easily opened the
way to conversation. Enough of years have passed since that autumn
morning to have worn out the then feeble thread of the old man's life,
but palpable to my memory as the recollections of my wedding day is
every lineament of that expressive face. I hear again, as I write, the
gentle music of his voice, his white hairs float before me stirred by
the morning mountain breeze, and I greet again his expressive
salutation, felt again if again unspoken, "God save you kindly."

To all my inquiries touching the country round about, and the harvest,
then all but gathered from the fields, he replied in that simple yet
lucid manner common to the most uneducated Irish peasant, when he
speaks of things familiar to him, chastened in his every remark by
expressions of his gratitude to God for bounties received, and of his
reliance upon his wisdom and goodness in affliction.

His calling, he told me, was a sad one. He, too, was a laborer in the
field, but the harvest he gathered was moist with the tears of many.
Death himself was the reaper. He was the village sexton.

I had often before met men of his melancholy occupation, but the
hearts of these seemed to have been hardened by the very nature of
their handicraft, as they became familiarized with that sorrow,
bitterest to human nature--the parting for ever in this world with the
truest and best beloved; but in the good old man beside me the keenest
sympathy for his suffering fellow mortals seemed to have found a meet
and fitting resting-place.

I learned from him that a few rods further on my way stood the chapel
and burying-ground of Drumbhan, where, for some fifty years back, he
had made the last dwelling-places of his friends and neighbors. Five
minutes' walking brought us to the open gate and to the pathway
leading to the modest village church, within whose sacred walls a
number of the villagers had already gathered to early mass.

Guided by my new acquaintance, I also entered, joining in the sacred
ceremony, which began soon afterward.

How is it, I ask you who have accompanied me thus far, reader, how is
it--and the feeling is common to almost all of us--that in such a
simple edifice as that I knelt in, paintless and unpictured, unadorned
by the bright conceptions of genius or the cunning fingers of art;
with naked floor and whitewashed wall; window untinted with Scripture
story, itself suggestive of devotion; no ornament save the simple
embellishments of the altar; no music save the solemn voice of the
priest, distinctly audible in the respectful stillness of the place;
how is it, I ask you, that in such a sanctuary our souls seem to reach
nearer to their God in silent adoration, than when we kneel on velvet
cushions in the temples of the city, with their graven oak and marble
pillars, their lofty domes of painted glass, their frescoes and their
statuary, their mighty organs and their hundred choristers?

{796}

On leaving the church, at the conclusion f the mass, I rejoined the
sexton, who had stopped a moment at the porch for his spade, where he
had left it in an angle as we entered. I followed him across the yard
and through the wicket which separated us from the burying-ground.
Calling my attention to some of the more imposing monuments of the
place, he passed forward along the narrow pathway to perform the
melancholy task which he had told me was his first duty of this
morning--to make a grave for the last, the very last, of the
companions of his boyhood; one, he said, whose death, like his life,
was all peace, and that was part of the reward of the gentleness of
his nature, the fulness of which was hereafter.

Passing from stone to stone, to linger for a moment at this which told
its tale of the early call of the young and innocent, or at that which
spoke of many years and mayhap of many sorrows, I stopped near to one
which, from the quaintness of the inscription and chaste simplicity of
its form had a peculiar attraction for me. It was a cross in granite
with a wreath not unskilfully chiselled crowning the upper limb,
whilst along the extended arms was a single line, "The 'Widow and her
Son."

Leaning on a more aspiring tombstone near, I read again and again
these simple words, all the while imagination doing its work of making
a history for the mother and her child, when from this my second
reverie of the morning, I was again aroused by the voice of my aged
friend.

"I see you have been reading that inscription, sir," he said. "I
have," I, replied, "and it has stirred my curiosity rather strangely.
It seems to me that there is much which the tombstone does not tell."

"Very much indeed, sir," returned the sexton; "look around me as I may
at these familiar forms, there is not one amongst them tells as sad a
tale as this one."

"Your reply does not lessen my curiosity," I said; "and even if it be
the saddest of your sad experiences, and that I did not fear to
trespass too much upon your feelings or your time, I should ask you to
tell me the story of those whose resting-place is thus beautifully,
yet strangely marked."

"No trespass, sir, no trespass," the old man replied. "If the story be
one to recall a scene which will make my old eyes weep, it will just
be such a one as suits my heart this morning. So having yet an hour to
spare before the remains of my old friend can reach the ground, we
shall sit down upon this grave here whilst I tell you the story of
Mary Donovan and her boy."

Glancing around to see that no unexpected duty called him, he seated
himself on the mound proposed. I sat down beside him, an eager
listener to that which follows, given to you in words as near his own
as may be, but wanting in that richness of accent and figurative
expression peculiar to his class and to his country.

Had business or pleasure called you to Castlewellan some six years
ago, began the sexton, you could hardly have failed to meet a
good-natured innocent,  [Footnote 211] some seventeen or eighteen
years old, ever to be seen the first at Blaney's when a traveller
pulled up his horse for refreshments or coach or car, to set down or
to receive a passenger. Ere the rattle of hoof or wheel had ceased in
the courtyard before the inn, the voice of poor Ned Donovan was sure
to fall upon the stranger's ear in a greeting, wild, yet musical, and
with that peculiarity of expression which told the story plainly, that
he was one of those to whom, for his own wise purpose doubtless, God
had been but sparing in the gift of mind. And yet there was a childish
joyousness in his every look and tone that compensated in some measure
for his misfortune, evidence as it was that he was saved from the
cares and anxieties common even to those of his early years.

  [Footnote 211: Synonymous with "Idiot" among the Irish peasantry
  when used in this way; they rarely use the word idiot unless in
  derision.]

{797}

Ned loved the horses and the cars, and knew every professional driver
that came that way to fair or market for miles and miles around. He
reserved, however, especial affection for the regular roadsters, man
and beast; these I mean that drove daily to Blaney's from Newry,
Rathfriland, or Dromore. The men, well acquainted with his ways, never
spoke a hasty or unkind word to him, although he was occasionally
self.willed in the matter of the horse-feed and the watering. The
horses naturally returned the affection of one whose attendance upon
them was untiring. He talked to them incessantly in public or in
private; their comfort occupied the first place in his thought. He
curried, whisked them down, patted and praised their best points with
all the enthusiasm of a connoisseur, or, when the like happened,
mourned over a broken knee or a windgall as over some serious domestic
trouble, as indeed to him it was. All this and more of the kind was
done without fee or reward, save the privilege at all hours of the
kitchen fireside and the stables, with an occasional ride down to the
river, "wid the creatures for a drink," as he would say or "to wash
the mud from their legs, and bad scran to it."

Few days passed, however, failing to bring him a chance horse to hold
for a fine gentleman "wid boots and spurs bedad," or when he had not
an errand to run or to lend a helping hand with the luggage of some
generous traveller; and with these opportunities came sixpences,
sometimes even shillings, for his trouble, but oftener still just
because he was Ned Donovan. Many to whom his story was unknown often
wondered at the glistening eager eye with which he counted his
earnings over, and at the happiness an additional sixpence seemed to
give him; all this was so unlike the hourly evidences of his most
unselfish nature. Strangers, less charitable in mind than in pocket,
led astray by this seeming love of money, not unfrequently thought
that much of the boy's idiocy was put on, and they said so; but they
did not know him, nor happily he the meaning of their sneer. It was
amusing to follow him at the lucky moment when he got a shilling or so
in this way, when be invariably made straight for the bar of the inn
to deposit it with the utmost gravity of manner in the safe keeping of
good Mrs. Blaney. He had learnt from bitter experience how unsafe it
was to be his own banker, as he had frequently lost his earnings in
the hay loft or the stable, before the happy thought had struck him to
find a better keeper for them. You would have heard there, too, how he
invariably came at night to withdraw his funds, and how he always had
money given him, more or less. For there were unlucky days for Ned,
when travellers were few or forgetful; but his memory was far from
faithful in this regard, and good Mrs. Blaney was more than kind.

The reason for this seeming selfishness of Ned is easily told. He had
a mother whom he loved with all his strange impassioned nature, a
widowed mother. To receive her grateful smile in return for the wages
of his industry each evening when he reached his home was the crowning
happiness of the day.

God was kindly with him--he was not alone, poor boy! He had a mother,
and all that mother's love. Had you travelled that way you must have
noticed their little cottage at the turning going up the hill to St.
Mary's. You may see it even now as you pass, but the roses Mary
trained there are dead and gone, the little latticed window broken,
the garden weedy and desolate, telling its tale of sorrow like the
tombstone.

Mary Donovan had lived there for many years--since her boy was quite a
child. She came one morning, so the gossips said, a passenger by the
coach, somewhere from the North. Her child was then but four years
old, and then, as ever after, an object for the sympathy of the kind
of heart. She took humble lodgings and applied to the {798}
shopkeepers and the neighboring gentry for employment at her needle,
with which she was wonderfully skilled, they said. The prejudices
which met her at the first, from all save the kind landlady of the
"Stag," soon gave way before her patient, unbending uprightness of
character and the unfathomable sorrow that weighed her down, for
sorrow is a sacred thing; even the voice of scandal hushes in its
presence. Her past history was her secret. Whether it was one of shame
or of suffering virtue no tongue could tell. Silent as the grave to
all impertinent inquiry, meek and humble before her God, and gentle as
gentleness itself with every living thing, her mystery became
respected, and she and her boy beloved.

From that evening, when wet and weary from her journey, she first
awoke the kindly sympathies of the hostess of the "Stag"--the same
good-natured Mrs. Blaney--for twelve long years the widow pursued her
peaceful way, earning for herself and for her child not merely a
livelihood, but many of the comforts of dress and food, which were
looked upon as luxuries by those around her; and never did mother
receive more fulness of reward in the passionate love of offspring
than she in that of her all but mindless boy.

When he was yet a child often have I watched him sitting at her feet,
as she sat at the cottage door or window plying her ever busy needle,
listening to the strange stories of the fairies and the leprechauns of
the olden times she could tell so well. Of Heaven and its glories,
too, she would sometimes speak, to be interrupted by some strange
remark, suggestive of more than human wisdom. Then the startled mother
would fix her eyes upon his face so earnestly, as if in hope that God
at last would shed light upon the shadowed mind of her bereaved one,
to meet ever and always the glance of childish adoration, but with it,
alas! the vacant smile that spoke forgetfulness already of the
transitory ray of reason that a moment rested there.

Often have I stopped, as I passed that way, to listen to some quaint
old ballad full of the melancholy music of her voice, and make my
friendly inquiries for herself and child, sure to find him in his
usual resting-place. My welcome was a warm one always, and my grey
hairs--for they were grey even then, sir--often mingled with the
yellow curls of the boy as he clambered up my knee to kiss me. We were
warm friends, sir, Mary and I, for I and I only, of all living beings,
knew her secret and the story of her sorrow--and this was the way I
learned it:

One day, soon after her arrival in the town, I had just risen from
early mass in the chapel and turned in here upon my morning round,
when the voice of some one weeping bitterly, and the sad wail of a
child accompanying, drew my attention to a corner of the yard and to
the kneeling figure of a woman and that of a little boy, seated among
the long grass of the grave beside her. Mourners were no unfamiliar
sights to me, even at such an early hour, but the woman's dress
bespoke the stranger and awoke my curiosity. I neared the grave and
recognized it as that of a good old man, once the village
school-master, who had died two years before. I knew him well; for
many years he had dwelt amongst us, respected for himself as for his
calling. He had been happy in the affections of an only child--a
daughter, the very picture of her mother, he used to say, whom he had
buried amongst strangers. In her was centred his every earthly hope.
She was his pride, and her pleasure all the reward he sought in a life
laden with all the petty vexatious of the teacher. She forsook him and
her happy home, and fled to England with one whom she had known for a
few weeks only, who had met her at Rostrevor, where her father's fond
indulgence had sent her for the season; forsook all for a
husband--scandal said, a lover--who, whilst enamored of her beauty,
scorned her father's poverty. The old man never raised his head again
in the village. Two years of sorrow, and the grave closed over him.
{799} I made it. The savings of his industrious life still lay in the
hands of the village pastor in safe-keeping for the lost one should
she ever return to claim it; but Mary never claimed it.

I drew nearer, for my heart told me who the mourner was. I, too, had
loved the girl, as who indeed had not? I, too, had shared the sorrow
of her honest father, and many a time had yearned to know the fate of
the fair-haired daughter of his affection.

I drew still nearer; my step was noiseless upon the grass. I leaned
upon a headstone near me. I spoke the words that pressed for
utterance, "Mary, Mary," I said, "You come too late, too late!"

She started from the grave; an exclamation of terror and surprise
broke from her. She looked me wildly in the face as if the spirit of
her injured father stood in shape before her, and recognizing the sad
features of that father's friend, she sank, sobbing convulsively, upon
the grave again, hiding her pale face in the long grass which covered
it.

I raised her kindly in my arms, and sitting down beside her, her
wondering yet gentle boy between my knees, I heard her sad tale of
passion and remorse. No other ever heard that story; she asked my
silence and I spoke not.

From that time forward, year after year, the penitent paid frequent
visits to her lather's grave; her gentle manner asked for no inquiry,
and none was made, and there was nothing left of the once joyous
daughter of the school-master to challenge recognition. The boy, too,
seemed to love the place, and oftentimes accompanied her. For her sake
it was he loved it, seeming to comprehend that here there was
something sharing with him her affection, some link which bound them
both to the place for ever.

Well, years passed on; and, as I have said, the voice of scandal had
long been hushed; the child had almost reached to manhood, and the
silver threads of time and sorrow had stolen in among the once golden
locks of the mother. Childlike ever, and uniformly good and cheerful,
Ned rose each morning, and as it had been for some years, the daylight
was not more certain to enter the pleasant bar-room of the "Stag" than
was the shadow of the innocent to fall across its threshold, its
earliest visitor. Evening brought him home with his caresses, his
childish chat; and his petty earnings to his mother, who, happy at the
pleasure his employment gave him, was profuse in the praises that he
loved to hear.

And so matters had gone on for years, just as if they might have done
so for ever, when God in his wisdom brought that sore affliction upon
us all--the famine and the sickness of '47. Who that has lived
through that year of misery and horror, but shudders at the
remembrances its very name recalls? Who but wails some beloved one
snatched away with scarce a moment's warning?--the child from its
mother's arms; the mother from the child's caresses; the youth
standing, full of hope on the threshold of his manhood, when the warm
blood froze suddenly in his veins, the glad visions of his future
faded before him as the relentless hand of death seized him with a
grasp of iron, leaving him upon the earth but one hour of agony, and
the breath to say farewell; the aged flung into the grave upon whose
brink they had, trembling, stood for years clinging to life with more
than the tenacity of the young;--all, all stricken with that horror of
dissolution; bowed down as if a curse had fallen upon us for our sins
as once came the plague upon the Egyptians.

First amongst the victims was the long-tried, patient Mary. With
sufficient warning only to bring the good priest to her side, to
receive the last rites of her faith, to press in her enfeebled arms
her terror-stricken son, and upon his lips one agonizing kiss--and her
soul was with its God.

The agony of the boy when once he realized the great grief that had
fallen upon him was, they told me, so fearful and so wild as, to wring
with horror the {800} hearts of all who heard him. After a time he was
somewhat pacified by the gentle persuasion of the priest and the kind
soothing of some good-natured neighbors, who, disregarding the danger
of the infection, had gathered in, out of love and pity. They strove
to lead him from the death-bed; but no! the first paroxysm of despair
once over, he sat him down, silent yet stern, by the bed side. He
spoke not, he wept not. Apparently unconscious of the presence of
others as of his own existence, the icy fingers of one hand clasped in
his, he thus sat gazing, motionless as stone, upon the dead face of
his mother.

On through the long hours of that autumn night sat the stricken
mourner, and though daylight came, aye, even the sunlight that he
loved stole in and crept up upon the bed till it fell upon the placid
features of the dead illumining them as with the glory of immortality,
still he moved not. Dead as the dead he seemed, in all but the
strange, weird evidence of being in his eyes. Stolid he remained to
all remonstrances; silent as motionless to all words of comfort. The
hour came at last for preparation toward the removal of the body--for
the cholera did not spare the poor body after death, decay set in so
rapidly--when, contrary to the expectation of all, the innocent
voluntarily arose and even assisted at the necessary duties, duties
which must have conveyed to him the knowledge of his approaching
parting with her to whom he still clung as lovingly in death as he had
done in life.

It was the afternoon of the day following that of Mary's death when a
few neighbors gathered to see her home, poor girl! I should not, say a
few either, for they were many at such a time, when the dead cart
rattled hourly past the door, and sorrowing and desolation was in
every home.

They bore her from the cottage and along the way leading to the
burying ground of Castlewellan, the parish she had lived and died in.
The wailing orphan walked stealthily behind, his head low bent,
unearthly pallor on his face, his fingers interlaced before him every
motion and expression speaking of the sorrow unto death, of the mortal
agony of desolation.

Mournfully the procession passed along till it reached the cross road
leading to this village here; but continuing their journey, those
forming it were suddenly interrupted by a wild unearthly cry from the
lips of the idiot.

"Where are yez goin', men, where are yez goin', men, I say? You must
take her to Drumbhan, you must take her to Drumbhan! She said she
would lie there some day beside her father; do you hear that, men? So
bring her to Drumbhan, I say!"

His agony was fearful, his shriek inhuman in the fierceness of its
passion. The bearers stopped, the mourners gathered around the boy,
but vain was every effort to appease him, and still his cry rose far
above their words of comfort: "Bring her to Drumbhan, oh! bring her to
Drumbhan!"

None there knew, as I have said, the mother's story, and all believed
this but a wild unreasonable fancy of poor Ned's; but had it been
otherwise, what could they do? The grave was already made, and the
good priest waiting to give the last religious rite to the body of
this patient and enduring Christian.

Seeing that they again moved on, Ned suddenly ceased his cry, as if he
had formed some strange resolution which pacified him, and relapsed
into the sudden gloom that had preceded the outcry of his anguish.
They buried her; he came away quietly with them. They sought, some of
them, to bring him to their houses, thinking to save him the agony of
returning home just then to miss her presence; but all efforts to lead
him any way but that toward his desolate home were fruitless He
returned to the cottage. He sat down by the vacant bed and rocked
himself to and fro, singing with mournful pathos snatches from an old
ballad, a favorite of his mother's.

{801}

An old neighbor promising to remain with him that night and care for
the cottage till next day, when arrangements were to be made for the
disposal of its contents and for the future of poor Ned, the others
went to their homes.

The shadows of the night came down. In and near the cottage all was
silent. The old woman crept toward the boy to rouse him from his
lethargy, and to urge him to take some food which she had prepared for
him. He was asleep. Thanking God for this, his greatest gift to the
sorrowing heart, the old woman sat down, and, covering her shoulders
with her clock, dozed away an hour or two, then awoke and watched,
then slept again, again awoke to find the idiot still asleep, then
slept again.

About an hour after sunrise she started from her seat, alarmed by an
outcry at the door, her name being loudly called, "In God's name,
what's the matter? who's dead now? is it the priest, alanna?"

"Oh! may the Lord be betune us an harum," said a voice from amongst a
crowd of excited people at the door, "if they haven't raised poor
Mary's body in the night! Here's Brian an' myself saw the empty grave
as we passed by the chapel yard just now. Sure never was such a thing
as that ever heard of before in Castlewellan anyhow."

"Whisht, whisht, for the love av God," said the old woman, "or Ned
will hear yez," and turning toward the bedside, hoping that he still
slept quietly, she saw but his vacant seat--the boy was gone.

"I know it all, I know it all," she cried. "As sure as God's in heaven
this day, he's gone and raised her up himself. I heard him in his
sleep, the crature, but thought nothing of his demented talk. Go after
him, men! Go after him, I say! He has gone wid her to Drumbhan."

They hurried off with many others who now heard this extraordinary
story. They ran eagerly down the hill toward the village here. You
know the distance, maybe? Two long miles at least. Well, when they had
reached within half a mile of this spot, sure enough, God knows, they
overtook the crazy boy, wheeling before him on a barrow the coffin
containing the dead body of his mother.

Never did human eye see sight like this before. He heard their hurried
footsteps coming on behind him, and setting down the barrow gently on
the road, he turned suddenly upon them with all the frenzy of the
fiercest madness in his face, and raising up the spade that lay beside
the coffin, and brandishing it above his head, he cried, "Back, back,
I tell you all; touch her one of you, and I'll cleave him! Didn't I
tell you to bring her to Drumbhan? Didn't I tell you she wanted to
sleep down here beside her father? You thought that you were good, did
you, and Father Connor, too, to put her up in the hill beside the big
church there? But what did you know? what did you know? Did she tell
any of you last night that she couldn't rest there; did she do that, I
say? No, no, she came to me who loved her, to her own poor Ned--she
came and asked me to bring her to Drumbhan; and so I will--so I will,
I say, in spite of you all! in spite of you all!"

So saying, he raised the barrow once again and passed onward with his
burden. They spoke not. They made no effort to turn him from his
purpose. Many there were who would gladly have eased the exhausted
creature of his burden, but, awe-stricken, they feared to approach
him, and silently fell behind a second time in sad procession at the
widow's funeral.

At last he reached the gate there. I was standing at it when he came.
He wheeled his burden along that path behind us, and to the grave,
here. I followed with the rest, as powerless to interfere as they. He
laid down the barrow gently again, and taking up the spade he had
carried with him, began to dig the grave. I joined him. He looked at
me at first inquiringly; then recognizing me, muttered something to
himself as if approvingly. Other hands besides ours were soon at work,
and a {802} few minutes more found Mary resting by her father's side
and the last sod carefully replaced--when, failing only when his task
was done, the worn-out boy sank senseless upon the grave.

They carried him away gently, and when consciousness returned, they
soothed him with kind words. The women blessed him and praised his
mother, and his love for her, till recollection returned, and tears
for his loss stole silently down the idiot's cheeks. All traces of
passion had disappeared, and in its place there seemed the evidence of
a new-born intelligence in the mute yet expressive sorrow of that pale
face.

He went with them without a murmur; several times turned hastily
whilst in sight of the graveyard to look back, then disappeared.

All that day the picture of that poor creature and the scene in which
he played so strange a part, haunted me at every step. Still I saw him
coming as he did that morning down the hill; the barrow, the coffin,
the crowd walking solemnly after. Still I saw it through that long,
long day, and leave my fancy it would not. That night I could not
rest. True, I had loved poor Mary and I had loved her boy; still I had
laid away in their narrow beds many, very many that were dear to me,
linked to my affection by the closest ties of kindred, but I had never
sorrowed, old man as I was, as I had done that day; never felt such
awe at the untold mystery of our nature and the wonderful ways of my
God.

In the morning I arose early, early for me, and although no duty
called me here till after early prayer's, I took my spade upon my
shoulder and came upon my way, feeling drawn toward the place, I knew
not why.

The morning was as beautiful as this one, and, as I think I have said
before, the season of the year the same. Already here and there I
noticed, as I came along, familiar faces in the fields, and some, too,
of my neighbors I met upon the road; but contrary to my usual custom l
avoided the familiar chat so frequently indulged in when we met each
other at such an early hour, passing on with a "good morrow" only,
eager to reach Drumbhan.

Some twenty minutes brought me to the chapel, for I lived then as I do
now, a short mile below there. I went in to say a prayer, conscious of
my weakness, in the hope to shake the weight from off my shoulders
that pressed me down so heavily. Thence passing into the graveyard
here, I turned my eyes in this direction to behold, prostrate upon the
grave of his. mother, the loving, harmless boy.

My knees trembled as with palsy. How came he here? I said, and when?
Why, I asked not; I knew too well of this love that was more than
earthly. Tottering, I drew near; I called him by his name. He answered
not. I called again. No voice replied; nor sound, nor motion was there
save the echo of my voice and my hurried footfall as I neared the
spot. I stooped, I raised him in my arms, I parted from his brow the
long hair damp with the dew of morning. I gazed upon that pale, pale
face, which, in the holy peace that rested there, spoke of the
goodness and the mercy of our Heavenly Father, into whose holy keeping
the spotless soul had passed. He was dead.

The sexton's tale was told.



{803}

ORIGINAL.

LIGHT.

Gaudium lucis AEternae.


  When the twilight veil is closing
    Gently o'er each darkening scene,
  Love we not the shades reposing
    Underneath its misty screen?

  When, like ruins dim and hoary,
    Forms are outlined on the sky,
  See we not surpassing glory
    In the day-god's closing eye?

  Yes! But from the LIGHT is given
    All the grace of coming night;
  And the change from day to even
    Is a change of varied light!

  Silent midnight reigneth over
    Scenes so lately bright and fair,
  Shades like gliding spectres hover.
    Round each faint-traced image there;

  And the darkness' onward stealing
    Shrouds the earth with dusky pall,
  But from LIGHT, the dim revealing
    Even of midnight's glories fall.

  And the purer spirit-vision
    Is a world all fair and bright;
  Ever in the dream elysian
    Joy is of "eternal light."

Marie.



{804}

From The Dublin University Magazine.

MEDIAEVAL BOOKS AND HYMNS.  [Footnote 212]

  [Footnote 212: The reader will bear in mind that the author of the
  following paper is a Protestant minister.-ED. CATH. WORLD.]

The fall of Rome was the annihilation of a great dominant power, a
power which had been supreme; and when the barbarians marched into her
streets and devastated her homes, the world sunk back into a tenebrous
night of social, intellectual, and moral darkness. Her mighty empire,
held together like one country by her genius, was broken up and
divided amongst the different tribes who had poured down from the
north and overrun Europe, divided just as the fortune of war or the
caprice of choice indicated. It was the approach of a moral chaos; but
the hand whose guidance is to be felt in the life of individuals, and
may be traced in the history of nations, did not abandon the world to
the utter confusion of its own impulses. As the imperial power of Rome
fell away and died out like an effete thing, wasted by its own'
corruption, a new power was springing up in vigorous youth by the side
of that which was declining. Christianity was advancing toward the
west with rapid strides, victorious through the persecution of tyranny
and the jealousy of philosophy; it was then taking its stand in the
world as an influence; but if at this moment amid the vast changes and
subversion of things which took place after the fall of Rome,
Christianity had been merely a reformed philosophy, and had been left
to the mercy of pagan barbarians, it would have been extinguished in
its infancy. That was avoided by a remarkable concatenation of
circumstances. For centuries there had been an apprehension in the
Roman empire of an advance of the barbarous nations in the north of
Europe, symptoms of which had manifested themselves in the earliest
period of the Christian era. Toward the latter end of the second
century the most powerful of these tribes, the Goths, impelled by some
influx of other barbarians, advanced from their position near the
mouth of the Vistula, invaded the Roman frontier, and took Dacia,
where they were found by the Emperor Caracalla at the opening of the
third century, in the middle of which they were allowed by Aurelian to
settle along the banks of the Euxine, when they were divided into two
parts--the "Ostro" or Eastern, and the "Visi" or Western Goths. In the
next century a terrible alarm was raised amongst them, which even
penetrated into the Roman empire, and up to its capital, where it was
related that an awful race of beings--savage, ugly, inhuman, begotten
of the devil--were pouring in thousands out of the deserts and plains
of Asia into Europe. Such were the Huns. Already they had reached the
territory of the Ostrogoths, whom they compelled to supply them with
guides to lead them on toward the Visigoths. These latter at their
approach fled in the extremity of terror toward the Danube, and
implored the protection of Valens the emperor, who allowed them to
settle in Moesia, upon the condition that they should defend the
imperial frontier. In less than forty years afterward from defending
the Roman frontier they sacked Rome. But during this interval an
incident took place which had a great influence upon the destinies of
Christianity. After the settlement with Valens, an intercourse of a
somewhat friendly character sprung up between the Romans and {805}
these barbarian defenders of the frontier. The church was suffering
from her great Arian apostasy--a form of scepticism exactly parallel
to that new light of modern times called Rationalism. Valens was an
Arian, and, wishing to convert these pagan barbarians, sent a
missionary amongst them in the person of the renowned Ulphilas, whom
he made bishop of the Moeso-Goths. This great bishop labored
assiduously for the conversion of the barbarians, invented an
alphabet, and translated the Scriptures with his own hand into their
strange idiom. His labors were blessed with success; the Goths
embraced Christianity, though in the Arian form; and fifty years
afterward, when Alaric led them into Rome, amid the tumult of the
unfettered license of the soldiers, an order was issued to respect the
churches of the apostles and the sacred places. In the midst of the
devastation of the city and through the very thick of the riot, a band
of priests and devotees were seen marching under the protection of
Gothic soldiery, carrying on their heads the sacred vessels of St.
Peter, and mingling with the shoutings of the ravagers the chant of
solemn psalms. Under Gothic protection, and by the express order of
the Gothic king, the sacred vessels were deposited in safety at the
Vatican; numbers of Christians joined the procession and received
shelter, whilst many who were not Christians also availed themselves
of the opportunity to join the band of believers and escape in the
general confusion.  [Footnote 213]

  [Footnote 213: Oroslus Hist., lib. vii. c. 39.]

This was the first indication of the new life which was to dawn upon
the world under the influence of Christianity. Gradually all the
tribes of barbarians yielded to its influence--the Burgundians in
Gaul, the Vandals in Africa, the Suevi in Spain, the Ostrogoths, the
Franks, and then the Saxons in England; but the early conversions of
these barbarians were to the Arian form of Christianity then in the
ascendant. Its principal tenet was the denial of the equality of the
Son to the Father; and the heresy spread until the error, after being
vigorously combated, was suppressed, and the new nations won back to
the orthodox faith. Thus was this compensation for the overturn of
civilization effected; the world was not abandoned to utter
destruction, it was indeed given up to the hands of rude barbarians,
but they in turn were subjected to a new influence which accompanied
them to the various kingdoms founded upon the ruins of' the extinct
empire, and formed the basis in each of those kingdoms of a new and
higher civilization. With the fall of Rome the gods of the pagans were
overturned, their temples destroyed; and in the midst of the
devastation, the ruin, and, the despair into which the world was
sinking, the Church of Christ arose as the guiding spirit, the pioneer
of the new life. Another incident in connection with the establishment
of Christianity, which saved the lore of ancient times from
destruction, was the adoption of the Latin language by the church; for
although that language had made a settlement in many of the countries
subject to the Roman arms, yet a tendency soon sprung up, from the
mixture with barbarian invaders, to the degeneracy of the Latin tongue
and the rise of new and separate idioms. But it was preserved in
comparative purity in the church, which naturally led to the
preservation of its most noble monuments; and it ultimately became,
when the modern languages were in their infancy, the tongue especially
devoted to the transmission of learning. History, poetry, science, and
what little there was of literature, found a medium of communication
and a means of preservation in the Latin language. Had it not been
adopted by the church then for some centuries, whilst the new tongues
were gradually developing and settling into a form, the world would
have been dark indeed, not a book, not a page, not a {806} syllable
would have reached us of the thought, the life, or the events of that
period.

From the fourth to the seventh century there would have been an
impenetrable gap in the annals of humanity--the voice of history would
have been hushed into a dead silence, and the light of the past which
beacons the future would have been extinguished in the darkness of a
universal chaos. In England, however, the case was somewhat different.
From the earliest period of the Saxon domination there was a struggle
for a literature in the vulgar tongue. The Saxons had brought with
them a vast store of traditional poetry out of which one specimen has
been preserved, consisting of an epic poem in forty-three cantos, and
about 6,000 lines--the oldest epic of modern times. It is called, "The
Gleeman's Song," and was composed by Beowulf in their native wilds and
brought over with them in the fifth century. It is a strange poem,
impregnated with the vigorous air of the North; strength and
simplicity being its chief characteristics. The principal personage is
Hrothgar the king, and the poem is full of incidental descriptions of
manners and customs which afterward became native to England, and
linger about among us even now: there are great halls, ale-carousals,
fighting with giants, the elements of a rude chivalry, and an
invincible prowess which dares both dragons and ghosts. But the first
native writer in Anglo-Saxon after the conversion to Christianity is
Caedmon, who lived in the latter part of the seventh century (680);
The story of his miraculous inspiration is recorded by Bede.
[Footnote 214]

  [Footnote 214:  Eccl. llist., lib. iv., c. 24.]

He was born in Northumbiria and was a monk of Whitby. He paraphrased
large portions or the Scripture, and has aptly been called the
Anglo-Saxon Milton; indeed it is more than probable that the Puritan
poet borrowed the ideas of his sublime soliloquy of Satan in
Pandemonium from this Saxon monk; After Satan's overthrow, Caedmon
says--[Footnote 215]

  [Footnote 215: Thorpe's edition of Caedmon.]

  "Then spake he worde:
  This narrow place is most unlike
  that other that we formerly knew
  high in Heaven's kingdom,
  which my master bestowed on me,
  Though we it for the All.powerful
  may not possess.
  We must cede our realm."

So Milton--

  "O how unlike the place from whence they fell!"

and in the words of Satan--

  "Is this the region, this the soil, the clime,
  That we must change for heaven, this mournful 	gloom
  For that celestial light? Be it so, since he
  Who now is Sovran can dispose and bid
  What shall be right."

Caedmon's notion of Pandemonium is the prototype of Milton:

  "But around me lie
    iron bonds;
    presseth this cord of chain,
    I am powerless!
    me have so hard
    the clasps of hell
    so firmly grasped.
    Here is a vast fire
    above and underneath;
    never did I see a loathlier landskip;
    the flame abateth not
    hot over hell.
    Me hath the clasping of these rings,
    this hard polished band,
    impeded in my course,
    debarred me from my way.
    My feet are bound,
    my hands are manacled
    . . . . .
    About me the
    huge gratings
    of hard iron,
    forged with heat,
    with which me God
    hath fastened by the neck."

Nearly all these ideas are incorporated in Milton's sublime picture--

  ". . . .   down
  To bottomless perdition, there to dwell
  In adamantine chains and penal fire."
  . . . . . _Line 48_.
  "Seest thou yon dreary plain, forlorn and wild?"
  . . . . . _Line 180_.
  "A dungeon horrible, on all sides round,
  As one great furnace, flamed."
        _Line 61_
  ". . . . torture without end
  Still urges, and a fiery deluge fed
  With ever-burning sulphur unconsumed."
       _Line 67_.

But after the death of Caedmon (680), there must have been a great
deal of poetry written which is now lost, for we read that Bede, on
his {807} death-bed, repeated several passages from national poets,
one of which is preserved in that interesting description of the last
moments of the great historian, written by S. Cuthbert, who was with
him to the end.  [Footnote 216] But the chivalrous poetry of tradition
gave way to that of  religion, which is the characteristic of Saxon
song after the sixth century.

  [Footnote 216: Asseri Annaies (Gale's Collec.) ann.; 731.]

We are also told that Aldhelm,
bishop of Sherbourne, who died in the year 709, was one of the best
poets of his day. But still at this period, although there was a
struggle after a national literature, the great works were all written
in Latin; and Bede, much as he admired the Saxon poets of his country,
intrusted his Ecclesiastical History to the only idiom sacred to
learning. Gildas and Nennius, who preceded Bede, also wrote in Latin.
But the Saxons were the first out of all the barbarians to acquire a
vernacular literature. Of that literature we are scarcely competent to
judge; but from what has come down to us, from allusions in history,
from the state of education among them, we may safely conclude that
although little has survived, it was not a poor literature. We must
remember the continual scenes of devastation which took place during
the period of their domination; when monasteries were rifled, books
burnt, and manuscripts wantonly destroyed. From the time of Alfred,
only one Anglo-Saxon writer of any consequence has come down to us,
Olfric; but from what we know of Saxon progress we may be assured
there were many others. It is evident from the state of education
among them. Before the middle of the seventh century schools had
sprung up, and toward the latter end an impetus was given to learning
by the labors of Theodore and Adrian, of whom Bede asserts that they
gathered together a crowd of disciples, and taught them not only the
books of Holy Writ, but the arts of ecclesiastical poetry, astronomy,
and arithmetic, and adds in proof that some of their scholars were
alive in his day who were as well versed in the Greek and Latin
tongues as their own.  [Footnote 217]

  [Footnote 217: Eccl. Hist. lib., iv., c. 2.]

Even the ladies among the Saxons were well educated, for it was to
them that Aldhelm addressed his work De Laude Virginitatis, and
Boniface corresponded with ladies in Latin. In the ninth century also
we find that schools were flourishing in various parts of the kingdom,
especially the one at York, under Archbishop Egbert, who taught Greek,
Latin, and Hebrew to the scholars, amongst whom was Alcuin the friend
of Charlemagne. From the letters of Alcuin, but more especially from
his History of the Church of York, we may learn that for the same
there was a renowned library there, and as it is the earliest list of
books--the first catalogue of an English library extant--we may as
well subjoin it. Alcuin says that in his library were the works of
Jerome, Hilarius, Ambrose, Augustine, Athanasius, Gregory, Pope Leo,
Basil, Chrysostom, and others. Bede and Aldhelm, the native authors,
of course were there. In history and philosophy there were Orosius,
Boethius, Pompeius, Pliny, Aristotle, and Cicero. In poetry, Sedulius
Juveneus, Prosper, Arator, Paulinus, Fortunatus, Lactantius; and of
the classics, Virgil, Statius, and Lucan. Of grammarians there was a
great number, such as Probus, Phocas, Donatus, Priscian, Servius,
Eutyehius, and Commianus. Boniface was a great book collector, and
used to send them home to England. So that we may fairly conclude that
if the Danish depredations and the internal dissensions of the country
had not been so fatal to the treasures hoarded up in monastic
libraries we should have had much more of Saxon literature. The
influence of Dunstan, too, gave an impulse to learning both in the
country {808} generally and in the church. He himself was a scholar, a
musician, an artist, an illuminator, and a man of science;  [Footnote
218] but the most prominent figure is Bede, who, as we observed, wrote
in Latin; he was well versed in Greek and Hebrew.

  [Footnote 218: "Artem scribendi necne citharizaudi pariterque
  pingendi peritiam diligenter excoluit."--Cotton MSS.---Cleop., B
  xiii., fol., 69. ]

He wrote many works--thirty-seven according to his own list, including
compilations; but the most important was his Ecclesiastical History,
which traces the course of the national church from the earliest times
down to 731, within four years of his own death. In his introduction
he honestly gives us a list of his materials, from which we can gather
that in all parts of the country the bishops and abbots had
instinctively turned their attention to historical writing; for he
says he was indebted to Albinus, abbot of St. Augustine's, Canterbury,
for the particulars of the Augustinian mission and the history of the
Kentish Church generally, and to Northelm, a priest of London, who had
discovered at Rome the epistles of Pope Gregory upon the subject; from
Daniel, bishop of the West Saxons, he received much assistance as to
the history of that province and the adjoining. Abbot Esius, of East
Anglia, and Cunebert, of Lindsey, are also mentioned as contributing
valuable materials. So that this history of Bede is compiled from the
most authentic sources, and forms one of the most valuable collections
of ecclesiastical annals extant in any nation. It is a fact worthy of
note in the history of letters, that these early prelates of the Saxon
Church, and in fact the monks in the various monasteries scattered
over the country from the earliest period, and even down to their
decadence, silently and patiently recorded the events of their times
and of their church, and that their labors, such as have been rescued
from the ravages of the past, form the only true "materia historica"
of modern writers. But we pass on from the time of Bede to that of
Alfred, under whose influence the Saxon language almost displaced the
use of the Latin. The extraordinary vicissitudes of his life have been
elsewhere recorded, but in literature he was an historian, a
theologian, a commentator, and a transcriber. His principal works were
translations of Gregory's Pastoral Care, the Universal History of
Orosius, Boethius's Consolations of Philosophy, Bede's Ecclesiastical
History, and several parts of the Bible; but he not only translated,
but interpolated whole pages of his own. In the Pastoral Care he has
inserted original prayers; in the History of Orosius there is a sketch
of the state of Germany by him, and the translation of Boethius is
tesselated with profound and pointed thoughts, which fairly entitle
him to the name of philosopher. The greatest achievement of King
Alfred was perhaps the reviving and restarting the Saxon Chronicle. It
is probable that from the earliest times of the Saxon rule a national
record of events had been kept somewhere, either from the instinct of
preservation or by concert. The evidence of Bede proves that it was
done in the church as regards ecclesiastical matters, and we know that
in the time of Alfred there was a short record of bare events, with
now and then a genealogy treasured up and handed down from age to age.
It was his thought and care to reform these records and restart the
Chronicle as a great national archive. For this purpose, he enjoined
Plegmund, Archbishop of Canterbury, to collect what could be found,
write it out fairly, and commence his labors as the chronicler of the
period. From that time the records are fuller and more in detail, and
down to the year 1154 it was kept up by different men in different
monasteries, who were eye-witnesses of the events they recorded, and
out of whose labors there are only six original MSS. extant of this
great national work. The first is called the Plegmund, or Benet MSS.,
because it was, as we have said, compiled by Plegmund at the
instigation of Alfred, and is preserved in Benet {809} (Corpus
Christi) College, Cambridge. From the year 891 it is written in
different hands and by different people down to the year 1070. The
second copy is in the Cottonian Collection at the British Museum
(Tiberius, A vi.), written apparently by one hand, which has been
attributed to Dunstan, and it terminates at the year 977, eleven years
before his death. The third copy is in the same collection (Cotton
Tiberius, B i.), and is thought to have been written in the monastery
of Abingdon; it reaches down to 1066. The fourth copy is also in the
Cottonian collection (Tiberius, B iv.), written by different men down
to the year 1079. The fifth manuscript is in the Bodleian library at
Oxford (Laud, E 80), from internal evidence, written in the year 1122,
compiled from older materials, and carried down in different hands to
the year 1154, showing the gradual degeneracy of the Saxon language
under Norman influence, from 1132 to the end. The sixth and last
manuscript is in the Cottonian library (Domitian, A viii.). It has
been accredited to a Canterbury monk; it is written in Latin and
Saxon, and terminates in 1058. Besides these six, one other MS. is
mentioned as of great value, being a transcription of a Cottonian MS.,
which perished in a fire at Dean's yard in 1731. It is in the Dublin
library (E, 5-15), and was written by Lombard in 1863-64.  [Footnote
219]

  [Footnote 219: For a more detailed account of these MSS. see Preface
  to Bohn's edition of the Translation of Bede and Saxon Chronicle.]

Scarcely any country in Europe possesses such an historical treasure
as this, so authentic and so characteristic. It is a very interesting
study to note its many peculiarities; there are sad gaps in its
records, as though the sorrow of the land was too great to be
recorded, and the hand had failed; there are songs of triumph at the
defeat of the enemy, and pathetic lamentations over desolated homes;
there are noble panegyrics upon men of blessed memory, who had fought
up bravely for their church and country, and words of bitter scorn for
traitors, cowards, and profligates; it contains pious reflections,
ejaculations, and aspirations; it is a most vivid picture of the
manners, the thoughts, the joys, the sorrows of the most interesting
and important period in the history of our country, as though the life
itself, with its characters and incidents, were made to pass before
our eyes in a rapid panorama.

Such was the result of one of Alfred's many plans for the good of his
kingdom. His own diligence as a writer and translator told vitally
upon the language, then rapidly improving. Latin manuscripts had for
some time previously been interlined with Anglo-Saxon "glosses"--that
is, interpretations of Latin words and passages in Anglo-Saxon--and
this gradually led to the complete transcription of Latin MSS. into
Anglo-Saxon, and the writing of original matter in the vernacular
tongue.  [Footnote 220]

  [Footnote 220: A specimen of this interlinear translation may be
  seen in the Cottonian collection--Vespasian, A i.--a Psalter
  written in the year 1000, in Latin capitals, with an Anglo-Saxon
  interpretation between the lines.]

Although only one writer of any consequence has been handed down to us
from the time of Alfred, yet we may fairly infer that many others
lived and wrote, whose works were destroyed in the ravages made by the
Danes from that time to the Norman conquest, and afterward when Norman
monks looked with contempt upon Saxon MSS., and used them for other
purposes, such as binding or transcription after erasure. The Latin
then once more became the language of literature in this country.
Still the Saxon lived, and would not be trampled out by the Normans,
though it degenerated sadly until, in the fourteenth century, an idiom
sprung up by a mingling of the two, which has been called Semi-Saxon.
Out of this came the early English, from which, after an additional
Saxon infusion from Puritan times, came the idiom we now use, whose
strong Saxon basis bids fair to make it live through all time, and, is
spreading it in every quarter of the world.

{810}

It will be interesting to note at this point that two men managed to
preserve a great deal of literary matter out of the gross Vandalism
which was rife, Archbishop Parker and Sir Robert Cotton. Parker's
collection is in Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, and those of
Cotton in the British Museum, the present reference to which, under
the titles of Roman emperor's, arose from the circumstance that in his
own library they were arranged on shelves, over each of which was a
bust of one of the Roman emperors. In this way, and by the diligence
of these two men, many valuable MSS. were rescued which had passed
into the hands of private individuals and booksellers.

All hopes of a national vernacular literature were, however,
frustrated by the advent of the Normans. Centuries before, the French
had ceased to sing their mournful litany, "A furore Normannorum libera
nos Domine," and had found it advisable to give these troublesome
strangers a settlement. Here they had multiplied and thriven until the
middle of the eleventh century, when they were the most promising
people in Europe. There are traits in the Norman character not unlike
the Roman. The Gothic tribes generally adopted the language and, to a
certain extent, the customs of the countries they conquered; but the
Normans, like the Romans, always endeavored to graft their own
language and customs upon their vanquished. As soon, therefore, as
William had made his tenure sure in England, he began the work of
Saxon extermination by ordering that the elements of grammar should be
taught in the French language, that the Saxon caligraphy should be
abandoned, and all deeds, pleadings in courts, and laws should be in
French. Saxon then sunk into contempt, and those of the old race who
were more politic than patriotic set to work vigorously to acquire the
elements of the favorite tongue. Then also the custom of writing books
in Latin was revived, and continued, as regards all important works,
down to the sixteenth century; for although books were written in
English before that time, the language was in a very crude state; for
as in Germany and other countries, so in England, the event which
first fixed the language was the translation of the Bible into the
vernacular; the book, which everybody read, soon became an authority,
and was appealed to on points of language. Still the influence of the
Normans was beneficial, both upon the manners and the literature of
the country. The Saxons, with all their greatness, were not a very
refined people; they were given to carousals of which we can scarcely
form any conception, their diet was coarse, and their manners
unpolished; but the Normans, if not more simple in their habits, were
more refined. Norman extravagance found vent, not in drunken orgies
and riotous feasting, but in fine buildings, horses, trappings, and
dress. [Footnote 221] The importation of provincial poetry in the
shape of Trouvere poems, romances, and fabliaux, had a refining effect
upon the literature, and laid the foundation of English chivalry. But
the most beneficial effect was the introduction of two or three master
spirits into the country, whose friendship William had formerly
cultivated. Of the two most important we will give a rapid sketch.

  [Footnote 221: There is a very good comparison of the manners of the
  two races drawn by William of Malmesbury in his Gesta Regum; and,
  being related to both, he is likely to have given a fair estimate.]

In the early morning of a day in the first quarter of the eleventh
century, a poor young scholar walked through the gates of Pavia, staff
in hand, into the open country, and made his weary way across the
Alps. He was heavy in heart and light in purse; he had lost his
parents, and had left his native city to seek the scanty livelihood of
a vagrant scholar, and yet bound up in that ragged form, as it were in
an undeveloped germ, were wealth, power, and influence; he was making
his way, {811} as far as he knew, to some of those French schools of
disputation which had sprung up, where a poor scholar whose wits had
been sharpened by scanty fare, might, by a happy sophism or a crushing
conclusion, earn a bed and refreshment for the night; but he was in
reality making his way to fame, distinction, and wealth, to a
conqueror's court, and to the episcopal throne of Canterbury. This
ragged scholar, who thus left his native city, was Lanfranc, a name
familiar to English ears and ever memorable in English history, For
some years he led this vagrant life, travelling from place to place,
disputing and studying, when he once more returned to Pavia and
established himself as a pleader. His eloquence soon brought fame and
competence; but urged by some hidden impulse, he threw up the
prospects open to him; once more left the city, and once more took his
way across the Alps and settled at Avranches in Normandy, where many
schools were established. He soon found disciples; but the secret
yearning of his heart developed itself--the monastery of Bea was not
far distant, and to it he bent his steps, hoping to find that peace
which the cloister alone could afford. But he was not allowed to
remain in obscurity, his scholars and others, attracted by his fame,
crowded around him, flocked to his lectures, and the school of Bea
became so renowned that the attention of the young Duke of Normandy,
who also had in him the germ of a glorious career, was attracted to
this rising dialectician, and through the medium of intellectual
intercourse a friendship was engendered which procured for the
conqueror of England a wise and trusty adviser, and paved the way to
fortune for, the poor student. The remainder of his career may be
summed up in a few words. William had just founded a new monastery at
Caen, and over it, he placed his friend as abbot. But during the
twenty years which had elapsed between the time of his settlement at
Bea and his elevation to the abbacy of Caen, the school he had founded
had become most renowned, and some of the great men of after times
boasted of having sat there at Lanfranc's feet. Among these were
Bishops Guimond, Ives, and another Archbishop of Canterbury, Anselm.
On one occasion after the elevation of Lanfranc to the primacy of
England, he was obliged to visit Rome and have an audience of Pope
Alexander II., who paid him such marked respect that the courtiers
asked the reason, and the Pope replied, "It is not because he is
primate of England that I rose to meet him, but because I was his
pupil at Bea, and there sat at his feet to listen to his instruction."

While at Caen, however, he entered into the renowned controversy with
Berenger upon the doctrine of the real presence in the Eucharist,
Berenger admitting the fact but denying the change of substance. The
results of this controversy, however, were anticipated by neither
party. It led to a thorough change in the mode of investigation of
truth, more especially of divine truth. Berenger had adopted the
course of arguing the point upon the grounds of pure reason, a course
not unfamiliar to an expert dialectician like Lanfranc, but utterly
novel in theological disputation, where authority was omnipotent.
Lanfranc himself says of his opponent that he desired "relictis saeris
auctoritatibus ad dialecticam confugium facere." But like a true
athlete, he meets his adversary with his own weapons, and for the
first time in Europe men beheld a vital theological dogma being
discussed by champions who had agreed to throw aside all the weight of
authority and rely upon the strength of their own logic. This was the
first signal for the union of scholasticism with theology, which
prevailed in Europe for centuries, tingeing even the writings of the
early reformers. What Lanfranc had done in the pressure of
controversy, Anselm took up with all the ardor of a convert; and the
change which passed over the thought of Europe {812} amounted to a
sort of intellectual revolution. But to return to the fortunes of
Lanfranc;--soon after William had been consecrated he returned to
Normandy, taking with him Stigand, the Archbishop of Canterbury, whose
deposition he ultimately procured, when he immediately installed his
friend and adviser, Lanfranc, into the see of Canterbury. At first,
however, Lanfranc declined the post, upon the grounds that he did not
know the language; but his objection was overruled, and in the year
1070 he was consecrated and took up his residence in England.

To him at Bea succeeded as teacher, Anselm, who made great advances in
the scholastic mode of teaching. He was also prior of the monastery,
and during this period he wrote six treatises on the Fall of Satan, on
Truth, on Original Sin, on the Reason why God created Man, the Liberty
of the Will, and the Consistency of Freedom with the Divine
Prescience. These great questions were then uppermost in men's minds,
and they were treated by Anselm in the new and more attractive mode of
appeal to pure reason. Whilst in the midst of these studies he was
appointed abbot of his monastery, which he reluctantly accepted, and
in the year 1093, fifteen years afterward, four years after the death
of Lanfranc, he was appointed by William II. to the archbishopric of
Canterbury. His relations with the king were not happy; he opposed
that obstinate and rapacious monarch, and a series of
misunderstandings ensued, which led him to retire to Rome to consult
with the Pope. During his absence he wrote that book by which he is
most known, Cur Deus Homo, Why God was made Man. He also took a
prominent part in the Council of Bari, in 1098, where he procured the
decision against the Greek delegates, upon the question of the
Procession of the Holy Ghost. Upon the death of William he returned;
but the rest of his life was occupied in continual disputes on points
of privilege with the king, Henry, and he died in the year 1109.

But we will now advance to the consideration of that great change
which came over the thought of Europe, and bears the name of
scholasticism. The controversy of Lanfranc with Berenger on the
doctrine of the real presence, may be accepted as the point where the
new method was applied to theology; from that time it became the
favorite mode. But although the scholastic philosophers professed to
rely upon bare reason, they appear to have instinctively felt that
great want of human nature, the want of an oracle, and they found
their oracle in the works of Aristotle, then in use in the university
and schools of Spain, sadly perverted by being filtered through an
Arabic translation. Men flew to Arabic grammars, and to Spain, to
Arabic versions of Aristotle, and the Stagyrite then became the oracle
of the Scholastics just as the fathers were of their opponents. But
still, as is and must be the case in all religious controversies, both
parties lay under the same necessity, and, after all, drew their
premises from the same quarter. The defender and the opposer were
alike subject to the influence of revelation; without that, the
opponent would have wanted the subject of opposition, and the defender
the object of his defence, so that the premises of both appear to be
involved in the same thing, and in fine the Scholastics fell back also
upon the fathers, as may be seen in the Sentences of Peter Lombard,
the handbook of scholasticism, which is nothing but a mass of extracts
from the fathers and popes, worked up together into a system of
theology. In its earliest form it cannot be denied that scholasticism
did good. It was a healthy revival of intellectual life, it stimulated
all classes of thinkers, and created a passion for inquiry; it brought
out such great minds as Abelard, Duns Scotus, and Thomas Aquinas. The
very subjects upon which men debated gave an elevation to thought, and
the result was an intellectual activity which has rarely been
equalled. It must be remembered also that the schoolmen did not
discard {813} the facts laid down by the fathers; they were not
infidels, but their investigations turned more upon the mode of
operation--they accepted the divine presence in the Eucharist, but
what they wanted to ascertain was the way in which it manifested
itself. They believed in the Incarnation, but they desired to know the
exact mode in which that sacrifice had worked out human redemption.

But we must return to the development of English literature. After the
Norman Conquest, we have already observed, the Latin tongue became
once more the medium of communication for the learned, and all great
works were written in that idiom, so that there were three tongues
used in England: the Latin by the clergy and scholars, the
Norman-French by the court and nobles, and the Saxon, which fell to
the common people. The literature of that period was rich in some
departments, poor in others. In philosophy, whatever we may think of
its merit, it was anything but scanty, and a perfect library of
scholastic writings has come down even to our times, a desert of
argumentation and reasoning, but containing veins of gold, could a
mortal ever be found endowed with the patience to dig deep enough, and
labor long enough to open them. The Book of Sentences, by Peter the
Lombard, bishop of Paris, to which we have already alluded, was one of
the wonders of the twelfth century. It was divided into four parts:
the first treated of the Trinity and divine attributes, the second of
the Creation, the origin of angels, of the fall of man, of grace, free
will, of original and actual sin; the third of the Incarnation, faith,
hope, charity, the gifts of the spirit, and the commandments of God;
and the fourth treated of the Sacraments, the Resurrection, the Last
Judgment, and the state of the righteous in heaven. Although a great
deal is borrowed from the fathers, yet there is in this work a marked
tendency toward the scholastic method; he wanders into abstruse
speculations and subtle investigations as to the generation of the
Word, the possibility of two persons being incarnate in one, sins of
the will and of the action. It did much to mould the thought of
succeeding writers, and it won for its author the title of Master of
Sentences; it was appealed to as an authority; what the "Master" said
was a sufficient answer to an opponent. Another great work was the
Summa of Thomas Aquinas, a book which excites admiration even now.
Duns Scotus and Occam, also contributed voluminously to the stores of
scholastic theology. The literature, however, was richer in history.
Whilst the theologians were debating about questions beyond the reach
of the human intellect, a band of quiet pious men devoted their time
to the recording the tale of human actions. Upward of forty men lived
from the twelfth to the fifteenth centuries, who have written the
history of the country from the earliest periods down to the dawning
of the sixteenth century. Probably no country in the world is richer
in historical material than ourselves; and as an admirable instance of
monastic diligence, and evidence of intellectual activity in what has
been usually termed an age of dense ignorance, we subjoin a table of
the historical writers, upon whose labors the authentic history of the
country must rest.   [Footnote 222]

  [Footnote 222: We omit in our list the supposititious history of
  Croyland, by Ingulphus, which has been disposed of by Richard
  Palgrave, as of the thirteenth or fourteenth century, and of little
  historical value.]


MONASTIC WRITERS OF ENGLISH HISTORY.

_Twelfth Century._

  William of Poictiers, History of Conquest--Chaplain to William I.

  Ordericus Vitalis, Ecclesiastical History to
  1141--Monk of St. Evroult.

  Anonymous, Gesta Stephani.

  William of Jumieges, History of
  Normandy--Monk of Jumieges.

  Florence of Worcester, Chronicon ex
  Chronicis to 1119--Monk of Worcestcr.

  Matthew of Westminstcr, Flores
  Historiarum--Doubtful.

{814}

  William of Malmesbury, Gesta Regum, Historia
  Novella, Gesta Pontificum, Vita Anselmi,
  De Antiquitate Glastoniae--Monk of Malmesbury.

  Eadmer, Historia Novorum, and others--
  Monk of Canterbury.

  Turgot, Confessor of Margaret, Queen of
  Malcolm Canmore; wrote her Life and
  History of Durham (called Simeon of Durham),
  History of St. Cuthbert, De Rebus
  Anglorum, and other works--Monk of Durham.

  Ailred, Account of Battle of Standards--Abbot
  of Rivault, York.

  Geoffrey of Monmouth, British History--Monk of Monmouth.

  Alfred of Beverley, Gestis Regum--Canon of
  St. John's, Beverley.

  Giraldus Cambrensis, Itinerarium Cambriae,
  Topographia Hiberniae, De Rebus a se Gestis,
  etc--Politician.

  Henry of Huntingdon, Eight Books History,
  Julius Caesar to 1154--Archdeacon.

  Roger of Hovenden, Chronicle, 732 to 1202,
  in continuation of Bede.

  William of Newburgh, Hist. from Conquest to
  1197--Monk of Newburgh.

  Benedictus Abbas, Chronicle, 1170 to 1192
 --Abbot of Peterboro'.

  Ralph de Diceto, Two Chron., one 589 to
  1148, and the other to 1199, Hist. of
  Controversy between Henry and a Becket,
  Lives of Archbishops of Canterbury to
  1200, in the Anglia Sacra--Archdeacon of London.

  Gervase of Canterbury, Chronicle, from 1100
  to end of century, three other pieces, Contests
  between Monks and Archbishop Baldwin,
  History of the Archbishops, from Augustine
  to Walter, 1205--Monk of Canterbury.


_Thirteenth Century._

  Richard of Devizes, Chron. of Reign of Richard I--Monk.

  Jocelyn de Brakelond, Chron., 1173 to 1202
 --Monk of St. Edmondsbury.

  Roger of Wendover, Hist. to 1235--Monk of St. Albans.

  Matthew Paris, Historia Major. Conq. to
  1259--Monk of St. Albans.


_Fourteenth Century._

  William Rishanger, Continuation of M. Paris
  to 1322, Wars of the Barons--Monk of St. Albans.

  John of Brompton,  [Footnote 223]
  Chron. to 1199, from Saxons--Monk of Jerevaux.

  [Footnote 223: Authorship doubtful.]

  Thomas Wickes, Chron., of Salisbury to 1304
 --Canon of Osney.

  Walter Hemingford, Hist. Conquest to 1273
 --Monk of Gisbro'.

  Robert of Avesbury, Hist. Reign of Edward
  III to 1356--Register of Canterbury.

  Nicholas Trivet, Hist. from 1135 to 1307--Dominican.

  Adam Murimuth, Chron. 1303 to 1337--Monk.

  Henry Knyghton, Hist. from Edgar to Richard II--Canon of Leicester.

  Thomas Stubbs, Chron. of Archbishops of
  York to 1373--Monk.

  William Thorne, Chron. of Abbots of St.
  Augustine, 1397--Monk.

  Ranulph Higden, Polychronicon  [Footnote 224] to 1357--Monk.

    [Footnote 224: Caxton printed it, with a
    continuation of his own, to 1460.]


_Fifteenth Century._

  Thomas Walsingham, Hist. Brevis to Hy. of
  Normandy--Monk of St. Albans.

  Thomas Otterbourne, Hist. to 1420--Franciscan.

  John Whethamstede, Chron. 1441 to 1461--
  Abbot of St. Albans.

  Thomas Elmham, Life of Henry V.--Prior of Linton.

  William of Worcester, Chron. 1324 to 1491--Monk.

  John Rouse, Hist. Kings of England to 1490--
  Chaplain to Earl of Warwick.


_Monastic Registers._

  Glastonbury,   63 to 1400
  Melrose,   735 to 1270
  Margan,  1066 to 1232
  Waverly,   1066 to 1291
  Ely,  156 to 1169
  Abingdon,  870 to 1131
  Bishops of Durham,  633 to 1214
  Burton   1004 to 1263
  Rochester,  1115 to 1124
  Holyrood,   596 to 1163

Add to these many historical documents which have been preserved from
destruction, such as the Doomsday Book, the Liber Niger, rolls and
public registers, and we have a repertoire of historical materials
such as scarcely any other nation in Europe can boast of. From the
time when the Saxon Chronicle was commenced down to the age of
printing, the pens of the monks were unwearied in recording the
history of their country; and although they had their share of human
weakness, and were influenced in matters of opinion frequently by the
treatment shown to their order, still among such a mass of writers the
truth may surely be ascertained. The severity of criticism applied to
history in these {815} days is driving men rapidly to active research
among these _origines histoicae_. Formerly when a man wrote a history,
he framed his work upon other men's labors and his own fancy, as was
instanced in the case of Robertson, who coolly tells us that he had
made up his mind to write a history of something, but was undecided
whether it should be a history of Greece, of Leo X., William III. and
Anne, or Charles V. At last he decided upon the latter, and we may
infer from a letter of his to Dr. Birch in what degree of preparation
he was for the work. He says: "I never had access to any copious
libraries, and do not pretend to any extensive knowledge of authors,
but I have made a list of such as I thought most essential to the
subject, and have put them down as _I have found them mentioned in any
book I happened to read_." In another letter he admits: "My chief
object is to adorn as far as I am capable of adorning the history of a
period which deserves. to be better known." Hume was no better than
Robertson, for it appears that the latter had consulted the great
English historian about Mary, who sent him a version which Robertson
at once used. But shortly after Hume received some MSS. from Dr.
Birch, who went more deeply into these things, and in consequence he
wrote to his friend Robertson to the following effect: "What I wrote
to you with regard to Mary, etc., was from the printed histories and
papers, but I am now sorry to tell you that by Murdin's State Papers
the matter is put beyond all question. I got these papers during the
holidays by Dr. Birch's means, and as soon as I read them _I ran to
Millar_ and desired him very earnestly to stop the publication of your
history till I should write to you and give you an opportunity of
correcting a mistake so important, but he _absolutely refused
compliance_. He said that your book was finished; that the whole
narrative of Mary's trial must be wrote over again; that it was
uncertain whether the new narrative could be brought within the same
compass with the old; that this change would require the cancelling a
great many sheets; and that there were scattered passages through the
volumes _founded on your own theory_." [Footnote 225]

    [Footnote 225: Disraeli's Literary Miscellanies.]

We quote these letters to show how history was written in bygone times
by men who until the days of Maitland and Froude have been regarded as
authorities. The blind led the blind, and the History of Scotland--
whole sheets of which ought to have been rewritten, and scattered
passages founded upon theory erased--was given to the world, because
the printer refused to disturb the press, and the author was
disinclined to demolish such a fair creation. But the day for
imaginative history is past, and a new light is dawning upon the
world, the necessity of which is apparent from these revelations. For
the future the historian must write from manuscripts or printed copies
of manuscripts, or his theories and his fancies will be soon
dissipated under a criticism which is becoming daily more powerful,
and acquiring new compass as fast as the labors of the Record Office
are being brought to light. The narrative of the most vital periods of
our country's history will have to be rewritten. We are being
gradually taught that the dark ages were not so dark as our
conceptions of them; that some of our favorite historical villains may
yet be saved; and that many of the gods we have worshipped had very
few claims to divinity. The very fact of there being such a repertoire
of historical materials created by the labors of those forty monks of
different monasteries; the existence of a voluminous and important
controversy involving the vital questions of religion, and argued with
scholarship, logical acuteness, wit, and vigor; the works of piety,
art, and architecture which have come down to us from that age--must
convince us that, however rude the physical mode {816} of life may
have been, the intellectual activity and mental calibre of the men of
those days, when we remember their immense disadvantages, were little
inferior to those of our day. We produce many things, but not many
great things; but the labors of mediaeval monasticism were not _multa
sed multum_, and they live now, and probably will live when much of
this multiform literature of our times will be obliterated by the
impartial, discriminating hand of time.

We cannot pass over this period of what we may call national Latin
literature--that is, when the literatures of all nations were written
in Latin--without noticing the history of one book which has ever
stood out prominently from the mass of mediaeval productions, not only
from its intrinsic excellence, but from the unfathomable mystery
connected with its authorship. We allude to the treatise De lmitatione
Christi, popularly attributed to Thomas a Kempis. His claim rests
chiefly upon the fact that the first printed copy was made from a
manuscript written by him and signed "Finitus et completus Anno
Domino, 1441, per manus patris Thomae Kempis in monte S. Agnetis prope
Swoll." But there is in this subscription no evidence of authorship;
it was the usual formula appended to copies. Kempis was an inveterate
copyist, and it will be a sufficient proof of the untenable nature of
this argument if we mention that a copy of the Bible made by him is
subscribed in a similar manner--"Finitus et completus Anno Domini,
1439, in Vigilia S. Jacobi Apostoli per manus Fratris Thomae a Kempis
ad laudem Dei in Monasterio S. Agnetis." There is no evidence,
therefore, of authorship in the subscription of the MS.

But doubts existed soon after the publication of the work about its
authorship, and another MS. was discovered at Arone bearing the
inscription, "Incipiunt capitula primi libri Abbatis Johannis _Gesen_
De Imitatione Christi et contemptu omnium vauitatum mundi," and at the
end was written "explicit liber quartus et ultimus Abbatis Johannis
_Gersen_ de Sacramento Altaris." The house in which this document was
found belonged to the company of Jesus, but as it had formerly been
held by Benedictines, some vigilant members of that active body at
once declared it must have been written by one of their order. They
managed to get possession of it, and immediately brought it out with
the addition in the title after the name of Gersen of "Abbatis Ordinis
Sti. Benedicti." Then commenced that celebrated controversy between
the two monastic orders, the Augustines, who advocated the claims of
Thomas a Kempis, and the Benedictines, who fought for Gersen. A volume
might be written easily upon the bare history of that controversy, as
some hundreds of volumes were during its progress. It began
immediately after the publication of this Benedictine claim in the
year 1616, and it raged in different countries in Europe for more than
two centuries, the last controversy coming to a conclusion in 1832,
which arose from the discovery of a MS. at Paris, copied in 1550, and
a document purporting that it was bequeathed to one of the De'
Avogadri family in the year 1347. This further confirmation of the
antiquity of the work gave rise to the last controversy which ended
like all the others in increasing the doubt as to Thomas a Kempis's
authorship and the uncertainty of the whole question.

We think it can be shown that the De lmitatione was known before the
birth of Thomas a Kempis, and about the time of the existence of
Gersen; but the evidence of the claim of the Gersenites is so slender
that the mere chronological coincidence is not sufficient to maintain
it. Passages have been collected from works written long before the
time of a Kempis word for word the same as in the De Imitatione. In
the conferences of Bonaventura to the people of Toulouse, written
about 1260, there are many such passages; {817} and in an office
written by Thomas Aquinas for the Pope Urban IV., about the same time,
there are many other passages.  [Footnote 226] In fact, in the
Conferences a whole paragraph is quoted verbatim, concluding with the
phrase, "as may be seen in the pious book on the 'Imitation of
Christ.'" Criticism has labored diligently to discover in its text
evidences indicative of the nationality of the author, but they have
ended in contradictions which seem to insinuate that it might be the
joint production of pious minds in different countries, which would
leave to Thomas a Kempis the honor of having collected and arranged
them into one form. However, instead of wasting time over a fruitless
investigation, we prefer taking the book as it is with its wealth of
spirituality, with its calm beauty, its power of soothing the
perturbed spirit, its subtle analyses of the human heart   [Footnote
227] and the springs of human action, its encouragement to a godly
life, its fervor, its eloquence, and its strange power; and we are
driven to the conclusion that it is the most marvellous book ever
produced--most marvellous from the universal influence it has exerted
over the minds of men of all creeds, ages, and countries, and from its
adaptability to the common yearnings of all humanity. Like the gospel,
of which it is the exponent, and therefore from which it derives the
quality, it stands out in its marked individuality, in the midst of
every phase of life through which it has passed, a distinct thing,
having nothing in common with the world or worldly pursuits, but
trying to wean men from them, or at least from allowing them to gain
an ascendency over their affections. In the present age this isolation
is more striking. We are far too philosophical, too scientific, too
logical, to attend to the ascetic ravings of this "monkish" book. The
business of life runs high with us, runs too noisily, to allow us to
listen to its small voice. We are so deeply engaged in the pursuits of
pleasure and the acquisition of wealth, that we have no time for the
"Imitation of Christ." We are involved in great undertakings--Atlantic
telegraphs, principles of physical science, railway committees,
parliamentary reforms, and drainage questions, absorb all our
attention. But philosophy, science, and logic fail to exempt humanity
from its ills. The hour comes when man falls sick, sick unto death;
then in that moment when philosophy deserts pain, and science affords
no consolation; when logic is dumb, and the soul with instinctive
apprehension is clamoring for help, then is the moment for such a book
as this. And it was in such a moment that La Harpe, cast into a
dungeon of the Luxembourg, with nothing but death before him,
accidentally meeting with this book, and opening its pages at the
words "Ecce adsum! Ecce ad te venio quia vocasti me. Lacrymae tuae et
desiderium animae tuae, humiliatio tua et contritio cordis
inclinaverunt me et adduxerunt ad te," [Footnote 228] he fell upon his
face heartbroken and in tears. We must conclude this portion of the
subject by repeating that the Latin language retained its position as
the language of literature until the time of the Reformation. But
during the fourteenth century there was a tendency to blend the two
vernacular tongues spoken in England--the French and the Saxon. In the
struggle for precedence the Saxon conquered, and out of it came the
present vigorous idiom spoken by the English; but nothing of any
consequence was written in this tongue until it became settled and
confirmed.

  [Footnote 226: These passages may be seen collected in parallel
  columns in a work by M. De Gregory on L'Histoire du Livre de
  l'Imitation. Paris,1843.]

  [Footnote 227: Vide the analysis of Temptation, lib. I., c. xiii.,
  and the well-known chapter on the Royal Road of the cross, lib. II.,
  c xii.]

  [Footnote 228: "De Imi., lib. III., c. xxi., sec. 6. Behold me!
  behold I come to thee because thou hast called me. Thy tears and the
  desire of thy soul, thy humiliation and contrition of heart have
  inclined and led me unto thee."]

We now advance to the consideration of one of the most beautiful
emanations of Christianity in the world---her hymns. We take up these
{818} hymns of the church, and we find that they bear testimony, not
only literary but historical, as to the state of the church at any
given time, and certainly one of the best and purest testimonies that
can be found. Few, if any, writers have sufficiently investigated this
branch of ecclesiastical history, the evidence of the hymnology of the
church. If we appeal to her controversial theology we shall find
invariably a mass of one-sided representation, mutual vituperation,
and invective; if we go to ecclesiastical history we shall find that
those histories are written by minds working under the bias of some
inclination toward sect or theory; but if we take up the hymns of the
church we shall have the pure, free, outspoken voice of the church--we
shall see, as it were, its internal organization, its emotions, its
aspirations, its thoughts, living, throbbing, palpitating--the very
heart of the church itself.

The song of Christianity has never ceased in the world; it has
continued in an unbroken strain. It began at its very outset in the
song of the mother of its founder, and it has been going on ever
since. As the voice of one age dies away, the strain is taken up by
the next. It has sunk at times into a low plaintive melody, and at
others mounted into a grand swelling psalm, heard above the noise of
the world, which ceases its strife to listen. to its music. Of this
melody we shall now endeavor to give a brief history. We begin at the
coming of our Lord; but the whole worship of the true God is marked by
the psalmody of rejoicing hearts. The children of Israel by the Red
Sea broke out into the first recorded song; a considerable portion of
the Scripture is in that form; Jesus with his disciples sung a hymn at
the Last Supper; the apostles continued the practice, and from
post-apostolic times there have come down to us three great hymns,
whose origin is lost in their remote antiquity--the Ter Sanctus, the
Gloria in Excelsis, and the Te Deum. These hymns were used in the very
earliest ages of the church. Of the latter there is a legend that it
was sung by Ambrose spontaneously at the baptism of Augustine.

The periods of hymnology may be divided into two great sections--the
earliest or Greek period, extending to the dawn of the fourth century,
when the second or Latin division commences; and this latter may be
subdivided into three parts--the Ambrosian, the Barbarian, and the
Mediaeval. The earliest Greek hymns are anonymous; there is one to
Christ on the Cross:--

  "Thou who on the sixth day and hour
  Didst nail to the cross the sin
  Which Adam dared in Paradise,
  Read also the handwriting at our transgressions,
  O Christ our Lord! and save us."

There is one on repentance, commencing:--

  "Receive thy servant, my Saviour,
  Falling before thee with tears, my Saviour,
  And save, Jesus, me repenting."

And a simple doxology:--

  "God is my hope,
  Christ is my refuge,
  The Holy Spirit is my vesture.
  Holy Trinity, glory to thee!"

The first name of a hymn-writer which has reached us is that of
Clement of Alexandria, who lived toward. the close of the second
century. One of his hymns is called, Hymn of the Saviour. But it is
recorded by St. Basil that a hymn was well known in the first and
second centuries, called, Hail, Gladdening Light! which was sung in
the churches at the lighting of the lamps:--

  "Hail, Jesus Christ! hail, gladdening light
  Of the immortal father's glory bright!
  Blessed of all saints beneath the sky,
  And of the heavenly company!

  "Now, while the sun is setting,
    Now, while the light grows dim,
  To Father, Son, and Spirit,
    We raise our evening hymn.

  "Worthy thou, while time shall dure,
  To be hymned by voices pure.
  Son of God, of life the giver,
  Thee the world shall praise forever!"

There were several Syriac hymns at this period. Ephraim Syrus, a {819}
monk, and deacon of Mesopotamia. wrote, The Children in Paradise, On
Palm Sunday, The Entry of Christ into Jerusalem, and another, called,
The Lament of a Father on the death of his Son, which used to be sung
at the funerals of children. Gregory of Nazianzen is the best known of
the Greek hymn-writers. There are two hymns to Christ extant by him,
and an evening hymn. In one of the hymns to Christ the following
passage occurs:--

  "Unfruitful, sinful, bearing weeds and thorns,
  Fruits of the curse--ah! whither shall I flee?
  O Christ, most blessed! bid my fleeting days
  Flow heavenward, Christ, sole fount of hope to me!

  "The enemy is near--to thee I cling!
  Strengthen, oh! strengthen me by might divine;
  Let not the trembling bird be from thine altar driven--
  Save me--it is thy will, O Christ!--save me, for I am thine."

Gregory's life was spent in a continual conflict with Arianism. At the
age of fifty he went to Constantinople, and as all the churches were
in the hands of the Arians, he preached in the house of a relative. He
was soon subject to persecution, was pelted in the streets, arrested,
tried, and with much difficulty acquitted. Ultimately he succeeded;
the Arian heresy passed away; the house where he had so faithfully
preached became the Church of "Anastasia;" the truth had risen there.
But time, though it brought success, had left him a sad, lonely old
man. He was made Patriarch of Constantinople by the Emperor
Theodosius; but he had lost all his dearest relatives, and he threw up
his dignity and retired from the world. In that retirement he wrote a
beautiful hymn, which sums up his life. We quote the first and last
verses:--

  "Where are the winged words? Lost in the air.
  Where the fresh flower of youth and glory? Gone!
  The strength of well-knit limbs? Brought low by care.
  Wealth? Plundered. None possess but God alone.
  Where those dear parents who my life first gave,
  And where that holy twain, brother and sister? In the grave.

  "This as thou wilt, the Day will all unite,
  Wherever scattered, when thy word is said;
  Rivers of fire; abysses without light,
  Thy great tribunal, these alone are dread.
  And thou, O Christ my King, art fatherland to me--
  Strength, wealth, eternal rest, yea all, I find in thee."  [Footnote 229]

    [Footnote 229: These extracts from translations of Greek hymns are
    quoted from The Christian Life in Song, where the full versions may be
    seen.]

St. Andrew of Crete, St. John of Damascus, St. Cosmas, Bishop of
Maiuma, and Chrysostom, were amongst the Greek hymn-writers. Their
productions are characterized by the greatest simplicity and fervor,
reliance upon Christ and love to God being the most prominent topics.
We now come to the period of Latin hymns, and we begin with the first
or Ambrosian division. The principal writers are Ambrose, Hilary, and
St. Prudentius. Augustine, in his Confessions, quotes one of Ambrose's
hymns, as having repeated it when lying awake in bed, "Atque ut eram
in lecto meo solus, recordatus sum veridicos versus Ambrosii tui: Tu
es enim.   [Footnote 230 ]

  [Footnote 230: August. Confess., lib. ix., c. 12.]

  "Deus creator omnium
  Polique rector, vestiens
  Diem decoro lumine
  Noctem sopora gratia.

  "Artus solutos ut quies
  Reddat laboris usul,
  Mentesque fessas adievet
  Lactusque solvat anxios."

Ambrose was born about the year 340; his father was a prefect of Gaul,
and belonged to a noble family. Before the age of thirty he himself
was consul of Liguria, and dwelt in Milan. Up to this time he had no
notion of becoming an ecclesiastic. But Anxentius, the Arian bishop,
having died, a dispute arose between the citizens of Milan and the
emperor, as to who should appoint the successor, each trying to evade
the responsibility. It was left to the people; the city was in a state
of great excitement, and a tumultuous assemblage filled the cathedral,
in the midst of whom appeared Ambrose in his civil capacity, to
command peace, and it is said that in the lull which ensued, a voice
was heard crying, "Ambrose is bishop," which the whole mass of people,
seized by a sudden impulse, repeated. {820} Soon afterward he was
ordained and consecrated. The majority of the people were opposed to
Arianism, and he was soon involved in a dispute with the Empress
Justina, who required him to give up the Portian Basilica to the
Arians. He refused, and accompanied by a multitude of people, took
possession of the church, and fastened the doors. The imperial troops
besieged them for several days, during which time the people kept
singing the hymns of Ambrose. Monica, the mother of Augustine, is said
to have been amongst the crowd in the church. One of Ambrose's hymns
was used for centuries as a morning hymn, called Hymn at the
Cock-crowing; another Advent hymn, Veni Creator gentium; one for
Easter, Hic est dies verus Dei. St. Hilary, Bishop of Arles in the
sixth century, is the next of the Ambrosian period; the best known of
his hymns is that to the morning, Lucis largitor splendide. But the
most prominent name of the period after Ambrose is Prudentius, who was
born about 348, practised in the courts as a pleader, and in his
fifty-seventh year forsook the world, and spent the rest of his days
in religious exercises. One of his great hymns is for Epiphany, O sola
magnarum urbium, another on the Innocents, Salvete flores martyrum;
but the hymn most known is a very beautiful, perhaps his most
beautiful composition, a funeral hymn, beginning Jam maesta quiesce
querela. After the reformation, this hymn was adopted by the German
Protestants as their favorite funeral hymn, their version beginning
"Hoert auf mil Trauern und Klagen."

The resurrection of the body is thus expressed--

  "Non si cariosa vetustas
  Dissolverit ossa favillis
  Fueritque cinisculus arens
  Minimi mensura pugilli:

  "Nec si vaga flamina et aurae
  Vacuum per inane volantes
  Tulerint cum pulvere nervos
  Hominem periisse licebit"

  "For though, through the slow lapse of ages,
    These mouldering bones should grow old,
  Reduced to a handful of ashes.
    A child in its hands may enfold.

  "Though flames should consume it and breezes
    Invisibly float it away,
  Yet the body of man cannot perish,
    Indestructible through its decay."

The next period of hymnology is what we have termed the barbarian,
because it began at the time when the northern invaders were settling
down in the various parts of Europe, which had fallen to their arms.
Though not so fertile in hymns, yet some beautiful things were
produced in this period. We shall only mention three
hymn-writers--Gregory the Great, Venantius Fortunatus, and Bede. The
principal hymn of Gregory's is the Veni Creator Spiritus; but the most
distinguished hymn-writer of this era is Fortunatus; he was an
Italian, born about 530; a gay poet, the delight of society, until
Queen Radegunda persuaded him to be ordained, and to settle at
Poictiers, where she, having left her husband, was presiding over a
monastic establishment. There is a beautiful hymn of his, which
commences--

  "Pange lingua gloriosi
  Praelium certaminis."

We quote two verses (v. i. and viii.) of the late Dr. Neale's
translation:

I.

  "Sing, my tongue, the glorious battle,
    With completed victory rife.
  And above the cross's trophy,
    Tell the triumph of the strife;
  How the world's Redeemer conquered,
    By surrendering of his life.

VIII.

  "Faithful cross, above all other,
    One and only noble tree,
  None in foliage, none in blossom,
    None in fruit, compares with thee;
  Sweetest wood and sweetest iron,
    Sweetest weight sustaining free."

A portion of one of his poems, on the resurrection of our Lord, was
sung in the Church for ten centuries as an Easter hymn. It commences,
Salve festa dies toto venerabilis aevo.  [Footnote 231] In another of
his poems, De Cruce Christi, there occurs a beautiful image of the
Cross as the tree around which the True Vine is clinging:

  "Appensa est vitis inter tua brachia, de qua
  Dulcia sanguineo vina rubore fluunt."  [Footnote 232]

    [Footnote 231: Trench's Sacred Latin Poetry, p. 152.]

    [Footnote 232: For the whole see Trench's Sacred Latin Poetry, p.130.]

{821}

But his most celebrated hymn is the one written on the occasion of the
sending the true cross by the emperor to Radegunda, at the
consecration of a church at Poictiers. It is called Vexilla Regis
prodeunt:

I.

  "The royal banners forward go,
  The cross shines forth with mystic glow,
  Where he in flesh, our flesh who made,
  Our sentence bore, our ransom paid.

  VI.

  "With fragrance dropping from each bough,
  Sweeter than sweetest nectar thou:
  Decked with the fruit of peace and praise,
  And glorious with triumphant lays.

  VIl.

  "Hall, altar! hail, O Victim! Thee
  Decks now thy passion's victory,
  Where life for sinners death endured,
  And life by death for man procured."  [Footnote 233]

  [Footnote 233: Dr. Neale's Mediaeval Hymns.]

Bede the Venerable wrote hymns also; the two best known are the Hymnum
canamus gloriae, and Hymnum canentes martyrum.

We now advance to the last and richest of all the periods of
hymnology, the mediaeval. The list is headed with the royal name of
Robert II. of France, who wrote, hymns, one of which is a Veni Sancte
Spiritus. Peter Damian, the cardinal bishop of Ostia, who died in
1072, wrote many hymns, but the two greatest are De Die Mortis and Ad
perennis vitae fontem.  [Footnote 234] Adam of St. Victor was another
prolific hymn-writer; thirty-six of his productions are extant, and
well known.  [Footnote 235]

  [Footnote 234: Trench's Sacred Latin Poetry, pp. 278, 315. ]

  [Footnote 235: Ibid., pp. 53. 111, 160, 202, 212, 227.]

Peter the Venerable and Thomas a Kempis have also left hymns behind
them. But it was reserved for Archbishop Trench to dig out of the
mouldering relics of the past a hymn written by a monk of Clugny, one
Bernard de Morlaix, the translation of which, by Dr. Neale, has
supplied the church of every denomination with favorite hymns; The
most general name by which it is known is Jerusalem the Golden. The
original is a poem of about three thousand lines, called De Contemptu
Mundi, a melancholy satire upon the corruptions of the times. The
first appearance of it in print, is in a collection of poems, De
Corrupto Ecclesiae Statu, by Flacius Illyricus. We cannot speak too
highly of this poem of Bernard, nor of the merits of Dr. Neale's
translation. The original is written in one of the most difficult of
all metres, technically called "leonini cristati trilices daetylici,"
a dactylic hexameter, divided into three parts, with a tailed rhyme
and rhymes between the two first clauses. Dr. Neale gives a specimen
of this verse in English:

  "Time will be _ending soon_, heaven will be _rending
    soon_, fast we and pray we;
  Come the most merciful; comes the most terrible,
    watch we while may we."

The imagery in the original poem is gorgeous; but Dr. Neale has
exceeded the original  [Footnote 236] in many parts of his
translation'. We add a few gems. The opening lines are--

  "Hora novissima, tempora pessima sunt vigilemus!
  Ecce minaciter imminet arbiter ille supremus.
  Imminet, imminet, ut mala terminet, aequa coronet
  Recta remuneret, anxia liberet aethera donet."

  "The world is very evil,
    The times are waxing late,
  Be sober and keep vigil,
    The Judge is at the gate;
  The Judge that comes in mercy,
    The Judge that comes with might,
  To terminate the evil,
    To diadem the right."

  [Footnote 236: The best edition of this poem is the little shilling
  volume by Dr. Neale, called the Rhythm of Bernard de Morlaix,
  published by Hayes, Lyall-place, Eaton-square. It contains between
  two and three hundred of the original lines, with Dr. Neale's
  complete translation.]

Dr. Neale has proved himself a true poet in this translation; the
rendering is most happy, and the whole version forms one of the finest
sacred poems in the language. The lines--

  "Patria luminis, inscia turbinis, inscia litis.
  Cive replebitur amplificabitur lsraelitis
  Patria splendida, terraque florida, libera spinis
  Danda fidelibus est ibi civibus, hic peregrinis,"

are thus happily rendered--

  "And the sunlit land that reeks not
    Of tempest nor of fight
  Shall fold within its bosom
    Each happy Israelite;
  The home of fadeless splendor,
    Of flowers that fear no thorn,
  Where they shall dwell as children,
    Who here as exiles mourn."

{822}

Then the episode--

  "Sunt radiantia jaspide moenia clara pyropo."

    "With jaspers glow thy bulwarks,
      Thy streets with emeralds blaze,
    The sardius and the topaz
      Unite in thee their rays;
    Thine ageless walls are bonded
      With amethyst unpriced;
    The saints build up its fabric,
      And the corner.stone is Christ.

    Thou hast no shore, fair ocean!
       Thou hast no time, bright day!
    Dear fountain of refreshment.
      To pilgrims far away.

    They stand, those halls of Sion,
      Conjubilant with song,
    And bright with many an angel
      And all the martyr throng;
    The Prince is ever in them,
      Their daylight is serene;
    The pastures of the blessed
      Are decked in glorious sheen.
    There is the throne of David,
      And there, from care released,
    The song of them that triumph,
      The shout of them that feast;
     And they who, with their leader,
      Have conquered in the fight,
    For ever and for ever
      Are clad in robes of white."

But we must pause, for to give all the beauties of this poem would be
to transcribe the whole. Another St. Bernard, the well-known abbot of
Clairvaux, was a contemporary with him of Clugny. He was one of the
most influential men of his age, a man far in advance of it; the
adviser of popes and the confidant of kings. Many hymns are attributed
to him, one of the most beautiful being that known as Jesu Dulcis
Memoria. In Trench's Sacred Latin Poetry there is a selection of
fifteen verses, but the original consists of forty-eight verses.
[Footnote 237] It is a fine specimen of the ardent loving poetry so
characteristic of the period. A very beautiful version, or rather
imitation of this poem, is extant in the Harleian MSS., written in the
reign of Edward I., and as it is a very good specimen of the English
of the period, and represents the spirit of the original, we venture
to quote a verse or two.  [Footnote 238]

  [Footnote 237: Sti. Bernardi Clarae Vallensis Opp: Benedictine
  edition, vol. ii., p. 895.]

  [Footnote 238: Printed also in the Percy Society's Publications,
  vol. iv., p. 68.]


I.

  "Jesu, suete is the love of thee,
  Nothing so suete may be;
  Al that may with eyen se
  Haveth no suetnesse ageynes the.


XIV.

  "Jhesu, when ich thenke on the,
  And loke upon the rode tre;
  Thi suete body to-toren se,
  Hit maketh heorte to smerte me.


XVIII.

  "Jhesu, my saule drah the to,
  Min heorte opene ant wyde undo;
  This hure of love to drynke so,
  That fleysshliche lust be al for-do.


XLV.

  "Jesut thin help at myn endyng,
  Ant ine that dredful out-wendyng
  Send mi soule god weryying,
  That y ne drede non eovel thing."


We can only notice one other grand hymn, selected also from a long
poem of Bernard, addressed to the different portions of the body of
Christ on the cross. This is from the Ad Faciem, and commences--
[Footnote 239]

    [Footnote 239: For the Latin, see Trench's Sacred Latin Poetry, p.
    139.]

  "Salve caput cruentatum
  Totum spinis coronatum."

As it is one of the finest mediaeval hymns, and has been translated
into nearly all European languages, we give the translation:--

  "Hail! thou head so bruised and wounded,
  With the crown of thorns surrounded;
  Smitten with the mocking reed,
  Wounds which may not cease to bleed,
         Trickling faint and slow.
  Hail! from whose most blessed brow
  None can wipe the blood drops now.
  All the flower of life has fled;
  Mortal paleness there instead.
  Thou, before whose presence dread,
        Angels trembling bow.

  "All thy vigor and thy life
  Fading in this bitter strife;
  Death his stamp on thee has set,
  Hollow and emaciate,
         Faint and drooping there.
  Thou, this agony and scorn,
  Hast for me a sinner borne;
  Me, unworthy--all for me,
  With those signs of love on thee.
        Glorious face appear!

  "Yet in this thine agony,
  Faithful shepherd, think of me;
  From whose lips of love divine
  Sweetest draughts of life are mine,
        Purest honey flows,
  All unworthy of thy thought,
  Guilty, yet reject me not;
  Unto me thy head incline.
  Let that dying head of thine
        In mine arms repose.

  "Let me true communion know
  With thee in thy sacred woe,
  Counting all beside but dross,
  Dying with thee on the cross;
        'Neath it will I die.
  Thanks to thee with every breath.
  Jesus, for thy bitter death;
  Grant thy guilty one this prayer--
  When my dying hour is near, 	t
         Gracious God, be nigh.

{823}

  "When my dying hour must be,
  Be not absent then from me;
  In that dreadful hour I pray
  Jesus come without delay,
        See and set me free.
  When thou biddest me depart,
  Whom I cleave to with my heart,
  Lover of my soul be near,
  With thy saving cross appear;
        Show thyself to me,"  [Footnote 240]

   [Footnote 240: Quoted in Christian Life in Song.]

There is an excellent version of this in German in the Passion Hymn of
Paul Gerhard, beginning--

  "O Haupt voll Blut und Wunden,
  Voll Schmerz und voller Hohn!"

But the grandest of all the mediaeval hymns is that attributed to
Thomas of Celano, known as the Dies Irae. Its authorship is uncertain;
it burst upon the world after a long silence in the church, like some
strain wafted over the earth on the winds of heaven. It has always
been the favorite hymn for solemnities in every country. In Germany
upward of sixty translations have been made of it. Goethe has
effectively introduced it into the "Faust" in the cathedral scene,
where Marguerite is tempted by the evil spirit, who, when the choir
chanted the words--

  "Dies irae, dies illa,
  Solvet saeclum in favilla,"

whispers sardonically into her ear--

  "Grimm fasst dich!
  Die Posaune toent!
  Die Graeber beben!
  Und dein Herz,
  Aus Aschenruh
  Zu Flammenquallen
  Wieder aufgeschaffen
  Bebt auf;"

and so on through the whole scene, corrupting the meaning of the hymn
in the mind of the broken-hearted girl. It was muttered by the dying
lips of Walter Scott, and has employed the genius of such men as
Schlegel, Fichte, and Herder. We give one passage--

  "Recordare, Jesu pie,
  Quod sum causa tuae viae,
  Ne me perdas illa die.

  "Querens me sedisti lassus,
  Redemisti crucem passus,
  Tantus labor non sit cassus."

  "Think of me, good Lord, I pray,
  Who troddest for me the bitter way,
  Nor forsake me in that day.

  "Weary sat'st thou seeking me,
  Diedst redeeming in the tree,
  Not in vain such toil can be."

The mediaeval period was one rich in art and active in intellectual
work. The great difference between that age and this is, that in
mediaeval times intellectual life was concentrated, and now it is
spread abroad; we get more books and readers, but less great books and
thinkers. Perhaps there has never been a time of such vigorous
intellectual effort in England, unless we except the Elizabethan age,
than that of the scholastic controversies of the twelfth, thirteenth,
and fourteenth centuries. It was in this age, too, that the
essentially mediaeval art of illumination flourished in all the
lettered monasteries of Europe, the age when all the great cathedrals
were built; and when that enchanting song whose notes we have just
been listening to was improvised and sung. The God who presides over
the economy of nature presides also over that of life. His hand is in
both, upholding, protecting, guiding. We take up a phase of human
history like this mediaeval phase, and to us it appears contradictory,
objectless, useless; but we must remember that it is but one part of
the great economy, that as every phase of nature has its separate use,
so every period in the history of humanity contributes its share to
the general result. There are no arid dark wastes in history any more
than in nature. Progressing geographical science is gradually
revealing to our minds the fact that Central Africa is not the deadly
useless desert of our imagination, but is probably belted and
intersected with rivers, whose fertilizing power has only to be
applied. So a progressive historical science is rapidly clearing away
the darkness of these dark ages, revealing to us treasures which have
long lain hidden. We speak of the past as antiquity, and we are apt to
associate the idea of age with it, just as we look {824} toward the
present as youthful and new. But we must remember that antiquity
really belongs to the present as the result of time, and that the past
was the youth. So when we go back into these past ages of the church
we must regard them as her youth, and instead of quarrelling with the
follies and wantonness inseparable from immaturity, endeavour to do
our best to help on the great consummation of her mission in the
world, knowing well that although the hey-day of her youth is past,
she has not yet attained her full maturity; and in times of despair,
when schism is rife, when the sons of her bosom desert her, when men
harden themselves against her love and forsake her, ever bear in mind
the promise of her great head and founder, "Upon this rock I build my
church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it."



Translated from the French.

ROBERT; OR, THE INFLUENCE OF A GOOD MOTHER.

CHAPTER IV.

"O Paris! gulf of evils, on each of thy stones we could drop a tear,
red with blood, if the sorrows, which thy walls enclose, could appear
before us."--J.J. ROUSSEAU.


The city of innumerable wonders, of shining domes, and colossal
towers, with its enchanting gardens, palaces, and gigantic monuments,
which one sees in the distance--the first glimpse he gets of Paris
through the blue haze--now appeared to the astonished gaze of the
little mountaineer, and was like a dream of the Arabian Nights. "O
Paris! Paris!" shouted he joyously, clapping his hands, and looking
eagerly through the misty veil that still enveloped the city. And, as
he approached nearer, his emotions redoubled; for it was there that
his mother predicted he would one day be happy. Oh! sweet security,
blissful trust of childhood, why must it pass away with advancing
years? Why is it that devouring inquietude and mental restlessness
then comes to our souls, and tortures them without ceasing? It is a
sad condition of our probation here, that we must see all the bright
delusions of early life disappear one by one; and submit unmurmuringly
to the different phases of life and the different ideas and feelings
to which time leads us all. And so it may perhaps be for little
Robert, who now trusts so confidently in the future, and in his
mother's prediction being fulfilled. Have confidence, like him, dear
readers--like him hope, without trying to draw aside the veil which
hides your destiny--but follow him, step by step, in all the changing
events of his life, and perhaps we shall see him fill an enviable
position, as the fruit of his good conduct and perseverance. And since
he is now radiant with hope, let us not efface, by our indiscreet
words, this vision which sustains and comforts all.

As the travellers neared Paris, the old man's forehead wrinkled, his
brows contracted each moment, and flashes of rage burst from his eyes.
The sight of the hordes of the enemy's soldiers who had established
their bivouacs before the capital, put him in a transport of fury.

The detested uniforms of the English, Austrians, Russians, and
Prussians which he saw before him, made him think he was the victim of
some dreadful hallucination, but the insolent air of the conquerors
awakened him to the frightful reality that the emperor could no longer
expel them. In his terrible rage he beat his breast with his fists,
swore, and uttered words that sounded like distant thunder, gnashing
his teeth at the same time most {825} convulsively. Then he walked on
with a resolute and hasty step, so that Robert was obliged to run,
rather than walk, at his side to keep up with him. He was very
taciturn, but the boy at once comprehended the reason of his stubborn
silence, and he respected the holy indignation of the old warrior,
wounded, in his national pride and his deepest feelings, when he saw
all his dreams of glory vanish with the shadow of the great man who
had made the fame and splendor of all France. To the ex-soldier of the
guard there was nothing left but cruel discontent. In Paris there was
militia of all ranks and grades and countries; but there were no brave
leaders, the old soldiers thought, and most of them were young men who
had yet to see the field of battle. The white stripes had replaced the
three colors, which disappeared with the glorious exile, Napoleon. The
despair of poor Cyprien was as great as his love for his emperor, and
nothing could soften his rage, so violent was the hatred he felt for
the new order of things.

Robert was much excited by the strange and picturesque spectacles
which presented themselves to his view on every side--by the gay
costumes of' the people, and the movements of this ocean of of human
beings, but he did not address many questions to his sad companion,
for he loved him already, and saw the deep sorrow that filled his
soul, and it made him timid and reserved.

It was now time to think of getting lodgings, and Cyprien wanted to go
into the most modest quarter of the city, where he was born, and for
which naturally he had the strongest affection. But in the twenty-five
years that he had been a wanderer, vast changes had taken place, and
most of his family had gone to rest. He found himself alone, separated
for ever from his old comrades of glory; but of this he thought
little, so completely was his heart filled with the adored image of
his emperor. The most extraordinary thing was that amidst his grave
thoughts he had found a place for the little orphan, whom chance had
thrown in his way, and for whom he evinced the strongest attachment,
which grew day by day, for Cyprien did nothing by halves; and when he
could for a moment forget his emperor, it was to bestow almost
paternal care upon his young _protege_. One day, when they had been
having a long talk, and he had said things which charmed the sensible
and loving boy, he asked him to take him to the Church of St. Germain
l'Auxerrois, for it was there that he was to find the cure to whom his
letter was addressed. "Willingly," replied Cyprien, "I will take you
there; but I cannot go in, it has been so long since I have made a
visit of that kind, that I don't care to go, but I will wait for you."
Robert presented himself alone at the door of the cure's house, and
was received by him with grace and a touching cordiality. He was a man
of fine address, with eyes that seemed to penetrate the depths of
one's soul, but his scrutiny was accomplished by a smile so
beneficent, that it drew you irresistibly toward the minister of' God.
The virtues he had practised appeared in his person, his language was
full of purity and goodness, and he appeared ever ready to pardon and
bless. Such, in general terms, was the man to whom Robert was
recommended. When he had read his friend's letter, he made the child
sit down and tell him all about his journey and the manner in which he
acquitted himself charmed the good cure, and his lively and
intelligent face set him to reflecting. The purity of his eyes showed
a generous and noble soul, and the good man knew that he was one of
those natures that always remain pure, in the midst of corruption.
These exiled angels have often sorrowful lives, before they reach the
glorious end. Deprived of pecuniary means, they see the paths to fame
closed for them, while it is open for the rich, and made wide and easy
of access.

{826}

The good cure, after making these observations mentally, recalled the
illustrious men who have illumined the earth from time to time with
the rays of their genius, and the traces of whose lives are still
visible; but the road to fame has, alas! been sown for centuries with
bitter tears, unknown sufferings, and cries of the despair of
unrecognized genius. He recalled faces radiant with sublime thoughts,
crowned with thorns, the only recompense of their work, and he said
with agony, "O God! if this child should ever be one of the victims,
if he should ever weep over lost hopes, would it not be better to
leave him as he is, simple and natural, ignorant of the delights of a
studious life; ignorant of knowledge, than to be initiated into the
cruel deceptions of hope long deferred, and which may be finally lost?
How often, like a beautiful dream, youth, glory, and mind fade away in
the awful struggle. But no," said he, fixing his eyes on the
expressive face of Robert, "his future will not be so sad. Too much
intelligence burns in his eyes, too much fire is lighted there, to be
extinguished by the wearying labors of mind, or by hunger and
frightful misery. If this diamond in the rough shows so much
brilliancy, what will it not be when it is polished? Then will all its
marvellous lustre appear, and I will have the holy joy of aiding to
perfect this work." These were his reflections, and so had it always
been with him; from the moment he was ordained to his saintly
ministry, he was always looking for the means of doing good to others;
and was a beautiful religious type of charity and goodness. It was so
great a happiness to him to make others happy, that he looked upon his
days as badly spent if he had not dried a tear, or given another joy;
and his doing good was so sweet a duty, that he passed his days and
nights in consoling the unfortunate. But for children especially was
he most tenderly solicitous, He said with one who was all love and
charity when among men, "Let little children come unto me." Like his
divine Master, he drew them to him and pressed them to his heart, his
hands rested on their young heads, and he called down upon them
celestial benedictions. But he did not stop here. He gave them not
only his prayers, but aid and protection. When his purse was
exhausted, and his personal resources no longer sufficed, he had
recourse to that of others. He was eloquent and persuasive when he
pleaded the cause of children, and happy in receiving the offerings
which were always deposited in his charitable hands. Thus he was the
father of a large family, the benefactor of many children, who,
becoming men, repaid his care by unlimited gratitude and
irreproachable conduct, and by the constant practice of the virtues of
which he had given them so noble an example. Robert found in him a
tender and devoted protector, who was interested for him, and in whose
future friendship he might trust. The day when this action was
registered in heaven, the good man felt a happiness he had never known
before in adopting before God the orphan that his friend, the cure of
the village of Bains, had recommended to him in such warm terms. The
vow which he made himself to protect him, was not like those men
usually make, and forget as soon as made.

During the interview between the child and the cure, the old soldier
was walking up and down outside, absorbed in reflections of quite an
opposite nature. Sometimes hope colored his thoughts; oftener they
were sombre and cold, like the clouds of the region to which memory
transported him, to the fatal soil of Russia, where victory had
abandoned the French flag. An hour was passed by him in recalling
these days of sorrow, but at last he grew tired of waiting, and jerked
at the bell string, which hung so modestly at the cure's door, most
violently. In an instant a servant appeared with harsh words on the
end of her tongue, but the severe face and long moustache of Cyprien
induced her to withhold from speaking them. Scarcely was the door
opened, when a voice, almost of thunder, {827} inquired for Robert.
Hearing it, the cure opened the parlor door, and advancing toward the
soldier, with an affable air, invited him in, saying, "I will be very
glad to talk with you. You were, I suppose, uneasy about your little
friend, whom I have detained a long time, I know, but it is not time
lost; we have become acquainted and are now old friends, and you have
a share of the affection I have avowed for this interesting child. You
have a noble heart, and the Lord will bless you, my friend, you may be
sure of that, for in the midst of your own sufferings you have had
compassion on those of others, and above all you have protected an
orphan!" The soldier was stunned by this benevolent speech; he, raised
his hand mechanically to his forehead, following the cure and
muttering the words "Pardon--excuse--do not pay any attention to me."
Robert had not dared to move, but when Cyprien came near him, he threw
himself into his arms. "There--that will do," said he to him--"pay
attention, the cure speaks." "Why did you not come in with Robert? You
have denied me the pleasure I should have had in talking with I a
brave soldier. Our _protege_ has spoken of you in most affectionate
terms, but he did not tell me you were waiting for him, or I should
not have suffered you to remain outside the door." "Thank you, M.
Cure, but I cannot talk to you, I have so few words, and have not been
accustomed to much, and all I know is how to use 'Arms.'" "Each of us
has his profession, my friend," replied the cure, "and you have made
yours glorious. Nevertheless you must allow me to think you know a
great deal besides." "If that is your idea, kind father, I will not
oppose it, but, with respect to you, I must tell you I have not seen a
book since I knew, the 'Little Corporal,' and we are old
acquaintances. Twenty-five years;" said he, "impossible to forget
that"--wiping away a tear.

"Yes, my friend, you have reason to regret your emperor, and even to
weep for him, for he was a great man, and loved you all as children."

"But, oh! how was he repaid?" and then he wept again.

"The love you bear your emperor honors you. Respect and devotion to
misfortune fills noble souls, and I understand very well how your
attachment is augmented in proportion to the sufferings which weigh
down your chief; and it is not for me, a minister of peace and
charity, to make a crime of your regrets and affection, or to denounce
them. But let us leave this sad subject, until you know me better and
have more confidence in me. For today we will talk about Robert and my
plans for him. I am thankful to you for taking a father's place to
him; without you he would have been lost in this great city, or might
perhaps have met persons who would have placed him in contact with
vice and wickedness. I rejoice that a kind Providence permitted this
child to awaken an interest in you, and that he found you so
affectionate a guide. You must continue your friendship, and I hope to
gain his, by the care I will take of him."

"Oh! my dear father," said Robert, kissing respectfully the hand of
his new protector, "you are too good to me, but I will try to repay
your kindness by a full and entire submission to your least wishes."

"Well spoken, little one!" exclaimed the soldier, "this is the first
duty of a conscript."

"I will try to find the mean s of aiding him to fill a high position
some day," said the cure. "I have acquaintances and friends who will
give me of their wealth, for," said he, in a tone of regret, "I am far
from being rich. But no matter, God will help us; I have this sweet
certainty, so you may take courage, my little friend, and whatever
taste you may have for study, I promise you I will do all that I can
to advance you. You are in such good hands that I shall have no cause
for uneasiness as to how you pass your time; and I will leave you for
a while, {828} and perhaps I may bring back some good news for you."

After calling at several houses without success, he chanced to see a
wealthy widow who had but one child, a son. This boy was of a most
vicious nature, and although young in years, he had every defect of
character, without a single good quality. He made his poor mother
despair, and she often reproached herself bitterly for her weakness
toward him, but she knew no means that would reform his bad habits,
which assumed the form of fatal and violent passion. When the cure
spoke of Robert, she said: "O God! since he is possessed of so many
amiable and virtuous qualities, entrust him to me. He will be treated
as my own child, will share the studies of Gustave, and have the same
masters; and perhaps God may pity a mother's sorrows, and that this
child may have so good an influence over him, that Gustave may feel a
desire to be good also. I pray you do not refuse me," said the mother
in a supplicating tone; "I cling to this last hope, as a ship-wrecked
man would cling to the plank he hopes will save him from perishing."

After long consideration of the chances of happiness and success in
the future if Robert accepted it--of the great dissimilarity of the
two persons who would thus be thrown together, and the disagreements
and sufferings for Robert; and still worse, if the pure, rich nature
of the orphan should be corrupted in the society of the wicked child,
whom he knew only too well--he was still undecided. But an
irresistible, though secret, argument spoke in favor of the mother of
Gustave; so that at last her pressing solicitations were acceded to.
He reserved for himself the right to watch closely over the precious
trust that Providence had confided to him, and after this it was
agreed that Robert should be presented to Madame de Vernanges (this
was the name of Gustave's mother) as soon as he could be informed of
it, and if he was willing to accept it.


CHAPTER V.

  "The heart of a wicked man sighs for evil, and no
  one can find pardon before him . . . . ."


Robert was willing to accede to any wish of the good man who had so
generously charged himself with his destiny. We have said before, that
he was gifted with noble qualities; he had a lively perception, his
intellectual faculties were strong, and he seemed to have power to do
all that was required of him. He had no knowledge of what was not
good, and possessed one of those happy organizations which can only be
a gift from God. He felt it his duty to obey all that his protector
wished; and when he told him that his interest required that he should
go to the house of' Madame de Vernanges, and share in the liberal
education this lady gave her son, Robert replied: "If' it is your
wish, I am ready to go."

'The cure was surprised and touched at this eagerness to fulfil his
wishes, this entire self-abnegation in one who could not but prize the
sweet liberty of acting for himself, which he had so long enjoyed on
his native mountain; and a still further proof of his remarkable
disposition was, that he knew, young as he was, the art of sacrificing
his tastes to duty, and the necessity of making himself agreeable to
those who interested themselves for him. The kind priest did not wish
to spend Robert's money for things which could be dispensed with, but
his clothes were unsuitable to his new position, so he had him a
complete wardrobe prepared, and a woman could not have been more
careful about the minutest details.

'When all was in readiness he conducted him to the house of Madame de
Vernanges. As soon as she saw him, she felt as if he was a
regenerating angel to be placed near her son. She embraced him
affectionately, and asked him if he "would love her like a mother?"
"Oh!" said he, at once becoming serious at such a question, "I cannot
promise you that, dear {829} madame, for it would be impossible for me
to feel for any other woman the same degree of affection that I feel
for my mother;" but, he added, smiling sweetly, "I think I can assure
you that I will love you much."

Some author says that a child only loves his mother for the services
she renders him. Can this be true? No--it is blasphemy against filial
love; and were it so, alas for the happiness of mothers! Far sweeter
is the idea that one loves the other for the other's sake alone; one
is the consequence of the other, it is a love eternal like the soul,
like its divine author, like God himself: There may be some selfish
children who measure their love for their parents by the services they
render them, but they are monsters--sad and rare exceptions--and
deserve all our pity. The proof of what we affirm is found in the love
that Robert always preserved in his heart for the dear and sacred
remembrance of his mother. It is the strongest, most lively and
unalterable of feelings, and has no rival in the other loves God has
given to man in his short life. Who can hear the name of mother spoken
without feeling a delicious sensation, and having a tear-drop moisten
the eye?

Madame de Vernanges was so pleased with Robert's frankness, that she
felt for him from that moment the most tender sympathy. After a few
moments' conversation Gustave was sent for, but the reception he gave
his future companion of play and study, was not very encouraging to
the latter. At first, from the height of his grandeur he looked down
upon him with disdain, and received with a very bad grace the amiable
advances of Robert, who wished to conquer at once the friendship of
his young comrade. He was astonished and sad at the coldness showed
him, but little by little Gustave softened, and laid aside his
insolent air. The acquaintances of this period of life are easily
made. Robert gave himself up with perfect abandon to the new pleasure
of playing and talking with a child of his own age. He was not
distrustful, for he had no experience; and as his own thoughts were so
good and pure, he never suspected others. The mother and the cure,
though seemingly occupied in conversation, followed with observing and
restless eyes the movements of the children. The latter feared, and
not without reason, to see some awkward blunder made by a child raised
so far from the world, and in the simple habits of a happy mediocrity.
But to his inexpressible satisfaction he saw Robert as easy in his
manners as in his language, and he acted as if he had been bred in a
parlor. His rare intelligence displayed itself in his answers to
Gustave, and he could not have been more sparkling in his repartees.
His candor and good nature did not permit him to comprehend the
perfidious intentions of his saucy interrogator, and it was a cruel
mortification for the wicked Gustave, not to be able, in spite of his
_ruses_, to find any fault with Robert. He had counted on a triumph,
and received a complete humiliation; he thought to show his
superiority to the child who was given him as a model, and his
disappointment was that he felt before him his great defects.

During this time the good priest inwardly rejoiced at the success of
the little orphan, while the poor mother sighed in making a sad
comparison between the children of the same age, but so different in
character; and in spite of her wish to the contrary, she could not but
see the low and envious sentiments which ruled the conduct of Gustave,
and the goodness contained in each word Robert uttered. Her heart was
well-nigh broken, and in bitterness she exclaimed: "Wicked! always
wicked! he has not one good thought, one blameless moment. I am
cruelly punished for my guilty weakness toward him. O God! is it too
late to reclaim him? Is there no remedy for his wickedness? and must I
bear all the ills of such a child?"

{830}

Assured by the way in which Robert had taken the first and most
difficult steps in his new abode, the good priest prepared to leave.
It was in warm and pressing terms that he recommended his _protege_;
and embracing him, gave him his paternal benediction. "I will see you
soon," he said to him, and this promise consoled him, for he felt sure
he would always be a generous defender, a tender and devoted. friend.
The child flattered himself for some time that he had gained the
confidence and friendship of Gustave, but he had soon to renounce that
belief, for, in spite of his profound dissimulation, the latter could
not always keep up appearances, and Robert suddenly discovered the
truth. This made Gustave hate him bitterly, and nothing could diminish
it; but Robert spoke of it to no one but the priest. Encouraged by his
silence, which Gustave mistook for the silence of fear, he was always
making war with him when they were alone. Before his mother, or any
other person, he did not dare to do so, but changes of manner were no
trouble to the young hypocrite, for he could put on a bold air, and
give himself the calm serenity of innocence. This premature
corruption, this innate science of' evil, he carefully hid, and was
deceitful above everything to those before whom he wished to appear
good. In the first days of their acquaintance he had conceived a
violent hatred to Robert, but he felt the necessity of dissimulating,
so as not to awaken the suspicions of his mother; so that he did not
openly declare war with his rival, for he knew that would be an
irreparable fault. He trusted to chance, which sometimes helps the
wicked, and waited for an occasion to present itself.

Robert all this while studied with care the lessons of his different
masters, which the goodness of his benefactress gave him the means of
sharing with Gustave. It was no trouble to him to learn, and his
progress was so rapid and so wonderful, that his masters were
enchanted, and were prodigal of their praises and marks of affection.
Gustave, the lazy, indolent boy, suffered all the torments of envy.
For the first time he felt pride, pushing toward emulation, enter his
heart, and that which neither the prayers nor the tears of his mother
could obtain, the odious sentiment of jealousy brought, and he worked
with ardor, Rage sustained him in his desperate resolution; his duties
were no longer neglected, and his hours for work were so laboriously
employed, that even his mother believed for a time in the complete
reformation of her son, under the happy influence of Robert. This joy
was of short duration, and the error soon dispelled, for, if his mind
profited on the one hand, his heart remained the same, and in it every
bad passion was kindled. Sad fruits of a neglected education, of an
infancy and childhood abandoned to itself, without care and without
culture.

Nearly a year had passed since Robert entered the house of Madame de
Vernanges, and the time had been most profitable to him in every way.
Study opened to his eyes the treasures that are concealed from the
vulgar, and he was already opening for himself a career sown with the
seeds of art and science, the flowers of which he longed to gather;
and in spite of all the cruelty and sarcasm of Gustave, he was very
happy, for he felt the love of his benefactress and the good cure, and
the remembrance of his cherished mother, and under these affections he
rejoiced, as one rejoices in the sunlight of heaven. From the night
she appeared to him in a dream, he was filled with the desire to be
good, and worked nobly for this end. Often his thoughts would fly to
his mountain home, and to the grave which contained her ashes. Neither
had he forgotten the venerable priest of the Baths of Mount Dore, and
had often written to him, and from time to time sent him small sums of
money to be employed in charities.

Among Robert's happiest hours now were those he passed with the cure
here; but even these he could not long enjoy alone, for the wicked
Gustave discovered that his sadness vanished {831} whenever he reached
the cure's door, and he took a cruel pleasure in always going with him
under various pretexts, and thus snatching these few moments of
happiness from his victim. But a smile, a kind word from his
benefactor, paid Robert doubly for this painful sacrifice, and Madame
de Vernanges noticed the hatred her son bore him. She was not to be
duped by the friendship he feigned for one he detested from his soul.
More than once the feeble mother had been a witness to the odious
wickedness of the one, and the admirable patience of the other. She
had seen, but had not corrected the guilty, for his strength
discouraged her; she was too heart-stricken to combat with the bad
genius that possessed him. It was easier for her to close her eyes to
it, though she had the justice to seek by delicate attentions and
tender caresses to repay Robert for some of his sufferings.

We have lost the old soldier for a time, but have not forgotten him.
At the time of their separation, both he and Robert shed bitter tears,
and the latter tried to make him promise that he would come sometimes
to see him in his new abode: "Not there," said the grenadier, "but I
will come sometimes and have a talk with you at the house of the cure,
for I love him, by the faith of Cyprien Hardy." And he kept his
promise, and many were the talks they had there together. On the 20th
of March of that year the exile of Elba made an appeal to all faithful
soldiers, and it was not made in vain. Cyprien responded at once to
the call of his emperor, and when he had buckled on his warlike
habits, he forgot for a while the orphan and the priest.

Madame de Vernanges counted her days only by her sorrows. She had no
repose--her health was failing so rapidly that the physicians said she
must pass the winter in a warmer climate and under a purer sky. This
was a sudden blow for Robert, for he had become much attached to his
benefactress, and she said he was to go to college with Gustave, who
saw with revolting indifference the sufferings of his mother at the
thought of a separation; but all her friends thought it was best,
hoping some change in his character might take place from the strict
and severe discipline of college life. This new arrangement was
submitted to the cure, who in all things pertaining to him, was guided
by the interest of his _protege_, and it met with his approbation.
Madame de Vernanges' was to be absent six months or a year, and Robert
felt that he should indeed be isolated from her protective affection,
and left alone to the wicked designs of Gustave; who, when they were
thrown together at college, used all his time and his power to turn
the students against Robert, and get them to league with him against
him, for he was longing for an occasion to avenge the marks of
tenderness and preference which his mother had shown Robert. Never was
a child's patience put to a more severe test--neither the goodness nor
generosity of the orphan could soften the hatred Gustave felt for him.
But though Robert was of so even and calm a temperament, he could not
be injured nor oppressed without defending himself, and there was but
one consideration that curbed his indignation, and that was the
certainty he felt that Gustave was the author of the persecutions
which each wicked boy inflicted upon him. Had he not been convinced of
this, he would have used the same means to punish them which they
employed to torture him; but, according to his pure sentiments, this
would not have been right, and he would not have the least reproach
from his benefactress for any unkindness toward her son. He did not
oppose his oppressors in any way, but they saw that he felt the
outrages perfectly, and disdained, and not without reason, to let them
know it. In this combat of all against one, the voice of conscience
was not always heard, and in spite of his efforts to keep silent,
there came a time when it was insupportable. The epithets of  "lazy
and coward" {832} resounding in his ears, filled him with indignation,
and those who spoke them did not dare repeat them a second time, for
he dealt with them in a way that convinced them he could not bear
everything. Two or three corrections soon put an end to this state of
things, and placed Robert high in the esteem of the older collegians.
In vain did Gustave try to reawaken the ardor of his partisans.
Frightened by the vigorous attack of Robert, they refused to unite in
any new vexations against one they respected and loved, and they all
vowed they would never take up a prejudice again. Thus Gustave saw, in
spite of all his odious efforts to the contrary, Robert loved by his
masters, respected and esteemed by his companions, who protected him
and despised his persecutor. Things had reached this point when, one
morning, an uncle of Gustave's came and took him hurriedly away,
leaving Robert at college. This strange conduct affected him very
much, and he wondered what it could mean. Could it be that his
benefactress had returned and withdrawn her affection, or was she more
ill? He was lost in sad conjectures for several days, which appeared
ages to him, as he waited in patience to hear. A visit from the cure,
with a sad countenance, revealed to Robert the misfortune which was to
oppress him. "Madame de Vernanges suffers no more," said he, with a
visible effort, drawing to his bosom the weeping child, whose sorrow
was certainly more profound and true than that of' Gustave. "Alas! my
child, you have lost your benefactress; before she died she asked to
see you, but this wish of a heart devoted to you was denied--God
willed it otherwise. But she did not need any further proof of your
love, your conduct has spoken it so often; and God will never abandon
you. Courage then, your recompense will come sooner or later. I will
assume from to-day my entire right of father, and my most tender
solicitude will be for you. Redouble your ardor at work, triple your
strength, and finally the end which I propose for your happiness will
come. Your studies, conscientiously finished, will be the magic keys
which will unlock the door to an honorable career. From this time
Gustave will not torment you, for he will not return to college."

Robert was too much moved to speak--too many sorrowful remembrances
pressed themselves into his heart, but he had not lost a single word
that was spoken to him. Six months after this he stood before the
abbot of Verneuil, to receive from his hands the crown he so justly
deserved. Oh! how his heart beat with joy when he heard his name
spoken in the sanctuary of science; it seemed then that the sweet
voice of his mother spoke to him. Each time he was named, his eyes
turned towards the cure, as if asking him: "Are you satisfied?" How
light and easy to wear are the laurels won by the victors in every
good work! Is it not a bright day in your lives, my dear children,
when you are proclaimed conquerors? What a sweet remembrance it leaves
in your hearts, that no after thoughts can ever crush out! Our young
laureate passed his vacation--that time of repose so dear to
students--with the cure. To Robert work was so much more a pleasure
than a fatigue, that he was obliged to allow him to study a great
deal; but he did not wish him to spend all his time at his books, but
to take some hours of respite each day. This excellent man, of such
simple habits and manners, and of such contentment, really suffered at
times that he could not from his limited means give Robert as many
pleasures as his heart dictated. He knew he needed air and liberty,
and wished he could send him into the country, where he would be free
from all restraints. "Poor child!" he would say to himself, "how he
must long for his native mountain." So, before he left, to return to
his studies, he thought he would give him an agreeable surprise. The
weather was lovely, and all nature seemed to rejoice. The cure and his
charge started in a _diligence_ for Versailles, the {833} wonderful
and magnificent palace once used as a royal residence. Robert had
never seen this place, once such a gay city, but whose gilded glory
has all departed. No more _fetes_, no more balls, in Louis XIV.'s
beautiful city. The grand palace is still there, but where are the
kings and courtiers? Oh! where?

The gardens charmed Robert, and he bounded about like a young fawn in
his native wood, to the great delight of the cure, who rejoiced in his
liveliness and happiness, and allowed this little bird that he had
freed to follow his capricious fancies, wherever they led him; for he
believed that all who loved children favored their pleasures; and it
is one of the sweetest joys God has given to man, that he should try
to leave no regrets to this age of life. As night was drawing on,
Robert left off his sports, and they made ready for their departure.
Robert's mind was filled with beautiful pictures of this visit, of
which the result was so sad. As they were entering Paris, the
benediction that the good cure gave the child each evening was
pronounced with much fervor, and it proved the last. They slept in the
same room, and Robert had gone happy and trustful to bed, little
dreaming of the new and terrible misfortune that awaited him, and in
the morning wakes to weep over the inanimate body of his loved
benefactor, whose calm and serene face is radiant with immortal joy.
The angel of death had come softly near the couch on which reposed the
servant of the Lord; and took him from life, to rest on the bosom of
his God, leaving a bright example of a virtuous and godly life.


CHAPTER VI.

  "O virtue! gift of God! grace divine! it is thou
  that givest the saintly and sublime inspirations of
  devotion, that trample down vice, that elevate above all
  feebleness and all obstacles."
    ANONYMOUS.


When Robert realized that he had no longer a protector or friend he
was plunged into the depths of despair, but it was not for the
miserable consideration of interest, which too often possesses
humanity, that he was so full of regret; it was for the wise and
virtuous man that he mourned, for the loss of his sweet and persuasive
language, and his tender and eloquent words, and his indescribable air
of goodness, united to his pure life, which won all hearts, as a
tender and delicate flower attracts and ravishes by its perfume.
Stranger to all that was passing around him, shut up in his sorrows,
made an orphan once more, Robert had still the happy consciousness of
having fulfilled all his duties to his benefactor. He awakened from
his lethargy at the sound of the first shovel of earth that fell on
the coffin of his, beloved cure. The awakening was frightful. The
tears and sobs he heard around him from the crowd of poor children and
unfortunate ones, of every degree, whom he had benefited during his
too short career, recalled with violence to his heart the sad reality.
Another sincere mourner for the cure was his faithful old housekeeper,
who, when she went in to take her last look of the venerable man, saw
Robert standing there in silence and sorrow, and she felt that she,
like him, was alone in the world, and suffered the same sorrow he did.
But his grief and his loss, bitter as it was, was not as fatal for his
advancement as might be supposed. His soul was too strongly fortified
with the blessing of religion to allow him to be long discouraged. And
when he could for a moment forget his losses, he would look to the
future, and dare to hope, that although deprived one by one of his
protectors, the path to success was still open to him. Madame Gaudin
had most bitter thoughts. She was now getting along in years, being
near fifty, and her age would be a barrier to her finding a home where
the work would be light, so that she could live without spending her
hard earned money. From her own personal thoughts she passed to
another subject of solicitude--the future of Robert. If she had not
felt any very strong interest in the fate of her master's _protege_,
{834} she was too compassionate a woman not to pity this child, who
had been the object of his tender care. She thought of how the saintly
man had praised the intelligence and amiable qualities of Robert, and
repeated his favorite words: "This child will be something one day."
Moved by these remembrances, she thought she heard him tell her to
watch over the orphan. Submission and respect for all the orders she
received was a habit with her, and she had been accustomed to obey
with such exactitude, that she took for reality the illusion of her
heart, and resolved to obey the inspired voice, and replace, if
possible, the charitable man who had adopted Robert. This resolution
once made, she thought of nothing but executing it. Going to Robert,
she said, "I know, my young friend, you are thinking of some way of
gaining a living for yourself. We can live together, and it will be
better for us both, and we shall each have some one to take care of
us. I will try to get lodgings and work, and you can be with me when
not at your work, and God will assist us. Unfortunately you will be
obliged to give up your studies for the present, which is my greatest
grief; but we will not lose courage, for I feel sure that, sooner or
later, God will give you another proof of his goodness. Your
penmanship, which is so beautiful, you can make useful and by it earn
money. I will go at once and find us a lodging, and will be entirely
the gainer by the arrangement, for I shall have for company a good
child, who will be like a son; won't he?" Madame Gaudin half smiled at
her project, half cried when she repeated the name of the cure, then
said, "Yes! yes! I am sure he inspires me to do this, he inspires me
with an interest for this child, whom he loved above everything else."
Some days after they were fixed in a small lodging in the rue des
Fosses, St. Germain. She bought a bed for Robert, and he obtained a
situation at twenty-five francs a month. A year passed in this way,
without anything at all remarkable happening. Madame Gaudin worked,
took care of things, and sang Robert's praises to all. After he had
conscientiously finished the day to the profit of his employer, he
returned to his lodgings, took his supper, and attended in the
evenings a gratuitous course of drawing lessons. This art, for which
he felt each day a more and more decided taste, made him forget for a
time his past delightful life of study, which had opened to his
dazzled eyes the book with golden leaves, which had as suddenly closed
to his inexpressible regret. As time wore on, Madame Gaudin's
attachment for Robert increased so much, that she almost believed he
was her son; and well did he merit it all, for he respected her
sincerely, and was most grateful for all she did for him. Whenever he
was out at night, she would await his return with the greatest
impatience, and was perfectly happy when she could be near him while
he was reading, writing, or drawing; which latter employed most of his
leisure hours. He imitated with great care the models given him, and
would have passed the entire night working at them, but that Madame
Gaudin sweetly forced him to lay them aside and go to bed.

Robert had now reached his sixteenth year, and his salary was
increased to forty francs a month, which gave him great joy, as well
as Madame Gaudin, though she thought that his merit was not yet
remunerated enough, notwithstanding it was a good opening for him to
another career. Some days after he had received this mark of the
satisfaction his good conduct had given, his employer handed him a
letter, with an express recommendation to a celebrated painter, and
asked him to take it to his studio, and wait for an answer.

Arriving there, he introduced himself into the studio where the artist
sat at his work. He laid down his palette, and when he had finished
reading the letter that was handed him, he saw to his great surprise
the young messenger absorbed before the picture that was on his easel.
After considering {835} him far a few moments in silence, he asked him
several questions, to which Robert replied with an emotion and an
accent that revealed to the painter the inspiration of his soul. The
most striking features of his face were his large and spiritual eyes,
and his broad open forehead, on which thought sat enthroned. The
artist was so charmed with his agreeable exterior, his frank and
expressive language, that he inquired with interest what he was doing,
who were his family, and what were his projects for the future. Robert
satisfied all these questions, which were asked in a benevolent tone,
by the recital of his childhood, of the loss of his mother, of his
studies, interrupted by the death of his benefactors, and finished by
telling his actual position, his love for drawing, and his ardent
desire to come to him to study painting. "Well, you can came, my boy,"
said the painter; "but if you should succeed one day, can you hide
from yourself the bitter deceptions which are the sad shadow of glory
and renown? Yet why should I frighten you and inspire you with fear,
when you trust so implicitly in the future? You can only hope. This
word is all-powerful, and with your ideas and wishes you can crush
under your feet every obstacle you wish to surmount. From this day
consider yourself my pupil, and I doubt not you will do me credit. I
will write the answer to the letter you brought me, and tell your
employer at the same time that you belong to me now." Robert really
thought he was dreaming, and was afraid to stir for fear his castle
would fall, until the painter put the letter he was to take into his
hand, and said, "Came back to-morrow."

He ran all the way, and stopped almost breathless before the door of
Madame Gaudin, opened it hastily, and threw himself into her arms in
an ecstacy of delight. "What is it?" she exclaimed, "what has happened
you? I know it is something good" Her eyes were so eloquent with
curiosity that he at once commenced to tell her, and related, without
omitting a single word, the recent conversation which he had with the
celebrated painter, and his promise to take him as a scholar. This
unexpected event had filled him with such delight, that he entirely
forgot the letter that was entrusted to him, but immediately set out
to deliver it. Contentment gave him wings, and he was delirious with
joy when he pressed against his breast the letter which was the bond
of his liberty and his deliverance; and without regret he bade an
eternal farewell to his former insipid labor, though his heart beat as
he gave it to his employer, and as he stood waiting for him to read
it, the minutes were like years. At last he raised his eyes, and said,
"So you are to leave me, Robert; I am sorry, for I like you, much, and
I shall not soon fill your place; still I cannot stand in the way of
your promotion." Robert's happiness knew no bounds, and he returned
and dreamed the sweetest dreams that ever came to childhood's pillow.
From this time his life of struggle and of real work commenced. Until
now he had lived almost alone, far from the world and its attractions,
and ignorant of all wickedness. When he finds himself face to face
with life's realities, he is like one shipwrecked. He was taken by his
new master into the studio, and presented to the other scholars.
Thrown like a timid lamb into this flock, he found they had no respect
for sacred things, and his innocence and candor were cruelly railed
at, his virtue rudely spoken of, and his religion turned into
ridicule; and then sometimes, under the pretext of friendship, they
would try to make him take part in their noisy revels. But he always
refused, never forgetting that his mother had told him to seek the old
and wise for advice, and to avoid the company of wicked young men.
This enabled him to resist courageously the deceitful pleasures
produced by licentiousness and debaucheries. To his pure mind nothing
was so delightful as the home friendship, the kindness and the sweet
counsels he had with Madame Gaudin. {836} Then he made excursions in
the neighborhood of Paris, where he found nature in all her beautiful
simplicity; he breathed the pure country air, and made sketches of the
surrounding scenery. In a word, he was entirely occupied with his art,
and it was his true enjoyment. The amusement and excesses of gayety,
which ordinarily delight the young, had for him no charm; and he
repulsed with horror the poisoned cup to which so many open eager
lips. My dear young friends, if you only knew what this bitter cup
contained, you would all dash it, far from you, for in drinking it to
the dregs, you will sometimes find crime, always remorse, a weariness
of all things, and a premature old age.

Robert was spared from falling into the snares which are set to allure
youth, which blessing can only be attributed to the pious education he
had received. First impressions are never effaced, they take deep root
in a child's heart, and if good, become the fruitful germs of many
virtues; if they are bad, they are the source from which vice and
passion flow. In his tender years Robert had loved God and his works;
later, when the good cure had revealed to him the sublimity of
religion, the orphan was penetrated with a great love for that God who
is goodness itself; and when reason and experience confirmed all which
his mother and his protector had taught him, he believed more firmly
still, and found in all nature visible proofs of the grandeur and
power manifested by the Sovereign Ruler of the universe. When his
companions were convinced that they could not make him one of their
band of idlers, they let him alone, and treated him with the most
contemptuous indifference, which was a great happiness to him, for he
was no longer disturbed in his studies, and applied himself with such
ardor and perseverance that his master was enchanted with his
progress, and prodigal of his praises and encouragement, his counsels
and lessons; and aided to the utmost of his ability this rare talent,
which only demanded for its perfection aid and good direction. Not a
day passed without his looking over Robert's studies, correcting them,
and stimulating the generous emulation of the young artist. Robert
proved his gratitude by his devotion to his studies, and if on the one
hand the master was proud of his pupil, on the other so sincere,
exalted, and just was his respect for him, that he would have
considered it but a small sacrifice to have given his life for a man
who was so liberal of his time and knowledge to him. This tribute
which his warm heart gave so willingly, was not the only one Robert
received. Madame Gaudin made a duty of continuing the charitable work
of the Abbe Verneuil, who had shown so sublime and disinterested an
affection for Robert. She spent without regret the sayings of twenty
years, and, although an old woman, she worked like a young girl,
inventing the most ingenious means for hiding the sacrifices she was
obliged to make. She exhausted herself by her labor; but she loved
Robert, and said, with a just pride, "He will be a great painter, and
will repay me a thousand times for all I do for him now. What is a
little trouble? Fatigue soon passes over. I am only an old woman, and
have no need of anything, but he is so young, so good and easily
contented, that if he only has air and sunshine he is happy. He never
spends a cent improperly, and is economical, charitable, and polite. I
could not love him more if I were his mother; and all I ask of God is,
that he will spare me yet a while, that I may work for him." Robert
had not the least idea of the expedients she employed for
dissimulating the privations she each day imposed upon herself, but he
worked with devouring energy night and day, and nothing is a trouble
to him, nothing a fatigue, which brings him nearer to that glorious
end, an artist! a true, soul-inspired artist! But material life and
its necessities must be provided for; yet he thinks not of privations,
so {837} completely is he fascinated with art and dreams of fame. It
soon became difficult for Madame Gaudin to hide from Robert her almost
penniless position, which was all the harder because of her excessive
tenderness and love for him. She seemed to have but one thought, and
that was to spare him all trouble. The courage of women has its source
in the heart, and if they have love as an incentive, they can
accomplish ends that place them far above men. So she kept from Robert
the knowledge of the obligation he was under to her, and for three
years struggled with energy and constancy to give the young painter,
not only the necessaries, but also an appearance of luxuries, which
deceived him to the last degree. Up to this time her heroic courage
was the same, but her health failed suddenly, and religion alone
sustained her, with a firm and consoling hand, when misfortunes came.
Robert also needed it to keep up his spirits, for he felt a keen
anguish when he saw her extended on a bed of pain; but his faith gave
him supernatural strength, and he struggled victoriously with poverty,
abandoning for a time his loved art to attend to the smallest details
of material life, dividing his time between the sick friend whom he
surrounded with delicacies, and upon whom he lavished his tenderest
care, and work; monotonous, but productive work; and with his money he
procured remedies which he hoped would bring back her health who had
done so much for him. In this hour of trial he never despaired, and
spent sixteen hours out of the twenty-four often in copying miserable
and ill-drawn pictures, and all for a salary. But he would exclaim, "I
will be an artist." He returned sacrifice for sacrifice, and while
Madame Gaudin was in danger, he had not a moment of repose, and only
found calmness and tranquillity when convalescence came. The _roles_
were changed. The protector became the protected; the kind guardian of
the orphan became the object of his earnest solicitude. He became a
man during her sickness; rendering her the attentions of a devoted
son, and providing for the expenses of the household. Brought down
from his fairy land of dreams by the realities of life, he is neither
less amiable nor less good, but stronger, braver, more faithful than
ever. The wings of the child have been folded; he is only a man, that
is all.



From All the Year Round.

  "INCONSOLABILE."


  I am waiting on the margin
    Of the dark, cold, rushing tide;
  All I love have passed before me,
    And have reached the other side:
  Only unto me a passage
    Through the waters is denied.

  Mist and gloom o'erhang the river,
    Gloom and mist the landscape veil.
  Straining for the shores of promise,
    Sight and hope and feeling fail.
  Not a sigh, a breath, a motion,
    Answers to my feeble wail.

{838}

  Surely they have all forgot me
    'Mid the wonders they have found
  In the far enchanted mansions;
    Out of heart and sight and sound,
  Here I sit, like Judah's daughters,
    Desolate upon the ground.

  Strangers' feet the stream are stemming,
    Stranger faces pass me by,
  Willing some, and some reluctant,
    All have leave to cross but I--
  I, the hopeless, all bereaved,
    Loathing life, that long to die!

  Be the river ne'er so turbid,
    Chill and angry, deep and drear,
  All my loved ones are gone over,
    Daunted not by doubt or fear;
  And my spirit reaches after,
    While I sit lamenting here.

  Happy waters that embraced them,
    Happier regions hid from sight,
  Where my keen, far-stretching vision,
    Dazed and baffled, lost them quite.
  Dread, immeasurable distance
    'Twixt the darkness and the light!

  And I know that never, never,
    Till this weak, repining breast
  Still its murmurs into patience,
    Yonder from the region blest
  Shall there break a streak of radiance,
    And upon the river rest.

  I shall hail the mystic token
    Bright'ning all the waters o'er,
  Struggle through the threat'ning torrent
    Till I reach the further shore;
  Wonder then, my blind eyes opened,
    That I had not trusted more.



{839}

ORIGINAL.

CHRISTINA G. ROSSETTI.   [Footnote 241]

  [Footnote 241: _Poems_, by Christina G. Rossetti. Boston: Roberts,
  Brothers. 1866.]


We had heard some little of Miss Rossetti, in a superficial way,
before reading this her book. Various verses of hers had met our eye
in print, and if they themselves left no very decided mark upon the
memory, yet we had the firm impression, somehow, that she was one more
of the rising school of poets. Accordingly we thought it well to take
a retrospect of a few post-Tennysonians--Mrs. Browning, Owen Meredith,
Robert Buchanan, Jean Ingelow, and so on--supposed fellow
disciples--so as to be tolerably sure of ranking the new-comer
rightly. On reading this volume, we find our labor lost through an
entirely unforeseen circumstance. Unfortunately, it does not appear
that Miss Rossetti is a poetess at all. That there are people who
think her one, we infer from the fact that this is in some sort a
third edition; why they think so, we are at a loss to see. The book
will not answer a single test of poetry. The authoress's best claim to
consideration is, that she sincerely, persistently, fervently _means_
to be a poetess. Only the most Demosthenian resolve could have kept
her writing in face of her many inherent unfitnesses. For imagination,
she offers fantasy; for sentiment, sentimentality; for aspiration,
ambition; for originality and thought, little or nothing; for melody,
fantastic janglings of words; and these, with all tenderness for the
ill-starred intensity of purpose that could fetch them so far, are no
more poetry than the industrious Virginian colonists' shiploads of
mica were gold.

The first cursory impression of this book would be, we think, that its
cardinal axiom was "Poetry is versified plaintiveness." The amount of
melancholy is simply overwhelming. There is a forty-twilight power of
sombreness everywhere. Now, criticism has taken principles, not
statistics, to be its province; but we could not resist the temptation
to take a little measurement of all this mournfulness. Limiting our
census strictly to the utterly irretrievable and totally wrecked
poems, with not a glimmering of reassurance, we found no less than
forty-nine sadnesses, all the way from shadow to unutterable
blackness--"_nfernam Iumbram noctemque perennem_." There is the
sadness decadent, the sadness senescent, the sadness bereft, the
sadness despondent, the sadness weary, the sadness despairing, the
sadness simply sad, the grand sadness ineffable, and above and
pervading all, the sadness rhapsodical. They are all there. Old Burton
will rise from his grave, if there be any virtue in Pythagoreanism, to
anatomize these poems. What it is all about is strictly a secret, and
laudably well kept; which gives to the various sorrows that touching
effect peculiar to the wailings of unseen babies from unascertained
ailments. So sustained is the grief, indeed, that after protracted
poring, we hang in abeyance between two conclusions. One is that Miss
Rossetti, outside of print, is the merriest mortal in the United
Kingdom; the other, that her health is worse than precarious. That one
or the other must be right, we know. There is no other horn to the
dilemma, no _tertiary quiddity_, no choice, no middle ground between
hilarity and dyspepsia.

Perhaps the reader can judge for himself from these lines, which are a
not unfair sample:

{840}

  "MAY.

  I cannot tell you how it was;
  But this I know: it came to pass
  Upon a bright and breezy day,
  When May was young; ah, pleasant May!
  As yet the poppies were not born,
  Between the blades of tender corn;
  The last eggs had not hatched as yet,
  Nor any bird foregone its mate.
  I cannot tell you what it was;
  But this I know: it did put pass.
  It passed away with sunny May,
  With all sweet things it passed away,
  And left me old and cold and gray."

We may be very unappreciative, and probably are sinfully suspicious,
but the above sounded at the first and sounds at the present reading,
exactly like a riddle. We certainly don't know how it was nor what it
was. There is a shadowy clue in its passing away with sunny May, but
we are far too cautious to hazard a guess. If there be any conundrum
intended, all we have to say is, we give it up.

We do but justice, however, in saying that amid much mere
lugubriousness there is some real and respectable sadness. The
following, in spite of' the queer English in its first lines, sounds
genuine, and is moreover, for a rarity of rarities, in well-chosen and
not ill-managed metre:

  "I have a room whereinto no one enters
  Save I myself alone:
  There sits a blessed memory on a throne,
  There my life centres.

  While winter comes and goes-Oh! tedious comer!
    And while its nip-wind blows;
  While bloom the bloodless lily and warm rose
    Of lavish summer;

  If any should force entrance he might see there
    One buried, yet not dead,
  Before whose face I no more bow my head
    Or (_sic_) bend my knee there;

  But often in my worn life's autumn weather
    I watch there with clear eyes,
  And think how it will be in Paradise
    When we're together."

Here is one of a trite topic--nearly all the good things in this book
are on themes as old as moonlight--but with a certain mournful
richness, like autumn woods:

  "Life is not sweet. One day it will be sweet
    To shut our eyes and die:
  Nor feel the wild flowers blow, nor birds dart by
    With flitting butterfly;
  Nor grass grow long above our head and feet,
  Nor hear the happy lark that soars sky high,
  Nor sigh that spring is fleet, and summer fleet,
    Nor mark the waxing wheat,
  Nor know who sits in our accustomed seat.

  Life is not good. One day it will be good
    To die, then live again;
  To sleep meanwhile: so not to feel the wane
  Of shrunk leaves dropping in the wood,
  Nor hear the foamy lashing of the main,
  Nor mark the blackened bean-fields, nor where stood
    Rich ranks of golden grain,
  Only dead refuse stubble clothe the plain:
  Asleep from risk, asleep from pain."

This is one of her best poems in point of style. The "waxing wheat" we
are just a shade doubtful about; but the mellowness of the diction is
much to our liking, and it is unmarred by any of the breaks of strange
ill taste that flaw nearly all these poems. If not poetry nor novelty,
at least we find it sadly agreeable verse.

Our professor of rhetoric once astonished his class by a heterodoxy,
which we have since thought sound as well as neat. "Walter Scott,"
said he, "writes verse as well as a man can write and not be a poet."
We are sorry we cannot say as much for Miss Rossetti; she has
considerable faults as a writer. The chief of these has elsewhere been
carped at--her laborious style of' being simple. The true simplicity
of poets is not a masterly artifice, but a natural and invariable
product where high poetic and expressive powers combine. The best
thought is always simple, because, it deals only with the essences of
things: the best expression--the machinery of thought--is simple,
just as the best of any other machinery is. But the grand, obvious
fact to the many is that the best poetry is admired for being simple.
Writing for this market, Miss Rossetti and unnumbered others have more
or less successfully attempted to achieve this crowning beauty of
style by various processes that are to the inspiration of' real
simplicity as patent medicines to vigorous vitality. Almost all hold
the immutable conviction that Saxon words are an infallible recipe for
the indispensable brevity. Accordingly the usual process is by an
elaborate application of' Saxon--if rather recondite or even verging
on the obsolete, so much the more efficacious--to a few random ideas.
Of course, with such painful workmanship, one must not expect the best
material. Original, or even well {841} defined thought seldom thrives
in the same hot-house with this super-smoothness. But without pursuing
the process into results at large, we have only to take Matthew
Arnold's distinction as to Miss Rossetti:--she tries hard for
_simplicite_, and achieves _simplesse_. But there is no such thing as
hard work without its fruits. This straining after effect crops
painfully out in a peculiar baldness and childishness of phrase that
is almost original. The woman who can claim The Lambs of Grasmere as
her own has not lived in vain. This production, with its pathetic
episode of the maternal

  "Teapots for the bleating mouths,
  Instead of nature's nourishment,"

has already been noticed in print, and duly expanded many visages. We
pause rapt in admiration of the deep intuition that could select for
song the incident of feeding a sheep with a teapot. It carries us
back, in spirit, to the subtle humor and delicate irony of Peter Bell,
and We are Seven. What a burst of tenderness ought we to expect, if
Miss Rossetti should ever chance to see stable-boys give a horse a
bolus! . . . . . We shall not cite examples of this _simplesse_; those
who like it will find it purer and more concentrated in the bard of
Rydal; or if they must have it, they are safe in opening this book
almost anywhere.

Of the individual poems, the two longest, The Goblin Market and The
Prince's Progress, are rivals for the distinction of being the worst.
All the best poems are short, excepting one, Under the Rose. The story
is of an illegitimate daughter, whose noble mother takes her to live
with herself at the inevitable Hall, without acknowledging her. There
are able touches of nature in the portrayal of the lonely, loving,
outlawed, noble heart, that, knowing her mother's secret, resolves
never to betray it, even to her. In the following passage, the girl,
alone at the castle, as her mother's favorite maid, describes her
inner life:

  "Now sometimes in a dream,
  My heart goes out of me
  To build and scheme,
  Till I sob after things that seem
  So pleasant in a dream:
  A home such as I see,
  My blessed neighbors live in;
  With father and with mother,
  _All proud of one another,
  Named by one common name;
  From baby in the bud
  To full-blown workman father;_
  It's little short of Heaven.
   . . . . .
  Of course the servants sneer
  Behind my back at me;
  Of course the village girls,
  Who envy me my curls
  And gowns and idleness,
  Take comfort in a jeer;
  Of course the ladies guess
  Just so much of my history
  As points the emphatic stress
  With which they laud my Lady;

  The gentlemen who catch
  A casual glimpse of me,
  And turn again to see
  Their valets, on the watch
  To speak a word with me;--
  All know, and sting me wild;
  Till I am almost ready
  To wish that I were dead,--
  No faces more to see,
  No more words to be said;
  My mother safe at last.
  Disburdened of her child
  And the past past."

The Convent Threshold--the last words of a contrite novice to her
lover--has touches of power. There is an unusual force about some
parts, as for example here:

  "You linger, yet the time is short;
  Flee for your life; gird up your strength
  To flee; the shadows stretched at length
  Show that day wanes, that night draws nigh;
  Flee to the mountain, tarry not.
  Is this a time for smile and sigh;
  For songs among the secret trees
  Where sudden blue-birds nest and sport?
  The time is short, and yet you stay;
  To-day, while it is called to-day,
  Kneel, wrestle, knock, do violence, pray;
  To-day is short, to-morrow nigh:
  Why will you die? why will you die!
    . . . . .
  How should I rest in Paradise,
  Or sit on steps of Heaven alone?
  If saints and angels spoke of love,
  Should I not answer from my throne,
  'Have pity upon me, ye, my friends,
  For I have heard the sound thereof?'
  Should I not turn with yearning eyes,
  Turn earthward with a pitiful pang?
  Oh! save me from a pang in heaven!
  By all the gifts we took and gave,
  Repent, repent, and be forgiven!"

The lines called Sound Sleep, p. 65, we like very well for very slight
cause. It says nearly nothing with a pleasant flow of cadence that has
the {842} charm of an oasis for the reader. Much better is No, Thank
You, John! which strikes into a strain of plain sound sense that we
could wish to see much more of. The style, as well as the sense, seems
to shuffle off its affectations, and the last two stanzas especially
are easy, natural, and neat.

A strange compound of good and bad is the singular one called


  "TWICE.

  I took my heart in my hand,
    O my love, O my love!
  I said, "Let me fall or stand,
    Let me live or die;
  But this once hear me speak,
    O my love, O my love!
  Yet a woman's words are weak;
    You should speak, not I."

  You took my heart in your hand,
    With a friendly smile,
  With a critical eye you scanned,
    Then set it down
  And said: "It is still unripe--
    Better wait a while;
  Wait while the skylarks pipe,
    Till the corn grows brown."

  As you set it down it broke--
    Broke, but I did not wince;
  I smiled at the speech you spoke,
    At your judgment that I heard:
  But I have not often smiled
    Since then, nor questioned since,
  Nor cared for corn-flowers wild,
    Nor sung with the singing-bird.

  I take my heart in hand,
    O my God, O my God!
  My broken heart in my hand:
    Thou hast seen, judge thou.
  My hope was written on sand,
    O my God, O my God!
  Now let thy judgment stand--
    Yea, judge me now.

  This, contemned of a man,
    This, marred one heedless day,
  This heart take thou to scan
    Both within and without:
  Refine with fire its gold,
    Purge thou its dross away;
  Yea, hold it in thy hold,
    Whence none can pluck it out.

  I take my heart in my hand--
    I shall not die, but live--
  Before thy face I stand,
    I, for thou callest such;
  All that I have I bring,
    All that I am I give,
  Smile thou, and I shall sing,
    But shall not question much."

This poem, we confess, puzzles us a little to decide upon it. The
imitation is palpable at a glance, but it is a very clever one: the
first three stanzas above all catch the mannerism of their model to
admiration. But the whole, is a copy, at best, of one of the
archetype's inferior styles; and yet we fancy we can see, under all
the false bedizening, something of poetry in the conception, though it
is ill said, and only dimly translucent. There is art, too, in the
parallelism of the first and last three verses. But we do not like the
refrain in the fourth verse--somehow it jars. Perhaps the best we can
say of it is, that Browning, in his mistier moments of convulsiveness,
could write worse.

There is another imitation of Browning in this book, that is the most
supremely absurd string of rugged platitudes imaginable--Wife to
Husband, p. 61. The last verse is sample enough:

  "Not a word for you,
    Not a look or kiss
      Good-by.
  We, one, must part in two;
    Verily death is this,
      I must die."

The metre generally throughout this book is in fact simply execrable.
Miss Rossetti cannot write contentedly in any known or human measure.
We do not think there are ten poems that are not in some new-fangled
shape or shapelessness. With an overweening ambition, she has not the
slightest faculty of rhythm. All she has done is to originate some of
the most hideous metres that "shake the racked axle of art's rattling
car." Attempting not only Browning's metrical dervish-dancings, but
Tennyson's exquisite ramblings, she fails in both from an utter want
of that fine ear that always guides the latter, and so often strikes
out bold beauties in the former. Most of Miss Rossetti's new styles of
word-mixture are much like the ingenious individual's invention for
enabling right-handed people to write with the left hand--more or less
clever ways of doing what she don't wish to do. What possible harmony,
for instance, can any one find in this jumble, which, as per the
printer, is meant for a "song:"

      "There goes the swallow--
         Could we but follow!
           Hasty swallow, stay,
           Point us out the way;
  Look back, swallow, turn back, swallow, stop, swallow.

{843}

      There went the swallow--
        Too late to follow,
          Lost our note of way,
            Lost our chance to-day.
  Good-by, swallow, sunny swallow, wise swallow.

      After the swallow--
        All sweet things follow;
          All things go their way,
          Only we must stay,
  Must not follow; good-by, swallow, good swallow."

Where on earth is sound or sense in this? Not a suggestion of melody,
not a fraction of a coherent idea. People must read such trash as they
eat _meringues a la creme_: we never could comprehend either process.

Truth to tell, we have in this book some of the very choicest
balderdash that ever was perpetrated; worthy to stand beside even the
immortal Owl and Goose of Tennyson. There is a piece at p. 41 which we
would give the world to see translated into some foreign language, we
have such an intense eagerness to understand it. Its subject, so far
as we have got, seems to be the significance of the crocodile,
symbolically considered. We glanced over, or rather at it once, and
put it by for after reading, thinking the style probably too deep for
love at first sight. On the second perusal we fell in with some
extraordinary young crocodiles that we must have missed before. They
had just been indulged in the luxury of being born, but Miss
Rossetti's creative soul, not content with bestowing upon them the
bliss of amphibious existence, made perfect their young beauty by
showing them "fresh-hatched perhaps, and--_daubed with birthday
dew_."

We are strong of head--we recovered from even this--we became of the
very select few who can say they have read this thing through. There
was a crocodile hero; he had a golden girdle and crown; he wore
polished stones; crowns, orbs and sceptres starred his breast (why
shouldn't they if they could); "special burnishment adorned his mail;"
his punier brethren trembled, whereupon he immediately ate them till
"the luscious fat distilled upon his chin," and "exuded from his
nostrils and his eyes." He then fell into an anaconda nap, and grew
very much smaller in his sleep, till at the approach of a very queer
winged vessel (probably a vessel of wrath), "the prudent crocodile
rose on his feet and shed appropriate tears (obviously it is the
handsome thing for all well-bred crocodiles to cry when a Winged ship
comes along) and wrung his hands." As a finale, Miss Rossetti, too
nimble for the unwary reader, anticipates his question of "What does
it all mean?" and triumphantly replying that she doesn't know herself,
but that it was all just so, marches on to the next _monumentum aere
perennius_. In the name of the nine muses, we call upon Martin
Farquhar Tupper to read this and then die.

There are one or two other things like this _longa intervallo_, but it
is reserved for the Devotional Pieces to furnish the only poem that
can compete with it in its peculiar line. This antagonist poem is not
so sublime an example of sustained effort, but it has the advantage
that the rhyme is fully equal to the context. Permit us then to
introduce the neat little charade entitled

  "AMEN.

  It is over. What is over?
    Nay, how much is over truly!--
  Harvest days we toiled to sow for;
    Now the sheaves are gathered newly,
    Now the wheat is garnered duly.

  It is finished. What is finished?
    _Much is finished known or unknown;_
  Lives are finished, time diminished;
    Was the fallow field left unsown?
    Will these buds be always unblown?

  It suffices. What suffices?
    All suffices reckoned rightly;
  Spring shall bloom where now the ice is,
    Roses make the bramble sightly,
    And the quickening suns shine brightly,
    And the latter winds blow lightly,
  And my garden teems with spices."

Let now the critic first observe how consummately the mysticism of the
charade form is intensified by the sphinx-like answers appended. Next
note the novelties in rhyme, The rhythmic chain that links "over" and
and "sow for" is the first discovery in the piece, closely rivalled by
"ice is" and "spices" in the last verse. But {844} far above all rises
the subtle originality of the three rhymes in the second. A thousand
literati would have used the rhyming words under the unpoetical rules
of ordinary English. Miss Rossetti alone has the courage to inquire
"Was the fallow field left _un_sown? Will these buds be always
_un_blown?" We really do not think Shakespeare would have been bold
enough to do this thus.

But despite this, the religious poems are perhaps the best. They seem
at least the most unaffected and sincere, and the healthiest in tone.
There are several notably good ones: one, just before the remarkable
Amen, in excruciating metre, but well said; one, The Love of Christ
which Passeth Knowledge, a strong and imaginative picture of the
crucifixion; and Good Friday, a good embodiment of the fervor of
attrite repentance. The best written of all is, we think, this one (p.
248):

  "WEARY IN WELL-DOING.

  I would have gone; God bade me stay;
    I would have worked; God bade me rest.
  He broke my will from day to day,
    He read my yearnings unexpressed
      And said them nay.

  Now I would stay; God bids me go;
    Now I would rest; God bids me work.
  He breaks my heart, tossed to and fro,
    My soul is wrung with doubts that lurk
      And vex it so.

  I go, Lord, where thou sendest me;
    Day after day, plod and moil:
  But Christ my God, when will it be
    That I may let alone my toil,
      And rest with thee?"

This is good style (no _simplesse_ here) and real pathos--in short;
poetry. We do not see a word to wish changed, and the conclusion in
particular is excellent: there is a weariness in the very sound of the
last lines.

It is remarkable how seldom _thought_ furnishes the motive for these
poems. With no lack at all of intelligence, they stand almost devoid
of intellect. It is always a sentiment of extraneous suggestion, never
a novelty in thought, that inspires our authoress. She seems busier
depicting inner life than evolving new truths or beauties. Nor does
she abound in suggestive turns of phrase or verbal felicities. In
fact, as we have seen, she will go out of her way to achieve the want
of ornament. But there is one subject which she has thought out
thoroughly, and that subject is death. Whether in respect to the
severance of earthly ties, the future state, or the psychical
relations subtly linking the living to the dead, she shows on this
topic a vigor and vividness, sometimes misdirected, but never wanting.
Some of her queer ideas have a charm and a repulsion at once, like
ghosts of dead beauty: _e.g._ this strange sonnet:

  "AFTER DEATH.

  The curtains were half-drawn, the floor was swept
    And strewn with rushes; rosemary and may
    Lay thick upon the bed on which I lay,
  Where through the lattice ivy-shadows crept.
  He leaned above me, thinking that I slept
    And could not hear him; but I heard him say,
  "Poor child, poor child!" and as he turned away
  Came a deep silence, and I knew he wept;
      He did not touch the shroud, or raise the fold
    That hid my face, or take my hand in his,
  Or ruffle the smooth pillows for my head;
  He did not love me living, but once dead
    He pitied me, and very sweet it is
      To know he still is warm though I am cold."

There is some _chiaro-oscuro_ about this. Under all the ghastliness of
the conception, we detect here a deep, genuine, unhoping, intensely
human yearning, that is all the better drawn for being thrown into the
shadow. We do not know of a more graphic realization of death. Miss
Rossetti seems to be lucky with her sonnets. We give the companion
piece to this last--not so striking as the other, but full of heart's
love, and ending with one of the few passages we recall which enter
without profaning the penetralia of that highest love, which
passionately prefers the welfare of the beloved one to its own natural
cravings for fruition and fulfilment:

  "REMEMBER.

  Remember me when I am gone away,
    Gone far away into the silent land;
    When you no more can hold me by the hand
  Nor I half turn to go, yet turning stay.
  Remember me when no more, day by day,
    You tell me of our future that you planned;
    Only remember me; you understand
  It will be late to counsel then or pray,
  Yet if you should forget me for a while
    And afterwards remember, do not grieve;
    For if the darkness and corruption leave
  A vestige of the thoughts that once I had.
    Better by far you should forget and smile
    Than that you should remember and be sad.

{845}

Another marked peculiarity often shadowed forth is our authoress's
sharply defined idea that the dead lie simply quiescent, neither in
joy nor sorrow. There are several miserable failures to express this
state, and one success, so simple, so natural, and so pleasant in
measure, that we quote it, though we have seen it cited before:

  "When I am dead, my dearest,
    Sing no sad songs for me;
  Plant thou no roses at my head,
    Nor shady cypress-tree:
  Be the green grass above me
    With showers and dew-drops wet;
  And if thou wilt, remember,
    And if thou wilt, forget.

  I shall not see the shadows;
    I shall not feel the rain;
  I shall not hear the nightingale
    Sing on as if in pain;
  And dreaming through that twilight
    That doth not rise not set,
  Haply I may remember,
    And haply may forget."

Such bold insight into so profound a subject says more for the soul of
an author than a whole miss's paradise of prettinesses.

In singular contrast with this religious fervency and earnestness, the
sincerity of which we see no reason to impeach, comes our gravest
point of reprehension of this volume. We think it fairly chargeable
with utterances--and reticences--of morally dangerous tendency; and
this, too, mainly on a strange point for a poetess to be cavilled
at--the rather delicate subject of our erring sisters. Now, we are of
those who think the world, as to this matter, in a state little better
than barbarism; that far from feeling the first instincts of Christian
charity, we are shamefully like the cattle that gore the sick ox from
the herd. The only utterly pitiless power in human life is our virtue,
when brought face to face with this particular vice. We hunt the
fallen down; hunt them to den and lair; hunt them to darkness,
desperation, and death; hunt their bodies from earth, and their souls
(if we can) from heaven, with the cold sword in one hand, and in the
other the cross of him who came into the world to save, not saints,
but sinners, and who said to one of these: "Neither do I condemn thee.
Go, and now sin no more."

But there is also such a thing as misdirected mercifulness; a
dangerous lenity, all the more to be guarded against for its wearing
the garb of charity; and we think Miss Rossetti has leaned culpably
far in this direction. Two poems are especially prominent
examples--Cousin Kate, and Sister Maude. In each the heroine has
sinned, and suffered the penalties of discovery, and in each she is
given the upper hand, and made a candidate for sympathy, for very bad
reasons. There is no word to intimate that there is anything so very
dreadful about dishonor; that it may not be some one else's fault, or
nobody's fault at all--a mere social accident. A few faint hinting
touches there may be of conventional condemnation, but somehow Miss
Rossetti's sinners, _as sinners_, invariably have the best of the
argument and of the situation, while virtue is, put systematically in
the wrong, and snubbed generally. The Goblin Market too, if we read it
aright, is open to the same criticism. We understand it, namely, to
symbolize the conflict of the better nature in us, with the prompting
of the passions and senses. If so, what is the story translated from
its emblematic form? One sister yields; the other by seeming to yield,
saves her. Again there is not a syllable to show that the yielding was
at all wrong in itself. A cautious human regard for consequences is
the grand motive appealed to for withstanding temptation. Lizzie tells
Laura, not that the goblin's bargain is an evil deed in the sight of
God, but that Jennie waned and died of their toothsome poisons. She
saves her by going just so far as she safely can. What, if anything,
is the moral of all this? Not "resist the devil and he will flee from
you," but "cheat the devil, and he won't catch you." Now, all these
sayings and silences are gravely wrong and false to a writer's true
functions. With all deference then, and fully feeling that we may
mistake, or misconstrue, we sincerely submit that some of these poems
go inexcusably beyond the bounds of that strict moral {846} right,
which every writer who hopes ever to wield influence ought to keep
steadily, and sacredly in view. We are emboldened to speak thus
plainly, because we have some reason to believe that these things have
grated on other sensibilities than our own, and that our stricture
embodies a considerable portion of cultivated public opinion.

In conclusion, we repeat our first expressed opinion, that Miss
Rossetti is not yet entitled to take a place among today's poets. The
question remains, whether she ever will. We do not think this book of
hers settles this question. [Greek text], she has done nothing in
poetry yet of any consequence. These verses may be as well as she can
do. They contain poetical passages of merit and promise, but they show
also a defectiveness of versification, a falseness of ear, and
occasionally a degree of affectation and triviality that, we can only
hope, are not characteristic. To borrow a little of the style and
technology of a sister branch of thought, the case, as now presented,
can be accounted for as in essence a simple attack of the old and
well-known endemic, _cacaethes scribendi_. Probably it befell her at
the usual early age. Only instead of the run of gushing girls, we have
Dante Gabriel Rossetti's sister, Jean lngelow's intimate friend, and a
young lady of intelligence and education, constantly in contact with
real literary society, and--what is thoroughly evident in this
book--read in our best poets. Add all these complicating symptoms, and
is there not something plausible about the diagnosis? We do not say,
observe, and do not mean to say, that this is Miss Rossetti's case;
only all she has done so far seems explicable on this hypothesis. For
ourselves, we lean to the view that she will do more. We judge hers a
strong, sensuous, impulsive, earnest, inconsiderate nature, that
sympathizes well, feels finely, keeps true to itself at bottom, but
does not pause to make sure that others must, as well as may, enter
into the spirit that underlies her utterances, and so buries her
meaning sometimes beyond Champollion's own powers of deciphering. But
her next book must determine how much is to be ascribed to talent, and
how much to practice and good models; and show us whether genius or
gilt edges separate her from the [Greek text].



ORIGINAL.

THE TEST.

  She stands with head demurely bent,
    A village maiden, young and comely,
  And he beside her, talking low
    And earnestly, is Lord of Bromleigh.

  "Now raise thine eyes, and look at me,
    And place thy little hand in mine,
  And tell me thou my bride will be,
    And I and Bromleigh shall be thine;
  In richest silks thou shalt be drest--
    Have diamonds flashing on each hand,
  And in all splendor shalt outshine
    The proudest lady in the land.

{847}

  On softest carpets thou shalt tread,
    On velvet cushions shalt recline;
  Whatever is most rich and rare
    That thou mayst wish for shall be thine."

  "I do not covet silk attire,
    Nor glittering gold, nor flashing gem;
  There is no longing in my heart
    To change my simple dress for them.
  A village maiden I was born--
    A Village maiden I was bred--
  A happy life for eighteen years
     In that low station I have led.
  How do I know if I should change
    My state for one so high, but then
  The world might change, and never be
    The thing it is to me again;
  But from the field, and from the sky,
    The glory and the joy would go;
  The greenness from the meadow grass,
    The beauty from all flowers that blow;
  The sweetness from the breath of spring,
    The music from the skylark's song:
  Content, and all sweet thoughts that bring
    A gladness to me all day long?"

  "Thy fears are idle fears," he said;
    "Love, loyal heart, and generous mind,
  Can happiness in lordly halls
    As well as in a cottage find.
  For this is of the soul, and bound
    To no degrees of wealth or state:
  Then put thy little hand in mine
    And speak the word that seals my fate!
  I love thee, Marian, more than life--
    Have loved thee, ah! thou dost not guess
  How long, unknown to thee, my soul
    Hath shrined in thee its happiness.
  More precious than the light of day,
    Thy beauty is unto mine eyes;
  More sweet than all earth's music else
    Thy voice that now to me replies.
  Oh! would it speak the words I long
    More than all other words to hear,
  I were the happiest man this day
    That breathes the breath of earthly air."

  She raised her head, and in her eyes
    A tender look his glances met,
  But 'twas not love--though kin to it--
    A look of pity and regret.

  "It pains me more than I can tell
    To speak the words I ought; but yet
  They must be said; and for your sake
    I would that we had never met

{848}

  For if you love me as you say,
    I can conceive how great the pain
  I give when I declare the troth,
    I cannot love you, sir, again.
  And I should sin a grievous sin,
    Should do a grievous wrong to you,
  If I should put my hand in yours
    Unless my heart went with it too.
  Not joy and pride, but grief and shame,
    Go with the bridegroom and the bride
  Into the house where they shall dwell,
    Unless love enter side by side.
  And I, because my heart is given
    To one I love beyond my life.
  Could find no joy in Bromleigh Hall
    Am all unfit for Bromleigh's wife:
  But did I love you, then, indeed,
    Although my state be poor and mean,
  I were as worthy Bromleigh Hall,
    As were I daughter of a queen.
  For love hath such divinity
    That it ennobles every one
  That owns its mast'ry, and can make
    A beggar worthy of a throne.
  This I have learned--love taught me this;
    The love that is my breath of life:
  That will not leave me till I die,
    That will not let me be your wife.
  Forbear to urge me more, my lord;
    It gives me pain to give such pain;
  Here let us part, and for the sake
    Of both, to never meet again."

  "Stay yet a little, Marian, stay!
    My heart was wholly thine before.
  Or what thou sayst would make me swear
    That now I love thee more and more.
  A beauty brighter than a queen's,
    A mind with noble thoughts so graced.
  Among the highest in the land,
    Were best esteemed, and fittest placed.
  Yes, there thy rightful station is.
    Amongst the noble of the earth:
  And 'twere a sin unto a clown
    To mate such beauty and such worth.
  Thou could'st not live thy truest life;
    Thy fullest joy thou could'st not find.
  Chained to a poor cot's drudgery.
    Wed to a dull, unlettered hind."

  Then flushed her face with maiden scorn.
    And thrilled her voice with proud disdain;
  And proudly looked her eyes at him
    Who dared not look at her again.

{849}

  "For shame! my lord; for shame! my lord;
    You shame your rank to slander so
  A man, I doubt if you have seen;
    A man I'm sure you do not know.
  The man I love is no base churl,
    No poor unlettered village hind;
  But in my soul he lives and reigns,
    The wisest, noblest of mankind.
  I grant him poor; I know he works
    With head and hands for daily bread;
  And nobler so in my esteem
    Than if a useless life he led.
  'Tis not the accident of birth
    Though with the flood the line began,
  Nor having lands and countless wealth,
    That makes and marks the gentleman.
  For these are earthly, of the earth,
    And by the vilest oft possessed;
  But 'tis the spirit makes the man,
    The soul that rules in brain and breast:
  The generous heart, the noble mind,
    The soul aspiring still to climb
  To higher heights, to truer truths,
    To faith more heavenly and sublime.
  These make the noble of the earth;
    And he I love is one of these:--
  And shall I for a title fall
    From such a soul and love as his?
  Believe me, no! Ten thousand times,
    A cot with him I'd rather share
  Than yonder hall with you, my lord,"
    And then she turned and left him there.
  Off fell the curls and thick moustache
    That hid the true look of his face.
  A step--and ere she was aware
    She struggled in a strong embrace;
  Whilst kisses rained on cheek and lips,
    She would have cried for help; but, lo!
  The voice was one she knew so well,
    Not that which spoke awhile ago.

  "Forgive me, oh! my dear, true love,
    If I have seemed thy love to test;
  I knew 'twas good, and pure, and true,
    As ever filled a maiden's breast:
  But I had something to reveal,
    And so I put on this deceit.
  Deceit! not so--for now I'm true,
    The past it is that was a cheat;
  For I this happy twelvemonth past,
    This year that gave thy love to me,
  Have lived a life not truly mine,
    Have lived it for the sake of thee.

{850}

  And though I Harry Nugent am,
    The master of the village school,
  So am I Harry Nugent Vane,
    Lord of a higher rank and rule,
  The which I left to win thy love;
    And now I know that it is mine,
  I take it back, my own true wife.
    And Bromleigh Hall is mine and thine.



ORIGINAL.

WHAT I HEARD ABOUT RITUALISM IN A CITY CAR.


"It ought to be stopped, and it's all nonsense."

"It is all very well to say 'it ought to be stopped,' and that 'it is
all nonsense,' but, my dear sir, we cannot stop it, for the people
will have it; and I beg leave to differ with you, for I think it is
very far from being nonsense."

It was in a Seventh Avenue railway car, and as I sat next to the last
speaker, a clerical-looking person, I could not help overhearing the
conversation. The other appeared to be one of those old gentlemen who
are positive about everything--who, even in the tie of their cravat,
say as plain as can be, "This is the way I intend to have it, and I
_will_ have it."

"I perfectly agree with the Bishop of Oxford," said he. "See here"--
and he opened a newspaper and read as follows: "'I have no great fear
that as to the majority of the people there is any tendency toward
Rome; and, on the contrary, I believe that in many cases this
development of English ritualism tends to keep our people from Rome.
It may, however, happen that the tendency of these things is to what I
consider to be at this moment the worst corruption of the church of
Rome--its terrible system of Mariolatry.' There, you see what it tends
to, and it is plain enough, although the bishop did not like to say
so, of course, that ritualism in our churches will educate our people
to become Catholics; and so he adds, very properly: 'I regard it with
deep distress. My own belief is that to stop these practices it will
only be necessary for the bishop to issue an injunction to the
clergymen to surcease from them--to surcease from incensing the holy
table--to surcease from prostration after the consecration of the
holy elements--to surcease from incensing at the _magnificat_.' My
opinion precisely."

"Have you ever considered the true sense of these things?" inquired
his clerical friend.

"Can't see any sense in it at all," tartly responded the old
gentleman.

"No?" returned the other; "surely there must be some good reason for
this wide-spread desire of both clergy and laity for a more elaborate
ritual in divine service."

"Fashionable, fashionable--nothing else."

"It gives dignity and solemnity to public worship."

"Mere show."

"It adds to the apparent reality of the sacred functions of religion,
in the administration of the sacraments particularly."

"Ha! ha! yes, it would be an apparent reality for us. I read about
that 'apparent reality' lately in the report of the ordination of one
of our bishops, and I thought it a very appropriate remark."

{851}

"But you must admit that it tends to edify the worshippers, and afford
them more ample means of lifting up the heart to God."

"It don't edify me."

"Then it is, besides, so full of instruction, for every ceremony fixes
the mind upon the religious truth to which the ceremony points, as,
for instance, making the sign of the cross must keep the truth of
redemption forcibly before the mind."

"Make the sign of the cross!" ejaculated the old gentleman, almost
jumping out of his seat, at which movement half a dozen ladies,
standing up and holding on the leathern straps, made a simultaneous
rush for the place.

"Why not?" said the other. "I am ready to do anything that will remind
me that my Saviour died for me. Then it is only fulfilling the
prophecy of St. Paul to bow or bend the knee at the mention of his
holy name, and to genuflect before the altar is very proper and right,
if we believe in the presence of Jesus Christ in the sacred elements."

"But we Protestants don't believe it."

"You must not be too sure of that; I know many who do. You know the
Scripture is very strong in its favor: 'This is my body--this is my
blood;' and I, as a good Protestant, who take my belief from the
Bible, may have the right to believe it, may I not?"

"H'm, h'm, but our church don't teach any thing of the kind."

"Not as a church, I grant you, but she has no right to trammel private
judgment; and if I choose to believe it, and act upon my belief, what
is to hinder me."

"It seems to me that as a minister of the church you ought to
_minister_ just what the church teaches and no more."

"If you follow that out, my friend, you will become a Romanist. A
Protestant cannot stand on that ground."

"Oh dear!" exclaimed the old gentleman drawing a deep breath, and
scratching his head. "I don't know what we are coming to. A man don't
want to be a papist, and yet he goes to his own Protestant church and
must put up with all the bowings and scrapings and genuflections and
candies and flowers, and all the rest of the popish fiddle.de.dees."

"Now you mention candles and flowers," said the clerical gentleman,
"what can be more appropriate symbols of joy and festivity? And when
the Christian is rejoicing on those solemn and joyful festivals of the
church, as, for instance, the birth of our Saviour at Christmas, and
his resurrection at Easter, how very natural it is that the sanctuary
of religion should be adorned with lights and flowers, than which
nothing could express more fitly the joy and thankfulness of the
heart. If you crush out all expression of these sentiments in the
service of the church you will render it a dull, cold formality; and
in this matter the church of Rome has been much wiser than we in
retaining all those things which, after all, are of apostolic origin,
and used by the earliest Christians."

"Incense, too, I suppose," added the old gentleman with a snarl.

"Incense too," repeated the other, "not the least doubt of it, as is
plain from the discoveries in the catacombs, and a beautiful emblem it
is of prayer. You know the scripture, 'My prayer shall ascend as
incense in thy sight.'"

The old gentleman here looked around the car with an air that seemed
to say, Will somebody have the kindness to tell me if I am asleep or
awake? Turning to his friend, he said: "Then I suppose that all our
protestations on this score against the Roman church have no
foundation either in reason or in holy Scripture?"

"That is not only my own opinion," replied the clerical gentleman,
"but I have every reason to believe it is the conviction of a very
large number of enlightened Protestants of our day."

"A conviction I sincerely deplore," said the old gentleman. "Good
morning," and he abruptly rose and left the car.

{852}

"Excuse me, sir," said I, "if I, as a Catholic, have been deeply
interested in your conversation just now; but may I ask on what
principle those ritualistic forms and ceremonies are being adopted by
Protestants, and being introduced into their services?"

"The principle is this, that they are all deeply significant of the
different truths of the Christian religion, a visible expression of
the faith of the worshipper."

"We understand that perfectly as Catholics," said I, "but as your
congregations differ so widely in their individual belief, these forms
and ceremonies would possess no significance to the half of anyone
congregation of Protestant worshippers. Now, with us Catholics, the
ceremonies have a universal significance, as all our people are united
in one faith."

"We will educate our people to it," said he.

"That is, you would make the faith of your worshippers an expression
of the ceremonies you perform, and not the ceremonies an expression of
their faith. In the Catholic church the faith is all one to start on,
and the appropriate ceremonies follow as a matter of course."

"I acknowledge," returned he, "that we have not paid sufficient
attention to the vital necessity of a ritual which would embody and
show forth the faith of our church."

"But when you have gotten a ritual which supposes, as it must, certain
doctrines, and which, as you said to your friend, instructs the people
in these doctrines, are you not trammelling the private judgment of
those worshippers who do not believe these doctrines and wish to have
a ritual which is consistent with their belief? What right have you to
impose a ritual upon them inconsistent with their belief?"

"We do not impose any particular ritual," he replied; "if they do not
like it they can go elsewhere."

"But then you would have, or ought to have, as many different rituals
as your people have individual differences of belief, and that would
end in endless division and dissension."

"It is excessively warm, don't you think so?" said the minister.

"It is," said I, "but I think we are going to have a storm soon; I see
it is getting quite cloudy."



ORIGINAL.

THE BARREN FIG-TREE AND THE CROSS.

  O hapless tree! which doth refuse
    Thy fruit to him who thee hath made:
  Cursed and withered none may use
    Thy barren limbs for fruit or shade.

  O Cross of death! which man did make,
    Barren and fruitless though thou be,
  Thy sapless branches life shall take
    From that sweet fruit he gave to thee.

  O happy tree! divinely blest!
    True, thou hast neither leaves nor root;
  Yet 'neath thy shade a world shall rest,
    And feast upon thy heavenly fruit!



{853}

MISCELLANY.


_A Peculiar Conglomerate_.--Mr. John Keily, of the Irish Geological
Society, has addressed a letter to the editor of the _Geological
Magazine_, describing a peculiar conglomerate bed which is on the
shore at Cushendeen, in the county of Antrim. The mass is about fifty
feet above the sea, and some thirty yards long and wide. It is
composed of round pebbles of quartz rock, from two to four inches in
diameter; and they occur so closely packed that everyone is in contact
with another, and no room left, except for the sand which cements
them, and which fills the openings between the pebbles, when
originally heaped together. These pebbles, as just stated, are of
quartz rock, and therefore all of one kind. There is no actual rock of
the same kind, on the shore, nearer than--(1) Malin Head, or Culdaff,
in Donegal; (2) Belderg, east of Belmullet in Mayo, where it occupies
the shore for fourteen miles; and (3) in the twelve bins, near
Clifden, in Connemara, where it forms bands interstratified with mica
slate. This mass is backed by a hill of brown Devonian grits and
shales interstratified, which extends from Cushendeen to Cushendal. In
both those rocks are a few round pebbles of quartz rock, similar to
those in the mass on the shore, but in the rocks of the hill they are
thinly disseminated, perhaps six or ten of them to a cubic yard. Mr.
Kelly desires to know how the quartz pebbles came together unmixed
with any other species of rock. The answer which the editor of the
_Geological Magazine_ gives in a foot-note seems very like the correct
one. It is to the effect that, in the grinding of the several elements
which were being rubbed together to form the conglomerate, the softer
ones became reduced to powder.--_Popular Science Review_.



_Old Roman Mines in Spain_.--In the mines of San Domingo, in Spain,
some discoveries of Roman mining implements and galleries have been
made, which show us the colossal character of the labors undertaken by
that ancient nation. In some instances, draining galleries nearly
three miles in length were discovered, and in others the remains of
wheels used to raise water were found in abundance. The wood, owing,
it is thought, to penetration by copper, is in a perfect state of
preservation, and there appears to be evidence that the wheels were
worked by a number of men stepping on the flanges somewhat after the
manner of prisoners on a tread-mill. There were eight of these
water-wheels, the water being raised by the first into the first
basin, by the second into the second basin, and so on, till it was
conveyed out of the mine. The age of these relics has been set down at
1500 years.--_Ibid_.



_Blood Relationship in Marriage_.--At a late meeting of the London
Anthropological Society, a paper was read by Dr. Mitchell on the above
subject. The conclusions arrived at are: 1. That consanguinity in
parentage tends to injure the offspring. That this injury assumes
various forms: "as, diminished viability; feeble constitution; bodily
defects; impairment of the senses; disturbance of the nervous system;
sterility.", 2. That the injury may show itself in the grand-children:
"so that there may be given to the offspring by the kinship of the
parents a _potential defect_ which may become _actual_ in their
children, and thenceforth perhaps appear as an hereditary disease." 3.
That idiocy and imbecility are more common than insanity in such
cases.


_Gigantic Birds'-Nests_.--Mr. Gould describes the Wattled Talegalla,
or Bush Turkey, of Australia, as adopting a most extraordinary process
of nidification. The bird collects together an immense heap of
decaying vegetable matter as a depository for the eggs, and trusts to
the heat engendered by decomposition for the development of the young.
The heap employed for this purpose is collected by the birds during
several weeks previous to the period of laying. It varies in size from
two to four cartloads, and is of a perfectly pyramidal form. Several
birds work at its construction, not by using their bills, but by
grasping {854} the materials with their feet and throwing them back to
one common centre. In this heap the birds bury the eggs perfectly
upright, with the large end upward; they are covered up as they are
laid, and allowed to remain until hatched, when the young birds are
clothed with feathers, not with down, as is usually the case. It is
not unusual for the natives to obtain nearly a bushel of eggs at one
time from a single heap; and as they are delicious eating, they are as
eagerly sought after as the flesh. The birds are very stupid, and
easily fall a victim to the sportsman, and will sit aloft and allow a
succession of shots to be fired at them until they are brought
down.--_Lamp_.



_The Muscular Fibres of the Heart of Vertebrates_.--We have received
from Dr. J. B. Pettigrew, the accomplished sub-curator of the Royal
College of Surgeons' Museum, a copy of his excellent monograph on the
above subject. The memoir is certainly the finest which has yet been
produced; for it is comprehensive, clear, and accurate, and is
accompanied by a great number of beautiful lithographs, which have
been taken from photographs of actual dissections. The arrangement of
the muscular fibres, as demonstrated by the author, sheds much light
upon the peculiar movements of the heart. For this reason the essay
has a great physiological importance, and, from the circumstance that
the anatomy of the heart in the four vertebrate classes is fully
explored by Dr. Pettigrew, it is of equal import and interest to the
comparative anatomist. We have also received Dr. Pettigrew's paper on
the valvular apparatus of the circulatory system, and we commend it
likewise to our readers' favorable notice.--_Science Review_.



ORIGINAL.

NEW PUBLICATIONS.


LIFE OF CATHERINE McAULEY.
Foundress of the institute of Religious Sisters of Mercy. By a member
of the order (belonging to the Convent of Mercy, at St. Louis), etc. 1
vol. 12mo, pp. 500. New York. D. & J. Sadlier & Co., 1866.

This biography introduces a new, and hitherto generally unknown,
character to the acquaintance, and, we are sure, to the admiration of
the English-speaking Catholic public. The anonymous religious
authoress has shown herself well qualified for her filial task, and
has conferred a great benefit both on her order and on the cause of
religion in general. The nearness of the period in which her venerable
subject lived, the testimony of a number of the best informed and most
trustworthy witnesses who were personally acquainted with her, and the
materials furnished by other memoirs and letters, have given the
writer of this biography an abundance of the most authentic data from
which to produce a truthful and complete sketch of the Foundress of
the Sisters of Mercy.

We have had the pleasure of learning something of the history of
Catherine McAuley, and of the foundation of her institute, from one of
her own earliest and most trusted pupils, who has planted the same
institute, and brought it to a flourishing condition in four of the
New England States. The portrait of her drawn by her biographer,
corresponds with, and completes the preconceived idea of her character
we had received from this authentic source.

It is eighty-one years since Catherine McAuley was born, forty years
since she made the first beginning of her institute, and twenty-five
years since her death. Her period of active life embraced only
fourteen years. Yet there are now more than two hundred convents, and
three thousand sisters, belonging to the congregation of Our Lady of
Mercy, scattered over Ireland, England, the United States, British
America, South America, and Australia; although the mortality among
the sisters is at the high rate of ten per cent a year.

These facts prove better than any eloquence the value of the life and
works of the foundress of the institute. Her personal history is
uncommonly interesting and highly romantic. She was the daughter of
highly respectable Catholic parents residing in Dublin. Losing her
parents at an early age, she came under the guardianship of relatives
who were strict Protestants and intensely hostile {855} to the
Catholic religion. Consequently, she was not able to receive any
instruction, to go to mass, or much less to receive the sacraments,
before she became a young lady. Her brothers and sisters were easily
induced to give up their minds to the influence of Protestant teaching
and example. Catherine, however, steadily refused to attend the
Protestant church; and, as soon as she was capable of doing so, made a
studious and thorough examination of the grounds of the two religions,
which resulted in establishing her forever in a faith which was not
only firm but intelligent. She eventually succeeded in bringing back
her sister and her nephew and niece to the Catholic church. While
still a child, Catherine McAuley was adopted by an elderly couple
named Callahan, who were very kind-hearted, very wealthy, and,
childless. They allowed her to practise her religion, although quite
indifferent to religion themselves, and gave her the means of
practising many of those acts of charity to which she was always
inclined.

This part of her history is strikingly interesting, as throwing light
on the state of the Catholic religion among the higher classes in
Ireland, during the latter part of the last century and the former
part of the present one. It contains some scenes of tragic pathos
taken from domestic life. Few are aware of the hatred, the contempt,
the cruelty, the bitter, unrelenting persecution, with which the
Catholic religion has had to contend in Ireland. Miss McAuley was once
obliged to fly from the house of her brother-in-law, at night, through
the streets of Dublin, to save herself from death at his hands.
Nevertheless, she conquered, as the holy faith has always conquered,
by undaunted courage joined with angelic meekness. The same
brother-in-law who had pursued her with a drawn dagger, declared to
her on his death-bed, that if he had time he would candidly examine
into the Catholic religion, and died repeating acts of contrition,
faith, hope and charity, which she suggested to him, leaving his
children to her guardianship.

At the age of thirty-five Miss McAuley was left, by the death of her
adopted parents, both of whom had become Catholics during their last
illness, mistress of a fortune, the exact amount of which is not
stated, but which appears to have at east equalled the sum of fifty
thousand pounds sterling. The whole of this fortune was devoted by her
to the foundation of her institute, which was opened about five years
afterward, that is, in the year 1827. She does not seem to have
cherished any aspirations after the religious state for herself,
during her youth, much less to have dreamed of becoming the foundress
of an order. In founding her institute in Dublin, she had in view the
plan of combining the efforts of charitable ladies for the benefit of
the poor, the sick, the ignorant, and particularly servant-girls who
were out of place. The community-life, and the whole religious
routine, grew up naturally and of itself. After a time, the judgment
of prelates, clergymen, and other persons of weight, induced Miss
McAuley and her associates to adopt a rule, and take perpetual vows.
The scope of the institute embraces choir duties to a moderate extent,
almost every kind of charitable work for the poor, a particular care
for respectable servant-girls out of place, poor-schools, and
high-schools or academies for girls of the middling classes.

The noble woman who planned all this vast scheme of good works, and
lavished her fortune with princely generosity to set it in motion,
died in the year 1841, at the age of fifty~four, ten years after
making her vows as a Sister of Mercy. It is an interesting
circumstance that the great and good Daniel O'Connell was one of her
warmest friends during her life, and one of her staunchest supporters
in her undertakings. These two magnanimous souls who loved their
country, their country's faith, and the patient, oppressed, but
unconquerable poor of their country, better than all earthly things,
could appreciate and honor each other. Our readers will thank us for
quoting the following description of the scenes which usually occurred
at the great Liberator's visits to the convents of the Sisters of'
Mercy:

  "In his journeys through Ireland, O'Connell nearly always visited
  the convents in his route. On these occasions his reception was a
  kind of ovation. The Te Deum was sung, the reception-room hung with
  green, the national emblems--harp, shamrock, and
  sun-burst--displayed, addresses were read by the pupils, and any
  request he asked implicitly granted. His manner at such scenes was
  particularly happy. To a young girl who had delivered q flattering
  address to the 'Conquering Hero,' he said, very {856} graciously,
  that he 'regretted her sex precluded her from that distinguished
  place in the imperial senate to which her elocutionary abilities
  entitled her.' Then glancing at the girls who surrounded the
  oratress, he continued with emotion: 'Often have I listened with
  nerve unstrung and heart unmoved to the calumny and invectives of
  our national enemies; but to-day, as I look on the beautiful young
  virgins of Erin, my herculean frame quivers with emotion, and the
  unbidden tear moistens my eye. Can such a race continue in ignoble
  bondage? Are you born for no better lot than slavery? No,' he
  continued, with increasing vehemence, 'you shall be free; your
  country shall yet be a nation; you shall not become the mothers of
  slaves.'" (pp. 146-47.)

What a contrast between such genuine heroic characters as these, the
true glory of their people, and the mock-heroic charlatans, whose
genius show itself only in gathering in money from laboring men and
servant-girls, and organizing raids which end only in the death and
imprisonment of their most unlucky dupes, and bitter mutual
accusations of treachery and cowardice among the leaders. The worst
enemies of the Irish people are those who seek to alienate them from
their clergy, and to lead them astray from the true mission given them
by divine providence, which is identified with their traditions of
faith and loyalty to the church. They are like Achaz and the false
prophets of Judah, who contaminated the people of God with the false
maxims of the nations around them. Men and women like Daniel O'Connell
and Catherine McAuley are the Macchabees and Judiths of their nation.
Through such as these, the faith of Ireland may yet conquer England,
as the trampled faith of Judaea conquered Rome; and her long martyrdom
obtain the due meed of glory from the children of her old oppressors.

We recommend this book to all those who claim kindred either in
nationality or in faith with its subject, and who wish to rekindle
their devotion or renew the memories of their ancestral home. We
recommend it especially to our wealthy Catholics, that they may
meditate on the example of princely charity given them by this young
heiress, who gave away a fortune more readily than most others would
give one twentieth of a year's income. We request our fair young
readers also, to lay aside their novels for a while, and read the life
of one who was beautiful, gifted, highly educated, beloved of all,
rich in worldly goods, and with all earthly happiness courting her
acceptance; and who, amid these allurements and the severest
temptations to her faith, shone forth a bright model of all high
Christian virtues to her sex. We wish that all those who are
prejudiced against the Catholic faith, and who nevertheless have the
candor which pays tribute to virtue, conscientiousness, and
self-sacrifice, wherever seen, might also read it. The history of
Catherine McAuley and her institute adds another to the many
practical, living proofs, more powerful than any speculative
arguments, of the truth and power of the Catholic religion. Such a
history never has been or will be possible outside the fold of the
Catholic church. Its occurrence in our own times shows that the church
is now, as of old, the fruitful mother of saints, and that the old
Catholic ideas which once made martyrs of young maidens, and raised up
Claras and Teresas, retain all their power over the souls of those who
have inherited the same faith. We have no fear of incurring the
displeasure of Urban VIII. or of his successor, in giving our judgment
that Catherine McAuley was a true Christian heroine, a woman of the
same high stamp of character with St. Teresa, whom she resembles in
many striking respects.

It is superfluous to say that this biography will be a most useful
book in religious houses. Example is more powerful than precept, and a
recent example is more powerful than a remote one. It were to be
wished that similar biographies were more numerous. There are
materials in the recent history of other orders, as well as in that of
the institute of Mercy, which might be used to great advantage. The
history of the American foundress of the Order of the Visitation would
be worthy of a place, even in the annals of that ancient order. Books
of this kind are not only instructive, but, when well written,
superior in that charm which captivate's the feelings and imagination
of the young, to the romantic tales over which their time and
sensibilities are too often wasted. The present volume is written in
that lively and piquant style, with a dash of humor to flavor it,
which makes a biography most readable and entertaining. Religion wears
its most cheerful and attractive countenance in {857} these pages, and
even the couch of the dying sisters are lit up with gayety. Mother
Catherine's life was a perpetual _Laetare_ Sunday in Lent, spiritual
joy ever decking with flowers the altar of sacrifice, and changing the
violet of penance and self-denial to rose-color. Her tranquil and
benignant countenance, as represented in the portrait which graces her
biography, expresses this type of spirituality which she communicated
to her order. The mirthful laugh of the common-room resounds through
the pages which relate of the unremitting labors and continual prayer,
whose effect decimates the ranks of the Sisters of Mercy every year.
We are not treated to any prosy disquisitions or abstracts of ascetic
treatises, which make some of the lives of saints such tiresome
reading, especially to young people. But we have something better; a
picture of virtue, of piety, of devotion to Jesus Christ, in their
most heroic form, blended with a joyousness to which, the boudoir and
the drawing-room are strangers, and which may well attract pure and
generous hearts to imitate such an engaging model of sanctity.

There are numerous episodes and sketches of the many persons with whom
Mother Catherine was associated, such as that of her little niece
Mary; of the good Welsh sister from Bridgenorth; of the English earl's
daughter, who entered the convent with her two waiting-maids; of the
accomplished but somewhat eccentric authoress of Geraldine; and the
inimitable Dr. Fitzgerald. Some of these are pathetic, and others
comic in the extreme. We have but one criticism to make, which is,
that a little more restraint and forbearance toward some who are
deemed to have erred in their duty to the order, would have added
another grace to the narrative. There are also some faults of
typography and slight clerical oversights, which will doubtless be
corrected in a second edition.

We hope we have piqued the curiosity of our readers enough to make
every reader buy the book, or tease papa to buy it. And if the desire
to read it is not enough to wake up our somewhat apathetic Catholic
public, let them remember that by buying the book they are
contributing to that unfailing spring of mercy which flows from the
convents of Catherine McAuley's daughters to relieve the poor.


ROBERT SEVERNE, His Friends and his Enemies. A Novel, by William A.
Hammond. Philadelphia. J. B. Lippincott & Co. 1 vol. 12mo, pp. 369.

This novel has the merit of being written by a scholar and a man of
science. The first part of it is well done, and excites no little
interest; but as we progress, it is plain that the author has
permitted his facile pen to have pretty much its own way. The general
impression, therefore, left on the mind is that as a novel it has been
hastily written. The characters are too perfect both in virtue and in
vice; and although the author is at great pains to describe his
characters, we are obliged to differ with him in our opinion of them.
The hero is brought before us as a hard student, yet we have quite
another idea of him from his words and actions. He is in effect a
wealthy gentleman, who moves easily in polite society, and has a fancy
for purchasing rare old books at ruinous prices: finds a Cabana or
Partaga cigar equally at hand in Europe and in his elegantly furnished
study at home (where it is true he consumes a great deal of brain and
time over his books), but we do not find the student in him when he
comes to play his part before us. He has been unfortunate in a first
marriage, and becomes violently misanthropical and suspicious. His
first act, however, is marked by surpassing benevolence and verdant
innocence. He is swindled in the street out of a ten-dollar gold piece
by a prostitute, who feigns poverty, and instantly conceives a violent
affection for this totally unknown person, and most unmisanthropically
determines to catch her, reform and educate her. We may remark, by the
way, that when our hero does "tip" anybody he does it in true Monte
Cristo style: it always is a ten-dollar gold piece, or a
hundred-dollar bill. Of course he falls violently in love with the
heroine at first sight, and loses his misanthropy with his heart. Sal
Tompkins, who is to be his _protegee_, turns out to have some
unusually good points, and having come to warn the heroine of a
premeditated attack upon her grandfather's house by a gang of
burglars, of one of whom she is the mistress, the utmost cordiality
and intimacy springs up between herself and the heroine; and, in fact,
we are led to believe, from a remark made by the grandfather, {858}
that these two ladies occupied the same room that night, if not the
same couch. The heroine's father was a bad man, and Sal Tompkins is
also a daughter of his, which may satisfy the reader, but should not
the parties concerned, seeing they knew nothing of the fact. Sal
becomes a very lady-like person in an incredibly short space of time,
and the discovery of her left-hand relationship is received without
the slightest remonstrance or disgust. The villain of the story is the
hero's lawyer and factotum; a pretty good villain, as far as his
language and intentions go; but he is represented as so violently
villainous that we are led to believe the author is prejudiced against
him. He makes use of a written confession of murder penned by the hero
while laboring under hallucination of mind (a real tit.bit of science,
which the distinguished author could illustrate much better in another
department of literature than he has done here), and on the strength
of it arrests him in England, whither Severne arrives after a
telegraphic journey around the world. The way in which our author here
dispatches messengers to Suez and Constantinople from England, quite
takes our breath away. The imprisonment, trial, acquittal, and
subsequent disgrace of the perjured lawyer quickly follow, to the
utmost satisfaction of the reader, who being behind the scenes (as he
is always kindly permitted to be), suffers no pangs of anxiety for the
results. The author says the heroine showed no emotion whatever of
surprise or annoyance when the self-accusation of murder written by
her affianced husband was shown to her, undoubtedly genuine as it was.
Here again we are sorry to differ with him. Of the other characters
little need be said. There is a portrait of "a lady" in Grace Langley;
an attempt at an imitation of Chadband, the renowned apostle of
"trewth," in Brother Jenkins; and a Mr. Goodall, who is introduced, as
it would seem, to play a part which he does not find. The story of
Ulrich de Hutten with his wonderful unique copy of an old book, and
his magic pentagramme, is made to link in with the principal events of
the story, but from its peculiarly romantic character, has no unity
with it: the best proof of which is that the whole of it could be
erased from the book, and the reader would not miss it. What moral we
are to draw from it we are also at a loss to divine.

That the author can write well is evident enough, both from this book
and from others of a high order of merit which he has contributed to
the department of science; but that he has accomplished as a novelist
all that he is competent to do, Robert Severne does not, in our humble
judgment, bear worthy testimony.


THE SCHOOL OF JESUS CRUCIFIED.
From the Italian of F. Ignatius of the Side of Jesus. Passionist. New
York. D. & J. Sadlier & Co.

To meet with a book like this among so much that is cold, speculative,
and heartless in the publications of our day, is like meeting with a
blushing red rose in a cotton bale. Its beauty and its sweetness
possess a double charm. Its every page glows with that tender piety
and warm devotion which is the expression of a devout Christian head,
and it cannot fail of kindling a like holy fire in the soul of him who
loves to learn the lessons taught from the summit of the Cross. The
worthy translator speaks thus in the preface: "The school of Jesus
Crucified! What Christian would not wish to study therein? to learn
wisdom and patience and resignation to the divine will, from the
example of a God-man, who came on earth and assumed our frail
mortality to be to us a model, as well as a Redeemer?" A question
which, we think, will serve to interest very many, and induce them to
procure and use this sweet little book. The very appropriate style of
its publication is quite a noticeable feature about it, and commends
itself to all lovers of well-printed and well-clothed books.


THE FRENCH MANUAL.
A new, simple, concise, and easy method of acquiring a conversational
knowledge of the French Language, including a Dictionary of over Ten
Thousand Words. By M. Alfred Havet. Entirely revised and corrected
from the last English Edition, with a new system of pronunciation. D.
Appleton & Co., New York.

{859}

This is certainly an advance on the old progressive system of
Ollendorff. It fully realizes all its title proposes, and is evidently
the work of one who is a successful teacher of the French language. We
commend it to the notice of all professors of French in our colleges
and schools, by whom, if we do not mistake, its merits will be duly
appreciated. We observe an error among the rules of pronunciation,
however, that should not pass unnoticed. The Parisian would not take
our sound of _wa_ in _waft_, _wag_, and _wax_, to express the sound of
_oi_ in _fois, soif_, etc. We presume the author has been accustomed
to hear those words pronounced woft, wog, and wox, as he dates his
preface from Edinburgh.


THE PHYSIOLOGY OF MAN.
Designed to represent the existing State of Physiological Science, as
applied to the Functions of the Human Body. By Austin Flint, Jr.,
Professor of Physiology and Microscopy in the Bellevue Hospital
Medical College, etc., etc. Vol. i., 8vo, pp. 495. D. Appleton & Co.,
New York. 1866.

This work has lain on our table for some time. The delay in writing
the notice has been from no lack of admiration or appreciation of the
book or its author, but from a desire to write more than an ordinary
book notice.

This we will defer till the work is completed, and in the mean time we
hasten to express our hearty approval of a literary and scientific
enterprise, which reflects the highest honor on the profession of
medicine and on the literature of the country.

Prof. Flint, the young author, has devoted his life to the study and
teaching of physiology. He steadily refuses the allurements and
emoluments of practice, and steadily and successfully pursues the
object of his ambition. His present work, if completed in accordance
with the first volume, will reward him for his past toil, and ensure
him an honorable and most enviable future among the leading minds of
his profession in this country and the scientific world.

It will be out of place to enter into any scientific discussion in the
pages of a journal devoted to general literature. It is sufficient to
say that Dr. Flint has presented, in elegant language and graphic
style, a correct view of the science of physiology to the time of
writing. He displays great erudition, a thorough grasp of the subject,
and a sincere desire to appreciate and communicate the exact truth. It
is the best book on the subject for college libraries, and is an
almost indispensable necessity to the physician.

We hope the publication of such works will renew the habit of studying
the philosophy of medicine as part of a liberal education, draw closer
the bond between the intellectual classes and the profession of
medicine, and in this way advance the interests of science, humanity,
and civilization.

This work is issued in an elegant form, worthy of its eminent
publishers.


KING RENE'S DAUGHTER.
A Danish lyrical drama. By Henrik Hertz. Translated by Theodore
Martin. New York: Leypoldt & Holt. 1867.

This is indeed a poetic gem of the first water, and we venture to
assert that few critics will contest our judgment. The author of the
introductory sketches repeats twice that it is lovely, and we think we
might repeat it twice more and it not be too often. He who will
commence reading it, and not finish it at one sitting, we pronounce
one of those beings so detested of Shakespeare, who has no music in
his soul.

It forms but one act in seven scenes, but is replete with events,
"stirring, surprising, yet harmonious." A bit of philosophy peeps out
here and there to interest and charm the most unimaginative thinker;
for instance, when Martha, the guardian of Iolanthe, the king's'
daughter, reasons upon her unconscious blindness:

  "May it not be, sir, while we darkly muse
  Upon our life's mysterious destinies,
  That we in blindness walk, like Iolanthe,
  Unconscious that true vision is not ours?
  Yet is that faith our hope's abiding star."

The innocent confession of the hitherto inexperienced passion of love
which springs up in the heart of Iolanthe, at the presence and sound
of the voice of her unknown betrothed, is a passage of rare beauty and
originality. He asks her to place her hand upon his head to mark his
height, that when he returns she may remember him. She answers:

          "What need of that?
  I know that few resemble thee in height;
  Thy utterance comes to me as from above,
  Like all that's high and inconceivable;
  And know I not thy tone? Like as thou' speakest
  None speak beside. No voice, no melody
  I've known in nature, or in instrument,
  Doth own a resonance so lovely, sweet,
  So winning, full, and gracious as thy voice.
  Trust me, I'll know thee well amidst them all!"

{860}

The final tableau, in which Iolanthe, with restored sight, recognizes
her father, and she and Count Tristan, her betrothed, each other, is
full of dramatic power. We promise the reader a pleasure in the
perusal of this poem such as he seldom enjoys.


OUT OF TOWN.
1 vol. 12mo, pp. 311. New York: Hurd & Houghton.

This is a sprightly book wrought out of a common and everyday subject:
a change from a city to a country life. The story is told in an easy,
off-hand, and peculiarly attractive way, and engages the attention of
its readers, particularly those of the rising generation. The writer
contrives to invest the most ordinary topics with a zest which keeps
alive the interest of his reader to the close. It is a perfect _pot
pourri_ of fun and humor, dished to suit all palates and all ages. But
it has a fatal blemish in our judgment:--a perpetual parade of
decanters and pipes. The writer seems to think that there can be no
such thing as conviviality or good cheer without intoxicating
libations. Why cannot those who write books for the young avoid this
rock of offence? Surely there is small need, in these days, of such
temptation. Everyday life reeks with the disgusting and pernicious
habit of tippling. Why does it become necessary that every new book
for our children should be redolent of the fumes of the bar-room? Are
our book-makers aware what an impetus they are imparting to that wave
of desolation which is swelling over the fair face of our beloved
country, and which threatens, more than any other one thing, to
submerge and sweep away all those barriers of virtue and morality on
which rely our hopes for the protection of religion and a healthy
morality?


SADLIER'S CATHOLIC DIRECTORY, ALMANAC, AND ORDO,
for the year of our Lord 1867. New-York: D. and J. Sadlier & Co.

This volume consists of about 647 pages of matter of which 290 pages
are devoted to the Church of the United States, 100 to the Church of
British North America and Ireland, and 257 to advertisements. As a
popular Catholic Directory for the United States it may be said that
at least one half of it is but of partial interest.

The portion devoted to the United States is apparently very full, and
as accurate, no doubt, as the publishers have been able to make it. We
observe however, that the Church statistics of Ireland and British
America possess a valuable little summary at the end of each while no
such summary is given for the Church of the United States.

If one would look anywhere for it we think it would be in just such a
publication as the one before us, and we must confess to being
disappointed in not finding it here.


MR. P. O'SHEA, New-York, has in
press a new edition of The Gentle Skeptic.
By Rev. C. Walworth.


BOOKS RECEIVED.

From D. APPLETON, & Co., New-York. Joseph II. and his Court. By Mrs.
L. Muehlbach. With Illustrations. 1 vol. 8vo. Cloth, $2 00.


From LEYPOLDT & HOLT, New-York. King Rene's Daughter, a Danish Lyrical
Drama. By Henrik Hertz. Translated by Theodore Martin. 1 vol. 12mo,
pp. 100. Price $125.



From M'GILL & NOLAN, Georgetown, D.C. The Messenger of the Sacred
Heart of Jesus, a monthly bulletin of the Apostleship of Prayer. Price
$2 per annum.


From BENZlGER BROS. Alte Neue Welt, an Illustrated German Catholic
Magazine. Price $3 00 per annum.



From HURD & HOUGHTON, New-York. Essays on Art By Francis Turner
Palgrave. 1 vol. 12mo, pp. 330. Price $1 75.


From D. APPLETON & Co. The French Manual: n. new, simple, concise, and
easy method of acquiring a conversational knowledge of the French
language, including a Dictionary of over ten thousand words. By M.
Alfred Harve. 1 vol. 12mo, pp. 188 and 112.


From D. & J. SADLIER & Co., New-York. Life of Catherine McAuley,
Foundress and first Superior of the Institute of Religious Sisters of
Mercy. By a member of the Order of Mercy. 1 vol. 12mo, pp. 500. Price
$2 50. Sermons by the REV. THOS. S. PRESTON. Revised and enlarged
edition. 1 vol. pp. 581. Price $2 50. The School of Jesus Crucified.
From the Italian of Father IGNATIUS, of the Side of Jesus, Passionist.
1 vol. pp. 334. Price 75 cents. The Christian armed against, the World
and the Illusions of his own Heart. By FATHER IGNATIUS of the Side of
Jesus, Passionist. 1 vol: 32mo, pp. 320. Price 50c.



From J. D. LIPPINCOTT & Co., Philadelphia. Robert Severne, His Friends
and his Enemies. A Novel. By William A. Hammond. 1 vol. 12mo, pp. 369.
Price $1 75.


MUSIC RECEIVED.

From J. L. PETERS & BRO., St. Louis &. Cincinnati. Shamus O'Brien, an
answer to Norah O'Neill. By William S. Hayes. Let the Dead and the
Beautiful Rest. Little Beauty. Pink of Perfection. Mary's Waiting at
the Window.