Born in boredom and anguish at seeing snow fall while doing her
dishes in front of the kitchen window, delivered meals, disposable
plates, and throw-away silverware of plastic came into being.  They had
seemed at first to her the perfect tools to minimize discontent.  Then
she kept the drapes shut at all times to keep from seeing the snow.
Still it did not help; and one evening she beat on his locked studio
door and screamed to it that she was going to her language class.  She
hadn't been there but once following her enrollment.
     While she went out with the snow and the wind, Nawin still
remained locked away but free in his colors.  They flowed in tight
brushstrokes of an earthy tone.  They were of French-Canadian
mannequins performing their perfunctory duties of marriage.  A summary
setting of a banquet table was under the window.  A profuse ochre
sunlight poured through the window permeating the scene at the wedding
banquet.  The table cast a shadow that inundated around the feet of the
mannequins like a pool providing the scene with form and volume.
However, greatness was in the details and that he was still lacking.
He was listening to Thai news from his computer.  The anchorman said
that Moslems and Hindus were burning houses in one Indian community.
Hindus were throwing Moslem children into bonfires, telling them they
would meet their deceased fathers.  His pastel colors began to have a
fiery gray bleakness.  He felt great despair.  He wondered why in the 3
million years of Australopithecus through the 100,000 years of his
species (if his species was to some degree related to Australopithecus)
humans had not learned love.  They had learned speech and social skills
for society to exist but they hadn't learned love.  He wondered if this
word was totally empty without substance. Maybe it was a make-believe
word to make humans feel better about themselves. He wondered if there
was anything outside of human selfishness.

 
     He had once gotten out of noodles--Noodles stirred in a wok or
alive, like worms, in a vat.  Briefly, he had gotten out of his boyhood
assignments of washing bowls in tubs, being the seamstress attaching
jasmine flowers into rosaries from a long, thick needle, selling them
on the streets in the traffic, and then returning to wash more bowls.
There was a time when his aunt had had mercy on him and had come into
his life despite the inauspicious marriage that her sister had made. It
almost seemed like a dream. Hadn't she first enrolled him in a Bible
School class?  Within that class so long ago, from a lost being of
himself, had he not taken a paper image of Christ and varnished it onto
a piece of wood?  Then his aunt let him dabble in education and gain
the full thirst on the new taste buds. Neurological responses burgeoned
and bifurcated within him. Now this wooden, shiny-faced Christ or the
ashes of it were somewhere in a colossal garbage heap with so much
Kumpee had coerced them to throw away or sell "to have as savings."
That image of Christ or the conceptualization of it in his head had not
spared either himself or it from the trash heap.  He was, nonetheless,
fond of it. Strangely, Bible school for him had been the initial stage
of his education at the temple school. He wished that he had that
plaque to keep forever.  If he were to have that plaque now it might be
precious proof that a young scholar had actually lived.
     This part of him was undeniably gone. Gone it was, for he
continually slid out of his skin so fully and naturally even though he
was rarely cognizant that this continual sliding away from himself was
taking place.  He was just slumbering as all slumbered. This was life,
and unlike a movie, music did not accompany it's plotless plodding of
time. The sliding out of his skin happened every minute of his life and
yet there was perhaps some consistency one might isolate as a Jatupon
if one were to imagine such a being when Buddhism stipulated that the
self was nothing but a delusion.  Whenever he saw an emaciated dog
wadded into itself like crumbled trash or sprawled out onto the
pavement as if dead he would always say, "poor baby dog."  It was a
long embedded sensitivity that he had developed in Ayuttaya from early
boyhood. In Bangkok where they seemed even more pathetic, the
sensitivity was exacerbated and he repeated this phrase over and over
again no different than when he was six years old. This was surely
proof of a bit of a consistent self.  Friends always went away after
they learned, shared, or enjoyed the company of a given person for they
needed to evolve to the next level and forget previous levels.
However, one surely did not lose himself completely.  He did not know.
      Still he was changing and within the darkness that was
subjugating him into doziness a new embedded consistency was
formulating. His mind kept flitting back to the thought of this girl,
Noppawan, and his imaginative curiosity invented a mansion where she no
doubt resided. He could imagine her governess and feel how contained
and alone she might be within a rigid schedule of private teachers and
tutors. He imagined her accompanied by servants while her continually
busy parents remained remote and detached from her life.
     He was as happy to be returning to his sordid smelling cell as
that time when he had returned from the fair.  With hairnet as a tail
in his back pocket, his eyes gleamed of hope, and curiosity brewed
about Noppawan.  Change also marked the life of Suthep, who was sitting
on two bags of his clothes, latent with the night, when Jatupon
approached the apartment building.
    "What are you doing?" he asked.  Suthep was smoking near a tree.
     "I got an apartment. I'm about ready to leave.  I thought I'd tell
you goodbye but maybe get you to help me with a bag if you don't mind."
     "You're leaving?" He felt nonplused.  His senses tingled and
throbbed in confusion like the onslaught of the mosquito when drugs had
conjured illusions and excavated buried, opaque truths.  "If you want
to leave us, why were we all working together earlier today?"
     "For old time's sake.  I'm not leaving completely--just from time
to time when I'm tired and want to be able to sleep without having to
come all the way back here."
     "What does Kazem say about this?"
     "What he says doesn't matter.  What does it matter what he says?"
     "I guess none but I want to know."
     Suthep paused.  He wasn't accustomed to confessions in the
confessionals of tree branches. He sighed and spoke with begrudging
reluctance. " I've explained this to him for months.  He has told me
many times that he wants me to stay here.  He always gets angry
whenever I talk about it. Now I've stopped talking and am doing it,
aren't I? No, he does not want anything to interfere with his notion of
what big brothers ought to do. He acts like he is a lot older than I
am. Anyhow, he is obnoxious: always dropping by my business when he
can't catch me here pretending to be concerned that I might need
something.  Most of those times he was just trying to persuade me that
we need some type of joint savings."  He coughed a deep chronic
continuum that shook his body.  He was of an average build but seemed
to Jatupon as gaunt and sickly at such moments.  "I laugh at his face
each time he does that.  I've been there, done that.  Kumpee made us
saps enough."
     "After Mother and Father's death we were stunned."
     "Maybe.  Maybe or just believing that only bad things would happen
which is probably about right. Anyhow, I'm more or less gone.  You both
should be thankful to be rid of me so that you can carry on without
being witnessed."  He laughed.  "Go ahead and look innocent and
confused."
     "I don't know what you mean."
     "About looking innocent and confused?" asked Suthep in a chuckle.
He also wanted to keep the conversation murky.
     "About any of it."
     "Good, stay that way.  None of us want to know anything-least of
all me. Here, you can help me by taking a bag." As Jatupon reached for
a bag he uncorked his flatulent gas.
      "How disgusting!  Are you going to fart all the way up there?"
      "Where is your apartment?" asked Jatupon, anxious that the
subject be changed.
      "You need to have a doctor check you out with all that farting
you do" said Suthep.  He was enjoying Jatupon's embarrassment.  "A fart
doctor," he said.  They both laughed.  They began walking down the soi
to the main street. Suthep smoked and coughed.  His face cringed and
then he spat out some mucus in front of a 7-11.  He buried it with the
sole of his sandal.  They began walking again.  Jatupon was feeling
even more reluctant to experience change and this reluctance spoke to
him in the scraping shuffle of their talking sandals.  Jatupon did not
know what his brother knew and his mouth opened a couple times as if
wanting to ask him.  Still, he could not speak such things.
     "How much is your rent?" he asked at last as the two of them
waited for a period of minutes for a bus. He was anxious to wedge them
out of the coffins that buried each of them separately into themselves.
 Only words and actions were his crowbar.
     "Just a thousand" Suthep grumbled. But from there the journey was
a wordless void.
     Before they arrived at the smaller cell Suthep bought a couple
cartons of beer from a convenience store and the two of them sank into
themselves within the barren room.  Exhaustion stung them and yet both,
wishing to find a chamber of themselves not mandated by work and sleep,
let the liquor and marijuana smoke toss about their beings--beings that
were sprawled on pillows on the tileless wooden floor.
     Suthep stared at him so directly for a period of seconds with a
face that looked like his aunt when she had peered out at him from her
glasses.  His stare seemed incessant and those eyes burned his face
that blushed from the worry of what the stare and the invitation to
visit here all meant.  His aunt's stare through her glasses had long
ago been like a version of the sanphraphun, the dollhouse of the
spirits that was often placed in front of businesses and residences.
At such sanphraphuns Thais put down plates of food and lit incense that
would carry to the gods their wishes.  She had been his guardian spirit
in a sanphraphun of those glasses and yet she had abandoned him. Like
the aunt, Suthep's eyes were probing.  In the smoke of the cannabis he
too seemed like a spirit.  Suthep's gaze attempted to measure the
traces of manhood that were in the youngest brother.  They attempted to
not be repulsed by the boy, the victim, that still surfaced.  Suthep
noticed that even in the masculine activity of beer drinking Jatupon
sipped the beer in little suctions like the infant to its bottle.
     "Go ahead, little man, swallow as much as you can in one gulp."
     "Why?"
     "Why not?"
     "I'm not so little.  We're nearly the same age and I'm taller than
you."
     "Age and height don't make one big.  It is experience, and you are
lacking experience."
     "Lacking experience in what?"
     "In what?  In everything.  In women, in outlook, whatever.  You're
a child."
     "And you dragged me here to tell me that?"
     "I didn't drag you.  You are making yourself the victim again."
Suthep chuckled.  Jatupon avowed the truth of this with a smile.
     "You make it sound like Mother and Father defended me as the baby
boy" he half joked.
     "Well, Kazem took up that role when we were out to beat you
senseless."
     "Don't you ever want to return?"
     "Return where?"
Jatupon swallowed in larger sips while his head was like a boat swiftly
churning its propellers but going nowhere.
     "To what we were. Like when we were able to finally afford a
restaurant and Mom would come with Kumpee in the taxi and they would
slide sacks and boxes of vegetables, rice, and pork that we would put
away enthusiastically; or when we ordered a plastic ball from box tops
of cereal boxes like the one that we spent months getting...the spacey
one with many suction cups...it would stick to about anything when wet;
that one Sonkran where we were in the back of a pickup truck with a
barrel of water for ammunition, aiming at every moving target.  Father
had rented a truck to pick up something.  I don't remember what.   But
then, for some reason, he changed his mind and took us..."  They both
sank into their father's rare episodes of kindness and then their minds
switched to the pure fun of Songkran chaos where society became freer
and fragmented to thoughtless instinctual responses of guerrilla
warfare where aiming guns for the open windows of busses and targeting
other rival gangs had no consequences.
     "I am a man now.  I don't want to hear bullshit about returning
back.  What good does it do to be sentimental, anyhow?  Chance took
them and if they are looking down on us it will be with as little
concern as when they were alive. As I see it, whether we honor their
jars of ashes at the temple or spit on them it doesn't much matter.
Their spirits didn't keep Kumpee from running off with what he could.
Do I want to return back?  Back wasn't any good either; so, no, not
really if I were to be honest about it."  Only the high he was
experiencing allowed him to be so honest.
     Anxieties began to wreak Jatupon's sensitivities.  The rag of a
drape hanging against the window in a knot looked like a gigantic
condom.  There was a huge hole in the wall symbolic of life being a
void. His brother was a person whom he was beginning to know well at
one moment and a stranger with a strange face reminiscent of an aunt,
dreamed or real, the next moment.  He thought how odd it was that the
whole perspective of someone he had known his whole life was
interchanging so randomly with the worst moments being when his brother
seemed to have a stone alien countenance.
      He let another golden wave hit his tongue.  It was like being hit
by a wave from an ocean all bitter and suffocating.  He began to laugh.
 He couldn't help it. Pains and pleasures seemed to him as such an
irrelevant and comical absurdity slapping a person around in its
inundations.  One moment he would be here and happy and then he would
be there and miserable. He drank more of the beer and laughed.
     "Chug it all down!" repeated his brother.
     He thought to himself that here they were-- two very young men who
had once run freely together through puddles on the streets and yet
despite their history (regardless of it not being a particularly close
relationship) Suthep and all that should seem him was tenuous and
frothy when it should be solid in his memory.  Staring at him for a
couple seconds, somehow he couldn't believe that someone who said "Chug
it all down" was his benefactor.  He looked down.  As he did so, he
sensed that the bubbles were increasing in his can of beer.  The
mosquito, that had been folded, spread out its large mass once it
climbed out of the beer can.
     "I don't want to be lectured to by you," said Jatupon in his mind
to the mosquito.  "I might want an education but not some garbled ideas
of an insect created by my own inebriated brain."
     "You get what you pay for. These opportunities of hearing me on my
soapbox is as much truth as any noodle worker will be exposed to."
     "I know you are horrible but I don't mind it anymore. I'm not
scared of it anymore. I'm used to it. If I can't get rid of you, at
least you will no longer upset me."
     "So quickly you people acclimate and adapt to rough ways.  How
have you been?"
     He felt stunned.  How good it was to hear those words. "Okay."
     "Is the job going okay?"
     "It is the same old thing."
      "Don't you feel proud being there enslaved to the needs of higher
classes than yourselves-especially when they are rather lowly to come
to you to begin with?  All of these department store workers and so
forth."
      "It's all right.  I don't know any better.  I want to know why
you like blood."
      "A bold childish inquisitiveness without considering order or
propriety. You really aren't afraid.  You are getting bolder by the day
in a more childish way.  Why do you like chocolate?"
     "I don't know.  I just do."
     "But why do you think that you like it so much?"
     "I wouldn't know."
     "You can guess if you follow your instincts.  If you follow your
instincts they will take you into prehistory when the sweet taste buds
formed for succulent bone marrow.  Which came first: the taste buds for
what was sweet or the experience tearing into bone marrow?  For the
answer to that question you don't need a PHD.  You just need to follow
your instincts and they will let you know everything."
     "I guess people in the past were often desperate for nutrients and
found that they could survive by eating bone marrow. Nature began to
instill man with a taste for that which was sweet so that he would more
likely eat bone marrow when in a desperate situation."
     "Excellent.  In answer to your question, maybe the boredom of
flying around this rocky planet causes us to need to bite into
something deeper.  Anyhow, I came to find out how you were doing
financially now that you have employment"
     "We don't need to worry about staying alive."
     "What more can you expect from life than that?"
      "Jatupon!"  There was a pause. "Jatupon!"
       "A le nah? (what is it?).
      "You are fading off completely," said Suthep with a grimace.  "I
think you need to get the hell out of here.  Your lover's waiting for
you.  Thanks for helping me bring some of this junk."

 

                            Chapter 9

     Nawin fell asleep in the suds of his bathtub and when he woke up
his thoughts were frothy. Melancholy dripped from the shower nozzle and
from time to time hit his head (the contents of which emulated the slow
and sad repetition of the dripping).  A year earlier it had been in
such a bathroom at an artsy party at a friend's house near Silpakorn
University that he went away from the crowd to sit on the edge of the
tub and weep with the fatuous wrestling of personal pain.  Noppawan
came into the bathroom to find out what was wrong. She sat on the edge
of the tub next to him and heard about the crash of the United Airlines
jet. Without words she took one of his hands. Without trying to absorb
the sadness of his face in the emotion of sympathy, he could tell that
she was imagining details beyond his relationship with his deceased
uncle or the explosion of the plane. Seated there, quickly overcoming
personal loss in favor of a more philosophic stance, he believed that
America was a self-centered bully and the Moslem world would continue
to attack her for being so opulent in a famished world, controlling
world policies without giving smaller nations a voice, cuddling the
Zionist entity of these self-professed "Chosen people," and for having
the dominant culture of individual freedoms that went contrary to their
Islamic tyranny.  The couple looked out into nothingness with similar
thoughts.  Both knew the naturalness of hate in recreating civilization
and that destructiveness in society was no different than the kinetic
universe as a whole.  Both knew that only hope came in recoiling in
one's passive intellectual pursuits. At that time he felt sick like
when one hadn't eaten for days: people who should have been important
and salubrious spun around in his head as hollow as all the others.
Only his uncle, a man who did not love him and had no particular
self-interest in the boy had saved him. Only Noppawan, during his time
of mourning, kept him from complete despair.  He wiped off his hands
and arms and made his call on the telephone as his body leaned stiffly
to the edge crushing through frothy embankments of his bubble bath.
     "Piggy?"
     "Yes?"
     "Piggy, is that you?"
     "Yes, Nawin."
     "Piggy, I feel tongue tied here.  This shouldn't be a question a
husband poses. I...I don't know what to say.  We are married
technically. Technically, and emotionally from my standpoint, that is
the case so as a husband don't you think I'd be curious when my wife is
going to start making love to me?"
     "I have, Nawin, but there isn't much I can do with us on different
sides of the planet."
     "Well, you should be here and she shouldn't.  I asked you to come."
     "And I said that I had papers to grade and research to do."
     "I understand all of that.  Nobody is to blame.  I'm not even
talking about that.  I'm talking about three times before we got
married.  2 1/2 times afterward. We're newlyweds. I need for you to
need to smell my feet, massage my back, do womanly things I can't talk
about on the telephone.  I need you."
      She thought to herself that appetites were not the substance of
memory.  She wanted to lecture him but only muttered,  "Did Porn leave
you?"
     "No, she is here.  But that is not the point.  The point is
figuring out if you will ever need me like a wife."
     "The way Porn does?  Honey, she is a businesswoman.  I'm sure she
enjoys you immeasurably but you would go broke paying for both of us."
She laughed. She was fully amused by herself; but then she noticed that
she had caused him to retreat in silence.  "Hello?" she said uneasily.
She picked up the poetic story, Thao Nok Kaba Phuak (The Nightjar) that
was on her bookshelf. She opened the book, which had his name and
address on it when he was 14 years old and her name since he had
dedicated the book to her.  Her fingertips caressed the illustration of
the Nightjar on the cover page.
     "Yeah, I'm here.  You continued to encourage me to have my
relationships after we were married.  It was crazy but I went along
with it.  I thought it was a game: playboy artist encouraged by his
wife to continue to draw saddened whores. I even went to the airport
with Porn thinking you would come there and stop us."
     "Surprise, surprise!" she said.  She laughed lovingly.  "Men
explode, Nawin.  They get it out of their system for a few hours but a
woman percolates romantically throughout the day.  She loses all sense
of reason. She does everything for the sake of that relationship.  She
loses herself."
     "So-no one wants to reason 24 hours a day.  You can't think that
people get married to stop sexual intercourse.  If that was your idea I
wish that you had told me before we got married."
     "Nawin, the reason I married you was not to percolate nor was it
to be a recipient of your explosions when you can't get any temporaries
to service you. I realize that temporaries are more erotic than wives,
Nawin, the same as temporaries are probably more erotic than husbands.
Anybody new will not be like stinking socks kicked off under the sofa."
     "Is that what I am?"  He remembered the stench of Kumpee. She
couldn't have chosen a more grotesque image.  He again felt like the
ugly dark skinned Jatupon with his pimples.
     "You understand what I mean."
     "I don't understand you at all.  I don't understand what we are,
honestly.  Do we even have a relationship?  Do you know?"
     "Of course, we've known each other forever. We're just trying to
figure out some new movements-our own ways of behaving."
     "I just want us to behave like normal couples do."
     Both of them were silent, digging deep into their brains for
memories of what normal families and normal couples did.  They couldn't
find what they were seeking.  Both exhumed half-dead children of
themselves whose eyes were blinded by pain and too much exposure to
darkness.  What did they know of families, couples, and what normal
people did?
    "We have a relationship but it's a peculiar thing.  It is one of
those rare finds based on understanding and admiration.  One great
thing about you that I admire is that, despite your moral turpitude, I
don't have to worry that you will someday become a bitter old man who
hates life.  Bitter old men, Nawin, tend to be that way because they
resent young men off having pleasures when they can't engage in them
any longer.  You have your art, your permanent window on the world. You
aren't just wasting your life on the next thrill-I mean not completely.
You'll have something to show for your life."
     "I need intimacy with my wife."
     "Isn't what I'm doing now intimacy?" she spoke with a bit of anger.  "Isn'
t going to an art museum even a higher intimacy?  Isn't
being an artist or in my case sharing my research on zoology to a
conference intimacy at its highest degree. You're ignorant but you
aren't stupid. You're not even so ignorant: just a victim of too much
testosterone clouding over your senses."
     "I need tender love."
     "Tender love isn't in a man's lexicon. You think you need women to
be tender enough to let you bang away on them. Pleasurable banging, and
one or two women as your permanent trophies: that's your need.   I
don't think it is much of a need. Wanting the right people is good.
Needing them isn't."  She paused and waited but his voice was not
forthcoming.  "Nawin, are you still there?."
     "I'm still here. Piggy, you haven't contacted me in weeks. I was
beginning to think that you were filing for divorce."
   "The line was too large at the lawyer's office" she joked. He
chuckled.
    "Are you okay, Piggy?"
     "I'm fine, Nawin.  Thanks for finally asking.  How are you and
Porn? How are your classes?"
     "The class on the influence of Caravaggio is useful.  All of the
classes are fine. Noppawan, I think that Porn hates being with me now.
I think she is disappointed being here with me."
     "Why?"
     "I'm too busy to take her wherever she wants to go."
     "Where does she want to go?"
     "I think anywhere but here-New York mostly."
     "Why don't you go?  It is just a day's journey, isn't it?"
     "I don't know," he sighed.  "Piggy, I've tried to call you twenty
times.  Why are you at your sister's?"
     "Oh, Nawin, that is a good question.  You know how the landlord
let four Chinese students rent out an apartment near us."
     "Yes."
     "Do you remember that we always heard that sizzling sound of them
frying food in their woks."
    "Yes, so-"
    "Well, they fried most of the apartment building.  The sprinklers
didn't turn on. No one was hurt fortunately.  You had only a few
canvases.  I took out your paintings and my computer and ran out before
the flames reached our door.  Our ideas are safe."
     "Thank God!  Thank God, no one was hurt."  He imagined the horror
of having all his canvases in that location and his image emblazoned in
light, heat, and smoke.  What a way of setting his reputation on fire.
What a way of enlightening the world.  And yet, in accordance with Zen,
burnt canvases would nip his ego and remind him of the true traceless
aspect of being.  If this had happened, to which his whole being poured
out praise to whatever forces of the cosmos intentionally or
unintentionally caused it to not occur, it would have taught him the
awareness that permanence was an illusion. It would have taught him an
acceptance of fate and an appreciation of the simple pleasure of just
being. He thought of the time that he and Noppawan were in a Songkran
Festival water fight in Banglampool.  Both were unlucky enough to have
both sides of their faces shot with water containing some form of
caustic chemicals that burned lacerations which later changed into
black eyes.  For a few weeks the friends had been freaks but then they
were always freaks, and at the age of 14 or 15, the inception of their
friendship, they had attended the natural science freak museum at
Siriaj Hospital.  In Thailand no one told the truth.  They were careful
and obsequious with their "wei," their traditions, and their buried
tongues.  They were in favor of just getting along.  To Thais, he and
Piggy would be perceived as intractably strange.  The couple couldn't
claim to be comfortable as freaks although freakishness was their
natural order.
     "Also, the monkey, the cat, and the parrot: I got them out too."
     "Noppawan?  Noppawan Rongthang" he said timidly in the fog of
self-doubt.
     "Jatupon Biadklang" she mocked him and laughed at his insecurity.
     "Why didn't you move into the condominium?"
     "My sister's apartment is near the university."
     "I'm feeling lonely," he said while laughing at himself.  "I love
you but I'm doubting if you love me."
     "Feelings come and go, Nawin.  We have a commitment to each other
as friends and we're married.  The way I look at it that is more stable
than what most people have.  There is me and there is you and from
those two important things we create us.  Where's Porn at now?"
     "She went to her language class."
     "Oh, is she now trying to learn Thai?"
     He laughed victoriously choking on his saliva.  He coughed. "You
are jealous!" he said gleefully.  "You do love me.  You are jealous out
of your mind."
     "Dream on, Nawin."
     "Piggy is jealous."
     "In your dreams, Nawin."
      He stopped laughing. "Piggy? I want to tell you about something."
     "Are you whining, Nawin?"
     "Well, I was ready to."
     She felt that husbands used women to rape or as confidants for the
release of their suffering boys.  She found it vertiginous and a bit
nauseating.
     "Yes," she said coldly, "What is it?"
     "I just want to tell you something that happened...I think I saw
my brother-one of them when I was leaving for the airport."
     "The one who beat up on your face when I first met you."
     "Yeah.  Maybe.  It's nothing.  It is just on my mind."
     "Did you talk to him?"
     "No, just saw him from a distance."
     Hanging up, he got dressed and, paintbrush in hand, he returned to
his dreams: dreams of people in movements imitated from their fathers
and forefathers-those in traditional marriages and traditional jobs who
were in their movements as perfunctory and dead as noodle workers.  He
swept color on his canvas.  He made imagined forms of those who had
not, in their early childhood been maimed in this mechanical apparatus
called family.  For selfish reasons, like those tiny salamanders
clinging to windows during a storm, he thought that he should spend
time with Porn, know her in more detail, listen to her, and understand.
 In part he was able to click into that tender inquisitive probing and
non-judgmental listening called empathy, but the thing that clicked his
brainwaves in this circuitry was often selfish.  He knew that he, his
wife, and his Porn were all maimed ones.  They were indeed a family.
They were part of him and he did not want to lose them.  Both brought
him pleasurable respites from himself who was often attuned to the pain
that was rife in all things.  When Porn came home he went to her.  He
asked how her day was.  He listened to her complaints.  He paused and
waited.  He understood her isolation.  Still he did not promise to take
her to New York.

 

     Impermanence was in all things. Galaxies collided or were pulled
into joint oval orbits.  Planets were sucked into those suns in the
realignment. The suns themselves eventually flared up into supernovas
consuming all planetary bodies orbiting their realm and died. Long ago
while the senator was in his first year of law school his sister had
become one of the hundred women on a given day that sought to get
traveler's visas at the German Embassy escorted by their boyfriends so
as to begin a departure that would keep them in exile. His parents were
now beginning to act the parts of invalids and leeches.  To his parents
he had failed them by being divorced and not having children that would
have fostered the illusion of continuum. They also thought he had
failed them by not inviting them into his home. The result was a
continual stream of their calls on his mobile telephone where the
mother and father diagnosed themselves and each other, listing all
symptoms and proposing materialistic requests and more time together
that would alleviate or distract their mental and physical suffering.
Women whom he had thought of as having permanent relationships gained
new perspectives from the intake of new information.  They also gained
more immediate and dominant feelings engendered by newer relationships.
They went on and became something different without any way of relating back si
nce, like the expanding universe, it all needed to go forward.
With aging parents and relationships awry came the growing daily
awareness of the limits of his lifespan making him all the more
glutinous to have money, status, and women who could produce for him
children.  But with each year of impermanence his identity of himself
fell on its own weight like a black hole and he did not know who he
was.  The loving neediness of wanting that special woman who would
take care of his sexual needs, give him children, and not extort him of
finances with a divorce grated against him stridently.  There was no
security against another mishap especially at his present age of forty
when his physical attributes were diminishing and a woman would not be
likely to marry him for how he made her feel.
     Jatupon wanted to be an aristocratic bum.  He wanted to commune
with inner voices within himself and to have the relationship of green
blades of grass firmly poking into the crevices of his toes when he ran
about barefoot in a park.  He wanted to return to that state of knowing
perfectly what to say when others asked him, at age five, what he
wanted to become when he grew up. "I want to become a tickle-man," he
would always tell them and then he would try to tickle them before they
tickled him. A decade later, this old long-lost game with Kazem in
particular could not be surpassed.  He still couldn't think of a better
vocation than a tickle-man.
     Outside of the continual wish to have an aristocratic life free of
the specious ambition to either sustain himself as a working class
slave or by the stretch of his imagination a CEO slave, a doctor, or a
senator, Jatupon's inward feelings were beginning to subtly change away
from his love of his brother, Kazem. His ideas and feelings were
shifting toward impermanence with each letter he received from Noppawan
Piggy.  Finally, he had a friend although for the past few years
Jatupon had virtually had none. As much as new manhood awakened old
instincts deep in cellular memory for the odor, the touch, the pleasure
and the pounding of any type of sexual activity where the differing
force of the thrusts and the stirred waves of his hormones all whizzed
him in a unique frenzy for a brief time, he yearned more for Noppawan.
He yearned for her ideas and her presence.
     He considered his need for her one time as the two brothers lay
naked immediately after a sexual encounter under a ceiling fan that was
newly installed.  He watched the blades chopping through the musty air
and in a very minute sotto voce of his thoughts he yearned for
destruction.  He wanted for the wobbly fan to fall and guillotine his
head.  For the most part, however, sexual acts like this one were his
rocket fuel to Nirvana.  It always brought him into a religious state
that he couldn't duplicate in any other way.  That one moment after his
brother's sexual act and his own masturbation, he was free of wanting
anything.  At such times he just lay there breathing in the oxygen
deeply and feeling fully satisfied with being.  This too he yearned for
and only his brother was able to grant him Nirvana.
     At last he had a friend. This relationship gave him more meaning
to the days than even the rain.  Sustained reflexes as an assistant
cook had caused the days to stumble along on deformed feet so
uneventfully after his parents' death. Now it wasn't so bad.  After the
washed-plate monotony of late evenings he would often pull out of his
back pocket a letter that he had read many times before.  At both
restaurants Kazem and Suthep individually razzed him about his new
girlfriend but they believed that he did not know anyone. To them the
girl had to be some remote villager wanting to learn about life in
Bangkok by advertising for a pen pal in the back of the comic book
pages. On one night of one particularly troublesome week without a
letter he went to sleep from his banal world at an empty table and
dreamed his anything but banal dreams.  Within Jatupon's sleep there
were at first tire swings and butterflies nestling on succulent flowers
but then on the flowers there was the perfidious couplings of
mosquitoes.  He smelt the pheromones that the male had emitted to make
the female believe that it was following a whole army of male hunters
who had procured food when really there was just that one male poised
relaxingly waiting for the ovulating specimen to come to its perch.
The female was as white as Kumpee's Chinese girlfriend and she hated
and loved the guile as much as the deceiver in that unique mix that
makes sex such a delight.  Then, after finishing its frenzy, the
mosquito was back with him.
     "I don't understand this delay in meeting" he dreamed of himself
telling the mosquito.
     "Still, after nearly four months in this city, you think that the
senator is really trying to fit you into his schedule of dinner guests
and your sweet mother and father are going to return from the dust."
     "Something like that.  I don't want to be forgotten.  If Mother
and Father are really dead in the true sense of the word I won't be
able to see them again."
     "Dear me, when are you going to shake your boyish Thai ways? Being
respectful to a couple morons who accidentally conceived you in their
sexual frenzy is too preposterous.  Regarding death, I can't see
anything wrong in just plain death. You kill enough of us when you do
your laundry each week.  I see you emptying out puddle-remnants of the
previous week's water from your plastic buckets where we are laying our
eggs and then pouring in new laundry soap and water. You attempt to
flatten us with the palms of your hands.  You never seem to consider
death such a tragedy in those circumstances.  I can't see why any
being--mosquito or human--would want to continue on for thousands of
years anyway.  A being continually growing from the same old bud in an
environment not all that conducive to growth becomes as fallow as the
world around him.  So much negativity from all of those disillusioned
experiences withers one in ennui-I can't think of anything more horrid!
 Then comes petty greediness to have something; and no one is pettier
than old men whom you give the "wei." Thais extend this deference to
these beastly wrinkled beings as if age makes such grumbling,
maundering creatures continually thinking of their mortality and their
aches and pains enlightened beings. I can't see that it would be good
to live forever.  It is better to die off completely and let the energy
come back as something totally different.  This new being will dance
its dance and celebrate the novelty of the world before adulthood hits
him across the face with a mallet."

 
     When they got home it was sleep again so that they would wake up
with energy and motivation to do more work. Before Jatupon awakened
naturally to the sun-god (the night having deadened his soul and put
him to sleep as any ancient Egyptian laborer long ago believed of his
own life), so Kazem in darkness came to his startled awakenings with an
alarm clock as well as the alarm of and in his own brain that yearned
for sustenance and more which always came from money.  With no love
oil, and no rimming, he took Jatupon with maximum thrusts engendering
within him the inclination, if not the incitement, for violence.
Jatupon's first thoughts of the morning were that he wanted to slit his
brother's throat.  He wanted to cut off Kazem's head, stuff it, and put
it on a bookshelf had they purchased a bookshelf.  It was no wonder, he
thought, that this one had no girlfriends.  Who would care to have one
so large-so large!  As the lovemaking subsided, it tossed Kazem back
into a nap like the soothing backward movement of the tide. Jatupon
felt that he was bleeding and so he went to the toilet and sat on the
stool feeling beneath him from time to time to see if there was blood.
There wasn't any. He sat and sat virtually thoughtless until the idea
returned that he could kill him.  He wanted to kill him veritably.  He
could take one of the new television sets that Kazem had purchased for
he and Suthep and smash his head while he was sleeping. He could spray
paint the walls with air freshener and light a match.  The whole room
could be set ablaze like a funeral pyre.  He got up and dressed.  He
needed to escape.  He needed to run away to the street people before
his actions matched his thoughts.  He needed to be with the street
people.  He told himself that he loved them veritably. He scavenged
money from Kazem's pants and took a taxi to an abandoned railway
station with its severed tracks where weeds or moss grew a little on
most of everything and homeless, crippled dogs with one or more smashed
paws found a respite.  He purchased some amphetamines from one of the
street people and, done in sync with his glue, his head began to spin.
Beethoven's Ninth Symphony, which he was exposed to from a movie on the
television earlier that week, played in his head and the dogs with
their mangled paws began dancing.   Plaid or corrugated he thought two
things intermittingly as the dogs continued to dance:
* Kazem, when he thought of Kumpee, wanted to twist off his head like a
crawdad-he who had stolen their money and put them in this hole.  Then
his anger subsided by again recalling a good thing that had come out of
it.  He, as yet, did not have to pay for rent or utilities.  Also the
two of the siblings were gone allowing him to be liberated.  The idea
of being a teenager free of mother and father had been intriguing to
him.  As much as he mourned the deaths of his parents, their deaths had
seemed to him liberation to manhood and his own sexual fulfillment.
The same was true of Kazem and Suthep. He didn't resist Kumpee's plan
to replant them in the modern sordid capital of Bangkok.  He sensed all
along that Kumpee would leave them and he didn't murmur a word.  His
opposition to Suthep's departure was mostly a show. He wanted to pursue
that liberation with impunity.  He went to work .
* "I can't stand the boredom of everything around me"  "But you have to
survive," said the mosquito.  "All animals have to survive."  "I am
declaring a day off.  Besides, when I see you I can't do anything
else."  "Aren't you the lucky one?" said the  mosquito.
* Kazem liked how obscure his petty actions were in the city.  No
matter what one did here it was obscure.  Here no one pretended to
care-so absorbed they were in making sure that their own sordid
activities were kept inside that they didn't need to feign being
shocked or to gossip about human anomalies all which were as old as the
species.
* "Why aren't you sitting.  You are just leaning against the building,
staring across severed train tracks."  "I'm in pain.  I can't sit."
* Long before light or orange robed monks made their alms he hauled his
cart from a lot where he stored it for a fee.  Hauling it on the edge
of the street like any other hapless ones, occasionally he met gaunt
dogs, salesman of real stores helping the deliverymen get their produce
off the trucks and dragging the boxes to the sidewalks, ice-cream
salesman on tiny bicycle-driven stores, and the glass aquarium fruit
cars with their gravel of ice that other hapless ones pushed along the
street; and from it all it was hard to feel alone.  Sound and motion
beat off the cruel static morbidity of his own thinking that had the
compunction of criticizing him for his actions with the youngest
brother and saw no future outside of monthly drunken vigils with fellow
restaurant workers and those rare occasions when he went off with
Suthem to ladies of the night he paid for.-is he thinking about me,
thought Jatupon.  -as he sets up the restaurant, is he thinking about
me?
* "And taking that makes you feel less blue?"  "At least less alone."
"Maybe you are an addict."  "I don't think so. It is recreational."
"Sounds like a venereal disease.  It sounds American."
* He liked being unmonitored.  Sure, there was adrenalin gained from
the hunt of a woman but more came from the more forbidden pleasures. A
man with money was more alluring to a female who needed this more
vehemently than sperm for the making of offspring.  What did he have to
give a woman.  He had dated before.  He was big.  It fascinated but
repelled them.
* "I told you.  I was feeling blue; and I like how the world turns
around like a carousel of caricatures when I mix the glue and the
pills.  Tracks, dogs, and the old abandoned railway station seem to be
breathing.  I don't have anyone else.  Sometimes I like hearing from
you."  "How kind!" said the mosquito stoically.
* Suthep's apathy had come from the acceptance of something deeply
sordid in himself.  Policemen were paid their paltry sums and had
bigger crimes to corner than family perverts. His was a business so
meager that it retained a tax exempt status by the nature of no status
at all, a business existing with no address although this oversight was
compensated for by a policeman who came to extort money from Kazem
weekly. Being sordid was a type of wisdom.  From it he was cognizant
that such instincts to conquer sexually were part of the sadistic
imaginings of the creative force or the pragmatic cause and effect that
engendered the floundering of human existence and he was hardly the
god for redesigning it all-especially he who rarely thought of it as
being essentially wrong in theory despite feeling nominally guilty.
* "Do you think that he loves me?"  "What definition of love are we
using now?"  "The real one.  I'm older now-almost 15.  I know.  Do you
think he loves me like someone with a great sickness inside of him who
desperately seeks medication or a yearning to slam himself into me
fully like one entity?" "Okay, I'll grant you that one," said the
mosquito and then it guffawed.
* And so, unchaining the tables from beneath his cart, pulling out the
plastic stools underneath, and kicking away a few sleeping dogs that
were lying there to be tripped over like disheveled rugs, alone he
started his business.  He chatted with those he encountered and felt
the light commotion of an awakening world fill him with its harmony
before routine tasks dominated over him.
* His father had tried to squash him.  He was excoriated for standing,
sitting, combing his hair, where he parted his hair, the food he ate,
the meat he abhorred, and the clothes he put on.  He couldn't do
anything.  He wasn't anything.
* Stirring a pot of rice deep memories ran by him in glimpsed ghostly
passing stirring up raw negative feelings that created the hard product
of his thoughts.  His father had been an aggressor at all times who
never mellowed any to his death.  For many early years Kazem's ears had
been pulled daily.
He had been dragged by the hair.  He had been forced to sit daily on a
little red footstool next to his father as punishment for not only
youthful exuberance (youth which ran around on two feet whereas he had
to flounder with a cane) but for the intractable insolence that would
interfere with his punishment of the two "suck-calves" of the youngest
brothers whom he hated.  Kazem still had the scars of cigarette burns
in his brown skin as palpable and tangible proof that the man had
really existed.-No, more than that.  His love for me is more than just
a sickness although it has that in it, said Jatupon to the mosquito.

     He couldn't tell where he was.  Faces of his parents, Kumpee, the
aunt and uncle,  the monks at the temple school, and that boy he had
been friends with for so many years (the one who had been with him
begging in front of the Dunkin Doughnuts shop and, a couple years ago,
had allowed his feet to slip from an open window that time they had
made their petty attempt into major thievery on that runaway trip into
Bangkok) all were without faces but wandering around like ghosts in his
thoughts. He could see the forms of these people in his head but only a
few of them had the slightest trace of a face.  He had somehow defaced
them.  Time had defaced them.  Memory was fading. As the hours passed
uncomfortably he became more aware of himself.  He forced himself to be
more rational.  He was hungry and tired.  He wanted to go home.  He
told himself that he'd kill his brother the next time he did something
like that. And yet, when he was about ready to be put in jail that time
in Bangkok it had been Kazem who had stolen money from their parents.
It was Kazem who had paid off a police officer.

      Nawin reflected Porn's feelings.  "So, you don't feel purposeful.
 You are in a relationship with a man who spends his time with his
paints leaving you alone in the cold of Canada without feeling
purposeful. You got so sick of washing dishes that we've now gone to
paper plates."  He chuckled.  She smiled. " I care about you.  I'm glad
you are here with me.  Regarding purpose, we'll work on that.  I'll see
if I can get you a job on campus.  I'll definitely stop things from now
on anytime you want to talk.  If you want to go out to a movie, I'll go
out with you."
      "I want to go to New York City."
      "That is something to be considered too," he said evasively.  He
changed his cynical ideas.  It seemed to him that empathy was love.

 
                                               Chapter 10

 
        Jatupon agreed to meet her at Siriaj Hospital.  From a bus he
took an express boat.  Seated there, he tried to read the Student
Weekly published by the Bangkok Post but attempts at understanding
English were to no avail.  The sun and wind together shot him with
tranquility darts that took him to an ethereal, unearthly peace exempt
from the conflicts of consciousness but also from assembling
understanding from the fragments of the pieces to the day that came
through his senses in a mosaic.  He wanted to understand his place in
the world.  He wanted to understand the premise of his life that
constituted a compromise of the internal conflicts of the mind.  But he
also wanted peace of mind and he sank in with his ease until he was
asleep.
     He woke on the hard orange chair inside the boat to a splash of
polluted water against his face. Once again he was staring at the
waters that gyrated against the boat. He watched the frothy mist from
the motion of the boat arise to the window-sized glassless hole that
was beside him. Again he was in the world of conflict and for a moment
he resented being there as if breathing and thinking deigned him. His
conflict was what he was doing now.  He was continuing his part as the
absent employee and he worried about the consequences. He thought of
going back.  All he had to do was step out onto any dock and wait for a
boat going in the opposite direction; but his legs were like stone.  He
would not budge. The boat was moving forward and so would he.  He
removed his sunglasses, put his hand into the water, scooped in a
residue of the moisture that did not fall from his fingertips, and
cooled the hot throbbing of the swollen blackish blue skin beneath his
left eye.  He was proud of his courage.  Four nights ago Kazem had
finally given into his demands for his mail but it had been a
calculative maneuver to mitigate their protracted altercation that had
gotten out of control over his noodle soup/fried rice-truancy.
     His thoughts carried him piggyback at a gallop.  There were savage
impulses amuck in that instinctual need to dominate in procreation and
yet how was it he had let himself become the one who was ridden on
instead of the one riding?  It was a mystery as to why he should be
content to a role so clearly defying the male instinct to be the sexual
aggressor. Maybe, he half-wondered or felt in some murky and illusive
way that failed to come together as a cohesive thought, it was from not
taking on that masculine pose of one ready to preempt his own selfish
and sadistic impulses onto others for his own self-gratification.
     He wasn't addicted to drugs any more than he was to love, he told
himself.  One needed a bit of both.  He wasn't weak.  Except once of
clearly finding himself addicted and being forced to go through
detoxification with some charitable monks (that had been the cocaine
period the result of frequent raids of the cash box and an episode of
thievery in Bangkok), he believed that his mentality was a strong one.
Of course, until the move to Bangkok, the family had ensured that for
the past two years he was rarely allowed out of their sight and never
came near the cash box.  This had assisted his lack of addiction.  Even
now his interaction with customers was overseen suspiciously.  And
laboriously friendless as his life droned on (with this new exception
if indeed she cared to really be his friend and he was anxious that she
should be such) he perceived himself as a freakish aberration to so
many boys his age that had normal if not exceptional lives.  They
walked together in throngs-schoolboys in their light blue knit shirts
and dark blue shorts walking the streets, entering 7-11s, clustering in
for "All You Can Eat" Pizza Hut specials, or walking hand in hand with
girls to the malls.  He half hated them.  He hated their laughter,
which seemed to deride him.  Sometimes he wanted to hit against the
wall that entrapped him.  It was like he was a Mexican and America had
deliberately concocted a wall to keep him out. If only it were an
eggshell, he thought to himself, he would be able to peck his way out.
       And here he was at the Siriaj pier.  There was a Dairy Queen,
and a Black Canyon Restaurant near the pier and a long winding outdoor
market.  He wondered why she had chosen Siriaj Hospital for their
meeting place and why, given the location, she had not chosen for them
to meet in one of those restaurants.  Instead, he was supposed to meet
her in front of a museum. He meandered in different pathways throughout
many buildings until he noticed her sitting on a stoop under a sign
that said "Museum" in English.  Her hair was shorter than the last time
he saw her and her cheeks seemed chubbier.  She was dressed in her
school uniform.
     "Sunthon Phu, there you are," Noppawan said.  Sunthon Phu was an
important poet long ago who had risen from humble parents to become a
private secretary for King Rama II because of his literary abilities.
     "Here I am," he said. He smiled glowingly.  There was nothing
about it that was affected. He came nearer to her.
     "I was worried that you wouldn't get my last letter."
     "I got it yesterday in my new mailbox at the post office" he said
with pride.
     "Good.  That brother of yours was really keeping my letters, was
he?  What a scoundrel ."
     "I'll always get them from now on. Do you want to go into the
coffee shop?  I can buy our coffee."
     "What happened to you?"  She was staring at his left eye.
     "Oh."  He realized that he had forgotten to put the sunglasses on
his face.
     "I got into an argument with him."
     "Over stealing the letters?"
     "Yes."
     " Is he the brawny one you told me about before-the oldest one?"
     "Yes."
     "Well, then he should be put in jail for thievery, assault and
battery, and being a brawny moron."
    "I have money. Do you want to eat at Black Canyon?  You might not
want coffee.  I never drink it.  Just water and cola."
     "If we were to eat at Black Canyon or someplace less dingy--
really elegant-- I'd make sure my father paid for it.  We wouldn't need
money.  The whole day could be put on a credit card."
     "No, as the man, I insist on paying."
     "Maybe later," she first spoke in irritation.  She wasn't
interested in his chivalry. " I want to go in here now.  Have you ever
been in here?"
     "No, what is it?"
     "Do you like museums?"
     "I love learning.  That's all I love."
     "Not just Laotian poetry?"
     "Everything."
     "Now you know why you are my friend.  When I saw you reading on a
bench-and reading an English translation of a book-- I knew that we
would get along well. This is a special place.  When I run away, I
often come here.  I spend hours not just learning about natural science
but becoming friends with it if that makes sense." She took his hand
and led him in.  "Don't be alarmed," she said, "Things that are
beautiful are often ugly, and what is ugly is often beautiful.   I like
coming to someplace where everything is true.  I hate lies, don't you?
Even ugly truths are better than that?"
      He thought about what the mosquito had said. "I've been told that
truth is sometimes a little ugly."
      "I think it's always ugly and beautiful-not just a little bit."
They climbed up three flights of stairs.  The air in the building
smelled like a biology laboratory during the dissection of frogs.  They
entered: internal organs in glass boxes of formalin; brains; an ear
with a joining canal; and then there was an entire baby standing there
also in formalin and also inside its large glass aquarium.  The child
was hauntingly ceramic in a grayish orange or ochre complexion and his
body was so tightly rigid.  It had calcificans congenita and, she said,
it must have been born as a non-movable rock.  Then there was a child
that had a gigantic, alien head.  It had suffered from internal
hydrocephalus .  It was all there: babies born with amencephaly (some
with partial heads and all with no brains); fetuses; four month old
fetuses with placentas and umbilical cords (one with hands together as
if it were praying or gesturing the "wei"); fetuses that were zygotic
twin quadruplets; babies born as Siamese and conjoined twins such as
pycopasus twins that were attached from their buttocks and Siamese
epionathus parasiticus that each had a brother's foot inimitably in a
mouth; full term fetuses with their chests dissected so that their
internal organs were exhibited from the slit; gigantic skeletons; dwarf
skeletons; twisted adult skeletons; regular skeletons upright in glass
cupboards or in standing coffins each with his photograph above his
skeleton--a photograph of what was; fetuses of all sizes and ages; and
a naked man and woman in whole with the front skin, muscle and skeleton
removed to give full view of their internal organs as one saw their
private exterior organs.  There they were more than naked and fully
intact as if basking in a tanning booth in order to get a suntan-only
they were ochre and stiff as ceramic vases and floating in formalin or
formaldeyhyde.
      He told himself that that from which one should hide he should
appreciate since it delivered him from the way he wanted the world to
be to what it really was. He repeated this to himself many times to
quell the weltering tremble of nausea and to hide his horrified child
in the presence of Noppawan.  He told himself that seeing this almost
delivered him to a new level of maturity.  If one could confront this
without losing his nerve, he reasoned, he could break from the ghosts
of mother and father, the innate need for family, and the wish to be a
less damaged "good for nothing."  He could sense the nuance of manhood
begin to brew up through him like a hot spring. Passing through another
aisle of stocked fetuses, he wondered about his conception.  Had it
been from loving caresses or a desperate release of stress and
frustration on one who had capitulated?  Yes, the exhibition was
beginning to deliver him into a new awareness and the two of them could
sense that it affected the other in the same way and also thrust that
individual into a soft sensitive regret for those who were never given
a chance to sense themselves against the tactile sensations of the sun,
the warmth, the feel of grass under bare feet, the wind, the caresses,
the rain, and the respite from inordinate heat and sun.  Feeling virile
and assured of this new manhood within him, he grabbed her hand swaying
it in the pretense of joy as they interweaved slowly around the myriad
cabinets.  He stared at it all as fully as he could.  It was there
shelf after shelf with some of it towering so high that he couldn't see
it very well at all.
     "I'm so happy that you aren't afraid.  When you come enough it
almost seems like there is a spirit hovering above it all and that they
appreciate someone being there for them.  I know that is silly.  I'm
not even religious.  Maybe it is just that it is very quiet.  I often
bring my books to the table near the skeletons. I just do some reading.
The doctors, the nurses, and the museum curator don't seem to mind.
They just say, "Hi, Piggy."  And again, it is a good place to run away
from it all.  Maybe it is a bit of a strange place to hide out for most
people but most people are scared of their own shadows.  If nothing
else this museum is a good place to know what death is-or at least come
as close as one can. Most people haven't a clue what really happens to
one's body after death.  Decaying corpses would of course be better
than this but they are vile to one's nose with everything going back to
the elements and all." They descended the stairs.  She sensed that his
hand was very sweaty.  "You are glad that I brought you, aren't you?"
     "Sure" he said although he wasn't fully.  He knew that seeing this
had made a dark impression on him that he would never be able to shirk.
 He suspected aptly that this friend of his had intentionally stabbed
the little innocence that was in him to match that of her own.
Enlightenment had punctured his innocence.  Outside, he stuffed his
hands in his pockets.  He felt a cold numbness in his limbs, a slight
coldness toward her, and ennui from memories of his peculiar history
that would impair his future relationships with girls.  They sat on the
stoop.
     "I hope you don't want to run away from me."
     "I'm not running.  I'm sitting here with you, aren't I?"
     "Okay, I guess so."
     "When you said "at least this was not a lie," what did you mean? 
I mean what are the lies?"
     "In society?"
     "Yes."
     "There are too many to count."
     "Mention one."
     "All right-religion.  My parents are Christians. The servants are
Christians.  When I was little the servants took me to Sunday school.
There, the teachers would always talk about heaven. I couldn't figure
out why if one would be with her family in heaven after she dies, as
the church teaches, that wouldn't mean being there with all humanity
regardless of religious preference.  If one were to be there with her
father and mother, she'd be there with hers, and she with hers, and she
with hers, and that seems to me like everyone. After all everybody is
supposed to be related to Adam.  That to me would mean that heaven is
some type of polluted hellhole a million times worse than Bangkok with
overcrowding so that you can't turn around without banging into
someone. I don't know.  It isn't important really.  It just shows that
nobody thinks anything out.  Maybe Heaven is just a Country Club only
for Christian Hara Krishnas who say Christ is salvation in rote but I
can't see how they'd extend much of an invitation to me. I never have
been much into rote." Jatupon didn't know who the Hara Krishnas were or
what a Country Club was but these items didn't detract from his
positive impression of her opposition to sententious punctilio.  He
smiled.  This was certainly better than talking to a mosquito.
     "Tell me another."
     "Another? All right.  I can keep firing them all day.  I can't see
how they can claim that King Phraya Taksin was really insane.  I mean
the man created military strategies that were successful at getting the
Burmese out of the country, or at least removed to Chaing Mai.  Then he
decided to control the church as well as the politics.  He became
arrogant and said that he was now equal to Buddha and could dictate
doctrine and political laws.  The people said that he was insane and
his military executed him.  He didn't just go from being a great
military strategist to insanity and if he was insane, that's a sickness
and they wouldn't have executed sick people-just people they were
scared of."
     "How do you know that?"
      "It's easy, Jatupon.  Just think it out.  Use some intuition and
common sense.  He just was overly ambitious and they hated him and
today we aren't supposed to think of him at all except as someone who
was insane.  We don't even have a road with his name attached to it.
Have you ever traveled on Taksin Road?  It doesn't exist. Back then
they put the first general in his place and declared him King Rama I.
Kings emerged from the Chakri Dynasty when really it should have been
the descendents of Taksin.  I don't even know why, in such a poor
country, we throw away tax money on these guys."
     "Be quiet.  Someone might hear you.  We could get arrested."
     "Do you really think they'd arrest 14 year olds?"
     "They'd arrest a 14 year old's parents."
     "My father should be arrested."
     "Why?"
     "Do you promise, as my best friend, to not tell anyone."
     "Sure."
     "He raped me.  Don't run away from me Jatupon.  Promise you
won't."
     "No, of course I won't." He felt nervous.  He didn't know what to
say.  "I'd never do anything like that," he affirmed.
     "So, you will buy the coffee?" she asked; and on the second floor
of Black Canyon the fumes of the molecules of coffee steam and "love"
slapped his senses. From the window of the air conditioned restaurant
they watched motor gondolas and express boats stir the waters the way
housewives in America would watch as their electric blenders stir cake
mixes-each wave falling, being sucked into the force that pulled in the
new part of the wave and then being pushed out into the wave again.  It
was all so fast and all so interconnected and systematic that each of
the waves looked like frozen motion or like society itself.
     He became mesmerized in the weltering waves.  He spoke glibly.
"Families are supposed to be shelter.  They're really just walls
cobbled up from dirt, you know.  Mine doesn't even exist but in Kazem's
head.  I feel sorry for him in ways. But sometimes I think I should
just run away completely and become a monk."
     "Why don't you?"
     "Monks don't have sex.  At least they aren't supposed to.  As you
said, lies."
     "Do you have sex?"
     "No, of course I'm a little young for that," he lied.  He looked
around the restaurant to make sure that others were not listening to
them. "But I don't want to give up that part of me.  I don't think that
is right."
     "My Auntie --well, really the servant but sort of the same except
that she must obey me usually-she says I should never come ten feet
near a monk since they are sexually repressed and might try to reach
under a girl's skirt."
     "Maybe but I've never heard anyone talk that way about monks.
The newspapers rarely but that is with individual monks accused of
crimes-- not monks altogether."
     "My family is a bit different that way. It's their only good
attribute."
     They sipped their coffee and then went to Silom Road on the
express boat. The annoyance of standing there in a crowd without a seat
became an ethereal essence of truth and beauty for him. He could not
remember being so happy. It stayed with him as they road the bus to
Lumpin Park.
     At a lake, in the park, they rented out a fishing boat.  They
paddled it chasing one puff of cloud in the hope of using it as an
umbrella.  They had cheese sandwiches, cola, sticky rice, and potato
chips that they consumed intermittently.
     "If I stay much longer," she said an hour later, "they will start
looking for me-or at least the servants will.  I usually only run away
on Saturdays and Sundays.  I don't like missing too much school."
     He knew what he had suspected on their first meeting: that her
rebellion was far larger and more personal than anything he had
witnessed before.  She kept mostly to intangible subjects like religion
because her repugnance toward religion had been easier for her to
communicate. He felt her rebellion.  It stood out like a Long Necked
Karen (the native Burmese people living in Chaing Mai who had the
tradition of distorting the growth of their necks).  He felt her
rebellion and it was a novelty for him.  It intrigued him and it felt
wholly real.  He thought, in Thailand one gave the "wei" to Buddhist
statues, stupas, shrines, temples, and people who were older and of
higher classes if such individuals exerted a powerful role over him;
and yet one did this not understanding why it was done. It occurred to
him that it was all ludicrous in a way and not just limited to Thai
customs.  How could she or anyone communicate the exact items that they
were rebelling against?  Rebellion was seen in the eyes but it could
not be readily explained and in ways it went contrary to nature and the
social response. Greed and aggression were entrenched in the survival
of a being and lay latent but active within every cell but those cells
were sugar coated with that cloying substance of Thailand, the land of
smiles.
     As they paddled back she looked up at the puffy whiff of clouds
above her and said, "This is real.  Relaxing and being part of the
clouds and the second, attaching to the mystery of it all . . . the
universe and time-that is the only thing that makes sense, don't you
think?"  He smiled and nodded his head in pleasure.  Yes, this was
certainly better than talking to the mosquito.  How strange they were.
Their serious probing of life and their awareness of the geyser of
unique thoughts that erupted in them certainly didn't seem Thai.  A
typical urban Thai yearned to languish if not extinguish himself or
herself in strolls in a shopping mall, a movie, a video game, laughter,
cellular telephones, beer, and comic books.  Jatupon did pursue the
pejorative in comic books as most Thai males from five to fifty and the
two of them were pursuing their quest of leisure as lazily as the best
of Thais; still to him they seemed so different from all others.
     She asked about his parents and was saddened to hear of their
tragedy. She probed into it further in interest and then backed away
when she saw his pain.  Kindness and empathy illuminated her
countenance.  She tried to mitigate his pain by becoming absorbed in
her own that she pursued philosophically exempt of emotionalism. "My
parents are always moving around in the future. Ambition moves them
around like the places on a board game of chess-or draughts played by
motorcycle taxi drivers when they wait-with the pop bottle caps-have
you seen them?" He was startled by how her ideas had such confluence
with his own.  She was an augmentation of his own thoughts.
     They left the park reluctantly.  She did not want to leave at all
without assurances and he offered them.  He told her that his brother
was not a violent person.  He said that Kazem sometimes belted him when
he really deserved it but that there were plenty of times he deserved
it and yet his brother wouldn't touch him.  She seemed to believe his
assurances and went away.
     As she vanished from his senses his empty hollow mind was filled
with images of half-headed beings, twisted skeletons, rigid corpses
like old ochre vases, the naked man and the woman floating in their
formaldehyde glass coffins with their fronts carved out for the display
of their entrails, the fetuses and their placentas, one child that had
such a gigantic head and another one that had been born like a solid
never feeling motion. These images attacked his consciousness.  It
seemed to him that the world was a loveless and ceaseless factory that
replicated over and over again manufacturing slightly damaged and
terribly damaged products with impunity.  He paid his two baht to the
lady in the glassless window and went into the public bathroom.  He
wept for those who had deserved better than this.  Then his weeping
poured into himself.  He knew that after what he saw he should not want
anything more from his life than the noodles that sustained him and yet
he did.  He knew he should not want a more purified love than what
Kazem extended to him and yet he nonetheless did.

 
    The hours of that spring day came and went indistinguishably from
other seasons, and all days were clones with stoic dispositions. His
majesty, King Rama IX, a few hours earlier, had changed the seasonable
robes of the Emerald Buddha like a girl dressing a doll.  He then
presided over the plowing ceremony with its blessings to the rice
goddess; and watched one cow predict the agricultural future of the
nation from its bovine appetites--the cow wandering over to preferred
troughs filled with anything from brandy to barley, beans and rice, or
just plain water--instinctively consuming something or another
interpreted as conditions prosperous or economically disparaging.
     Further into the heart of the city, Suthep slept removed from the
mooing of omniscient cows in Sanam Luang which stood on an island of
dirt where kites had flown surrounded by inundating dark black exhaust
fumes and fast, obnoxious wheeled beasts, honking their loud voices as
they passed each other. Tucked in his smaller cell he rode the REM of
being.  He dreamed he was on a motorcycle leaving his uncomfortably
tight partial apartment that was comfortably free of brothers and
awkward moments of catching them together.  Hired to cater his fried
rice with chicken he cooked it, put it on paper plates, and sealed the
plates with plastic wrap. Then he put them in baskets on opposite sides
of a bamboo pole.  Balancing the pole of baskets on his back, he drove
to a government building.  Why the banquet only had that one dish of
"kow pat" (fried rice) was a point that the dream did not address.
Also the street names were not those of the Dusit area but those of
central Bangkok. As he came near the building , a limousine hit him and
hurried off.  Blood poured from the orifice of his face. There was
nothing but gray and a firm belief he would die.  The ambulance
drivers, none of whom were paramedics, came to pillage him of his
wallet and watch. He got up, Thai boxed them for his things, and
realized as they ran from him in fright that he was as ethereal as a
cloud. And then his parents came out of nothingness and he told them
that they needed to go away since he (ghost or man) was now a free
agent and did not need them any longer.  As he got back on his
motorcycle someone knocked on the door.
     He woke up but his brain was retarded in an earlier being.   As he
heard the knocking he imagined that Jatupon was lying beside him and
listening to his scurrying feet move toward the door.  So many years
they had slept in the same room.  They had slept side by side until a
few years ago.  Did he love his brother so much that he would wake up
with him skirting around in his dreams?  Maybe he did since the habit
of being with him was long.  The youngest sibling was so much of his
past and he had been accustomed to him without major aversion.  The
habit of being with someone without major repugnance was indeed the
only thing that constituted fraternal love; and yet, little as it might
be, it was what the particles of black space in the universe were
created for.
     Suthep, slapped a cap on his head with the visor inverted to the
back of his head and greeted the knocker in his underwear.
     "A le nuh?," (what is it?), asked Suthep as he straightened the
cap. It was a man in livery asking the surname of this family of
impoverished brothers.  Suthep imagined the stink of his armpits as he
addressed the guest and the staleness of air in the room which was in
deep need of a deodorizer. He began to feel foolish but he kept his
boyish poise while the man tried to withhold his laughter.  He didn't
hear the question.  The man repeated it and Suthep wanted to
prevaricate.  Then he reluctantly said that his last name was
Biadklang.  It was the senator's page and they were finally invited to
meet the apotheosis that had given them their living.

 
                              Chapter 11

      It was no wonder that one set of freaks felt cognate with another
set.  For him, the sight of the formaline or formaldyhyde-laden corpses
at the Siriaj Hospital Museum as well as the girl who introduced him to
them seemed to have exhilarated a nascent courage, an oozing, a growth
hormone of the mind.  New neurological connections were burgeoning or
the same ones were reconnecting in different patterns. Anyhow, he felt
the inception of something new that made him feel that he wasn't quite
the same: that he was outgrowing patterns of behavior.  He was not able
to distinguish if his freakishness was exceptional, deficient, or
exceptionally deficient to the point of being inept. Certainly if his
gray matter made him innately exceptional, his noodles made him less
than ordinary. His gray matter was becoming grayer with each dusk of a
dying day.  Being with noodles so long no doubt loosened this compact
tissue of brain into something quite slimy. The use of his brain in the
mundane tasks of thinking about the size of meat he wanted to cut with
the butcher knife had perhaps cut his corpus callosum.  At least he
thought so.  But regardless of being superior or inferior in his
freakishness, this was who he was. There was a history: the history was
of being maimed.  There was the character of Jatupon: there were dark
prodigious forces inside and outside that frame that were ineluctable.
No celestial power would rectify his life by making family better than
what it was or himself, the sordid bastard that loomed there, as
hallowed and saintly as what he once believed monks to be.  Nature
begot freaks of the worst kind and so becoming a freak in the tossing
of the passing years was understandable.
      Jatupon's ego was not turgid.  In ways it was self-deprecating.
That which hadn't been squashed by his father and eldest brother,
poured into countless bowls, or slapped onto myriad plates had such
deformed and stunted growth. He had trouble making opinions about
people.  He did it with shy reluctance and usually the feelings he had
about them never emerged all that much in a cohesive thought. He
considered Noppawan Piggy to be his superior in intellect and yet there
was one thing about her he had to admit that he detested and that was
the abhorrent smell of baby powder that came from her body.  It made
Jatupon feel like his nose had gotten trapped in a dust storm in which
naked and screaming babies flew with the dust in an attack against him.
Not all girls and women in Thailand smelled the same but those who had
abhorrent smells, although not abhorrent themselves, couldn't be said
to be totally agreeable.
     Upon leaving the park his intention was to go to the library and
look up information on the peculiarities he had seen in the museum that
had smiled upon him freak to freak but he found himself distracted by a
large comic book kiosk that whisked him off from this world to that of
another.  One such comic book was set into the future of 3000 AD and
non-existent creatures with little resemblance to anything extant
propelled him into problems of their non-existent agricultural and
mining planet-colonies and he lost himself there for an hour.  How
splendid it was to lose oneself wholly and he savored the time there
until his left foot fell asleep while he was seated on a plastic stool.
Then he stood up.
     "Your time is up again."  Jatupon faced a scrawny teenager with
glasses who was a year or two older than he was.  "Are you reading or
buying?"
     "Reading" he said; but afterwards he stretched his neck only to
see his reflection in the store's anti-theft mirror.  The skin around
his eye looked darker and it felt even more painful.
     "You need to pay another fifteen baht to continue reading."
     "No, I guess I'll stop reading.  I'll go," he said.
     Standing there ready to go, his taciturn heart pardoning Kazem
who had been the only one who cared about him, he tried to not think
about the hot stinging of the swelling around his eye.  Instead, he
thought about this uncle whom he had only met on rare occasions long
ago.  It seemed that it only took the frequent utterance of his name
and they had been granted a livelihood--a continuing sustenance as if
by magic.  And yet it had not exactly been much of an effusion of
magic.  It had been the most niggardly and scanty display that any
affluent magic man could bestow and it brought the renewal of their
servitude. Before they were restored to a similar but diminished
livelihood, they had often spoken of this vaguely real or super-real
entity (this uncle by a marriage) as one might think of the early king
Ramas of the Chakri Dynasty.
     Walking away from the kiosk, he wanted to return to early
childhood: of hopscotch, climbing trees with his brothers, Suthep
teaching him how to throw a ball, taking cups of ice to the customers
so that they could pour out the water in pitchers that were on their
tables, skin around the eyes that wasn't black and swollen, and the
time when his body wasn't being invaded.  He could run away for good;
but where would he run?   There was nothing in Ayutthaya and if he
really wanted to run away he would be more invisible in Bangkok. He
would need money.  He considered becoming a Luk Thung singer of
Traditional Thai music.  They wore their heavy makeup and pointed
golden tiaras for beggarly bits of baht. However, he told himself that
his voice probably wasn't as good as the worst of them and even if it
was he did not want to do tricks for a few baht.  It was too demeaning
and contrary to the aristocratic life he envisioned. There was a famous
Swedish Luk Thung singer named Jonas Anderson who had lived his whole
life in Thailand but only someone with vocal training and boldness
could persevere to be someone accomplished in this musical genre.   He
could run to Noppawan Piggy's home.  He had the address on the mail she
sent to him. But there would be no sense in running to someplace that
Noppawan herself was running from and the likelihood of a rich family
taking in a strange teenager, and an ex-burglar and quasi-drug addict
at that, was more than a remote possibility.  An emaciated dog with
clumps of fur falling out had a greater chance of being made into a
pet.  Just as the need for the enzymes of animal protein was one trait
of many linking the human to and as an animal, so enmeshed in soul,
sentiment, and survival he clung to Kazem for his sense of home and
family.
     He knew that he was just a collection of molecules being shot out
into space and time.  Others were the same but they flew away from him
in their own deviant paths.  He knew.  He thought he knew.  Did he
know?  Did he really know anything?  Thoughts were so dreary.  They
enervated him. He got on a bus to go home (that stationary foundation
from which outlook, experience, thought, and restoration of energy for
movement were generated). Even on such a simple event as going home he
was lost in the intricate circuits of his brain, lost in the labyrinth
within himself.
     But through the window he saw the clear beauty of other beings
that passed; and even in the ugly faces there was a posture, a smile,
even a vehement depth of lonely despair so uniquely beautiful and yet
universal.  The bus passed four stores each of which seemed to alternate a pres
entation of boys, dogs, and combinations sleeping
against the facades of buildings. The passing was quick like fingers
moving against a keyboard and the sight was as euphonious as melancholy
in sound.  Then for a second, in stalled traffic, Jatupon found himself
looking into the deep eyes of a deformed boy beggar. Jatupon was inside
the bus and the boy outside of it, but they both saw an affinity in
each other.  They were the same.  They were both unfortunate beggarly
outsiders beaten up by life; and yet he was riding around in an
air-conditioned bus.  He was not one of the 2 billion people who lived
on 2 dollars a day in a rural area on the verge of starvation.  Inside
the bus the facial expressions of the money collector were stone as
death with monotony that was distinct, ebullient, and luminous as
sunlight against wind-rippled leaves. A woman sleeping in a seat to his
right had a head that fell toward the aisle, straightened, fell again,
and straightened like a pendulum.
     He might have gone back to work to appease Kazem.  He might have
started taking orders from the customers with no explanation and let
the hours make the whole issue of his long absence mute.  His brother
would not have made an embarrassing scene in public.  The hours would
alone have just slowly uncorked it all allowing the rage to disperse
slowly and unnoticed.  The restoration of old habits would have made
the past issue so irrelevant that a bit of the mind would have
questioned if his absence had even occurred.  It had been his intention
to do so when he left the comic book kiosk and it continued to be his
intention when he sat on the seat in the bus.  Yet a human being
fulfilled few intentions.  Scholars were sociable creatures who needed
meaningless action and cacophony even when it adulterated their aims.
Petty government officers on their meager salaries, as well as the
well-paid top tier, didn't need to be cloistered in the political
issues that mired the day but yearned for sports columns in their
newspapers and genuflected to the action effusing from their television
sets. And tired people on Bangkok busses that were plodding their way
slowly through traffic had intentions other than sleep but yearned for
rest and an easy way home.  He was one of the latter that needed sleep;
and yet when he was in the cell, which was his home, his mind was
active in dread.  Its color was gray, its texture coarse, and the
molecules that oozed up from it acrid.  Within the space of his own
head he was vanquished in the gloom, the nothingness, the vanished
thoughts of the hollow cavities that were part of one waiting for
punishment.  He lay on the floor with an old, previously read comic
book in his hands.  His head was so preoccupied with the barrenness of
thought and the feeling of dread that he didn't understand the pictures
and the words.  He got up.  He dipped up a bowl of rice from a rice
cooker, drenched it in soy, chili sauce, and a bit of pepper and
vinegar. He did his pushups in front of a televised soccer game and
when the game was over he shut off the set and in an hour sleep
percolated over him.  In his dreams he was in a penthouse on the
fifteenth floor and below him were beggars like moving dots.  Above the
moving dots were moving golden skies of sunset.  Gigantic clouds moved
through the air in the shape of viruses.
     Then there was a punch on his face and it reopened the facial
wound causing blood to rush on the floor.  In that second his dream
fragmented into many dreams and spun out of control.  He was no longer
in a penthouse but was a sidewalk-based seamster with his little
antique sewing machine, a pedal, and a hill of torn clothes he was
supposed to sew.  He was all alone on a cement cover of a city sewer
that went under the sidewalk. Then he fell into the sewer.  Self was
gone. In the last of his dream or dreams, before he completely
awakened, there was no self.  There was just the scene of a large park
ahead of him, the aesthetic glow of a withdrawing sun, and an old man
who bought some phad-thai and found a pavilion near a lake.  He sat
down and began to eat his noodles, watching the lights of skyscrapers
and the fast moving traffic far beyond the lake.  The cacophony of boys
playing football irritated him because he was envious of it.  He put
his empty Styrofoam container back in the plastic bag and laid it down.
 A rat scurried from one flower and fern bed; and dragged the bag into
another flowerbed.  The old man could hear the gnawing of the
Styrofoam.  Jatupon sensed that the rat might be himself.
     He felt blood oozing from him and uniting as a puddle under his
face.  Kazem, dumbfounded by the vehement rage that disgorged from him,
floundered a few steps in the room, sat down, and whined, "It's all on
me. If you are on drugs or stealing something, I've got to get you out
of it.  It's all on me. I have to be responsible for you but you just
do whatever you please."  His voice trailed away and faltered.  He
cleared his throat. "You don't ever behave with any responsibility
toward me. I give you days off here and there.  I don't get any.  You
work or don't work or work for one of us and not the other based on how
you feel on a given day.  You steal money out of my pockets and I don't
say anything. Don't blame me. You've brought it on yourself."  Jatupon
sat up and glared with one eye.  The second eyelid was already drooping
from swelling.  It wouldn't open fully and it squinted from a bit of
blood that sank into it.  He intuitively guessed that his brother knew
he was losing control of him.  He waited and observed the guilt-ridden
countenance and the gauche retreat from the offensive.  He judged that
the assault had been a desperate one.  Jatupon smiled malevolently as
of a masochist exuding pride that the pain had only brought the
opposite wish of the inflictor.  Kazem's unpaid noodle worker who
wasn't allowed to loosen his fetters and shackles had slipped from them
anyway.  He had gone out to see Piggy and there was nothing Kazem had
been able to do to stop him.  Jatupon smiled wider.  Then he guffawed
scoffingly like a lunatic although the pleasure soon extinguished
itself.
     "Do you want me to come over there and squeeze the juice out of
your head?"  The muscles in Kazem's arms and legs suddenly stiffened
like one ready to suddenly stand and attack.
     "I'm not listening to you," Jatupon spoke firmly. "You are a
pathetic bully-a fucking ape--and it is the end of it for me.  It is
the end of it!" Manhood's conviction and effrontery reeked from his
mouth like foul breath and Kazem, who already wanted to wreak havoc on
his impudence, flipped him over with the elastic of his underwear like
a pancake.
     "Okay, swim in your own blood. Swim! Let's see you drown in it."
Jatupon's hair was twisted in Kazem's fingers and his face was in his
own blood as the thick leather hand swatted him a few lateral slaps.
Then Kazem's compunction again caused him to flounder back to his seat.
 It was the only chair in the room.  He put his elbow on his leg and
hand on the forehead of his genuflected head.  His ideas were
discombobulated.
   Jatupon was floundering too from more than the nausea of lost blood.
 He was half a boy and half a man and this newly begotten half called a
"man" was having manhood castigated, excoriated, and leaked from him.
Callow as he was, he was not just half a man or half a boy the way the
Nightjar poem concerned itself with a bird-boy. He was a hybrid of
boy/man and God with vast wisdom from fathoms of himself examined from
suffering.
     He again stared at the other presence in the room.  It was a
monster, a being of violence, and an unknown phantom. Still this
monster was the one who had delivered him from the watery abyss, the
one who did not chastise his addiction (at least then he didn't) but
was with him through the withdraws, the one who fixed his bicycle, who
had introduced him to basketball and his first beer. Appearing like his
brother it was the brother mixed with some type of shadowy creature he
could not comprehend and this being, familiar and unfamiliar, he
loathed.  The elastic of his underwear had been encroached.  He had
been violated with those fingers. His body had been flipped over like a
pancake.  He had felt his face pushed in a puddle of his blood.
Sitting on the floor, piercing him with his eyes, he wanted to purge
this beast from his life.  Then a few seconds later his next conscious
assembly of understanding only made him want to vanish.  He wanted so
much of the impossible that second: for the substance of his own life
to vaporize swiftly and meaninglessly and opposite of this, to kill the
monster and resurrect his dwarfed manhood in his own eyes. Sitting
there he felt as if time had ended and that all entities on the Earth
were waiting and watching the two of them in silent dread but neither
god nor man cared about any aspect of this relationship at all.  Things
went on as cruel as death.  In one second a fly flew and landed in a
bottle of water, a dog barked from outside, a rat scurried around in
front of the building for food, a family was feuding in the apartment
above him, and a car came onto the thin long back-road called a soi.
     Kazem looked onto this bludgeoned ugly little face reluctantly and
Jatupon felt like a piggish or bovine woman whose acquaintance said,
"We could never be more than friends, you know" and she--Yes, she could
see. She could see--hadn't she seen it before?  Had she really
dismissed those countless earlier smirks of repugnance aimed at her fat
enervated face and her clumsy tense body both of which made her
nothing.  Mother nature made the being breed with the best of bodies to
create a good physical specimen in the baby.  Sex, romance, or just an
intimate talk with a man would not be hers since she could not trigger
the pleasure response--not even intellectually.  Romantic and sexual
inclinations were discriminatory.  They were as cruel as death and she
would tell him that sex wasn't intimacy although she wouldn't believe
it.  She craved such intimacy more than she could ever articulate and
she would not tell him that. She would tell him that being in love was
a delusion that one biologically craved to propagate the species. She
would say that she did not want to go through the brief illusion of
being in love.  She did not want to be high in urinary molecules from
his underwear flying into her face when he had her denuded and lying on
a bed littered in clothes. She would tell him that one generation after
another would dance its sexual dance before passing and that she had
been fortunate enough to be born a disagreeably unaesthetic thing with
a face like a mushy old apple.
     Feeling sick and weak, his mind was running away from him.  His
head was thinking himself a different gender. He was believing that he
could hear the content of the feuding family upstairs.  The eldest son,
having gotten his girlfriend pregnant, had been compelled to bring her
into the home and the fight was about him running away from the family
every evening after work to drink with his buddies.
     Then suddenly, without even knowing it, he stood up, grabbed the
television that Kazem had given to him as a gift, and he was running
toward him.  There he was aiming the television at his brother's head
only to have it reflexively snatched from him by Kazem's dexterous
fingertips.  Finally, there he was peering up at it and backing away
into the corner where he came from, realizing that one impulse
materialized in action had caused a counter action that was about ready
to kill him.  It had been just one unrestrained impulse that, repulsive
to the consciousness, he hadn't even considered; and it had slipped
from his brain slimy as a worm.  It had materialized in action and now
it had lethal consequences.
     "Don't play so hard, boys" said Kumpee.  In Jatupon's perspective
the stink of his smoke-ridden clothes and the beer of his breath gave
an acrid and fetid cloud which was miraculously saving him.
     Kazem lowered his arms.  "Where the hell have you been?" he asked.
He put the television on the floor relieved at having escaped the worst
passion that can fulminate in a man and lose him in the deepest abyss
of regret.  Sweat poured from Kazem's forehead and his face became a
deep red in chagrin.
     "With my woman. If you were to have a woman you wouldn't have so
much time to play with your Jatu-PORN."
     "Where's our money?"
     "Invested."
     "Invested how?"  He grabbed the chair and sat down.  He wiped the
sweat from his forehead.  Jatupon was already seated in a corner with
his puddle of blood.
     "But your worries have ended.  The senator's page visited you,
didn't he?  Maybe he was our uncle's chauffeur.  I forget now.  You
look confused.  He came to my apartment to tell me the definite date
for the agreed dinner after somehow finding Suthep and informing him.
Well, anyhow, it happened because of my own efforts."
    "You visited him and got him to agree to see us?  You? How could
you do that looking as you do? I tried many times.  I don't believe
you."
     "Well, there's nothing I can do about your hateful beliefs, but
all the same I'm telling you the truth."
     "So, you are the big brother looking after all of us now" said
Kazem incredulously. He snickered.
     "Sure. It's obvious by age and merit.  I've never tried to kill
one of you in the entire duration of my 18 years.  Aren't I the lucky
omen?  I saved you both from killing each other and had some additional
favorable news to spill out."
     "What was your reason for coming here?"
     "Nothing.  Just to make sure you were coming."
     "When?"
     "Next Saturday."
     "Time?"
     "6 p.m."
     "You can deal with him.  I don't want to stay here tonight.  I'm
finished watching over these two.  I'm leaving."
     "Two?  I only see one.  The other monkey didn't like you and ran
away.  And where, might I ask, are you going?"
     "A Hotel.  A bar.  A massage parlor.  Anywhere I like although it
isn't any of your business."
     "It seems rather wasteful to me when I have provided this
apartment for you rent-free but I guess you can go ahead."
      Kazem laughed sardonically for a minute.  He needed to release
the shock of discovering the vile hatred that had arisen in himself and
Jatupon and the serendipitous arrival of Kumpee, who if worthless at
everything else, had delivered them from being sealed into the body
bags of unrestrained emotion.  "It hasn't been rent free for a long
time. We get billed from the father of your Chinese bitch and we pay
the money like responsible tenants-bank transfers."
     "She was a bitch," said Kumpee pensively.  He became preoccupied
with this self-absorbed thought. "And her father just couldn't warm up
to what could have been his son in law.  I'm seeing her sister now."
Then he stared at Kazem with a specific intent.  "Just remember the
appointment and that you need to be punctual.   Since you need some
time away I'll look after the little one."  Jatupon mumbled a response.
 "What did you say?"
     "Nothing."
     "No, come on.  What did you say?"
     "I don't need you.  I hate you worse than I hate him," said
Jatupon.  Kumpee laughed and then all of them were taciturn for a
minute. Kazem folded some clothes and put them in a bag.   Kumpee got a
bottle of coca cola from a carton in the corner and pulled off the
bottle top by wedging it like a lever between the drawer of a cabinet
and its handle.  He drank slowly savoring every sip.
     "Maybe that attitude toward older brothers is what has caused your
head to be kicked around like a football," said Kumpee after Kazem
left the apartment and he heard the door shut.  "What do you think
about that, you little monkey," he said as his fingers disheveled
Jatupon's hair abrasively and then pulled his ear playfully.  "Just you
and me, Jatuporn.  Jatuporn.  Why do you think that you are called
Jatuporn?"  Jatupon slithered into a dry corner and began to shake.  He
tried not to cry.  "Why did you do that?  I'm not going to hurt you,"
said Kumpee; but it was really the loss of blood, the trauma, the
opaque surrealism of what had occurred that made him tremble.  "I see
your eyes all watered.  You want to cry, don't you?"
     "I want to sleep.  I don't understand any of this.  I don't."
     "You've got to know more than I do about it."
     "Well I don't"
     "Mmmm.   Well, he was ready to put you in the television.  You did
something you shouldn't or maybe you just wouldn't let him put himself
into you.  Have you become a frigid bitch?  Have you, Jatuporn?  You
thought I didn't know about that, didn't you?  You thought that the
nickname we created for you didn't mean anything but just meanness but
we had a reason for giving it to you."  He chuckled.  "I keep an eye on
my boys.  That you can be sure of."
     Kumpee sat down beside the sprawled body of his brother and drank
his cola in equanimity, from time to time placing the bottle between
his legs.  "I needed more from my life than this, you know.  Do you
remember when we were kids and we collected bottles like this.  We got
a few baht from the stores for every twenty we brought into them.  We
thought we would buy a Chinese restaurant for father and mother with
air conditioning and an electric juke box."  He laughed.  "Maybe you
don't remember.  You were four or five."
     "I do." Jatupon really couldn't remember this but yearning for
some unadulterated version of innocent love or compassion not linked to
the selfish inclinations that were part of being human, he halfway
believed that he remembered and he put his hand on his brother's arm.
Kumpee's posture tightened.  The eldest brother felt squeamish from a
man's hand on him but, not wanting to reject the youngest outright he
did not move his arm.  Also, a sick curious depravity began to flood
out of the squalor of the recesses to his mind.  He looked at the
half-empty phallic bottle, picked it up, and said "What about this
bottle?  Would you take in anything hard?" But the youngest brother was
asleep and so, a minute later, he removed the hand and abandoned him.

 

                                                         Chapter 12

 
     It was their third time playing the board game of Monopoly that
week and Porn sensed that another ineluctable habit was being imposed
onto her more from within than without.  She often deliberately tossed
the dice directly into his token when it was near her side of the board
but mostly her rolling was with a lethargic rattling in her palm and
the apathetic dropping of dice from her numb fingertips. Once she
spilled the content of her glass, which then flooded over Marlborough
and Vine Streets as well as Community Chest. She snowed her popcorn
crumbs over two colors of property. He silently blamed her clumsiness
on the vodka that she had mixed into her cola.   From time to time he
could see irascible facial expressions cutting through her guile of
complacent concentration and close lipped smiles but he told himself it
was just a bit of competitive strife or tipsiness even though he knew
better. At the beginning of each game, for the brief period that it
lasted, he felt for certain that she enjoyed playing and discussing
life with him.  He was right about the former.  For her the beginning
of the game brought the rush of accumulating play-money, gibbering her
attempts at English to play the game, and having one monotony replace
that of another.  The game was one way of killing an hour or more of a
given day as sedately as a hot bath.  She hated cold weather to such
extremes that, outside of her irregular attendance at the language
school, the nearby grocery store a block or two away from this distant
campus had become her only cultural attraction.  She was waiting for
spring but meanwhile her life was becoming as frigid as a housewife.
     "It certainly is coming down," he said as he heard hail beat
against the windows. "You surely aren't thinking about going out in
this."
     "I never do," she said.
     "I mean you can if you want."
     "Yes, master."
     "You get to massage my feet for that comment, dearest.  I
especially like it when you go down on each toe the way you do; but, as
a gentleman, I don't force that on you."
     "No, master."
     "Do you like anything about the classes at all?"
     "The students and the teacher are old, Nawin. There's nothing to
say."
     "How old?"
     "Old.  Retirement age. "
     "Hmm... it is strange that they should be immigrating to Canada
at an old age like that."  She ignored him.  "Don't you think so?"
     "I don't know Nawin.  Roll your dice."
     She knew that the only force really binding her on that chair at
the kitchen table was herself. She was uncomfortable with his
tenderness because it shackled her at his side but out of courtesy to
him she tolerated the situation with only a few major grimaces. This
quality time together had occurred for her sake but she minimized its
effects where she could.  She cynically told herself that these games
were his pathetic way of finding relief from his solitary ways. She
felt sorry for him and this sympathy ameliorated the loathing she was
beginning to feel for the introverted bore.  Looking back on what she
knew of him, she assessed that this wooer of whores had always stayed
in safe circles.  In Thai parties that they had attended following his
exhibits he had never been much of a mingler and had relied on her to
be his public relations gadabout.   Here in Canada he wasn't a
celebrity.  For him there were just classes and an occasional sale of a
painting.  She had no role with him here.  She was a bed partner and a
grocery shopper.  Even when fulfilling the wifely forgery of grocery
shopping, she was curtailed by financial considerations.  If she didn't
buy generic food of inferior taste he reprimanded her for overspending.
     Porn asked if Park Place and Boardwalk were real properties and he
told her that they might be.  It was a question that she had also posed
two days earlier but Nawin responded to it with the same cheerfulness
as if there had been sense in asking it a second time. She asked if he
thought they were well known New York City properties and he told her
that was quite possible.  She glanced at their quality time together
through the slow perennial movements of the second hand. These
movements of the long second hand were so wobbly as if 60 seconds were
like climbing over a mountain range. She would not only glance up at
the kitchen clock but also the window as if expecting the snow to be
melted and birds singing in her window.  She had wanted his attention
and now that she had it she realized that this was just aspirin dulling
the headache.  There was a bigger problem.  Being poor and lacking
choices had caused her rabid craving for more of everything just as
something long ago down deep in him was probably responsible for his
artistic brooding.  The past was always sucking one into its whirlpool.
     He rolled the dice and moved his token.  "Oh, Old Kent Road-I want
that."
     "Why do you want worthless properties like that?"
     "I don't think either of those two properties are worthless."  He
smiled as radiantly as a child pleased to have one of his best friends
participating in one of his favorite games. He closed his lips in a
tight thoughtful smile.  "You know what I've been thinking about?"
     "No." She didn't really care.
     "When you met Piggy for the first time."
     She frowned.  Was this what they had become: a couple of tycoon
wannabes, two individuals acting like a married couple, or worse two
people acting like an old couple reminiscing about their early days in
front of bored games or a deck of cards?  They did not have years
together-just two or three months of knowing each other--and she
thought he had no right to reminisce about anything.  As much as she
hated the past, the present was equally bad at absorbing one in its
reality. She had now become his wife because she was with him at
present. His wife had been relegated as one force that had brought them
together because she was not immediately accessible nor was she sexual.
"Oh," she said disinterestedly. She rolled the dice with more force and
moved her token from the present to the future. "I'll take that
railroad," she said.  Still she couldn't help being influenced by him
and for a couple seconds she was absorbed in that immediate past.  That
day had been good but strange. After Noppawan had taken her shopping at
Chatuchok Market for clothing, they briefly went into the Butterfly
Farm and Insect Museum (a neutral alternative to the deleterious
proposal of Siriaj Hospital's dead people museum that made Porn gasp).
The butterflies were fine.  She enjoyed seeing their colors flittering
around the caged park although the encasement of dead insects in the
adjacent room was not to her liking.  The face bug with its human
camouflage on its back was for her as frightening as it was fascinating
to Noppawan.  She watched this wife of Nawin.  She was the type that
would put her nose and glasses up against, in her opinion, the
damnedest of things. When they arrived at the married couple's second
home on the opposite part of the city he was fixing a meal for the
three of them.  He was preparing salad, toasting hamburger buns on a
barbeque, and microwaving meatless tofu hamburgers in a culture that
was all his own.  As the two women chatted on the balcony Porn tried to
overcome feeling like a face bug caught in a key chain. As they ate,
dusk elongated and then intertwined their shadows before night
approached. Soon the remnant of the day became a violet, a purple, and
a black and she felt like a child first introduced to colors through
crayons.  They watched the lit barges on the river and gorgeous glassy
skyscrapers with lit angular tiaras.  Strangely enough she felt at
peace with them as if they were more than friends but family and the
words of model or prostitute did not exist. Still it was strange and
uncomfortable because it was so strange.

 
     He dreamed that he was in her mind, that there was adrenalin in
the rebellion, that this adrenalin was the meaning of it all, and that
the meaning of all luminesced from her.  Immediate relatives and some
more distant ones had her life planned for her; and her parents, the
main instigators of the status quo in their family, were rocks.  They
didn't change apart from greed that intensified with years and tiers.
Stratums of higher and more violent winds raged them in insatiable
appetites.  Wants fed more wants insatiably.  They stayed on the same
growing pieces of land, had the same opulent homes and efficient
factories (although more and more of them), matched political ideas to
whatever brought benefits to their wallets, and with these government
positions they implanted such aspirations on the little brother's mind
with the idea that he was clay by which a conqueror with a double edged
sword of business and politics was formed. After going into the
monastery to have his foray as a monk and finishing his university
education he would be this and once she found a man in college she
would be that.
     She, the girl, would be less of the plan but still, years into the
future, they would partition a piece of their land and give it to her
husband.  She would be expected to reproduce her higher beings on their
land allowing the elderly parents to be spared loneliness by the
sounds of young voices.  She would be expected to take care of them as
their servants had taken care of her and to absolutely inebriate them
against any suffering as if Buddha's attempts at bypassing human
suffering had been an avoidance of it. This would begin in a decade or
so (such a quick passing of time).  She would be expected to succumb to
female yearnings-this needing of another to escape the lonely void,
this need to reach out for the silk of human flesh, to consume, to
care, to be intermingled entities in love, and reproduce.  And yet she
had been nothing but a little doll that they had shown off and shoved
into a storage room especially when she was dirty or naughty.
     And then her bedroom became a limb of a tree and there she was
transforming into an adult female mosquito and he was becoming a male
one.  There they both were in complete maturity.  He did his dance and
he rubbed his legs so as to attract her with his sound.  She was
ceramic in her stiffness.  Her skin was ochre like the dead bodies at
the Siriaj Hospital museum sunk into their glass caskets of
formaldehyde.  Yet her eyes were lively even though they looked at him
so askance and distant.  She smiled with her closed insect lips.  The
smile was ingenuous and warm but wry.  He could tell from these
infinitesimal muscular contractions and relaxation in her stony insect
face that she did not want him to think of their friendship as a
relationship and the words passed from brain to brain (hers to his, his
to hers, and hers to his like a mutating ping pong ball) something to
the effect that a being was born selfish and two selfish beings
together were a compounded selfish knot and so something new was in
order.  Something new was in fact in order.  There, ardent in her eyes,
was the relationship of her parents: it was based on hoarding property
and power.  It also was based on begetting emotional servants for their
old age and that in particular was abhorrent to her.  But he, the male
mosquito that was programmed for copulation and no other task, loved
her.  He had to since he needed her for the satisfaction of his hungers
and a deliverance from the past.  He continued with his male-on-the-make dance.
  She bit into him.  His blood was on her lips.
     And when he woke up he wasn't himself.  His ideas were
discombobulated and he could tell that his consciousness or sanity was
like a loose button on a thin thread dangling from his shirt.  He was
ill and numb as if all of his senses were bandaged over in gauze.  He
woke up fully, checked his face in the mirror to see that it was still
the same, and washed it.  He tried to desist from many thoughts.
Thoughts were pins stabbing him. He turned on the television, muted the
sound, and saw images as the hours of the day became vanquished.  Then
Kazem came back early to bring him some food and in so doing he
suspended their mutual reticence briefly.
     "I have some food for you," he said in disgust.
     "Thanks" Jatupon responded in insolent despondency.
     The next day it was the same.  Kazem came back briefly with some
food and a new pair of sunglasses for Jatupon's face.
     "I have some food for you," he said in disgust.
     "Thanks" Jatupon responded in insolent despondency.
     "I also have some sunglasses for you" Kazem said in disgust.
     "Thanks" Jatupon responded with a surly and begrudging tone of a
nearly mute volume.
     He controlled his contempt out of an instinct for self-
preservation.  He wanted to keep himself from being bludgeoned with the
sledgehammer of his brother's fist or beaten with the leather skin of
his slaps.  Kazem wanted to ask if Kumpee had said anything more about
their dinner engagement with the senator as an effort to establish its
veracity-a senator they called uncle as a disingenuous ploy to bring
them into a greater stratum of wanting and needing, winds of higher and
more pleasurable velocity.

 
     The mosquito buzzed around Jatupon's blackened eyes and then
around the opened bottle of glue.  With his wings he made a pejorative
click the way people use their tongues when they shake their heads.
Jatupon was not glad to see him. He did not want the condemnation. At
first this glue-begotten ride had been an enjoyable thrill.  The
newness of a newborn was at that time gleaming out of his orbs.  He was
like a child in wonder of himself flossing his toes in the grass,
having his hair massaged by the winds, and chasing god in the clouds.
Now the mosquito was here spoiling the solitary party of one which was
steadily waning.
      The mosquito greeted him in English. "Hello, little man." He
thought it was Kumpee at first but, to his knowledge, Kumpee didn't
know any language apart from the strident sounds of Thai and was more
in favor of using the word "monkey" in place of "little man."  Jatupon
looked down at a gigantic insect that was nonetheless smaller than
himself.  He responded in the same international tongue with a hello.
"Where did you learn your English?" asked Jatupon; but no sooner had he
done this than he realized how foolish the question was since the
mosquito was an extension of himself.  For some reason he was both
cognizant of the fact that the creature didn't exist and yet believing
in him.  It was undeniable that if Buddha was right in claiming that
the self was a delusion there was a chance that instead of the mosquito
being less real it might be more real than himself.  It was true that
the mosquito wasn't afraid of a man but a man was afraid of a mosquito.
 Wasn't that, he asked himself, proof that the one who wasn't afraid
was more real?
     "Where did you learn your English? "asked the mosquito.
     "Music, TV shows, story books from the library, Newsweek in my
more ambitious times, cartoons mostly."
     "Well, then, me too" the mosquito said. It paused and then pulled
out a cigarette from its gums and lit it without a match by striking it
against the metallic hair on one of its legs. "Another day without
going to work?"
     "Another day."
     "Taking it a bit easy?"
     "Taking it a bit easy.  Yes," answered Jatupon.
     "I would like to know why you have a black eye and a swollen face."
     "You know everything and yet I'm supposed to believe that it
hasn't it occurred to you that I'm not wanting to think about
this-about this situation I'm in."
     "I understand that but am nonetheless curious what you have to say
on the subject."
     "Very little, if you don't mind."
     "All right.  Are you snorting glue because of what has happened to
you?"
     "Why ask so many questions?"
     "Because I am cruel."
     "Yes, you are, you know."
     "You don't like me at all?"
     "Oh," Jatupon sighed, "I do like you in ways."
     "What a charming endorsement! I elicit the same response
everywhere I go.  Oh well...truth doesn't have to be a comfortable
realm.  It rarely is."
     "Yes," said Jatupon pensively, "I imagine it rarely is."
     "The pain is so overwhelming you can't work?"
     "The boredom is so overwhelming I can't work.  It is a rot-a rot
under my hairnet.  I can't do it-reflexes every day and not with-"
     The mosquito waited to hear the word "him."  "Go ahead and say
it" was in the mosquito's thoughts but it was Jatupon who articulated
this oblique command, "Go ahead and say it!" to twist the direction of
the conversation .
     "I don't understand," said the mosquito.
     "Aren't you wanting to give me your lecture that I have to
survive?"
     "I wasn't going to say anything but you are meant for more than
this dizzying work and the instinct to survive is thrust on all living
things in all actions. You can't but help obey it to some degree."
     "I can't do it any longer."
     "You might have a nervous breakdown if you were to continue.
Kazem was your link. It's gone now."
     "I'd rather die than go back to it now.  Die in the streets if I
have to."
     "I think you are zipping up your pants again and finding them too
tight.  You are shedding your boyhood."
     "Do you really think so?"
     "Yes," said the mosquito pensively.  "Unfortunately, it was your
best trait."

     The mosquito dissipated with the smoke of Jatupon's cigarette that
he rested and twirled in his fingertips.  Smoking was his new habit
that he pursued in the hope of having a more insouciant image, which
with practice, he could learn to believe in. Boys of himself at earlier
ages came and pressed their noses near him as he had done long ago to
the glass outside the Dunkin Doughnuts Restaurant in Ayuttayha.   Long
lost versions of himself at various ages passed up against him and
passed him by.  They too dispersed with the gaseous midst of black
carbon smog released by the traffic.  His head was spinning around
skyscrapers and billboards.  They, he, a single homeless woman who
rented out babies to increase the chances of getting more substantial
alms, two dogs copulating, and all, were dwarfed in advertisements for
shark fins for the man with refined taste, Electric piecemeal
billboards for Singh Beer and cellular telephone companies with new
images rotating with the pieces, plain billboards of pimpleless white
skinned Thai models selling or hustling some facial cream, flashing and
mutating signs advertising various self-improvements seminars at
different universities and at the Convention Center,  neon animations
of Barcelona's Bangkok tour for the Invitation Cup Football Match, and 
advertisements for every international and domestic product imaginable
thrust into the hands of consumers in the form of flyers.  Indeed, it
was obscene enough to make a man become a monk: orgasmic organisms,
sensation of void.

 

                                            Chapter 13

 

 
     The glue-induced waves of befuddlement came to him curled like
talons and this twisted and grotesque inundation beat his shore pulling
and pushing bits of himself fervently in all directions.  It was as his
father had told him often:  he did not know if he was coming or going.
He was both becoming more conscious of himself and his environment and
yet more despondent with strange thoughts fulminating out of his living
carcass, controlling him. He was moving toward reality and yet
diverging from it.  He believed that he was downtown with Noppawan and
that they were wasting some time before the meeting with this former
avuncular image.  They were walking through a mall and he was thinking
how long ago in boyhood he and his brothers had entertained the thought
of this man really being family to ease the pain of routine
constricting them in noodles.  In the hallucination they left the mall
and went into an adjacent 80-story building and then took a high-speed
elevator to the top of that skyscraper.  There the couple sat in the
opulence of the Baiyoke Sky Lounge revolving around glass windows and
ordering their cappuccino.
     Then he wasn't there.  He was in his room, his cell, staring out
of the window. He was watching a tiger watching the descending sun.  He
was startled.  He hadn't known that animals would look out at the
beauty of a descending sun.  The tiger noticed him and got up; but
discerning this human's own benign posture directed toward the same
sunset, the tiger returned to where it was at and once again revered
the sun.  Then he was walking the streets and feeling such a crazy
loneliness.  He began to mutter nonsense and he felt himself numb and
slipping on his own frozen thoughts. It was very strange for he wasn't
moving and yet the streets moved him--strange as the fetid one, Kumpee,
having been the angel who had come at the right second delivering him
from his worst impulses to kill Kazem.  If anything had given him food
for thought that week of idleness and recuperation in his cell, it had
been the irony of the fetid one as his guardian angel.  If the fetid
one had not stepped in nothing would have intervened and he would have
murdered his brother or been murdered by him.  If Suthep had come at
that instant, instead of Kumpee, he would have believed in Buddha or
God.  As it was, he believed in Glue and its power to imitate the
strange magic of the world that was all around him.
     His hallucination took him through the drenching storms of heavy
rains and again to the heavily billboarded world of downtown opulence:
iridescent Isuzu Ascender, its back wheels aired above a city, front
wheels ascending toward the fiery black nothingness of space, ascend,
it says, ascend, as if it, a thing, were the portal to creation, the
why, the reason of it all, ascend; Compaq Computers, don't be left
behind, don't, easy just a don't; large, sprawling cursory sentences of
lumination on these black moliminous rectangles towering above all the
tiny traffic, tiny cars and tinier lives, advertising self-help and
get-rich seminars; a more conventional but gigantic billboard placed
near a skyscraper lit like stage lights on an actress, a gigantic face
of a beautiful Chinese Thai with clean and white Chinese skin that
stayed pimpleless with Johnson and Johnson's Clean and Clear. There
were electric rotating piecemeal signs advertising cellular phones and
internet providers (instantaneous messages not for his patronage).
Advertisements were on the sides of busses and bus stops of happy soap
families and big-breasted bra wearers both of which made the saliva
increase in his mouth the way an orange would. Shop signs crouched low
with sidewalk beggars, international fast food restaurants and flyers
thrust into hands: and it all spoke of the city the same as the
skyscrapers that alone were the epitome of opulence and disparity.
"What do you want from life?" said the whore at her door.  "Enroll at
Siam University and find new opportunities.  Don't let bad grades stop
you," she continued.  "Come in, and I'll give you a massage that will
make your body feel in ways you've never imagined," said the shark
restaurant worker who made a commission luring those of supercilious
tastes to a cuisine laced in marginal traces of mercury. "Shark Fins
this way," said the tuc tuc driver eager to compound a taxi fee with an
agency's commission for bringing a foreigner to a beloved half-hour
lady of the night. "Want a girl?" asked the white robed female Buddhist
nuns who had shaved heads and collection canisters in their hands as
they stood on the steps leading to the platform of the sky train like
Hara Krishnas.  Jatupon heard the door open.
     "Oh, God," he heard Kazem's voice. Surprisingly, it wasn't angry.
He heard footsteps of restless movement.  "Oh, God," he heard again.
Then he heard the footsteps move toward him.  The movements were slow
and careful.  He opened his eyes and saw his brother. Kazem was
scratching his head in confusion.
     "I'm sorry buddy.  I'm so sorry. I know I'm late saying that, but
fuck, you were ready to throw a television into my head. I don't know
how all that happened, but what a mess.  Why did you have to get
yourself all doped like that at this time-especially this time; and oh,
fuck, did you get into my whiskey?  You did, you little thief!  Right?
Right?  Was that a nod?  Was that a nod? Do you like that?  I'll pull
your ears off the way father nearly did.  Man, we've got an
appointment!  Did you take anything besides sniffing this stuff? I mean
besides drinking my liquor and sniffing glue was there a third thing?
Think:  I've got to know how serious!" This had been one of Jatupon's
only times of being in the cell and flying within his own head. Nearly
all the other times he had gone out to the streets to gain his high and
stayed there until he was able to return home halfway sober and feign a
sickness successfully. He regretted being witnessed and scrutinized by
Kazem. The environment was bouncing to the cadence of Kazem's voice and
stung Jatupon's hands through the conduit of the rubbery stickiness of
desiccated glue that still hung in patches from some of his fingertips.
He was pulled into the shower with underpants still on.  The hair of
his head was locked in Kazem's fingers. He could smell the sweetness of
his brother's sweat.  He could smell his body odor like any dog getting
its molecular high.  Jatupon thought it was very romantic.  He smiled
widely at Kazem whose fingers clenched him by the throat pinning him
against the back wall of the shower as the cold waters ran over him and
through his underpants. Jatupon fought like a suffocating fish and when
he was free from the loosened grasp he gasped and then kissed and
licked the body that he was denuding--the same body that had brought
him near death but the same one who had saved him from drowning long
ago when he was a boy.

 
     Then after a good long vomit and a brief nap he exited with his
brother into the light rain and they were off to see the wizard.  They
went by taxi with the idea of picking up Suthep along the way. Kazem
waited in the taxi while Jatupon knocked on Suthep's door.  Jatupon
knocked, stood, and waited repeatedly for five or ten minutes without
success.  Then he began to return to the taxi looking down and
scrapping his feet against dirt and rocks like a child preferring to be
left alone in his imagination.
     But when he returned the taxi had turned into a limousine like a
pumpkin into a carriage. He wondered if he was hallucinating once
again.  Then standing there like a diffident and disconcerted child in
total confusion, he noticed the window descending for him and out poked
the head of the fetid one but his hair was cut, greased back, and
nicely groomed, his face was shaven, and the cologne or aftershave
lotion that he was wearing had molecules that poignantly bit into
Jatupon's psyche favorably.  Here was a dark but handsome man.  He
never knew him, before, to be such.  "Get in you little Monkey--up
front with the driver." When Jatupon was seated comfortably in softness
and space he glanced back at his three brothers who reclined in an
opulent shadow.
     "Cheers, Jatuporn," said Kumpee.
     Kazem clanged his glass against the glasses held by Kumpee and
Suthep. "Cheers to every boy, girl, hollering hound, and wide spread
whore on the planet," said Kazem.  Suthep and Kumpee laughed.
     "Yes, I'll have to say my cheers to them too," said Kumpee.  All
three brothers were drinking wine in the back seat.
     "Should we give him something?" asked Suthep.
     "Are you kidding," said Kazem.  "That boy goes places we can only
dream about.  No more fuel for that tank.  He's been there, done that.
He's gone on one round trip today. That's enough."  He drank more of
his wine.  "Sometimes I have to sleep with one eye open to make sure he
doesn't drift further into mischief."
     "Did you like how we fucked up your mind?" Kumpee asked Kazem.
"It was Suthep's idea of parking on the corner. When you didn't leave
the taxi we still waited a little until you fell into a smoking
addiction.  Suthep said, 'Just wait, he'll go into the 7-11' and that
is exactly what happened.  While you were in there buying your
cigarettes we paid off the taxi driver and sent him away.  Then we
parked in his place."
    "Well, if that trick was for me, it didn't do anything.  I wasn't
even surprised let alone shocked.  I definitely didn't think I was out
of my mind."
     "Well, Jatuporn sure thought he was seeing things," said Suthep.
     "He looked like the Emerald Buddha was talking to him," said
Kumpee.
     The brothers laughed.  Suthep farted.
     "Bangkok bus exhaust.  Plug your nose," commented Kumpee. Their
laughter intensified. Even Jatupon was laughing with them.
     "I want to know why Jatuporn is wearing sunglasses," said Suthep
anxious to diffuse their thinking of his odor. Horrific odors were
usually attributed to Kumpee and he cared to keep it that way.
     "You know already," said Kazem. "Leave it alone.  Why are you
wearing that gold chain around your neck?"
     "A girl gave it to me" said Suthep.
     "What girl?  Some girl behind a cash register.  Did you pull out a
gun and make her believe her brains would be splattered?"
     "That wouldn't have been me.  I am a woman lover.  I don't make
war," said Suthep.  "Show me your eyes, Jatuporn."
     "Leave him alone," said Kazem.
     Kumpee grabbed Jatupon's head, yanked off the glasses, and twisted
the face so that Suthep could see it.  "A regular raccoon, that one is.
 "No, even a raccoon is lighter than that.  Maybe it's like watching a
raccoon after he and a bear have been going at it:  the bear with a
television in his paws and the raccoon cowering near his puddle of
blood.  Thai boxing doesn't get as exciting as what I saw.  I just
regret not having been there for the whole show."
     "Stop it!" ordered Kazem.
     "Does he always give orders like that?" asked Kumpee to Suthep.
Then to Kazem he said, "Hey, remember that I am the oldest one here.
Could you say that in a more pleasant tone?"
     "I would like for you to stop picking on him.  Look at him up
there." Jatupon's eyes were withdrawn and his head was slightly tilted
to the dashboard.
     "Here are your glasses," said Kumpee as he stood and bent forward
with effort to give them back. His hand disheveled Jatupon's unkempt
hair even further. "You need to comb that mop."
     Arrows of the past, mostly from his father and Kumpee, shot out of
the neurological circuitry of his brain paralyzing him in a numb
withdrawal of survival.   It was no different than at earlier stages of
his life when he wondered why things didn't move forward but at the
same time was fearful that they would.  He was back in the horror known
as family withdrawing himself from it, living in his protective bubble
of withdrawal.  "You are afraid of your own shadow." "Are you preparing
for a flood?  Those pants look stupid on you."  "What are you doing
sitting over there?  Get out of that seat?"   "I'll mop up the floor
with you one of these days." "Why aren't you working?  You are
absolutely good for nothing." "What do you do in that back room, you
pimple faced monkey?  Get out of that cage of yours and put down those
books.  No use you thinking you are any better than the rest of us."
"Get out of my seat you ugly little fart." He heard it even though none
of these disparaging ideas were articulated in the limousine.
     Jatuporn, Jatuporn, he thought.  They knew and they mocked him
with his ignominy.  If he had been a girl and someone had sexually
abused him he could speak of it and have a good purifying cry cleansing
himself of his stress but his situation was different.  It was one he
had invited upon himself.  He'd sleep with the others as well if it
would make them kinder to him-so vehement was his need for their love.
 How horrible it was to meet this rich avuncular stranger, he thought
to himself.  It would be horrible enough meeting a bag lady with a face
that looked like a raccoon and an aching in his raw bottom.  He put on
his sunglasses.

     In an odd way for him it was like traveling on a poor man's cattle
train back to the town from whence an exodus from the rice fields had
occurred.  No poor man would want to return to his farm and admit that
he couldn't obtain employment in Bangkok and no one with any real
self-esteem wanted to link again to a wealthy man who, for good reason,
had been reluctant to have any association with his ex-nephews-in-law.
His father had tried countless times to get money from the senator.
His mother had been subtler and more industrious.  She got a campaign
drive active in her neighborhood to do her little part in trying to get
him reelected.  The senator never forgot such hard working activists
and always remembered her birthday with a gift.  She was content with
that but for her husband it intensified his yearning for better things.
 And so it was with his brothers: they thought about how their dreams
could be effectuated with a bit of the senator's savings. Jatupon did
not adhere to this disingenuous wish for a family reunion and so
trapped in a moving box with brothers who had one converging theme that
was not his own, he felt like an unemployed laborer returning back on
the poor man's train even though he was riding in a limousine.
     The recurring idea that the aunt and the uncle had not gone to the
funeral made him even increasingly repellent toward this meeting with
the senator.  He halfway wanted to jump out of the door and let a
physics lesson ensue.  Would he just drop or would he be thrust out
like a projectile. Would his blood ooze out or would it disgorge like
the insides of a tossed pumpkin?  He looked out of the window at the
quick passing of buildings and then up to the billowing clouds.  They
were gas with distinct and individual form.  They were energy that was
distended and fomenting.  How mysterious it all was. When one was
cremated he would be such gas. Man was ephemeral noise but nature was
reticent and swelling.  Distending and distending, it extended him
beyond his petty thinking.  How good it all was!
     Well, he thought, there was no resisting the inevitable.  He
would be entering the senator's house mortified from his sunglasses and
black eyes but the issue was petty enough that there would not be any
serious consideration about avoiding this eventuality through jumping
out of a moving car. Kazem had attempted to put a story into his head
that might save them from being scrutinized about this subject.  It had
seemed plausible enough: an injury from the recent Songkran festival in
Banglampool gained from a water fight where some water in the plastic
guns had been adulterated with some caustic chemicals.  However, he did
not like casting shadowy illusions into the senator's mighty halls.
No, he shouldn't be with this chain gang of prisoners going to the
warden's home, dragging the noodles that bound them, asking for him to
remove them.  This avuncular stranger hadn't come for their parents'
funeral.  He hadn't wished them condolences.  It would have been such a
little thing to do; and since it wasn't done it was monumentally wrong.
     Reticent and deep in himself so that his brothers' pejorative
comments did not hurt him tremendously when they pierced, he
implemented the same defense mechanism that had saved him from
psychosis in such a family all of these years. This withdrawal made the
rational self into a deadened membrane and shield.  This shield
deflected their arrows. How profoundly intricate the psyche's defenses
were.  What wouldn't the brain do to spare itself wounds!  The mind,
perhaps, did the same with love.  Within life's physical titillations
in this sordid realm through the smell and feel of breath rhythmically
sliding onto his nose from the spewing mouth of his mate --a warm
soothing wind crossing the hill of his nose; the tactile wearing of
another's skin by touch more luxurious than any silk; merciful orgasmic
clemency from logic; the moving of a chest; the heart beat; and yes,
the feeling of being in love addictive and sensitive toward another
human presence, one's ideas of life were whitewashed and exhilarated.
For him, sex in the shower had annulled his hatred of Kazem.  It had
made the world into less of a hostile place. It had provided the
specious idea that he was not alone. He looked out of the car window.
The palm trees seemed like rock solid Cyclopes eating away the remnants
of the sun.  He noticed that the car was stopping. The gates opened to
an acreage far from balloon peddlers, sandwich salesmen with a box
strapped onto their chests, holy jasmine makers, goldfish in the bag
mountebanks, car window newspaper accosters, and the sidewalk noodle
workers.
     "Will he be alone?" asked Suthep.
     "His staff will be there," said Kumpee.
     "I mean women.  An Old guy with lots of money must have new ones
around each week.  I mean they wouldn't like him but they would feel
important and ornamental to be there at his home."
     "I wouldn't know one way or the other."
     "What did you do when you were together with him?" asked Suthep.
     "I wasn't really.  It was through a speaker.  I finally got him to
talk through the speaker after pleading with all his servants that way.
 I made him feel guilty.  I told him he should have gone to the
funeral.  I told him he needed to help his relatives or I'd see if a
newspaper reporter would talk to me."
     "You said that!" yelled Kazem angrily.
     "Oh, he agreed with me that he was wrong.  He said that he wanted
to see us.  He told me that.  Then we got visits from his men and this."

     When they arrived into what was to them an opulent mansion (a
couple of the dozen rooms that were only marginally spacious by western
standards) they saw him in the living room in front of a big screen
where, what to the gods, were tenuous carbon copies of men falling from
the windows of a skyscraper with their myriad papers.  America
(specifically New York City) was under siege.
     The boys gestured the "wei" to him.  He saw prayerful hands in
front of faces and, except in the youngest who was hidden behind his
sunglasses, their beggarly downtrodden expressions depicted their
unworthiness to meet him. That was their ploy. He gestured the "wei" in
return. He was begrudging of their entrance in his life and resented
having to comply with the wishes of the eldest that the meeting take
place.  However, his plan was to neutralize the possibility of negative
publicity.  He just wanted to allow these meetings to take place from
time to time.  If the "thugs" thought that he would be giving them
anything more than an occasional meal it was their own delusion and in
the meantime he would be keeping any problems from occurring like the
unlikely eventuality of an newspaper article scathing him for lack of
interest in the welfare of his relatives and making an assumption that
he wouldn't be interested in the welfare of others.  Something like
that, unlikely as it was, could nonetheless happen if he didn't pacify
those who had the power to possibly create such problems.  "Come in and
sit down over here," he said.  The tone of voice of this avuncular
stranger was grave and his face hardly glanced at them as their
barefooted feet ascended into his domain. The television tugged in
their diffident movements to plush, white, upholstered chairs and these
chairs kept saying to Jatupon that he and his brothers had no right to
sit there. Still and seated, they became like spectators at the
Coliseum.  It was a CNN glimpse into the future: skyscrapers ablaze
from passenger jets deliberately being slammed into them.  They were
being made aware of horrific ways of dying and since it was so horrific
there was no self-centeredness and movement by which to callously
disregard it.  They were empathic and there was no escape.  Jatupon
wanted to shake the gods from their slumber, to knock the emerald
Buddha from its pedestal, and to hijack fate and turn it around at
gunpoint from the cockpit.  He wanted all life to cease and start again
in parity and respect.  He wanted deliverance for Siriaj Hospital
freaks, the aborted, the stillborn, deformed, diseased, and the
downtrodden, those who die from malnutrition, old men who always think
that their lives have been for nothing, the elephants that lose their
molars and so search for a soft shaded area of grass to lie down in
comfortable death, weaker animals not yet dead fallen as prey, soldiers
who must lose their lives in war, and child soldiers whose short lives
were as instruments of hate.  To him it was no wonder that they
(humans) were bad.  They were all conceived by greedy sexual devouring,
these selfish absorptions and attempts at fitting into silk skinned
robes and hallucinogenic shadows.  The World Trade Center disaster was
proof not only that people were bad but that there was no god overseer
above looking at this clashing of wills.  There was just malicious and
inane preying on others and this time it might well be that these
hijackers had not even been incensed at opulence and starvation which
stood back to back like America and Afghanistan or a domineering state
like America to a stateless one like Palestine.  If this had been
planned by the rich ex-Saudi, Bin Laden, it was just hate (senseless,
irrational hate that existed for no particular reason at all), the
desire for power, the idea of heroism and a sure ticket to heaven, and
the dramatic thrill of destruction that would go down as historical.
     It was strange that people should perish so terribly and that
those perpetrating this action could rationalize America as a monster
worthy of monstrous actions that would humble this one nation under
God, indivisible with liberty and justice for all.  Foremost it was
strange to him that such suffering could be ignored, if not partially
forgotten so quickly when Vanont, the servant, came in for the third
time telling them that the dinner was getting cold and he wasn't going
to warm it up for the second time.  No longer mesmerized, they came
back to themselves. At the dining room table they began their banal
chatter. They asked about the number of his servants, how long he had
lived here, his typical working day, and what he did when he returned
home.  They wanted to ask about their aunt but they had determined as
they rode over here that the subject might alienate their host. Except
for Jatupon whose lips slightly frowned, the brothers gained pleasure
pointing out various items in the room, asking questions about them,
and feeling pleased to be in such opulence.  The senator asked about
Kazem and Suthep's restaurant businesses.  When Suthep made a more
obvious attack to evoke sympathy for their nominal existence the
senator said, "You are young.  It is a first business." Then to avert
hearing anything more on that matter, he switched to Kumpee who had
extorted this family reunion.  He asked what he did for a living.
Kumpee's circumlocutory answer was no different than any hustler's
grandiloquence about selling one thing or another real or imagined.
His quick words were inarticulate and glib.  Nobody understood what he
said for the words were mountainous heaps of illusion.  The senator did
find out that Kumpee had fathered a child.  He had a baby girl.  Kumpee
took out the photograph from his wallet and then he passed it around.
The senator affected a smile when he saw the picture but he conjectured
that "this boy" was living from this arrangement with the girlfriend
and the baby he had fathered.  Jatupon, surprised like his other
siblings, found pleasure in the thought that he was now an uncle.  For
a moment he felt love for this unseen entity and a desire to ensure
that her life turned out better than his but then he realized that he
would never see her, and being the child of a rich Chinese Thai, she
would have a better life than he had.
     The senator asked Jatupon why he was wearing sunglasses.  He gave
the rehearsed answer and then had to remove the sunglasses at the
senator's insistence.  "The Songkran festival ended over a month ago,"
said the avuncular stranger.  "Why do you still have black eyes now?"
     "Yes, but my face was really hurt badly" Jatupon responded.  The
senator looked at him sternly.  He didn't want to waste his night
hearing their lies, and if they were all like Suthep, he didn't want to
hear the truths either.  Kazem opened his mouth.  He was prepared to
say that Jatupon had gotten himself into a fight but when he saw the
stern expression of the unbelieving host his words retreated.
Jatupon saw himself and his brothers shaded in the dismal gray of those
who could not be trusted.  A man's mind was a tenuous object swayed in
the winds of discourse so when it sensed a disingenuous response in the
surreal uncertainty of understanding a matter fully it cringed.  He
felt like he was casting shadows onto the senator's grand walls like
children using their hands to project shadows of rabbits and dogs.  But
then his conscience waned. He again remembered that the aunt and uncle
hadn't attended the funeral of his parents.  He remembered his aunt's
magnanimous crusades to become so important in his life, seeing him
educated by paying his tuition and sending him to private tutorials,
the Bible school, the varnishing of Christ's picture on wood, the taste
of punch at the Bible School, and how outside the building there was a
soccer ball tied to a string and a pole and how the children tried to
compete to get the ball wound up on their side of the poll.  She would
sometimes come to pick him up and take him to an ice cream parlor.  She
didn't have any children of her own.  He frowned at the senator's
scolding facial expressions.  He met angered glances with those of his
own. The family chatted on.  The senator seemed friendlier and Jatupon
even began to look up from his plate.  The distrust had diffused to the
point where it ceased to matter.  They chatted and their chatter was
irrelevant.
     "Why did this happen?" blurted out Jatupon from nowhere.  "If it
is Islamic terrorists how could they hate that badly?  Is it envy of a
wealthier and more powerful country, or the hatred toward Israeli aid
from the United States?  I don't understand it.  We talk and talk and
yet people are falling out of windows of 100 story buildings.  How can
we eat and carry on with things?"
     Kumpee and Suthep scoffed at him.
     "It is barbaric, barbaric no matter what line of reasoning they
use to justify their actions.  Do you know anything about the Islamic
world and why it dislikes the west, Jatupon?"  The choice of his words
were influenced by his Moslem background."
     "I don't really," he said. " If Bin Laden is so rich it isn't
inequality that he hates. Tyrants like building up empires but he
doesn't seem to want one-- just wants to destroy the west.  I don't
understand it at all.  I know that there are 7000 American soldiers in
the holy land of Saudi Arabia to protect that area from Iraq's
aggression and-" He swallowed hard.  He knew that his brothers would
hate him.  "I know that America continues to supply Israel with
millions of dollars in aid and billions of dollars in weapon sales even
though Israel still occupies what was once Palestine."  He knew that he
needed to summarize these issues with some scanty understanding to
impress the senator.  "America imposes sanctions against Iraq out of
fear of its military buildup but these sanctions cause thousands of
people to die from malnutrition.  America financially backed Iraq
against Iran in that war and the Taliban against the Soviet Union and
now those regimes were the wrong choices. The enemy of my enemy is my
friend was the wrong philosophy.  Those were bad foreign affairs
blunders.  They continually interfere with the policies of Moslem
countries so that the oil that drives their economy doesn't cease. It
is economic considerations that cause them to back the governments of
Algeria and Egypt that they can influence even though those governments
are not democracies. They've made Iraq and Iran as strong as America."
     The senator knew that this was a good understanding for a
14-year-old boy.  "How do you know these things, Jatupon?"
     "He reads a lot of comic books," said Suthep.  They laughed.
     "I go to the library when I can," he said modestly.  "Sometimes I
go there just to read comic books and once in a while I read Newsweek."
     "Do you know English?"
     "Yes, I do," he said proudly.  The senator found himself
interested in the boy the way his ex-wife had been. Her reasons,
however, had been maternal ones and her disinterest had been from the
same source.  A voice of an alter ego that was fettered in a private
chamber in the cellar of her mind shrieked stridently that this was no
child of her own and it had been for this reason that she had dropped
him from her life suddenly.  His interest was of a man who sees
continuum of what he is or a rejuvenation of what he was.  Both
reactions were selfish ones but this was the planet Earth where most
good actions were dictated by egocentric realms.

 
     Vanont yelled that one of the buildings was imploding and the
senator got up from the table. "Continue eating," he said as he exited
the room. Jatupon looked out of the window.  Thai thunder crackled the
skies like an empty bag of potato chips.  Lightning streaked across the
Thai skies naked and ominous. There he was seated with his brothers in
that home they had always wanted to enter for so many years.  And yet
instead of being the happy family members visiting the relatives, they
were nothing but a group of extortionists who had manipulated their way
through locked gates. This fraternity of boyhood had evolved on higher
tiers of wants into a Tower of Babel, a tower of thugs.
     Low levels of hate still exuded from him toward Kazem who had done
this to his face.  He was sedentary in his own guilt for his attempt to
murder Kazem, which later led to the best sexual experience he had ever
had. Hate and the frenzy of love were rotting the best aspects of him
that was so neatly named a soul.  Hate and love had been horrible
fulminations of neediness that ignited a person into another being,
possessed will, and thrust reality into chaos.  Sure this release of
sexual tension, in the acme of ecstasy, led to Nirvana like any well
thrust missile but each intimacy was like a cow that jumped over the
moon.
     He heard his brothers talk but did not listen to anything.  Talk
was a kinetic sport. The mouth was a spout. In it emotions were like
boiling water steaming out the teapot. For him, the introvert who
communed with the original wisdom deep in the stagnant pool of his
being, there was only the window and a landscape of waxy greenery in
the rain.  He was mesmerized in the mellifluous monotony of rain
slapping against the window.
     Men falling from the windows of the World Trade Center in New
York: the world was an evil place and he wanted to sink under the veil
of Childhood for it was benign.  Guileless, ingenuous, innocuous,
worriless childhood was where the imagined was tangible and personal.
Planes deliberately crashed into skyscrapers incinerating buildings and
people: this was solid proof that it was a godless universe, but then
he had always assumed that it was such.  Still to take a deep breath
was amazing.  To be thinking was amazing. To see from the window such a
beautiful verdant acreage and rain pouring onto it making it greener
yet was like fecund life commencing after the destruction of a forest
fire. His parents died but in so doing here he was in the senator's
dining room: wasn't this an amazing chain of events even if their
arrival had been obtained badly?  The senator called them to come in
with their plates and drinks.  For Jatupon it felt like they were a
family huddled together in front of the television--images of tragedy
shared together in common.
     A half hour later the senator found himself irritated by the one
likable thug looking the part.  "Can you see anything with those
sunglasses on?" he asked bitterly.
     "Not much" said Jatupon.
     "I've seen what you look like.  Take them off."
     "Take them off you little idiot" said Kumpee.  Jatupon obeyed but
glanced at Kumpee with a strong glare of hate.
    "Did you really get that from Songkran?" asked the senator.
Jatupon sensed that the senator's tone was jocular.  He could tell that
the avuncular stranger, like them all, just needed a respite from the
grave images they were witnessing.
     "He's always getting into fights" lied Kumpee stealing the words
that still wouldn't come from Kazem's mouth.
     "Is that so?" asked the senator but it was to no one specific.
     "All the time" confirmed Suthep.
     "Is that true?" the senator asked Jatupon.  "Who with?"
     "I can't imagine who.  I guess myself," said Jatupon while he
stared into the senator's eyes with a bold earnestness.
     The senator laughed  "I'll interpret that as a need for privacy,"
he said.  He backed away from the truth.  He sensed it already and it
was really none of his business.  In a strange way he was even
beginning to like their presence.  It was the closest thing he had to
family, and so he told himself that maybe he should enjoy it.
     Jatupon looked out across the senator's spacious living room and
then returned to the center where they were.  He noticed a bowl on an
end table.  The bowl contained wrapped caramel within it.
     "Help yourself," said the senator as he passed the bowl first to
Kumpee who was seated nearest to him.
     They chewed.  The senator continued translating pertinent bits
that were anchored on the news program.  "America under attack" was the
logo at the bottom of the screen.  The brothers had no label for this
snack but they knew that it was catered to the higher status of palate
and because of this they ate it gluttonously.  The taste and the gummy
texture were foreign to them.  Jatupon thought of his own insatiable
need for sweets any time he saw his aunt.  If she continued to buy
candy necklaces for him to slobber on she continued to care and it was
for that reason that he craved for sweets so voraciously.
     "The wrappers are labeled with the names of American states on
them."
     "Yes, I like caramel. I always have since Chusanee and I were
married.  She liked them so much. Anyhow that's over now.  By the way,
I'm not sure if you know this, Jatupon, but after your mother and
father separated briefly, your mother went away to the states. You were
born in America." Jatupon sat there in numb surprise with a caramel
square smashed into the back of his mouth.  He didn't chew or swallow
as the senator elaborated on a trip that their aunt had arranged for
their mother to give her some time to think.  "I'm mentioning it to you
now because you are American and you should know that fact if ever you
have an opportunity to travel. It is easier with an American passport."
 Then his face focused on the images.  A second tower imploded.  How
many thousands were dead and dying was anyone's guess. It was a
horrible thing and yet he felt that they all, rightly or wrongly, were
linked together in the belief that gluttony and poverty were the main
instigators.  He wondered if his brothers thought that justice was
being rendered.
     Later, when Jatupon was returning from the bathroom, Vanont
stopped him and asked him to go into the study.  Ten minutes later the
senator came in and sat down at his desk.  He handed Jatupon a can of
Coca Cola.  The senator had a second one that he also opened and drank.
     "Why do you think that your brothers have been so persistent about
seeing me?" asked the senator.
     "I don't know for sure. That's the truth. I don't think there is
anything too planned in it. They're selfish.  I know that.  It was
wrong how Kumpee arranged the meeting.  Even Kazem thinks that; but it
isn't so calculating for a bunch of boys with no real family--not even
with each other--to want to know their uncle.  I know that you aren't
married now and it isn't as if you are an uncle like blood or have to
have anything to do with us. Anyhow I think more than anything they
just wanted to meet someone respectable when their lives aren't of any
consequence.  At least that is how I feel about it.  Maybe they think
that they can get something out of it but I don't think they've really
isolated what they want.  Maybe it isn't much more than just wanting to
feel a bit linked to you.  I guess I want that in ways, but in ways I
don't.  I mean you've been really nice but I don't understand why you
didn't go to my parents' funeral.  There was nobody really but us.
Nobody came at all really."
     "Maybe I should help you," said the senator." The words ran out of
his mouth like a loose dog.  He was surprised to see them running away.
Jatupon could see that he regretted the words.
     "I need out. I don't mean to come here with you.  I want, on my
own, to break from them. I can't go back there again."
     "Which one beat up on you like that?"  Jatupon didn't say anything
but looked down at his legs.  The senator asked, "Does it happen very
often?"
     "Well, I'm not a kid."
     "You're 14, aren't you?"
     "Yes."
     "Well, that isn't manhood yet.  It is an awkward age."
     "I won't return.  I hate him for doing that to me.  He just left
me in the puddle of my blood.  I hated him so badly I wanted to kill
him afterwards."
     "Which one?"
     "All of them hate me.  Suthep and Kumpee resented what Aunt
Chusanee tried to do for me but I don't hate them."
     "She always said that you were clever."
     "I wish I could go away and be somebody different than what I am,
and yet I wish that I could be important to them and that the four of
us could be a close family. You too, if you want."
     "Jatupon, families aren't forever.  Boys grow up and they gain
their own lives.  They have children.  Those children grow up.  I don't
know what you might or might not have done to get into a fight with
them or one of them but it didn't deserve a fist in your face.  You
look awful.  Give me a week.  I want you to contact me in a week. I've
got some work I need to do and Vanont will show you and your brothers
out.  He'll point you in the direction of the bus stop.  It isn't all
that late.  All the busses should still be running.  Tell your brothers
that we'll try to get together again in a couple months or so."

 
     From the window of the classroom, Noppawan saw the wind kick about
the branches of the trees in an anomaly not characteristic of Bangkok
weather.  She hated feeling hostage to proctor the eye movements of
these students, to walk every several minutes through the aisles of the
desks, and to scrutinize wanton little individuals prepossessed of
schemes for cheating that could improve their chances of getting good
grades and hasten the end of the tests.  Their main wishes were for the
resurrection of their still cadavers to the kinetic movement of going
with their friends to the next Hollywood movie, the next shrill of
laughter, gossip, and karaoke booths in the corridors of malls. She
liked the wind's attitude of just knocking around the day, kicking off
the old leaves, and dancing about.  She wondered why she admired
kinetic movement in nature and not in the uniformed idiocy of the
students before her.  It was, she answered to herself, because each of
these uniformed specimens probably did the same exact actions of their
fathers and mothers before them.  Certainly year after year new groups
of freshmen were identical to each other. They engaged in senseless
programmed activities like ants: the mating frivolity before working
and hoarding.  As rich as they were (these future owners of their
parents' factories) they were walking down the same hill toward their
deaths no different than the worker ants.  None of them contributed to
the permanency of thought and understanding.  They just followed and
followed.
     Nature experimented, she caused uniqueness in form if not
attitude, she continentally drifted lands for the hell of it, she
erupted volcanoes and earthquakes in the damnedest of places and let
her creatures adapt or perish.  Nature was an alchemist and a lover of
the extraordinary.  Noppawan wanted to open a window.  After all, the
students were cold in the air conditioning and she wanted to feel the
breeze, but some fool or another who supervised proctors would complain
that something in the room wasn't orthodox.  She didn't want to get a
letter in her mailbox complaining that she hadn't sealed up the
envelopes of the tests with enough tape or another odd irrelevant idea
because she hadn't been as orthodox as she should have been.
     It was the administration that consisted of desperate fools during
times that were irregular.  She had been forced to teach an
anthropology class this semester.  How that was related to zoology she
couldn't say unless the administration was privy to the philosophy of
mice and men. All she knew was that the anthropology teacher ran away
and they were in desperate need of someone to fill the gap as well as
perform her regular duties.  A numb throbbing of life's dreariness
overtook her as she walked around these handsome faces and thought to
herself how she really wanted to open the window.
     Her husband had not throbbed his body in her inordinately so she
did not understand why she was jealous of his activities, and yet she
was. It was this beyond all other things that was a gloom over her
sedentary thoughts that were constricted to monitor the eye movements
and actions of the students and to be the perfect guard of these
prisoners that had been assigned to her. She looked at the girl test
takers.  Unlike Porn, whose focus was business, they were disrespectful
whores whose interest was only in sucking up the pheromone fumes,
having babies, and raising them to fulfill their need for stability and
permanence.  To have a role in the world (that of being a mother) would
override the love needs of the contributor of the sperm, and they would
cling to motherhood as salamanders in the rain.  That  "salamander in
the rain" idea had been one of her husband's more clever thoughts that
he attributed to the lack of creativity he saw around him.  He was
clever and she had liked him so much for so many years. She hadn't been
in love with him until his departure.  If she had been like all other
women she would have succumbed to these feelings and thoughts that she
needed her man terribly. Their overwhelming power tried to destroy her
resolve and only the idea that these feelings were illusions was she
able to maintain her integrity. The feelings were unadulterated
neediness because of his adultery-the jealous biological programming of
a woman. This feeling of love, this motif of women and pop culture,
vexed her.  It was annulling her marital contract that had been
engendered out of friendship of two people who were complete unto
themselves.  Well, he wasn't so complete.  He did whine.  That was for
sure.  There was a boy that came out from time to time needing a mommy.
 It had been nauseating to tolerate to say the least; but she had done
so under the firm belief that most men were worse than he was on this
point. And for her, there were female vulnerabilities but earlier she
had been prudent enough to get herself sterilized and minimized her
sexual activity.
      Before she came into the classroom she had encountered a couple
of her colleagues laughing shyly.  In the couple seconds that she drew
near them before passing they were tacit in the shamefaced ways of
Thais. She knew that many of them gossiped about her who was the wife
of a man celebrated for his adulterous debauchery.  She could have been
their holy martyr as the object of sympathy and the icon of women's
suffering but her frank endorsement of her husband's activities to
newspaper reporters had made her the subject of ridicule.  A man would
be totally lost if he didn't have his extramarital affairs, she said.
He would have no knowing of the nothingness of his misadventures unless
he were to experience minutes of despair after the orgasm was complete.
 This is what she told the reporters on a few occasions-each time
expanding on her ideas and making them more colorful than at previous
times.  She was proud of creating the Noppawan doctrine and she knew
that because of it the university wanted to get rid of her.  In ways
she was proud of being sneered at but it was uncomfortably lonely. She
imagined the thoughts of these two instructors who passed her, "Craggy
thing, no man would mount you. It is no wonder that you're forlorn for
the whores." No, they'd never even say anything like that even to each
other. They wouldn't even consciously think it. Thais were too polite
and too deferential to even the despised for that: instead there was
that shamefaced laugh and that reciprocal glance.   Then, as she was
walking to Building P with the tests that she had picked up from the
administration office, a boy and a girl were in front of her.  This
pair, holding hands, were taking up the whole sidewalk and blocking
everyone from passing in their slow movements.  The girl had books on
her head that she was trying to balance.  The boy watched her lovingly.
 She wanted to smack them-these dummies who were dopamine gluttons.
Everywhere she went it was young couples in love.  She wanted to get
out the biggest can of Raid and perform a major insecticide/genocide
that would give Miloshevik a companion in the Hague; but being a humane
individual such hideous thoughts could only instigate a wry smile or an
occasional chuckle.  When she saw such couples everywhere it made her
feel an antithesis of things: like an uncomfortable young girl
experiencing the wetness of blood being absorbed into her tampons for
the first time and as of a 26 year old tripping around in her days with
an old woman inside of her.
     This subject she was proctoring was business law, a subject so
unrelated to her field.  She unfastened a sheet of paper that was
posted on the window and looked at this list of student names. She
matched their identification cards to the list of names and got each of
their signatures. Weird ideas took over her brain as she looked into
their faces one by one and at their photographs on their student
identification cards.  "Surawit ,without glasses you would be as ugly
as with them; Wilawan, that bun of a pony tail is one thing that has
just got to go; Sira, you have nice swarthy skin so fuckable but that
nose is like it came from the days when wild boars used to roam the
whole planet-totally obscene and pugnacious; Kanoknant, really are you
the same girl in this picture I.D?  How strange! It looks like your
older sister and you look like you'd be one of the proud little girls
who possess one of these book bags near the white board with little stuffed ani
mals dangling from them-oh, god, I bet your parents hold
their heads in chagrin after giving birth to you;  Pornpitcha, ya'
frizzed orange hair is of a disco queen; Wiliwan playing beauty shop
with your pony tail-better on yourself than on other girls since that
is the usual preoccupation in classes; Pawisar, wouldn't that fat face
be less obtrusive if your hair was put in a pony tail-well, maybe
not...maybe it would be worse but still that hair is dangling into your
face distracting you from taking the test and more importantly looking
downright uncouth and stringy; Ekkachai, you certainly have a long
tie-I wonder how big your penis gets."  Those thoughts droned on and on
in the same pattern of crude novelty.

 

                                          Chapter 14

          Restless in the dewy grass of the hard ground, he was asleep.
His dreams registered what, numb, he hadn't comprehended so well the
previous evening. His brain rehashed those images surreal and slow:
Vanont slipping them a thousand baht; the decision on the sidewalk to
go to the whores; Kumpee saying that he, Jatupon, was a ladyboy and
couldn't go with them as if he had wanted to go with them (He might
have wanted to go but not with them and not with that thousand baht);
his numb malevolent smile at their laughter; being handed some loose
change to go home with; and then getting on a bus randomly, handing the
ticket tearer ten baht and pretending to be mute and dumb when asked
his destination since there was none.  He hadn't even said goodbye to
his brothers and all of those years together.  He just contemptuously
smiled at their contempt and disappeared. One day he would be in
America.  In time, he told himself, in time.  Being the cockroach had
passed in time. He had lived in the world as that of an insect all
those years. These family members didn't even have to ferret out his
miserable little existence to stomp on him daily.  It hadn't been much
of a sport just to see him scurry around in the same space within his
pain and yet it had been their main preoccupation.  Bad as it was, it
had passed without the necessity to kill himself. He just said to
himself that it would pass and it had.  He was no ladyboy. Maybe his
serious intensity made his limbs rigid and his movements circumspect
and gauche. Maybe it was strange that he rarely walked with his
brothers but instead walked behind them.  Undoubtedly he had been the
sexual recipient. Still that didn't make him into a ladyboy nor did it
make him gay. He was liberated.  He was a changing creation.  Past
actions did not have to define him. The word, ladyboy, for once did not
hurt him deeply since he was undergoing the metamorphosis of manhood.
Manhood was indefinable since it could be anything one slipped off and
slipped on at will during times that were critical junctures, as he
knew this was.  If he were to go back to Kazem or scurry over to the
senator so begrudging innate inclinations to help him, he would be a
man but a dependent one with childish yearnings to be shaped by others.
 He told himself he would smell like the fetid one, he would let the
sagging elasticity completely peel off his underwear embarrassingly,
and he would eat stray cats in the park but he would not sacrifice his
newly discovered integrity for the sake of comfort.
     In the early light of morning he woke up with maximum
determination despite the lack of solid sleep and seeing that his new
home was on the outskirts of a park.  It was a grassy fringe that went
behind the wall and gate that enclosed the actual park.  The sprinkling
of rain was falling onto him and he could smell the stink of his damp
shirt as if the metamorphosis to manhood had made him into the fetid
one.  Behind the wall he heard the squeaking chains of empty swings
being moved slowly in the wind.  Cars that infrequently passed the park
were unreal and eerie as descending ghosts. No sooner had he awakened
than a middle-aged woman in a red jacket rode up beside him on her
bicycle.  "Fortune teller?" she asked.
     "No," said Jatupon.
     "Don't you want your fortune read?"
     "No," he said. He knew he didn't have one.
     "I teach English too."
     "No," said Jatupon.  "I don't have anything for you."
     "Here.  Give this to someone who needs it."  She gave him a
business card that was nothing but a sliver of paper with a computer
printed, reduced, and photocopied message of Thai on one side and
English on the other. In her palm she had a whole stack of these tiny
square bits of paper.  As she rode away he read the English.  "Nattanat
near Lumpini Park.  (13:00-21:00) Office 3761/296 soi Yudee 9 Chan
Road Tambon Bangko, Kate Bangkolaem, BKK 10120 Thailand.
Tel.02-673-1436  Time call 04.00 AM or after 10.00 PM  Fortune Teller:
I give you many gifts  I am teacher English teacher/ Thai language
Ride big bicycle." She was one of the lucky ones.  Occasionally she
probably was able to find a foreigner who wanted to learn Thai and each
day she was able to give some fortunes that allowed her to have her own
little room and a telephone.  Thin as she was, she was able to live
even if, in part, she had to seek clients in the beggars themselves. He
waited around for the park to open.  Slipping into numbness with
nothing industrious to do, his integrity was shaken. He didn't want to
be here.  He could still go back to Kazem, he told himself.
     Kazem had always been "kind" in the respect that he had domineered
over him and protected him from harm except for times when he harmed
him; and this interestingly contradictory reality was what made their
relationship more sexy and beguiling the way a similar one might
beguile a battered woman in love to have more sex and children despite
her wish to leave him.  Sex (heterosexual or homosexual, conventional
or incestuous) was a passion of frenzy based on pleasure bonding and
emotional dependency, an inordinate amount of semen and sperm needing
to be ejaculated especially after a few days of sexual abstinence, and
force and self-consumption in a hunger to defy aloneness in rhythmic
banging and basic hedonism.  Kazem was strong and being a force that
could reckon with the world physically, he engendered in others an
instinct rife in interpreting powerful figures such as him as a prime
breeding experience.  A kind individual could never elicit the same
response.  For Jatupon a muscular presence that could harm him oozed
not only a pheromone but triggered in him a yearning to breed with a
prime specimen who asserted his will. If he had been a woman a baby of
this kind might well be created.  It would be a baby who would become a
man well equipped to survive and be sexy enough to perpetuate another
generation of this kind and deep in the psyche of every human was that
wish to breed with the best physical specimens.
     This being "in love" was an addictive rush and despite his mental
convictions, his body craved for the beloved.  Still one night had
totally passed without him and there would be others.  The time on the
ground had been uncomfortable but he knew he could be inured to it.  He
could numb himself to survive and it wouldn't be all that bad. This
wound Kazem had given him was a blackening of perspective as well as
the eye.  It was the only gift he had really given him: the gift of
maturity.
     He did not know what he was to do with the day.  Was he to spend
the last of his baht on bags of breadcrumbs that, like an old man, he
was to spread out for his friends, the pigeons?  He paid a couple baht
at a public bathroom.  After relieving himself, he took a partial bath
by cleaning part of his upper body in a sink.  Then he went into a
booth that had a faucet, which leaked water into an Asian style toilet.
Through effort he was able to catch some of the water before it went
into this urinal that was embedded into the floor. He was able to wash
off a bit of his lower extremities by these sprinkles.  He didn't want
to splash too much water or he might be fined or arrested.
     Numb and wary how to proceed with the hours of the days, he did
not know what to do with himself or how others in his predicament
wrestled with their time.  Was he supposed to meander along with
nothing to guide his walking?  Was he supposed to follow behind those
who seemed like herds and those who seemed like flocks?  If so, he told
himself, it should be with those who were homeless. By following them
he could learn how homeless people survived best and fulfill, at least
in a minuscule way, one's innate need for society.  He felt loose and
disconcerted.  His thoughts insurrected him and it felt as if they were
towing away bits of his brain.  The post office would open in a few
hours.  He could make the long sojourn to his mailbox and see if he had
a letter from Noppawan Piggy but public transportation cost money so he
just needed to comfort himself with the ideas that she had presented to
him.  She often said that everyone from ambassadors to beggars sewed
such petty lives for themselves. At least he thought those were her
exact words. She said something to that effect.  Each time that he
tried to remember exactly what she had written to him, and what she had
spoken from the boat, it became different.  It was distorted by the
impermanent neurological circuitry of the brain (so little did one
possess himself). The world was godless, love was a selfish realm, and
from what he knew of friendship, it was with people who used each other
to grow for a certain time or share similar attitudes in the hope of
not feeling alone when going through certain stages of life.  He
wondered if even his friendship with Noppawan was evanescent as a whiff
of clouds.  Why should she write to him, he thought to himself.
     If there hadn't been a bit of a thrill in becoming independent
and killing off past associations with family, he told himself, he
would commit suicide.  He couldn't really see much point in survival
anyhow with the inevitability of death biting at one's heels.  It was
good to kill off past family associations.  His aunt, he thought, had
invited a boy of his realm into her domain only to find that he had too
many needs and wasn't worth the trouble-the dog that needed to be sent
back to the pet store.  He resented her and was pleased with his
independent stance at severing family from his mind.  He tried to
forget the comfort of sleeping in his cell and never having to worry
about having money for meals and public toilets.
     He slept intermittently on park benches throughout the day.  To
avoid hunger and thirst he took a cup he found in the trash and begged
outside the park.  He watched a blind old woman with a wooden attaché
case of lottery tickets, a jasmine rosary salesman with merchandise
looped around his arms like long bracelets who went from car to car, a
woman at a table stringing them for her own sales (even the mendicants
had to compete with each other to gain a mere sustenance), sidewalk
seamstresses with their antique foot pumped sewing machines, and a man
with a bicycle-pulled ice-cream cart who stood there scooping out a dip
for someone.   A sock salesman at his table sat on a stool with his
hand poised under his chin when the rest of his life was faltering.
They did have such petty lives.  They, no different than the rich,
consumed food and expended their kinetic energy and liquids in the
bedroom in this perennial trap that human instinct and physiognomy
concocted.  He put on his sunglasses to blind himself from the motion
around him and time became stagnant as a traffic jam he was
witnessing-the people finally oozing out of trapped busses and around
halted vehicles like leaking oil.  The hours passed somehow and again
the park closed and he slept on its fringes with many others.
     The next morning taught him that breakfast could be waived if
begging from the previous evening had not gotten him the twenty baht
required for a meal but he needed to always keep some coins in his
pockets so that he could go into a public bathroom. Around 2:00
sidewalk restaurant workers tended to need their own respite from
drudgery and a barter arrangement of a meal for an hour's work could
sustain him and keep him from having to buy food. As non-preferable as
it was, the police did not badger one if he washed away his rotting
layers of stinking skin in the polluted canals or the Chao Phraya River
so long as he entered and exited with his underwear on.  The waters did
give him a skin rash, after a few days of bathing in this manner, but
this itch around his thighs was bearable.  Lucrative ventures came
every now and then when men wanted him.  He, at such times, was
sufficiently numb and insouciant in manhood and he would go there and
serve them safely without letting the whining child within him clamor
out.  He performed, was paid, and left never combining emotions with
such a physical act.  These men would not be his deliverance.  He had
to force that idea into his head and fight off his wish for a savior.

 
     Within a month and a little bit of persistency against refusals,
the metropolitan authorities scheduled him for an interview as a money
taker on a city bus.  He was scheduled with a score of others despite
his age.  He might not have gotten any job at all let alone a better
one than what he was applying for had English not rescued him.  They
needed someone knowledgeable of English in the information booth in an
air-conditioned cubicle at a skytrain station.  He would not be wearing
the grungy blue suits of the money takers but white ones that looked
like a captain. The thought of it filled him with pride.
     They gave him an advance so that he could buy this clothing, rent
out a cheap room, and not fast when it came to purchasing his lunches.
They didn't give him a day off but outside of making change for the
customers that needed to be done quickly, the work was easy.  It just
required a familiarity with major landmarks around each of the stops
and that he be able to direct foreigners where they needed to go.
National holidays (when he got them) were spent in the vicarious
borrowing of a personal life from a movie at a theatre.  He didn't
really know his coworkers.  Since it was his first job, and a new one
at that, he kept quiet and focused on his work.  He looked gauche and
foolish and he worked around them trying not to get into much contact.
They gossiped about others whom he didn't know (perhaps himself as
well) and repeatedly asked how he knew English so well.  Their tones
always became more caustic in addressing him; and when it came to
justifying his knowledge of English he would always vary his answers
fictitiously so as not to feel that he was buried in a rubble of
monotony.   His introverted awkwardness was at variance with their
complacent self-assured movements, and he withdrew into a world of
shadows surreal as being sucked up into random scenes of a silent
picture show. He was friendless and alone.  Outside of Noppawan, he
couldn't even imagine anyone who really cared about him a little; but
he did not have time to go to his post office box and he feared that
she was lost to him forever.  A solitary person usually needed to
invent a commiserating individual out there even if that person did not
really care; but he did not know anyone with whom to fool himself and
he saw that despite the Noppawan Doctrine against pettiness, he was
securing a petty life for himself like everyone else and the
exhilaration from his independence was waning.
     As Vanont slipped 40 baht through the hole of the window, Jatupon
changed it, attempting to keep his eyes steady in a marginally sunken
poise of professionalism without any special recognition of the
customer wanting the change.  The old man smiled at him warmly.  "Where
have you been, my boy?" he asked.

 
     Nawin Biadklang: it was a label, just a simple and different group
of words in which an entire metamorphosis took place.  He was new and
glorious and the lost and forlorn being that was Jatupon had fallen
from him effortlessly like the stink of scathing skin that he had
showered away in the morning.  Nawin Biadklang stood near the
Hualampong train station, watching the mosaic of light and shadow at
his feet like a child fully in the splendor of the present moment.  He
was drinking milk at a newsstand and thinking about his recent meeting
with Piggy in the Siriaj Hospital Museum.  He had asked her to go with
him to Wonder World Amusement Park but she wanted the silence away from
the meaningless of action. He turned to the headlines of the Bangkok
Post glancing at the cacophony of human relations.
     He read that a very passive anti-war demonstration had occurred in
Pattaya.  10,000 Thai Moslems had prayed for peace.  Well, he thought,
it was certainly gentler than placards and banners outside the American
Embassy in Bangkok, equating Bush as Satan; however it was probably
less effective.  Was the God who allowed thousands of people to be
incinerated in fire and melting steel caring especially about the fate
of the Afghans from a meditation and a chant?  He thought that it was
no wonder people tried to shut out larger issues than themselves and
seek comfort in the personal domain of their petty lives.  He turned
away from the newspaper. Four filthy boys came to him forcefully.  They
wanted milk from his grocery bag.  They wanted the same as what he was
drinking while reading the horror of the daily news.  He gave part of
what he had but he didn't want to give out the rest.  He was already
becoming coarse in his luck and he knew that he was guilty for
providing them with a nominal gratuity and shooing them away.  He went
inside the building, looked for more food and magazines to take with
him on his trip, and then entered the train.

     When the train began to move he went into a corridor connecting
two cars and rinsed his face in the sink.  He looked into the mirror.
Even his reflection seemed different.  His eyebrows seemed more bristly
and masculine.  He wasn't Jatuporn any longer.  A good son must join
the monastery for a while to fulfill his mother's wish to see her son
take on such holy head-shaven rites.  A good son must fund the
livelihood of his middle-aged parents who wanted to be free from the
hardship of work. A good son must renovate and extend the house of his
elderly parents. A scenario of filial loyalty to serve the parents' 
wishes abounded in Thais' simplistic notions of "good" behavior but
tragedy had freed him from it.  Then abuse disabused him of fraternal
loyalties.  Now he would be educated and find new compounds in his
sunrises and sunsets.
      A train officer asked him to get his luggage out of the way of
the aisle. Jatupon put his suitcase onto the ceiling rack and sat down
watching the scenery go by-watching Bangkok zip past him and become the
vanishing point from which something different would emerge from his
experiences at Chaing Mai International School.  He pulled the postcard
out of his pocket.  He read the words again and again, "I got them to
allow me to come to Chaing Mai.  I'll transfer there.  See you in a
week."  He smiled, slapped the postcard against his lower lip, and
watched the departure from Bangkok where the scenery became
increasingly green.

 
     When he came home he opened the door onto plentiful space.  His
body became stiff and cold. He needed to give directives to his legs in
order to move. The movements of his splayed legs when he walked were
like parting ice cycles even though the furnace was operating and it
was warm inside his apartment. Nearly everything movable by two hands
was gone, as well as most that would have required an additional mover.
 Only the heaviest things remained although clavicles of hangers
dangled from the bedroom closet and pots and pans were loyal and
steadfast.  The sofa remained.  It had been difficult to get in.  It
was no wonder that it hadn't been budged.  His socks and underwear had
been knocked out of the dresser before it was taken. He sighed.  His
canvases were gone and from them his new leitmotif that was maturing
beyond Patpong whores in Bangkok to something more thoughtful and
original. True, most of those canvases had been of her so she must have
thought that she was entitled to them as well. She was the model and
more who was seeking justice, he told himself, and justice was equity.
He hadn't paid her so she was seeking compensation.  All relationships
were a contract. All contracts were based upon the two parties gaining
some entitlement from the agreement. Was there nothing better than
this, he asked himself.  There wasn't.  He had thought that he was
helping her, that he was enlightening her, and that he was involved
with her. A tear rolled down his cheek.  She thought that she was
entitled to the canvasses too, he repeatedly thought.  She thought she
was entitled to it all.  Then, for a second, his attitude changed about
the stolen paintings and he was glad that, at least, she had cared
enough to take them. Then he knew that she would shake sentiment from
them no different than tossing out the contents of his clothing from
the dresser. She would sell even those portraits of herself wherever
she could.
     He backed against an empty wall and slid down it squatting like a
dog ready to defecate. Then he pulled into himself in a fetal position.
He was Jatupon in his puddle of blood yearning for the love of the
violator.  If love was mixing oneself into someone like vodka and cola,
he loved her.  If it was a child crying over the loss of his favorite
toy, he was feeling that.  Should a Thai newspaper reporter get a look
at him now, he thought, the nonchalant seducer of the souls of Patpong
girls would seem to him as a fraud.  The reporter would be
disillusioned that this young man championed for his bit of hedonism
had been an illusion.  His head throbbed.  He needed love from anyone,
sex with a stranger, anything that would stop the pain in his head.
With difficulty he slowly removed his winter coat and gloves with the
awkwardness of a child.
     Love, glue, or cocaine-it was all the same.  It was all molecules
of smell and taste.  It was a vertiginous freedom and insobriety of
action exempt of logic.  It was the personal adventure in a world of
impersonal actions.  It was admiring certain characteristics that were
lacking in oneself and it sometimes contained some degree of friendship
and caring or wanting to be cared about.  Maybe it was a vulnerability
of a human's weaker domain that wanted to merge with another being to
seem to himself as if he were less petty than what he really was or to
record himself permanently in the thoughts of another being.
     It was all gone including those canvasses on French Quebec
mannequins.  His evolution as an artist had been stunted.  He wanted to
cry but beyond that one tear there was nothing.  All he could do was
moan and pick up the telephone.  He needed a connection.  He needed
Noppawan.  Her sister answered.  "Nawin," she said nervously,  "she
moved.  She got a different teaching position.  She wanted a change.
She doesn't want to see you-I'm not really sure why and I don't think
she means it permanently.  Well, I do understand why. She's moving on.
I don't think that she sees it as much of a marriage. Surely you
understand that point. I like you but-"  He clicked off the telephone.
He couldn't help himself.  The void was sucking him into its black
hole.  He wanted to lie on his bed.  He was thankful to still have one.
 He wanted Kazem to materialize and to copulate with him on that bed.
He remembered then, long ago, having his thoughts in a black hole and
doubting if Kazem's love was real, seeing the abstraction of love in
colors and design like cubism, and how hungry he was in love with Kazem
especially when doubting that love.  Nothing had changed.  He loved
Porn and Piggy each in their own way as desperate as a clinging
salamander in the rain.
     He called Thai information.  He asked the operator to search for
Suthep, the youngest and the one closest to his sympathies. At least he
used to be. Then he had her search for Kazem and even Kumpee.   None of
the three had phone connections in their names.  His aunt, if she were
still living, would be married to someone else.  How would he be able
to find her again in this vast and mutable cosmos?  He wouldn't.  The
operator gave him the number of Amorn Tuwayanonde.  Maybe it was the
same one whom he had sometimes begged and played with as a boy-maybe
the same one who had grabbed his shoe instead of the ankle causing his
dangling body to fall from the window and into the warehouse triggering
off the burglar alarm.  He dialed the number.  A man answered.  Nawin
did not know what to say so he hung up the telephone.  The one he
really wanted to connect with was his uncle and he was dead.  And yet
they hadn't really had a relationship.  It was strange that the man had
paid for all of his tuition and stay at the international school, all
undergraduate and graduate expenses, and yet had remained a stranger.
He had been the man's son, in a way, and outside a couple times of
staying at his home, during Songkran, he had not known him.  When he
died he did not inherit anything.  He didn't even want or expect
anything.  He was grateful for the educational transformation that had
been bestowed unto him.  What happened to the man's money was anyone's
guess.
     If only he could commune with him somehow to again thank him it
would solidify a meaningful connection in his barren heart.  The cards
congratulating him on his first art exhibition at the art museum at
Silpakorn University and later, the temporary exhibit at the National
Gallery showed that he must have cared about him. He must have been
proud of him.  "Congratulations on the showing."  That was all they had
said.  Nawin guessed that the man had read about him in the newspapers
and knew of the exhibits that way. It was all strange.
     On his knees he scurried through his socks while discarding his
underwear in a pile.  Most of those socks that she had littered on the
floor were folded into each other as mates, but not all.  He felt
inside each sock and when he couldn't find anything he would throw it
into that pile like a dead fish.  Within the toes of one pair he pulled
out four plastic bags of cocaine.  It was his stash for periods of loss
and he monitored what he took according to the dictates of his third of
a teaspoon rule for self-rations.  The Nawin rule stated that once
every three months if an emergency arose requiring exhilaration or
thrust away from the void, then he might administer the prescription.
Such was his doctoral degree of addiction and from this philosophical
islet inundations from void and addiction could not take him away.  He
sat on the unmovable sofa and snorted the cocaine from one of its
wooden armrests.  He could feel it like a Thai massage over his entire
body and the insouciance it brought to his thoughts.
     He put on his winter coat and gloves and got in a taxi.  He told
the taxi driver to take him to a go-go bar called "Foxy's."  He had
been there several times before.  He watched women twisting their
bodies around poles as if each movement of being a woman was centered
on waxing the shiny phallus.  Tissue paper probably enlarged their
bosoms but he didn't care.  He would eat the juicy fruit and its
wrappings no different than any nigger his melon.  He wanted to relieve
himself in one or more of them.  Lost, he wanted to be lead by the
hallucinations of his mind.  When one who was on break said her hellos
and sat down on his lap, he put his paws on all parts of her body.  She
told him that he was a "naughty boy" and asked him where he was from.
He told her.  She said that she liked Asian men since they were so
small.  He told her that he wasn't small.  "I've seen them before.
They are itsy bitsy small." She used her fingers as a measurement.  It
wasn't what he cared to hear and although he wanted to pierce her with
his lengthy sword, he left in disgust.  He walked further down the
street to a male go-go bar that he had never been in before although
his wistful eyes had scanned it numerous times in the past month.
     When he entered young men from their angles of the platform were
pulling on their genitalia within dark frothy briefs of an opaque
translucency that made the movements of their genitalia obvious.  He
watched and waited not understanding why it was erotic.  He watched and
waited for the midnight all-legal fuck show.  He was tempted to take
these sly masturbators by force until what little was rational in his
brain contrived a belief that he was shackled against the wall waiting
to be attacked by them.  That portion of the brain said to him, "Even
if you were to get out of your shackles and fetters it would be bad
manners to attack these men before they come to attack you."  He
watched their contortionist-twisting and the surreal images on the
stage became more like flames and smoke.  The why-the reason that the
movements were erotic--eluded him.  The why-the reason-that flames and
smoke plumes made these adonises erotic in a spinning room of gnarling
metallic walls was a mystery.
     He wasn't sure if it was a dismembered part of a woman, a
transvestite, or something amorphous and alien, but lips in the sky
spoke to him.  "Do you want to take one home, honey?"
     "I want all of them," he said.  She laughed.
     "Do you have that much money?" she asked.
     "Maybe for one," he said.  "I need one to fuck me and my
girlfriend throughout the night."
     "That will be double the price, but well worth it.  We'll see to
that.  Satisfaction guaranteed. What's your girlfriend's name, honey?"
asked the lips.
     "Foxy's," he said.
     "Foxy's, like the girl go-go bar across the street?"
     "I don't know her name," he told the lips.
     "You don't know your girlfriend's name?" guffawed the lips.
     "I never checked the birth certificate."
     "Never checked the birth certificate! What a crazy mother fucker
you are!"  The lips laughed hysterically.
     "Do you have paint and canvases?"
     "Do I have what?"

     "I need paint.  I'll paint the fuck show on the walls.  I'm a
famous artist in Thailand.  Don't you know?"
     "No, is that so?"
     "I have to draw when the fuck show begins."
     The lips laughed hysterically.  She coughed from choking on her
own saliva.  "Wanting to pay in paint?" she asked.
     "Wanting to paint a fuck show," he said. He looked through her
mouth. He could see down her throat into her entrails.  Her brain was
where her stomach should have been.

     "Where to?" asked the taxi driver.  The voice again seemed like
one he could vaguely recall.  A boy who had been on top in the fuck
show (a boy 18 or 19 who was a snowman with a bit of a French
complexion) was seated next to him.  He remembered paying top Canadian
dollars for this boy.
     "Just keep going."
     "You said that 15 minutes ago but I need a destination."
     "Foxy's" he said.
     "We passed that long ago. It was right across the street from
where you were at," said the taxi driver through his gray balding scalp.
     "Okay, just take us out of the city.  Someplace rural."
     "Okay, I'm now turning on a highway going north."
     "Do you still want me with your girlfriend?" asked the boy.
     "I was going to pair you up with a girl: voyeurism.  I've had
second thoughts."  He kissed the boy on his lips.  He wanted to drain
him of all liquids including his breath.
     The boy pulled back his face to come up for breath.  "Where are
we going?"
     "I don't know, really.  Maybe we should go to a hotel.  I guess
we can't do it in the backseat here, off of a road somewhere."
     "Yeah, the back seat of a taxi thing wouldn't be too comfortable
for anyone."
     "Yeah, okay."
     "There's a sign pointing out a Best Western," he told Nawin.  "Can
you take us to that hotel?" the boy asked the taxi driver.
     "Excuse me.  Is that the decision?  Best Western?" asked the taxi
driver.
     "Yes," said Nawin.
     Turning to Nawin he interjected, "You aren't a psycho, cannibal,
or anything, are you?"
     "I'm a vegetarian," said Nawin.  He chuckled.  "Don't worry.  I
won't cut you up into pieces.  I'm harmless, and I hope the same is
true of you."
     "Sure, most of the time," said the boy as he yawned.
     "Jatupon, don't be shocked!  Look at me in the rear view mirror.
Face your fears," said the taxi driver.  Jatupon looked up.  He was
startled but he wasn't horrified.  He saw that the mosquito was in the
old man's form.
     "I made a merger," said the mosquito.  "I bought out the stock of
his blood.  With controlling stock I am the head of the company.  I
control all movements."  He laughed.  "How do I look?"
     Nawin did not know what to say.  "My God, I haven't seen you in 12
years, my boy.  You've grown up.  You have money and nice clothes.
Who'd ever think we'd meet again and in Montreal of all places."
     Nawin laughed bitterly  "Don't use that word, Jatupon, with me.
Okay?  I hate that word. You didn't need to emerge.  My lessens about
life are all my own, now."
     "Can you face life without clinging to anything?"
     "It is the way of the Buddha"
     "But is it your way?"
     "Sure, why not?  If I choose so I can do anything.  If I choose, I
can swat you out of existence."
     "The only friend you've ever had?"
     "Sure, why not?  Just like with a gnat." He slapped him on the
head and the mosquito seemed to shrink.
     "Please don't.  Who will drive you then if you get rid of me? You
killed my ancestors in your buckets of laundry soap and slapped them
into your palms like a sport. I think that is enough."
     "I can get into another cab if I choose. I can stop the coke if I
choose.  I don't need women or anybody least of all you.  But you know,
you aren't so bad.  You certainly aren't scary any longer.  Maybe I'll
let you stay."
     "Gee, thanks."  The mosquito paused for a moment.  "Why do you
have this go-go boy in here?  Who is this boy? " he asked.
     "Someone I'm ready to fuck"
     "I gathered that; and that the tenor of the conversation had
turned against back seat liaisons. I'm just puzzled by these changeable
sexual patterns, Jatupon.  Something's not right in your head."
     "Listen!  Don't use that name with me or I'll take you by the
fucking neck and smash your face against the windshield"
     "Okay, Nawin, calm down."
     "For that matter, I could roll down the window and let you fly out
and drive myself.  I have an international driver's license.  Nawin is
a big boy, now, Mosquito."  He guffawed at the pest and slapped him on
the head.   The mosquito/man hissed and stuck out its fangs.  "You
watch yourself.  You are in forces over your head.  You're not even in
control of yourself.  Why did you get married?  Why did you bring Porn
here?  Why am I and this boy with you now?  What forces drive you?"
     "Hunger."
     "Porn?"
     "Hunger."
     "Noppawan?"
     "Union."
     "Hunger again.  Hunger for stability."
     "Okay, hunger again.  Women are a turn on"
     "Are they?  And here you are with a boy, Jatupon."
     "The name's Nawin," he shouted.  Then he calmed down and laughed
at himself.  "Yeah, it's Jatupon; and you're right, here I am with a
boy."  He laughed again.  "Variety is the spice of life. That is an
American aphorism, Mosquito; and Nawin here is a full blooded American
born in the states."
     "I don't see a Best Western.  How far out on this road do you want
to go?"
     Nawin looked at the boy next to him who had fallen asleep.  "He
looks like a child-a hurt child trying in sleep to just figure out how
to make sense out of his situation, survive and not sell himself out
too fully.  I should be saving kids like this-even in Canada kids can
be trashed."
     "Will you save him before or after you fuck him?"
     "Maybe I ought to just go home.  This guy on top or bottom isn't
going to stop me from hurting or from being hungry. It just propels me
quicker to the next hunger."  He smiled.  "I think I can get a grip on
me completely.  I really do.  Having people plug up my pain is the glue
that I disgorge into my nostrils, the caulk and the repainting that
hides the broken facade.  I don't want to be a wrinkled black
thing like you and still picking up prostitutes.  Piggy had the right
idea.  I might as well start the habit sooner than later."
     "She's left you.  She's gone now."
     "It's okay. Maybe she needs some time to grow away from being a
Biadklang.  Maybe she needs to get rid of my name completely.  I can be
alone.  I need a relationship with myself anyhow.  Maybe I'll see her
again and maybe not.  Anyhow, there's some Aristotle and Plato I want
to read-a textbook on tenebrism I need to get through for my Caravaggio
class. I'll have to begin my doctoral thesis shortly."
     "Hollow ideas."
     "To the impetuousness of human feelings, hollow; but not to the
mind. There the theory of forms is sensed as eternal.  Take me home.
Drop this kid off wherever he wants first."