Finally, filtering companies' failure to engage in regular
re-review of Web pages that they have already categorized (or
that they have determined do not fall into any category) results
in a substantial amount of over- and underblocking.  For example,
Web publishers change the contents of Web pages frequently.  The
problem also arises when a Web site goes out of existence and its
domain name or IP address is reassigned to a new Web site
publisher.  In that case, a filtering company's previous
categorization of the IP address or domain name would likely be
incorrect, potentially resulting in the over- or underblocking of
many thousands of pages.
The inaccuracies that result from these limitations of
filtering technology are quite substantial.  At least tens of
thousands of pages of the indexable Web are overblocked by each
of the filtering programs evaluated by experts in this case, even
when considered against the filtering companies' own category
definitions.  Many erroneously blocked pages contain content that
is completely innocuous for both adults and minors, and that no
rational person could conclude matches the filtering companies'
category definitions, such as "pornography" or "sex."


The number of overblocked sites is of course much higher
with respect to the definitions of obscenity and child
pornography that CIPA employs for adults, since the filtering
products' category definitions, such as "sex" and "nudity,"
encompass vast amounts of Web pages that are neither child
pornography nor obscene.  Thus, the number of pages of
constitutionally protected speech blocked by filtering products
far exceeds the many thousands of pages that are overblocked by
reference to the filtering products' category definitions.


No presently conceivable technology can make the judgments
necessary to determine whether a visual depiction fits the legal
definitions of obscenity, child pornography, or harmful to
minors.  Given the state of the art in filtering and image
recognition technology, and the rapidly changing and expanding
nature of the Web, we find that filtering products' shortcomings
will not be solved through a technical solution in the
foreseeable future.   In sum, filtering products are currently
unable to block only visual depictions that are obscene, child
pornography, or harmful to minors (or, only content matching a
filtering product's category definitions) while simultaneously
allowing access to all protected speech (or, all content not
matching the blocking product's category definitions).  Any
software filter that is reasonably effective in blocking access
to Web pages that fall within its category definitions will
necessarily erroneously block a substantial number of Web pages
that do not fall within its category definitions.
2.        Analytic Framework for the Opinion: The Centrality of Dole
and the Role of the Facial Challenge

Both the plaintiffs and the government agree that, because
this case involves a challenge to the constitutionality of the
conditions that Congress has set on state actors' receipt of
federal funds, the Supreme Court's decision in South Dakota v.
Dole, 483 U.S. 203 (1987), supplies the proper threshold analytic
framework.  The constitutional source of Congress's spending
power is Article I, Sec. 8, cl. 1, which provides that "Congress
shall have Power . . . to pay the Debts and provide for the
common Defence and general Welfare of the United States."  In
Dole, the Court upheld the constitutionality of a federal statute
requiring the withholding of federal highway funds from any state
with a drinking age below 21.  Id. at 211-12.  In sustaining the
provision's constitutionality, Dole articulated four general
constitutional limitations on Congress's exercise of the spending
power.


First, "the exercise of the spending power must be in
pursuit of 'the general welfare.'"  Id. at 207.  Second, any
conditions that Congress sets on states' receipt of federal funds
must be sufficiently clear to enable recipients "to exercise
their choice knowingly, cognizant of the consequences of their
participation."  Id. (internal quotation marks and citation
omitted).  Third, the conditions on the receipt of federal funds
must bear some relation to the purpose of the funding program.
Id.  And finally, "other constitutional provisions may provide an
independent bar to the conditional grant of federal funds."  Id.
at 208.  In particular, the spending power "may not be used to
induce the States to engage in activities that would themselves
be unconstitutional.  Thus, for example, a grant of federal funds
conditioned on invidiously discriminatory state action or the
infliction of cruel and unusual punishment would be an
illegitimate exercise of the Congress' broad spending power."
Id. at 210.


Plaintiffs do not contend that CIPA runs afoul of the first
three limitations.  However, they do allege that CIPA is
unconstitutional under the fourth prong of Dole because it will
induce public libraries to violate the First Amendment.
Plaintiffs therefore submit that the First Amendment "provide[s]
an independent bar to the conditional grant of federal funds"
created by CIPA.  Id. at 208.  More specifically, they argue that
by conditioning public libraries' receipt of federal funds on the
use of software filters, CIPA will induce public libraries to
violate the First Amendment rights of Internet content-providers
to disseminate constitutionally protected speech to library
patrons via the Internet, and the correlative First Amendment
rights of public library patrons to receive constitutionally
protected speech on the Internet.
The government concedes that under the Dole framework, CIPA
is facially invalid if its conditions will induce public
libraries to violate the First Amendment.  The government and the
plaintiffs disagree, however, on the meaning of Dole's
"inducement" requirement in the context of a First Amendment
facial challenge to the conditions that Congress places on state
actors' receipt of federal funds.  The government contends that
because plaintiffs are bringing a facial challenge, they must
show that under no circumstances is it possible for a public
library to comply with CIPA's conditions without violating the
First Amendment.  The plaintiffs respond that even if it is
possible for some public libraries to comply with CIPA without
violating the First Amendment, CIPA is facially invalid if it
"will result in the impermissible suppression of a substantial
amount of protected speech."


Because it was clear in Dole that the states could comply
with the challenged conditions that Congress attached to the
receipt of federal funds without violating the Constitution, the
Dole Court did not have occasion to explain fully what it means
for Congress to use the spending power to "induce [recipients] to
engage in activities that would themselves be unconstitutional."
 Dole, 483 U.S. at 210; see id. at 211 ("Were South Dakota to
succumb to the blandishments offered by Congress and raise its
drinking age to 21, the State's action in so doing would not
violate the constitutional rights of anyone.").  Although the
proposition that Congress may not pay state actors to violate
citizens' First Amendment  rights is unexceptionable when stated
in the abstract, it is unclear what exactly a litigant must
establish to facially invalidate an exercise of Congress's
spending power on this ground.
In general, it is well-established that a court may sustain
a facial challenge to a statute only if the plaintiff
demonstrates that the statute admits of no constitutional
application.  See United States v. Salerno, 481 U.S. 739, 745
(1987) ("A facial challenge to a legislative Act is, of course,
the most difficult challenge to mount successfully, since the
challenger must establish that no set of circumstances exists
under which the Act would be valid."); see also Bowen v.
Kendrick, 487 U.S. 589, 612 (1988) ("It has not been the Court's
practice, in considering facial challenges to statutes of this
kind, to strike them down in anticipation that particular
applications may result in unconstitutional use of funds.")
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted).


First Amendment overbreadth doctrine creates a limited
exception to this rule by permitting facial invalidation of a
statute that burdens a substantial amount of protected speech,
even if the statute may be constitutionally applied in particular
circumstances.  "The Constitution gives significant protection
from overbroad laws that chill speech within the First
Amendment's vast and privileged sphere.  Under this principle, [a
law] is unconstitutional on its face if it prohibits a
substantial amount of protected expression."  Ashcroft v. Free
Speech Coalition, 122 S. Ct. 1389, 1399 (2002); see also
Broadrick v. Oklahoma, 413 U.S. 601, 612 (1973).  This more
liberal test of a statute's facial validity under the First
Amendment stems from the recognition that where a statute's reach
contemplates a number of both constitutional and unconstitutional
applications, the law's sanctions may deter individuals from
challenging the law's validity by engaging in constitutionally
protected speech that may nonetheless be proscribed by the law.
Without an overbreadth doctrine, "the contours of regulation
would have to be hammered out case by case – and tested only by
those hardy enough to risk criminal prosecution to determine the
proper scope of regulation."  Dombrowski v. Pfister, 380 U.S.
479, 487 (1965); see also Brockett v. Spokane Arcades, Inc., 472
U.S. 491, 503 (1985) ("[A]n individual whose own speech or
expressive conduct may validly be prohibited or sanctioned is
permitted to challenge a statute on its face because it also
threatens others not before the court – those who desire to
engage in legally protected expression but who may refrain from
doing so rather than risk prosecution or undertake to have the
law declared partially invalid.").


Plaintiffs argue that the overbreadth doctrine is applicable
here, since CIPA "threatens to chill free speech – because it
will censor a substantial amount of protected speech, because it
is vague, and because the law creates a prior restraint . . . ."
 Unlike the statutes typically challenged as facially overbroad,
however, CIPA does not impose criminal penalties on those who
violate its conditions.  Cf. Freedom of Speech Coalition, 122 S.
Ct. at 1398 ("With these severe penalties in force, few
legitimate movie producers or book publishers, or few other
speakers in any capacity, would risk distributing images in or
near the uncertain reach of this law.").  Thus, the rationale for
permitting facial challenges to laws that may be constitutionally
applied in some instances is less compelling in cases such as
this, which involve challenges to Congress's exercise of the
spending power, than in challenges to criminal statutes.
Nonetheless, "even minor punishments can chill protected
speech," id., and absent the ability to challenge CIPA on its
face, public libraries that depend on federal funds may decide to
comply with CIPA's terms, thereby denying patrons access to
substantial amounts of constitutionally protected speech, rather
than refusing to comply with CIPA's terms and consequently losing
the benefits of federal funds.  See 47 C.F.R. Sec. 54.520(e)(1) ("A
school or library that knowingly fails to ensure the use of
computers in accordance with the certifications required by this
section, must reimburse any funds and discounts received under
the federal universal support service support mechanism for
schools and libraries for the period in which there was
noncompliance.").  Even in cases where the only penalty for
failure to comply with a statute is the withholding of federal
funds, the Court has sustained facial challenges to Congress's
exercise of the spending power.  See, e.g., Legal Servs. Corp. v.
Velazquez, 531 U.S. 533 (2001) (declaring unconstitutional on its
face a federal statute restricting the ability of legal services
providers who receive federal funds to engage in activity
protected by the First Amendment).


The Court's unconstitutional conditions cases, such as
Velazquez, are not strictly controlling, since they do not
require a showing that recipients who comply with the conditions
attached to federal funding will, as state actors, violate
others' constitutional rights, as is the case under the fourth
prong of Dole.  However, they are highly instructive.
The Supreme Court's pronouncements in the unconstitutional
conditions cases on what is necessary for a plaintiff to mount a
successful First Amendment facial challenge to an exercise of
Congress's spending power have not produced a seamless web.  For
example, in Rust v. Sullivan, 500 U.S. 173 (1991), the Court
rejected a First Amendment facial challenge to federal
regulations prohibiting federally funded healthcare clinics from
providing counseling concerning the use of abortion as a method
of family planning, explaining that:
Petitioners are challenging the facial validity of the
regulations.  Thus, we are concerned only with the
question whether, on their face, the regulations are
both authorized by the Act and can be construed in such
a manner that they can be applied to a set of
individuals without infringing upon constitutionally
protected rights.  Petitioners face a heavy burden in
seeking to have the regulations invalidated as facially
unconstitutional. . . .  The fact that the regulations
might operate unconstitutionally under some conceivable
set of circumstances is insufficient to render them
wholly invalid.


Id. at 183 (internal quotation marks, alterations, and citation
omitted).  In contrast, NEA v. Finley, 524 U.S. 569 (1998), which
also involved a facial First Amendment challenge to an exercise
of Congress's spending power, articulated a somewhat more liberal
test of facial validity than Rust, explaining that "[t]o prevail,
respondents must demonstrate a substantial risk that application
of the provision will lead to the suppression of speech."  Id. at
580.
Against this background, it is unclear to us whether, to
succeed in facially invalidating CIPA on the grounds that it will
"induce the States to engage in activities that would themselves
be unconstitutional," Dole, 483 U.S. at 210, plaintiffs must show
that it is impossible for public libraries to comply with CIPA's
conditions without violating the First Amendment, or rather
simply that CIPA will effectively restrict library patrons'
access to substantial amounts of constitutionally protected
speech, therefore causing many libraries to violate the First
Amendment.  However, we need not resolve this issue.  Rather, we
may assume without deciding, for purposes of this case, that a
facial challenge to CIPA requires plaintiffs to show that any
public library that complies with CIPA's conditions will
necessarily violate the First Amendment and, as explained in
detail below, we believe that CIPA's constitutionality fails even
under this more restrictive test of facial validity urged on us
by the government.  Because of the inherent limitations in
filtering technology, public libraries can never comply with CIPA
without blocking access to a substantial amount of speech that is
both constitutionally protected and fails to meet even the
filtering companies' own blocking criteria.  We turn first to the
governing legal principles to be applied to the facts in order to
determine whether the First Amendment permits a library to use
the filtering technology mandated by CIPA.
3.        Level of Scrutiny Applicable to Content-based Restrictions
on Internet Access in Public Libraries



In analyzing the constitutionality of a public library's use
of Internet filtering software, we must first identify the
appropriate level of scrutiny to apply to this restriction on
patrons' access to speech.  While plaintiffs argue that a public
library's use of such filters is subject to strict scrutiny, the
government maintains that the applicable standard is rational
basis review.  If strict scrutiny applies, the government must
show that the challenged restriction on speech is narrowly
tailored to promote a compelling government interest and that no
less restrictive alternative would further that interest.  United
States v. Playboy Entm't Group, Inc., 529 U.S. 803, 813 (2000).
In contrast, under rational basis review, the challenged
restriction need only be reasonable; the government interest that
the restriction serves need not be compelling; the restriction
need not be narrowly tailored to serve that interest; and the
restriction "need not be the most reasonable or the only
reasonable limitation."  Cornelius v. NAACP Legal Def. & Educ.
Fund, 473 U.S. 788, 808 (1985).


Software filters, by definition, block access to speech on
the basis of its content, and content-based restrictions on
speech are generally subject to strict scrutiny.  See Playboy,
529 U.S. at 813 ("[A] content-based speech restriction . . . can
stand only if it satisfies strict scrutiny.").  Strict scrutiny
does not necessarily apply to content-based restrictions on
speech, however, where the restrictions apply only to speech on
government property, such as public libraries.  "[I]t is . . .
well settled that the government need not permit all forms of
speech on property that it owns and controls."  Int'l Soc'y for
Krishna Consciousness, Inc. v. Lee, 505 U.S. 672, 678 (1992).  We
perforce turn to a discussion of public forum doctrine.
1.        Overview of Public Forum Doctrine
The government's power to restrict speech on its own
property is not unlimited.  Rather, under public forum doctrine,
the extent to which the First Amendment permits the government to
restrict speech on its own property depends on the character of
the forum that the government has created.  See Cornelius v.
NAACP Legal Def. & Educ. Fund, Inc., 473 U.S. 788 (1985).  Thus,
the First Amendment affords greater deference to restrictions on
speech in those areas considered less amenable to free
expression, such as military bases, see Greer v. Spock, 424 U.S.
828 (1976), jail grounds, see Adderley v. Florida, 385 U.S. 39
(1966), or public airport terminals, see Int'l Soc'y for Krishna
Consciousness, Inc. v. Lee, 505 U.S. 672 (1992), than to
restrictions on speech in state universities, see Rosenberger v.
Rector & Visitors of Univ. of Va., 515 U.S. 819 (1995), or
streets, sidewalks and public parks, see Frisby v. Schultz, 487
U.S. 474 (1988); Hague v. CIO, 307 U.S. 496 (1939).
The Supreme Court has identified three types of fora for
purposes of identifying the level of First Amendment scrutiny
applicable to content-based restrictions on speech on government
property: traditional public fora, designated public fora, and
nonpublic fora.  Traditional public fora include sidewalks,
squares, and public parks:
[S]treets and parks . . . have immemorially been held
in trust for the use of the public and, time out of
mind, have been used for purposes of assembly,
communicating thoughts between citizens, and discussing
public questions.  Such use of the streets and public
places has, from ancient times, been a part of the
privileges, immunities, rights, and liberties of
citizens.


Hague, 307 U.S. at 515.  "In these quintessential public forums,
. . . [f]or the State to enforce a content-based exclusion it
must show that its regulation is necessary to serve a compelling
state interest and that it is narrowly drawn to achieve that
end."  Perry Educ. Ass'n v. Perry Local Educs. Ass'n, 460 U.S.
37, 45 (1983); see also Int'l Soc'y for Krishna Consciousness,
505 U.S. at 678 ("[R]egulation of speech on government property
that has traditionally been available for public expression is
subject to the highest scrutiny."); Frisby, 487 U.S. at 480
("[W]e have repeatedly referred to public streets as the
archetype of a traditional public forum.").
A second category of fora, known as designated (or limited)
public fora, "consists of public property which the State has
opened for use by the public as a place for expressive activity."
 Perry, 460 U.S. at 46.  Whereas any content-based restriction on
the use of traditional public fora is subject to strict scrutiny,
the state is generally permitted, as long as it does not
discriminate on the basis of viewpoint, to limit a designated
public forum to certain speakers or the discussion of certain
subjects.  See Perry, 460 U.S. at 45 n.7.  Once it has defined
the limits of a designated public forum, however, "[r]egulation
of such property is subject to the same limitations as that
governing a traditional public forum."  Int'l Soc'y for Krishna
Consciousness, 505 U.S. at 678.  Examples of designated fora
include university meeting facilities, see Widmar v. Vincent, 454
U.S. 263 (1981), school board meetings, see City of Madison Joint
School Dist. v. Wisc. Employment Relations Comm'n, 429 U.S. 167
(1976), and municipal theaters, see Southeastern Promotions, Ltd.
v. Conrad, 420 U.S. 546 (1975).


The third category, nonpublic fora, consists of all
remaining public property.  "Limitations on expressive activity
conducted on this last category of property must survive only a
much more limited review.  The challenged regulation need only be
reasonable, as long as the regulation is not an effort to
suppress the speaker's activity due to disagreement with the
speaker's view."  Int'l Soc'y for Krishna Consciousness, 505 U.S.
at 679.
2.        Contours of the Relevant Forum: the Library's
Collection as a Whole or the Provision of Internet
Access?

To apply public forum doctrine to this case, we must first
determine whether the appropriate forum for analysis is the
library's collection as a whole, which includes both print and
electronic resources, or the library's provision of Internet
access.  Where a plaintiff seeks limited access, for expressive
purposes, to governmentally controlled property, the Supreme
Court has held that the relevant forum is defined not by the
physical limits of the government property at issue, but rather
by the specific access that the plaintiff seeks:
Although . . . as an initial matter a speaker must seek
access to public property or to private property
dedicated to public use to evoke First Amendment
concerns, forum analysis is not completed merely by
identifying the government property at issue.  Rather,
in defining the forum we have focused on the access
sought by the speaker.  When speakers seek general
access to public property, the forum encompasses that
property.  In cases in which limited access is sought,
our cases have taken a more tailored approach to
ascertaining the perimeters of a forum within the
confines of the government property.
Cornelius v. NAACP Legal Def. & Educ. Fund, Inc., 473 U.S. 788,
801 (1985).


Thus, in Cornelius, where the plaintiffs were legal defense
and political advocacy groups seeking to participate in the
Combined Federal Campaign charity drive, the Court held that the
relevant forum, for First Amendment purposes, was not the entire
federal workplace, but rather the charity drive itself.  Id. at
801.  Similarly, in Perry Education Association v. Perry Local
Educators' Association, 460 U.S. 37 (1983), which addressed a
union's right to access a public school's internal mail system
and teachers' mailboxes, the Court identified the relevant forum
as the school's mail system, not the public school as a whole.
In Widmar v. Vincent, 454 U.S. 263 (1981), in which a student
group challenged a state university's restrictions on use of its
meeting facilities, the Court identified the relevant forum as
the meeting facilities to which the plaintiffs sought access, not
the state university generally.  And in Christ's Bride
Ministries, Inc. v. SEPTA, 148 F.3d 242 (3d Cir. 1998), involving
a First Amendment challenge to the removal of advertisements from
subway and commuter rail stations, the Third Circuit noted that
the forum at issue was not the rail and subway stations as a
whole, but rather the advertising space within the stations.  Id.
at 248.  Although these cases dealt with the problem of
identifying the relevant forum where speakers are claiming a
right of access, we believe that the same approach applies to
identifying the relevant forum where the parties seeking access
are listeners or readers.


In this case, the patron plaintiffs are not asserting a
First Amendment right to compel public libraries to acquire
certain books or magazines for their print collections.  Nor are
the Web site plaintiffs claiming a First Amendment right to
compel public libraries to carry print materials that they
publish.  Rather, the right at issue in this case is the specific
right of library patrons to access information on the Internet,
and the specific right of Web publishers to provide library
patrons with information via the Internet.  Thus, the relevant
forum for analysis is not the library's entire collection, which
includes both print and electronic media, such as the Internet,
but rather the specific forum created when the library provides
its patrons with Internet access.
Although a public library's provision of Internet access
does not resemble the conventional notion of a forum as a well-
defined physical space, the same First Amendment standards apply.
 See Rosenberger v. Rector & Visitors of Univ. of Va., 515 U.S.
819, 830 (1995) (holding that a state university's student
activities fund "is a forum more in a metaphysical than a spatial
or geographic sense, but the same principles are applicable");
see also Cornelius, 473 U.S. at 801 (identifying the Combined
Federal Campaign charity drive as the relevant unit of analysis
for application of public forum doctrine).
3.        Content-based Restrictions in Designated Public Fora


Unlike nonpublic fora such as airport terminals, see Int'l
Soc'y for Krishna Consciousness, Inc. v. Lee, 505 U.S. 672
(1992), military bases, see Greer v. Spock, 424 U.S. 828 (1976),
jail grounds, see Adderley v. Florida, 385 U.S. 39 (1966), the
federal workplace, see Cornelius v. NAACP Legal Def. & Educ.
Fund, 473 U.S. 788, 805 (1985), and public transit vehicles, see
Lehman v. City of Shaker Heights, 418 U.S. 298 (1974), the
purpose of a public library in general, and the provision of
Internet access within a public library in particular, is "for
use by the public . . . for expressive activity," Perry Educ.
Ass'n v. Perry Local Educs. Ass'n, 460 U.S. 37, 45 (1983),
namely, the dissemination and receipt by the public of a wide
range of information.  We are satisfied that when the government
provides Internet access in a public library, it has created a
designated public forum.  See Mainstream Loudoun v. Bd. of
Trustees of the Loudoun County Library, 24 F. Supp. 2d 552, 563
(E.D. Va. 1998); cf. Kreimer v. Bureau of Police, 958 F.2d 1242,
1259 (3d Cir. 1992) (holding that a public library is a limited
public forum).
Relying on those cases that have recognized that government
has leeway, under the First Amendment, to limit use of a
designated public forum to narrowly specified purposes, and that
content-based restrictions on speech that are consistent with
those purposes are subject only to rational basis review, the
government argues for application of rational basis review to
public libraries' decisions about which content to make available
to their patrons via the Internet.  See Rosenberger, 515 U.S.
819, 829 (1995) ("The necessities of confining a forum to the
limited and legitimate purposes for which it was created may
justify the State in reserving it for certain groups or for the
discussion of certain topics."); Perry, 460 U.S. at 46 n.7 (1983)
("A public forum may be created for a limited purpose such as use
by certain groups . . . or for the discussion of certain
subjects.").


In particular, the government forcefully argues that a
public library's decision to limit the content of its digital
offerings on the Internet should be subject to no stricter
scrutiny than its decisions about what content to make available
to its patrons through the library's print collection.  According
to the government, just as a public library may choose to acquire
books about gardening but not golf, without having to show that
this content-based restriction on patrons' access to speech is
narrowly tailored to further a compelling state interest, so may
a public library make content-based decisions about which speech
to make available on the Internet, without having to show that
such a restriction satisfies strict scrutiny.
Plaintiffs respond that the government's ability to restrict
the content of speech in a designated public forum by restricting
the purpose of the designated public forum that it creates is not
unlimited.  Cf. Legal Servs. Corp. v. Velazquez, 531 U.S. 533,
547 (2001) ("Congress cannot recast a condition on funding as a
mere definition of its program in every case, lest the First
Amendment be reduced to a simple semantic exercise.").  As
Justice Kennedy has explained:
If Government has a freer hand to draw content-based
distinctions in limiting a forum than in excluding
someone from it, the First Amendment would be a dead
letter in designated public forums; every exclusion
could be recast as a limitation. . . .  The power to
limit or redefine forums for a specific legitimate
purpose does not allow the government to exclude
certain speech or speakers from them for any reason at
all.
Denver Area Telecomm. Consortium, Inc. v. FCC, 518 U.S. 727, 801
(1996) (Kennedy, J., concurring in the judgment).


Although we agree with plaintiffs that the First Amendment
imposes some limits on the state's ability to adopt content-based
restrictions in defining the purpose of a public forum, precisely
what those limits are is unclear, and presents a difficult
problem in First Amendment jurisprudence.  The Supreme Court's
"cases have not yet determined . . . that government's decision
to dedicate a public forum to one type of content or another is
necessarily subject to the highest level of scrutiny.  Must a
local government, for example, show a compelling state interest
if it builds a band shell in the park and dedicates it solely to
classical music (but not to jazz)?  The answer is not obvious."
Denver, 518 U.S. at 750 (plurality opinion); see also
Southeastern Promotions, Ltd. v. Conrad, 420 U.S. 546, 572-73
(1975) (Rehnquist, J., dissenting) ("May an opera house limit its
productions to operas, or must it also show rock musicals?  May a
municipal theater devote an entire season to Shakespeare, or is
it required to book any potential producer on a first come, first
served basis?").
We believe, however, that certain principles emerge from the
Supreme Court's jurisprudence on this question.  In particular,
and perhaps somewhat counterintuitively, the more narrow the
range of speech that the government chooses to subsidize (whether
directly, through government grants or other funding, or
indirectly, through the creation of a public forum) the more
deference the First Amendment accords the government in drawing
content-based distinctions.


At one extreme lies the government's decision to fund a
particular message that the government seeks to disseminate.  In
this context, content-based restrictions on the speech that
government chooses to subsidize are clearly subject to at most
rational basis review, and even viewpoint discrimination is
permissible.  For example, "[w]hen Congress established a
National Endowment for Democracy to encourage other countries to
adopt democratic principles, 22 U.S.C. Sec. 4411(b), it was not
constitutionally required to fund a program to encourage
competing lines of political philosophy such as communism and
fascism."  Rust v. Sullivan, 500 U.S. 173, 194 (1991); see also
Velazquez, 531 U.S. at 541 ("[V]iewpoint-based funding decisions
can be sustained in instances in which the government is itself
the speaker, or in instances, like Rust, in which the government
used private speakers to transmit information pertaining to its
own program.") (internal quotation marks and citation omitted).
Although not strictly controlling, the Supreme Court's
unconstitutional conditions cases, such as Rust and Velazquez,
are instructive for purposes of analyzing content-based
restrictions on the use of public fora.  This is because the
limitations that government places on the use of a public forum
can be conceptualized as conditions that the government attaches
to the receipt of a benefit that it offers, namely, the use of
government property.  Public forum cases thus resemble those
unconstitutional conditions cases involving First Amendment
challenges to the conditions that the state places on the receipt
of a government benefit.  See Velazquez, 531 U.S. at 544 ("As
this suit involves a subsidy, limited forum cases . . . may not
be controlling in the strict sense, yet they do provide some
instruction.").


Even when the government does not fund the dissemination of
a particular government message, the First Amendment generally
permits government, subject to the constraints of viewpoint
neutrality, to create public institutions such as art museums and
state universities, dedicated to facilitating the dissemination
of private speech that the government believes to have particular
merit.  Thus, in NEA v. Finley, 524 U.S. 569 (1998), the Court
upheld the use of content-based restrictions in a federal program
awarding grants to artists on the basis of, inter alia, artistic
excellence.  "The very assumption of the NEA is that grants will
be awarded according to the artistic worth of competing
applications, and absolute neutrality is simply inconceivable."
Id. at 585 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted).
Similarly, as Justice Stevens explained in his concurring
opinion in Widmar v. Vincent, 454 U.S. 263 (1981), the First
Amendment does not necessarily subject to strict scrutiny a state
university's use of content-based means of allocating scarce
resources, including limited public fora such as its meeting
facilities:
Because every university's resources are limited, an
educational institution must routinely make decisions
concerning the use of the time and space that is
available for extracurricular activities.  In my
judgment, it is both necessary and appropriate for
those decisions to evaluate the content of a proposed
student activity.  I should think it obvious, for
example, that if two groups of 25 students requested
the use of a room at a particular time – one to view
Mickey Mouse cartoons and the other to rehearse an
amateur performance of Hamlet – the First Amendment
would not require that the room be reserved for the
group that submitted its application first.  Nor do I
see why a university should have to establish a
"compelling state interest" to defend its decision to
permit one group to use the facility and not the other.
Id. at 278 (Stevens, J., concurring in the judgment).




The more broadly the government facilitates private speech,
however, the less deference the First Amendment accords to the
government's content-based restrictions on the speech that it
facilitates.  Thus, where the government creates a designated
public forum to facilitate private speech representing a diverse
range of viewpoints, the government's decision selectively to
single out particular viewpoints for exclusion is subject to
strict scrutiny.  Compare Rosenberger, 515 U.S. at 834 (applying
heightened First Amendment scrutiny to viewpoint-based
restrictions on the use of a limited public forum where the
government "does not itself speak or subsidize transmittal of a
message it favors but instead expends funds to encourage a
diversity of views from private speakers"), with Finley, 524 U.S.
at 586 ("In the context of arts funding, in contrast to many
other subsidies, the Government does not indiscriminately
encourage a diversity of views from private speakers.") (internal
quotation marks and citation omitted).
Similarly, although the government may create a designated
public forum limited to speech on a particular topic, if the
government opens the forum to members of the general public to
speak on that topic while selectively singling out for exclusion
particular speakers on the basis of the content of their speech,
that restriction is subject to strict scrutiny.  For instance, in
City of Madison Joint School District No. 8 v. Wisconsin
Employment Relations Commission, 429 U.S. 167 (1976), the Court
held that where a school board opens its meetings for public
participation, it may not, consistent with the First Amendment,
prohibit teachers other than union representatives from speaking
on the subject of pending collective-bargaining negotiations.
See id. at 175 (noting that the state "has opened a forum for
direct citizen involvement"); see also Ark. Educ. Television
Comm'n v. Forbes, 523 U.S. 666, 680 (1998) (distinguishing, for
purposes of determining the appropriate level of First Amendment
scrutiny, a televised debate in which a public broadcasting
station exercises editorial discretion in selecting participating
candidates from a debate that has "an open-microphone format").


Finally, content-based restrictions on speech in a
designated public forum are most clearly subject to strict
scrutiny when the government opens a forum for virtually
unrestricted use by the general public for speech on a virtually
unrestricted range of topics, while selectively excluding
particular speech whose content it disfavors.  Thus, in Conrad,
the Court held that a local government violated the First
Amendment when it denied a group seeking to perform the rock
musical "Hair" access to a general-purpose municipal theater open
for the public at large to use for performances.  See also
Denver, 518 U.S. at 802 (Kennedy, J., concurring in the judgment)
(suggesting that strict scrutiny would not apply to a local
government's decision to "build[] a band shell in the park and
dedicate[] it solely to classical music (but not jazz)," but
would apply to "the Government's creation of a band shell in
which all types of music might be performed except for rap
music").
Similarly, in FCC v. League of Women Voters of Cal., 468
U.S. 364 (1984), the Court subjected to heightened scrutiny a
federal program that funded a wide range of public broadcasting
stations that disseminated speech on a wide range of subjects,
where the federal program singled out for exclusion speech whose
content amounted to editorializing.  As the Court later
explained:
In FCC v. League of Women Voters of Cal., 468 U.S. 364
(1984) the Court was instructed by its understanding of the
dynamics of the broadcast industry in holding that
prohibitions against editorializing by public radio networks
were an impermissible restriction, even though the
Government enacted the restriction to control the use of
public funds.  The First Amendment forbade the Government
from using the forum in an unconventional way to suppress
speech inherent in the nature of the medium.

Velazquez, 531 U.S. at 543.


In sum, the more widely the state opens a forum for members
of the public to speak on a variety of subjects and viewpoints,
the more vulnerable is the state's decision selectively to
exclude certain speech on the basis of its disfavored content, as
such exclusions distort the marketplace of ideas that the state
has created in establishing the forum.  Cf. Velazquez, 531 U.S.
at 544 ("Restricting LSC attorneys in advising their clients and
in presenting arguments and analyses to the courts distorts the
legal system by altering the traditional role of the attorneys in
much the same way broadcast systems or student publication
networks were changed in the limited forum cases . . . .").
Thus, we believe that where the state designates a forum for
expressive activity and opens the forum for speech by the public
at large on a wide range of topics, strict scrutiny applies to
restrictions that single out for exclusion from the forum
particular speech whose content is disfavored.  "Laws designed or
intended to suppress or restrict the expression of specific
speakers contradict basic First Amendment principles."  United
States v. Playboy Entm't Group, Inc., 529 U.S. 803, 812 (2000);
see also Denver, 518 U.S. at 782 (Kennedy, J., concurring in the
judgment) (noting the flaw in a law that "singles out one sort of
speech for vulnerability to private censorship in a context where
content-based discrimination is not otherwise permitted").
Compare Forbes, 523 U.S. at 679 (holding that the state does not
create a public forum when it "allows selective access for
individual speakers rather than general access for a class of
speakers") (emphasis added), with Police Dep't of the City of
Chicago v. Mosley, 408 U.S. 92, 96 (1972) ("Selective exclusions
from a public forum may not be based on content alone, and may
not be justified by reference to content alone.") (emphasis
added).


We note further that to the extent that the government
creates a public forum expressly designed to facilitate the
dissemination of private speech, opens the forum to any member of
the public to speak on any virtually any topic, and then
selectively targets certain speech for exclusion based on its
content, the government is singling out speech in a manner that
resembles the discriminatory taxes on the press that the Supreme
Court subjected to heightened First Amendment scrutiny in
Arkansas Writers' Project, Inc. v. Ragland, 481 U.S. 221 (1987),
and Minneapolis Star & Tribune Co. v. Minnesota Commissioner of
Revenue, 460 U.S. 575 (1983), which we explain in the margin.
4.        Reasons for Applying Strict Scrutiny

1.        Selective Exclusion From a "Vast Democratic
Forum"



Applying these principles to public libraries, we agree with
the government that generally the First Amendment subjects
libraries' content-based decisions about which print materials to
acquire for their collections to only rational review.  In making
these decisions, public libraries are generally free to adopt
collection development criteria that reflect not simply patrons'
demand for certain material, but also the library's evaluation of
the material's quality.  See Bernard W. Bell, Filth, Filtering,
and the First Amendment: Ruminations on Public Libraries' Use of
Internet Filtering Software, 53 Fed. Comm. L.J. 191, 225 (2001)
("Librarians should have the discretion to decide that the
library is committed to intellectual inquiry, not to the
satisfaction of the full range of human desires.").  Thus, a
public library's decision to use the last $100 of its budget to
purchase the complete works of Shakespeare even though more of
its patrons would prefer the library to use the same amount to
purchase the complete works of John Grisham, is not, in our view,
subject to strict scrutiny.  Cf. NEA v. Finley, 524 U.S. 569
(1998) (subjecting only to rational basis review the government's
decision to award NEA grants on the basis of, inter alia,
artistic excellence).
Nonetheless, we disagree with the government's argument that
public libraries' use of Internet filters is no different, for
First Amendment purposes, from the editorial discretion that they
exercise when they choose to acquire certain books on the basis
of librarians' evaluation of their quality.  The central
difference, in our view, is that by providing patrons with even
filtered Internet access, the library permits patrons to receive
speech on a virtually unlimited number of topics, from a
virtually unlimited number of speakers, without attempting to
restrict patrons' access to speech that the library, in the
exercise of its professional judgment, determines to be
particularly valuable.  Cf. Rosenberger v. Rector & Visitors of
Univ. of Va., 515 U.S. 819, 834 (1995) (applying strict scrutiny
to viewpoint-based restrictions where the state "does not itself
speak or subsidize transmittal of a message it favors but instead
expends funds to encourage a diversity of views from private
speakers").  See generally supra Section IV.C.


In those cases upholding the government's exercise of
editorial discretion in selecting certain speech for
subsidization or inclusion in a state-created forum, the state
actor exercising the editorial discretion has at least reviewed
the content of the speech that the forum facilitates.  Thus, in
Finley the NEA examined the content of those works of art that it
chose to subsidize, and in Arkansas Educational Television
Commission v. Forbes, 523 U.S. 666 (1998), the public broadcaster
specifically reviewed and approved each speaker permitted to
participate in the debate.  See id. at 673 ("In the case of
television broadcasting, . . . broad rights of access for outside
speakers would be antithetical, as a general rule, to the
discretion that stations and their editorial staff must exercise
to fulfill their journalistic purpose and statutory
obligations."); Finley, 524 U.S. at 586 ("The NEA's mandate is to
make esthetic judgments, and the inherently content-based
'excellence' threshold for NEA support sets it apart from the
subsidy at issue in Rosenberger – which was available to all
student organizations that were 'related to the educational
purpose of the University . . . .'") (quoting Rosenberger, 515
U.S. at 824); see also Cornelius v. NAACP Legal Def. & Educ.
Fund, 473 U.S. 788, 804 (1985) ("The Government's consistent
policy has been to limit participation in the [Combined Federal
Campaign] to 'appropriate' voluntary agencies and to require
agencies seeking admission to obtain permission from federal and
local Campaign officials. . . .  [T]here is no evidence
suggesting that the granting of the requisite permission is
merely ministerial.").  The essence of editorial discretion
requires the exercise of professional judgment in examining the
content that the government singles out as speech of particular
value.


This exercise of editorial discretion is evident in a
library's decision to acquire certain books for its collection.
As the government's experts in library science testified, in
selecting a book for a library's collection, librarians evaluate
the book's quality by reference to a variety of criteria such as
its accuracy, the title's niche in relation to the rest of the
collection, the authority of the author, the publisher, the
work's presentation, and how it compares with other material
available in the same genre or on the same subject.  Thus, the
content of every book that a library acquires has been reviewed
by the library's collection development staff or someone to whom
they have delegated the task, and has been judged to meet the
criteria that form the basis for the library's collection
development policy.  Although some public libraries use "approval
plans" to delegate the collection development to third-party
vendors which provide the library with recommended materials that
the library is then free to retain or return to the vendor, the
same principle nonetheless attains.


In contrast, in providing patrons with even filtered
Internet access, a public library invites patrons to access
speech whose content has never been reviewed and recommended as
particularly valuable by either a librarian or a third party to
whom the library has delegated collection development decisions.
 Although several of the government's librarian witnesses who
testified at trial purport to apply the same standards that
govern the library's acquisition of print materials to the
library's provision of Internet access to patrons, when public
libraries provide their patrons with Internet access, they
intentionally open their doors to vast amounts of speech that
clearly lacks sufficient quality to ever be considered for the
library's print collection.  Unless a library allows access to
only those sites that have been preselected as having particular
value, a method that, as noted above, was tried and rejected by
the Westerville Ohio Public Library, see supra at 46-47, even a
library that uses software filters has opened its Internet
collection "for indiscriminate use by the general public."  Perry
Educ. Ass'n v. Perry Local Educs. Ass'n, 460 U.S. 37, 47 (1983).
 "[M]ost Internet forums – including chat rooms, newsgroups, mail
exploders, and the Web – are open to all comers."  Reno v. ACLU,
521 U.S. 844, 880 (1997).


The fundamental difference between a library's print
collection and its provision of Internet access is illustrated by
comparing the extent to which the library opens its print
collection to members of the public to speak on a given topic and
the extent to which it opens its Internet terminals to members of
the public to speak on a given topic.  When a public library
chooses to carry books on a selected topic, e.g. chemistry, it
does not open its print collection to any member of the public
who wishes to write about chemistry.  Rather, out of the myriad
of books that have ever been written on chemistry, each book on
chemistry that the library carries has been reviewed and selected
because the person reviewing the book, in the exercise of his or
her professional judgment, has deemed its content to be
particularly valuable.  In contrast, when a public library
provides Internet access, even filtered Internet access, it has
created a forum open to any member of the public who writes about
chemistry on the Internet, regardless of how unscientific the
author's methods or of how patently false the author's
conclusions are, regardless of the author's reputation or
grammar, and regardless of the reviews of the scientific
community.
Notwithstanding protestations in CIPA's legislative history
to the contrary,  members of the general public do define the
content that public libraries make available to their patrons
through the Internet.  Any member of the public with Internet
access could, through the free Web hosting services available on
the Internet, tonight jot down a few musings on any subject under
the sun, and tomorrow those musings would become part of public
libraries' online offerings and be available to any library
patron who seeks them out.


In providing its patrons with Internet access, a public
library creates a forum for the facilitation of speech, almost
none of which either the library's collection development staff
or even the filtering companies have ever reviewed.  Although
filtering companies review a portion of the Web in classifying
particular sites, the portion of the Web that the filtering
companies actually review is quite small in relation to the Web
as a whole.  The filtering companies' harvesting process,
described in our findings of fact, is intended to identify only a
small fraction of Web sites for the filtering companies to
review.  Put simply, the state cannot be said to be exercising
editorial discretion permitted under the First Amendment when it
indiscriminately facilitates private speech whose content it
makes no effort to examine.  Cf. Bell, supra, at 226 ("[C]ourts
should take a much more jaundiced view of library policies that
block Internet access to a very limited array of subjects than
they take of library policies that reserve Internet terminals for
very limited use.").
While the First Amendment permits the government to exercise
editorial discretion in singling out particularly favored speech
for subsidization or inclusion in a state-created forum, we
believe that where the state provides access to a "vast
democratic forum[]," Reno, 521 U.S. at 868, open to any member of
the public to speak on subjects "as diverse as human thought,"
id. at 870, and then selectively excludes from the forum certain
speech on the basis of its content, such exclusions are subject
to strict scrutiny.  These exclusions risk fundamentally
distorting the unique marketplace of ideas that public libraries
create when they open their collections, via the Internet, to the
speech of millions of individuals around the world on a virtually
limitless number of subjects.




A public library's content-based restrictions on patrons'
Internet access thus resemble the content-based restrictions on
speech subsidized by the government, whether through direct
funding or through the creation of a designated public forum,
that the Supreme Court has subjected to strict scrutiny, as
discussed above in Section IV.C.  Although the government may
subsidize a particular message representing the government's
viewpoint without having to satisfy strict scrutiny, see Rust v.
Sullivan, 500 U.S. 173 (1991), strict scrutiny applies to
restrictions that selectively exclude particular viewpoints from
a public forum designed to facilitate a wide range of viewpoints,
see Rosenberger v. Rector & Visitors of Univ. of Va., 515 U.S.
819 (1995).  Similarly, although the state's exercise of
editorial discretion in selecting particular speakers for
participation in a state-sponsored forum is subject to rational
basis review, see Ark. Educ. Television Comm'n v. Forbes, 523
U.S. 666 (1998), selective exclusions of particular speakers from
a forum otherwise open to any member of the public to speak are
subject to strict scrutiny, see City of Madison Joint School
Dist. No. 8 v. Wis. Employment Relations Comm'n, 429 U.S. 167
(1976).
And while the government may, subject only to rational basis
review, make content-based decisions in selecting works of
artistic excellence to subsidize, see NEA v. Finley, 524 U.S. 569
(1998), the Supreme Court has applied heightened scrutiny where
the government opens a general-purpose municipal theater for use
by the public, but selectively excludes disfavored content, see
Southeastern Promotions, Ltd. v. Conrad, 420 U.S. 546 (1975),
where the government facilitates the speech of public
broadcasters on a virtually limitless number of topics, but
prohibits editorializing, see FCC v. League of Women Voters of
Cal., 468 U.S. 364 (1984), and where the government funds a wide
range of legal services but restricts funding recipients from
challenging welfare laws, see Legal Servs. Corp. v. Velazquez,
531 U.S. 533 (2001).  Similarly, where a public library opens a
forum to an unlimited number of speakers around the world to
speak on an unlimited number of topics, strict scrutiny applies
to the library's selective exclusions of particular speech whose
content the library disfavors.
2.        Analogy to Traditional Public Fora


Application of strict scrutiny to public libraries' use of
software filters, in our view, finds further support in the
extent to which public libraries' provision of Internet access
promotes First Amendment values in an analogous manner to
traditional public fora, such as sidewalks and parks, in which
content-based restrictions on speech are always subject to strict
scrutiny.  The public library, by its very nature, is "designed
for freewheeling inquiry."  Bd. of Education v. Pico, 457 U.S.
853, 915 (1982) (Rehnquist, J., dissenting).  As such, the
library is a "mighty resource in the free marketplace of ideas,"
Minarcini v. Strongsville City Sch. Dist., 541 F.2d 577, 582 (6th
Cir. 1976), and represents a "quintessential locus of the receipt
of information."  Kreimer v. Bureau of Police for Morristown, 958
F.2d 1242, 1255 (3d Cir. 1992); see also Sund v. City of Wichita
Falls, 121 F. Supp. 2d 530, 547 (N.D. Tex. 2000) ("The right to
receive information is vigorously enforced in the context of a
public library . . . ."); cf. Int'l Soc'y for Krishna
Consciousness, Inc. v. Lee, 505 U.S. 672, 681 (1992) ("[A]
traditional public forum is property that has as 'a principal
purpose . . . the free exchange of ideas.'") (quoting Cornelius
v. NAACP Legal Def. & Educ. Fund, 473 U.S. 788, 800 (1985)).


We acknowledge that the provision of Internet access in a
public library does not enjoy the historical pedigree of streets,
sidewalks, and parks as a vehicle of free expression.
Nonetheless, we believe that it shares many of the
characteristics of these traditional public fora that uniquely
promote First Amendment values and accordingly warrant
application of strict scrutiny to any content-based restriction
on speech in these fora.  Regulation of speech in streets,
sidewalks, and parks is subject to the highest scrutiny not
simply by virtue of history and tradition, but also because the
speech-facilitating character of sidewalks and parks makes them
distinctly deserving of First Amendment protection.  Many of
these same speech-promoting features of the traditional public
forum appear in public libraries' provision of Internet access.
First, public libraries, like sidewalks and parks, are
generally open to any member of the public who wishes to receive
the speech that these fora facilitate, subject only to narrow
limitations.  See Kreimer, 958 F.2d at 1260 (noting that a public
library does not retain unfettered discretion "to choose whom it
will permit to enter the Library," but upholding the library's
right to exclude patrons who harass patrons or whose offensive
personal hygiene precludes the library's use by other patrons).
Moreover, like traditional public fora, public libraries are
funded by taxpayers and therefore do not charge members of the
public each time they use the forum.  The only direct cost to
library patrons who wish to receive information, whether via the
Internet or the library's print collection, is the time spent
reading.


By providing Internet access to millions of Americans to
whom such access would otherwise be unavailable, public libraries
play a critical role in bridging the digital divide separating
those with access to new information technologies from those that
lack access.  See generally National Telecommunications and
Information Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce, Falling
Through the Net: Defining the Digital Divide (1999), available at