ANGER.

It was a memorable saying of Peter the Great; "I have civilized my
country, but I cannot civilize myself." He was at times vehement and
impetuous, and committed, under the impulse of his fury, the most
unwarrantable excesses; yet we learn, that even he was known to tame his
anger, and to rise superior to the violence of his passions! Being one
evening in a select company, when something was said which gave him
great offence, his rage suddenly kindled, and rose to it's utmost pitch:
though he could not command his first emotions, he had resolution enough
to leave the company. He walked bare-headed for some time, under the
most violent agitation, in an intense frosty air, stamping on the ground
and beating his head with all the marks of the greatest fury and
passion; and did not return to the company until he was quite composed.




  AUTHENTICATED ETYMOLOGIES.

Antiquarians say, that an old negro at Cape Cod, whenever his master
required any thing of him, would exclaim, "_Massa chuse it_." Thence in
time the name of _Massachusett_.

The city of _Albany_ was originally settled by Scotch people. When
strangers on their arrival there asked how the new comers did? the
answer was, "_All bonny_." The spelling we find a little altered, but
not the sound.

When Julius Caesar's army lay encamped at _Ticonderoga_, near a thousand
years ago, the deserters were commonly tied up upon a battering ram and
flogged: When any culprit was brought out, the commanding centurion
would exclaim, _Tie on the rogue!_ The name, we see, has worn well.

A fat landlady, who about the time of the flight of Mahomet from Mecca,
lived between new Orleans and the Chicasaw cliffs, was scarcely ever
unfurnished with pigeon sea pye; and thence got the name of _Mrs. Sea
Pye_. The enormous river Mississipi, owes its name to the fat landlady.

In the reign of Dermot O'Mullogh, in the kingdom of Connaught, about the
beginning of the second century, a noisy fellow by the name of _Pat
Riot_, made himself very conspicuous; the word _Patriot_ has come down
to us perfect and unimpaired.



           *       *       *       *

     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._

             +JULIET.----A Story.+

The sun had descended just below the horizon--all nature was wrapped in
solemn silence--when Juliet hastened to the tomb of her dear friend.
Having seated herself upon the green turf near his head, and looking
with anxiety to the grave, she exclaimed-- "Oh Lovemore!-- Why leave
your Juliet thus to mourn?-- Answer me, my dear, this once--how cruel to
separate us!-- Oh Death, thou welcome messenger to those who are
troubled--thou finisher of grief and despair--thou antidote to all
future evils-- Why thus delay thy second coming?--- Or, why didst thou
come so soon?-- What have I been guilty of, that thus thou dost
torment?-- If Lovemore received the summons, why not Juliet?-- Oh
Lovemore!--- thou who wert once the boast of creation, now to be no
more!-- Thou who were once the delight of all who had the pleasure of
thy acquaintance---now to be a companion for worms.--- Cruel fates thus
to deprive me of my all--- If the summons must be obeyed, why was not
the tomb of Lovemore made the receptacle for Juliet too.---
Lovemore---he is gone---alas! he's gone---never to return---never to
behold his Juliet again.--- Lovemore! Lovemore!--- why thus callous to
the cries of her whom it was ever thy wish to please?--- Must Juliet,
thy beloved Juliet, weep in vain?--- And must those lips which never
spoke of Lovemore but with affection and delight, be silenced without a
reply?--- Surely you have not grown disdainful to her whom you once
adored?--- If still thou art the Lovemore whom Juliet once beheld---if
still thy affection for her is pure, why thus be silent?--- I conjure
you by those tender vows which once you made, answer me now."----
"Juliet--- Juliet"---- "Hark!--- What voice is that I hear calling on
Juliet's name?"---- "Why thus repine at the will of Heaven?--- and why
thus dictate to thy Creator how to act?--- Consider thy presumption in
reproving him.--- Will your repeated cries to heaven restore new vigour
to that inanimate, cold, and putrified clay?--- No;--- all will be in
vain.--- I charge you, reflect."---- "Have I erred?--- Oh! righteous
Heaven, and have I been guilty of accusing thee of injustice?--- Have I
called in question thy power?--- Yes;--- it is too true--- I have.---
Why did Juliet murmur, and why oppose thy just decrees?--- O Heaven, was
it not for the affection she bore to thee, Lovemore, that caused her
thus to transgress?--- Yes, it was, Juliet loved him, and Juliet still
loves him---but her will must be submissive to the will of Heaven.--- He
who gave thee birth, O Lovemore! has called you hence--- You have
answered your mission.--- The summons served, the debt of nature's
paid.--- Juliet will no longer grieve.--- Lovemore, soon shall you find
thy Juliet in thy arms:--- then that tomb which is now the receptacle of
thy body, shall be mine--- And that tear which was seen on Juliet's
cheek shall be changed to joy.--- She who now weeps over thy cold clay,
shall then be thy companion for ever." Here Juliet embraced the grave of
Lovemore, and summoning up the virtues of resignation and patience to
her aid, she silently quitted the spot---and calmly mourned, not
murmured, till Heaven united her spirit with that of her departed lover.

  TYRUNCULUS.

    NEW-YORK _Sept. 21, 1796_.



           *       *       *       *

  A RURAL PICTURE.

On a spacious lawn, bounded on every side by a profusion of the most
odoriferous flowering shrubs, a joyous band of villagers were assembled;
the young men dressed in green; youth, health, and pleasure in their
air, led up their artless charmers, in straw hats adorned with the
spoils of Flora, to the rustic sound of the tabor and pipe. Round the
lawn, at equal intervals, were raised temporary arbours of branches of
trees, in which refreshments were prepared for the dancers; and between
the arbours, seats of moss for their parents, shaded from the sun by
green awnings, on poles, round which were twined wreaths of flowers,
breathing the sweets of the spring. The surprise, the gaiety of the
scene, the flow of general joy, the sight of so many happy people, the
countenances of the enraptured parents, who seem to live anew again, the
sprightly season of youth in their children, with the benevolent looks
of the noble bestowers of the feast, filled my eyes with tears, and my
swelling heart with a sensation of pure, yet lively transport, to which
the joys of the courtly belles are mean.




  GLEANINGS.

When a man is disposed to reveal a secret, and expects that it shall be
kept, he should first enquire whether he can keep it himself. This is
good advice, perhaps a little in the Irish way.

All the wisdom in the world will do little while a man wants presence of
mind. He cannot fence well that is not on his guard. Archimedes lost his
life by being too busy to give an answer.

Notwithstanding the difference of estate and quality among men, there is
such a general mixture of good and evil, that in the main, happiness is
pretty equally distributed in the world. The rich are as often unhappy
as the poor, as repletion is more dangerous than appetite.

It is wonderful how fond we are of repeating a scrap of Latin, in
preference to the same sentiment in our own language equally well
expressed. Both the sense and words of Omnia vincit amor (love conquers
all) are worthy only of a school-boy, and yet how often repeated with an
affectation of wisdom!

Revenge, speaking botanically, may be termed wild justice, and ought to
be rooted out, as choaking up the true plant. A first wrong does but
offend the law, but revenge puts the law out of office. Surely, when
government is once established, revenge belongs only to the law.

For more than a century, has Billingsgate been proverbial for the
coarseness of its language. Whence is this? What connexion is there
between fresh fish and foul words? Why should the vending of that useful
commodity, and elegant luxury, prompt to oaths, execrations, and every
corruption of language, more than any other? And to think that the
parties concerned are of the fair sex---O fye!

Reason has not more admirers than there are hypocrites. Hypocrites
admire only the profits of wisdom, and approve just so much of her, as
is agreeable and serviceable to their ends.



           *       *       *       *

  THE VICTIM OF MAGICAL DELUSION.
  _OR, INTERESTING MEMOIRS OF MIGUEL, DUKE DE CA*I*A._
  Unfolding Many Curious Unknown Historical Facts.

  _Translated from the German of Tschink._

  (Continued from page 95.)

"You know that he has been in our house some time ago, informing us of
your exaltation to the ducal dignity, and at the same time, placed the
declaration of the ghost, concerning the murder, in its proper point of
view. However, you are still ignorant of the most important
circumstance. I will not dwell on the uncommon praise he bestowed on
your family, and you in particular, but only mention that he concluded
his panegyrics with the observation, that the Countess herself would
deem you deserving her love, if she should be acquainted more intimately
with your Grace. This unexpected turn perplexed Amelia evidently. She
replied, she did not doubt the amiable qualities of the Duke, however
she vowed eternal fidelity to the Count. 'If that is your sole
objection,' the Irishman replied, 'then I shall soon remove it. The
deceased himself shall release you from your vow, from the performance
of which he can derive neither benefit nor pleasure; it is in my power
to make him declare it himself.' 'No, no!' exclaimed Amelia, terrified,
'the rest of the deceased shall not be interrupted; I should not be able
to stand the sight of him.' 'No apparition, my Lady,' the Irishman
replied, 'you shall neither hear nor see the deceased!'--With these
words he took a blank piece of paper out of his pocket-book, requesting
Amelia to write upon it the following words:----'Spirit of the Count of
Clairval, shall I preserve my heart and hand faithful to thee till
death, according to my vow?' As soon as the Countess had been persuaded
to it with great difficulty, and wrote these words, the Irishman
prevailed upon her to carry the paper to an apartment to which no one
could have access without her knowledge and leave. Amelia chose the
apartment contiguous to her bed-chamber. The shutters were bolted from
within, the paper placed upon a table, and the room strongly fumigated
by the Irishman, who uttered some mysterious words. When they had
retired, the Irishman requested her to return and look after the paper;
however she could see nothing but the words written by herself, upon
which she shut the door, and put the key in her pocket.

"'Sleep easy,' the Irishman added, 'and don't open the chamber before
to-morrow morning, when you will find an answer to your question.'

"The Irishman left us at eleven o'clock, and Amelia went to her
bed-room, which she left not for a moment all night.--She went to bed,
but uneasiness and curiosity did not suffer her to close her eyes. Not
the least noise was heard in the adjoining apartment, and when Amelia
entered it early in the morning, she had observed beneath the lines she
had wrote, pale but legible characters, which she instantly knew to be
the hand-writing of her deceased Lord------'Thy vow, which binds me to
be a living being upon earth, and, thee to one who is deceased, shackles
my liberty. I break these chains. The man by whose orders I have been
assassinated is Vasco**ellos.'

"Imagine how Amelia was astonished at an incident which evidently was
the effect of a superior power; the apartment, the shutters, and the
door of which had been carefully secured, and which was guarded by
Amelia herself, being entirely inaccessible to any mortal, except by
violent means, of which no traces could be perceived on the window
shutters. This miraculous event was decisive for my friend, who
professed herself entirely at liberty from that moment.

"Your Grace will easily believe me, that the tender attachment to you,
which had found access to her heart, guarded by a solemn vow, acquired
additional activity when the shackles were thrown off. The ghost himself
appeared to have silently approved, by naming the real murderer, the
passion for a Prince, whose father had been injured by an unjust
suspicion. Amelia endeavoured, nevertheless, to conceal from me the real
state of her heart, and, out of caprice, rather would leave me to guess,
than to confess herself, what might have been misinterpreted as a
weakness. However, that very constraint which she experienced by
concealing a secret that struggled to break its confinement, some words
which she dropped unknowingly, her gloomy looks and silent
melancholy----in short, all those traits which seem to have told you so
very little of Amelia's secret sentiments, convinced me soon that love
was the silent tormentor of her heart. I communicated my discovery to
her, and she confessed at last that I was not mistaken."

"Gracious Heaven!" I exclaimed, "she confessed---"

"And at the same time desired me earnestly to conceal it carefully from
you; and do you know for what reason?"

"No!"

"Amelia feared she was not beloved by you. Your having proceeded on your
travels during her illness without so much as taking leave of her, made
her already suspect your indifference. This suspicion gained additional
strength by your never having wrote a single line to her after your
departure. Your behaviour during your present stay with us too, has
cured her of that error as little as the information of your departure."

"Should it be possible my love could have escaped Amelia's looks?"

"It did not escape my observation.----I gathered carefully all the marks
of it, and communicated them to my friend. However, they appeared to her
to be nothing farther than proofs of gallantry, which every
well-educated man is wont to offer at the shrine of beauty. 'Is it
possible,' she said, 'that true, ardent love, could refrain so long from
coming to an explanation?' And indeed, my Lord, can you say any thing
against this objection?"

"My Lady, I could not entertain the least idea of such an explanation,
while the misunderstanding concerning the murderer of Count Clairval was
not removed, although I had not been ignorant of the residence of
Amelia, which was unknown to me ever since the removal from the castle
in the forest, and the mysterious conduct of the Countess has prevented
me from declaring now, what I ardently wished to avow publicly ever
since I got acquainted with her. What has made _you_ guess my happiness
has induced _me_ to apprehend my misfortune----I even feared to offend
the Countess by my presence. I expected secret dislike to me, at most
pity, but never a return of my love."

"I see you are but a novice in love," Lady Delier said smiling, "and I
have of course acted wisely that I opened your eyes!"

"O! my dearest Baroness!" I replied, kissing her hand, my gratitude will
end only with my life."

"Silence! Silence!" she exclaimed, putting her hand on my lips, "I have
told you, as yet, only good news----the worst is coming now!"

"What can that be?" I asked with consternation.

"You shall hear Amelia's own words: 'The Duke' said she, 'does not love
me, and even if he should have a passion for me, and avow it, he should
hear the confession of my reciprocal tenderness, but never receive my
hand. I am indeed released of my vow, but my present liberty will raise
my fidelity to my deceased Lord, which was till now mere duty, to merit,
and I will remain constant to him, as far as it will be in my power.
I cannot command my love for the Duke, however my hand is at my
disposal."

"Heavens! how you have damped my happiness!" I replied after a painful
pause.

"Should a mere whim of the Countess really be able to dishearten your
Grace? You do not consider how soon the love of a living adorer can
subdue the fidelity to a deceased husband. Amelia's heart is yours, and
her hand will certainly follow."

"It is not only this incertitude that makes me uneasy; the Countess
loves me because she cannot help it. Can a love which I do not owe to a
voluntary attachment render me happy?"

"How you are roving! what ought to make you proud and happy damps your
spirits. What was it that impelled Amelia irresistibly to love you? can
it have been any thing else but the consciousness of your perfections,
and an irresistible sympathy which has united your hearts; and what can
be more desirable, what more sincere and durable than such bonds? My
Lord, love has done every thing for you, and you have done nothing for
love. Disclose to Amelia your sentiments, communicate to her your
tenderness, and her involuntary attachment to you will soon be changed
into a voluntary passion."

"My dearest friend! My comforter!" I exclaimed, "what friendly genius is
it that speaks through you, and animates my whole nature?"

"The genius of love--I have loved too, and know how to advise in affairs
of the heart. But tell me sincerely, my Lord, would your father consent
to a match beneath your dignity?"

"It would be of no consequence if he should not; I am Duke."

"I understand you; however I fear Amelia would never consent to a union
which should be destitute of the benediction of the Marquis of
Villa**al."

"My father loves me, and he will never oppose his only son in a matter
upon which depends the happiness of his life."

"Well then! I will leave you to your good fortune. I shall not fail to
contribute as much as is in my power to promote that union. However,
(added she with dignity) I expect from your candour, that you will not
misinterpret my interview with you, and the interest I take in that
affair."

"I look upon it as a proof of your inestimable friendship."

"O! my children!" the Countess resumed with great emotion, "I love you
as a mother. I could not bear any longer that two people, who seem to
have been born for each other, should misunderstand one another in a
manner so tormenting to both of you. You will render Amelia happy, my
Lord, or I am dreadfully mistaken in my opinion of you. With this hope I
put the fate of my friend entirely in your hands. I confide to your care
an angel, whose early improvement was my work; and constitutes my pride,
and whose perfections you scarcely know by half. I entrust to you a
being of the purest and most excellent of hearts. Conclude from this,
upon the confidence I repose in you."

"I shall endeavour to deserve it."

"Retire now, else we shall be surprised by Amelia; but take care not to
make her suspect our interview and conversation. You even must not visit
us this evening earlier than usual."

I promised it, and retired. My whole frame had been in a feverish tremor
from the beginning of our conversation. I could scarcely utter the most
necessary answers to the discourses of the Baroness. To be beloved by
Amelia! This intelligence imparadised me, and my heart could scarcely
contain the unspeakable bliss which had been showered down upon me.
I went home like a dreaming person, went again abroad, and my feet
carried me, unknowing to me, to the spot whither a secret impulse urged
me to go. However, the severe command of the Baroness had drawn a large
circle around Amelia's abode, which repelled me. I hovered at the margin
of it like a spell-bound spirit, and sighed for the arrival of the
appointed hour. Never had the setting in of night been expected with
more impatience, and the sun appeared to me to retire unusually late
from the horizon.

At length the wished-for hour arrived; however, the moment when I was
going to the house which contained all that was dear to me, an
unspeakable anxiety damped suddenly my rapturous joy. I had promised not
to betray by my behaviour the intelligence which the Baroness had
imparted to me, and yet I deemed it impossible to preserve such a
dominion over myself if the vehemency of my state of mind should not
abate. This was the source of my anxiety, which added to the danger of
exposing myself, because it deprived me of the small remnant of self
dominion which my rapturous joy had left me. I entered the house. The
woman of the Countess told me her Lady was in the garden. I went through
several rows of trees without finding her. The moon peeped now and then
through the fleecy clouds, and concealed her silvery orb again. The
great extent of the garden, and the impetuous state of my mind,
increased the difficulty of finding the idol of my heart. At length,
stepping forth from a side path, enclosed with high hedges, I fancied I
saw something stirring at a distance, near a statue. Having advanced
some paces the light of the moon reflected from the marble statue upon
Amelia, removed every doubt. I approached with tottering steps, and
found Amelia reclining against a pedestal of a Diana, and immersed in
profound meditation. The rustling of the dry leaves beneath my
footsteps, roused her from her reverie.

  (_To be continued._)




     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._

               REMARKS ON MUSIC.

  (Continued from page 91.)

The present universal passion for this art, and the fashion of making it
a necessary part of education, induces me to consider it as relating to
the fair sex, more particularly. Parents are naturally inclined to make
their children partake of those amusements the most prevailing and
fashionable. As music in this age comes under that denomination, it is
no wonder we find every attention paid to this qualification at the
earliest period of life. The most eminent masters are obtained; and much
time and expence bestowed to acquire this accomplishment. The fond
parent, anxious to embellish the darling child, and render her fit for
polite company, compels her to perseverance, without discriminating the
propensity of her own nature, but vainly imagines, that a proficiency is
certainly to be obtained in proportion to the reputation of her
instructor. Under this delusion the young lady is too often brought into
public company, and exhibits her own performance, to the well-bred,
amidst the admiration and astonishment of the ignorant many, and the
silent pity of the judicious few. Here again let us call to mind the
observation of Plutarch, and consider how far the manners of a people
are denoted by the state of their music. The present state of
dissipation in the fashionable world, and the agitation of spirits ever
attendant on crouded assemblies and pleasurable pursuits, elevate the
mind and taste above the standard of sober thoughts. Every thing is
sought which can assist the temporary frenzy, and nothing deemed worth
our knowing but how to forget ourselves. This unhappy situation renders
the generality of our fashionable people lost to any serious examination
of true or false impression, while they are indiscriminately led to
approve or condemn whatever the multitude of fashion establishes by its
sanction. It is not now sought as a repose for the mind after its
fatigues, but to support its tumults; and the imagination is now to be
surprised with the wonderful execution of the performer, whilst the
effect is totally neglected.

Since the supreme Being has formed many of his most beautiful works
according to the principles of harmony, from whence some of our most
pure and affecting pleasures arise, can it be looked upon as unbecoming,
that our youth of both sexes should bestow some portion of their time to
the study of what was manifestly intended by Providence to allure us to
love of order, according to the Platonic doctrine quoted by Plutarch?
surely not; the younger part of the female sex, who discover the least
propensity to music, or shew any signs of having a good ear, should
certainly learn music, not for the sake of rendering these fit for the
fashionable world, nor for parade and ostentation; but should so learn
as to amuse their own family, and for that domestic comfort they were by
Providence designed to promote; and to relieve the anxieties and cares
of this life, to inspire cheerfulness, and elevate the mind to a sense
of love of order, virtue and religion.

  A. O.

  (_To be continued._)

    NEW-YORK _Sept. 26, 1796_.




  _NEW-YORK._



    MARRIED,

A few days ago by the Rev. Dr. Beach, Mr. RICHARD ELLIS to Miss
CATHARINE VAN TUYL.

Also Mr. PETER VANDERVOORT LEYDARD to Miss MARIA VAN TUYL---both the
ladies, daughters to Andrew Van Tuyl, Esq. of this city.

On Wednesday last by the Rev. Dr. Beach, Mr. ROBERT WARDELL to Miss
LAVINIA WOODS, daughter to John Woods, Esq.




  _METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS._
  _From the 18th to the 24th inst._

    _Days of the Month._
      _Thermometer observed at 8, A.M. 1, P.M. 6, P.M._
        _Prevailing winds._
          _OBSERVATIONS on the WEATHER._

           deg.  deg.  deg.    8. 1. 6.  8. 1. 6.
              100   100   100
  Sept. 18  55    58 25 53 75  nw. do. do.  cloudy, h wd. do. do.
        19  52 50 64    53 50  w. nw. do.   clear, h. wd. do. do. lt w.
        20  57 75 68    66 75  nw. do. do.  clear, h. w. do. do. do.
        21  57    67 50 63 50  nw. sw. ne.  clear, lt. wd. do. do. do.
        22  66    73 75 58 50  s. sw. sw.   clear, rn. very high. wd.
        23  50    63    59     n. do. do.   clear, lt. wd. do. do.
        24  53 25 67 75 64     w. sw. do.   clear, lt. wd. do. do.



           *       *       *       *

     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._



                   TO CLARA.

  And could'st thou think our commerce thus should end,
    Oblivion thus blot out the sacred fire,
    Thy virtues, worth, and merit that expire,
  That does adorn my lovely charming friend:
        Ah no! while mem'ry holds her seat
          Within the precincts of this breast,
        The soft sensation e'er will beat,
          And e'er remain my steadfast guest;
      Nor, while the blood flows round my heart,
      With the blest image will I part:
  While o'er each raptur'd scene will fancy play,
  And friendship's consecrated flame shall light the way.

  Alas! my mind recalls with rapturous joy
    Those early times when tender Clara smil'd;
  Nor pain nor sorrow did our souls annoy,
    When social converse the soft hours beguil'd.
  Where oft' when Sol's bright beams illum'd the morn,
  Together we have tripp'd the pearly lawn;
  With rapturous joy have hail'd the new-born day,
  And tun'd to nature's God the vocal lay:
  And oft' when evening's sable humid cloud
  The glowing sun retiring did uncloud,
  On airy pinions borne, by fancy rais'd,
  With solemn awe and adoration gaz'd
  At that great power, whose mandate does controul,
  Combine, connect, and regulate the whole.
        Thus did our bosoms mutual glow
          With sacred friendship's flame;
        We only wept for others' woe,
          Not did we weep in vain:
  For white-rob'd charity, borne by the breeze along,
  Heard and approv'd the sympathizing song.

        Those early joys, alas! are o'er,
          For fate's barb'd arrows struck my soul;
        Pale sorrow does my bosom gore,
          And anguish all my mind controul:
  My heart's unstrung, no more can music charm,
  Nor mirth nor pleasure my cold bosom warm;
  For melancholy's poison to me clings,
  And sorrow's dark veil'd mantle round me flings:
        For, O alas! unpitying Heav'n
          Has clos'd in everlasting sleep,
        The gentlest soul that e'er was giv'n
          O'er misery's sad form to weep:
  Though kind, though chaste, to virtue strict allied,
  To Death's unerring shafts--she bow'd--and died!

  Yes, dear Maria, though thou art no more,
    Reflection e'er will prey upon my heart;
  Until we meet upon that blissful shore,
    In joys uninterrupted, ne'er to part.
  But hark, what magic sound
  Thrilling the ambient air around,
  So soft, so gentle--now more loud,
  Some seraph, surely, rides upon the cloud;
  Or, is it Orpheus with his heav'n-born lay,
  Driving the mystic shades of pain away:
  Or is it friendship's dulcet voice, whose strain
  Can thus raze out the troubles of the brain;
  O yes, 'tis friendship--friendship's hallow'd song,
  To her alone such heavenly powers belong.

  Angelic maid, again strike the wrapt wire,
  Let music's softest notes flow from thy lyre;
  With sweet vibrations cut the liquid air,
  And banish from our souls corroding care;
  For when thy flowing numbers ride the gale,
  The woe-struck heart forgets her tragic tale;
  To black-rob'd melancholy bid adieu,
  We catch the rapturous sound, and only think of you.

    EMMA.

      NEW-YORK _Sept. 24, 1796_.




     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._



                    SONNET.

  Thou fading mount, whose variegated brow
    The rage of rude autumnal blasts betrays,
  How justly emblematical art thou
    Of life's dire changes, and its sad decays.
  When on the pensive visage time pourtrays
    His stealing languor, and the sickning heart,
    Dead to the smiles of joy, and charms of art,
  To blooming hope, and pleasure's soft controul,
    No more with sweet emotion can impart
  A gleam of comfort to the chearless soul;
    Still holds the allusion when thy honours bow
  Beneath the early storm's despoiling rage,
    And sad affliction, life consuming woe,
  Forestals the influence of declining age.

    MATILDA.

      MONTREAL.




  THE CAPTIVE'S COMPLAINT.
  (_Inscribed to Anna._)

  Hark, the chains rattle round as I turn on my side,
    And the pains of captivity now are my doom;
  My cell and my bed are scarcely as wide
    As yon willow-tree grave I discern through the gloom.

  I was borne from my home, the frail child of despair,
    O'er the main I was driv'n, whose limits are wide;
  The winds and the waves all augmented my care,
    And the chains of injustice hung hard by my side.

  The tyrant, stern grief, my little children attends,
    And tears from their eyes impatiently glide;
  They weep and they mourn without comforting friends,
    While I in despair shake the chains by my side.

  The days and the nights too slow pass away,
    And death, though hard by, my pains won't decide;
  Oh! why will he pause and his purpose delay,
    For the chains rattle hard which cling to my side.

  The morning may dawn when the Heav'ns more kind,
    May unfetter the pris'ner whose anguish is wide;
  Shake those chains far away, and give ease to a mind
    Grown callous by grief, and the chains of his side.

    L. LE FEVRE.

      PINE-STREET, _Sept. 23, 1796_.


NEW-YORK: _+Printed by JOHN BULL, No. 115, Cherry-Street+, where every
Kind of Printing work is executed with the utmost Accuracy and
Dispatch.--+Subscriptions+ for this +Magazine+ (at 2s. per month) are
taken in at the Printing-Office, and by E. MITCHELL, Bookseller, No. 9,
Maiden-Lane._



           *       *       *       *



  _UTILE DULCI._

  THE NEW-YORK WEEKLY MAGAZINE;
  or, Miscellaneous Repository.

  +Vol. II.+]  +Wednesday, October 5, 1796.+  [+No. 66.+


  +On Singularity of Manners.+

There are few people of such mortified pretensions, as patiently to
acquiesce under the total neglect of mankind; nay so ambitious are most
men of distinction, that they chuse to be taken notice of, even far
their absurdities, rather than to be entirely overlooked, and lost in
obscurity, and, if they despair of exciting the attention of the world,
by any brilliant or useful accomplishment, they will endeavour to regain
it by some ridiculous peculiarity in their dress, their equipage or
accoutrements.

But if we must distinguish ourselves from the rest of mankind, let it be
by our intrinsic virtue, our temperance and sobriety, and a
conscientious regard to every relative duty; but as we ought "to think
with the wise, and talk with the vulgar," let us also act differently
from a great part of the world in matters of importance, but conform to
them in trifles. This is what Seneca so forcibly inculcates in his fifth
epistle to his friend Lucilius.

"I both approve of your conduct, and sincerely rejoice that you
resolutely exert yourself; and, laying aside every other pursuit, make
it your whole study to improve yourself in wisdom and virtue. And I not
only exhort, but earnestly intreat you to persevere in this course.

Give me leave however, to caution you not to imitate those pretended
philosophers, who are more solicitous to attract the notice of the
world, than to make a progress in wisdom; nor to affect any thing
singular in your dress, or in your manner of life. Avoid that
preposterous ambition of gaining applause, by your uncouth appearance,
your hair uncombed, and your beard neglected; nor be always declaiming
against the use of plate, of soft beds, or any thing of that kind. The
very name of a philosopher is sufficiently invidious, though managed
with the greatest modesty and discretion.

Suppose we have entered upon our stoical plan, and began to sequester
ourselves from the conversation and customs of the vulgar; let every
thing _within_ be dissimilar; but let our _outward_ appearance be
conformable to the rest of the world. Let not our apparel be splendid or
shewy, nor yet mean or sordid. Let not our plate be embossed with gold;
but let us not imagine, that the mere want of such expensive plate is a
sufficient proof of our frugality. Let us endeavour to live a better
life, not merely a life contrary to that of the vulgar; otherwise,
instead of conciliating the favour of those whom we wish to reform, we
shall excite their aversion, and drive them from our company; we shall
also deter them from imitating us in any thing, when they are afraid
that they are to imitate us in every thing.

The first advantages which philosophy promises are, a just sense of the
common rights of mankind, humanity, and a sociable disposition; from
which advantages, singularity and dissimilar manners will entirely
seclude us. Let us beware, lest those peculiarities by which we hope to
excite the admiration, should expose us to the ridicule and aversion, of
mankind.

Our object is to live according to nature; but to torture our bodies, to
abhor cleanliness in our persons, when attended with no trouble, or
affect a cynical filthiness in our food; this sure is living contrary to
nature. As it is a mark of luxury to hunt after delicacies, to reject
the common unexpensive comforts of life is a degree of madness. Our
stoic philosophy requires us to be frugal, not to mortify ourselves; but
there is such a thing as an elegant frugality. This moderation is what I
would recommend."




  SOCIETY.

Society has been aptly compared to a heap of embers, which, when
separated, soon languish, darken, and expire; but, if placed together,
glow with a ruddy and intense heat, a just emblem of the strength, the
happiness, and the security, derived from the union of mankind. The
savage, who never knew the blessings of combination, and he, who quits
society from apathy or misanthropic spleen, are like the separated
embers, dark, dead, and useless; they neither give nor receive any heat,
neither love or are beloved.



           *       *       *       *

  Interesting History Of
  _THE BARON DE LOVZINSKI._

  With a relation of the most remarkable occurrences in the life
  of the celebrated COUNT PULASKI, well known as the champion of
  American Liberty, and who bravely fell in its defence before
  Savannah, 1779.

  _Interspersed with Anecdotes of the late unfortunate KING of POLAND,
  so recently dethroned._

  (Continued from page 99.)

Encouraged in this manner, what dangers had I to fear? I departed
accordingly, but in the course of that campaign, there happened nothing
worthy of narration; the enemy, equally careful with ourselves to avoid
any action which might produce an open war between the two nations,
contented themselves with fatiguing us by means of frequent marches: we,
on the other hand, bounded our views to following and observing them;
and they only seemed to oppose themselves to us, in those parts where
the open country afforded them an opportunity of making good their
retreat.

At the end of the campaign, they prepared to retire on purpose to take
up their winter-quarters in their own country; and our little army,
composed almost wholly of gentlemen, separated soon after.

I returned to Warsaw full of joy and impatience; I thought that Love and
Hymen were about to bestow Lodoiska on me.----Alas! I no longer had a
father. I learned, on entering the capital, that Lovzinski died of an
apoplexy on the night before my arrival. Thus I was deprived of even the
sad consolation of receiving the last sighs of the most tender of
parents; I could only offer up my sorrows at his tomb, which I bathed
with my tears!

----"It is not," says Pulaski to me, who was but little moved with my
profound sorrow; "it is not by means of barren tears that you can do
honour to a father such as thine. Poland in him regrets a Citizen----
----a hero, who would have been of immense service during the critical
moment which now approaches. Worn out with a tedious malady, our monarch
has not a fortnight to live, and on the choice of his successor depends
the happiness or misery of our fellow-citizens.

"Of all the rights which the death of your father transmits to you, the
most noble is undoubtedly that of assisting at the Diet, in which you
are to represent him; it is there where he will revive in you; it is
there, where you ought to exhibit a courage infinitely more difficult to
be sustained than that which consists only in braving death in the field
of battle!

"The valour of a soldier is nothing more than a common virtue; but they
are not ordinary men who on awful emergencies, preserving a tranquil
courage, and displaying an active penetration, discover the projects of
the powerful who cabal, disconcert the enterprises of the intriguing,
and confront the designs of the factious; who, always firm,
incorruptible, and just, give not their suffrages but to those whom they
think most worthy of them; whom neither gold nor promises can seduce,
whom prayers cannot bend, whom menaces cannot terrify.

"These were the virtues which distinguished your father; this is the
precious inheritance which you ought to be desirous of sustaining. The
day on which the states assemble for the election of a king, will be the
epoch on which the pretensions of many of our fellow-citizens, more
occupied with their private interests than jealous of the prosperity of
their country, will be manifested, as well as the pernicious designs of
the neighbouring powers, whose cruel policy it is to destroy our
strength by dividing it.

"I am deceived, my friend, if the fatal moment is not fast approaching,
which will for ever fix the destinies of our country,----its enemies
have conspired its ruin; they have secretly prepared for a
revolution;----but they shall not consummate their purposes while my arm
can sustain a sword! May that God, who is the protector of the republic,
prevent all the horrors of a civil war! But that extremity, however
frightful it appears, may perhaps become necessary; I flatter myself
that it will be but a short, although perhaps a violent crisis, after
which the regenerated state will assume its ancient splendour.

"You shall second my efforts Lovzinski; the feeble interests of love
ought to disappear before more sacred claims. I cannot present my
daughter to you during this awful moment of suspense, when our common
country is in danger; but I promise to you, that the first days of peace
shall be marked by your union with Lodoiska."

Pulaski did not speak in vain. I felt that I had now more essential
duties to fulfil than those of love; but the cares with which my mind
was occupied, were hardly able to alleviate my grief. I will even avow
to you, without blushing, that the sorrow of my sisters, their tender
friendship, and the caresses more reserved but no less pleasing of my
mistress, made a stronger impression on my heart than the patriotic
counsels of Pulaski. I beheld Lodoiska tenderly affected with my
irreparable loss, and as much afflicted as myself at the cruel events
which forced us to defer our union; my chagrin, by being thus divided
with that lovely woman, seemed insensibly to diminish.

In the mean time the king dies, and the Diet is convoked. On the day
that it was to open, at the very instant when I was about to repair to
the assembly, a stranger presented himself, and desired to speak to me
in private. As soon as my attendants were retired, he enters my
apartment with precipitation, throws himself into my arms, and tenderly
embraces me. It was M. de P----! Ten years, which had elapsed since our
separation, had not so much changed his features as to prevent me from
recognizing him, and testifying my joy and surprise at his unexpected
return.

"You will be more astonished," says he to me, "when you know the cause.
I have arrived this instant, and am about to repair to the meeting of
the Diet;--would it be presuming too much on your friendship to reckon
on your vote?"

"On my vote! and for whom?"

"For myself," continues he with vivacity; "it is not now time to account
to you the happy revolution that has taken place in my fortune, and
which at present permits me to entertain such exalted hopes: it is
sufficient to observe, that my ambition is at least justified by a
majority of suffrages, and that it is in vain that two feeble rivals
would attempt to dispute with me the crown to which I pretend.

"Lovzinski," adds he, embracing me again, "if you were not my friend,
and I esteemed you less, perhaps I should endeavour to dazzle you by
means of promises; perhaps I should recount to you the favours which I
intend to heap upon you, the honourable distinctions that are reserved
for you, and the noble and glorious career that is about to offer itself
to your ambition;----but I have not any need of seducing, and I only
with to persuade you.

"I behold it with grief, and you know it as well as myself, that for
several years past our Poland, become enfeebled, owes its safety to
nothing else than the distrust of the three great powers* which surround
it, and the desire to enrich themselves with our spoils, may in one
moment re-unite our divided enemies.

  [* Russia, Prussia, and the House of Austria.]

"Let us prevent, if we can, this inauspicious triumvirate from
dismembering the republic. Undoubtedly, in more fortunate times, our
ancestors were able to maintain the freedom of their elections; it is
necessary however that we should yield to that necessity which is become
inevitable.

"Russia will necessarily protect a king, whom she herself has elevated;
in receiving the sovereign of her choice, you will defeat the views of
that triple alliance which will render our perdition certain, and we
shall acquire a powerful ally, who will oppose herself with success to
the two enemies that remain to us.

"These are the reasons which have determined my conduct; I do not
abandon part of our rights, but to preserve the most precious of them.
I wish not to ascend a fickle throne, but with the intention, by the
means of a sage policy, to give it stability; I consent not to alter the
constitution of the commonwealth, but to preserve the kingdom entire."

We repaired to the Diet together; I voted for M. de P----. He in effect
obtained the majority of the suffrages; but Pulaski, Zuremba, and some
others, declared themselves in favour of Prince C----. Nothing was
decided amidst the tumult of this first meeting.

When the assembly broke up, M, de P---- invited me to accompany him to
the palace, which his secret emissaries had already prepared for him in
the capital**. We shut ourselves up together during several hours, and
renewed the promises of a friendship that should endure for ever. I then
too informed M. de P---- of my intimate connection with Pulaski, and of
my love for Lodoiska. He repaid my confidence with more important
communications; he informed me of the events which had led to his
approaching grandeur; he explained to me his secret designs; and I left
him, convinced that he was less occupied with the desire of his own
elevation, than with that of restoring Poland to its ancient prosperity.

  [** The diet for the election of the kings of Poland is held half
  a league from Warsaw, in the open air, on the other side of the
  Vistula, near to the village of Vola.]

Possessed with these ideas, I flew towards my future father-in-law,
burning with the desire of adding him to the party of my friend. Pulaski
was walking at a great pace up and down the chamber of his daughter, who
appeared equally agitated with himself.

"Behold," said he to Lodoiska, the moment that he saw me enter, "behold
that man whom I esteem, and whom you love! He has sacrificed us both to
his blind friendship." I was desirous to reply, but he went on--"You
have been connected from your childhood with M. de P----. A powerful
faction is about to place him on the throne; you know you are acquainted
with his designs; this very morning, at the diet, you voted for
him;--you have deceived me:--but do you think that you shall deceive me
with impunity?"

I besought him to hear me, and he constrained himself so far as to
preserve a stern silence: I then informed him that M. de P----, whom I
had for a long time neglected, had agreeably surprised me by his
unexpected return.

Lodoiska appeared charmed to hear me commence my justification.--"You
shall not deceive me in the same manner as if I were a credulous woman,
says Pulaski.--But it signifies not---proceed."

I then recounted to him the particulars of the short conversation that I
had with M. de P------ before I repaired to the assembly of the states.

"And these are your projects!" exclaims he. "M. de P------ sees no other
remedy for the misfortunes of his fellow-citizens than their slavery! He
proposes this, one of the name of Lovzinski, approves of it; and they
despise me so much as to tempt me to enter into this infamous plot!
Shall I behold the Russians commanding in our provinces in the name of a
Pole?"

"The Russians, say I with fury; the Russians reign in my country!" On
this Pulaski, advancing towards me with the greatest impetuosity, cries
out: "Perfidious youth! you have deceived me, and you would betray the
state! Leave my house this very moment, or know that I shall order you
to be dragged out of it!"

I frankly acknowledge that an affront so cruel, and so little merited,
disarmed me of my prudence: in the first transports of my fury, I placed
my hand upon my sword; and quicker than lightning Pulaski brandished his
in the air.

His daughter, his distracted daughter, rushed forward, and precipitated
herself upon me, crying out: "Lovzinski, what are you about to do?" On
hearing the accents of a voice so dear to me, I recalled my wandering
reason; but I perceived that a single instant was about for ever to
bereave me of my Lodoiska! She had left me to throw herself into the
arms of her father. He, cruel man, beheld my grief, and strove to
augment it: "Go, traitor!" says he, "be gone---you behold Lodoiska for
the last time!"

  (_To be continued._)



           *       *       *       *

     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._



               REMARKS ON MUSIC.

  (Continued from page 103.)

Music is capable of a variety so infinite, so greatly does the most
simple differ from the most complex, and so multiplied are the degrees
between those two extremes, that in no age could the incidents
respecting that fascinating art have been few or uninteresting: But,
that accounts of these incidents should be handed down to us, scanty and
imperfect, is no matter of surprize, when we recollect that the history
of music is the history only of sounds, of which writing is a very
inadequate medium; and that men would long employ themselves in the
pleasing exercise of cultivating music before they possessed either the
ability or the inclination to record their exertions.

No accurate traces, therefore, of the actual state of music, in the
earlier ages of the world, can be discerned. Our ideas on the subject
have no foundation firmer than conjecture and analogy.

It is probable, that among all the barbarous nations some degree of
similarity is discernable in the stile of their music. Neither will much
difference appear during the first dawnings of civilization. But in the
more advanced periods of society, where the powers of the human mind are
permitted without obstacle to exert their native activity and tendency
to invention, and are at the same time affected by the infinite variety
of circumstances and situations which before had no existence, and,
which in one case accelerate and in another retard; then that
similarity, once so distinguishable, gives place to the endless
diversity of which the subject is capable.

The practice of music being universal in all ages and all nations, it
would be absurd to attribute the invention of the art to any one man. It
must have suffered a regular progression, through infancy, childhood,
and youth, before it could arrive at maturity, the first attempts must
have been rude and artless; probably the first flute was a reed of the
lake. Music is supposed to have taken its rise in the earliest periods
of society. "Juba," we find soon after the creation of the world; "was
the father of all such as handle the harp and the organ;" and it is more
than probable that Moses, the most ancient of all writers, was well
acquainted with this art. The Egyptians, were the promoters of science
in the Hebrew nation, and Moses was instructed in all the learning of
the Egyptians. The sublime and animated song of Moses on the overthrow
of Pharoah in the red sea, was, we believe, adapted to the sweet strains
of music; for we are told it was sung by Moses and the children of
Israel:---- After the conclusion of the song, "Miriam the prophetess,
the sister of Aaron, took a timbrel in her hand, and all the women went
out after her with timbrels and with dances; and Miriam answered them,
Sing ye to the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously; the horse and his
rider hath he thrown into the sea."

We read in the Mosaic law of the sounds of trumpets in approaching the
field of battle, and the power of trumpets in its religious observances.

  A. O.

  (_To be continued._)

    NEW-YORK _Sept. 26, 1796_.




  FRIENDSHIP.

Friendship, among people who have not been corrupted by those artificial
vices which fatally wait upon civilized life, exists in the greatest
possible purity and constancy. The Abbe Fortis gives some curious
particulars relative to the friendships of the Morlacchi, a people who
inhabit the mountainous part of inland Dalmatia. Friendship is lasting
among the Morlacchi. They have even made it a kind of religious point,
and tie the sacred bond at the foot of the altar. The Sclavonian ritual
contains a particular benediction, for the solemn union of two male or
two female friends, in the presence of the congregation. The Abbe says,
that he was present at the union of two young women; who were made
_Posestre_ in the church of Perussich. The satisfaction that sparkled in
their eyes when the ceremony was performed, gave a convincing proof,
that delicacy of sentiments can lodge in minds not formed, or rather not
corrupted by society, which we call civilized. The male friends thus
united are called _Pobratimi_, and the females _Posestreme_, which mean
half-brothers and half-sisters. Friendship between those of different
sexes are not bound with so much solemnity, though perhaps in more
ancient and innocent ages it was also the custom. From these consecrated
friendships among the Morlacchi, and other nations of the same origin,
it should seem that the _sworn brothers_ arose, a denomination frequent
enough among the common people in many parts of Europe. If discord
happens to arise between two friends among the Morlacchi, it is talked
of all over the country as a scandalous novelty; and there have been
some examples of it of late years, to the great affliction of the old
Morlacchi, who attribute the depravity of their countrymen to their
intercourse with the Italians. Wine and strong liquors of which the
nation is beginning to make daily abuse, after our example, will, of
course, produce the same bad effects as among us.

Nor is the Abbe mistaken. When these simple people become more men of
the world, the romantic part of their friendships will degenerate into
that motly unintelligible thing which many people call Friendship.
Whoever, therefore, wishes to enjoy real friendship, must in the first
place expect no more from man than the frailty of his nature will admit;
and in the second place, he must not expect friendship from those, who
from their ignorance are not enabled, or from their wickedness are not
disposed, to perform acts of mutual benevolence in trying situations.



           *       *       *       *

  THE VICTIM OF MAGICAL DELUSION;

  _OR, INTERESTING MEMOIRS OF MIGUEL, DUKE DE CA*I*A._

  UNFOLDING MANY CURIOUS UNKNOWN HISTORICAL FACTS.

  _Translated from the German of Tschink._

  (Continued from page 103.)

"Good evening, my Lord," said she with evident confusion, "have you not
met Lady Delier?"

"No, my Lady! I have not."

"She left me some time since, and might already have returned."

"Very strange! I am come to take leave, and meet you first by accident."

"Leave?" she replied with surprise, "Then you are determined to depart
to-morrow."

"I must."

A long pause.

"And you are going to Ma***t?"

"To Ma***t, and from thence to my native country."

A second pause. At length she said with emphasis and affection: "Heaven
protect you on your journey."

"Dearest Countess--"

"What is the matter with you, my Lord?" Amelia exclaimed, fixing her
eyes on me, "Good God, how pale you look!"

The emotions of my heart were dreadful; my working bosom threatened to
burst. "God knows," I replied with a faltering voice, "whether I shall
see you again."

"We shall certainly meet again," said she, looking up to heaven.

"Merciful God! should my hopes blossom first beyond the grave."

"What hopes?" she exclaimed with inquisitive astonishment.

"And do you not divine how this separation will wound my heart?"

Amelia looked anxiously around, as if seeking Lady Delier; and then
fixed her eyes again doubtfully on me.

"My Lord, your words and your behaviour are mysterious to me."

"Then receive their explanation kindly," I replied, letting myself down
on one knee, and taking hold of her hand, "I love you."

The Countess was struck dumb with surprise.----"And this you tell me
when taking _leave!_" she lisped at length.

I fancied I perceived a soft pressure from her hand, and returned it
with glowing lips. She bent her taper form to raise me up, and Lady
Delier stepped suddenly between us. "What do I see?" she exclaimed,
dissembling astonishment, "a declaration of love?"

Amelia remained silent, and the Baroness repeated her question.

"A declaration, my Lady!" I replied, but no answer.

"My sweet friend," she whispered archly in Amelia's ear, "I hope you
will not let him despair."

"I cannot conceive, my Lord," Amelia replied, "why you make this
declaration when taking _leave!_"

I told her nearly the same I had said to the Baroness in the morning.
Amelia viewed me a long time with silent astonishment, and at length
replied:

"A misunderstanding, a misunderstanding on both sides! very strange
indeed!" she shook her head smiling.

"My dearest love," the Baroness exclaimed, "look at the Duke, how he
watches every word of yours in hope of receiving an answer."

Amelia seemed to hesitate what to reply; however, after a short silence,
said to me with the innate dignity of a noble, generous mind: "My Lord,
if you want to have a consort, then I must beg you to forget me. But if
you are in quest of a loving heart, then--" added she in a low accent,
and with crimsoning cheeks, "you have found it."

I don't know what I replied, nor can I recollect what I said afterwards;
for from the moment she had pronounced the confession of her reciprocal
love, I thought myself transported to Paradise, and breathed in a new
and better sphere. The possession of Amelia's heart, ensured to me by
the declaration of her own lips, had expelled from my breast every
terrestrial wish; my whole nature seemed to me exalted and purified of
all earthly dregs, and the flame which had penetrated my frame, was a
sacred fire cleared of every particle of sensuality. O! innocent love,
thou offspring of the sacred affinity of two congenial souls, thou art
perhaps the sole species of union and enjoyment, which is capable to
afford us here below a notion of the union and the pleasure of the
inhabitants of the heavenly regions. How natural therefore, if we,
particularly in the first moments of enjoyment, are incapable to express
such sentiments by words. However, my faltering accents, my confused
expressions, and my incoherent sentences, seemed nevertheless to be as
well understood by Amelia, as if she were reading in my soul, which I
could conclude from her words, and the still plainer speaking play of
her mien. Love had diffused over her countenance new and unspeakable
charms, which surrounded her with a glory that made her appear to me a
more than mortal being. And to be beloved by her--that bliss would have
overpowered me, if I had not been made acquainted with my happiness in
the morning.

Lady Delier, who had left us to ourselves all the time, interrupted us
at length. "Children!" said she, "do you know that it is not far from
eleven o'clock?" I started up as if some grisly spectre had surprised
me, because I recollected the _Unknown_, eleven o'clock being the time
when I had promised to meet him at the place of rendezvous at a
considerable distance.

To take leave!--without knowing whether I should ever see her again, for
I was to depart the next morn with the dawn of day. This idea
overpowered me so much, that I promised Amelia and myself to visit her
once more to-morrow before my departure. Our separation was,
nevertheless, so afflicting, the parting on both sides so difficult, and
the last adieu pronounced with quivering lips.--Alas! a secret
presentiment seemed to whisper in my ear that we should meet no more.
How many times did I attempt to go and stopped again--how many times did
I go and return again to assure Amelia that I should certainly see her
once more!--Her emotions seemed, indeed, to be less vehement than mine,
however, I could not be deceived, and observing the secret workings of
her soul, perceived the pearly tear that started from her eye, and the
violent heaving of her bosom.

Lady Delier did not long remain an idle spectator, exhorting us to
dedicate the present moment to joy, and to yield to our grief to-morrow,
tearing the Countess from my arms, and wishing me a good night.

I stopped once more on the terrace, saw the two ladies retiring to a
grove, of beech-trees, and Amelia turned twice, beckoning to me. My
tears flowed fluently, my arms were expanded for her, the darkness of
the night concealed her from my wishful looks. I rushed mechanically
into the street, and arrived at the place of rendezvous without knowing
how. It was lonely spot covered with trees. The Irishman soon joined me.

"My time is short," he said, "and I have to tell you a great deal; let
us sit down." So saying he led me to a stone bench beneath a spreading
oak, and we seated ourselves.

He seemed to observe my being violently agitated, and kept a long and
solemn silence to give me time to recover.--"I wish, my dear Duke!"--he
at length began, "that you may not expect more from this interview than
I am allowed to give. I must confine myself merely to the theoretical
part of that occult science to which I have promised to initiate you
after the time of probation shall be finished. However, it is here as it
is with all other sciences; the pupil of sense guesses by the theory,
what he may expect from the practical part of the science--as a painter
beholds in a sketch the picture which is to be drawn, or as an architect
sees in the plan drawn on the paper the building which is to be
constructed; be therefore satisfied with what I dare impart to you for
the present."

"I do not desire you to disclose to me, more than I am able to bear at
present."

The Irishman paused again, and then began thus:

"If our powers of perception were confined only to our senses, the
visible world would then encompass all our ideas, sentiments, wishes and
hopes. No idea of spirits, of God and of immortality would raise us
above the sphere of materiality. In order to produce and to conceive
these ideas, a supersensible faculty is required. This faculty which, if
closely examined, bears not the least resemblance to the rest of our
intellectual powers, is called _reason_. The idea of the whole sensible
world offers nothing to us that is not corporeal, finite, and
perishable. However the territory of reason opens to us a prospect to a
world without bounds, and of an everlasting duration; displays to us a
kingdom of spirits which is governed by _one_ Infinite Spirit after wise
and sacred laws. An unknown world of which we had not the most distant
notion, of which sensation gives us not the least hint, and for which
our senses have no perception nor scale, opens to our view when our
reason begins to unfold itself. You see, therefore what faculty of the
soul must be our guide in our present investigation, if we wish to
penetrate, by means of it, to the kingdom of spirits."

"Reason!"

"Certainly! there is no other choice left; and therefore let us learn to
value and to use this light that illuminates the darkness in which every
object disappears from the eyes of mere sensitive men, or at most
appears very _obscure_ to them. That man whose reason is overdarkened,
or discomposed by sensuality, either will deny the existence of spirits
and our relation to them, or attribute to them the contradictory shape
which his disordered imagination has hatched out, like the blind-born,
who denies the existence of colours as ridiculous and absurd, or if he
believes the unanimous testimony of those that see, imagines colours to
bear some resemblance to sounds. Unbelief and superstition afford us
numberless instances of people of that description. Only the more
impartial have always maintained that one ought not to judge
precipitately of these objects, and only the wisest of mankind have been
able to form a just judgment of them."

"O Hiermanfor! introduce me to the circle of the latter. I have already
in the different periods of my life adhered to all the other parties. In
the days of my earlier youth I believed in apparitions, like the most
ignorant of the lowest class. In a more advanced period of life I
fancied I was convinced of the impossibility of apparitions, and ever
since I got acquainted with you, I have been wavering between unbelief
and superstition. It was but lately that I resolved to postpone my
judgment on these subjects, till I should be better convinced, and this
conviction I expect of you."

  (_To be continued._)




  RUNNERS REMARKABLE FOR SWIFTNESS.

Philippides being sent on a message from the Athenians to the republic
of Sparta, to gain their assistance against their enemies the Persians,
ran within the compass of two days an hundred and fifty Roman miles and
an half.

Under the emperor Leo, the same that succeeded Marcian, there was a
Greek named Indacus, a man of extraordinary courage, and of wonderful
nimbleness of foot. He was to be seen at parting, but vanished in the
twinkling of an eye; he rather seemed to fly than run over mountains and
dangerous precipices, and would run farther in a day than any post could
ride, though he staid not a minute to change his horse, and having
performed his journey, would return back the next day, though there was
no occasion for making so much haste, merely because he took delight in
running, and never complained of being weary.

In Peru they have Casquis, or foot posts, to carry letters or messages
from place to place, who have houses about a league and an half asunder,
they running each man to the next, will run fifty leagues in a day and a
night.



           *       *       *       *

     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._



                  A FRAGMENT.

  "Child of a day--the being of an hour,
    He hurries swiftly through life's troublous scene
  Treads the same path which thousands trod before,
    Then dies, and is as though he ne'er had been."

    Mrs. FAUGERES.

--"But just launched on time's wide ocean!" exclaims the expiring
EDWARD, "and, Oh! must the farewell be now? Must I now take a long,
a last adieu of all I hold dear in life? 'Tis true! He that lays the
king on a level with the beggar now calls on me. My glass is almost run;
the sands fall fast; the last one now trembles to be gone; tis near the
bottom!--it drops! 'tis gone!"----"And there fled thy spirit too,"
sobbed out MATILDA.

How despotic does Death wield his sceptre! but with what impartiality!
It matters not; "the flower just opening into bloom," or the hoary head
that has long been ripening for the grave: He strikes indiscriminately;
the young and the aged are alike exposed.

The silken bands of matrimony had but just fastened EDWARD to MATILDA.
No tender pledge of their mutual loves had yet blest them. Happiness
seemed within their grasp. But, how transient are our pleasures! how
fleeting are our joys!--Business had called EDWARD to the metropolis: On
his return he was taken sick. A skilful physician was procured, who gave
it as his opinion that his patient had caught the malignant distemper
which so greatly prevailed in the capital. But it might give way to
medecine, and it was liberally administered for that purpose. Unavailing
were the efforts of the doctor to revive the almost expiring lamp of
life. In a few days EDWARD laid down his mortal life, and his spirit
took its flight to happier regions.

His amiable partner, to shew the love she bore him, had a marble slab,
plain and neat, placed over his grave, on which is this inscription:

  Near to this place
  Reposeth
  EDWARD BLACKRIDGE.
  A pattern of unfeigned
  Love:
  Who was robbed of existence,
  While yet in his
  Prime.

And at intervals MATILDA steals to this spot, and bathes the stone with
her tears.

  L. B.

    NEW-YORK _Oct. 1, 1796_.




  REMARK.

The tears which we strive to hide are the most affecting. The violence
we thus do ourselves shows both courage and sensibility.--In like
manner, laughter is never more strong than when we endeavour to suppress
it. Every opposition strengthens desire: the wave which meets with
obstacles, foams, becomes impetuous, or rises into the air.



           *       *       *       *

  _NEW-YORK._



    MARRIED,

On Wednesday evening last by the Rev. Dr. Linn, Doctor WILLIAM DOLL of
Colchester, to Miss SOPHIA CHRISTINA BAUMAN, daughter of Col. Sebastian
Bauman of this city.

At Norwalk, on Monday evening the 26th ult. by the Rev. Mr. Ogilvie, Mr.
JAMES JARVIS of this city, to Miss BETSEY MOTT of that place.

  May blessings, without ceasing,
    Upon their heads descend;
  And pleasures, ne'er decreasing,
    With love and friendship blend.

  Soon a fair train surrounding,
    May they enraptur'd see;
  In antic races bounding,
    Or prattling on the knee.

  And when, with heads declining,
    And silver'd o'er with age,
  Their latest breath resigning,
    They quit this mortal stage;

  May the angelic legions
    Their happy souls convey
  High to the blissful regions
    Of everlasting day.




  _METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS._
  _From the 25th ult. to the 1st inst._

    _Days of the Month._
      _Thermometer observed at 8, A.M. 1, P.M. 6, P.M._
        _Prevailing winds._
          _OBSERVATIONS on the WEATHER._

           deg.  deg.  deg.    8. 1. 6.  8. 1. 6.
              100   100   100
  SEPT. 25  57 25 73    72     w. sw. w.    clear, do. do.
        26  54    65 50 62 75  nw. do. do.  clear, do. do.
        27  56 50 67    63     se. s. do.   rain, do. do.
        28  58 50 64    50     ne. sw. do.  great rain cloudy do.
        29  57 25 65 25 61 25  nw. do. do.  clear, do. do.
        30  53    63 50 60     n. do. nw.   cloudy, do.
  *OCT.  1  46    54           n. do.       cloudy do.

  [* This observation has been made at 6 A.M. or about Sun-rise, and
  3 P.M. on the supposition, that those hours will better shew the
  state of our climate, as it is generally supposed, that at or nearly
  Sun-rise, it is the coldest, and at 3 P.M. the warmest time of the
  day.

  This change in the periods of observation, will be continued in
  future.]




  RESULTS OF METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS.
  _For Sept. 1796._
                                                            deg. 100

  Mean temperature of the thermometer at 8 A.M.              63    2
  Do. do. of the do. at 1 P.M.                               71   12
  Do. do. of the do. at 6 P.M.                               67   65
  Do. do. of the whole month                                 66   92
  Greatest monthly range between the 14th & 23d              33    0
  Do. do. in 24 hours, between the 22d & 23d                 23   75
  Warmest day the 14th.                                      83    0
  The coldest do. the 23d                                    50    0

   9 Days it has rained in this Month, and a considerable quantity
       has fallen.
  One day it thundered, and lightned the 14th, and it is presumed
       there was as great a quantity, as ever was experienced within
       eight hours.
  17 days it was clear, at 8, 1 & 6 o'clock,
   5 days it was cloudy at 8, 1 & 6 o'clock.
   3 do.  the wind was high, at ditto,
  18 do.  the wind was light at do.
  20 Days the wind was to the westward of North and South.
  10 Do   the wind was to the Eastward of do.  do.



           *       *       *       *

     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._



                 MILITARY FAME.

  O thou that sigh'st to join the scenes of war,
    And gain the glories of the martial train;
  Reflect what woes surround the trophied car,
    What crimson tints the wish'd-for circlet stain.

  If tender sympathy be not unknown,
    If heaven-born mercy in thy bosom glow,
  Reject the impurpl'd wreath, the laurel crown
    Can flourish only in the scenes of woe.

  Wert thou the noblest bravest son of Mars,
    Did fear precede thee, conquest still attend;
  All the long glories of successive wars
    On fickle Fortune's favouring smile depend.

  Ev'n godlike Paoli's confest her sway,
    By her they flourish and by her they fade;
  The adverse fortune of one hapless day
    Condemns thee to oblivion's dreary shade.

  Such is a brittle bubble blown in air,
    Such the bright lustre of the morning skies;
  So some tall tree may vernal honours bear,
    And bloomy verdure charm the wondering eyes:
  But, ah! how fleeting the illusive glare
    When the clouds gather, and the storms arise!

    MATILDA.

      NEW-YORK.




  REFLECTIONS IN A CHURCH-YARD.

  All hail ye peaceful scenes, in whose still plain
    Sweet solitude and melancholy dwell;
  Where uncontrolled awe doth pensive reign,
    And rev'rence muses in each silent cell.

  With mem'ry's retrospective eye I view
    These ghastly figures--(loathsome to the eyes)
  These are the skulls of those I lately knew,
    The once adored, beautiful, and wise!

  The statesman and the clown here peaceful lie,
    The slave for liberty don't here dispute:
  With death's decree Neptune and Mars comply,
    And patriotic eloquence lies mute!

  When Sol the East with blushes does adorn;
    The rose expands her leaves to every ray:
  Tho' thus compos'd of beauty in the morn,
    At eve she bows her head and doth decay.

  So lies the maid who once with beauty blest,
    And at whose feet youths supplicating lay,
  While beauty reign'd she was by them carest:
    But none pays tribute to her breathless clay.

  Each silent tomb methinks lets fall a tear,
    While ev'ry grave in plaintive accents say;
  "In pride of youth like you we did appear,
    "But you like us, must moulder and decay."

  "Ye sons of dissipation, new pursue
    "The paths of rectitude--for short's the span,
  "Remember while these monuments you view,
    "The chiefest study of mankind is man."



           *       *       *       *

  ON MY BEARD.--A SONNET.

  The orb of day seven times, this fatal morn,
    Has sped his course thro' each revolving sign,
  Since first in evil hour, reluctant torn,
    The down of youth forsook these cheeks of mine.

  Ah! fashion! had I view'd thy sneers with scorn,
    Unravag'd still the sacred growth would shine:
  The majesty of manhood, still unshorn,
    Shou'd sweep my breast luxuriant as the vine.

  Now, woe is me! a dupe to impious zeal,
    Unequal war with Nature do I wage;
  While, as each sun returns, the ruthless steel,
    To waste her produce, plies its whetted rage.
  Like Grecia's godlike sages dare I feel,
    My shaggy chin shou'd mock this silly age.




  THE DOCTORS' DUEL.

  Two Doctors fought, and thrice from each
    A deadly ball was sent,
  Though keenly aim'd, the bullets' force
    In air impassive spent.

  Ye sons of Mars forbear to smile,
    Since every man must know;
  'Tis not by pistol, sword, or gun,
    A Doctor kills his foe.

  For had they been on death intent,
    How surely might they kill,
  Or by a gentle cooling draught,
    Or mild _Saturnian Pill_.




  THE EXTENT OF LIFE'S VARIETY.

  Just this little, and no more,
  Is in ev'ry mortal's pow'r,
  Each to say, I tasted breath,
  But the cup was fraught with death;
  I have sigh'd, have laugh'd, have wept,
  Wak'd to think, and thinking slept;
  Slept my wearied limbs to rest,
  Wak'd with labour in my breast;
  Met with sorrows, happ'ly o'er,
  Mix'd in pleasures now no more;
  Hop'd and fear'd, with equal sense,
  Dup'd by many a slight pretence:
  Soon shall my soul her veil throw by,
  My body with its kindred lie;
  Of this I'm certain, but the rest
  Is lock'd within a higher breast.




  EPIGRAM.
  On Seeing the Servant of a Scoundrel Beat his Master's Coat.

  Why merciless thwack PETER's coat?
    My friend you surely jest!
  I'd rather beat the Losel's back,
    And let his vestment rest.

  The Castigator look'd and smil'd;
    Said he, "You've wrong premis'd;
  "For 'tis the _habits_ of the man
    "That make the man despis'd.


NEW-YORK: _+Printed by JOHN BULL, No. 115, Cherry-Street+, where every
Kind of Printing work is executed with the utmost Accuracy and
Dispatch.--+Subscriptions+ for this +Magazine+ (at 2s. per month) are
taken in at the Printing-Office, and by E. MITCHELL, Bookseller, No. 9,
Maiden-Lane._



           *       *       *       *



  _UTILE DULCI._

  THE NEW-YORK WEEKLY MAGAZINE;
  or, Miscellaneous Repository.

  +Vol. II.+]  +Wednesday, October 12, 1796.+  [+No. 67.+


  _HYMNS_

  Of the native Peruvians, used at the solemn worship of the Sun,
  which they adore as chief of their Gods. Extracted from the INCAS,
  by Marmontel, a beautiful work, combining all the elegancies of
  language, the embellishments of fancy, and the charms of historical
  narration. It it intended for publication in 2 vols. by the Editor.

  CHORUS OF THE INCAS.

Soul of the universe! thou which from the heights of Heaven ceases not
to pour forth, in one great stream of light, the principles of warmth,
of life, and of fertility; O Sun! receive the vows of thy children, and
of a happy people who adore thee!

  PONTIFF ALONE.

O King! whose lofty throne blazes with immortal splendor, with what
awful majesty dost thou reign in the vast empire of the sky! When thou
appearest in thy glory, and shakest the sparkling diadem that adorns thy
head, thou art the delight of the earth! thou art the pride of Heaven!
Whither are they fled, those fires which so late bespangled the veil of
night? Could they abide the majesty of thy presence? Did it not please
thee to retire, and give them liberty to come forth and shew themselves,
they would remain swallowed up for ever in the abyss of thy effulgence.
Their place would be no where to be found.

  CHORUS OF VIRGINS.

O delight of the world! Happy the wives who reign in thy celestial
court! How beautiful art thou at thy awaking! How magnificent the
ceremonies of thy rising! What charms are scattered by thy presence! The
fair companions of thy slumbers undraw the purple curtains of the
pavilion where thou reposest, and thy first looks dispel the vast
obscurity of night. Oh, with what joy must nature have been transported
at receiving thy first visit! Surely she remembers it: nor ever does she
greet thy return without experiencing those tender yearnings which a
fond daughter feels at the return of her long absent father.

THE PONTIFF ALONE.

Soul of the universe! but for thee, the vast ocean were but a motionless
and frozen lump: the earth a barren heap of sand and mud; the atmosphere
a gloomy void. Thou cherishedst the elements with thy vivifying and
genial warmth; the air became fluid and insinuating, the waters moist
and yielding, the earth animated and fruitful. Every thing took life;
every thing wore the face of beauty. The elements, those universal
parents which till then had lain fast locked in the chill arms of rest,
now moved into alliance. The fire slid into the bosom of the waters: the
waters parting into vapour, flew aloft, and spread themselves through
the air: from the air, the earth received into her womb the precious
rudiments of fertility: then began she to bring forth the unceasing
fruits of that ever-renewing love, first kindled by thy rays.

  CHORUS OF INCAS.

Soul of the universe! O Sun! art thou alone the Author of all the good
thou bringest us? Or art thou but the minister of a First Cause; an
intelligence superior to thee? If it be thy own will that guides thee,
receive the effusions of our gratitude: if thou dost but accomplish the
will of a Supreme Invisible Being, cause our vows to come unto him; how
should it but please him to be adored in thee, his brightest image?

  THE PEOPLE.

Soul of the universe! Father of Manco! Father of our kings! O Sun!
protect thy people, and make thy children prosper!




DISCONTENT.

Dionysus Senior, though he was the richest and most potent tyrant in his
time, yet was exceedingly afflicted and discontented in his mind,
because he could not make better verses than the poet Philoxenus, and
dispute more learnedly than Plato the philosopher; therefore in great
wrath and vexation, he threw one into a dungeon, and drove the other
into banishment.



           *       *       *       *

  Interesting History Of
  _THE BARON DE LOVZINSKI._

  With a relation of the most remarkable occurrences in the life
  of the celebrated COUNT PULASKI, well known as the champion of
  American Liberty, and who bravely fell in its defence before
  Savannah, 1779.

  _Interspersed with Anecdotes of the late unfortunate KING of POLAND,
  so recently dethroned._

  (Continued from page 107.)

I returned home in a state of desperation. The odious names which
Pulaski had lavished on me, returned unceasingly to my reflection. The
interests of Poland, and those of M. de P----, appeared to be so
intimately connected together, that I did not perceive in what manner I
could betray my fellow-citizens by serving my friend; in the mean time I
was obliged either to abandon or renounce Lodoiska for ever. What was I
to resolve? what part should I take? I passed the whole night in a state
of the most cruel uncertainty; and when the day appeared, I went towards
Pulaski's house, without yet having come to any determination.

The only domestic who remained there informed me, that his lord had
departed at the beginning of the night, with his daughter, after having
first dismissed all his people. Think of my despair on hearing this
news. I asked to what part Pulaski had retired. But my question was in
vain, he informed me that he was certainly ignorant of the place of his
destination.

"All that I can tell you," says he, "is that you had scarce gone away
yesterday evening, when we heard a great noise in the apartment of his
daughter. Still terrified at the scene which had taken place between
you, I approached the door, and listened. Lodoiska wept: her furious
father overwhelmed her with injuries, bestowed his malediction upon her,
and I myself heard him exclaim: 'To love a traitor, is to be one!
Ungrateful wretch! I shall conduct you to a place of safety, where you
shall henceforth be at a distance from seduction.'"

Could I any longer doubt the extent of my misery? I instantly called for
Boleslas, one of the most faithful of my domestics: I ordered him to
place trusty spies about the palace of Pulaski, who should bring an
account of every thing that passed there; and commanded that if the
count returned to the capital before me, he should follow him wherever
he went. Having given these instructions, and not yet despairing of
still finding the family at one of their seats in the neighbourhood of
the metropolis, I myself set out in pursuit of my mistress.

I accordingly searched through all the domains of Pulaski, and asked
concerning Lodoiska of all the passengers whom I met, but without
success. After having spent eight days in fruitless enquiry, I resolved
to return to Warsaw, and I was not a little astonished, on my arrival,
to find a Russian army encamped on the banks of the Vistula, almost
under the very walls of that city.

It was night when I entered the capital: the palaces of the grandees
were all illuminated, an immense multitude filled the streets; I heard
the songs of joy; I beheld wine flowing in rivulets in the public
squares: every thing announced to me that Poland had a king.

Boleslas, who expected me with impatience, informed me that Pulaski had
returned alone on the second day after my departure; and that he had not
stirred from his own palace but to repair to the diet, where, in spite
of his efforts, the ascendancy of Russia became every day more manifest.
"During the last assembly held this very morning," adds he, "M. de P----
united almost all the suffrages in his favour, and was about to be
declared king, when Pulaski pronounced the fatal _Veto_: at that instant
twenty sabres were brandished in the air. The fierce palatine of
--------, whom the count had insulted in the former assembly, was the
first to rush forwards, and gave him a terrible wound on the head.
Zaremba, and some others, flew to the defence of their friend; but all
their efforts would have been unable to have saved him, if M. de
P-------- had not ranged himself on their side, exclaiming at the same
time, that he would sacrifice, with his own hand, the first person who
dared to approach him. On this the assailants retired. In the mean time
Pulaski, fainting with the loss of blood, was carried off the field in a
state of insensibility. Zaremba departed also, swearing to avenge his
friend. Having thus become master of the deliberations, the numerous
partisans of M. de P--------, instantly proclaimed him sovereign.

"Pulaski, who had been carried to his palace, was soon restored to life;
and the surgeons who attended him, declared that his wounds, although
dangerous, were not mortal. In that state, although languishing under
the most cruel torments, contrary to the advice of all his friends, he
ordered himself to be lifted into his carriage, and before noon he left
Warsaw, accompanied by Mazeppa and a few male-contents."

It was scarcely possible to have announced worse news to me. My friend
was upon the throne, but my reconciliation with Pulaski appeared
henceforth impossible, and in all appearance Lodoiska was lost for ever.
I knew her father so well as to be under apprehensions lest he should
proceed to extremities with his daughter. I was affrighted at the
present, I durst not look forwards towards the future; and my heart was
so devoured with chagrin, that I did not go out, even to felicitate the
new king.

One of my people, whom Boleslas dispatched after Pulaski, returned at
the end of the fourth day: he had followed him fifteen leagues from the
capital; when, about that distance, Zaremba, who perceived a stranger at
a little distance from the carriage, began to conceive suspicions. As
they proceeded, four of his followers, who had concealed themselves
behind the ruins of an old house, surprised my courier, and conducted
him to Pulaski. He, with a pistol in his hand, forced him to acknowledge
to whom he belonged. "I shall send you back to Lovzinski," said the
fierce republican, "on purpose to announce from me, that he shall not
escape my just vengeance." At these words they blindfolded my servant,
who could not tell where they had carried him. At the end of
four-and-twenty hours they resumed, and tying a handkerchief once more
about his eyes they put him into a carriage, which having stopped at
length, after a journey of several hours, he was ordered to descend.
Scarce had he put his foot upon the ground but his guards departed at a
full gallop; on which he removed the bandage, and found himself
precisely on the same spot as that on which he had been first arrested.

This intelligence filled me with uneasiness; the menaces of Pulaski
terrified me, much less on my own account than on Lodoiska's, who
remained in his power: in the midst of his fury he might sacrifice her
life! I resolved therefore to expose myself to every species of danger,
on purpose to discover the retreat of the father, and the prison of his
only child.

On the succeeding day, after informing my sisters of my design, I left
the capital: Boleslas alone accompanied me, and I passed for his
brother. We wandered over all Poland, and I then perceived that the
fears of Pulaski were but too well justified by the event. Under
pretence of obliging the inhabitants to take the oath of fidelity to the
new King, the Russians, scattered about in the provinces, desolated the
country, and committed a multitude of exactions in the cities.

After having spent three months in vain enquiries, despairing of being
able to find Lodoiska, touched with the most lively grief for the fate
of my country, and weeping at one and the same time for her misfortunes
and my own, I was about to return to Warsaw, to inform the new king of
the excesses committed by those foreigners in his states, when an
adventure that at first seemed to be very inauspicious, forced me to a
very different resolution.

The Turks having declared war against Russia, the Tartars of Budziac and
the Crimea made frequent incursions into Volhynia, where I then was.
Four of those robbers attacked us one afternoon, as we were leaving a
wood near Ostropol. I had imprudently neglected to load my pistols; but
I made use of my sabre with so much address and good luck, that in a
short time, two of them fell covered with wounds. Boleslas encountered
the third: the fourth attacked me with great fury; he gave me a slight
cut upon the leg, but received a terrible stroke in return, that
dismounted him from his horse, and felled him to the ground. Boleslas at
the same moment perceived himself disencumbered from his enemy, who, at
the noise made by his comrade's fall, took to flight. He whom I had just
vanquished, then addressed me in very bad Polish, and said: "a brave man
like you ought to be generous. I beg my life of you; instead of putting
me to death, succour me, relieve me, bind up my wounds, and assist me to
arise."

He demanded quarter with an air so noble, that I did not hesitate for a
moment. I accordingly descend from my horse, and Boleslas and myself
having helped him to arise, we dressed his wounds. "You behave well!"
says the Tartar to me; "you behave well!" As he spoke we beheld a cloud
of dust, and in a moment after more than three hundred Tartars rushed
upon us at full speed. "Be not afraid, dread nothing," says he whom I
had spared; "I am chief of this troop." Accordingly, by means of a sign,
he stops his followers, who were on the point of massacring us; and
speaking to them in their own language, which I was unable to
comprehend, they instantly open their ranks on purpose to permit us to
pass.

"Brave man," exclaims their captain, addressing himself to me once more,
"had I not reason to say that you behaved well? You left me my life, and
I now save yours; it is sometimes right to spare an enemy, and even a
robber! Hear me, my friend: in attacking you, I followed my profession,
and you did your duty in conquering me. I pardon you, you have already
pardoned me; let us therefore embrace."--He then adds: "The day is
wasting, and I would not advise you to travel in these cantons during
the present night. My people are about to repair each to his respective
post, and I cannot answer for their discretion. You perceive a castle on
a rising ground, towards the right: it belongs to a certain Pole of the
name of Dourlinski, for whom we have a high esteem, because he is very
rich. Go, demand an asylum from him; tell him that you have wounded
Titsikan, and that Titsikan pursues you. He is acquainted with my name:
I have already made him pass many an uneasy night. As to the rest, you
may rely on it, that while you remain with him, his castle shall be
sacred; but be careful not to come forth on any account before the end
of three days, and not to remain there longer than eight.---Adieu!"

It was with unfeigned pleasure that we took leave of Titsikan and his
companions. The advice of the Tartar was a command: I therefore said to
Boleslas; "Let us immediately make for the castle that he has now
pointed out to us; I am well acquainted with this same Dourlinski by
name, Pulaski has sometimes spoken to me concerning him: he perhaps is
not ignorant of the place to which the Count has retired; and it is not
impossible but that with a little address we may be able to draw the
secret from him. I shall say at all events that we are sent by Pulaski,
and this recommendation will be of more service to us than that of
Titsikan: in the mean time, Boleslas, do not forget that I am your
brother, and be sure not to discover me."

  (_To be continued._)




  REMARK.

There are people, whose conversation or presence always excites languor
in others: these are men who, by the void in their minds, communicate
weariness; or who are fatiguing by a superabundance of uninteresting
conversation; thus want and superfluity are sources of languor.



           *       *       *       *

  PERFECT FRIENDSHIP.

Seneca has observed, and justly, that a great man struggling with
adversity, and bearing its attacks with fortitude, is a sight worthy of
the gods. But a sight, as interesting, if not more so, is that of a
virtuous mind, oppressed by calumny, with the ability to elude its
shafts, yet cheerfully opposing itself to their force, for some secret
but worthy purpose.

Fouquet, intendant of the finances to Lewis the Fourteenth, after living
in the greatest splendor, enjoying the unlimited favour and confidence
of his master, and seeing his levees crowded by the first nobles in the
land, fell into disgrace, and was sent to the Bastile. He experienced
the common fate of all favourites in disgrace; forsaken by his friends,
and persecuted by his foes, the courtiers in general viewed his ruin
with pleasure, and charitably resolved to complete his destruction. The
envious and the disappointed had found means to prejudice his sovereign
against him, and his displeasure was the signal of hatred and
persecution to the fawning crew that surrounded his throne. Adulation is
coeval with monarchy; and no king probably ever deserved implicit
obedience from his subjects more than Lewis the Fourteenth*, on whom
nature had conferred every quality that could excite awe, or command
respect; the majesty of his person seemed one of his first claims to
sovereignty. It has been remarked, that but very few of those who were
so unfortunate to incur the displeasure of this prince, could survive
the loss of his favour**. Fouquet is one of the few. He was well aware,
however, of the extreme danger to which he was exposed; and among an
infinity of motives for serious apprehension, the intendant regarded the
examination of his papers as one of the most certain causes of his ruin.
This consideration greatly encreased the anxiety occasioned by his
confinement; if he could but have destroyed those unfortunate papers
previous to his detention, he should not have so much dreaded the
machinations of his enemies, however ingeniously formed, or inveterately
pursued.

  [* The reader must recollect that these are the sentiments of a
  Frenchman, before the late revolution! The character of Lewis the
  Fourteenth, as a promoter of the arts and sciences, is certainly
  respectable--but as a monarch--who should prefer the welfare and
  felicity of his subjects to the gratification of his own ambitious
  views--it is DETESTABLE!]

  [** It is certain that the famous painter, Le Brun, having lost the
  favour of Lewis the Fourteenth, who had been particularly kind to
  him, died thro' despair, at the Gobelins. The death of Racine,
  the celebrated dramatic poet, which happened not long after the
  production of Athalia, one of his best pieces, was owing to the
  same cause; and the haughty Louvois only survived his disgrace three
  days.]

In the midst of these alarms for his situation, he received the dreadful
news that Pelisson, his secretary, and his friend, had openly declared
himself his accuser, and was soon to be confronted with him. Shocked at
the intelligence, his courage forsook him, and he gave way to despair.

This action of Pelisson's soon made a noise in the world, and excited
the most lively sensations of resentment in the minds of the public, who
so seldom interest themselves in the fate of the unfortunate. Every body
exclaimed that he was the most base and most criminal of mankind! Loaded
with the benefactions of his master, honoured with his particular
confidence,--his friend, in short--he stands forward in the infamous
light of a public informer, and is about to stab him to the heart.

Pelisson, could not be ignorant of these reports to his prejudice, which
encreased every day; at length they attained to such a height, that some
worthy members of society took the resolution publicly to reproach him
with the baseness of his conduct, wherever they met him. The secretary,
though now an object of contempt, preserved his tranquility, and
appeared wholly indifferent to every thing that was said to him. The few
friends who still remained true to the interests of the unfortunate
minister, went to Pelisson's house, and by alternate threats,
entreaties, and supplications, endeavoured to deter him from his
purpose, but in vain; he remained firm, and persisted in his resolution
of speaking the truth, and of accusing Fouquet to his face. It must be
observed that the prisoner, during this time, was invisible to every one
but his judges, who were his greatest enemies, and many of whom, in
violation of every principle of justice, had openly declared their
intention of finding him guilty.

At length the day arrived on which Pelisson was to prefer his
accusation, and incur the atrocious sin of ingratitude. The doors of the
Bastile are opened to him: he is confronted with his master, who
exclaims, "Ah Pelisson, is it you? Are you my enemy, too?--Alas!
I mistook you for my friend!"--The secretary, far from being
disconcerted at this exclamation, began to fulfil the task he had
undertaken, with all the impudence of the most hardened calumniator; he
taxed Fouquet with crimes which were totally destitute of foundation,
and which he hastened to contradict, with the manly firmness of
conscious innocence. "That is not true," said he, interrupting Pelisson,
"you are an impostor, a detestable lyar! Can you advance falsehoods thus
gross, and not blush with shame?"--"Oh," replied Pelisson, whose
countenance betrayed the most violent indignation, "you would not dare
to contradict me, with so much assurance, if you did not know that your
papers were burnt."

These last words flashed conviction on the mind of Fouquet, who
immediately perceived the wonderful address of Pelisson, and the
generosity of his soul. He perceived that his secretary, firm and
unshaken in his friendship, had burned his papers, and had conceived the
design--the only one that could be possibly adopted--of becoming the
accuser, in order to gain admittance to his inaccessible prison, that he
might make him acquainted with the important service he had rendered
him. The intendant, ashamed of his unjust suspicions, and anxious to
make amends for them, cast a look on Pelisson, which gave him to
understand that he had perfectly understood him, and was penetrated with
the most lively sensations of gratitude for his conduct.

The secretary, feeling the complete satisfaction at the success of his
project, still continued to expose himself to the scorn and indignation
of the public. Considered as the basest of mankind, he experienced every
species of insult; while conscious integrity insured to him that
serenity of soul, which was regarded as the hardened effrontery of a
mind wholly callous to shame.

It was not till some time after that the truth came to be known. The
scene then changed. Pelisson became the object of general admiration,
and of enthusiastic esteem, that bordered on veneration; but he still
preserved the same serenity of mind, and displayed the same indifference
to merited praise, as he had before shewn to unmerited censure. Whenever
his friends expatiated on his unshaken firmness, and extraordinary
heroism, the worthy stoic replied--"That man must appear of little
consequence in his own eyes, whose moral existence depends merely on the
opinion of others! It is our place to fix a just value on ourselves
before others attempt to appreciate us. I did but fulfil my duty in
serving a man to whom I did not chuse to be an impotent or useless
friend: the title of friend imposes on those who bear it essential
obligations, which I have endeavoured to discharge; I have given more
than my life: I have suffered myself to be polluted by the imputation of
vice and dishonour; because it was the only means of serving the friend
I loved. What made me amends for the mean opinion which the public
entertained of me?--The good opinion I entertained of myself. That paid
me amply for the effects of prejudice which was founded in injustice.
Virtue is but mental fortitude; and I exerted the whole of mine, to be
able to brave the opinion of all mankind. You now see, there are
occasions which require a man to raise himself above that _solemn_
judgment to which every human being must generally submit. You must
permit me, however, to give you one piece of advice. Another time be
less prompt to decide on the merits of a man who enjoys some reputation
for probity; and be assured, that he can never be on a sudden converted
into the vilest of rogues. The friend of Fouquet could not act in a
manner so contrary to his natural disposition."

Philosophy--adds the relator of this anecdote--will have attained to its
highest degree of perfection, when it shall have enforced the
conviction. That virtue is infinitely superior to talents. By virtue
alone can the duties we owe to society, and to ourselves, be properly
discharged.




  GLEANINGS.

Man is not more superior to a brute, than one man is to another by the
mere force of wisdom. Wisdom is the sole destroyer of equality, the
fountain of honour, and the only mark by which one man, for ten minutes
together, can be known from another.

Were men always skilful they would never use craft or treachery. That
men are so cunning, arises from the littleness of their minds, which, if
it can conceal itself in one place, quickly discovers itself in another.

Cunning men, like jugglers, are only versed in two or three little
tricks, while wisdom excels in the whole circle of action.

The cunning man and the wise man differ not only in point of honesty,
but ability. He that can pack the cards, does not always play well.

I have a right to hold my tongue, and to be silent at all times; but if
I speak to another, I have no right to make him answer for me just as I
please.



           *       *       *       *

  THE VICTIM OF MAGICAL DELUSION.
  _OR, INTERESTING MEMOIRS OF MIGUEL, DUKE DE CA*I*A._
  Unfolding Many Curious Unknown Historical Facts.

  _Translated from the German of Tschink._

  (Continued from page 110.)

"I will not disappoint your hope; however, I must repeat once more that
I can lead you to truth by no other road but that of reason purified
from all sensual dregs. You will find it difficult to pursue that road,
and it will be no easy task to me to guide you. I shall be obliged to
avoid all emblematic language, in order to convey to your mind these
supersensible notions in their natural purity, and it will be necessary
that you should know how to apply the abstractest and purest notions,
although they should contradict your present manner of perception."

"I shall at least not be wanting in attention and good-will."

"First of all it will be necessary to agree in the notion of what is
called _spirit_. The best method of fixing that notion will be to
examine what the word spirit means according to the general rules of
language. If one man says, man consists of body and spirit, by the
former a corporeal, and by the latter an incorporeal being is
understood. We have, therefore, a common point from which we can proceed
in our investigation. _Spirit_ is opposite to body. In this point we
agree according to the most general meaning and use of the word."

"I do."

"Let us see what follows thence! Every _body_ is a compounded, extended,
impenetrable being, subject to the laws of motion, consequently, every
_spirit_ is a simple, unextended and penetrable being, not subject to
the laws of motion."

"Exactly so!"

"Bodies are extended, that is they occupy a _room_, and the proportion
which one body bears to the other in point of _room_, constitutes its
_place_; spirits are not extended, and consequently exist in no _room_,
and in no _place_."

"How am I to understand this?"

"Just as I have said.--But let me elucidate my argument. Why cannot two
bodies exist at the same time, in the same space? Because they exclude
each other on account of their extension and impenetrability. Two bodies
must, of course, occupy two different places, if existing at the same
time; that is, every individual body must occupy its own individual
place. And why must every body occupy its _own_ place?"

"Because of its expansion and impenetrability."

"Very well! But these two qualities cannot appertain to a spirit, and,
consequently, a spirit can occupy no place."

"This seems really to follow."

"This argument can also be stated thus: a spirit has, as a simple being,
neither a right nor left, neither a front nor a back side, and
consequently can have no relation from _no side_ to any thing that
occupies a space. The conclusion is very palpable."

"Then a spirit could occupy no room in the whole material world?"

"Would you perhaps assign to spirits a place in the immaterial world?
How could you imagine, without contradiction, that space or place can
exist in _such_ a world? If one spirit does not occupy a room, then all
spirits together can occupy none, how could therefore any proportion
exist among them with relation to space or place?"

"I comprehend and do not comprehend you. You want to convince me of the
possibility of apparitions of spirits, and deny the existence of
spirits; for if they do occupy no place either in the visible or
invisible world, _where_ else can they exist?"

"How sensitive and confused your ideas are! Don't you perceive that your
question is equal to this: _in which place_ do spirits exist? and that,
of course, you premise in your question what I have just clearly proved
to be absurd. Do you not comprehend that _room_ and _place_ are nothing
else but _external_ qualities, only relations of _material_ things? and
do you believe that the existence of any being depends merely on
external qualities and material relations?"

"Have patience with me!"

"I have; for I am well aware how difficult it is to abstract from
material ideas; however, since they cannot be applicable to spirits we
must renounce them, else we cannot pass over the bounds of the material
world."

"I intreat you, Hiermanfor, to go on!"

"From our investigation we have learnt, as yet, nothing farther than
what a spirit is _not_, and what attributes _cannot_ be ascribed to it.
We now must endeavour to state what _real_ qualities constitute the
nature of spirits. One of them we have already touched upon; I mean,
independence of the laws of physical nature, or _arbitrary choice_. A
second quality presses upon us, namely the _faculty of perception_,
which our soul is endowed with like all other spirits. And now we are
enabled to form a notion of spirits, which, however imperfect it be, yet
is determined: a spirit is a simple being, endowed with _arbitrary
choice_, and the _faculty of perception_. Don't you think that this
definition answers the common manner of speaking."

"An additional proof of its fitness."

"In the same manner in which the body evinces its existence, by the
material effect it produces in the room, the spirit likewise proves its
existence by the manifestation of its faculty of perception and of free
will. However evident and generally received this proposition is, yet it
is misapplied very frequently; for it is, according to my premises,
absolutely false, and nothing else but a kind of optic illusion, if we
imagine our soul to be inclosed in the human body, nay even in some
particular place of it. This illusion may be opposed by another: there
are diversions of thought, in which the thinking principle leaves our
body so entirely, that only the animal powers are active in the latter,
and on the return of our awakening self-consciousness, the soul seems to
return from far distant regions. However, this too is mere illusion. We
can say nothing farther of the union which subsists between our soul and
body, than that our soul is sensible of the existence of a corporeal
organ, the mutations of which harmonise exactly with her ideas and
resolutions; however, as you never will suppose that your spirit is
inclosed by the walls of Amelia's distant habitation, where your whole
soul, with all her sentiments and ideas, is, as it were, translated to;
so your spirit can also not be supposed to be inclosed in your body,
which seems to be its common residence. No, no, my Lord, that cannot be!
the bonds of space can never fetter an immaterial being to a material
one."

"This is indeed the natural conclusion which flows from your premises;
but by _what_ bonds should then the communion between body and soul be
preserved?"

"Your question refers to a fact, the answer to it, consequently, belongs
to the practical part of this philosophy. Yet," added the Irishman after
some reflections, "I can give you a hint upon that head, which will
throw some light upon it: Every substance, consequently the body too,
must possess an internal activity, that is the invisible cause of its
external actions, which are visible in the space. This internal
principle of the body, acts upon the spirit in the same manner in which
the spirit acts upon this principle. Soul and body, consequently, cannot
act upon each other _immediately_, but only by means of this principle.
As all material beings, concretively taken, compose a great totum, which
is called the physical world, so the concrete of all immaterial beings
composes what we call the immaterial world. It follows from the
antecedent, that the order, regularity, and union which are seen in the
former world, are entirely different from the order, regularity, and
union which prevails in the latter world. All material beings are
subject to the sceptre of stern necessity, and kept in order by physical
laws; the rank which these beings maintain towards one another, is
founded either on innate qualities, or such as have been attributed to
them by general agreement; and they are nearer each other, or more
distant from one another, according to their relations constituted by
space and time. How different is this in the material world! rational
beings, endowed with free will, are subject to no other laws but to
those of morality; the prerogatives and degrees which subsist among
them, depend on the different degrees of their wisdom and virtue, and
according to the similarity or difference of their manner of thinking,
and of their sentiments, they are nearer each other, or more distant
from one another; that is, they harmonize, or disharmonize. Man belongs,
by virtue of his body and soul, to both of these worlds, and,
consequently, is connected with the material and immaterial world. It
may therefore happen, that the same person who acts an important part on
earth, in virtue of his physical or political situation, occupies at the
same time the lowest degree among the super-terrestrial beings; that the
soul of a body whose beauty charms every eye here below, is an
indifferent, or a contemptible object in the spiritual world; that the
soul of an inhabitant of Saturn, and that of an inhabitant of the earth,
with regard to their spiritual communion, are oftentimes, nearer
neighbours than the souls of those whose abode is beneath the same
roof."

"This is very plain!"

  (_To be continued._)




     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._



             CHARACTER OF A GOOD MAN.

Agatho makes the interest of mankind, in a manner, his own; and has a
tender and affectionate concern for their welfare; he cannot think
himself happy, whatever his possessions and his preferments are, while
he sees others miserable; his power and wealth delight him chiefly, as
the poor and indigent are better for it; and the greatest charm of
prosperity is the advantage it affords of relieving his
fellow-creatures; and to give assistance and support, according to the
various exigencies of those with whom he converses, is his constant
endeavour; and that he may practice the more large and generous charity,
he retrenches useless pomp and expence, esteeming that a much more
sublime and noble gratification than the amusements and gallantries of a
vain and luxurious age. In fine, he is unwearied in his endeavours to
promote the happiness of others, and he not only takes all opportunities
that present themselves of doing good, but seeks all occasions to be
useful, though he has frequently met with ungrateful returns----He is
good.




  ANECDOTE.

Sir William Lilly, a famous painter in the reign of king Charles I. had
at a certain agreement drawn the picture of a rich citizen of London to
the life, that was not indebted to nature either for face or proportion
of body; but when the citizen came to fetch it away, he refused to give
Sir William so much money, as they had agreed for, because, as he
alleged, if the owner did not buy it, it would lie upon his hands.
"That's your mistake," says the painter, "for I can sell it for double
the price I demand." "How can that be," says the citizen, "for 'tis like
nobody but myself?" "'Tis true," says Sir William, "but I will draw a
tail to it, and then it will be the best piece for a monkey in England."
Upon which the citizen rather than be exposed, paid down his money and
took away his picture.




  MAXIMS.

What gold is in the crucible that refines it, the learned man is in his
country.

The wise and learned in his own opinion, is but an ignorant person in
the eyes of God and men.

It is less difficult to divert a wicked man from his iniquitous schemes,
than to dispel the sorrows of a heart that permits grief to prey
upon it.



           *       *       *       *

  _NEW-YORK._



    MARRIED,

On Wednesday last, by the Rev. Mr. Beach, Mr. GARLAND DAVIES, to Miss
ELIZABETH BARTON, both of this city.

On Thursday evening, the 29th ult. by the Rev. Mr. Woodhull, Mr. WILLIAM
LAWRENCE, merchant, to Miss MARGARET VAN HORNE, daughter of Mr. James
Van Horne, merchant, late of this city, deceased.

On Saturday evening last by the Rev. Dr. M'Knight, DANIEL PARIS, Esq. of
Montgomery county, to Miss KITTY IRVING, daughter of Mr. William Irving
of this city.

The same evening, by the Rev. Dr. M'Knight, Mr. JONAS MAPES, to Miss
ELIZABETH TYLEE, daughter of Mr. James Tylee of this city.

On Sunday evening last, by the Rev. Dr. Foster, Mr. THOMAS RINGWOOD,
Printer, to Miss CATHARINE HERBERT, both of this city.




  _METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS._
  _From the 2d to the 8th inst._

    _Days of the Month._
      _Thermometer observed at 6, A.M. 3, P.M._
        _Prevailing winds._
          _OBSERVATIONS on the WEATHER._

        deg.  deg.    6. 3.  6. 3.
           100   100
  Oct 2  54    60 75  ne. do.  cloudy lht. wd. do.
      3  53    54     ne. do.  rain high wd. do.
      4  51    65     n. do.   cloudy h. wd. do. do.
      5  53    63 75  sw. e.   cloudy calm do. do.
      6  52    63     nw. w.   cloudy lt. wd. clear do.
      7  46    59     nw. do.  clear, light wind do.
      8  44    57     n. w.    clear, light wd. do.




  TO A YOUNG LADY,
  On the Author's Reading to her Sterne's Beautiful Story of Maria.

  As Sterne's pathetic tale you hear,
    Why rudely check the rising sigh?
  Why seek to hide the pitying tear,
    Which adds new lustre to the eye?

  Tears that lament another's woe,
    Unveil the goodness of the heart:
  Uncheck'd, Maria, these should flow--
    They please beyond the pow'r of art.

  Does not yon crimson-tinted rose,
    Whose opening blush delights the view,
  More splendid colouring disclose,
    When brightly gem'd with morning dew?

  So shall Maria's beauteous face,
    Drest in more pleasing charms appear;
  When aided by the magic grace
    Of pity's sympathizing tear.




  THE REPARTEE.

  Cries Sylvia to a reverend Dean,
    What reason can be given,
  Since Marriage is a holy thing,
    That there are none in Heaven?
  There are no women he replied.----
    She quick returns the jest--
  Women there are, but I'm afraid
    They cannot find a priest.



           *       *       *       *

     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._



                    TO EMMA.

  Charm'd by returning Friendship's gentle voice,
    Each waken'd pulse with new-born rapture beats;
    My lonely heart the welcome stranger greets,
  And bids each quiv'ring, trembling nerve rejoice.
        Emma again shall meet my view,
        Still beats her heart to Friendship true,
        All the gay scenes by hope pourtray'd,
        Late hid by sorrow's sombre shade,
        Revive upon my raptur'd sight,
        In glowing colours now more bright
  Than when we erst in early Friendship's bands,
  First join'd our hearts and lock'd our infant hands.

  Friend of my heart, that time again returns,
    Again we'll taste the joys of Friendship pure;
  And tho' Maria's loss my Emma mourns,
    Time and fond sympathy her grief shall cure.
        There she was pity's mildest form,
        Her heart with ev'ry virtue warm,
        And well deserv'd affection's tear,
        The tender thought and sigh sincere;
        I too her early fate deplore,
        And mourn fair Virtue's child no more:
  In tender sympathy with thee I'll join,
  "Give tear for tear, and echo sighs to thine."

  The subject sad my early woes revives;
    I too, my friend, have felt misfortune's dart,
  Still in my soul the sad remembrance lives
    Of objects dear;--Ah! doom'd how soon to part:
        Still in the melancholy hour
        Memory exerts her tyrant pow'r;
        Recalls thy form, Oh! parent dear,
        Still bids the much-lov'd shade appear,
        And prompts the deep-drawn sigh sincere,
        While down my pale cheek flows the tear:
  Deep in the grave my tender parent sleeps,
  While o'er the sod each kindred virtue weeps.

  Soon too Selina did thy early worth
    The blooming beauty heaven its favourite gave,
  Seek the dark confines of the chilling earth,
    And join our much lov'd parents in the grave:
        Ye oft I meet, beloved shades,
        When wandering through the moonlight glades;
        Pale shadows shoot athwart my view,
        I start, I sigh, and think of you,
        And oft my wilder'd fancy brings
        Your dear lov'd forms, and o'er them flings
        Bright robes of heavenly radiance fair,
        Anon they vanish into air:
  Thus fled my joys, I cry, and tears pursue,
  The pleasing phantoms melting from my view.

  Have I not cause, my friend, to grieve,
    To bid the mournful numbers flow,
    In solemn strains of dirge like woe,
  And tears the wounded heart relieve:
        But resignation, heaven born maid,
        Still sooths me with her cheering aid,
        She calls my wandering fancy home,
        To scenes of bliss beyond the tomb,
        And bids my rapt thought soar away,
        "In visions of eternal day."
  Emma's dear friendship too shall calm my woe,
  Forbid the sigh to heave, the tear to flow.

  Yes, charming maid, thy love returned bestows
    A cheering ray my darken'd path to light,
    As from the cloud, the sun breaks forth more bright,
  And all the sky with borrowed lustre glows:
        Again shall please, the sweets of spring,
        And fancy ever on the wing,
        Assay to cull Pierian flowers,
        And spend the chearful smiling hours;
        When at the muses' shrine I bow,
        In waving garlands for thy brow:
  Nor thou my friend, the humble boon refuse,
  Tho' mean the gift, pure are the giver's views.

  Yet think not, partial friend, thy Clara vain,
    Ah! well she knows, she wants the muses fire,
    Some abler hand should strike the sounding lyre,
  And with my Emma's praises swell the strain:
        Yet though my lay be wild and rude,
        By friendship's partial eye when view'd,
        Emma may smile--no more I ask,
        I will repay the pleasing task:
  More than the applauding world her smile I prize,
  Than the morn the mildness of her eyes.

    CLARA

      NEW-YORK Oct. 3, 1796.




  SOLILOQUY TO LOVE.

  O thou, or fiend, or angel, by what name
  Shall I address thee? how express thy powers?
  Strange compound of extremes! of heat and cold,
  Of hope and fear, of pleasure and of pain!
  Nought can escape thy prying scrutiny;
  Wretched, should aught but thwart thine ardent wish;
  And oh! how ravish'd if thou mark'st one glance,
  Which tells the latent longings of the soul!
  In that high fever, the delirious brain
  Coins gaudy phantoms of celestial bliss,
  Of bliss that never comes--for now, e'en now
  From airy joys he wakes to solid pain.
  Quick to his sight up springs, in long array,
  A tribe of horrid ills--the cold reply;
  The unanswer'd question; the assenting nod
  Of dull Civility; the careless look
  Of blank Indifference; the chilling frown
  That freezes at the heart; the stony eye
  Of fixt Disdain; or more tormenting gaze
  Bent on another. These, with all the train
  Of fears and jealousies that wait on Love,
  Are no imagin'd griefs; no fancied ills
  These; or, if fancied, worse than real woes
  Such art thou, Love; then who, that once has known
  Thy countless rocks and sands that lurk beneath,
  Would ever tempt thy smiling surface more?
  Long toss'd on stormy seas of hopes and fears,
  How willingly at last my wearied soul
  Would seek a shelter in forgetfulness!
  Oh! bland Forgetfulness, Love's sweetest balm,
  Through all my veins thy pow'rs infuse; close up
  Each avenue to Love; purge off the lime
  That clogs his spirit, which fain would wing its flight
  To Sense, to Reason, Liberty and Peace.


NEW-YORK: _+Printed by JOHN BULL, No. 115, Cherry-Street+, where every
Kind of Printing work is executed with the utmost Accuracy and
Dispatch.--+Subscriptions+ for this +Magazine+ (at 2s. per month) are
taken in at the Printing-Office, and by E. MITCHELL, Bookseller, No. 9,
Maiden-Lane._



           *       *       *       *



  _UTILE DULCI._

  THE NEW-YORK WEEKLY MAGAZINE;
  or, Miscellaneous Repository.

  +Vol. II.+]  +Wednesday, October 19, 1796.+  [+No. 68.+


  REFLECTIONS ON THE HARMONY OF SENSIBILITY AND REASON.

  SINCERITY.

A little judgment, with less sensibility, makes a man cunning; a little
more feeling, with even less reason, would make him sincere.

Some have no more knowledge of humanity, than just serves them to put on
an appearance of it, to answer their own base and selfish purposes.

He who prefers cunning to sincerity, is insensible to the disgrace and
suspicion which attend craft and deceit, and the social satisfaction
which the generous mind finds in honesty and plain-dealing.

Men who know not the pleasures of sincerity, and who traffic in deceit,
barter an image of kindness for a shadow of joy, and are deceived more
than they deceive.

  PASSION.

Let us suppose an end of Passion, there must be an end of reasoning.
Passion alone can correct Passion. Thus we forego a present pleasure, in
hopes that we shall afterwards enjoy a greater pleasure, or of longer
duration: or suffer a present pain, to escape a greater; and this is
called an act of the judgment. He who gives way to the dictates of
present passion, without consulting experience, listens to a partial
evidence, and must of course determine wrongfully.

Some, in order to pay a false compliment to sentimental pleasures,
attempt altogether to depreciate the pleasures of sense: with as little
justice, though with like plausibility, have men endeavoured to decry
the natural passions and affections as inconsistent with human felicity.
Not from our natural desires and passions do we suffer misery; for,
without these, what pleasure can we be supposed to enjoy? But from false
desires, or diseased appetites, acting without the aid of experience and
understanding.

He who commits an action which debases him in his own mind, besides its
other evil consequences, lays up a store of future misery, which will
haunt him as long as the memory of the deed remains.

Along with the present effects of any action, in order to judge of it
aright, we must put in the balance also its future consequences, and
consider, on one side, the satisfaction and honour; on the other, the
evil and disgrace that may attend it.

Magnanimity exercises itself in contempt of labours and pains, in order
to avoid greater pains, or overtake greater pleasures.

  TEMPERANCE.

The great rule of sensual pleasures is to use them so as they may not
destroy themselves, or be divorced from the pleasures of sentiment; but
rather as they are assisted by, and mutually assisting to, the more
refined and exalted sympathy of rational enjoyment.

Men ever refine the meaning of the word pleasure to what pleases
themselves: gluttons imagine, that by pleasure is meant gluttony. The
only true epicures are such as enjoy the pleasures of temperance. Small
pleasures seem great to such as know no greater. The virtuous man is he
who has sense enough to enjoy the greatest pleasure.

Superfluity and parade among the vulgar-rich pass for elegance and
greatness. To the man of true taste, temperance is luxury, and
simplicity grandeur.

Whatever pleasures are immediately derived from the senses, persons of
fine internal feelings enjoy besides their other pleasures; while such
as place their chief happiness in the former, can have no true taste for
the delicious sensations of the soul.

They who divide profit and honesty, mistake the nature of the one or the
other. We must make a difference between appearances and truths: the
really profitable and the good are the same.

False appearances of profit are the greatest enemies to true interest.
Future sorrows present themselves in the disguise of present pleasures,
and short-sighted folly eagerly embraces the deceit.



           *       *       *       *

  Interesting History Of
  _THE BARON DE LOVZINSKI._

  With a relation of the most remarkable occurrences in the life
  of the celebrated COUNT PULASKI, well known as the champion of
  American Liberty, and who bravely fell in its defence before
  Savannah, 1779.

  _Interspersed with Anecdotes of the late unfortunate KING of POLAND,
  so recently dethroned._

  (Continued from page 115.)

We soon arrived at the ditch of the castle; the servants of Dourlinski
demanded who we were; I answered that we were come from Pulaski, and
wished to speak to their lord, and that we had been attacked by robbers,
who were still in pursuit of us. The drawbridge was accordingly let
down; and having entered, we were informed that at present we could not
see Dourlinski, but that on the next day at ten o'clock he would give us
audience. They then demanded our arms, which we delivered up without any
difficulty, and Boleslas soon after took an opportunity of looking at my
wound, which was found to be but superficial.

In a short time a frugal repast was served up for us in the kitchen. We
were afterwards conducted to a lower chamber, where two beds were
prepared for us. The domestics then left us without any light, and
immediately locked the door of the apartment.

I could not close my eyes during the whole night. Titsikan had given me
but a slight wound, but that which my heart had received was so very
deep! At day break, I became impatient in my prison, and wished to open
the shutters, but they were nailed up. I attacked them, however, so
vigorously, that the fastenings gave way, and I beheld a very fine park.
The window being low, I cleared it at a leap, and in a single instant
found myself in the gardens of the Polish chieftain.

After having walked about for a few minutes, I sat down on a stone
bench, which was placed at the foot of a tower, whose ancient
architecture I had been some time considering. I remained for a few
seconds enveloped in reflection, when a tile fell at my feet. I thought
that it had dropped from the roof of this old building; and, to avoid
the effects of a similar accident, I went and placed myself at the other
end of the seat. A few moments after, a second tile fell by my side. The
circumstance appeared surprising: I arose with some degree of
inquietude, and attentively examined the tower. I perceived at about
twenty-five or thirty feet from the ground, a narrow opening. On this I
picked up the tiles which had been thrown at me, and on the first I
discovered the following words, written with a bit of plaister;

  "+LOVZINSKI, is it you! Do you still live!+"

And on the second these:

  "+Deliver me! save Lodoiska.+"

It is impossible to conceive how many different sentiments occupied my
mind at one and the same time: my astonishment, my joy, my grief, my
embarrassment, cannot be expressed. I examined once more the prison of
Lodoiska, and plotted in my own mind how I could procure her liberty.
She at length threw down another tile, and I read as follows:

"At midnight, bring me paper, ink, and pens; and to-morrow, an hour
after sun-rise, come and receive a letter.--------Begone."--

Having returned towards my chamber, I called to Boleslas, who assisted
me in re-entering through the window. I then informed my faithful
servant, of the unexpected accident that had put an end to my
wanderings, and redoubled my inquietude.

How could I penetrate into this tower? How could we procure arms? By
what means were we to deliver Lodoiska from captivity! How could we
carry her off under the eye of Dourlinski, in the midst of his people,
from a fortified castle? and supposing that so many obstacles were not
unsurmountable, could I attempt such an enterprize during the short
delay prescribed by Titsikan?

Did not the Tartar enjoin me to stay with Dourlinski three days, but not
to remain longer than eight?

Would it not be to expose ourselves to the attacks of the enemy, to
leave this castle before the third, or after the expiration of the
eighth day? Should I release my dear Lodoiska from a prison, on purpose
to deliver her into the hands of robbers, to be forever separated from
her either by slavery or death? This would be a horrible idea!

But wherefore was she confined in such a frightful prison? The letter
which she had promised would doubtless instruct me: It was therefore
necessary to procure paper, pen and ink. I accordingly charged Boleslas
with this employment, and began to prepare myself for acting the
delicate part of an emissary of Pulaski in the presence of Dourlinski.

It was broad day-light when they came to set us at liberty, and inform
us, that Dourlinski was at leisure and wished to see us. We accordingly
presented ourselves before him with great confidence; and we were
introduced to a man of about sixty years of age, whose reception was
blunt, and whose manners were repulsive. He demanded who we were. "My
brother and myself," replied I, "belong to Count Pulaski. My master has
entrusted me with a secret commission to you. My brother accompanies me
on another account. Before I explain, I must be in private, for I am
charged not to speak but to you alone."

"It is very well," replies Dourlinski: "your brother may retire, and you
also," addressing himself to his servants; "begone! As to him (pointing
to a person who was his confident), he must remain, and you may speak
any thing before him."

"Pulaski has sent me."--------"I see very well that he has sent you,"
says the palatine, interrupting me----"to demand of you--"
"What?"--------"news of his daughter."--"News of his daughter! Did
Pulaski say so?"--------"Yes my lord, he said that his daughter was
here."---I perceived that Dourlinski instantly grew pale; he then looked
towards his confident, and surveyed me for some time in silence.

"You astonish me," rejoins he at length. "In confiding a secret of this
importance to you, it necessarily follows that your master must have
been very imprudent."

"No more than you, my lord, for have not you also a confident? Grandees
would be much to be pitied if they could not rely upon any of their
domestics. Pulaski has charged me to inform you, that Lovsinski has
already searched through a great part of Poland, and that he will
undoubtedly visit these cantons."

"If he dares to come here," replies he with great vivacity, "I will
provide a lodging for him, which he shall inhabit for some time. Do you
know this Lovsinski?"

"I have seen him at my master's house in Warsaw."--"They say he is
handsome?"

"He is well made, and about my size."

"His person?---is prepossessing; it is--------"

"He is a wretch," adds he, interrupting me in a great passion------"O
that he were but to fall into my hands!"

"My lord, they say that he is brave---"

"He! I will wager any sum of money that he is only calculated to seduce
women!---O that he would but fall into my hands!" Then, assuming a less
ferocious tone, he continued thus. "It is a long time since Pulaski
wrote to me---where is he at present?"

"My lord, I have precise orders not to answer that question: all that I
dare to say is, that he has the strongest reasons for neither
discovering the place of his retreat, nor writing to any person, and
that he will soon come and explain them to you in person."

Dourlinski appeared exceedingly astonished at this information; I could
discover some symptoms of fear in his countenance. At length, looking at
his confident, who seemed equally embarrassed with himself, he
proceeded: "You say that Pulaski will come here soon?"---"Yes, my lord,
in about a fortnight, or a little later." On this he again turned to his
attendant; but in a short time affecting as much calmness as he had
before discovered embarrassment; "Return to your master," added he;
"I am sorry to have nothing but bad news to communicate to
him--------tell him that Lodoiska is no longer here." I myself became
surprised in my turn at this information. "What! my lord,
Lodoiska--------"

"Is not longer here, I tell you!--------To oblige Pulaski, whom I
esteem, I undertook, although with great repugnance, the talk of
confining his daughter in my castle: nobody but myself and he (pointing
to his confident) knew that she was here. It is about a month since we
went, as usual, to carry her provisions for the day, but there was
nobody in the apartment. I am ignorant how it happened; but what I know
well is, that she has escaped, for I have heard nothing of her
since.---She must undoubtedly have gone to join Lovsinski at Warsaw, if
perchance the Tartars have not intercepted her in her journey."

My astonishment on this became extreme. How could I reconcile that which
I had seen in the garden, with that which Dourlinski now told me? There
was some mystery in this business, which I became exceedingly impatient
to be acquainted with: I was however extremely careful not to exhibit
any appearance of doubt. "My lord," said I, "this is bad news for my
master!"--------"Undoubtedly, but it is not my fault."

"My lord, I have a favour to ask of you."

"Let me hear it."------"The Tartars are ravaging the neighbourhood of
your castle--they attacked us------we escaped as it were by a miracle.
Will you permit my brother and myself to remain here only for the space
of two days?"

"For two days only I give my consent."

"Where do they lodge?" says he to his attendant. "In an apartment below
ground," was the reply.

"Which overlooks my gardens?" rejoins Dourlinski, interrupting him with
great agitation.

"The shutters are well fastened," adds the other.

"No matter--------You must put them elsewhere." These words made me
tremble.

"It is not possible, but,"------continues the confident, and then
whispered the rest of the sentence in his ear.

"Right," says the Baron; "and let it be done instantly." Then,
addressing himself to me, "know that your brother and you must depart
the day after to-morrow: before you go, you shall see me again, and I
will give you a letter for Pulaski."

I then went to rejoin Boleslas in the kitchen, where he was at
breakfast, who soon after presented me with a little bottle full of ink,
several pens, and some sheets of paper, which he had procured without
difficulty. I panted with desire to write to Lodoiska; and the only
difficulty that now remained, was to find a commodious place where I
might not be discovered by the curiosity of Dourlinski's people.

They had already informed Boleslas that we could not again be admitted
into the apartment where we had spent the preceding night, until the
time should arrive when we were to retire to rest. I soon, however,
bethought myself of a stratagem which succeeded to admiration.

The servants were drinking with my pretended brother, and politely
invited me to help them to empty a few flasks.

I swallowed, with a good grace, several glasses of bad wine in
succession: in a few minutes my legs seemed to totter, my tongue
faltered: I related a hundred pleasant and improbable tales to the
joyous company; in a word, I acted the _drunken man_ so well, that
Boleslas himself became a dupe to my scheme, and actually trembled lest,
in a moment when I seemed disposed to communicate every thing, my secret
should escape.

  (_To be continued._)



           *       *       *       *

     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._



               REMARKS ON MUSIC.

  (Continued from page 108.)

The sacred scriptures afford almost the only materials from which any
knowledge of the Hebrew music can be drawn. In the rapid sketch,
therefore of ancient music which I mean to exhibit, very few
observations are all that can properly be given to that department of
the subject.

Moses was educated by Pharoah's daughter in all the literature and
elegant arts cultivated in Egypt. It is probable, therefore, that the
taste and style of Egyptian music would be infused in some degree into
that of the Hebrews. Music appears to have been interwoven thro' the
whole tissue of religious ceremony in Palestine. The priesthood seem to
have been musicians hereditarily and by office. The prophets appear to
have accompanied their inspired effusions with music; and every prophet
like the present Improvisatori of Italy, seems to have been accompanied
by a musical instrument.

Music, vocal and instrumental, constituted a great part of the funeral
ceremonies of the Jews. The pomp and expence used on those occasions
advanced by degrees to an excessive extent. The number of flute-players
in the procession amounted sometimes to several hundreds, and the
attendance of the guests continued frequently for thirty days.

The Hebrew language abounds with consonants, and has so few vowels, that
in the original alphabet they had no characters, it must, therefore,
have been harsh and unfavourable to music. Their instruments of music
were chiefly those of percussion, so that the music must have been
coarse and noisy: The vast numbers of performers too, whom it was the
taste of the Hebrews to collect together, could not with such language
and instruments produce any thing but clamour and jargon. According to
Josephus, there were 200,000 musicians at the dedication of the temple
of Solomon.

The history of King David furnishes us with very striking proofs of his
attachment to music. Saul being troubled in his mind, and melancholy,
was advised to apply to music as a remedy for his disorder: "David took
his harp, and played tunes of sweet melody, and Saul was comforted."

The Psalms of David, which glow with ardour of genius, of an elevation
of the most becoming sentiments, were, it is more than probable, set to
the most sublime and expressive music, such was the attachment of the
Hebrews to this art, and such was the proficiency they made in it; and
when they were in captivity in Babylon, they regretted the loss of those
songs which they had sung with rapture in the temple of Jerusalem. Such
are the circumstances from which only an idea of the Hebrew music can be
formed, for the Jews neither ancient nor modern have ever had any
characters peculiar to music; and the melodies used in their religious
ceremonies have at all times been entirely traditional.

  A. O.

  (_To be continued._)



           *       *       *       *

     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._



                THE RENCOUNTER.

  "Shame! Where is thy blush?"

How degrading to human nature! Worse than the brute is he who endeavours
to draw another into a contest!

An instance occurred a few days since of a _battle_ between two persons,
who (as I withhold their real names) I shall distinguish by the titles
of Willet and Martin. Willet had long been a visitor at the house of the
other, for what purpose I know not; but be it what it may, his
intentions, no doubt, were honourable. Martin has an amiable sister, and
report says, the heart of Willet has been smitten by her charms; and
when time permitted, and she consented, he intended to have made her his
bride.

His visits, it seems, were not very pleasing to the brother of the young
lady, who took an opportunity of loading him with a series of epithets
consisting of "_mean, low_," &c. &c. To these Willet scarcely deigned a
reply. When Martin found the object of his malice removed by his vile
insinuations, he challenged him to _fight_. He was forced to comply,
though much against his inclination, and both quitting the house, he
found himself instantly attacked in the open street, where a scene
ensued that would have made the unprincipled savage, were he present,
blush with indignation.

In short, the challenger was worsted; he was not a match for his
antagonist, though he had the better of him in years. His mother and
sister saw the conflict from a window, and endeavoured to restore him to
reason, but without effect; he was quite transported with excess of
passion.

Martin was the aggressor, and his punishment was just. When he became
sensible that he had suffered sufficiently, he was conveyed home,
without enjoying the pleasure of beholding that bright luminary, the
sun, the cuffs he had received having entirely closed up the organs of
sight; to all appearance, a few more would have made him an inhabitant
of the world of spirits; but by a lucky turn of the wheel of fortune,
they were restrained.

  THEODORE.

    NEW-YORK Oct. 12, 1796.




  FRAGMENTS OF EPICHARMUS.

  Moral Maxims.

Be sober in thought; be slow in belief; these are the sinews of wisdom.

It is the part of a wise man to foresee what is to be done, so shall he
not repent of what is done.

Throw not away thine anger upon trifles--Reason and not rage should
govern.

  AN ANTITHESIS.

It demands the strength of a lion to subdue the weakness of love.



           *       *       *       *

  THE VICTIM OF MAGICAL DELUSION;
  _OR, INTERESTING MEMOIRS OF MIGUEL, DUKE DE CA*I*A._
  Unfolding Many Curious Unknown Historical Facts.

  _Translated from the German of Tschink._

  (Continued from page 119.)

"The human soul, of course, is already, in this life, connected with the
members of the invisible world, and this connection is lasting and
essential, while that with the body is accidental and transient. However
a union of substances, that is, of active natures, cannot be supposed to
exist without a reciprocal influence; consequently the human soul must
have an effective influence upon the spirits to whom she is linked, and
the members of the spiritual world must act reciprocally on our soul.
But why are we not equally sensible of these reciprocal influences and
communications, as of those which subsist between our soul and body? The
cause of this is very obvious. The human spirit can have a clear idea
only of the objects of the material world, because of its corporeal
organ; it is, therefore, not even capable of a clear immediate
contemplation of its own self, much less of its immaterial relations to
other spirits: the difference which exists between those ideas which
arise in our soul by means of its immateriality, and its communion with
spiritual beings, and the ideas which it receives by the medium of the
body, or abstracted from material objects, is so essential, that the
ideas of the former kind cannot come in connection with those of the
latter; for which reason we have either no notion at all of them, or, at
most, a very obscure one; however, we become plainly conscious of them
as soon as the union of the soul and its corporeal organ ceases."

"This, Hiermanfor, seems, in some measure to be the case when we are
sleeping, and the sensitive organs are resting from their occupations.
Should therefore those philosophers of antiquity, who have believed that
in our dreams we are capable of being influenced by superior beings, and
of receiving supernatural inspirations, be mistaken?"

"There is, certainly, some truth in this remark. I must, however,
observe, that we do not possess that capacity when dreaming, but when we
are fast asleep. It is commonly thought that we have only obscure
notions in the latter state, and this opinion arises from our not
recollecting them when we awake; however, on what ground can we conclude
therefrom that they have not been clear while we were sleeping? Such
ideas, perhaps, may be clearer and more extensive, than even the most
perspicuous when we are awake, because the activity of our soul is
neither modified nor confined by any thing whatever, the sensitive
organs being intirely at rest. However this very rest of our sensitive
organs, is the cause which prevents the re-production of these ideas
when we are awake, our sleeping body having no share in them, and,
consequently, being destitute of its concomitant notion of them; they,
of course, remain insulated in our soul, having no connection at all
with those ideas which arise within ourselves before and after we are
fast asleep, and in which our body takes a greater or a smaller share.
This is not the case with our dreams; for when we are dreaming, the
faculties of the soul do not act so pure and uncontrouled as when we are
fast asleep. Dreaming is an intermediate state between waking and
sleeping. We have then already, in some measure, clear ideas, and
interweave the actions of our soul with the impressions of our exterior
senses, whereby a strange, and sometimes ridiculous mixture is
engendered, which we partly recollect when we awake."

"You have, as yet, proved only the probability of clear notions during
our being fast asleep; could you not also prove their reality?"

"Certainly! however these arguments do not belong to the theoretical
part of our philosophy. Yet I must beg of you to recollect, en passant,
the actions of some noctambulos, who sometimes, during the profoundest
sleep, shew more understanding than at any other time, but cannot
recollect those actions when awake?"

"This is true!" I exclaimed, "this throws an astonishing light upon this
matter."

"Yet not only while asleep," the Irishman continued, "but also when
awake, many people can be capable of having a clear notion of their
connection with the spiritual world, and the influence of spirits upon
them. Yet the essential difference which exists between the notions of
_spirits_ and those of _men_ is a great impediment, which, however, is
not at all insurmountable. It is true than man cannot have an
_immediate_ notion of those spiritual ideas, because of the co-operation
of his corporeal organs; however they can, in virtue of the law of the
association of ideas, produce in the human mind those images which are
related to them and consequently procreate analogical representations of
our senses, which, although they be not the spiritual actions
themselves, yet are their symbols."

"I perceive what you are aiming at."

"Examples will render the matter more intelligible to you. Experience
teaches that our superior intellectual notions, which are near a-kin to
the spiritual ideas, commonly assume a bodily garb, in order to render
themselves perspicuous. Thence the poet transforms wisdom into the
Goddess Minerva, the stings of conscience into furies, and personifies
virtues and vices; the mathematician describes time by a line, and is
there any philosopher who always forms an idea even of the Godhead,
without intermixing human qualities? In that manner ideas, which have
been imparted to us by spiritual influence, may dress themselves in the
symbols of that _language_ which is common to us, and the presence of a
spirit which we perceive, assume the image of a _human shape_--witness
the late apparition of your tutor.----Thus the theory of all
supernatural inspirations and visions is ascertained; consequently the
apparitions of spirits have that in common with our dreams, that they
represent to us effects which are produced within ourselves, as if
happening _without ourselves_; however, at the same time, they differ
from them with respect to their being really founded upon an effect from
_without_, a spiritual influence. However this influence cannot reveal
itself to our consciousness immediately, but only by means of associated
images of our fancy, which attain the vivacity of objects really
perceived. You see, therefore, what an essential difference there is
between the phantoms of our dreams, and the apparitions of spirits. But
here is the boundary of theory. The criterion whereby apparitions of
spirits, in every particular case, can be distinguished with certainty,
from vain phantoms, and supernatural inspirations from natural ideas,
and the means of effecting apparitions, and of obtaining assistance and
instructions from spiritual beings; these and several more things belong
to the practical part of the occult philosophy.

"Here, my Lord, I must conclude for the present, and drop the curtain.
Stress of time obliges me to abbreviate my discourse on a subject which
would not be exhausted in many days; however I may safely leave to your
own understanding the finishing and enlargement of this sketch. Suffice
it that I have enabled you to comprehend the apparition of your friend,
and to see that reason does not pronounce judgment against subjects of
this nature, but rather is the only mean which affords us light and
certainty with respect to them. The theory which I have given you may,
at the same time, serve you to judge whether it will be worth your
trouble to be initiated in the mysteries of the practical part of this
philosophy. However, I must tell you, that no mortal who has not
sanctified himself by bridling his sensitive nature, and purifying his
spiritual faculties, can be admitted to that sanctuary. Are you resolved
to do this?"

  "I am, put me to the test!"

"Then depart with the first dawn of day for Ma**id, without taking leave
of the Countess."

The Irishman could not have chosen a severer trial, nor demanded a
greater sacrifice. The combat which I had to fight with my heart, before
I could come to a resolution, was short but dreadful.---I promised the
Irishman to execute his will.

"Well!" said he, "then hear what measures you are to take. As soon as
you shall be arrived at Ma**id, you must, without delay, wait upon the
Prime Minister, Oliv**ez, and the Secretary of State Suma*ez, but take
care not to discover your political views to either of them; pretend
that you intend to stay some time at Ma**id merely for the sake of
amusement. Repeat your visits till you have gained their confidence.
Your winning demeanor, my Lord, and your intimate connection with
Vascon*ellos will render this conquest easy.---Farewell, at Ma**id we
shall meet again!"

We parted. The Irishman returned once more. "Your manner of life while
at Ma**id," said he, "will require great expences, and you must be well
provided with money. I have taken care that you shall be well supplied
with that needful article. You will find in your apartment a sum which
you may dispose of at pleasure." So saying, he left me suddenly.

On coming home, I found on my table two bags with money, each of them
containing a thousand ducats. Pietro told me they had been brought by a
servant of the Irish Captain.

No one will doubt that I was now entirely devoted to the Irishman. By
his discourse at the burying place he had _persuaded_, and by his
liberality _convinced_ me, that I could not do better than to let myself
be guided entirely by him; and as I at first had been determined to this
by the conquering superiority of his soul, so I was now confirmed in it
by the applause of my reason. Nay, if the Irishman should now have
offered to break off all connection with me, I should have courted his
friendship, so much had I been charmed by the profound wisdom of his
discourse. Not the least vestige of mistrust against his secret power
was left in my soul, and the very regard for philosophy which but lately
had prejudiced me against him, was now one of the strongest bonds that
chained me to him. How agreeably was I surprised to find in _Reason_
herself, whom I formerly had thought to be the principal adversary of
the belief in miracles, the most convincing arguments for the same, and
to have been conquered with the same weapons which I had been fighting
with against the Irishman, without having the least reason to reproach
him with having had recourse to any stratagem whatever. The frankness
and strength of argument which distinguished every step of his
philosophical instruction, were to me the most unexceptionable security
for the justness of the result. If he had delivered his arguments in a
flowery and mysterious language, supported by the charms of declamation,
then I should certainly have suspected them; however he had made use of
the cool, simple and clear language of reason, divested of all
sophistical artifices; started from principles which are generally
received, drew no conclusions to which he was not entitled by his
premises, combatted errors and prejudices upon which he could have
founded surreptious conclusions; nay, it appeared as if he, unmindful of
what he was to prove, had left it entirely to the course of his
impartial inquiry whither it would lead him, and I beheld myself, with
astonishment, on the conclusion of it, at the mark from which the road
we had taken threatened to lead us astray.

I cannot describe the wonderful bold ideas which the instructions I had
received produced in my mind, nor the awfully agreeable sensations which
those ideas were accompanied with. The rising sun surprised me in that
indescribable state of mind, and reminded me by his rays, that it was
time to set off.

  (_To be continued._)




  ARABIAN MAXIMS.

The car of Hope is always escorted by Want.

Consider the man that flatters you as an enemy.

If there were none but wise men in the world it would soon be desert.

Would you censure others? Examine your own conduct first.



           *       *       *       *

     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._



         METAMORPHOSIS OF CHARACTERS.

How much is man the creature of incidents!----The solitary student
becomes a Hypochondriac, a Misanthropist; the world seems to him a
prison, and its inhabitants a parcel of rogues and vagabonds; he no
longer views mankind with complacency, with a fellow feeling for their
infirmities and pity for their misfortunes, but considers them with the
severity of a Censor.----But let him emerge from his closet, let him
enter into the concerns of life and undergo the salutary agitation of
gentle exercise, while he beholds his neighbours industriously and
chearfully employed, and he becomes quite another man. If we now
penetrate his mind we find him no longer disturbed by imaginary evils,
or vexed with supposed injuries. He begins to view mankind as his
brethren, and fellow travellers; and feels a disposition to assist the
weary, and to recall the wanderer to the right path, with a friendly
commiseration for his errors. Scrupulosus was once a crabbed, morose
_sceptic_; he would believe nothing but what had undergone the ordeal of
his own reason, nor trust any man farther than he could see
him.--Necessity drove him into the busy world, and a concurrence of
events, placed him in the matrimonial state.--He now finds fewer
difficulties, than formerly, to encounter; and perceives that his
self-sufficiency, and conceit had involved many things in an
impenetrable mist.--Connections multiply, and a smiling progeny
surrounds him.---Scrupulosus, is no longer a cavilling sceptic---he is a
christian.

What a change is this! what a metamorphosis of characters! Neither is it
the fiction of imagination, but the delineation of what daily occurs in
real life.---The traveller is quite a different being from the sedentary
man, because he is active, and constantly excited by a variety of
objects.

Our ideas of the Almighty, are not less influenced by the circumstances
which surround us. Behold the torpid monk, seeking the favour of a God
of vengeance, by the rigours of an austere life. On the other hand, see
the chearful friend of man, addressing the father of his
fellow-creatures, with a heart full of love and gratitude, and a lively
hope of his favour and protection. Such, then, is the penalty imposed on
immoderate study, and thus the solitary pursuit of knowledge, when
excessive, will entirely frustrate our expectations, and destroy the
health of both body and mind.

  VIATOR.




  MORAL MAXIMS.

Mankind are more indebted to industry than ingenuity: the gods set up
their favours at a price, and industry is the purchaser.

A man without merit may live without envy; but who would wish to escape
on these terms?



           *       *       *       *

  MARRIED,

On Thursday evening last by the Rev. Bishop Provost, Captain JOHN
SANDERS, of Exeter, (England) to the amiable Miss CATHERINE LIVINGSTON,
of this city.




  _METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS._
  _From the 9th to the 15th inst._

    _Thermometor observed at 6, A.M. 3, P.M._
      _Prevailing winds._
        _OBSERVATIONS on the WEATHER._

          deg.  deg.    6. 3.  6. 3.
             100   100
  Oct.  9  43    55     ne. s.   clear, light wind do. do.
       10  37 50 51     ne. do.  clear, lht. wd. cloudy do.
       11  48    55 75  ne. se.  cloudy lt. wd. do. do.
       12  46    58     n. se.   clear lt. wd. do. do.
       13  55    66     ne. se.  foggy light wind calm do.
       14  55    70 75  w. s.    cloudy light wind clear calm
       15  53    61 50  n s.     foggy calm clear light wind




     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._

  LA FAYETTE----A SONG.
  By William Bradford, Esq.
    Late Attorney General of the United States.

  As beside his cheerful fire,
    'Midst his happy family,
  Sat a venerable sire,
    Tears were starting in his eye;
  Selfish blessings were forgot
  Whilst he thought on Fayette's lot,
  Once so happy on our plains,
  Now in poverty and chains.

  Fayette (cried he) honoured name,
    Dear to these far distant shores:
  Fayette, fired by Freedom's flame,
    Bled to make that freedom ours;
  What, alas! for thee remains,
  What, but poverty and chains!

  Soldiers, in the field of death,
    Was not Fayette foremost there?
  Cold and shivering on the heath,
    Did you not his bounty share?
  What for this your friend remains,
  What, but poverty and chains!

  Born to honours, ease, and wealth,
    See him sacrifice them all,
  Sacrificing even health,
    At his country's glorious call.
  What reward for this remains,
  What, but poverty and chains!

  Hapless Fayette! 'midst thy error,
    How my soul thy worth reveres;
  Son of Freedom, tyrant's terror,
    Hero of both hemispheres.
  What, alas! for thee remains,
  What, but poverty and chains!

  Thus with laurels on his brow,
    Belisarius begged for bread;
  Thus, from Carthage forced to go,
    Hannibal an exile fled:
  Fayette thus, at once sustains,
  Exile, poverty, and chains!

  Courage, child of Washington,
    Though thy fate disastrous seems,
  We have seen the setting sun
    Rise and shine with brighter beams;
  Thy country soon shall break thy chain,
  And take thee to her arms again.



           *       *       *       *

     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._



  When the Author of the following Elegy finds it is committed to
  print, he will not, I am persuaded, be offended, after I remind
  him of the conversation we had some time since:--And also when he
  reflects on the injury he does the Public, by keeping any of his
  productions from their view.


  ELEGY
  Addressed to the Calliopean Society,
  on the Death of Doctor Joseph Youle.

  Within these walls let awful stillness reign:
  _Sorrow_, thy louder extacies restrain:
  Each sound that on the solemn scene would break
  Be hush'd----let Silence more emphatic speak.
  Ev'n thou, upon thy pensive lyre reclin'd,
  (Dark cypress with thy drooping laurel twin'd,)
  Our guardian Muse! let not a trembling note
  Through the still air in plaintive sweetness float;
  Save when Affliction's deep collected sigh
  Low breathing in symphonious melody,
  With faint vibrations agitates the chords,
  While Friendship's mourning voice our lot records.

  On the cold couch of death our brother sleeps;--
  Chill o'er his grave the gale of midnight sweeps.

  Oh, Death! if 'tis thy glory to destroy
  The fairest opening bud of human joy;
  If 'tis thy boast severely to display
  And wide diffuse the terrors of thy sway,
  High o'er this grave thy proudest trophy rear,
  And tell with exultation _who lies here_.

  Ye whom _Philanthropy_ benignant guides,
  Ye in whose hearts fair _Piety_ presides,
  Children of genius, friends of _Science_, come,
  With silent step approach the hallow'd tomb.----
  _He was your brother_----generous was his mind,
  Warm with benevolence to all mankind.
  Gently to raise affliction's drooping head,
  To comfort sickness on the lonely bed,
  To lead the ignorant in virtue's way,
  On the dark mind to pour instruction's ray,
  The paths of science to extend and smooth,
  And wide diffuse the genial light of truth;
  These were his objects, these his noble pride;
  For these he labour'd, and for these he died.

  And ye whose virtuous efforts here combine
  To cultivate those faculties divine,
  _Friendship_ and _Science_ breathe a deeper sigh--
  He was _your_ brother by a dearer tie:
  With you he trod the same delightful road;
  For you his heart with love peculiar glow'd.
  Can you forget how many social hours
  Derived new joys from his instructive pow'rs?
  Can you upon these scenes look back unmoved,
  Scenes, where, so oft, delighted and improv'd,
  Attention fondly on his accents dwelt,
  And every breast the warmth of friendship felt;
  While Fancy, led by Hope, the theme pursu'd,
  And future prospects more delightful view'd?
  Fancy! where now are thy illusive dreams?
  Where, Hope! thy visions bright with golden gleams?
  Friendship, thy prospects?--Fame, thy laureate wreath?
  All past----all faded in the shades of Death.

  'Tis past--the sigh is breath'd, the tear is shed,
  The last sad tribute to a brother dead.--
  _Our loss_ demands--receives the mournful strain:
  Let sounds of triumph celebrate _his gain_.
  the _Spirit_, starting from its bonds of clay,
  Traces with Angel guides the lucid way;
  Exalted notes from harps celestial rise,
  And _kindred spirits_ hail him to the skies.
  _There_, Earth's embarrassments no more controul
  The great exertions of the active soul:--
  By weak humanity no more confin'd,
  Enlarg'd, enlarging still, his opening mind;
  With strength encreasing through creation soars,
  Infinite space, eternal times explores;
  More nearly contemplates the great _First Cause_,
  More clearly comprehends his sacred laws;
  With _Newton_ darts among the Worlds of light,
  Systems on systems blazing on his sight;
  With Franklin, mitigates the whirlwind's force,
  Averts the lightning's flash, and turns the thunder's course;
  Or joins with extacy the holy throng
  Who to Jehovah's throne exalt the song,
  Shout the loud victory o'er the bounds of earth,
  And joyful celebrate their heavenly birth.

  Is this a subject for the plaints of woe?
  Can friendship _here_ the tear of grief bestow?
  No----elevated by the glorious theme,
  We hope, ere long, to die---to rise, like him,
  To join with transport his celestial flight,
  Again to meet him in those realms of light
  Where widow'd friendship ceases to deplore,
  Affection feels the parting pang no more,
  Hush'd is the sigh of grief--the groan of pain,
  And Virtue dwells with Joy in everlasting reign.




  _A +Lady+ having received a Bouquet from a +Boy+,
  sent him the following Verses._

  Next your dear image in my breast,
  Your fancied flowers I fondly plac'd,
    But mourn my adverse fate,
  Who by compulsive atoms hurl'd,
  Was forc'd so soon into this world,
    Where you arrived too late.

  _The ANSWER, by a Friend of the BOY._

  Permit me, dear madam, to tell you you've err'd
    In this hardy censure on Fate,
  Which though my arrival is somewhat deferr'd,
    By no means has sent me too late.
  Here Providence wisely has acted its part,
    Well knowing, or I'm much mistaken,
  That Woman, however she may have the start,
    Would willingly be overtaken.




  EPITAPH ON MR. W---- N----

  Poor N---- beneath this stone
    A quiet nap is taking,
  His wife requests you may not moan,
    For fear of his awaking.


NEW-YORK: _+Printed by JOHN BULL, No. 115, Cherry-Street+, where every
Kind of Printing work is executed with the utmost Accuracy and
Dispatch.--+Subscriptions+ for this +Magazine+ (at 2s. per month) are
taken in at the Printing-Office, and by E. MITCHELL, Bookseller, No. 9,
Maiden-Lane._



           *       *       *       *



  _UTILE DULCI._

  THE NEW-YORK WEEKLY MAGAZINE;
  or, Miscellaneous Repository.

  +Vol. II.+]  +Wednesday, October 26, 1796.+  [+No. 69.+


  A SENTIMENTAL FRAGMENT.

It was low ebb when our vessel made the offing of Dublin bay, and it
being then night, we lay at anchor till morning. The moon shone
remarkably bright, and reflected in silver shades upon the sea, which
waved with a gentle heaving---a murmur---it was nature sighing with a
love-creating respiration.

For some leagues on each side the harbour's mouth it was encircled with
a fleet of herring boats, and I not being inclined to sleep, accompanied
the captain in the yawl, to visit them.

The drawing of the herring nets, is, perhaps, the most pleasing and
beautiful sight the human mind can conceive: the fish, as they are
hawled up the vessel's side, sparkle like diamonds.

I could not but express my surprize to the captain at the quantity
taken; and by him was informed, that these sculls approached the coast
by millions and tens of millions, extending many miles, and swimming
several fathoms deep over one another. They make their way through the
sea, as men do on earth, each individual striving to be uppermost, and
with this stronger circumstance of similarity, that the fish which gets
uppermost is always in most danger.

"I shall eat half a dozen of these herrings," said the captain, as he
took about a dozen out of a net without leave or notice, to the boatman,
who made no objection. "I shall eat half a dozen of these herrings,"
said he, "when I return to my vessel."---"What, captain, must six lives
be sacrificed to satisfy your appetite at one meal?"

For half a moment I was converted by this reflection to the religion of
the Indian Bramins, who refuse all animal food; but the captain who was
a philosopher, as suddenly induced me to apostatize from my new opinion.

A number of large porpoises or sea hogs, were sporting round.---"Why not
eat them?" said the captain, pointing to the porpoises; "those creatures
feed upon herrings, and innumerable great fish feed upon them; and it is
the same to the herring, whether he is eaten by a porpoise or by a man."

"Very true," said I, "there are sea monsters, who live upon their
fellow-creatures as well as land monsters, who devour each other."

"It is impossible to understand those affairs, or the reason of them,"
observed the captain; "I have got a microscope on board, and I'll prove
to you that innumerable animals perish at every suction of your breath.
The great difference between voracious fish, voracious quadrupeds,
voracious birds, and voracious man, is this: the first three classes eat
to satisfy hunger only, and devour without preparation; but the cruelty
which man inflicts upon those creatures Providence has empowered him to
use for his sustenance, may be considered as a species of ingratitude,
which of all crimes merits the severest punishment."




  +Wisdom and Virtue.+

Wisdom or virtue is nothing more than the disposition to attain and
enjoy the greatest happiness, with the knowledge how to attain and to
bestow it.

Wisdom has ever some benevolent end in her purposes and actions; on the
contrary, folly either mistakes evil for good, or, when she assumes the
nature of vice, entertains a malevolent intention.

The advantages and defects of nature mould be considered as common to
society: the weak have a claim to the assistance of the strong; the
strong derive a pleasure from assisting the weak; and the wise are so
far happy as the well disposed partake of their wisdom.

There is no one virtue that includes not, in a general sense, all other
virtues. Wisdom cannot subsist without justice, temperance, and
fortitude, for wisdom is the sum of all these. It is impossible to be
just without temperance, or temperate without fortitude, and so
alternately of the rest.




  MORAL MAXIMS.

A man without merit may live without envy; but who would wish to escape
on these terms?

Live so as to hold yourself prepared either for a long life or a short
one.



           *       *       *       *

  THE VICTIM OF MAGICAL DELUSION;
  _OR, INTERESTING MEMOIRS OF MIGUEL, DUKE DE CA*I*A._
  Unfolding Many Curious Unknown Historical Facts.

  _Translated from the German of Tschink._

  (Continued from page 126.)

I made, without delay, the requisite preparations, and in a quarter of
an hour, stepped in my carriage. I looked once more back to the spot
where Amelia resided, and drove through the city-gate.

At the first stage I wrote to her that an unforeseen important accident
had forced me to set out on my journey so early in the morning that it
would have been unbecoming to pay her the promised farewell visit;
I vowed to return on pinions of love, as soon as my business at M****d
should be settled. I painted with lively colours all the pains of
separation, and all the tenderness of an afflicted heart, in order to
convince Amelia, that I had been forced by stern necessity to depart
without seeing her once more. Alas! the farther the rolling carriage
removed me from the dear object of my love, the more I grew sensible of
the greatness of the sacrifice which I had made to the Irishman.
I examined my letters and papers in order to divert my gloomy thoughts,
and found one more copy of a letter from the Irishman which I had not
yet decyphered. The following is the result of my endeavours to unfold
its contents:

  "MY LORD,

"My designs on Miguel had very near been ruined by the loss of his life,
and in some measure I myself have been the cause of his having been
hurried to the brink of destruction. But who could have foreseen such an
event! With the leave of your Excellency, I shall relate the incident at
large.

"I had sent one part of my servants to follow Miguel on his journey.
I myself staid behind in order to make an attempt of restoring the
health of the Countess, for whose life the ignorance of her physicians
had made me tremble. The success I met with surprised my most sanguine
expectation. Some drops of an electuary which I poured into the mouth of
the Countess produced so sudden an effect, that, in a few hours, the
most unequivocal signs of returning health were perceived. As soon as I
had been informed of this desirable change, I followed Miguel with the
rest of my people; having previously ordered the valet of the Countess
to write three days after to the Duke, that the Countess was dead--and
in a few days later, that I had recalled her to life. At the same time I
requested him to desire his dismission from Amelia, and to follow me,
because I wanted his assistance in the execution of my designs. The view
I had in commanding him to inform the Duke of Amelia's pretended death,
was to convince myself by the manner in which he should receive that
intelligence, whether his love to the Countess had been only a transient
attachment, or whether his passion for her was of a more serious nature,
and what degree it had attained. I need not explain to your Excellency,
how necessary this knowledge was to me. The second commission had no
other aim, than to pour balsam in Miguel's wound, and at the same time,
to make me appear to him a miracle-working being, and his and Amelia's
friend; whereby I expected to gain his confidence.

"I pursued my road with so much speed, that I overtook Miguel before he
had finished one half of his journey, and joined my people, who preceded
me. As soon as the Duke had arrived at the place of his destination, and
we along with him, I quartered my people in different places in such a
manner, that he was surrounded by them from all sides. I took a
convenient house in the suburbs for myself, in order to escape his looks
with greater safety.

"On the third day after our arrival, Miguel received the letter by which
he was informed of the Countess's death. The effects which this
intelligence produced upon him must have been a kind of frenzy. One of
my people who watched all his steps, informed me late in the evening, he
had seen Miguel rushing out of his house with every mark of despair in
his countenance, and running with such a velocity that he and his
comrade hardly had been able so follow him. He added, that Miguel after
two hours roaming about, had stopped not far from hence, at the banks of
a river, where he was walking up and down, absorbed in profound reverie.

"Soon after a second messenger told me, Miguel had plunged into the
river, but one of his comrades who had watched him narrowly, and leaped
after him, had saved him, and was going to carry him to my house. A few
minutes after, Miguel was brought by some of my people. He resembled a
corpse, the palpitation of his pulse was scarcely perceptible, and he
was entirely bereft of his recollection. I ordered him instantly to be
carried to a spacious empty vault, and while some of my men endeavoured
to restore him to the use of his senses, I was making preparations to
chastise him severely when he should have recovered from his stupor.

"As soon as my servants perceived that he was recovering, I ordered him
to be carried into the middle of the vault, and placed myself in deep
disguise opposite him at a considerable distance, making a signal to
those who were present to retire to an adjoining apartment, and to take
the candles with them. No sooner was every thing in order, than I
perceived by a deep groan of Miguel, that he had recovered his
recollection. His state of mind when awaking, must have been very
strange. His recollection told him, that he had plunged into the river,
in a place where he saw nobody present, and now he awoke in a dry,
empty, and spacious dark room: he must have fancied he awoke in another
world; and this idea seems to have thrilled him with its acutest
pungency, for he uttered a loud scream which made the vault resound.*
This was the signal for which my people had been waiting in the
adjoining chamber. They kindled a pole which was fixed near an aperture
in the wall, and enveloped with flax, and wetted with spirit of wine,
which spread a faint light through the spacious vault. The astonishment
which Miguel was seized with, when looking all around and seeing nothing
but a man wrapt in a scarlet cloak, surpasses all powers of description.
His anxiety encreased when he saw me staring at him without replying a
word to his questions, and heard one of my people exclaim, in a doleful
accent, woe! woe! woe! When I at last stepped forth and made myself
known to him, he prostrated himself, as if in the presence of a superior
being. I read him a severe lecture on his rash deed, and at the same
time endeavoured to rouse his ambition for the service of his country,
in which I succeeded. A soft music began at once in the adjoining
chamber, on a signal which I made to my people. The melodious strains of
a harp and a flute were accompanied by the sweet notes of an harmonious
voice, which announced to the astonished Miguel that Amelia was alive.
His rapture bordered on frenzy. I ordered him to be silent, blind-folded
him and delivered him to the care of a servant, whom I secretly ordered
to conduct him to his hotel, and to return no answer to his questions.
My deputy acquitted himself extremely well of his trust. He led him
silently to his hotel, and when Miguel turned round the corner of the
house, unfastened the bandage which blind-folded his eyes, and concealed
himself in a house, the door of which was open. Miguel must have been
strangely situated, when after a few steps the bandage dropped from his
eyes and nobody was seen around him. Very fortunately the night was far
advanced, and the whole affair remained concealed.

  [* This is a mistake, for we know by the Duke's own account, that
  he uttered this scream because he felt himself pulled down by an
  invisible hand when he was going to get up. The Irishman having
  known nothing if this circumstance, it is probable that the unknown
  cause of this pulling down, was no other than a foot of the Duke,
  with which he, in his stupor, kept his cloak down, when he was
  getting up, without knowing it.]

"Thus happily ended an adventure which had begun in a manner so
inauspicious.

"However, Paleski has committed a foolish trick, which I cannot forgive
him. He desired his dismission from the Countess, which being refused by
his Lady, who imagined him to be a faithful servant, he left her
_clandestinely_. He shall smart for this inconsiderate action.

"I am with the greatest respect,

  "&c. &c. &c."

As far as this letter informed me that no superior power had had a share
in the above mentioned adventure, it contained nothing that was new to
me, for the Irishman himself had not concealed from me, that all the
wonderful adventures which had happened to me before Paleski's
confession had been the effect of illusion; however, it was important to
me to learn _how_, and by what artifices I had been deceived. I cannot
but confess that this natural explanation of the whole affair excited my
astonishment at the Irishman, not less than those adventures had
surprised me at the time when I believed him to be a supernatural being,
and that I ardently wished to have cleared up several other events of
that epocha which I could not unriddle.

Soon after my arrival at M****d, I went to pay a visit to the minister.
He received me very kindly, and discoursed above an hour with me,
although he was so over charged with state-affairs that no stranger
could get access to him. I was not less successful with the Secretary of
State, in whose favour I ingratiated myself so much in the course of
half an hour, that he professed himself extremely happy in having got
acquainted with me. Both of them invited me to visit them frequently
during my stay at M****d, an invitation which I took care to make the
best use of.

I perceived soon with astonishment and joy, that I was getting nearer
the mark much sooner than I had expected first. Though I am of opinion
that the visibly growing favour of these two courtiers was partly
founded on personal attachment, yet the Irishman had not been mistaken
when he told me, that the relation which existed between myself and
Vascon*ellos would render the access to their confidence easier.
Sum**ez, the Secretary of State, enjoyed the most intimate confidence of
the Minister, and was related to Vascon*ellos. Therefore the friendship
of the latter paved for me the road to Sum**ez, and the friendship of
Sum**ez to Oliva*ez. The two secretaries of State were the chief
administrators of the government; Sum**ez in the council of Sp**n, at
Ma***d, and Vascon*ellos in the council of state at L*sbon, and
consequently were the vice-tyrants of my native country, who jointly
executed the designs of Oliv**ez, who in the name of the King of Sp**n
was at the helm of despotism.

That the Irishman had very well calculated these concatenations, will
appear by the subsequent plan which he founded upon them. I had wrote to
Amelia, and Lady Delier, as soon as I had arrived at M****d, and now
received an answer from both of them. Every line of the former breathed
heavenly love and kindness; the tender and amiable sentiments of her
soul, purified by the trials of misfortunes, were palpably displayed in
her letter, as in an unspotted mirror. O! how many a time did I kiss,
read, and re-peruse it, till at length, what a sweet delusion of my
enraptured imagination! I fancied I saw the amiable writer before me,
and heard from her lips the words which were written upon the paper.--

  (_To be continued._)




  AUTHENTICATED ETYMOLOGIES.

The term _hurricane_, is supposed to take its rise from one _Harry
Kane_, a turbulent Irishman who lived at _Antigua_, the name of which is
now well known to be derived from an avaricious old female planter who
once lived on the island, and was called by the sailors _Aunt Eager_.

A jolly West-Indian, whenever the neighbouring girls came to his
plantations, insisted upon their sipping his choicest syrups, and
reiterated the terms "_My lasses_;" thence the name of that syrup. Few
words have aberrated from their primaries less than this.



           *       *       *       *

     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._



           MARIA; OR, THE SEDUCTION.

                 +A Fragment.+

  "How curst the monster, who with specious guile,
    "Employs _Seduction's_ soul-degrading arts,
  "To drench in tears the cheek that once could smile,
    "To blast the joy that innocence imparts!"

**** I saw she was falling, and hastened to her assistance. I caught her
in my arms, and led her into the house. By the application of salts she
recovered---"He refused to listen to me!" she exclaimed, when her powers
of utterance had returned, "and but for him I still might have been
happy." I asked who the person was she spoke of? "Ah!" replied she, "it
was the wretch that seduced me from the paths of rectitude."---When she
had regained sufficient strength I requested her to relate to me her
misfortunes, and she gratified me as follows---

  MARIA'S NARRATIVE.

Under the specious pretext of love, Frederick has bereaved me of all the
happiness and comfort of life. While I fondly dreamed of future bliss he
became a visitor at our house. I knew not then that 'twas to see me
alone he came, as he had not given me the least hint of it; but my
parents imagined he was wooing me to become his bride.

It was some time before he paid any direct addresses to me. He then said
that he had long been in love with me, but forbore to mention it sooner
as he feared I would discard him; and ended with asking if he might be
permitted to hope. I gave him no positive answer, until he enquired
whether I had a partiality for any other. I told him I had not. His
countenance brightened at this. He took my hand, and with all the fervor
of love raised it to his lips. When he departed, he said, that was the
happiest moment of his life.

After this his visits were more frequent. One evening I was left
entirely alone, the family had gone to the theatre. Mrs. M----, a lady
from England, made her first appearance on the New-York stage. A slight
indisposition occasioned my not being of the party. Frederick, it seems,
knew I was alone, and came in just after they had departed.

The next week had been appointed for our nuptials. He entered rather
dejected. I enquired the reason of his melancholy. He said he was
fearful I did not love him sincerely. I asked if I had ever given him
reason for such a suspicion; and said that all beside him were
indifferent to me. Here his countenance again assumed its wonted
brightness. "Do you then indeed behold me with pleasure?" said he.
"I know that on you alone depends my felicity---should you be cruel,
Frederick would cease to exist." He took my hand, and imprinted on it a
profusion of kisses. To me he appeared sincere, and I viewed him as
singled out by fate for my companion thro' life.

"Ah! my Maria!" continued he, still holding my hand clasped in his, "did
you but know the happiness your words have given me---It is
indescribable.---Still manifest for me your love, and every hour of my
life will study to deserve it. Should I ever prove myself unworthy your
tender regard, I should abhor myself." He continued protestations of his
love---the minutes were swift--and ere the evening had elapsed he
triumphed over my innocence and credulity---in fine, he left me
miserable.

When my parents returned I beheld myself degraded below them, and unfit
for their company. I sat in a musing posture. They attributed my want of
spirits to the head-ach, which had occasioned my staying at home, and
endeavoured to enliven me by giving an account of the entertainments,
and the excellent performance of Mrs. M----. I paid no attention to what
they said. To bed I went, but not to close my eyes: Sleep had fled me.
In the morning I had a slight fever, and was at times delirious. In a
few days I recovered sufficiently to learn that Frederick had set out
for France the day after he rendered me so completely miserable. This
occasioned a relapse, and I had approached the verge of the grave. My
friends were weeping over me, expecting every moment to be my last.
I wished not for life; I sought for death as the only means to conceal
my shame. But it pleased Heaven to raise me, contrary to all
expectation. In two weeks from the time I began to mend, I had strength
sufficient to leave my room, I then found it too true that my deceiver
had left home, and did not expect to return in two years.

I dreaded staying any longer where I expected the resentment of my
father, when he should become acquainted with my disgrace. I left the
house under cover of the night, unperceived. I took with me a small
bundle of clothes, and some trifle in cash, which were my own. By
working I hoped to subsist until Frederick's return; for I still thought
his voyage was of necessity, and unexpected. The money was soon gone,
and almost every article I could possibly spare. I expected to starve.
In this dilemma, I chanced to hear of a place where a young woman was
wanted for the upper servant in the kitchen. I applied, and obtained it.
The wages were liberal, and I had not the more laborious part;
I endeavoured to give satisfaction to my employer, I lived in this
manner until I was taken ill, when I gave birth to this child--I called
him after his father.

My recovery was slow; and when I could walk I was unable to work as
before; consequently I was forced to give up my place. Since then I have
wholly subsisted on the charity of others.

This morning, by accident, I beheld the cause of my woes. I determined
to speak with him although he was in company. When I first accosted him,
he disregarded me. I told him I was in a poor state of health, and
requested only a small boon. "Is that your child?" he asked. "Yes,"
I replied, "and his name is Frederick." He looked me in the face, for I
perceived until then he did not know me--"I have nothing for you!" he
exclaimed in an angry tone, and passed on with his companions. My head
felt light, and I certainly should have dropped on the pavement, had not
heaven sent you to my relief----

  L. B.

    _October 17, 1796._



           *       *       *       *

  Interesting History Of
  _THE BARON DE LOVZINSKI._

  With a relation of the most remarkable occurrences in the life
  of the celebrated COUNT PULASKI, well known as the champion of
  American Liberty, and who bravely fell in its defence before
  Savannah, 1779.

  _Interspersed with Anecdotes of the late unfortunate KING of POLAND,
  so recently dethroned._

  (Continued from page 123.)

"Gentlemen," said he, to the astonished Bacchanals, "my brother's head
is not very strong to-day: it is perhaps in consequence of his wound;
let us not therefore either speak to or drink any more with him; for I
am afraid of his health, and indeed you would oblige me exceedingly if
you would assist me to carry him to his bed."--"To his own bed?" says
one of them: "that is impossible! But I will most willingly lend him my
chamber." They accordingly laid hold of me, and conveyed me into a
garret, of which a bed, a table, and a chair, formed the sole movables.
Having shut me up in this paltry apartment, they instantly left me. This
was all that I wanted, for the moment that I was alone, I immediately
sat down to write a long letter to Lodoiska.

I began by fully justifying myself from the crimes of which I had been
accused by Pulaski: I then recounted every thing that had occurred since
the first moment of our separation, until that when I had entered the
castle of Dourlinski: I detailed the particulars of my conversation with
the Baron: I concluded by assuring her of the most tender and the most
respectful passion, and swore to her, that the moment she gave me the
necessary information concerning her situation, I would expose myself to
every danger, in order to finish her horrid captivity.

As soon as my letter was sealed, I delivered myself up to a variety of
reflections, which threw me into a strange perplexity. Was it actually
Lodoiska who had thrown those tiles into the garden? Would Pulaski have
had the injustice to punish his daughter for an attachment which he
himself had approved? Would he have had the inhumanity to plunge her
into a frightful prison? And even if the hatred he had sworn to me had
blinded him so much, how was it possible that Dourlinski would thus have
condescended to have become the minister of his vengeance?

But, on the other hand, for these three last long months, on purpose to
disguise myself, I had only worn tattered clothes: the fatigues of a
tedious journey, and my chagrin, had altered me greatly; and who but a
mistress could have been able to discover Lovzinski in the gardens of
Dourlinski? Besides, had I not seen the name of Lodoiska traced upon the
tile? Had not Dourlinski himself acknowledged that Lodoiska had been a
prisoner with him? It is true, he had added that she had made her
escape; but was not this incredible? And wherefore that hatred which
Dourlinski had vowed against me, without knowing my person? What
occasioned that look of inquietude, when it was told him, that the
emissaries of Pulaski occupied a chamber that looked into his garden?
And why above all that appearance of terror, when I announced to him the
arrival of my pretended master?

All these circumstances were well calculated to throw me into the
greatest agitation. I ruminated over this frightful and mysterious
adventure, which it was impossible for me to explain. For two hours,
I unceasingly put new questions to myself, to which I was exceedingly
embarrassed to make any reply; when at length Boleslas came to see if I
had recovered from my debauch. I had but little difficulty in convincing
him that my inebriety was mere affectation; after which we went down
together to the kitchen, where we spent the rest of the day. What a
night! none in my whole life ever appeared so long, not even that which
followed.

At length the attendants conducted us to our chamber, where they shut us
up, as on the former occasion, without any light: it was yet two tedious
hours until midnight. At the first stroke of the clock, we gently opened
the shutters and the casement. I then prepared to jump into the garden;
but my embarrassment was equal to my despair, when I found myself
obstructed by means of iron bars. "Behold," said I to Boleslas, "what
the cursed confident of Dourlinski whispered in his ear! behold what his
odious master approved, when he said, _let it be done instantly!_ behold
what they have been working at during the day! it was on this account
that they prevented us from entering the chamber."

"My lord, they have stood on the outside," replies Boleslas; "for they
have not perceived that the shutter has been forced."

"Alas! whether they have perceived it or not," exclaim I with violence,
"what does it signify? This fatal grating destroys all my hopes: it
insures the slavery of Lodoiska--it insures my death."

"Yes, without doubt, it insures thy death!" repeats a person, at the
same time opening the door; and immediately after, Dourlinski, preceded
by several armed men, and followed by others carrying flambeaux, enter
our prison _sabre in hand_. "Traitor!" exclaims he, while addressing
himself to me with a look in which fury was visibly depicted, "I have
heard all--I know who you are,--your servant has discovered your name.
Tremble! Of all the enemies of Lovzinski, I am the most implacable!"

"Search them," continues he, turning to his attendants: they accordingly
rushed in upon me; and as I was without arms, I made an useless
resistance. They accordingly robbed me of my papers, and of the letter I
had just written to Lodoiska. Dourlinski exhibited a thousand signs of
impatience while reading it, and was scarce able to contain himself.

"Lovzinski," says he to me, endeavouring to smother his rage, "I already
deserve all your hatred; I shall soon merit it still more: in the mean
time, you must remain with your worthy confident in this chamber, to
which you are so partial."

After uttering these words, he left me; and having double-locked the
door, he placed a centinel on the outside, and another in the garden,
opposite to the window.

Figure to yourself the horrible situation into which Boleslas and myself
were now plunged. My misfortunes were at their height; but those of
Lodoiska affected me more than my own! How great must be her uneasiness!
She expects Lovsinski, and Lovsinski abandons her! But no--Lodoiska
knows me too well; she can never suspect me of such base perfidy.
Lodoiska! she will judge of her lover by herself; she will think
Lovsinski partakes her lot, since he does not succour her---Alas! the
very certainty of my misfortunes will augment her own!

On the next day, they gave us provisions through the grating of our
window; and by the quality of the viands which they furnished us with,
Boleslas augured the most sinister events. Being, however less unhappy
than myself, he supported his fate much more courageously. He offered me
my share of the mean repast which he was about to make; I would not eat:
he pressed me; but it was in vain! for existence was become an
insupportable burden to me.

"Ah! live!" said he at length, shedding a torrent of tears: "live; and
if not for Boleslas, let it be for Lodoiska!" These words made the most
lively impression on my mind; they even re-animated my courage; and hope
having once more re-entered my heart, I embraced my faithful servant.
"O my friend!" exclaimed I at the same time with transport, "my true
friend! I have been the occasion of thy ruin, and yet my misfortunes
affect thee more than thine own! Yes, Boleslas! yes! I will live for
Lodoiska; I will live for thee: if just Heaven shall restore me to my
fortune and rank, you shall see that your master is not ungrateful!" We
now embraced once more.

Ah! how much do misfortunes connect men together! how sweet it is, when
one suffers, to hear another unfortunate address a word of consolation
to him!

We had groaned in this prison for no less than twelve days, when several
ruffians came to drag me forth on purpose to conduct me to Dourlinski.
Boleslas wished to follow, but they repulsed him with violence: however
they permitted me to speak to him for a single moment. I then drew from
a private pocket a ring which I had worn for ten years, and said to
Boleslas:---"This ring was given me by M. de P. when we were at college
together at Warsaw: take it, my friend; and preserve it for my sake. If
Dourlinski this day consummates his treason by my assassination, and if
he should at length permit you to leave this castle, go, find your king,
recall to his memory our ancient attachment, recount my misfortunes to
him; he will recompense you, and succour Lodoiska. Adieu my friend!"

After this, I was conducted to the apartment of Dourlinski. As soon as
the door opened, I perceived a lady in a chair, who had just fainted
away. I approached her---it was Lodoiska! Heavens! how much did I find
her altered!---but she was still handsome! "Barbarian!" exclaimed I,
addressing myself to Dourlinski; and at the voice of her lover, Lodoiska
recovered her senses.

"Ah, my dear Lovsinski," says she, looking wistfully at me, "do you know
what this infamous wretch has proposed? do you know at what price he has
offered me your liberty?"

"Yes," cries the furious chieftain, "yes, I am determined upon it: you
see that he is in my power; and if in three days I do not obtain my
wishes, he shall be no more!" I endeavoured to throw myself on my knees
at the feet of Lodoiska; but my guards prevented me: "I behold you
again, and all my ills are forgotten, Lodoiska---death has now no longer
any thing terrifying in its aspect."

"Wretch," added I, looking sternly at Dourlinski, "know that Pulaski
will avenge his daughter! know that the king will avenge his friend!"

"Let him be carried away!" was the only reply made by the ferocious
palatine.

"Ah!" exclaims Lodoiska, "my love has been your ruin!" I was about to
answer, but the attendants dragged me out, and re-conducted me to
prison.

Boleslas received me with inexpressible transports of joy; he avowed to
me that he thought me lost for ever, and I recounted to him how that my
death was but deferred. The scene of which I had been a witness,
confirmed all my suspicions; it was evident that Pulaski was ignorant of
the unworthy treatment which his daughter experienced; it was also
evident that Dourlinski, old, amorous, and jealous, was determined, at
any rate, to satisfy his passions.

In the mean time, two of the days allowed by Dourlinski for the
determination of Lodoiska, had already expired; we were now in the midst
of the night which preceded the fatal third; I could not sleep, and I
was walking hastily about my prison. All at once I heard the cry of "To
arms! to arms!" The most frightful howlings prevailed on the outside,
and a great commotion took place within the castle. The centinel placed
at our window, left his post. Boleslas and I were able to distinguish
the voice of Dourlinski, calling and encouraging his followers; and we
soon distinctly heard the clashing of swords, the cries of the wounded,
and the groans of the dying. The noise which at first was very great
seemed at length to die away. It recommenced soon after; it redoubled;
and at length we heard a shout of "Victory!"

To this frightful tumult, a still more frightful silence ensues. In a
short time, a low crackling sound is heard to approach us; the air seems
to hiss with violence; the night becomes less dark; the trees in the
garden assume a red and warm tint; we fly to the window: the flames are
devouring the castle of Dourlinski! they approach the chamber in which
we were confined, from all sides; and, to overwhelm me with new horror,
the most piercing shrieks are uttered from that tower in which I knew
that Lodoiska was imprisoned!

The fire becoming every moment more violent, was about to communicate to
the chamber in which we were shut up, and the flames already began to
curl around the base of the tower in which Lodoiska was immured!

  (_To be continued._)




  MILITARY ANECDOTE.

During the late war in America, when drafts were made from the militia
to recruit the continental army, a Captain gave liberty to the men, who
were drafted from his company, to make their objections, if they had
any, against going into the service. Accordingly, one of them who had an
impediment in his speech, came up to the captain and made his bow. "What
is your objection?" said the captain. "I ca-a-ant go,"--answers the man,
"because I st-st-stutter." "Stutter," says the captain, "you don't go
there to talk, but to fight." "Ay, but they'll p-p-put me upon
g-g-guard, and a man may go ha-ha-half a mile before I can say wh-wh-who
goes there?" "Oh that is no objection, for they will place another
sentry with you, and he can challenge, if you can fire." "Well, b-b-but
I may be ta-ta-taken, and run through the g-g-guts, before I can cry
qu-qu-quarter." This last plea prevailed, and the captain, out of
humanity (_laughing heartily_), dismissed him.




  TO THE EDITOR.

  SIR,

Being told that I am supposed, by many, to be the author of a piece
signed "Theodore," which appeared in your last, under the title of "THE
RENCOUNTER;" I hereby inform them that I had no hand either directly or
indirectly therein. Far be it from me to wish to expose the failings of
_any_ of my fellow creatures; and much more so of those for whom I
entertain no small degree of esteem.

  WALTER TOWNSEND.

    _October 25, 1796._




  +To the Editor.+

  SIR,

Having learned that the piece in last week's Magazine, entitled "THE
RENCOUNTER," has given considerable offence to one of the parties, whom,
through misinformation, I pictured as the aggressor; I sincerely beg his
pardon, as I have since heard he was innocent---Therefore I now assure
him that the charge I exhibited against him, is void of foundation, and
was related to me with all the appearance of truth.

  THEODORE.

    Monday morning, Oct. 24, 1796.



           *       *       *       *

  _NEW-YORK._



    MARRIED,

On Thursday the 13th inst. by the Rev. Dr. Rogers, Mr. A. M'GREGOR,
merchant, to Miss JANET WILSON, both of this city.

On Monday evening last, by the Rev. Dr. Moore, Mr. EDWARD MEEKS, cabinet
maker, to Miss SUSANNAH COOPER, daughter of Mr. Cornelius Cooper, both
of this city.

Same evening, Mr. JOHN MUNROE, of this city, merchant, to Miss OLIVIA
ROE, daughter of the Rev. Azel Roe, of Woodbridge, New Jersey.

At Horse-Neck, on Sunday evening, the 16th inst. by the Rev. Dr. Lewis,
Mr. BREZELIEL BROWN, to Miss CHARLOTTE MARSHALL, both of that place.

On Saturday se'nnight, by the Rev. Mr. Woodhull, Mr. GIDEON HALLETT, to
Miss POLLY PUGSLEY, both of New-Town, (L.I.)

On Saturday evening, by the Rev. Mr. Abeel, Mr. JOHN TENBROOK, Merchant,
to Miss ALITHEA SICKLES, daughter of Mr. John Sickles, all of this city.




  _METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS._
  _From the 16th to the 22d inst._

    _Thermometor observed at 6, A.M. 3, P.M._
      _Prevailing winds._
        _OBSERVATIONS on the WEATHER._

          deg.  deg.    6. 3.  6. 3.
             100   100
  Oct. 16  60    62 50  s. do.   cloudy high wd.  rn. small do.
       17  49    56 75  nw do.   clear, high wind  do. lht. wd.
       18  41 50 49     n. do.   clear, light wind  do. do.
       19  44 50 55 75  sw. do.  foggy calm  cloudy lt. wd.
       20  49    57     ne. do.  cloudy light wind  do. do.
       21  50    54 50  ne. se.  cloudy light wind  do. do.
       22  54    57     e. se.   cloudy lt wd. rn.  cly. lt wd.




  CONTENTED IN THE VALE.

  While envy and ambition fire,
    The wealthy and the proud,
  I to my humble cot retire,
    To shun the selfish croud.

  Secure, I envy not a king,
    While o'er my nut brown ale,
  I merrily and jocund sing,
    Contented in the vale.

  Let senators and statesmen great
    Together disagree,
  While I remain in humble state
    Both unconcerned and free.

  No duns to interrupt my joy,
    Nor troubles to assail,
  I'd live retir'd from care and noise,
    Contented in the vale.

  The stately oak that proudly held
    Dominion o'er the plains,
  Is by the furious tempest fell'd,
    The humble reed remains.

  Then may I envy not the hill,
    Nor at my fortune rail,
  But unconstrain'd continue still,
    Contented in the vale.



           *       *       *       *

     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._

                  TO CLARA.

  'Twas near the cool Aonian fount reclin'd,
    Courting dull melancholy's devious shade;
  While misery and grief usurp'd my mind,
    And dark despair my every thought pourtray'd.
  The neighbouring dells responsive to each moan,
  Vibrate each sigh and echo'd groan for groan:
  Wrapt in affliction, stranger to repose,
  In solitude's dark cell wept o'er my woes;
  'Till lovely Clara's heaven-born lyre
  With melting softness and Apollo's fire
  Expell'd the ebon shades of darken'd night,
  And heavenly glories burst upon my sight:
  When she strikes the trembling strings,
  When through tepid air it rings,
  When it vibrates through the gale,
  When it does our ears assail,
  When, borne upon the ambient breeze along,
  Entranc'd we listen to the magic song;
  Forget our cares and lull our griefs to sleep,
  While fancy learns of sacred truth to weep:
  Serene amid the angry storm,
    She checks the frenzied passion's scope;
  And radiant as an angel form,
  Smiles on the death carv'd urn of hope:
  As when Favonius joins the solar blaze,
  And each fair fabric of the frost decays.

  And shall we then again be friendship's guests,
  Again with Clara's smiles shall I be blest;
  Again together hail each raptur'd scene,
  Where happiness' bright rays shall on us beam;
  Again wipe the big drop from misery's eye,
  And shed the soften'd tear of sympathy.
  Like the bright Ledean stars together roam,
  And Clara and her Emma be but one;
  And when bright Cynthia's lucid light
  Breaks through the opaque clouds of night,
  And throws a fulgent radiance round,
  At death's cold tomb will we be found:
  And o'er our relative's sad bier,
  Together shed the sacred tear:
  Through night's dark vista thus pour out our soul,
  While sorrow's magic power our minds controul;
  And when the sun's returning light
    Drives each humid cloud away,
  We together will unite,
    And bless them with the new-born day:
  And with soft cadence through the solemn glade,
  Perform a requiem to their lifeless shade.

  Yes, lovely maid, thy Emma's heart
  Friendship's soft sympathy 'll impart;
  Will catch the tear's effulgent glow,
  Repress the bosom's swelling flow.
  In dark oblivion's grave her woes confine,
  And bow fore'er at friendship's hallow'd shrine:
  For her she'll seek the flow'ret's bloom,
  The woodbine's delicate perfume;
  The jasmine breathing sweets divine,
  And the rubic eglantine.
  Then quickly fly, swift as old winged time,
  And round her temples the fair wreathe entwine.
  And didst thou think thy Emma could refuse
  The gift sent by thy heavenly muse;
  So valued--with so kind a view,
  To thy poor friend--alas! not due;
  Who if to thy soft soothing lay
  The trembling wire she did essay;
  To strike--perchance one casual note,
  Upon the liquid air to float:
  Inspir'd by thy sweet muse supreme,
  Of happiness might dart a gleam.
  To thy mellifluous harp the sounds belong,
  For thou alone attun'd the friendly song:
  As the pale moon that does illume the night
  From heaven's bright radiant orb receives her light,

    EMMA.

      NEW-YORK Oct. 17, 1796.




  TO THE EDITOR.

If you think the inclosed ELEGY, the production of a _Boy_, deserving a
place in your Magazine, you are welcome to publish it. I believe few, if
any, in this city have seen it.

  MATILDA.




  ON THE MUCH LAMENTED DEATH OF MISS POLLY MARTIN,
  WHO DIED IN THE 18th YEAR OF HER AGE.

  Forgive a youth, although the effort's vain,
    Who dares to raise the sympathetic lay;
  Though lost with Shenstone in th' elegiac strain,
    And loose unstrung reclines the lyre of Gray.

  Yet when fair virtue animates the line,
    Say, shall the muse withhold her wonted fire;
  When cherubs drooping o'er the urn recline,
    Shall she unwilling strike the golden lyre.

  Here lies the maid who late the village charm'd
    From whose remains the virgin lily springs,
  Emblem of her who envy's pow'r disarm'd,
    While round her turf the mournful robin sings.

  Chaunt your sweet vespers through the ambient air,
    Ye wild companions of the tufted grove;
  Sing how your Polly once was heavenly fair,
    Form'd of compassion, tenderness and love.

  Yet what avails the muse's plaintive song,
    Can she to life these loved remains restore,
  These mouldering relics to the earth belong,
    The young, the lovely Polly is no more.

  Her placid eye, bright as the orient day,
    Too finely wrought for such a world as this,
  Was clos'd by saints, who bore her form away,
    Serenely gliding through the realms of bliss.

  By fancy form'd I view her from above,
    Bending from clouds her parents to implore,
  Breathing rich fragrance of seraphic love,
    And soft pronouncing, "mourn for me no more.

  "Look on religion's wide-extended page,
    "Where faith triumphant shews th' uplifted cross;
  "Let hope of future bliss thy grief assuage,
    "Think Polly lives, no more deplore thy loss."

    SALEM, July 10, 1794,

      Washington County, State of N.Y.


NEW-YORK: _+Printed by JOHN BULL, No. 115, Cherry-Street+, where every
Kind of Printing work is executed with the utmost Accuracy and
Dispatch.--+Subscriptions+ for this +Magazine+ (at 2s. per month) are
taken in at the Printing-Office, and by E. MITCHELL, Bookseller, No. 9,
Maiden-Lane._



           *       *       *       *



  _UTILE DULCI._

  THE NEW-YORK WEEKLY MAGAZINE;
  or, Miscellaneous Repository.

  +Vol. II.+]  +Wednesday, November 2, 1796.+  [+No. 70.+


  AN ESSAY ON PATIENCE.

The man of a frantic heated imagination considers patience as flowing
from a meanness of soul, a dastardly disposition, the last resource of
cowards. But the man of real sagacity, who can view things through a
dispassionate medium, discovers in it all the genuine marks of a noble
mind. It is supported by hope, and is entirely unacquainted with every
species of despair, the constant companion of the lowness of sentiment.
Patience is so strong a barrier against every kind of disgrace, that all
our ills lose the greatest part of their power by opposing this virtue
to them; it combats all opponents, and every conflict is a victory. It
honourably resists the greatest hardships of this world, and sweetens
the bitters of adversity in such a manner, that we scarce perceive we
are unfortunate. It is one of those virtues that constantly carries its
own reward; for the very practice of it makes us sensible of its
benefits. The Emperor M. Aurelius often said, that Caesar acquired the
empire by the sword, Augustus by inheritance, Caligula by the merits of
his father, Nero by tyranny, Titus by having vanquished Judea, but for
his part, though of low extraction, he had obtained it by patience.

Whatever crosses and misfortunes we meet with, and however heavy their
burden, they cannot overwhelm us whilst we are not abandoned by
patience: on the contrary, they become proportionally lightened as we
resolutely exercise this virtue. As every thing in nature has its
contrast, so patience is the opposite to despair; wherefore the
Christians consider it as an heavenly grace, and the philosophers of
antiquity pronounced it the last efforts of a firm and generous soul. It
is very nearly allied to courage, which cannot shine without opponents;
in like manner this virtue disappears as soon as misfortunes desert us.
Patience is the most generous of all friends, never appearing in
prosperity; but when our miseries attain a pitch that threatens all our
future happiness, she never fails to offer her assistance to those
really inclined to avail themselves of her kindness. Patience is the
birthright of the wise, an inheritance precluded from fools, who are
never the architects of their own good fortune, but frequently of their
own misery.

The _Spectator_ observes, that resolution in an assassin is, according
to reason, quite as laudable as knowledge and wisdom exercised in the
defence of an ill cause. Those men only are truly great who place their
ambition rather in acquiring to themselves the conscience of worthy
enterprises, than in the prospect of glory which attends it. These
exalted spirits would rather be secretly the authors of events which are
serviceable to mankind, than, without being such, to have the public
fame of it. Where, therefore, an eminent merit is robbed by artifice or
detraction, it does but encrease by such endeavours of its enemies; the
impotent pains which are taken to sully it or disguise it among a croud,
to the injury of an individual, will naturally produce the contrary
effect; the fire will blaze out and burn up all the attempts to smother
what they cannot extinguish. There is but one thing necessary to keep
the possession of true glory, which is to hear the opposers of it with
patience, and preserve the virtue by which it was acquired. When a
person is thoroughly persuaded that he ought neither to admire, wish
for, nor pursue any thing but what is exactly his duty; it is not in the
power of seasons, persons, or accident, to diminish his value. He only
is a great man who can neglect the applauses of the multitude, and enjoy
himself independent of its favours. This is indeed an arduous task, but
it should comfort a glorious spirit that it is the highest step to which
human nature can arrive. Triumph, applause, acclamations, are dear to
the mind of man; but it is still a more exquisite delight to say to
yourself, you have done well, than to hear the whole human race
pronounce glorious.




  PRIDE.

It is the sullen pleasure of the proud man to insult and oppress those
who have less power than himself. The man of a rational and manly
spirit, could not give pain to the weak and the helpless without
stabbing his own heart. The pride which God disapproves, cringes to
titles and enormous wealth. Laudable spirit is most resolute and
inflexible, in repelling any attack on his rights, when the invasion is
made by formidable power.



           *       *       *       *

  THE VICTIM OF MAGICAL DELUSION;
  _OR, INTERESTING MEMOIRS OF MIGUEL, DUKE DE CA*I*A._
  Unfolding Many Curious Unknown Historical Facts.

  _Translated from the German of Tschink._

  (Continued from page 131.)

The following passage in Lady Delier's letter struck me particularly:
"I neither have read Amelia's letter, nor has she read mine; however, if
she has been sincere, she will have wrote to you many fond things, as I
can guess by her grief at your departure, and by the warmth with which
she is animated when she speaks of you. I think that Amelia's resolution
not to marry again will be dropt, as soon as the murderer of her late
Lord ceases to live, if not sooner. However, I would not have you think
that Amelia ever has mentioned any thing to that purpose, or that I
believe that a noble spotless soul like hers, could harbour sentiments
of revenge; but I suppose only that the amiable enthusiast perhaps
fancies that the ghost of her murdered Lord will not enjoy a perfect
tranquility and happiness, before the perpetrator of that villainous
deed has received the just reward of his atrocious crime. Endeavour, my
Lord, to settle your affairs at Mad**d as soon as possible, in order to
gladden our hearts by a speedy return."

With regard to the latter point I wrote to Amelia: "My affairs make a
rapid and successful progress, and I shall soon see your Ladyship again.
See Amelia again! What happiness do these words imply! Heavens, how
great would my felicity be if I constantly could fix my eyes on the
loveliest of women! How superlatively happy should I be if I were
Amelia's brother, in order that I could be constantly about her, and
speak to her: or her slave, that I could breathe under the same roof
with her, follow her every where, and anticipate every wink and every
wish of hers."

I had been about three weeks at Mad**d when I visited the minister one
evening, and found him in company with a person who, by his dress,
appeared to be a man of rank. He seemed to be very old and infirm, but
conceive my astonishment, when, on approaching nearer, I fancied I
discerned the features of the Irishman, though every thing else was so
entirely changed, that he appeared to be quite a different person; a wig
covered his head, his dark eye-brows were changed into grey, his
complection yellowish, his voice weak, and frequently interrupted by a
hectic cough. The minister met me with the words: "My Lord Duke, I have
the honour to present to your Grace the Marchese Ricieri, who lately is
returned from a journey through your native country." The Marchese rose
with difficulty, as it appeared, from his seat, and after reciprocal
civilities, and a short conversation, took his leave.

My looks followed him with astonishment to the anti-chamber, and I found
it extremely difficult to conceal my emotions from the minister, who
told me that the Marchese had brought bad news from Port***l, where the
spirit of sedition was said to be very busy. Not knowing how far I durst
disclose my thoughts on that head without blundering upon the design of
the Irishman, I returned an indifferent answer, and endeavoured to turn
the conversation to some other object. Fortunately company was
announced, I staid an hour longer, and then took leave.

On my way to the hotel, somebody tapped me on the shoulder, and a
well-known voice said, "I am glad to see your Grace well." I turned
round and the Irishman stood before me, dressed in black, and wrapt in a
scarlet cloak. I was seized with astonishment. "I give you joy, my
Lord;" said he in a friendly accent, "how do your affairs go on?"
"Extremely well!" I replied, adding after some hesitation, "will you
come with me to my hotel?" He accepted my invitation.

"Be so kind," said he when we were arrived at my apartment, "to take
care that we are not interrupted, nor over-heard!" This preamble made me
expect to hear important matters, and I was not deceived. Having
communicated to him how I had succeeded with Oliva*ez, and Suma*ez, he
approved my diligence and discretion, adding, "it is now time to come
nearer to the point. I am going to entrust you with two commissions,
both of which are equally important."

"Let me hear what I am to do!"

"First of all you must endeavour to prompt the minister to publish a
royal edict, by which the Port****e nobility are ordered, under the
penalty of losing their estates, to enter into the military service of
Sp**n."

"Good God, what do you mean by that?"

"Then," he added, without noticing my exclamation, "you must advise the
minister to seize the person of the Duke of Brag**za."

I flared at the Irishman, "Then the revolution is to be given up!" said
I, after a pause of anxious astonishment.

"Not at all, it rather is to be promoted by these means."

"I cannot comprehend you;" I exclaimed, "you either are counteracting
your own plan; or the revolution will be destroyed in the bud."

"My good Duke, one must frequently _appear_ to counteract a plan in
order to carry it into execution with greater safety. I will explain
myself more distinctly." So saying, he pushed his chair closer to me,
and continued in a lower accent; "Let us take a short view of the
situation of your country. Not to mention the enormous loss of its
possessions abroad, which it has suffered during the subjection to
Sp**n, the interior state of the empire is deplorable beyond
description. The King of Sp**n looks upon your country as a conquered
province, and takes the greatest pains to exhaust it entirely, in order
to keep it in inactivity with more ease; the royal revenues of Port***l
are either distributed among the favourites of the King, or mortgaged;
more than 300 gallies, and 2000 cannons have been carried to Sp**n; the
nobility are injured by the most unjust demands; the clergy must see
their benefices in the possession of foreigners; the people are beggared
by enormous taxes--in short matters have almost been carried to the
highest pitch. So much the better, for this is a sign that our
undertaking is ripe for execution. Let us strain the strings a little
more, and they must break."

"And what then?" said I with ardour. "General commotion, and at the same
time universal confusion will be the consequence; and it is very obvious
that thus my country will not regain its liberty, but rather be plunged
in a more oppressive state of slavery. If the people are not supported
by the nobility, and both parties not united under one common head, the
furious unbridled populace will rage till the Sp**sh goads shall have
reduced them again to obedience."

"You have divined my most secret thoughts," the Irishman replied. I was
as if dropt from the clouds. "Then I have entirely misconstrued your
words," I replied, "I am to endeavour to obtain an edict in virtue of
which, the Port****ze nobility are to be bound to enter in the service
of Sp**n, under the penalty of losing their estates; I am to advise the
minister to seize the Duke of B----a! Did you not say so?"

"Exactly so!"

"However, if the P---e nobility should enter into the Sp***sh service,
how are they to be active in the service of _their country?_ If the Duke
of Bra***za should be seized, how will it be possible that he should
become the head of the conspirators?"

"Heaven forbid your _ifs_ should be realized!"

"But why the preparations for it? Indeed I do not comprehend you."

"You soon shall; only suffer me so go on. The people must be supported
by the accession of the nobility and clergy, and all parties guided by a
common leader; thus far you are perfectly right: and in order to effect
that purpose every preparation has been made, and the general commotion
will be effected in a harmonious and regular manner, if _ever it can_ be
effected. But, dearest Duke, you look upon what _may_ happen as already
existing. I was saying just now, that matters have _almost_ been carried
to the highest pitch! one moment of rashness may ruin the most prudent
plan. It is true, that the people and the clergy are waiting anxiously
for the signal of a revolution; however, the nobility are not
sufficiently exasperated. Once already have they been ordered to enter
into the service of Sp**n against the Cata**nians; however, they were
satisfied to evince their displeasure silently, by obeying the edict
reluctantly and negligently. If in this situation of affairs that edict
should be renewed, and the transgressors punished by the seizure of
their estates, their resentment, which is burning under the embers, will
soon burst out into a blaze; then all the states of the empire will be
equally provoked, and it will be seasonable for the Duke of Bra***za to
give the signal for a general commotion."

"But is not this very Duke to be seized and imprisoned?"

"Neither is he to be seized, nor are the Port****ze nobility to enter
into the Sp**sh service, but both parties are to be provoked, by the
severest oppression, in such a manner that their resentment may break
out into open revolt."

"His father would not have wanted such a violent incitement; the Duke
has, however, inherited very little of the spirit of his parent*."

"A rash resolution is not always the firmest, nor is a precipitate deed
always the best. And besides, the undertaking of the Duke of Bra***za is
of such a nature, that he risks nothing less than his own and his
family's welfare; it requires therefore a more mature consideration."

"But if he should flinch back!"

"His retreat must be entirely cut off, and this is to be effected by the
execution of the second commission which I have given you."

  [* The Grandmother of the Duke of Brag**za had already attempted to
  enforce her claim to the throne; she was, however, obliged to yield
  to superior power. His father was hurt so much at the loss of the
  crown, that he had formed the design to seize the King of Sp**n when
  he stopped at his palace at Vi**ciosa, on his journey to Li*bon, and
  not to set him at liberty till he should have renounced to him the
  crown of Por***al. His friends represented to him how impossible it
  would be to accomplish this design; however, he could not be
  persuaded to desist from all farther attempts of getting possession
  of the sceptre of Port***al, and his people were frequently
  instigated by him to quarrel with the King's Officers at Li*bon, on
  which occasion the populace evinced clearly how strong their
  attachment to the family of Bra***za was. But matters were never
  pushed any farther, the proper time when the crown of Por***al,
  should be restored to its lawful possessors being not yet arrived.
  The old Duke was so much grieved at his unsuccessful attempt, that
  at length his reason was disordered. He spoke constantly of war and
  arms, and ordered his family, on his death-bed, to bury him with
  Royal pomp, which was actually done, though in secret.]

  (_To be continued._)




  _EULOGY ON BUFFON, the celebrated Naturalist._

Le Compte de la Cepede, in his description of the Four Lamps suspended
in the Temple of Genius, erected in the bosom of France, has given the
following Eulogy of Buffon:

"It was no longer night: a star created by nature to illuminate the
universe, shone with majesty. His course was marked by dignity; his
motion by harmony, and his repose by serenity: every eye, even the
weakest, was ready to contemplate it. From his car, resplendent over the
universe, he spread his magnificence. As God enclosed in the ark all the
works of creation, he collected, on the banks of the Seine, the animals,
vegetables and minerals dispersed in the four quarters of the globe.
Every form, every colour, all the riches and instincts of the world were
offered to our eyes, and to our understandings. Every thing was
revealed; every thing ennobled; every thing rendered interesting,
brilliant or graceful. But a funeral groan was heard---Nature grieved in
silence---with Buffon, the last lamp was extinguished."



           *       *       *       *

     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._



               REMARKS ON MUSIC.

  (Continued from page 124.)

Some Historians affirm that music was first known in Egypt, and by
comparing the accounts of Didorus Siculus, and of Plato, there is reason
to suppose, that in very ancient times the study of music in Egypt, was
confined to the Priesthood, who used it only on religious and solemn
occasions; that, as well as sculpture, it was circumscribed by law: that
it was esteemed sacred, and forbidden to be employed on light or common
occasions; and that innovation in it was prohibited; but what the style
or relative excellence of this very ancient music was, there are no
traces by which we can form any accurate judgment. After the reigns of
the Pharoahs, the Egyptians fell by turns under the dominion of the
Ethiopians, the Persians, the Greeks, and the Romans. By such
revolutions, the manners and amusements of the people, as well as their
form of government, must have been changed. In the age of the Ptolemies,
the musical games and contests instituted by these monarchs were of
Greek origin, and the musicians who performed were chiefly Greeks. The
most ancient monuments of human art and industry, at present extant at
Rome, are the obelisks brought there from Egypt, two of which are said
to have been erected by Sesostris at Heliopolis, about 400 years before
the siege of Troy. These were by the order of Augustus brought to Rome
after the conquest of Egypt. One of them called _guglia rotta_, or the
broken pillar, which during the sacking of the City in 1527 was thrown
down and broke, still lays in the Campus Martius. On it is seen the
figure of a musical instrument of two strings and with a neck. It
resembles much the calascione still used in the kingdom of Naples.

This curious relict of antiquity is mentioned, because it affords better
evidence than, on the subject of ancient music, is usually to be met
with, that the Egyptians at so very early a period of their history, had
advanced to a considerable degree of excellence in the cultivation of
the arts. By means of its neck, this instrument was capable, with only
two strings, of producing a great number of notes.

These two strings if tuned fourths to each other, would furnish that
series of sounds which the ancients call _heptichord_, which consist of
a conjunct tetrachord as B. C. D. E; E. F. G. A; if tuned in fifths;
they would produce an octave, or two disjunct tetrachords. The annals of
no other nation than Egypt, for many ages after the period of the
obelisk at Heliopolis, exhibit the vestige of any contrivance to shorten
strings during performance by a neck or finger board. Father Montfaucon
observes, that after examining 500 ancient lyres, harps, and citheras,
he could discover no such thing.

  A. O.

  (_To be continued._)



           *       *       *       *

     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._



            THE ROSE--A REFLECTION.



             Addressed to Mr. ----.

This morning it unfolded its beauties to the eastern sun; it exhaled its
rich perfume; I beheld the beautiful flower with pleasure. A person past
my window, and, no doubt, to please me, plucked it from the stalk. He
gave it me; I placed it in my bosom. It faded--it died away--and when
evening came it was no longer charming.

Vain man! in this flower thou mayest behold an emblem of thyself. Thou
too in the morning of thy days wast amiable. But when thou hadst arrived
at mature age, then thou wast severed from conscious innocence; then
thou didst imbibe the vices of the age. As the flower lost its crimson
hue, thou wast fast losing thy hold of virtue. And as the rose had
entirely faded, so rectitude, integrity, innocence, and every amiable
virtue became strangers to thy heart; and left thee, entirely, a man of
the world.

  L. B.

    _October 25. 1796._




  GENEROSITY.

Generosity is the part of a soul raised above the vulgar. There is in it
something of what we admire in heroes, and praise with a degree of
rapture.

In paying his debts a man barely does his duty, and it is an action
attended with no sort of glory. Should _Lysippus_ satisfy his creditors,
who would be at the pains of telling it to the world? Generosity is a
virtue of a very different complexion. It is raised above duty, and,
from its elevation, attracts the attention and the praises of us little
mortals below.




  CURIOUS OBSERVATIONS.

The word _Pat_, has a peculiarity hardly belonging to any other; read it
which way you will, though it forms different words, yet they are
exactly of the same import, for a _Pat_, or a _Tap_, it is well known,
signify a gentle stroke.

The word _murmur_ read backwards, repeatedly names a liquor that some
people are remarkably fond of, viz. _rum rum_; and when this dear
delightful beverage cannot be had, read it forwards, and it will shew
you what they will be very apt to do, viz. _murmur_.

Again in the word _glass_---this is what some men love exceedingly, and
if we use what is called the _aphoerisis_, or the taking away of a
letter, it will then be what most men love, viz. a _lass_, but take away
the _l_, and the remainder will shew what he is who loves neither a
_glass_ nor a _lass_, viz. an _ass_.



           *       *       *       *

  Interesting History Of
  _THE BARON DE LOVZINSKI._

  With a relation of the most remarkable occurrences in the life
  of the celebrated COUNT PULASKI, well known as the champion of
  American Liberty, and who bravely fell in its defence before
  Savannah, 1779.

  _Interspersed with Anecdotes of the late unfortunate KING of POLAND,
  so recently dethroned._

  (Continued from page 135.)

Lodoiska uttered the most dreadful groans, to which I answered by cries
of fury. Boleslas rushed from one part of the prison to another, like a
madman; he sent forth the most terrible howlings; he attempted to burst
open the door with his hands and feet. As for myself, I remained at the
window, and shook, amidst my transports of fury, those massive iron-bars
which I was unable to bend.

All of a sudden, the domestics, who had lately mounted the battlements,
descend with precipitation, and open the gates: we heard the voice of
Dourlinski himself, begging for quarter. The victors instantly
precipitate themselves amidst the flames; and being at length attracted
by our cries, they force open the door of our prison with their
hatchets.

By their dress and their arms, I know them to be Tartars: their chief
arrives----it is Titsikan!

"Ah! ah!" exclaims he; "it is my brave friend!"

I instantly throw myself on his neck:--"Titsikan!----Lodoiska!----a
lady!----the fairest of women!----in that tower!----about to be burnt
alive!"

These were the incoherent expressions by which I made my feelings known.

The Tartar instantly gives the word of command to his followers----they
fly to the tower---I fly along with them---Boleslas follows us. They
burst open the doors; and near to an old pillar we discover a narrow,
winding stair-case, filled with smoke.

The Tartars, affrighted at the danger, start back: I prepare to ascend.

"Alas! what are you about?" exclaims Boleslas.

"To live or die with Lodoiska!"

"And I will either live or die with my master!" was the reply of my
generous servant.

I rush on---he follows me! At the risk of suffocation, we ascend about
forty steps; by the light of the flames we discover Lodoiska in a corner
of her prison; who feebly utters; "Who is it that approaches me?"

"It is Lovzinski! it is your lover!"

Joy instantly lends her new strength; she rises and flies into my arms:
we carry her away; we descend a few steps; but volumes of smoke now fill
all the stair-case, and we are forced to re-ascend with precipitation.
At that very instant, too, a part of the tower gives way!---Boleslas
utters a dreadful shriek, and Lodoiska falls into a swoon.

That which was on the point of destroying, saved us! The flames,
formerly smothered, began to extend with greater rapidity; but the smoke
was dissipated.---Laden with our precious burden, Boleslas and I descend
in haste---I do not exaggerate; every step trembled under our feet! the
walls were all on fire! At length we arrived at the gate of the tower;
Titsikan, trembling for our safety, was expecting us there: "Brave
men!"---exclaimed he, on seeing us appear again.----I place Lodoiska at
his feet, and fall down lifeless by her side!

I remained nearly an hour in this situation. They tremble for my life;
and Boleslas weeps aloud. I again recover my senses, on hearing the
voice of Lodoiska, who, returning to herself, calls me her deliverer.
The appearance of every thing was altered; the tower was entirely in
ruins. The Tartars, however, had stopt the progress of the flames; they
had destroyed one part of the castle, on purpose to save the remainder;
in fine, we had been carried into a large saloon, where we were
surrounded by Titsikan and some of his soldiers. Others of them were
occupied in pillaging and in bringing away the gold, silver, jewels,
plate, and all the precious effects which the flames had spared.

Near to us Dourlinski, loaded with fetters, and uttering repeated
groans, beheld this heap of riches, of which, he was about to be
despoiled. Rage, terror, despair, all the passions which can tear the
heart of a villain suffering under punishment, were visibly depicted in
his wild and wandering looks. He struck the earth with fury, dashed his
clenched hands against his forehead, and, uttering the most horrible
blasphemies, he reproached Heaven for its just vengeance.

In the mean time, my lovely mistress holds my hand clasped in hers.
"Alas," says she at length, with tears in her eyes, "alas! you have
saved my life, and your own is still in danger! Nay, even if we escape
death, slavery awaits us!"

"No, no, Lodoiska, be comforted, Titsikan is not my enemy; Titsikan will
put a period to our misfortunes--"

"Undoubtedly, if I am able," exclaims the Tartar, interrupting me: "you
are in the right, brave man! (adds he) I see that you are not dead, and
I am happy: you always say, and do good things; and you have there
(turning to Boleslas), you have there a friend who seconds you
admirably."

On this I embrace Boleslas:--"yes, Titsikan, yes, I have a friend, who
shall always be dear to me!--"

The Tartar again interrupts me: "What! were not you both confined in an
apartment below ground, and was not this lady in a tower? What was the
reason of that? I will lay any wager, continues he with a smile, that
you have taken this female from that old wretch, (pointing to
Dourlinski), and you are in the right; for he is a dotard, and she is
beautiful! Come--inform me of every thing."

I now discover my own name to Titsikan, that of Lodoiska's father, and
every particular that had occurred to me until that moment. It belongs
to Lodoiska, I observe in conclusion, to make us acquainted with what
she has been obliged to suffer from the infamous Dourlinski, ever since
she has been in his castle!

"You know," replies Lodoiska, "that my father me to leave Warsaw, on the
day that the diet was opened. He first conducted me to the territories
of the Palatine of --------, at only twenty leagues distance from the
capital, to which he returned, on purpose to assist at the meeting of
the states.

"On that very day when M. de P------ was proclaimed king, Pulaski took
me from the castle of the palatine, and conducted me here, thinking that
I should be better concealed. He charged Dourlinski to guard me with
extraordinary strictness; and, above all things, to take especial care
to prevent Lovzinski from discovering the place of my retreat. He then
left me, as he informed me, on purpose to assemble and encourage the
good citizens to defend his country, and to punish traitors. Alas! these
important avocations have made him forget his daughter, for I have never
seen him since.

"A few days after his departure, I began to perceive that the visits of
Dourlinski had become more frequent than usual; in a short time, he
hardly ever quitted the apartment assigned me for a prison. He deprived
me, under some trifling pretext, of the only female attendant whom my
father had left me; and to prevent any person (as he said) from knowing
that I was in his castle, he himself brought me the food necessary for
my subsistence, and passed whole days along with me. You cannot
conceive, my dear Lovzinski, how much I suffered from the continual
presence of a man who was odious to me, and whose infamous designs I was
suspicious of: he even dared to explain himself to me one day: but I
assured him that my hate should always be the price of his tenderness,
and that his unworthy conduct had drawn upon him my sovereign contempt.

"He answered me coldly, that in time I should accustom myself to see
him, and to suffer his assiduities; nay, he did not in the least alter
his usual conduct, for he entered my chamber in the morning, and never
retired until night. Separated from all I loved, I had not even the
feeble consolation of being able to enjoy the sweet recollection of past
happiness. A witness to my misfortunes, Dourlinski took pleasure in
augmenting them.

"'Pulaski,' says he to me, 'commands a body of Polish troops; Lovzinski
betraying his country, which he does not love, and a woman concerning
whom he is indifferent, serves in the Russian army, where he will be cut
off during some bloody engagement: besides, if he survives, it is
evident that nothing can ever reconcile your father to him.'

"A few days after, he came on purpose to announce to me, that Pulaski,
during the night, had attacked the Russians in their camp; and that,
amidst the confusion that ensued, my lover had fallen by the hand of my
father. The cruel Palatine even made me read a narrative of this event,
drawn up with every appearance of truth, in a kind of public gazette,
which doubtless he had procured to be printed expressly for the purpose:
besides, on perceiving the barbarous joy which he affected on this
occasion, I thought the news but too true.

"Pitiless tyrant! cried I, you enjoy my tears and my despair; but cease
to persecute me, or you will soon see that the daughter of Pulaski is
herself able to avenge her own injuries!

"One evening that he had left me sooner than usual, after I retired to
bed, I heard my door open very softly. By the light of a lamp, which I
kept always burning, I beheld my tyrant advancing towards my bed. As
there was no crime of which I did not believe him to be capable, I had
foreseen this event; and I had even taken measures to render it
unsuccessful. I accordingly armed myself with a long sharp knife, which
I had the precaution to conceal beneath my pillow; I overwhelmed the
wretch with the reproaches which he so justly merited; and I vowed, if
he dared to advance, that I would poniard him with my own hand.

"He retired, with surprise and affright visibly delineated on his
countenance: 'I am tired,' said he as he went out, 'with experiencing
nothing but scorn; and if I were not afraid of being overheard, you
should soon perceive what a woman's arm could effect against mine! But I
know a way of vanquishing your pride! By and by you will think yourself
but too happy in being able to purchase your pardon, by the most
humiliating submissions.'

"He now withdrew. A few moments after, his confident entered with a
pistol in his hand. I must, however, do him the justice to say, that he
wept while he announced to me the orders of his lord.

"'Dress yourself, Madam; you must instantly follow me!'--This was all
that he was able to say to me.

"He then conducted me to that very tower, where, without you, I should
this morning have perished: he shut me up in that horrible prison; it
was there that I had languished for more than a month, without fire,
without the light of heaven, and almost without clothes; with bread and
water for my food; for my bed a few trusses of straw: this was the
deplorable state to which the only daughter of a grandee of Poland was
reduced!

"You shudder, brave stranger, and yet believe me, when I assure you,
that I do not recount to you any more than a small part of my
sufferings. One thing, however, rendered my misery less insupportable:
I no longer beheld my tyrant. While he expected with tranquility that I
should solicit my pardon, I passed whole days and nights in calling on
the name of my father, and in bewailing my lover!                   *

       *   *   *                   *   *   *   *   *   O Lovzinski! with
what astonishment was I seized; with what joy was my soul penetrated, on
that day when I once more beheld you in the gardens of Dourlinski!"

*   *                   *   *   *   *

  (_To be continued._)



           *       *       *       *

          THE FOLLY OF FREETHINKING:



                 +An Anecdote.+



Among words which in their present acceptation are remote from their
original and rigid meaning, none perhaps are more striking than Deism
and Freethinking. The former, which in its strict import signifies
nothing more than a belief in the existence of the Deity, in opposition
to Atheism (and in this sense every christian is a Deist) is now
universally understood of all persons who reject the christian
revelation; and the word Freethinking, which should convey the idea of a
man of liberal and ingenuous disposition, free from vulgar prejudice and
unmanly bigotry, and investigating truth with virtuous view, and a deep
veneration of the Supreme Being, is now commonly appropriated to those
persons, who from a love of singularity, an affectation of superior
understanding, or innate malignity of mind, would combat truths the most
universally received and revered in all ages and in all countries, and
would dissolve those sacred ties by which society is united, and destroy
those hopes of immortality which God hath given as incentives to virtue,
and the best security of our happiness here and hereafter.

The conduct of the Freethinker, whether actuated by such motives or not,
is replete with extreme folly, to give it no harsher appellation. An
anecdote of the late Mr. Mallet affords a remarkable instance of the
truth of this observation, and cannot fail to convey some useful advice.
This gentleman was a great Freethinker, and a very free speaker of his
free thoughts. He made no scruple to disseminate his opinions wherever
he could introduce them. At his own table, the lady of the house (who
was a staunch advocate for her husband's opinions) would often in the
warmth of argument, say, 'Sir, we Deists.' The lecture upon the non
credenda of the Freethinkers was repeated so often, and urged with so
much earnestness, that the inferior domestics became soon as able
disputants as the heads of the family. The fellow who waited at the
table being thoroughly convinced, that for any of his misdeeds he should
have no after account to make, was resolved to profit by the doctrine,
and made off with many things of value, particularly the plate. Luckily
he was so closely pursued, that he was brought back with his prey to his
master's house, who examined him before some select friends. At first,
the man was sullen, and would answer no questions; but, being urged to
give a reason for his infamous behaviour he resolutely said, 'Sir, I had
heard you so often talk of the impossibility of a future state, and that
after death there was no reward for virtue, or punishment for vice, that
I was tempted to commit the robbery.' 'Well; but you rascal,' replied
Mallet, 'had you no fear of the gallows?' 'Sir,' said the fellow,
looking sternly at his master, 'what is that to you, if I had a mind to
venture that? You had removed my greatest terror; why should I fear the
least?'



           *       *       *       *

  _NEW-YORK._



    MARRIED,

On Wednesday the 19th ult. by the Rev. Mr. Moore, of Hempstead, Mr.
ISAAC HAGNER, to Miss HANNAH TOFFY, daughter of Mr. Daniel Toffy, both
of Herricks, (L.I.)

On Saturday se'nnight, by the Rev. Dr. Foster, Mr. GEORGE STEWART, to
Miss NANCY BRANT, both of this city.

On Thursday evening last, by the Rev. Mr. Milledoler, Mr. CASPER
SEMBLER, to Miss HANNAH SMITH, both of this city.




  TO CORRESPONDENTS.

The SONNET by ANNA, is received, and shall appear in our next.

THEODORE's remarks on Mr. Townsend's note, we must be excused from
publishing. Personal feuds can by no means be interesting to the public,
and are ever totally inadmissible; we recommend to the parties, an
amicable reconciliation which will assuredly be productive of more
satisfaction than sullen revenge can ever afford.




  _METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS._
  _From the 23d to the 29th ult._

    _Thermometor observed at 6, A.M. 3, P.M._
      _Prevailing winds._
        _OBSERVATIONS on the WEATHER._

         deg.  deg.    6. 3.  6. 3.
            100   100
  Oct 23  52 50 70     s. w. do.  clear, light wind  do. lt. wd.
      24  57    76     s. w. do.  clear, calm  do. high wd.
      25  58    77     sw. nw.    foggy light wind  clear do.
      26  56    58 25  e. se.     cloudy lt. wd.  do. do.
      27  49 50 55     ne. n.     clear do.  high wind light wd.
      28  37    47     n. sw.     clear lt. wd.  do. do.
      29  44 50 58     sw. w.     clear lht. wind  cloudy do.




     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._



              EVENING.--EXTEMPORE.

  The sun retires behind the western hills,
  And lengthening shadows shew the parting day;
  A hollow sound echoes from murm'ring rills,
  Which fall from distant rocks and glide away.

  Now sol's faint beams scarce glisten o'er the glade,
  All nature's various beauties sink from sight;
  The verdant vales are wrapt in gloomy shade,
  And day retires before the mists of night.

  Thus life's vain pleasures short delight impart:
  Those scenes, which once so brilliant did appear,
  Return no more to chear the pensive heart,
  And memory recalls them with a tear.

    J. P.

      NEW-YORK Oct. 29, 1796.



           *       *       *       *

     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._



              TO MISS A---- H----.

  Though F----s muse may grief assume,
    And teach his plaintive soul to mourn;
  No wreath I make for Anna's tomb,
    Nor weep upon her chilly urn.

  'Tis not for me to mourn as dead,
    The fair whom blooming I survey,
  Nor with a turf to grace her head,
    Nor change her limbs to mould'ring clay.

  Let friendship's artless voice inspire
    My muse to sing in diff'rent strains:
  While as a friend I here admire
    Her more--than on the Etherial plains.

  Far distant may the period be,
    When Anna's form shall lose its bloom;
  And F----s frantic verse we see
    Sadly inscribed upon her tomb.

    ANNA.

The above address was occasioned by the following Epitaph, written
by a Clergyman, and presented to the young lady whose tomb it was
to adorn.

  Reader, if thou are _good_, and _wise_, and _witty_,
  Drop on this sable hearse some tears of pity;
  For know kind reader, that it is a duty
  To the remains of innocence and beauty.




  +Epitaph on a Celebrated Coach-Maker.+

  Once in the gilded chariot high,
    I sat in worldly state;
  Now in the darksome tomb I lie,
    The _chariot_ built by fate.

  Yet in this _carriage_ form'd of dust
    I hope one day to gain
  The place where dwell the good and just;
    And endless pleasures reign.

  This is the _chariot_ that must bring
    The GREAT and SMALL at last,
  Before their JUDGE and Heav'nly KING:
    When earthly joys are past.




  ON A GOOD CONSCIENCE.

  The solid joys of human kind,
  Are those that flow from peace of mind;
  For who the sweets of life can taste,
  With vice and tim'rous guilt opprest?
  'Tis virtue softens all our toils,
    With peace our conscience crowns;
  Gives pleasure when our fortune smiles,
    And courage when it frowns;
  Calms every trouble, makes the soul serene,
  Smooths the contracted brow, and chears the heart within.



           *       *       *       *

  MATERNAL AFFECTION.

  Now swiftly fled the shades of night,
  Before the sun's transparent light,
  Fresh with the glitt'ring dews of morn,
  More fragrant bloom'd the verdant thorn.

  The tender DELIA waking, smil'd,
  And flew to clasp her lovely child;
  Asleep the angel infant lay,
  Fair as the glowing dawn of day.

  A soothing lullaby she sung,
  And o'er the cradle fondly hung:
  What eye could view a fairer sight?--
  How pure her innocent delight!

  In happy wedlock early join'd,
  A mother, with a virgin mind,
  Just sev'nteen summers had she seen,
  And tall and graceful was her mien.

  She paus'd a while, and strove to trace
  The father in her infant's face;
  'How sweet,' she cried, 'a mothers bliss!
  'And sweet, oh sweet, my cherub's kiss!

  'Sleep on! my babe, securely rest!
  'I feel thee mantling in my breast;
  'Sleep on, and with each hour improve--
  'My first--my only pledge of love!

  'How could I bear from thee to part,
  'Thou dearest treasure of my heart?
  'Yet, ah! I tremble when I know
  'What ills my babe must undergo!

  'What sickness, and what days of pain,
  'What chances too, must thou sustain?
  'How can I hope my child to save,
  'When thousands meet an early grave?

  'And must--ah must these busy fears
  'Still grow with thy encreasing years?
  'Must they my bosom still annoy,
  'And mingle with a mother's joy?

  'Secure in the Almighty hand,
  'The offspring of his high command;
  'Will not his name become thy shield,
  'His terrors strong protection yield?

  'Unto the will of Heav'n resign'd,
  'Let doubt no more disturb my mid;
  'This precept soothes my troubles breast,
  'Whatever God ordains is best.

  'Sleep on--then sleep, my baby fair,
  'May Heav'n thy infant beauty spare.
  'Sleep on--sleep on, thy mother's pride,
  'May Heav'n thy future being guide.'


NEW-YORK: _+Printed by JOHN BULL, No. 115, Cherry-Street+, where every
Kind of Printing work is executed with the utmost Accuracy and
Dispatch.--+Subscriptions+ for this +Magazine+ (at 2s. per month) are
taken in at the Printing-Office, and by E. MITCHELL, Bookseller, No. 9,
Maiden-Lane._



           *       *       *       *



  _UTILE DULCI._

  THE NEW-YORK WEEKLY MAGAZINE;
  or, Miscellaneous Repository.

  +Vol. II.+]  +Wednesday, November 9, 1796.+  [+No. 71.+


  AN ESSAY ON HOPE.

There is, perhaps, no word in our language more generally understood
than the term HOPE. The idea represented by this word is so well known
from its pleasing effects on the mind, and so indiscriminately
experienced in one or other of its degrees, that any explanation of it
seems to be unnecessary. All know that Hope signifies an expectation
indulged with pleasure.

In all the works of Nature we can find no two objects exactly similar.
The surprising diversity proceeds from a degree almost imperceptible, by
a slow gradation, down to direct opposition in the minutest
circumstances; so that in the amazing variety, we can find no object,
whether of sense or imagination, which has not its direct reverse.

With respect to the sensations of the mind, I know none more directly
contrasted than that expressed by the word Hope. Its reverse is Fear.
And though Love and Hatred--Joy and Sorrow--Light and Darkness are not
more opposed to each other than those two passions; yet it will appear a
little remarkable, that they not only spring from the same source, but
are _really_ and _identically_ the same in some of the original steps or
gradations. The same passion or power of the mind varies its name in the
different stages of its advancement. Every thing has its state of
infancy. In their pristine state, Hope and Fear are both called Esteem.
This may be termed the _infant state_ of attachment to any object.
Esteem soon advances to its second stage, in which it takes the name of
Love. In a third gradation it is called Desire; Love ever produces the
desire of enjoyment. Those are the original and _common_ steps of Hope
and fear; nor is there yet any sort of distinction either with respect
to _object_ or _sensation_: but here the difference begins.--They are no
longer the same. The strong dissimilarity of different minds may render
the subsequent stages of operation as different as contradiction itself.
Mark the progression of Desire in two minds of different textures. Let
us suppose the object the same. Let us suppose it Riches; or (if that
will animate the idea) a person of a different sex. In the one mind
Desire improves to Hope; in the other it degenerates to fear. In the one
instance, Hope advances to a state of superior sensation, which we term
Joy; in the other, fear sinks down the rugged declivity to that dreary
region called despair.

Thus one man looks with pleasure and fortitude beyond his present
difficulties; and though his hopes, in some instances, may be decidedly
blasted, what then? he never anticipated the disappointment, nor will
the happy turn of his mind permit him to indulge its vexations. His
active passions soon find another object of exercise and pursuit. Very
frequently he gains the summit of felicity in the enjoyment of his
favourite object; and still he has the _independent_ happiness arising
from the constant exercise of Hope. A person of the above description is
never heard to complain of this _troublesome, woeful, sinful world_; he
has no such bad opinion of life in general, as promotes a desire of
quitting it; or of going to another, to avoid the disappointments of
this---the common source of all such wishes. No: he acts his part as a
man; enjoys life as man was designed to do; contributes to the happiness
of all around him, and secures his own.

Let us now take a slight view of the other side of the picture---the man
of an opposite cast. We left him in despair of possession; he yields his
cowardly heart a victim to the vulture; and, if his distress is not
somewhat alleviated by transferring his attention to some other object,
he either abridges his life with a pistol or halter, or drags along a
miserable existence indeed. These are no exaggerated or imaginary
ideas.---This is reason, truth, fact---Human Nature.

The above simple remarks may convince us, that the same passions are
very different (in point of degree) in different persons. What
predominates in one, is counteracted and overpowered in another; and men
are happy or otherwise, as Hope or Fear happens to be the most powerful
passion.

Those to whom the important charge of education is committed, may
perhaps draw some useful inferences from the above observations. It is
much in their power (if calculated for the serious business) to
suppress, to a proper degree, any abstract passion of an unhappy
tendency, whether in itself or its consequences.



           *       *       *       *

  THE VICTIM OF MAGICAL DELUSION;
  _OR, INTERESTING MEMOIRS OF MIGUEL, DUKE DE CA*I*A._
  Unfolding Many Curious Unknown Historical Facts.

  _Translated from the German of Tschink._

  (Continued from page 139)

"How am I to understand this?"

"You think this measure would be too harsh and violent, however it is
not a mere arbitrary artifice, but adapted to the situation in which the
Duke of Bra***za is at present. The minister of Sp**n is not ignorant of
the fermentations in Po****al, and suspecting the Duke to be the chief
source of them, his principal attention is directed to him.--But what
could Oliva*ez have attempted against him as yet? Open force would have
been fruitless, and not only forwarded the general revolt, but also
justified the actions of the Duke. He was therefore forced to have
recourse to art. At first he conferred the government of Mi*an upon the
Duke, in order to have an opportunity of getting him in his power;
however that keen-sighted nobleman declined that honour, pretending not
to have sufficient knowledge of the country to acquit himself honourably
of a trust of so much importance. Soon after the minister found another
opportunity of laying a new snare. The King of Sp**n having resolved to
chastise the rebellious Catal*nians in person, the Duke was very civilly
invited to accompany him in the field; but he begged to be excused,
alledging that this would be attended with great expences, and that his
finances were very low. However Oliva**z was not discouraged by this
refusal, and has lately made a third attempt. A rumour having been
spread all over the country, that a Fren*h fleet was approaching the
coasts of Po****al, probably with a view to make a descent, Oliva**z
conferred upon the Duke an almost unlimited power to make the requisite
preparations against the impending invasion, and particularly to review
all the ports, to fortify and to garrison them. Meanwhile the Sp**ish
Admiral, Don Lopez Oz**co had received secret orders to carry his fleet
to a port where the Duke should be, to invite him to review it, and when
he should have seized him, to sail with his prisoner to Sp**n. This plan
was however rendered abortive by a dreadful storm which dispersed the
fleet, and forced the Admiral to desist from his design of visiting the
Port****ze ports. No new attempt has been made since, and the minister
is silently hatching other artifices. Yet this calm is, without
comparison, more dreadful than all the attempts which have been made.
I know that he has an emissary in Por***al, who watches secretly every
step of the Duke,* whose liberty and life are in imminent danger. The
ruin of the head of the conspiracy would be a mortal blow to the whole
revolutionary society; even the imprisonment of the Duke would unnerve
the hands of the conspirators. If, therefore, the revolution is to take
place, the Duke must be secured against the secret machinations of the
minister; I say the _secret_ machinations, for if they should be carried
on publicly, as it has been the case as yet, his snares may easily be
evaded. For which reason it will be matter of great importance to
persuade the minister to carry on his attempts in the usual way, and to
effect this will be in your power. Nay, you yourself must frame and
direct the designs upon the Duke."

  [* This emissary will soon be introduced to the reader.]

"I fear," said I to the Irishman, "you expect more from my feeble
exertions than I shall be able to perform."

"Hear first my plan! You are to go, the day after tomorrow, to Oliva*ez,
and to inform him that you have received intelligence of the commotions
in Por***al--"

"Besides," I interrupted him, "Oliva*ez has told me to-day that he has
received an account of these commotions from a certain Marchese Ricieri,
who is returned from his travels through Por***al."

"So much the better!" he replied, without returning my inquisitive look,
or changing his countenance at the name of Ricieri, "so much the better!
then you have a prefacer to whose introduction you can link your
discourse. Tell, therefore, the minister, that the letter which you have
received from Por***al makes it very plain to you, why the Duke had
declined all the invitations which the court had given him. Oliva*ez
will request you to explain these words, and then you must reply, that
you suspect the Duke of Brag**za to avoid the neighbourhood of the
Court, because he is sensible he has deserved the resentment of the King
by his disloyalty. At the same time you must add, that you are very
sorry to be obliged to declare against so near a relation as the Duke;
that, however, the voice of your conscience has more weight with you
than that of consanguinity, and that your allegiance to the King of
Sp**n and your country, which has been reduced to the greatest distress
by the constant internal commotions, does not suffer you any longer to
regard as a friend, the man who was the chief cause of all these
troubles. Thus you will gain the confidence of the minister, and he will
ask you what measures for seizing the Duke you think would be most
proper and safe. Take hold of that opportunity to convince the minister
that, and for what reason, violent measures of any kind, would produce
the worst consequences. Approve of the means which the wisdom of his
policy has already adopted as the safest, by which the Duke ought to be
persecuted till no farther evasion should be left for him. Oliva*ez will
desire you to give him your opinion more at large, and then you must
address him to the following purpose:--'I am of opinion that you ought
to inform the Duke of the misfortune which has befallen the fleet, and
to charge him, under the pretext that this had rendered the situation of
the empire very perilous, with the commission to inspect all the strong
places of the kingdom, and to fortify them where he shall think it
requisite. At the same time you will do well to order all the commanders
of the fortified towns to seize the Duke as secretly as possible. In
order to prevent any evasions under the pretext of want of money, you
must send him, at the same time, a sum sufficient for defraying the
expences of his journey."

"But suppose," said I, "this proposal should be accepted, how could the
Duke of Brag**za escape the snare?"

"Can we not apprize him of his danger? If he cannot find means to escape
the snare by dint of art, he must have recourse to open force, and call
to arms. Thus the revolution will begin, and our chief aim be attained."

"One can predict," the Irishman continued, "with some degree of
certainty, that Oliva*ez will not reject that proposal, which is nothing
but a continuation of his former plan, and of course, will flatter his
conceit. As soon as you shall have carried this point, you must
endeavour to effect the promulgation of the edict against the nobility;
which will be no difficult task, if you pretend to have been informed by
letters from Por***al, that the major part of the nobility is entirely
devoted to the Duke, and will support him if a revolt should break
out.--Hence you may draw the conclusion that the fermentation in
Por***al will never cease, and the wisest measures against him, though
ever so successful, will not have the desired effect, while the nobility
shall not be employed somewhere else, and forced to submit to the edict
by which they are ordered to enter into the service of Sp**n. I advise
you, at the same time, to add, that the indulgence which has been shewn
to those who have refused to obey the proclamation of the Court, will
render the nobility more daring, and the Duke of Brag**za more
dangerous. In short, you must exert every power of persuasion to incite
the minister to renew and to enforce that edict."

After a short pause the Irishman added:--"This advice would appear
suspicious, if proposed by any other person but yourself. You have
gained, already, his confidence to such a degree, that it will derive
additional strength from your apparent zeal. And indeed every thing that
can contribute to remove all traces of suspicion from you concurs in
your person! The proposals which you are to make have not only the
appearance of destroying the design of the Duke and the conspirators,
but you have also been on your travels when they were fabricated, and of
course, cannot be suspected of having the least share in them. While you
have been here your time has been spent in amusements and diversions,
how could you, therefore, be supposed to have been capable of paying any
attention to deep laid intrigues of state? On the contrary, the minister
is no stranger to your father's fidelity to the King of Sp**n, and to
the secret hatred which your family harbours against the Duke of
Brag**za; how could, therefore, your proposal appear to him otherwise
than natural and sincere? Your friendship for Velas*os alone would be
sufficient to make him believe so."

"I need not remind you," added the Irishman, when he was going to leave
me, "not to forget to interest the Secretary of State, Suma*ez, for your
transactions."

"But suppose," I replied, "I should acquit myself of my charge to your
satisfaction, how am I to conceal the matter from my father?"

The Irishman replied after a momentary consideration: "If the minister
should approve your proposals, you must request him frankly not to
mention any thing to the Marquis, pretending to intend to surprise him
in an agreeable manner, by an oral account, when the whole affair shall
be happily concluded."

Before he took leave, he enjoined me to be circumspect, courageous, and
active.

I cannot say whether it was owing to the execution of this advice, to
the facility of the task, or to favourable accidents, that I carried my
point without difficulty. The minister approved my plan; the Duke of
B----a received the above mentioned order along with 40,000 ducats, and
the edict concerning the nobility was renewed. However, the Duke of
B----a again escaped the snare. He did, indeed, execute the orders of
the Sp***sh court, travelled all over P****l, and observed every where
how the people were devoted to him; the money he had received, and the
power that was entrusted to him, enabled him to gain many friends, and
he entered the fortified towns so well escorted, that none of the
Sp***sh governors dared seize him.

The Irishman who gave me this information, provided me at the same time
with instructions how to act if the minister should complain of the
miscarriage of my plan, which soon happened. Oliva*ez acquainted me very
peevishly, with the bad success of our undertaking. "We may yet carry
our point," I replied, after some reflection, with seeming unconcern.
"If you wish to pursue your plan, you may easily lay a new snare for
him, from which the Duke will not be able to extricate himself. You have
the best opportunity of sending him an order to repair to Mad**d, and to
make to his Majesty an oral report of the state of Port**l."

The minister approved of this advice, and carried it into execution
without delay. The Duke of B----a, who was well aware that the order
from the Sp***sh court could not be declined any longer, sent his
Chamberlain to Mad**d in order to hire a palace, to engage a number of
servants, and to make every preparation for his pretended arrival, but
nevertheless did not come. One time he pleaded ill health, at another
time want of money; and at last, wished to know what rank he was to hold
at Mad**d. However, I was so fortunate as to guide the minister in such
a manner that every obstacle was removed at last, and the Duke received
6000 ducats for defraying the expences of his journey.

"Now," said the Irishman to me, "the Duke will find it impossible to
shift any longer, and either must repair to Mad**d, which he will take
care not to do, or give the signal for the revolution. Your business, my
Lord, is finished, and nothing further will be required of you than the
strictest secrecy. When your country will be free, we shall meet again,
and then you may expect to see all my promises accomplished."

  (_To be continued._)



           *       *       *       *

      CURIOUS OBSERVATIONS ON MAKING LOVE.



               +From The Tatler.+

I fell in the other evening with a party who were engaged in examining
which was the handsomest style of addressing the Fair, and writing
Letters of Gallantry.--Many were the opinions immediately declared on
this subject: Some were for a certain softness; some for I know not what
of delicacy; others for something inexpressibly tender: When it came to
me, I said there was no rule in the world to be made for writing
Letters, but that of being as near what you speak face to face as you
can; which is so great a truth, that I am of opinion, writing has lost
more Mistresses than any one mistake in the whole legend of Love. For
when you write to a Lady for whom you have a solid and honourable Love,
the great idea you have of her, joined to a quick sense of her absence,
fills your mind with a sort of tenderness, that gives your language too
much the air of complaint, which is seldom successful. For a man may
flatter himself as he pleases, but he will find, that the women have
more understanding in their own affairs than we have, and women of
spirit are not to be won by mourners.--Therefore he that can keep
handsomely within rules, and support the carriage of a companion to his
mistress, is much more likely to prevail, than he who lets her see the
whole relish of his life depends upon her. If possible therefore, divert
your mistress, rather than sigh to her. The pleasant man she will desire
for her own sake; but the languishing lover has nothing to hope for but
her pity. To shew the difference I produced two Letters a Lady gave me,
which had been writ to her by two gentlemen who made love to her, but
were both killed the day after the date at the battle of _Almanza_. One
of them was a mercurial gay-humoured man; the other a man of a serious
but a great and gallant spirit. Poor _Jack Careless!_ This is his
letter: You see how it is folded: The air of it is so negligent, one
might have read half of it by peeping into it, without breaking it open.
He had no exactness.

  _MADAM_,

'It is a very pleasant circumstance I am in, that while I should be
thinking of the good company we are to meet within a day or two, where
we shall go to loggerheads, my thoughts are running upon a Fair Enemy in
_England_. I was in hopes I had left you there; but you follow the camp,
tho' I have endeavoured to make some of our leaguer Ladies drive you out
of the Field. All my comfort is, you are more troublesome to my Colonel
than myself: I permit you to visit me only now and then; but he
downright keeps you. I laugh at his honour as far as his gravity will
allow me; But I know him to be a man of too much merit to succeed with a
woman. Therefore defend your heart as well as you can, I shall come home
this winter irresistibly dressed, and with quite a new foreign air. And
so, I had like to say, I rest, but alas! I remain, _Madam_,

  _Your most Obedient, Most Humble Servant_,

    JOHN CARELESS.

Now for Colonel _Constant's_ Epistle; you see it is folded and directed
with the utmost care.

  _MADAM_,

'I do myself the honour to write to you this evening because I believe
to-morrow will be a day of battle, and something forebodes in my breast
that I shall fall in it. If it proves so, I hope you will hear I have
done nothing below a man who had a love of his country, quickened by a
passion for a woman of honour. If there be any thing noble in going to a
certain death; if there be any merit, I meet it with pleasure, by
promising myself a place in your esteem; if your applause, when I am no
more, is preferable to the most glorious life without you; I say, Madam,
if any of these considerations can have weight with you, you will give
me a kind place in your memory, which I prefer to the glory of _Caesar_.
I hope, this will be read, as it is writ, with tears.'

The beloved Lady is a woman of a sensible mind; but she has confessed to
me, that after all her true and solid value for _Constant_, she had much
more concern for the loss of _Careless_. Those great and serious spirits
have something equal to the adversities they meet with, and consequently
lessen the objects of pity. Great accidents seem not cut out so much for
men of familiar characters, which makes them more easily pitied, and
soon after beloved. Add to this, that the sort of love which generally
succeeds, is a stranger to awe and distance. I asked _Romana_, whether
of the two she should have chosen had they survived? She said, She knew
she ought to have taken _Constant_; but believed, she should have chosen
_Careless_.



  ARABIAN MAXIMS.

The monument which a wise man is ambitious to leave behind him, is not a
numerous posterity, but the lasting honours of a virtuous fame.

In learning to know yourself, you learn to know God.

Do good; and your reward shall be, if not the plaudits of men, the
approbation of God.

It is lost labour to endeavour to give understanding to him that has
none; especially, if he thinks himself more sensible than you.

Nobility does not consist in magnificence of dress or eminence of rank.
Art thou virtuous? Thou art sufficiently noble.

The life of man is a journal: good actions only should be written in it.

He who sows duplicity will reap calamity.

Whatever is not God, is nothing.

There are three things of which we cannot be certain but in three
circumstances; courage can be conspicuous only in the combat; wisdom,
when you are offended; and friendship, in adversity.



           *       *       *       *

  Interesting History Of
  _THE BARON DE LOVZINSKI._

  With a relation of the most remarkable occurrences in the life
  of the celebrated COUNT PULASKI, well known as the champion of
  American Liberty, and who bravely fell in its defence before
  Savannah, 1779.

  _Interspersed with Anecdotes of the late unfortunate KING of POLAND,
  so recently dethroned._

  (Continued from page 142.)

Titsikan was listening to the story of our misfortunes, with which he
appeared to be deeply affected, when one of his centinels approached,
and sounded an alarm. He immediately left us in great haste, on purpose
to run to the drawbridge. We heard a great tumult, and began already to
presage some inauspicious event.

While we remained plunged in consternation,---"Lovzinski, Lodoiska,
cowardly and perfidious pair!" exclaims Dourlinski, unable to contain
his joy---"you have hoped to be able to elude my vengeance, and escape
my chastisement. Tremble! you are once more about to fall into my hands.
At the noise of my captivity and misfortunes, the neighbouring nobility
are undoubtedly assembled, and have now come to succour me."

"---They can only revenge you, villain!" cries Boleslas, interrupting
him in the midst of his threats, and seizing, at the same time, an iron
bar, with which he prepared to knock him down; I, however, instantly
interposed and prevented him from executing this act of justice.

Titsikan returned in a few minutes: "It is only a false alarm," said he
to us; "it is nothing more than a small detachment which I dispatched
yesterday, on purpose to scour the country---they had orders to rejoin
me here; and they have brought me some prisoners: every thing is quiet,
and the neighbourhood does not appear to be in the least commotion."

While Titsikan yet spoke to me, a number of unfortunates, whose luckless
fate had delivered them into the hands of the enemy, were dragged before
him. We first beheld five, who, being unbound, walked by the side of
their conquerors, with a downcast and melancholy aspect. The Tartars
told us, that one of their companions had been overcome with great
difficulty, and that was the reason why he was bound hand and foot!

The sixth now appeared: "O Heavens! it is my father!" exclaims Lodoiska,
running at the same time towards him.---I, too, threw myself at the feet
of Pulaski. "Are you Pulaski?" says the Tartar chieftain, "'tis well;
the event is lucky! Believe me, my friend, it is not more than a quarter
of an hour since I first heard of you. I know however, that you are
proud and hot-headed, but no matter! I esteem you; you possess both
courage and abilities; your daughter is beautiful, and does not want for
understanding; Lovzinski is brave---braver than myself, as I have
already experienced. Attend to what I am about to say----"

Pulaski, motionless with astonishment, scarcely heard the sound of the
Tartar's voice; and struck, at the same time, with the strange spectacle
that offered itself to his view, he began to conceive the most horrible
suspicions.

He repulsed my caresses with the most significant disgust: "Wretch!"
exclaims he at length, "you have betrayed your country, a woman who
loved you, a man who prided himself in calling you his son-in-law; it
was only wanting to fill up the measure of your crimes, that you should
league with robbers!"

"With robbers!" cries Titsikan---"with robbers indeed, if it so please
you to call us: but you yourself must acknowledge that description of
people to be good for something; for without me, perhaps, your daughter,
by to-morrow's sun, would no longer have been a maiden! Be not alarmed,"
said he, addressing himself to me: "but I know that he is proud, and I
therefore am not angry."

We had by this time placed Pulaski in a chair; his daughter and myself
bathed his manacles with our tears; but he still continued to frown at
and to overwhelm me with reproaches.

"What can you wish for?" cries the Tartar, once more addressing his
captive: "I tell you that Lovzinski is a brave man, whom I intend to see
married; and as for your Dourlinski, he is a rogue, whom I am about to
order to be hanged.

"I repeat to you once more, that you alone are more _hot-headed_ than us
three put together. But hear me, and let us finish this business, for it
is necessary that I should depart. You belong to me by the most
incontestible right, that of the sword. But if you promise me, upon your
honour, that you will be sincerely reconciled to Lovzinski, and give
your daughter to him for a wife, I will restore you to your liberty."

"He who can brave death," replies the haughty Pulaski, "can support
slavery. My daughter shall never be the wife of a traitor."

"Do you love better that she should be a Tartar's mistress?---If you do
not promise to give her, within the space of eight days, to this brave
man, I myself shall espouse her this very night! When I am weary of you
and of her, I will sell you to the Turks. Your daughter is handsome
enough to find admittance into the _haram_ of a bashaw: and you yourself
may perhaps superintend the kitchen of some janissary."

"My life is in your hands; do with it whatsoever you please. If Pulaski
falls beneath the sword of a Tartar, he will be lamented, and even his
enemies will agree that he merits a more glorious destiny: but if he
were to consent: No! no! I rather choose---I prefer death!"

"I do not desire your death! I wish only that Lovzinski should espouse
Lodoiska. What!---Shall my prisoner give the law to me? By my
sabre!---this dog of a Christian---but I am in the wrong---he is
furious, and is assuredly deprived of his reason."

I now beheld the Tartar's eyes sparkle with fury, and therefore recalled
to his memory the promise he had made me, that he would not give way to
his passion.

"Undoubtedly! but this man wearies out the patience of a favourite of
our prophet! I am but a robber!---Yet Pulaski, I repeat it to you again,
that it is my command that Lovzinski espouse your daughter. By my sabre,
he has fairly gained her; but for him she had been burnt last night."

"But for him!"

"Yes! Behold those ruins; there stood a tower in that place; it was on
fire, and no person dared to ascend it: he, however, mounted the
stair-case, attended by Boleslas---and they saved your daughter!"

"Was my daughter in that tower?"

"Yes! that hoary villain had confined her there; that hoary villain, who
attempted to violate her!---Some of you must relate the whole to him;
but make haste, as it is necessary that he should decide instantly;
I have business elsewhere, for I do not intend that your militia* shall
surprise me here: it is otherwise in the plains; there I should laugh at
them."

  [* The troops stationed on purpose to watch over the safety of the
  frontiers of Podolia and Volhnia, and preserve them from the
  incursions of the Tartars, are called Quartuaires.]

While Titsikan ordered the rich booty which he had taken, to be stowed
in little covered waggons, Lodoiska informed her father of the crimes of
Dourlinski, and mingled the recital of our affection so artfully with
the history of her misfortunes, that nature and gratitude at one and the
same time began to besiege the heart of Pulaski.

Affected in the most lively manner with the misfortunes of his daughter,
and sensible of the important services which I had rendered her, he
embraces Lodoiska, and at length beholding me without resentment, he
seemed to wait impatiently for an opportunity to be reconciled to me.

"O Pulaski!" I exclaim, "you whom Heaven hath left me, on purpose to
console me for the loss of the best of fathers; you for whom I have an
equal friendship and veneration; why hast thou condemned thy children
unheard? Why hast thou supposed a man who adores thy daughter, guilty of
the most horrible treason?

"When my vows were offered up in favour of that prince who now fills the
throne, I swear to you, Pulaski, by her whom I love so tenderly, that I
looked upon his elevation to be an event highly auspicious to the
happiness, the safety, and the prosperity of my country.

"The misfortunes which my youth did not foresee, thy experience had
anticipated: but because I have been wanting in prudence, ought you to
accuse me of perfidy? Ought you to have reproached me for loving my
friend? Can you now look upon it as a crime, that I still give him my
esteem? For the three last months, I have beheld the misfortunes of my
country in the same point of view as yourself: like you, I have mourned
over them; but I am sure that the king is still ignorant of their
extent, and I shall go to Warsaw on purpose to inform him of all that I
have seen."

Pulaski here interrupts me:---"It is not there that you ought to repair:
you tell me that M. de P*** is not informed of the wrongs done to his
native country, and I believe you: but whether he is acquainted with, or
whether he is entirely ignorant of them, is now but of little
consequence. Insolent foreigners, cantoned throughout our provinces,
strive to maintain themselves in the republic, even against the king,
whom they have caused to be elected. It is no longer in the power of an
impotent or a mal-content king, to chase the Russians from my country!

"Let us trust only to ourselves, Lovzinski; and let us either avenge our
country, or die in her defence. I have assembled 4000 noble Poles in the
palatinate of Lublin, who wait but for the return of their general, to
march against the Russians: follow me to my camp----on this condition I
am your friend, and my daughter shall be your wife!"

  (_To be continued._)




  CONJUGAL AFFECTION.

Lady Fanshaw, whose husband was Clerk of the Council to Charles the
First and Second, and translator of the Pastor Fido, relates the
following extraordinary circumstance in some MSS memoirs of herself,
addressed to her son. The transaction took place during a voyage that
Lady Fanshaw made from Galway to Malaga, in the spring of the year 1649.

"We pursued our voyage with prosperous winds.--When we had just passed
the Straits, we saw coming towards us, with full sails, a Turkish galley
well manned, and we believed we should be carried away slaves; for the
captain had so laden his ship with goods for Spain, that his guns were
useless, though the ship carried 60 guns. He called for brandy, and
after he had well drunken and all his men, which were near 200, he
called for arms, and cleared the deck as well as he could, resolving to
fight rather than lose his ship, which was worth 30,000l. This was sad
for us passengers, but my husband bid us be sure to keep in the cabin,
and not appear, which would make the Turks think we were a man of war,
but if they saw women, they would take us for merchants and detain us.
He went upon deck, and took a gun, a bandelier, and sword, expecting the
arrival of the Turkish man of war. The beast of a Captain had locked me
up in the cabin---I knocked and called to no purpose, until the
cabin-boy came and opened the door. I, all in tears, desired him to be
so good as to give me his thrum cap and his tarred coat, which he did,
and I gave him half a crown, and putting them on, and flinging away my
night-clothes, I crept up softly, and stood upon the deck by my
husband's side, as free from sickness and fear as, I confess, of
discretion, but it was the effect of that passion which I could never
master. By this time the two vessels were engaged in parley, and so well
satisfied with speech and sight of each other's force, that the Turks
men tacked about, and we continued our course. But when your father saw
it convenient to retreat, looking upon me, he blessed himself, and
snatched me up in his arms, saying, "Good God, that love can make this
change!" and though he seemingly chid me, he would laugh at it as often
as he remembered that voyage."



           *       *       *       *

  _ANECDOTE_
  OF MRS. D'ARBLAY (LATE MISS BURNEY),

  The much admired Authoress of EVELINA, CECILIA, and a work of still
  greater merit, entitled CAMILLA; OR, A PICTURE OF YOUTH: the latter
  has but just appeared in London, is now in the press, and will
  shortly be published by the EDITOR.

Miss Burney, who has lately married M. D'Arblay, a French Emigrant, is
daughter to the late Dr. Burney, so well known in the annals of music.
At an early age she was passionately fond of reading novels, which drew
on her the censure of her father, who looked on those then extant, as
but ill calculated to afford any solid improvement or rational
amusement. Soon after, Miss Burney, without the knowledge of her parent,
wrote the much admired history of Evelina---, which was immediately
published in London, without disclosing the name of the author, as she
dreaded incurring her father's displeasure.

Dr. Burney, soon after the publication of Evelina, having accidentally
entered a bookseller's shop, was presented with this work, and strongly
recommended to purchase it; his general dislike to novels, prevented his
compliance, till strongly urged by the bookseller to give it even a
cursory review: but no sooner had he perused a few pages, than he made
his bargain, and having gone through the whole performance, he called
his daughter, and recommended it to her as the only production of the
kind that merited her attention; observing, that "the other books she so
much read, were entirely beneath her notice, but that he was now happy
in being able to present her with a novel, possessed of such intrinsic
merit, as to render it well worthy her most attentive perusal."

How great was Miss Burney's surprize, on being presented with the work
of her own pen, produced during many a stolen hour snatched from
pleasures or from sleep! yet how flattering and how grateful to her
sensible mind must the eulogium of so excellent a judge have proved!

Encouraged by his approbation, she disclosed the secret to the joy of a
doating parent, who felt proud at having a daughter possessed of a
genius capable of producing a piece which he deemed inimitable. Evelina
went through four editions in the course of the first year, and Cecilia
met with the most unbounded applause. The Queen, hearing so much in
favour of our heroine, gave her the appointment of reader to her
Majesty, with a large salary annexed, but interdicted her from
publishing any thing, as derogatory to the dignity of her station.

Her marriage with Mr. D'Arblay, a gentleman suited to so amiable a
partner, occasioned the loss of her place at court. This circumstance
may be considered as a very considerable advantage to the republic of
letters.

As the sun after a long concealment behind the darkening cloud, breaks
forth with redoubled lustre, to the joy and exhilaration of mankind---so
does this amiable writer appear to the votaries of taste and literature,
holding in her hand the interesting history of Camilla---depicting in
the most striking and variegated colours the feelings and propensities
of the youthful mind, whether actuated by the celestial principles
inspired by heaven, or stimulated by the bias of evil examples or
vicious inclinations. Nor does she here omit the opportunity of
displaying virtue in the most fascinating garb, while vice is depicted
in the most forbidding and hateful dress. The sentiments she here
inculcates, are of the most noble, refined and exalted nature---such as
if generally diffused, would contribute to instil in the heart of man,
the divine attributes of his maker, and render him as happy as would be
consistent with the frailty of his probationary state. In fine, we may
pronounce Camilla a _chef d'oeuvre_, worthy the perusal of all who are
desirous of rational entertainment, or anxious to have the feelings of
the heart awakened to impressions of the most delightful and charming
nature.




  _NEW-YORK._



    MARRIED,

On Wednesday last, by the Right Rev. Bishop Provost, Capt. ALEXANDER
DON, to the amiable Miss MARIA BERRIMEN, both of this city.

  That union sure, completely blest must prove,
  Founded on Virtue just esteem and love.
  Happy, thrice happy, may you be thro' life,
  He the best husband, you the kindest wife.

On Saturday evening last, by the Rev. Mr. Pilmore, Mr. WILLIAM SHATZEL,
to Miss ELSIE HALL, both of this city.




  LINES FROM THE REV. MR. BISHOP TO HIS WIFE,
  WITH A PRESENT OF A PENKNIFE

  A knife, dear girl, cuts love they say,
  Mere modish love perhaps it may:
  For any tool of any kind
  Can sep'rate what was never join'd--
  The knife that cuts our love in two
  Will have much tougher work to do;
  Must cut our softness, worth and spirit,
  Down to the vulgar size and merit;
  To level yours with modern taste,
  Must cut a world of sense to waste,
  And from your single beauty's store
  Chip what would dizen out a score.
  The self same blade from me must sever
  Sensation, judgment, sight forever!
  All mem'ry of endearments past,
  All hope of comfort long to last,
  All that makes fourteen years with you
  A summer--and a short one too;
  All that affection feels and fears,
  When hours without you, seem like years;
  Till that be done, (and I'd as soon
  Believe this knife will chip the moon)
  Accept my present undeterr'd,
  And leave their proverbs to the herd.

  If in a kiss (delicious treat)
  Your lips acknowledge the receipt,
  Love, fond of such substantial fare,
  And proud to play the glutton there,
  All thoughts of cutting will disdain,
  Save only--_cut and come again_.



           *       *       *       *

     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._



                    SONNET.

     Extracted from a Novel in Manuscript.

  Winter, thy reign is past, and graceful spring
    Comes all attir'd to bless expectant May;
  From every Vale the Zephyrs odours bring,
    And birds sit twittering on each budding spray.

  Wide stream the splendors from the Orb of Day,
    To warm the chilly bosom of the earth;
  While smiling FLORA, greets the genial ray,
    And calls her timid beauteous favourites forth.

  But I hail not the glories of the SUN,
    Nor bless the spicy breeze that skims the heath:
  For I, an exile, unbelov'd--unknown,
    Am hastening to the cold--cold realms of _death!_

  I sink into the grave without a name,
  The hapless victim of a Sacred Flame.

    ANNA.

      July 17th, 1796.




  THE EVE OF HYMEN.

  'Tis late--and my DELIA now hastens to rest,
    Rapt into sweet visions, I wander alone,
  Love soothes the fond wishes that glow in my breast,
    With transports, to wealth, and to grandeur unknown.

  Soft--soft be thy slumbers, dear, innocent fair,
    Descend, smiling peace, on my bosom's delight,
  Hope sheds her pure beams on each long nourish'd care,
    As day brightly dawns on the shadows of night.

  Reclin'd on her pillow, now mute is that voice,
    Whose sounds my affection insensibly stole,
  And clos'd are those eyes, in whose beams I rejoice,
    And veil'd are those lips which enrapture my soul.

  Conceal'd are those cheeks where luxuriantly glow
    The tenderest graces of beauty and youth,
  And hidden from me is that bosom of snow,
    The mansion of purity, virtue, and truth.

  She's absent, yet lovely and graceful to view,
    Kind fancy restores the fair pride of my heart,
  Spring calls forth the verdure of nature anew,
    Her smiles to my senses fresh pleasures impart.

  No more shall soft sorrow my verses inspire,
    Despondence has clouded my spirits too long
  In extacy sweeping the soul-breathing lyre,
    Love, Hymen, and rapture enliven my song.




  TO A VIOLET.

  Tho' from thy bank of velvet torn,
    Hang not, fair flower, thy drooping crest;
  On Delia's bosom shalt thou find
    A softer sweeter bed of rest.

  Tho' from mild Zephyr's kiss no more
    Ambrosial balms thou shalt inhale,
  Her gentle breath, whene'er she sighs,
    Shall fan thee with a purer gale.

  But thou be grateful for that bliss
    For which in vain a thousand burn,
  And, as thou stealest sweets from her,
    Give back thy choicest in return.



           *       *       *       *

  THE SNOW-DROP AND PRIMROSE.

  A Primrose, ever sweet to view,
  Beside a lovely Snow-drop grew.
  They were the boasted pride of Spring,
  Fann'd by the zephyr's balmy wing;
  Each thought itself the choicest flower
  That ever drank the spangled shower;
  And vied for beauty, fought for praise,
  Beneath the sun's resplendent rays.
  At length the Snow-drop, fraught with ire,
  Began to vent its jealous fire.

      'You, Primrose! are not blest as I,
    'Who can delight each gazing eye;
    'Superior beauties I may claim,
    'But you were born to meet disdain!
    'That yellow tinge which courts the air,
    'Is nothing but the type of care!
    'Review my innocence and worth,
    'Know that I sprung from purer earth;
    'While you from coarser mould arose--
    'The truth your fallow visage shows
    'A grov'ling paltry flow'r, and pale,
    'The jest of ev'ry nipping gale!
    'I am the youthful Poet's theme,
    'Of me the bard delights to dream;
    'In lofty verse he sings my praise,
    'And paints me in his choicest lays;
    'But you, the early bud of care,
    'Are never seen to flourish there!'

    The Primrose heard, with modest ear,
    And, 'Flow'r,' it said, 'tho' sprung so near,
    'I still coeval praise may claim,
    'Nor was I born to meet disdain!
    'Know that we both, tho' now so gay,
    'Shall soon be lost, and fade away;
    'And if for beauty's meed you vie,
    'What boots it? since next eve you die!
    'The Rose is lovely to behold.
    'The Cowslip too, which boasts of gold,
    'The Tulip and the Lilly fair,
    'All yield their fragrance to the air;
    'But soon their beauty fades away,
    'And then, proud Snow-drop, what are they?'

    Celia, be wise, from pride refrain,
  Nor of your matchless face be vain!
  Beauty is short, and soon you'll find,
  The greatest centers in the mind.
  Let Virtue be your sov'reign guide,
  Make her your friend, your boast and pride;
  Then will the brightest deed be done,
  And all the beauties shine in One.




  AN APPEAL.

  What must he---who in secret passion dies,
  Who doats, yet dares not to reveal his sighs?
  Love urges forward to declare his pain,
  Fear trembling chides his passion to restrain.
  Thus Love, more noble, towards Fate would bend,
  But Fear repels it least it should offend.
  What then, ye Gods! must he in secret pine,
  Or bravely dare and live---or life resign?


NEW-YORK: _+Printed by JOHN BULL, No. 115, Cherry-Street+, where every
Kind of Printing work is executed with the utmost Accuracy and
Dispatch.--+Subscriptions+ for this +Magazine+ (at 2s. per month) are
taken in at the Printing-Office, and by E. MITCHELL, Bookseller, No. 9,
Maiden-Lane._



           *       *       *       *



  _UTILE DULCI._

  THE NEW-YORK WEEKLY MAGAZINE;
  or, Miscellaneous Repository.

  +Vol. II.+]  +Wednesday, November 16, 1796.+  [+No. 72.+


  ON CONVERSATION.

That conversation may answer the ends for which it was designed, the
parties who are to join in it must come together with a determined
resolution to please, and to be pleased. If a man feels that an east
wind has rendered him dull and sulky, he should by all means stay at
home till the wind changes, and not be troublesome to his friends; for
dulness is infectious, and one sour face will make many, as one cheerful
countenance is soon productive of others. If two gentlemen desire to
quarrel, it should not be done in a company met to enjoy the pleasures
of conversation. It is obvious, for these reasons, that he who is about
to form a conversation party should be careful to invite men of
congenial minds, and of similar ideas respecting the entertainment of
which they are to partake, and to which they must contribute.

With gloomy persons, gloomy topics likewise should be (as indeed they
will be) excluded, such as ill health, bad weather, bad news, or
forebodings of such, &c. To preserve the temper calm and pleasant, it is
of unspeakable importance that we always accustom ourselves thro' life
to make the best of things, to view them on their bright side, and to
represent them to others, for our mutual comfort and encouragement. Few
things (especially if, as christians, we take the other world into
account) but have a bright side; diligence and practice will easily find
it. Perhaps there is no circumstance better calculated than this to
render conversation equally pleasing and profitable.

In the conduct of it, be not eager to interrupt others, or uneasy at
being yourself interrupted; since you speak either to amuse or instruct
the company, or to receive those benefits from it. Give all, therefore,
leave to speak. Hear with patience, and answer with precision.
Inattention is ill manners; it shews contempt; contempt is never
forgiven.

Trouble not the company with your own private concerns, as you do not
love to be troubled with those of others. Yours are as little to them,
as theirs are to you. You will need no other rule whereby to judge of
this matter.

Contrive, but with dexterity and propriety, that each person may have an
opportunity of discoursing on the subject with which he is best
acquainted. He will be pleased, and you will be informed. By observing
this rule, every one has it in his power to assist in rendering
conversation agreeable; since, though he may not choose or be qualified,
to say much himself, he can propose questions to those who are able to
answer them.

Avoid stories, unless short, pointed, and quite _a-propos_. He who deals
in them, says Swift, must either have a very large stock, or a good
memory, or must often change his company. Some have a set of them strung
together like onions; they take possession of the conversation by an
early introduction of one; and then you must have the whole rope; and
there is an end of every thing else, perhaps, for that meeting, though
you may have heard all twenty times before.

Talk _often_ but not _long_. The talent of haranguing in private company
is insupportable. Senators and barristers are apt to be guilty of this
fault; and members, who never harangue in the house, will often do it
out of the house. If the majority of the company be naturally silent, or
cautious, the conversation will flag, unless it be often renewed by one
among them who can start new subjects. Forbear, however, if possible, to
broach a second before the first is out, lest your stock should not
last, and you should be obliged to come back to the old barrel. There
are those who will repeatedly cross upon, and break into the
conversation with a fresh topic, till they have touched upon all, and
exhausted none. Oeconomy here is necessary for most people.

Laugh not at your own wit and humour; leave that to the company.

When the conversation is flowing in a serious and useful channel, never
interrupt it by an ill-timed jest. The stream is scattered, and cannot
be again collected.

Discourse not in a whisper, or half voice, to your next neighbour. It is
ill breeding, and, in some degree, a fraud; conversation-stock being, as
one has well observed, a joint and common property.

In reflexions on absent people, go no farther than you would go if they
were present. 'I resolve,' says bishop Beveridge, 'never to speak of a
man's virtues to his face, nor of his faults behind his back;' a golden
rule! the observation of which would, at one stroke, banish flattery and
defamation from the earth.



           *       *       *       *

  THE VICTIM OF MAGICAL DELUSION;
  _OR, INTERESTING MEMOIRS OF MIGUEL, DUKE DE CA*I*A._
  Unfolding Many Curious Unknown Historical Facts.

  _Translated from the German of Tschink._

  (Continued from page 147.)

I thanked him, and when he was going to leave me, asked him, "how does
our royal hermit do?"

"He----is well, and you shall hear from him as soon as the Duke of
B----a shall have dispossessed the King of Sp---n of the throne of
P---t------."

"But my old friend------"

"Will soon press you again to his bosom."

"And Amelia?"

"Considering the terms on which you already are with her, you will not
be in want of the assistance of my power." So saying, he took,
a friendly leave of me.

It was indeed high time that the Irishman released me from my
engagement, for my stay at Mad---d began so grow extremely irksome to
me. An irresistible power urged me to return to her who had inthralled
me with magic bonds. My separation from her, and the letters I received
from the dear woman, had heated my passion to the highest degree. Her
letters, breathing nothing but tenderness and affection, were indeed
entirely destitute of that fiery impetuosity of love which characterised
mine; however, this was just adding fuel to the flame, which consumed
me. I felt that I could not live without her. She did not indeed
encourage my hope of getting possession of her hand, yet she did not
repel it entirely, and several hints which Lady Delier had given me,
served to support it. I was already computing with rapture the effect
which my unexpected arrival would produce on Amelia, and made the
necessary preparation, for my return to her without apprising her of it;
however, my soul preceded these preparations, and only the lesser part
of it was remaining at Mad---d; no wonder therefore, that the letters of
my father, and the Marquis of Ferei*a, which recalled me to Port----l,
had no effect upon me.

"I cannot divine," the Marquis wrote to me, "what may have induced your
father to return this year to the capital much earlier than usual.
However, I can tell you that you will scarcely know him again when you
shall see him. Ever since he pretends to have seen the ghost of Count
Santeval, he is changed most wonderfully. He is in a state of utter
apathy, gloomy and reserved, and I may truly say, superstitious. He
avoids, since his late illness, as much as decency will permit, all
conversation, even mine. There is but one person who has free access to
him, and seems to have possessed himself entirely of his confidence. Let
me give you a description of that man.

"Imagine to yourself an elderly man above the middle size, with a long,
thin face, a yellow complexion, a strongly-furrowed brow, hollow, small,
and red eyes, and staring, almost deadened features, which, when he
smiles, changes into a kind of grinning. This physiognomy, of which no
faithful verbal description can be given, and which has been stamped in
a most unfavourable manner by nature's forming hand, is softened by an
affected air of piety; however, if examined minutely and narrowly, peeps
with increased horrors through the borrowed veil. This countenance
appears to me like a dreadful mystery, and I cannot behold it without
secret terror. The _tout ensemble_ of that man exactly fits this
head---a sneaking gait--a stooping neck--a grey coat---but you must and
will see him yourself. I hate him from the bottom of my soul, and think
that he is not capable of a good action, and that his mere presence must
be sufficient to dispel even from the hearts of others every noble
sentiment. It would be a mystery to me, how your father can converse
with him, if I did not know that he has been blinded by his hypocrisy
and devout discourses. That man (he calls himself _Alumbrado_) pretends
to be regenerated, and talks a great deal of the gifts of supernatural
light. Your father, who takes for sterling truth whatever comes from his
lips, seems to be more charmed with him every day. O hasten, my friend,
to deliver your father from this ignoble, and, as I fear, dangerous
enchantment. I think that an emotion like that which the sight of you
after so long a separation, must cause in the mind of your father will
be necessary to rouse from his apathy, &c. &c. &c."

My situation rendered this letter, as I have already mentioned,
ineffectual. The apprehensions of the Marquis appeared to me
exaggerated; his unfavourable judgment of Alumbrado, originating from
physiognomical reasons, unjust, and uncharitable, and my father old and
sensible enough to see and avoid the danger, if any should be existing.
I deemed the return to the Countess much more pressing than the journey
to P--------l, took leave of Oliva*z and Suma*ez, assuring them that the
affair concerning the Duke of B----a had been pushed to a point where it
soon would come to a crisis without our assistance. They were of the
same opinion, and dismissed me in a very obliging manner.

I had already made every preparation for setting out the next morning,
when a letter from Amelia and Lady Delier defeated my design. The former
informed me that a pressing letter from her uncle, who was on the brink
of eternity, and desired to see her once more before his death, rendered
it necessary for her to hasten to Cadiz. In the letter of the Baroness,
which, amongst others, contained the direction of the Countess at Cadiz,
the portrait of Amelia was enclosed.

Amelia's portrait! the image of those heavenly charms, the contemplation
of which would afford delight even to angels, and the lifeless imitation
of which filled my soul with rapture. O! with what an unspeakable
delight did my entranced eyes imbibe them! how did the sight of him
recall to my enraptured bosom all those sweet emotions which the
presence of the original had formerly excited in my breast.

This softened the blow which repelled me so suddenly from the port of
happiness which I fancied I had almost reached. Alas! this blow
inflicted a deep wound on my heart, which at once found all the sweet
presentments of meeting again changed into the nameless throes of a new
separation. However, the sight of the picture representing to me the
absent darling of my heart, and the secret meaning of that gift gave me
some comfort, and inspired me with new hopes. Who else but my Amelia
could have sent me that present? Her letter did, indeed contain only a
few distant hints, and the picture was enclosed in that of Lady Delier;
yet this did not misguide me, for I was too well acquainted with
Amelia's delicacy. I resolved now to return to my father, and to prepare
him for my union with the Countess.

I acted wisely in surprising him by my sudden arrival, for otherwise he
would, probably, not have received me with that kindness to which my
unexpected appearance impelled him. No sooner were the first moments of
mutual fondness past, when he said, with apparent coldness, "the world
must have had very irresistible charms for you?"

"The charms of novelty, my dear father."

"It must have been very painful to you to return to your paternal house;
for it seems you had almost forgot your way homeward."

"I had much to see, and have experienced a great deal!"

"I do not doubt it; you have had very little leisure for thinking of
your father."

I endeavoured to refute his reproach which I had expected, and succeeded
pretty well. The Marquis grew warmer and more affectionate; he enquired
after my tutor and Count Clairval. It seemed to wound him deeply that I
could give no satisfactory account of the former. With regard to the
latter, I told him that important family affairs had called him from me
unexpectedly.

My father appeared then not to be in a favourable disposition for
listening to an account of my connection with the Countess, and how
strongly soever the impulse of my heart pressed me to speak on that
subject, yet prudence advised me to wait for a more favourable
opportunity. The following morning appeared to me propitious for that
purpose. My father was very cheerful, and I contrived being surprised by
him with Amelia's picture in my hand.

"What have you there?" he asked me.

"The picture of the Dowager Countess of Clairval."

"How far is she related to your travelling companion?"

"She was married to his brother."

"So young, and already a widow?" said he, looking at the picture;
"I should have mistaken it for the picture of a girl of seventeen years.
However, the painters are used to flatter."

"I assure you, the original possesses numberless charms which have
escaped the artist."

"Then the Countess must be extremely handsome."

"She is an angel."

"The face is more interesting than handsome."

"Handsome and interesting to a high degree."

"You are in love with her."

"My father--"

"I should be very sorry at it."

"For what reason?" I asked, thunderstruck.

"The young Princess of L**** --what do you think of her?"

"I don't like her at all."

"This would grieve me extremely, for I have chosen her for your wife."

"My heart has already chosen. Your consent, my father--"

"The Countess of Clairval? Never!"

"You don't know her. Her family and fortune are very considerable."

"I hope you will not liken her, in that respect, to the Princess
of L****?"

"Not at all! but the amiable character of the Countess--"

"The character of the Princess is without blame. My dear son, consider
the splendor and the honour which our family would derive from that
alliance. Consider that you will render me happy by that union. When
you, by my desire, broke off your connection with a certain Darbis, you
revived my hope of seeing you allied to the family of L****; do not
thwart my plan by a new love, do not cross my fondest wishes. You are,
indeed, your own master, and may chuse for yourself; you must, however,
not expect my consent and a father's blessing, if you do not marry the
Princess of L****. I am sensible that it will give you pain to renounce
the Countess, and for that reason will not press you farther at present.
I shall not desire you to come to a resolution before the end of seven
weeks. Till then, do not mention a word about the matter."

Seeing that I was going to reply, he took me by the hand. "Be a man,"
said he, "who knows how to conquer juvenile passions. Gain my regard as
you have gained my affection. My life is joyless, do not make me hate
it. My dear son, I have sacrificed much for you, sacrifice now in return
a little for your father!" So saying, he left me.

  (_To be continued._)




  MAXIM.

False appearances of profit are the greatest enemies to true interest.
Future sorrows present themselves in the disguise of present pleasures,
and short-sighted folly eagerly embraces the deceit.



           *       *       *       *

     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._



               REMARKS ON MUSIC.

  (Continued from page 140.)

The monaulos, or single flute, called by the Egyptions photinx, was
probably one of the most ancient instruments used either by them or any
other nation. From various remains of ancient sculpture, it appears to
have been shaped like a bull's horn, and was at first, it may be
supposed, no other than the horn itself.---Before the invention of
flutes, as no other instruments except those of percussion were known,
music must have been little more than metrical, when the art of refining
and lengthening sounds was first discovered, the power of Music over
mankind, from the agreeable surprize occasioned by soft and extended
notes was probably irresistable. At a time when all the rest of the
world was involved in savage ignorance, the Egyptians were possessed of
musical instruments capable of much variety and expression.----Of this
the astonishing remains of the city of Thebes, still subsisting, afford
ample evidence. In a letter from Mr. Bruce, ingrossed in Dr. Burney's
history of Music, there is given a particular description of the Theban
harp, an instrument of extensive compass, and exquisite elegance of
form. It is accompanied with a drawing taken from the ruins of an
ancient sepulchre at Thebes, supposed by Mr. Bruce, to be that of the
father of Sesostris.

On the subject of this harp, Mr. Bruce makes the following striking
observation. "It overturns all the accounts of the earliest state of
ancient music, and instruments in Egypt, and is altogether in its form,
ornaments, and compass, an incontestable proof, stronger than a thousand
Greek quotations, that geometry, drawing, mechanics, and music, were at
the greatest perfection when this harp was made; and that what we think
in Egypt was the invention of arts, was only the beginning of the era of
their restoration."

Indeed, when the beauty and powers of this harp, along with the very
great antiquity of the painting which represents it, are considered,
such an opinion as that which Mr. Bruce hints at, does not seem to be
devoid of probability.

It cannot be doubted, that during the reigns of the Ptolemies, who were
voluptuous Princes, Music must have been much cultivated and encouraged.
The father of Cleopatra, who was the last of that race of Kings, derived
his title of Auletes, or flute player, from excessive attachment to the
flute. Like Nero, he used to array himself in the dress of a Tibicien,
and exhibited his performance in the public musical contests.

The Greeks are indebted to the Egyptians for their knowledge of music;
Homer, the most ancient author unconnected with the sacred writers, has
given us very striking descriptions of the efficacy of music. We are
told Apollo invented the Lyre, and instructed Orpheus to play upon it.
The Lyric and Dramatic poets were all after the time of Homer,
proficients in music, and in all probability contributed much to the
perfection of that art in Greece. We are well assured, that in the days
of Philip, and his son Alexander the Great, Music had arrived to its
highest degree of perfection. From Greece it made its way to Rome, and
from Rome it spread abroad over all the countries of Europe.

  A. O.

  (_To be continued._)




  ON CONTENTMENT.

The world has been often, and properly enough, compared to a theatre, in
which men step forth to public view, and act their several parts. These
parts are allotted by the Governor of the Universe, who best knows the
characters to which we are suited; and it is our greatest wisdom to
acquiesce in them, and to endeavour to sustain them with propriety,
whilst we are upon the stage of this life.---Happiness is distributed
with a more impartial hand than we generally imagine. It consists not in
the possession of riches and honours, in outward shew and splendor: it
is something internal. It is seated in the mind, and if we seek it
elsewhere, we shall seek it in vain. The contented peasant in his humble
cot is happy with a sufficiency, whilst the greatest Lord in the
Universe, in the midst of all his wealth and grandeur, is often a prey
to anxiety and discontent. Does not the poor beggar, with all his
apparent want, frequently enjoy more real happiness than the rich miser
in the midst of his abundance? The latter is continually tormented with
the fear of losing his superfluous treasures: eager of adding to his
store, he even denies himself common necessaries, and leads a miserable
life; whilst the former, unmindful of future wants, is heard to sing
over his scanty meal. Contentment is a most valuable blessing. It is the
sovereign medicine of afflictions. By bearing them with patience and
resignation, we in a great measure lessen their weight, and are better
prepared to withstand any future adverse stroke of fortune. But instead
of alleviating, we only add to our troubles by repining. Often do we
wantonly contrive to be our own tormentors, by looking with an envious
ill-natured eye, upon the condition of others, or by contemplating only
the dark side of our own. Often, too often, do we reject our own
happiness, by neglecting every substantial blessing that is within our
reach; and court misery, by creating imaginary wants to ourselves, and
hunting after some fugitive enjoyment, which, like a shadow always flies
from us in proportion to the swiftness with which it is pursued.




  TASTE.

The force of custom, of fancy, and of casual associations is very great
both upon the external and internal taste. An Eskimaux can regale
himself with a draught of whale-oil, and a Canadian can feast upon a
dog. A Kamtschatkadale lives upon putrid fish, and is sometimes reduced
to eat the bark of trees. The taste of rum or green tea, is at first as
nauseous as that of ipecacuanha to some persons, who may be brought by
use to relish what they once found so disagreeable.



           *       *       *       *

  Interesting History Of
  _THE BARON DE LOVZINSKI._

  With a relation of the most remarkable occurrences in the life
  of the celebrated COUNT PULASKI, well known as the champion of
  American Liberty, and who bravely fell in its defence before
  Savannah, 1779.

  _Interspersed with Anecdotes of the late unfortunate KING of POLAND,
  so recently dethroned._

  (Continued from page 150.)

"Pulaski, I am ready to obey you: I swear to follow your fortunes, and
to participate in your dangers. And think not that it is Lodoiska alone,
who has exacted from me this oath: I love my country as much as I adore
thy daughter; I swear by her, and before you, that the enemies of the
republic have always been, and shall never cease to be mine: I swear
that I will spill the very last drop of my blood, to chase those
foreigners out of Poland, who reign there in the name of its king!"

"Embrace me, Lovzinski! I now recognise you; I adopt you for my
son-in-law--My children, all our misfortunes are at an end!"

Pulaski desired me to unite my hand to Lodoiska's, in token of our
union; and we were embracing the brave palatine at the very moment that
Titsikan re-entered.

"Good! good!" exclaims the chieftain: this is what I wished; I am fond
of marriages. Father, I shall instantly order you to be unbound.

"By my sabre!" adds the Tartar, while his followers were cutting the
cords with which the hands and feet of Pulaski were tied; "by my sabre!
I shall do a noble action, but it will cost me a world of wealth! Two
grandees of Poland! a beautiful maiden! They would have produced me a
large ransom!"

"Titsikan, such a thought is not worthy of you!" says Pulaski,
interrupting him.

"No! no!" rejoins the Tartar, "it is a mere reflection only---it is one
of those ideas which a robber cannot prevent.---My brave and unfortunate
friends, I demand nothing from you---nay, more, you shall not retire on
foot; I have some charming horses, with which I intend to present
you.---And, for this lady, if you please. I will give you a litter, on
which I myself have been carried for these last ten or twelve days. This
young man here had given me such a wound, that I could no longer sit on
horseback.---The litter is indeed a bad one, clumsily constructed, by
means of branches of trees; but I have nothing except that or a little
covered waggon, to offer you: choose which ever of them you please."

In the mean time, Dourlinski, who had not as yet uttered a single word,
remained with his eyes fixed upon the ground, while an air of
consternation was spread over his countenance.

"Unworthy friend!" says Pulaski to him, "how could you so cruelly abuse
the confidence I reposed in you? Were you not afraid to expose yourself
to my resentment? What demon blinded you?"

"Love!" replies Dourlinski, "an outrageous love! You, perhaps, do not
comprehend to what excess the passions may hurry on a man, violent and
jealous by nature. This frightful example, however, ought to teach you,
that a daughter so charming as yours is a treasure which one ought not
to entrust to any person.

"Pulaski, I have, indeed, merited your hatred; but I am still worthy of
your pity. I have rendered myself exceedingly culpable; but you behold
me cruelly punished. I lose, in one single day, my rank, my riches, my
honour, my liberty! more than all this, I lose thy daughter!

"O, Lodoiska! lovely maiden, whom I have so much outraged, will you
deign to forget my persecutions, your danger, and your grief? Will you
deign to grant to me a generous pardon?

"Ah! if there are no crimes which a sincere repentance cannot expiate,
Lodoiska, I am no longer criminal. I would I were able, at the price of
all my blood, to redeem those tears which I have occasioned you to shed.
Amidst the horrible state to which Dourlinski is about to be reduced,
shall he not be permitted to carry with him the consoling recollection
of having heard you tell him, that he is no longer odious to you?

"Too amiable, and until this present moment, too unfortunate maiden!
however great my wrongs may have been in regard to you, I have it in my
power to repair them all by means of a single word---advance---approach
me---I have a secret which can only be entrusted to your private ear: it
is exceedingly important that it should be revealed to you!"

Lodoiska, without the least distrust, now leaves my side, and advances
towards him without suspicion.

At that very moment I beheld a poniard glittering in the hand of
Dourlinski!

I precipitate myself upon him.---It was too late; for I could only parry
the second thrust; and the lovely Lodoiska, wounded immediately above
the left breast, had already fallen senseless at the feet of Titsikan!

Pulaski, furious at the horrid treason, drew his sabre quick as
lightning, on purpose to avenge his daughter's fate.

"No! no!" exclaims the Tartar, at the same time withholding his arm:
"you are about to make this wretch suffer too gentle a death!"

"It is well," says the infamous assassin, addressing himself to me, and
at the same time contemplating his victim with a cruel joy. "Lovzinski
you appeared but now eager to be united with Lodoiska; why do you not
follow her? Go, my too happy rival, go and accompany your mistress to
the tomb! Let them prepare my _punishment_; it will appear pleasant to
me: I leave you to torments no less cruel, and infinitely longer than
mine."

Dourlinski was not allowed to utter another sentence, for the Tartars
rushed in upon him, and threw him into the midst of the burning ruins.


What a night! how many different cares, how many opposite sentiments
agitated my unhappy mind during its continuance! How many times did I
experience the successive emotions of fear, hope, grief and joy! After
so many dangers and inquietudes, Lodoiska was at length presented to me
by her father, and I was intoxicated with the near hope of possessing
her:---a barbarian had but now assassinated her in my pretence!

This was the most cruel and unfortunate moment of any during the whole
course of my life!---But my happiness eclipsed, as it were, in a single
instant, was not long in shining forth with all its former splendor.

Amidst the Tartars belonging to Titsikan, was one somewhat conversant in
surgery. We sent for him; on his arrival he examines the wound, and
assures us that it is but a slight one. The infamous Dourlinski,
constrained by his chains, and blinded by his despair, had happily been
prevented from giving any other than an ill-directed blow.

As soon as Titsikan was informed that the life of Lodoiska was not in
any danger, he prepared to take leave of us.

"I leave you," said he, "the five domestics who accompanied Pulaski;
provisions for several days, arms, six excellent horses, two covered
waggons, and the people belonging to Dourlinski in chains. Their base
lord is no more! Adieu! the day is about to appear; do not leave this
place until to-morrow; I shall then visit the other cantons. Adieu,
brave Poles! tell to your countrymen that Titsikan is not so bad as he
has been represented to them; and that he sometimes restores with one
hand what he takes with another. Adieu!"

At these words he lifts his hand to his head, and having saluted us
gracefully after the manner of his country, he gives the signal to
depart: the Tartars mount their fleet coursers in an instant, pass along
the drawbridge, and make for the neighbouring plain at a full gallop.

They had been gone scarcely two hours when several of the neighbouring
nobility, supported by a detachment of militia, came on purpose to
invest the castle of Dourlinski.

Pulaski himself went out to receive them: he related the particulars of
all that had occurred; and some, gained over by his eloquence, promised
to follow us to the palatinate of Lublin.

They asked for only two days to prepare every thing necessary for the
expedition, and actually came and rejoined us at the appointed time, to
the number of sixty.

Lodoiska having assured us that she was now able to undergo the fatigues
of a journey, we placed her in a commodious carriage, which we had
luckily been able to procure for this purpose.

After having restored Dourlinski's people to liberty, we abandon the two
covered waggons to them, in which Titsikan, acting with his usual
generosity, had left part of his immense booty: this we divided among
them in equal proportions.

We arrived, without meeting with any accident, at Polowisk, in the
Palatinate of Lublin, this being the place which Pulaski had appointed
for the general rendezvous.

The news of his return having gone abroad, a crowd of malecontents in
the space of less than a month flocked to and increased our little army
to such a degree, that we soon found it to amount to no less than 10,000
men.

Lodoiska entirely cured of her wound, and perfectly recovered from her
fatigues, had regained her usual spirits, and appeared in possession of
all her former beauty. Pulaski one day called me into his tent, and
spoke as follows. "Three thousand Russians have appeared, as you well
know, upon the heights above, and at no greater distance than half a
league from us: take, in the course of the ensuing night, three thousand
chosen men, and go and chase the enemy from the advantageous posts which
they now occupy. Recollect that on the success of a first attempt
depends almost always that of the campaign; recollect that you are about
to avenge your country's wrongs; recollect too, my friend, that
to-morrow I shall learn thy victory, and that to-morrow also thou shalt
espouse Lodoiska!"

  (_To be continued._)




  THE FIERY ORDEAL;
  A Judicial Anecdote.

Towards the end of the Greek Empire at Constantinople, a general, who
was an object of suspicion to his master, was urged to undergo the fiery
proof of the Ordeal by an archbishop, a subtle courtier. The ceremony
was this; three days before the trial the patient's arm was inclosed in
a bag, and secured by the royal signet; he was expected to bear a red
hot ball of iron three times, from the altar to the rails of the
sanctuary, without artifice and injury. The general eluded the
experiment with pleasantry. 'I am a soldier,' said he, 'and will boldly
enter the lists with my accusers; but a layman, a sinner like myself, is
not endowed with the gift of miracles. Your piety, holy prelate, may
deserve the interposition of heaven, and from your hands I will receive
the fiery globe, the test of my innocence.' The archbishop stared, the
emperor smiled, and the general was pardoned.




  POWER.

Power is no good quality by itself; it is the Power of doing good,
alone, that is desirable to the wise. All vice is selfishness, and the
meanest is that which is most contractedly selfish.

Great minds can reconcile sublimity to good-humour; in weak ones, it is
generally coupled with severity and moroseness.

Sublime qualities men admire; they love the gentler virtues. When Wisdom
would engage a heart, she wooes in a smile. What the austere man advises
with his tongue his frown forbids.

The vulgar-rich call the poor the vulgar: let us learn to call things by
their proper names; the rude and ungentle are the vulgar, whether, in
fortune, they be poor or rich.

The truly poor and worthless are those who have not sense to perceive
the superiority of internal merit to all foreign or outward
accomplishments.



           *       *       *       *

  ANECDOTE OF DR. GOLDSMITH.

Those in the least acquainted with the private character of the doctor,
knew that _economy_ and _foresight_ were not amongst the catalogue of
his virtues. In the suite of his pensioners (and he generally enlarged
his list as he enlarged his finances) was the late unfortunate Jack
Pilkington, of scribbling memory, who had served the doctor so many
tricks, that he despaired of getting any more money from him, without
coming out with a _chef d'oeuvre_ once for all. He accordingly called on
the doctor one morning, and running about the room in a fit of joy, told
him his fortune was made, "How so, Jack?" says the doctor. "Why," says
Jack, "the duchess of Marlborough, you must know, has long had a strange
_penchant_ for a pair of _white mice_; now, as I knew they were
sometimes to be had in the East Indies, I commissioned a friend of mine,
who was going out then, to get them for me, and he is this morning
arrived with two of the most beautiful little animals in nature." After
Jack had finished this account with a transport of joy, he lengthened
his visage by telling the doctor all was ruined, for without _two
guineas_ to buy a cage for the _mice_, he could not present them. The
doctor unfortunately, as he said himself, had but half a guinea in the
world, which he offered him. But Pilkington was not to be beat out of
his scheme; he perceived the doctor's watch hanging up in his room, and
after premising on the indelicacy of the proposal, hinted, that if he
could spare that watch for a week, he could raise a few guineas on it,
which he would repay him with gratitude. The doctor would not be the
means of spoiling a man's fortune for such a trifle. He accordingly took
down the watch, and gave it to him, which Jack immediately took to the
pawn-brokers, raised what he could on it, and never once looked after
the doctor, till he sent to borrow another half guinea from him on his
death-bed; which the other, under such circumstances, very generously
sent him.




  FUGITIVE TRIFLES.

Every species of vice originates either from insensibility, from want of
judgment, or from both. No maxim can be more true than that all vice is
folly. For either by vice we bring misery more immediately on ourselves,
or we involve others in misery; if any one bring evil on himself, it is
surely folly; if his present pleasure be to make others miserable, were
he to escape every other punishment, he must suffer for it by remorse,
or it is a certain proof he is deprived of that sense or sympathy which
is the opposite to dullness; in either of which cases, it is evident
that all vice is folly.

Whatever pleasures are immediately derived from the sense, persons of
fine internal feelings enjoy, besides their other pleasures; while such
as place their chief happiness in the former, can have no true taste for
the delicious sensations of the soul.



           *       *       *       *

  _NEW-YORK._



    MARRIED,

On Thursday the 3d inst. at his Excellency John Jay's, Esq. by the Rev.
Dr. Rodgers, JOHN LIVINGSTON, Esq. of the Manor of Livingston, to Mrs.
CATHARINE RIDLEY, daughter of his Excellency William Livingston,
Esquire, late Governor of New-Jersey.

On Saturday evening the 5th inst. by the Rev. Dr. Foster, Mr. PETER
WARNER, of Boston, to Miss ELIZABETH AMELIA FIELDING, of this city.

On Sunday evening the 6th inst. by the Rev. Dr. Moore, Mr. THOMAS LLOYD,
to Mrs. SARAH ELLIS, both of this city.

Same evening, by the Rev. Dr. Ireland, Mr. WILLIAM WATSON, of this city,
to Miss JEMIMA HONEYWELL, daughter of Israel Honeywell, Esq. of
West-Chester.

On Monday the 7th inst. by the Rev. Mr. Ogden, of Newark, Mr. JOHN
STEVENSON, of this city, to Miss HANNAH KINGSLAND, daughter of Mr.
Joseph Kingsland, of Second River, New-Jersey.

On Tuesday evening the 8th inst. by the Rev. Dr. M'Knight, ROBERT LEE,
Esq. to Mrs. CAROLINE BETTS, both of this city.

On Friday evening last, by the Rev. Mr. Rattoone, EBENEZER BROWN, Esq.
of Philadelphia, to Miss ESTHER ANN WATSON, sister to James Watson, jun.
of this city.




  _METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS._
  _From the 30th ult. to the 12th inst._

    _Thermometor observed at 8, A.M. 3, P.M._
      _Prevailing winds._
        _OBSERVATIONS on the WEATHER._

          deg.  deg.    6. 3.  6. 3.
             100   100
  Oct. 30  46    57     w. do.   clear light wind. do. do.
       31  44    54     w. sw.   cloudy lt. wind do do.
  Nov.  1  37    45     n. do.   clear high wind do. lt. wd.
        2  35    49     nw. w.   clear light wind. do. do.
        3  41    52     sw. w.   clear high wind, do. lt. wd.
        4  43    44     w. do.   cloudy lt. wind, clear do.
        5  47    53 50  w. nw.   cloudy high wd. cr. lt. wd.
        6  45 50 46 25  sw. nw.  clear lt. wd. do. high wind.
        7  32    44     nw. do.  clear high wd. do. lt. wind.
        8  38    50 25  sw. do.  clear lt. wd. cloudy do.
        9  46    48     sw. do.  cloudy lt. wd. do. do.
       10  43 75 56 50  sw. e.   cloudy lt. wd. do. do.
       11  48 75 53     e. do.   cloudy lt. wd. do. do.
       12  43 50 52     n. do.   cloudy lt. wd. clear lt. wd.




  RESULTS OF METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS.
  _For October 1796._
                                                            deg. 100

  Mean temperature of the thermometer at Sunrise:            49   18
  Do. do. of the do.  at 3 P.M.                              58    5
  Do. do. for the whole month                                53   61
  Greatest monthly range between the 25th & 28th             40
  Do. do. in 24 hours, the 25th                              24
  Warmest day the 25th                                       77
  The coldest do. the 28th                                   37

   2 Days it has rained, and but a small quantity.
  11 days it was clear at the observation hours.
  11 do.  it was cloudy at the same  do.
  18 do.  the wind was light, at do.  do.
   2 do.  the wind was high  do.  do.
  18 Days the wind was to the westward of North and South.
  18 Do. the wind was to the Eastward of do.  do.



           *       *       *       *

     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._



  [The Editor is exceedingly thankful to MONIMIA for the three
  different views of Winter, which she has so beautifully contrasted.
  --The first is presented to the admirers of Poesy, the two latter
  shall follow in rotation.]


  THE BELLE'S INVOCATION TO WINTER.

  Winter, dear season of delights,
  Of joyous days and brilliant nights!
  Oh haste, on swiftest pinions haste,
  For summer's lingering hours are past,
  And dreary Autumn ready stands
  To yield the sceptre to thy hands.
  Too long by potent heats subdued,
  I've sought refreshment in the wood;
  Where dull retirement's drowsy charms
  Have raised no bustling dear alarms.

  Then winter haste, and bring again
  Enchanting pleasure's golden reign:
  Oh! waft me on thy snowy wings,
  To charming York's bewitching scenes;
  Where fashion all her offerings brings,
  And dulness never intervenes.

  The sprightly dance, the magic song,
  Shall then the festive night prolong;
  The tragic muse shall lend her aid,
  In JOHNSON's matchless charms array'd;
  Or MELMOTH rouse the tender tear,
  Now melt in woe--now start with fear;
  While every sportive Thalian grace,
  In either HODGKINSON we trace.

  Enticing cards shall next invite
  To scenes of ever new delight,
  We'll spend the night at dear _vingt-un_,
  Retire at two, and sleep till noon.
  Now seated in the social sleigh,
  To Haerlem or the Bridge, away;
  While frolic joy usurps the hour,
  Unaw'd by form's despotic power;
  For though her laws we all obey,
  We sometimes love a holiday.

  At thy approach, dear winter, too,
  The Beaux present themselves to view:
  Their nerves by piercing Boreas brac'd,
  And summer's languor's all eras'd;
  They then, attendant at our side,
  Through every scene of pleasure glide;
  Admire our dress, our beauty more,
  And (as in duty bound) _adore_.

  Since such delights I tasted last,
  Near eight insipid months have past;
  Each circling hour a dreary void,
  Despis'd, neglected, unenjoy'd:
  But when the heart in transport swims,
  How light, how active are the limbs!
  And fashion's mutable commands
  Finds business for the head and hands.
  Then, Winter, haste thy golden reign,
  And bring those halcyon days again.

    MONIMIA.



           *       *       *       *

  THE COMPLAINT.

  Oft has the splendour of a court,
  Where wealth and elegance retort,
    And bliss ideal reigns;
  Midst sparkling gems and brilliant toys,
  Been deem'd inferior to the joys
    Which sport on rural plains.

  But ah! our share of bliss below,
  Bears no proportion to the woe
    That rankles in the heart:
  For all the happiest man can boast,
  Is but a partial bliss at most--
    A happiness in part!

  Say, has that God, whose word from high
  With orbs unnumber'd gem'd the sky,
    And bade the waters flow;
  In mercy, or in wrath, decreed
  That ev'ry heart by turns must bleed,
    And taste the cup of woe?

  Tho' what we wish attend our pray'rs
  A something yet the joy impairs,
    And spreads a dark'ning gloom.
  Our fears are ever on alarm,
  And always point to future harm,
    Which yet may never come.

  Let Casuists inform me why
  Our bliss is tainted with alloy;
    Why mingled thus with woes?
  For such the fate of all our joys,
  That what most ardently we prize,
    We always fear to lose.




  ADDRESS TO A FAVOURITE CANARY BIRD.

  Sweet Bird! devoid of ev'ry care,
    You feel no idle rage
  To wander in the fields of air;
    You're happy in your cage.

  You cheerful hop, and plume your wing,
    And all your wants assuage,
  Pick up your food, and drink and sing,
    And revel in your cage.

  Your heart no female charms allure,
    No vain desires engage;
  And many evils, I endure,
    Are strangers to your cage.

  Tho' free to rove, I cannot find,
    On life's disastrous stage,
  Such calm content and peace of mind,
    As rest within your cage.

  Then well you may your song pursue,
    With ills no war you wage;
  And Kings, my Bird! may envy you
    The blessings of your cage.


NEW-YORK: _+Printed by JOHN BULL, No. 115, Cherry-Street+, where every
Kind of Printing work is executed with the utmost Accuracy and
Dispatch.--+Subscriptions+ for this +Magazine+ (at 2s. per month) are
taken in at the Printing-Office, and by E. MITCHELL, Bookseller, No. 9,
Maiden-Lane._



           *       *       *       *



  _UTILE DULCI._

  THE NEW-YORK WEEKLY MAGAZINE;
  or, Miscellaneous Repository.

  +Vol. II.+]  +Wednesday, November 23, 1796.+  [+No. 73.+


  ON LAUGHING.

To form a true judgment of a person's temper, begin with an observation
on his _laugh_; for the people are never so unguarded as when they are
pleased; and laughter being a visible symptom of some inward
satisfaction, it is then, if ever, we may believe the face; but for
method sake, it will be necessary to point out the several kinds of
laughing, under the following heads:

The dimplers.--The smilers.--The laughers.--The grinners.---The
horse-laughers.

The dimple is practised to give a grace to the features, and is
frequently made a bait to entangle a gazing lover. This was called by
the ancients, the chain-laugh.

The smile is for the most part confined to the fair sex, and their male
retinue; it expresses our satisfaction in a silent sort of approbation,
and does not disorder the features too much, and is therefore practised
by lovers of the most delicate address.

The grin is generally made use of to display a beautiful set of teeth.

The horse-laugh is made use of with great success, in all kinds of
disputation. The proficients in this kind, by a well-timed laugh, will
baffle the most solid argument. This, upon all occasions, supplies the
want of reason, and is received with great applause in coffee-house
disputes; that side the laugh joins with, is generally observed to gain
the better of his antagonist.

The prude has a wonderful esteem for the chain-laugh or dimple; she
looks upon all other kinds of laughter as _excessives_ of levity, and is
never seen upon the most extravagant jests, to disorder her features
with a smile; her lips are composed with a primness peculiar to her
character; all her modesty seems collected into her face, and but very
rarely takes the freedom to sink her cheek into a dimple. The effeminate
fop, by the long exercise of his countenance at the glass, is in the
same situation, and you may generally see him admire his own eloquence
by a dimple.

The young widow is only a chain for a time; her smiles are confined by
decorum, and she is obliged to make her face sympathise with her habit;
she looks demure by art, and by the strictest rule of decency is never
allowed to smile, till the first offer or advance to her is over.

The wag generally calls in the horse-laugh to his assistance.

There are another kind of grinners, which some people term sneerers.
They always indulge their mirth at the expence of their friends, and all
their ridicule consists in unseasonable ill-nature; but they should
consider, that let them do what they will, they never can laugh away
their own folly by sneering at other people's.

The coquette has a great deal of the sneerer in her composition; but she
must be allowed to be a proficient in laughter, and one who can run
through all the exercise of the features: she subdues the formal lover
with the dimple---accosts the fop with a smile--joins with the wit in a
downright laugh:---to vary the air of her countenance, she frequently
rallies with a grin---and when she hath ridiculed her lover quite out of
his understanding, she, to complete his misfortunes, strikes him dumb
with the horse-laugh.

At present the most fashionable is a mixture of the horse-laugh and the
grin, so happily blended together, that the teeth are shown without the
face being distorted.




  EXTRAVAGANCE AND AVARICE.

Some rich men starve to-day for fear of starving to-morrow, (as a man
leaps into the sea to avoid being drowned) and the indigent often
consume in an hour what they may feel the want of a year: as if old
people hoarded money because they cannot want it, and young men throw it
away because it is necessary to their subsistence.

He is rich enough that needs neither flatter nor borrow, and truly rich
that is satisfied: want lies in desire.

History tells us of illustrious villains, but there never was an
illustrious miser in nature.



           *       *       *       *

  THE VICTIM OF MAGICAL DELUSION;
  _OR, INTERESTING MEMOIRS OF MIGUEL, DUKE DE CA*I*A._
  Unfolding Many Curious Unknown Historical Facts.

  _Translated from the German of Tschink._

  (Continued from page 155.)

O! Why did he request me _such_ a manner to make him a sacrifice which
would have rendered me miserable! I wished then the first time in my
life, that he had spoken to me in a menacing, domineering, or only in a
harsh tone, then I should have had a pretext for resisting him, and
enforcing my own will. But how could I have had the courage to
contradict that tender solicitation, that entreating persuasion of a
father. And yet, was I not necessitated to do something worse, to
counteract my parent? I never felt more strongly than at that moment,
that it was utterly impossible for me to renounce the possession of
Amelia. Alas! never was a situation more unfortunate than mine, and
never has a human heart been reduced to such a dreadful conflict with
itself by two people so dear as my father and Amelia were to me.

I looked around with weeping eyes in search of a person to whom I could
unbosom my straitened heart. I went to the Marquis of Ferei*a.*

  [* Here I have expunged a picture which the painter has drawn of me,
  with too much partiality.

    MARQUIS OF FEREI*A.]

I had not informed him of my return; he uttered a scream of joy when he
saw me enter his apartment. However, his satisfaction at my return made
room to sorrow, when I acquainted him with my deplorable situation.
"Yes, my friend!" said he, after he had viewed me some minutes with
looks of pity, "if it is in your power to subdue that passion, then let
me implore you--"

"Don't finish that sentence!" I interrupted him, "it is impossible!"

"If that is the case, then only two ways are left to you to attain the
consent of your father; one of which is tedious and rugged, but
straight."

"Name it!"

"You must endeavour to work upon the nerves of the paternal heart in
such a manner, that his affection for you gets the better of his
ambition."

"And the second---"

"It is a bye-road which will lead you soon and safely to the
mark---serpents are, however, lurking on that road, and tygers lying in
ambush---"

"Don't name it!"

"I will name it, in order to caution you against it---it is called
Alumbrado. O my friend!" squeezing my hand affectionately, "go take the
straightest road."

"That I will, you have given me a very bad character of that Alumbrado."

"And would not retract a syllable of what I have wrote."

"Where is he, I have not yet seen him."

"He is abroad."

"I am curious to get acquainted with him."

"Don't come near him, lest he catch you in the same snare in which he
has caught your father."

"Fear nothing, I shall endeavour to deliver my father from that shameful
captivity."

"O! if you could do it! But be on your guard, lest he whom you are going
to draw out of the pit, drag you after him into the abyss."

I promised it, and he clasped me in his arms.

Previous to my departure from P----l, I had promised the Marquis to keep
a journal, and to insert the most remarkable incidents, which I was to
communicate to him after my return. He enquired now after that journal.

"It abounds with remarkable incidents," I replied, "and you will learn
strange things on perusing it: I have not mentioned a syllable of them
in my letters to you, in order to surprise you. However, you must curb
your curiosity till I shall have arranged my papers."

The Marquis consented to my request.

My noble friend! you will forgive me that artifice. It was a mere
pretext, in order to stay your curiosity till the revolution should have
taken place; for I had promised the Irishman to observe the strictest
silence till then. It was no mistrust that influenced me, but duty
imposed upon me by the promise I had made; and the event proved that I
acted wisely in doing so.

Four days after my first meeting with my friend, the Irishman stopped me
one evening in going home. His eyes flashed like lightning, his features
were distorted, his countenance was truly dreadful. "Have you," said he,
grinding his teeth, "betrayed the conspiracy to Vascon*ellos?" "No,"
I replied. "Have you warned him of the impending danger in some other
manner?" "No." "Have you disclosed the secret to one of your friends?"
"To no man living." "Can you pledge your honour for the truth of your
declaration?" "I can."

These questions succeeded each other rapidly, and he left me with equal
haste. I was almost petrified at this incident. My astonishment,
however, soon gave place to a different sensation, for I concluded from
the words, and the perturbation of the Irishman, nothing less than that
the plot had been discovered. The intelligence which I gained afterwards
seemed to confirm this conjecture. Vasconcel*os had left his castle
suddenly and crossed the river Ta*o, a circumstance that justly had
raised the suspicion of his having discovered the plot through one of
his numberless spies, and instantly made preparations for seizing the
conspirators. However, this apprehension was refuted that very night.
Vasconcel*os had only been at a feast, and returned late at night in
high spirits, and preceded by a band of musicians, not suspecting that
he would be a dead man at that hour the following night. I myself did
not imagine that the revolution would break out so soon, although I knew
that event to be drawing near. The day following, (December 1, 1640) at
eight o'clock in the morning, the conspirators repaired in small
divisions from all parts of the town to the Ducal Palace, partly on
horseback, and partly on foot, but most of them in coaches or chairs, in
order to conceal their arms. The number of noblemen, most of whom were
the chiefs of their families, amounted to fifty, and that of the
citizens to two hundred. As soon as it had struck eight by the clock of
the cathedral, Pinto Rib**ro, one of the Duke's privy counsellors, gave
the last signal for the attack by firing a pistol, and the conspirators
marched to the different places of their destination.

Pinto Rib**ro repaired with his troop to the palace of Vascon*ellos, who
was so little prepared for the unexpected attack, that he scarcely could
get time to conceal himself in a chest. However, he was discovered,
saluted with a pistol shot, stabbed with a number of poniards, and
thrown out of the window amid the loud exclamation; "The tyrant is dead!
long live liberty and King John, the new Sovereign of Port***l!"

The populace who were assembled under the windows of the palace,
repeated these words with loud acclamations of joy. In order to protect
the corpse against the fury of the mob, the society of charity pressed
their way thro' the crowd, and carried it away on a bier, which is only
used at the burials of slaves.

Meanwhile another troop had penetrated into the palace of the
Vice-Queen. The Archbishop of Bra*a, who was with her, and as a near
relation of Vasconcel**s, had also been doomed to destruction, was saved
with great difficulty from the fury of the conspirators by the
intercession of Miguel d'Al*eida. The Vice-Queen turned to the
conspirators when they rushed into her apartment, declaring that
Vasconce*los had deserved their hatred, but that they would be treated
as rebels if they should proceed a step farther. She however was told,
that so many nobles had not assembled merely on account of a wretch who
ought to have been executed by the public hangman, but in order to
restore the crown to the Duke of Bra--za, who was the lawful owner of
it. The Vice-Queen began to talk of the power which she had been
entrusted with by the king of Spa*n. The reply was, that no one could be
acknowledged as King but John, Duke of B----a. She now offered to run
out of the apartment in order to implore the assistance of the people;
however, some of the noblemen stopped her, telling her it would be
dangerous to suffer her to appear before a people who had been oppressed
many years, and were highly exasperated.---"And what could the people do
to me?" she said with scornful looks. "Nothing else but throw your
highness out of the window;" one of the noblemen replied. The Archbishop
of Bra*a was so much exasperated at this speech, that he seized a sword
in order to avenge the Vice-Queen. Almei*a however embraced and
entreated him to retire, because he had had great difficulty to persuade
the conspirators to spare his life. This discovery disarmed at once the
zeal of the Prelate.

Meanwhile the chiefs of the Spani--ds had been seized, and the
conspirators requested the Vice-Queen to send an order to the Commander
of St. Ge* to surrender; for that castle, which commanded the whole
town, was still in the possession of the Spani--ds. The Vice-Queen
refused to comply with their request; yet when she was told that her
refusal would be the signal for killing all the imprisoned Spani--ds,
she drew up the desired order, expecting that no attention would be paid
to it. However the commander of the castle, who did not dare to defend
himself, executed her order literally, and thus the town was freed of
all fear. It is almost incredible how quickly and easily the four troops
of the confederates took the posts allotted to them, and gained their
aim. But much more astonishing is the readiness and the quickness with
which not only the whole kingdom, but also all foreign settlements
followed the example of the capital. The revolution no sooner had begun
than it was accomplished. It is the only one in its kind, and a similar
one never will happen.---The execution of it proves with how much wisdom
it has been designed and conducted.

It was, however, like a sudden clap of thunder to my father, and
affected him with redoubled force, because it happened so unexpectedly.
The slow rising of the tempest, the silent brewing on the political
horizon had been concealed from him by his retirement from the world,
and even the visible forerunners of it, which at last forced themselves
upon his eyes, appeared to him to be nothing but the lightning arising
from transient vapours. The sudden eruption of the tempest, and its
consequences almost petrified him. His silent stupor soon gave room to
the loudest manifestations of his dissatisfaction; and nothing but
repeated persuasions to yield to stern necessity and superiority, could
prevail upon him to remain quiet.

  (_To be continued._)




  COMPASSION---AN ANECDOTE.

A respectable character, after having long figured away in the gay world
at Paris, was at length compelled to live in an obscure retreat in that
city, the victim of severe and unforeseen misfortunes. He was so
indigent, that he subsisted only on an allowance from the parish. Every
week a quantity of bread was sent to him sufficient for his support, and
yet at length he demanded more. On this the curate sent for him. He
went: "Do you live alone?" said the curate; "With whom, sir," answered
the unfortunate man, "is it possible I should live? I am wretched; you
see that I am, since I thus solicit charity, and am abandoned by all the
world." "But, sir," continued the curate, "if you live alone, why do you
ask for more bread than is sufficient for yourself?" The other was quite
disconcerted, and at last, with great reluctance, confessed that he had
a dog. The curate did not drop the subject. He desired him to observe,
that he was only the distributor of the bread that belonged to the poor,
and that it was absolutely necessary that he should dispose of his dog.
"Ah, sir," exclaimed the poor man, weeping; "and if I should lose my
dog, who is there then to love me?" The good pastor melting into tears,
took his purse, and giving it to him, "take this, sir," said he; "this
is mine---this I can give."




  REMARK.

The wisdom of Solomon has produced few things more just, than that 'we
should not judge of a man's merit by his great qualities, but by the use
he makes of them.'



           *       *       *       *

  EXTRAORDINARY INSTANCES OF GRATITUDE.

  _From 'WATKINS' Travels into Swisserland, Italy, Sicily,' &c._

Lorenzo Musata, a native of Catania, in Sicily, was, in the year 1774,
taken in a Maltese ship by an Algerine corsair. When the prize was
carried into port, he was sold to a Turkish officer, who treated him
with all the severity that the unfeeling disposition of a barbarian,
rendered intolerable by bigotry, could inflict. It happened fortunately
for the Sicilian, that his master's son Fezulah, (about ten years old)
became extremely fond of him; and, by numberless little offices of
kindness, alleviated his slavery. Lorenzo, in consequence, became as
much attached to the boy, as the boy was to him; so that they were
seldom separate from each other. One day, as Fezulah (being then
sixteen) was bathing in the sea, the current carried him off; and he
certainly would have perished, had not Lorenzo plunged in, and saved
him, at the hazard of his life. His affection was now heightened by
gratitude, and he frequently interceded with his father for his
deliverer's emancipation, but in vain. Lorenzo often sighed for his
country, and Fezulah determined that he should return there. With this
resolution, he one night conveyed him on board an English merchant-ship
that lay off Algiers; and having embraced him with tears, retired with
all that exquisite glow of pleasure and self-approbation, which virtue
feels in acting with gratitude and generosity. The Sicilian returned to
his country, where he found that a relation had bequeathed him a small
tenement; upon which he settled, and enjoyed the sweets of competency
and repose, rendered infinitely more grateful, than they otherwise would
have been, by the remembrance of his past slavery. At length growing
tired of a sedentary life, he accompanied his kinsman, a master of a
vessel, to Genoa. On landing in the D'arsena, he heard a voice cry
out--'Oh, my friend, my Lorenzo,' and instantly found himself in the
arms of Fezulah. He was at first lost in surprize and joy; but how rapid
was the transition to grief, when he perceived by his chains that
Fezulah was a slave!--He had been taken by a Genoese galley on his
voyage to Aleppo. You have already seen that the ruling passions of
Lorenzo's breast were generosity and gratitude; and to these he now
determined to sacrifice every other consideration. Having divided his
purse with his former companion, he took his leave, telling him he
should be again at Genoa within two months. And so he was. He returned
to Sicily; sold his little tenement, though to great disadvantage, and
with the money ransomed his friend, whom he sent back to his country.
Fezulah has lately visited Lorenzo at Catania, where they now are, and
has not only re-purchased for him his estate, but considerably enriched
him.

These actions might by some, who have more prudence than philanthropy,
be deemed enthusiastic; I must however, consider them as genuine virtue,
and am only sorry I cannot be an associate in the friendship of Fezulah
and Lorenzo.



           *       *       *       *

  _ANECDOTE of the Celebrated JOHN de WITT._

This illustrious pensionary of Holland, when he was one day asked how he
could get through with ease the immense load of business, that would
oppress most other men; replied, by doing one thing at a time. Another
of his maxims, in the conduct of life, and of still more value than all
his political ones, was to be careful of his health, but careless of his
life. This great man well knew the importance of health to the mental as
well as to the corporeal functions, and at the same time was convinced
that in certain situations, where the duty to one's country, to one's
relations, to one's friends, and to one's self, demands it, that a
sacrifice of those is justly and honourably made, and that not to make
it is "propter vitam vivendi perdere causam." The manner of life of this
great man, was so simple, that though his name appeared by the side of
that of emperors and of kings in many public acts, that he used to walk
from his own house to that of the States at the Hague, attended only by
a single servant, and that one man and one maid-servant composed his
whole domestic establishment.




  ON IMAGINATION.

The imagination is a quality of the soul, not only a brilliant but an
happy one, for it is more frequently the cause of our happiness, than of
our misery; it presents us with more pleasures than vexations, with more
hopes than fears. Men of dull and heavy dispositions, who are not
affected by any thing, vegetate and pass their lives in a kind of
tranquility, but without pleasure or delight; like animals which see,
feel, and taste nothing, but that which is under their eyes, paws, or
teeth; but the imagination, which is proper to man, transports us beyond
ourselves, and makes us taste future and the most distant pleasures. Let
us not be told, that it makes us also foresee evils, pains, and
accidents, which will perhaps never arrive: it is seldom that
imagination carries us to these panic fears, unless it be deranged by
physical causes. The sick man sees dark phantoms, and has melancholy
ideas; the man in health has no dreams but such as are agreeable; and as
we are more frequently in a good, than a bad state of health, our
natural state is to desire, to hope, and to enjoy. It is true, that the
imagination, which gives us some agreeable moments, exposes us, when
once we are undeceived, to others which are painful. There is no person
who does not wish to preserve his life, his health, and his property;
but the imagination represents to us our life, as a thing which ought to
be very long; our health established and unchangeable; and our fortune
inexhaustible: when the two latter of these illusions cease before the
former, we are much to be pitied.




  REMARK.

A man who pretends to know every thing, never knows any thing. A man of
general information, as he is called, has, in reality, never any upon a
particular subject.



           *       *       *       *

  Interesting History Of
  _THE BARON DE LOVZINSKI._

  With a relation of the most remarkable occurrences in the life
  of the celebrated COUNT PULASKI, well known as the champion of
  American Liberty, and who bravely fell in its defence before
  Savannah, 1779.

  _Interspersed with Anecdotes of the late unfortunate KING of POLAND,
  so recently dethroned._

  (_Continued from page 158._)

I began my march about ten o'clock.---At midnight we surprised our
enemies in their camp. Never was a defeat more complete: we killed seven
hundred men; we took nine hundred prisoners; we seized all their cannon,
the military chest, and the ammunition.

At break of day Pulaski marched out to join me with the remainder of the
troops: he brought Lodoiska along with him: we were married in Pulaski's
tent. All the camp resounded with songs of gladness: valour and beauty
were celebrated in joyous epithalamiums: it seemed to be the festival of
Venus and Mars; and it might be truly said, that every soldier appeared
to be impressed with the same sentiments as myself, and that they all
partook of my happiness.

After I had given up the first days of so dear an union entirely to
love, I began to think of recompensing the heroic fidelity of Boleslas.
My father-in-law presented him with one of his castles, situate at some
leagues from the capital; and Lodoiska and myself added to this princely
donation a considerable sum in ready money, on purpose to enable him to
lead an independent and tranquil life.

He first refused to leave us; but we commanded him to go and take
possession of his castle, and live peaceably in that honourable retreat
which his services had so amply merited. On the day of his departure I
took him aside:---"You must go in my name," said I, "and wait upon our
monarch at Warsaw: inform him that I am united in the bonds of Hymen to
the daughter of Pulaski: state to him that I am armed on purpose to
chase out of his kingdom those foreigners who are ravaging it; and tell
him, in particular, that Lovzinski, a foe to the Russians, is not the
enemy of his King."

The recital of our operations during eight succeeding years of bloody
war would be uninteresting.---Sometimes vanquished; much oftener
victorious; equally great in the midst of a defeat, as formidable after
a victory, and always superior to events, Pulaski attracted and fixed
the attention of all Europe, whom he astonished by his long and vigorous
resistance. Obliged to abandon one province, he made incursions into,
and performed new prodigies of valour in another: and it was thus that,
in marching successively throughout all the palatinates, he signalized
in each of them, by some glorious exploit, that eternal hatred which he
had sworn against the enemies of Poland.

Wife of a warrior, daughter of a hero, accustomed to the tumult of a
camp, Lodoiska accompanied us every where. Of five children which she
had borne me, an only daughter alone remained to us, about eighteen
months old. One day, after a most obstinate engagement, the victorious
Russians precipitated themselves towards my tent, on purpose to plunder
it. Pulaski and myself, followed by some nobles, flew to the defence of
Lodoiska, whom we saved with difficulty: my daughter, however, had been
carried off.

This lovely child, by a sage precaution which her mother had wisely made
use of in those times of intestine commotion, had the arms of our family
impressed, by means of a chemical preparation, under her left breast:
but my search after my daughter has hitherto been ineffectual. Alas!
Dorliska, my dear Dorliska, either exists in slavery, or exists no more!

This loss affected me with the most lively sorrow. Pulaski, however,
appeared almost insensible to my misfortunes; either because his mind
was occupied at this moment with the great project which he soon after
communicated to me, or because the miseries of his country alone could
affect his stoic heart. He, as usual, re-assembles the remains of his
army, takes possession of an advantageous post, employs several days in
fortifying, and maintains himself in it for three whole months, against
all the efforts of the Russians.

It, however, became at length necessary that he should abandon this
situation, as provisions were beginning to be scarce.---Pulaski, on this
occasion, came to my tent; and, having ordered every one to retire, when
we alone remained, he addressed me as follows:

"Lovzinski, I have just reason for complaining of your conduct. Formerly
you supported, along with me, the burden of command, and I was enabled
to divide with my son-in-law a part of my laborious avocations: but, for
these two last months, you do nothing but weep; you sigh like a woman!
You have abandoned me in a critical moment, when your assistance was
become the most necessary! You see how I am attacked on all sides;
I fear not for myself; I am not unhappy for my own life: but if we
perish, the state has no longer any defenders.

"Awake, Lovzinski! hew nobly you once participated in my cares! Do not
now remain the useless witness of them. We are indeed bathed in Russian
blood: our fellow citizens are avenged; but they are not saved: nay,
even in a short time we may be able no longer to defend them."

"You astonish me, Pulaski! Whence these sinister auguries?"

"I am not alarmed without reason. Consider our present position: I am
forced to awaken in every heart the love of its country; I have found no
where but degenerate men born for slavery, or weak ones, who, although
penetrated with a sense of their own misfortunes, have bounded all their
views to barren complaints.

"Some true citizens are, indeed, ranged under my standards; but eight
long and bloody campaigns have lessened their number, and almost
extinguished them. I become enfeebled by my very victories:--our enemies
appear more numerous after their defeats."

"I repeat to you, Pulaski, once more, that you astonish me! In
circumstances no less disastrous, no less unhappy, than the present,
I have beheld you sustain yourself by your courage.   .   .   .   .
   .   ."

"Do you think that it now abandons me? True valour does not consist in
being blind to danger, but in braving it after it has been foreseen. Our
enemies prepare for my defeat; however, if you choose, Lovzinski, the
very day which they point out for their triumph shall perhaps be that
destined to record their ruin, and achieve the safety of our
fellow-citizens!"

"If I choose! Can you doubt my sentiments? Speak! what would you have
done?"

"To strike the boldest stroke that I ever meditated! Forty chosen men
are assembled at Czenstachow along with Kaluvski, whose bravery is well
known; they want a chief, able, firm, intrepid---It is you whom I have
chosen."

"Pulaski, I am ready."

"I will not dissemble to you the danger of the enterprize; the event is
doubtful, and, if you do not succeed, your ruin is inevitable."

"I tell you that I am ready, therefore explain yourself."

"You are not ignorant, that scarce four thousand men now fight under my
command: with these undoubtedly I have still an opportunity of
tormenting our enemies; but with such feeble means, I dare not hope to
be ever able to force them to leave our provinces. All the nobility
would flock beneath our banners, if the King were in my camp."

"What do you say? Can you hope that the King would ever consent to
repair hither?"

"No: but he must be forced to do so."

"Forced!"

"Yes! I know that an ancient friendship connects you with M. de P----:
but since you have supported, along with Pulaski, the cause of liberty,
you know also that you ought to sacrifice every thing to the good of
your country; that an interest so sacred--------"

"I know my duty, and I am ready to fulfil it; but what is it that you
now propose to me? The King never leaves Warsaw."

"True; and it is, therefore, at Warsaw that you must go and find him: it
is from the heart of the capital that he must be forced."

"What preparations have you made for so great an enterprise?"

"You behold yon Russian army, three times as strong as mine, and which
has been encamped three months in sight of us: its General, tranquil at
present within his entrenchments, impatiently waits until, forced by
famine, I shall surrender myself at discretion.

"Behind my camp are marshes which he thinks impracticable: the moment
that it is night, we shall traverse them. I have disposed of every thing
in such a manner that the enemy will be deceived, and not perceive my
retreat until it is too late. I hope therefore to be able to steal more
than an hour's march upon them, and, if fortune seconds me, perhaps a
whole day. I shall advance straight forward to Warsaw by the great road
that leads to the capital, notwithstanding the efforts of the little
Russian bands who hover continually in its neighbourhood. I shall either
encounter and conquer these separately, or, if, they form a junction on
purpose to stop my progress, I shall at least be able to occupy their
attention in such a manner that they will not be able to impede your
operations.

"In the mean time, Lovzinski, you will have preceded me. Your forty
followers disguised, and armed only with sabres, poniards and pistols
concealed under their clothes, shall have arrived at Warsaw by different
roads. You must wait there until the King has left his palace; you are
then to carry him off, and to bring him to my camp. The enterprise is
bold---rash, if you please so to term it: the march to Warsaw is
difficult; the stay in it dangerous; the return from it extremely
perilous. If you are vanquished, if you are taken prisoner, you will
perish, Lovzinski, but you will perish a martyr to liberty! and Pulaski,
jealous of so glorious an end, sighing at being obliged to survive you,
shall send Russians, thousands of Russians, to accompany you to the
tomb!

"But on the contrary, if an all-powerful Deity; if a God, the protector
of Poland, has inspired me with this hardy project, to terminate her
evils; if thy good fortune shall procure a success equal to thy courage,
what a glorious prosperity will be achieved by means of this noble
daring!

"M. de P*** will not see in my camp, other than citizen-soldiers, the
foes of foreigners, but still faithful to their king: under my patriotic
tents, he will respire, as it were, the air of liberty, and the love of
his country: the enemies of the state shall become his; our brave
nobility, ashamed of their indolence, will readily combat under the
royal banners, for the common cause; the Russians shall either be cut
in pieces, or be obliged to pass the frontiers---my friend, in thee thy
country shall behold her saviour!"     *       *       *       *

       *       *       *       *       *       *       *       *

Pulaski kept his word. That very night he accomplished his retreat, with
equal skill and success, by traversing the marshes in profound silence.
"My friend," said my father-in-law to me, as soon as we were out of the
reach of the enemy, "it is now time that you should leave us. I know
well that my daughter has more courage than another woman; but she is a
tender wife, and an unfortunate mother. Her tears will affect you, and
you will lose in her embraces that strength of mind, that dignity of
soul, which now becomes more necessary to you than ever: I advise you,
therefore, to be gone, without bidding her farewell."

  (_To be continued._)




  HUMANITY.

As pain is what we are all naturally averse to, our own sensibility of
it should teach us to commiserate it in others, not wantonly or
unmeritedly to inflict it. But the absurd barbarity of our prejudices
and customs often leads us to transgress this rule.--When we are under
apprehension that we ourselves shall be the sufferers of pain, we
naturally shrink back at the very idea of it: we can then abominate it,
we detest it with horror; we plead hard for mercy; and we feel that _we
can feel_. But when man is out of the question, humanity sleeps, and the
heart grows callous.



           *       *       *       *

  INSTANCE OF BENEVOLENCE.

A gentleman, being at Marseilles, hired a boat with an intention of
sailing for pleasure; he entered into conversation with the two young
men who owned the vessel, and learned, that they were not watermen by
trade, but silversmiths; and that when they could be spared from their
usual business, they employed themselves in that way to increase their
earnings. On expressing his surprise at their conduct, and imputing it
to an avaricious disposition; "Oh! sir," said the young men, "if you
knew our reasons, you would ascribe it to a better motive. Our father,
anxious to assist his family, scraped together all he was worth;
purchased a vessel for the purpose of trading to the coast of Barbary,
but was unfortunately taken by a pirate, carried to Tripoli, and sold
for a slave. He writes word, that he is luckily fallen into the hands of
a master who treats him with great humanity; but that the sum which is
demanded for his ransom is so exorbitant, that it will be impossible for
him ever to raise it; he adds, that we must therefore relinquish all
hope of ever seeing him, and be contented, that he has as many comforts
as his situation will admit. With the hopes of restoring to his family a
beloved father, we are striving by every honest means in our power, to
collect the sum necessary for his ransom, and we are not ashamed to
employ ourselves in the occupation of watermen." The gentleman was
struck with this account, and on his departure, made them a handsome
present.

Some months afterwards the young men being at work in their shop, were
greatly surprised at the sudden arrival of their father, who threw
himself into their arms; exclaiming, at the same time that he was
fearful they had taken some unjust method to raise the money for his
ransom, for it was too great a sum for them to have gained by their
ordinary occupation. They professed their ignorance of the whole affair,
and could only suspect they owed their father's release to that
stranger, to whose generosity they had been before so much obliged.

After Montesquieu's death, an account of this affair was found among his
papers, and the sum actually remitted to Tripoli for the old man's
ransom. It is a pleasure to hear of such an act of benevolence performed
even by a person totally unknown to us; but the pleasure is infinitely
increased, when it proves the union of virtue and talents in an author
so renowned as Montesquieu.




  RETROSPECTION.

Happy is it for those who have committed material errors, if they have
the inclination and opportunity of seriously reflecting and repenting;
but still more happy are those who can (as far as human frailty will
permit) look back with satisfaction on their past life, and thus avoid
the misery of bitter reflections, which is an almost insupportable
addition to the natural calamities of this world. A lady once said to a
pious friend, "I should like to die your death, but I should not like to
live your life;" meaning, that it was too dull and insipid for her.



           *       *       *       *

  _NEW-YORK._

  MARRIED,

On Wednesday evening the 2d inst. by the. Rev. Dr. Foster, Mr. CEPHAS
ROSS, to Miss MARY BOWMAN, both of this city.

On Saturday se'nnight, at Greenwich, by the Rev. Mr. Woodhull, Mr.
NEHEMIAH DENTON, of Brooklyn, (L.I.) to Miss ELIZA BERTIS, daughter of
Mr. Peter Bertis of that place.

Same evening, by the Rev. Mr. Strebeck, Mr. MICHAEL SHATZEL, of this
city, to Miss BARBARA WOOD, of Harvestraw.

On Tuesday evening last, by the Rev. Mr. Coles, Mr. JAMES MITCHELL, of
Dosoris, to Miss RHODA HALL, daughter of Darius Hall, Esq. of Oak-Neck,
Oyster Bay, (L.I.)

On Wednesday evening last, by the Rev. Mr. Phoebus, Mr. THOMAS SEAMAN,
to Miss ELIZABETH LOWREY, both of this city.

Same evening, by the Rev. Dr. Moore, JACOB HOCHSTRASSER, Esq. of Albany,
to Miss ELIZA T. MILLER, of this city.

On Thursday evening, by the Rev. Dr. Foster, GEORGE SIMPSON, Esq. to
Miss MARY PENN, both late of England, now of this City.




  _METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS._
  _From the 13th to the 19th inst._

    _Thermometor observed at 6, A.M. 3, P.M._
      _Prevailing winds._
        _OBSERVATIONS on the WEATHER._

          deg.  deg.    6. 3.  6. 3.
             100   100
  Nov. 13  36 50 50     ne sw.  clear cloudy, lt. wind calm.
       14  47    50     nw. s.  cloudy do. light wind do.
       15  48    52 75  s. sw.  foggy do. lt wd. do. sm. rn.
       16  43    43     nw. n.  clear do. high wind ditto.
       17  26 50 40     ne. e.  clear cloudy, light wind do.
       18  46 50 50 50  sw s.   cloudy cr. do. lt wd. sm. rn.
       19  40    56 75  s. do.  foggy clear, light wind do.




  SONNET TO MARIA.

  How oft, dear maid, enamour'd bards have sung,
    The blooming beauties of their fav'rite fair;
  Petrarch to Laura's charms his lyre has strung,
    And Prior's muse oft braided Cloe's hair.

  Let others sing the cheek, whose roseate hue
    Transcends the blushing beauties of the rose,
  The lip, like cherries dipt in balmy dew,
    From whence a breath more sweet than violets flows.

  Whilst I, a youthful bard, to fleeting fame,
    And flattery's menial arts alike unknown;
  All common-place analogy disclaim,
    Comparing you---unto yourself alone:
  For who but folly's sons would needless toil,
  To place the sterling gem beneath the foil?



           *       *       *       *

     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._

       THE POOR MAN'S ADDRESS TO WINTER.

  Oh stay a while--unfeeling Winter--grant
    A little respite to a hapless wretch;
  Who now, though doom'd to misery and want,
    On the bare ground his weary limbs can stretch.

  He _now_, when bath'd in night's unhealthful dews,
    Can point his bosom to the solar ray;
  That friendly ray shall warmth and life infuse,
    And with its cheerful influence bless the day.

  He _now_, at "stern necessity's command,"
    Can roam in quest of his precarious food;
  Claim a small pittance from some generous hand,
    And for a moment feel each pang subdu'd.

  But when thy snows and biting frosts descend,
    Where shall he lay his unprotected head?
  What blazing hearth its welcome flames shall lend,
    What careful hand prepare the needful bed?

  And how, when Famine shews his haggard face?
    Shall these frail knees assay the treacherous ice;
  How bear me safely to some distant place,
    Amid the cruel sports of youthful vice?

  And oh! how oft shall anguish rend this breast,
    When luxury shall pass triumphant by,
  In all the pride of costly ermine drest,
    And cast on poverty a scornful eye.

  But keener pangs, alas! this heart shall feel,
    When some poor partner in affliction's lot
  Shall scenes of equal misery reveal,
    And pour of deep despair the mournful note.

  Oh then, how freely would this hand bestow
    A little aid to soothe a brother's grief,
  Wipe the moist traces from the cheek of woe,
    And send to every want a kind relief!

  But e'en this comfort cruel fate denies,
    And nought but powerless pity can I give;
  Still doom'd to hear the wretch's piercing cries,
    To hear--and, oh distraction! not relieve.

  Then yet a while, unfeeling Winter, rest
    Thy hoary head on Zembla's frozen lap--
  But hark! I hear from far thy voice unblest,
    And see thy thick'ning storms the heavens enwrap.

  Oh! then, in dreadful pity aim thy blow:
    Let thy keen blasts congeal this vital dream,
  Then o'er these limbs thy snowy mantle throw,
    More useful far than Sol's refulgent beam.

  Thus let me leave a world of care and strife,
  And wake to scenes of everlasting life.

    MONIMIA.



           *       *       *       *

  ODE TO BACCHUS.

  Sportive Bacchus, hail to thee,
  Wine's supreme divinity!
  Bards mistaken oft have sung
  Thee, for ever blithe and young,
  Jovial, ruddy, gay and free,
  Always fraught with mirth and glee,
  Blest with power to impart
  Balm that heals the wounded heart!

    Shall brain-wove fiction then alone inspire
      The enraptur'd poet's adulating lays?
    If heav'n-born Truth attune her golden lyre,
      Where are his boasted honours, where his bays?
  Like conscious guilt, which seeks the shades of night,
  They fly from truth's investigating light.

  Now let the god himself appear,
    Midst all the sport of mingled dance:
  What sounds discordant strike mine ear,
    As Bacchus and his crew advance.

  Behold! the god approaching nigh,
    His face with deadly paleness fraught,
  No pleasure sparkling in his eye;
    A thinking being void of thought.

  And next his car, so! madd'ning rage,
  (Prepar'd on rape or murder to engage)
  High brandishes his angry arm,
  And spreads around the dire alarm.

  While white-rob'd Virtue, child of Heav'n!
    Whose pow'rs untainted joys obtain,
  By noise and dissipation driv'n,
    Fearfully flies the giddy train.

  Reason, fair Virtue's bright compeer!
    Beholds and joins her rapid flight,
  Intent to seek some happier sphere,
    Where mirth and innocence unite.

  Still as they go, with pitying eye
    They view the Bacchanalian crew,
  For these they heave the parting sigh,
    And kindly look their last adieu.

  Next dire diseases crowd his train,
    With inexhausted hoards of woe;
  Fevers replete with burning pain,
    Lingering consumptions, sure tho' slow,

    And last, to close the horrid scene,
    With haggard eye, and frightful mien,
    Lo! the grim tyrant Death appears;
    A ghastly smile his visage wears,
  Whilst in his hand exultingly he shews;
  Emblem of timeless fate! the wither'd half-blown rose.

    If such th' attendants which belong
  To Bacchus, "roseate god of wine,"
  O make me, rose-lipp'd Temp'rance, thine,
    And shield me from so dire a throng--
  Till youth, with all its joys are flown,
  And age has mark'd me for his own.


NEW-YORK: _+Printed by JOHN BULL, No. 115, Cherry-Street+, where every
Kind of Printing work is executed with the utmost Accuracy and
Dispatch.--+Subscriptions+ for this +Magazine+ (at 2s. per month) are
taken in at the Printing-Office, and by E. MITCHELL, Bookseller, No. 9,
Maiden-Lane._



           *       *       *       *



  _UTILE DULCI._

  THE NEW-YORK WEEKLY MAGAZINE;
  or, Miscellaneous Repository.

  +Vol. II.+]  +Wednesday, November 30, 1796.+  [+No. 74.+


  THE GOOD HUSBAND.

The good husband is one, who, wedded not by interest but by choice, is
constant as well from inclination as from principle; he treats his wife
with delicacy as a woman, with tenderness as a friend: he attributes her
follies to her weakness, her imprudence to her inadvertency; he passes
them over therefore with good nature, and pardons them with indulgence:
all his care and industry are employed for her welfare; all his strength
and powers are exerted for her support and protection; he is more
anxious to preserve his own character and reputation, because her's is
blended with it: lastly, the good husband is pious and religious, that
he may animate her faith by his practice, and enforce the precepts of
Christianity by his own example: that as they join to promote each
other's happiness in this world, they may unite together in one eternal
joy and felicity in that which is to come.




  THE GOOD WIFE.

The good wife is one, who, ever mindful of the solemn contract which she
has entered into, is strictly and conscientiously virtuous, constant,
and faithful to her husband; chaste, pure, and unblemished in every
thought, word, and deed; she is humble and modest, from reason and
conviction; submissive from choice, and obedient from inclination; what
she acquires by love and tenderness, she preserves by prudence and
discretion; she makes it her business to serve, and her pleasure to
oblige her husband; as conscious that every thing which promotes his
happiness, must in the end contribute to her own: her tenderness
relieves his cares, her affection softens his distress, her good humour
and complacency lessen and subdue his affliction; she openeth her mouth,
as Solomon says, "with wisdom, and in her tongue is the law of kindness;
she looketh well to the ways of her husband, and eateth not the bread of
idleness: her children rise up and call her blessed; her husband also,
and he praiseth her." Lastly, as a good and pious Christian, she looks
up with an eye of gratitude to the great dispenser and disposer of all
things, to the husband of the widow, and father of the fatherless,
intreating his divine favour and assistance in this and every other
moral and religious duty; well satisfied, that if she duly and
punctually discharges her several offices and relations in this life,
she shall be blessed and rewarded for it in another.




  ANECDOTE OF SIR PHILIP SIDNEY.

After Sir Philip Sidney was wounded near the walls of Zetphen, the horse
he rode upon being rather furiously choleric than bravely proud, forced
him to forsake the field, but not his back, as the noblest and fittest
bier to carry a martial commander to his grave. In this sad progress,
passing along by the rest of the army, where his uncle, Robert, earl of
Leicester, the general, was, and being thirsty with excess of bleeding,
he called for drink, which was presently brought him. But, as he was
putting the bottle to his mouth, he saw a poor soldier carried along,
who had been wounded at the same time, ghastly casting up his eyes at
the bottle: sir Philip perceiving this, took it from his head, before
drinking, and delivered it to the poor man, with these words: "THY
NECESSITY IS YET GREATER THAN MINE."

This generous behaviour of the gallant knight ought not to pass without
a penegyric. All his deeds of bravery, his politeness, his learning, his
courtly accomplishments, do not reflect so much honour upon him, as this
one disinterested and truly heroic action. It discovered so tender and
benevolent a nature: a mind so fortified against pain; a heart so
overflowing with generous sentiments to relieve, in opposition to the
violent call of his own necessities, a poor man languishing in the same
distress, before himself, that none can read it without the highest
admiration. Bravery is often constitutional: fame may be the motive to
seats of arms; a statesman and a courtier may act from interest; but a
sacrifice so generous as this, can be made by none but those who are
good as well as great; who are noble minded, and gloriously
compassionate, like Sidney.




  SELF-LOVE.

Nothing is so capable of diminishing self-love as the observation, that
we disapprove at one time what we approve at another.



           *       *       *       *

  THE VICTIM OF MAGICAL DELUSION;
  _OR, INTERESTING MEMOIRS OF MIGUEL, DUKE DE CA*I*A._
  Unfolding Many Curious Unknown Historical Facts.

  _Translated from the German of Tschink._

  (Continued from page 163.)

His resentment against the new King remained however rankling in his
heart; he did homage to the Sovereign with visible satisfaction, and, as
I suspect, not without secret reservation, while I swore to him the oath
of allegiance, in hopes that I should soon renew it to the lawful King,
who was still concealed. My country now was delivered from the Span--sh
yoke, but my heart remained in the thraldom of love. The fetters which
it was chained with were, indeed, nothing but garlands, but nevertheless
stronger than bonds of adamant; how was it therefore to be expected,
that I should have been inclined and capable to obey my father, who
wanted me to break them? This bondage was so sweet to me, and my sharing
it with an adored woman, rendered it dearer to me than the most
unbounded liberty; it was my sole and most ardent wish to tie the bonds
by which we were united still faster. But alas! my father desired me not
to mention a syllable of a union with Amelia, and without his sanction I
durst not expect her consent! The Marquis of Ferei*a exhausted in vain
all his eloquence in order to melt the flinty heart of my inexorable
parent. In that wretched situation I sent several times for Alumbrado's
assistance, yet I always shrunk back at the idea of owing any obligation
to that man. His first visit confirmed the remarks of the Marquis, and
all the civilities he lavished upon me, served only to strengthen my
antipathy against him. My soul was as gloomy as my exterior situation.
The view of my heaven was overdarkened by clouds which grew darker and
darker. Only one star was glimmering through the blackness of that
dismal night; one single star to which I could direct my weeping eyes.
I was confident that the Irishman could be no stranger to my comfortless
situation, and would aid me by his power, imagining that he now had the
best opportunity of rewarding my reliance in him, and would undoubtedly
conduct me over insurmountable obstacles to the promised land of
happiness. Meanwhile the time when my father expected my declaration for
the Princess of L*** was approaching with gigantic strides, and the
Irishman did not appear. Anxiety struggled with my hope. I enquired
every where for my protector, but I enquired in vain, and my anxiety
increased to black despair.


     *   *   *   *

    CONTINUATION

  By the MARQUIS of FEREI*A.

Here a great deal is wanting in the memoirs of the Duke of Cami*a, which
I cannot leave unsupplied, otherwise an important part of his history
will be lost, and the rest remain obscure. To fill up this empty space,
will be the last duty of friendship I shall be able to perform for that
unhappy man. I shall, therefore, continue his mournful tale, till I can
connect again the thread of my narration to the remaining papers of the
Duke.

The grief assailing the heart of my unhappy friend soon depicted itself
so strongly in his countenance, that I began to tremble for his health.
Alas! my apprehension was but too soon realized, his sufferings being
increased, by an information he received from the brother of the new
King, to a degree which entirely overcame his enfeebled spirits.

"My dearest friend," the Prince wrote to him, "I have not discontinued,
since your departure, the inquiries after your tutor, which I began when
you were here. However, I should undoubtedly have continued them with
the greatest prudence and activity, without coming any nearer to the
mark, if the very man whom I had been endeavouring to find out had not
spared me that fruitless talk.

"Yes, my friend, your tutor has personally surprised me in a most
pleasing manner. But, O! my friend, moderate your joy when reading these
lines. The meeting with that dear man was like airy vision, which
appears and vanishes again after a few moments. Your tutor came, and
went to those realms from whence no mortal can return.

"Five days are now elapsed, since he astonished me, one morning, by his
unexpected visit. I soon observed with surprise, that he returned the
manifestations of my joy with much restraint, while his inquisitive
looks were doubtfully directed at me. His relation soon unfolded this
mystery.

"Will you believe it, my friend, that in that very night, when we
expected him in vain with so much impatience and anxiety, he had been
taken up secretly, carried off, and imprisoned? He was on his way to my
house, when he met a carriage which he mistook for mine. In this opinion
he was confirmed, when the coachman stopt the horses, and a servant in
my livery opened the coach door for him. Two unknown gentlemen, who were
sitting in the carriage, begged him to get in, pretending to have been
sent by me to fetch him. He joined them without hesitation, and when the
coachman drove out of the town gate, instead of taking the road to my
house, he was told that one more guest was to be fetched. This pretended
guest made his appearance in the suburbs, and as soon as he had got in
the carriage, pointed a dagger at the heart of your tutor, while his two
associates seized and tied his hands. All this was effected before Count
Galvez could gain time for resistance, which would have been equally
dangerous and fruitless. He was told that if he would submit silently to
his fate, no injury should be offered him, but that he would be stabbed
without mercy if he should cry for assistance; at the same time he was
blind-folded, and after about half an hour's ride the carriage stopped,
when your tutor was taken out of it, and conducted over several flights
of steps, through long passages, in a room where he was shut up, and
left alone.

"When Count Galvez removed the bandage from his eyes, he found himself
in a spacious apartment, lighted with lamps; two smaller rooms were on
each side, but none of them had windows. Some time after his arrival,
two masked men brought him victuals and drink, which afterwards was
repeated every noon and evening. He was in want of nothing, liberty
excepted. He could not leave his apartments, which were bolted on the
outside, and having not been able to persuade his masked attendants to
answer to his questions, he could not learn where he was imprisoned. The
frequent chiming of bells, the singing of hymns, which seemed to be very
near him, and several other circumstances, made him, however, suppose
that he was confined in a cloister.

"It is remarkable, that during his confinement, he was obliged to sit to
a sculptor, who executed his statue so masterly, that it resembled him
in the most striking manner. The artist too was masked and nothing could
persuade him to tell for what purpose the statue was designed.

"At length the wished for hour of enlargement arrived. The prisoner was
called up between one and two o'clock in the morning, and ordered to
prepare for his departure. He was blindfolded and conducted to the
street, where he was placed in a coach, and threatened with instant
death if he should dare to utter a syllable. After half an hour's ride
he was taken out of the coach, upon which, his conductors drove away at
a furious rate. As soon as he perceived that he was alone, he removed
the bandage from his eyes, and found himself in a lonely part of the
suburbs, and with the first dawn of day called at my house.

"As soon as Count Galvez had finished his extraordinary tale, I summoned
my servants, in order to clear myself from a suspicion which afflicted
me severely, and examined them rigorously in his presence. It was,
however, proved that my horses and carriages, as well as my servants,
had been at home at the hour when the Count was carried off, which
rendered it very probable that the _Unknown_ must have imitated my
equipage and livery, in order to ensnare the Count with greater ease.

"Your tutor enquired much, and with great affection after you: I told
him as much as I knew, but he was not satisfied with it. The following
morning he departed for Lisb*n, in hopes of meeting you there, after a
long and painful separation. I rode on horseback by his carriage in
order to accompany him a few miles; the impatient desire of seeing you
soon made your tutor urge the postillion to press his horses onward; the
fellow was offended at the incessant solicitations of the Count, and
drove slower, which vexed our friend to such a degree, that he exhorted
the postillion rather warmly to proceed faster, adding some menaces. The
postillion being provoked by your tutor's threats, whipped his horses
furiously, without taking proper notice of the neighbourhood of the
precipice, which you will recollect; the animals grew wild, and the
carriage was precipitated into the abyss. The Count scarcely breathed,
when he received assistance, and the postillion was dashed to pieces
against the rocks.

"I ordered instantly all possible care to be taken of our friend;
however, a violent vomiting of blood, the consequence of a contusion on
his breast, put an end to his life the subsequent day. A few minutes
before his death, he wrote the following note, but was soon interrupted
by a fainting fit.

"'Ere while we were separated by men, but now we are going to be
disunited by God. I do not murmur; yet I should have been happy to see
you once more. On the brink of eternity I am expanding my hands,
blessing thee, excellent young man! Weep not at my death; we shall meet
again in yon blissful mansions, where all good men shall be reunited for
ever. Honour my memory by keeping firm to my principles, which from my
soul, flowed over in your mind.'"

Two mortal wounds like those which the ill-fated love affair, and the
death of Count Galvez inflicted on the heart of my friend, confined him
to a sick bed. Now happened what I had dreaded, without my having been
able to prevent it. Alumbrado, who was returned from his journey,
intruded on my friend, and soon traced out the safest road to his heart.
My friend was weak enough to communicate to him the situation in which
he was with regard to Amelia; and Alumbrado hesitated not a moment to
procure him the consent of his father. The power exercised by that man
over the Marquis was so great, that the latter suffered himself to be
persuaded to write to the Countess, and to invite her in the most
honourable and flattering manner, to render his son happy by giving him
her hand.

  (_To be continued._)




  ON HYPOCRISY.

Mr. Addison somewhere observes, that hypocrisy at the fashionable end of
the town, is very different from hypocrisy in the city. The fashionable
hypocrite endeavours to appear more vicious than he really is; the other
kind of hypocrite more virtuous. The former is afraid of every thing
that has a shew of religion in it, and would be thought engaged in any
criminal gallantries and amours, of which he is not guilty. The latter
assumes a face of sanctity, and covers a multitude of vices, under a
seemingly religious deportment. There is a third sort of hypocrites, who
not only deceive the world, but very often impose upon themselves. These
different kinds of hypocrisy cannot be too much detested. The first is a
flagrant depravity of mind, which induces a man to prefer the appearance
of vice to virtue, and despicable to an amiable character. The second
disgraces and abuses virtue by assuming her resemblance; the last,
though not more criminal, is more dangerous than either of the former,
as it is accompanied with mental blindness, and self deception.




  NATURE.

Nature only is lovely, and nothing unnatural can ever be amiable. The
genuine expressions of truth and nature are happily calculated to
impress the heart with pleasure.



           *       *       *       *

  VIRTUE REWARDED:
  A Pastoral Tale:

  [From the German of Gesner.]

Glicera was beautiful and poor. Scarce had she numbered sixteen springs,
when she lost the mother who had brought her up. Reduced to servitude,
she kept the flocks of Lamon, who cultivated the lands of a rich citizen
of Mitylene.

One day, her eyes flowing with tears, she went to visit her mother's
solitary tomb. She poured upon her grave a cup of pure water, and
suspended crowns of flowers to the branches of the bushes she had
planted round it. Seated beneath the mournful shade, and drying up her
tears, she said, 'O thou most tender of mothers, how dear to my heart is
the remembrance of thy virtues! If ever I forget the instructions thou
gavest me, with such a tranquil smile, in that fatal moment, when
inclining thy head upon my bosom, I saw thee expire; if ever I forget
them! may the propitious Gods forsake me, and may thy sacred shade
forever fly me! It is thou that hast just preserved my innocence. I come
to tell thy manes all. Wretch that I am! Is there any one on earth to
whom I dare open my heart?

'Nicias, the Lord of this country, came hither to enjoy the pleasures of
the autumn. He saw me; he regarded me with a soft and gracious air. He
praised my flocks, and the care I took of them: he often told me that I
was genteel, and made me presents. Gods! how was I deceived! but in the
country who mistrusts? I said to myself, how kind our master is! may the
Gods reward him! all my vows shall be for him; 'tis all that I can do;
but I will forever do it. The rich are happy, and favoured by the
immortals. When bountiful, like Nicias, they deserve to be happy. This
to myself I said, and let him take my hand, and press it in his. The
other day I blushed, and dared not look up, when he put a gold ring upon
my finger. See, he said, what is engraved on this stone? A winged child,
who smiles like thee; and 'tis he that must make thee happy. As he spoke
these words, he stroaked my cheeks, that were redder than the fire. He
loves me; he has the tenderness of a father for me; how have I deserved
so much kindness from a Lord, and so rich and powerful? O, my mother,
that was all thy poor child thought. Heavens! how was I deceived! this
morning he found me in the orchard; he chuck'd me familiarly under the
chin. Come, he said, bring me some new-blown flowers to the myrtle
bower, that I may there enjoy their sweet perfumes. With haste I chose
the finest flowers; and, full of joy, I ran to the bower. Thou art, he
said, more nimble than the Zephyrs, and more beautiful than the Goddess
of flowers. Then, immortal Gods! I yet tremble at the thought; then he
catch'd me in his arms, and pressed me to his bosom, and all that love
can promise, all that is soft and seducing, flow'd from his lips.
I wept; I trembled. Unable to resist such arts, I had been forever lost.
No, thou wou'dst no longer have had a child, if thy remembrance had not
watch'd over my heart. Ah! if thy worthy mother had even seen thee
suffer such disgraceful caresses! that thought alone gave me power to
force myself from the arms of the seducer and fly.

'Now I come; O with what comfort is it that I still dare! I come to weep
over thy grave. Alas! poor and unfortunate as I am, why did I lose thee
when so young. I droop like a flower, deprived of the support that
sustain'd its feeble stalk. This cup of pure water I pour to the honour
of thy manes. Accept this garland! receive my tears! may they penetrate
even to thy ashes! Hear, O my mother, hear; 'tis to thy dear remains,
that repose beneath those flowers, which my eyes have so often bedewed:
'tis to thy sacred shade I here renew the vows of my heart. Virtue,
innocence, and the fear of the Gods, shall make the happiness of my
days. Therefore poverty shall never disturb the serenity of my mind. May
I do nothing that thou wou'dst not have approv'd with a smile of
tenderness, and I shall surely be, as thou wast, belov'd of Gods and
men: For I shall be gentle, modest, and industrious, O my mother, by
living thus, I hope to die like thee, with smiles and tears of joy.'

Glicera, on quitting the place, felt all the powerful charms of virtue.
The gentle warmth that was diffused over her mind, sparkled in her eyes,
still wet with tears. She was beautiful as those days of spring, when
the sun shines through a transient shower.

With a mind quite tranquil, she was hastening back to her labour, when
Nicias ran to meet her. 'O Glicera!' he said, and tears flowed down his
cheeks, 'I have heard thee at thy mother's tomb. Fear nothing, virtuous
maid! I thank the immortal Gods! I thank that virtue, which hath
preserved me from the crime of seducing thy innocence. Forgive me,
chaste Glicera! forgive, nor dread in me a fresh offence. My virtue
triumphs through thine. Be wise, be virtuous, and be ever happy. That
meadow surrounded with trees, near to thy mother's tomb, and half the
flock thou keepest, are thine.

'May a man of equal virtue complete the happiness of thy days! weep not,
virtuous maid! but accept the present I offer thee with a sincere heart,
and suffer me from henceforth to watch over thy happiness. If thou
refusest me, a remorse for offending thy virtue will be the torment of
all my days. Forget, O vouchsafe to forget my crime, and I will revere
thee as a propitious power that hath defended me against myself.'

  [[Sources:

  Original: Daphne, prose, by Salomon Gessner 1730-1788.
  Translations: Aminta, prose, in Gessner's works, 1802 (different
    translation than the one given here);
  prose, "Nicias and Glicera";
  verse, "Daphne, or the Orphan".]]




  THE MISER AND PRODIGAL.

The hoarding miser torments himself, and the spendthrift punishes the
innocent. The hoarder heaps up for others; and the prodigal scatters
what others had heaped. The hoarder thinks so much of the time to come,
as to forget the present; the squanderer has his thoughts so much taken
up with the present, as to forget the future. The first lives as if he
were never to die, and the last as if he had but a day to enjoy. Both
are unprofitable members of society; the one occasioning a stoppage in
the circulation, and the other an haemorrhage. The hoarding miser is like
a fog that infests the air; the prodigal resembles an outrageous storm
that overturns all in its way. The hoarding miser is a ridiculous
creature, and the prodigal a noxious animal.



           *       *       *       *

  Interesting History Of
  _THE BARON DE LOVZINSKI._

  With a relation of the most remarkable occurrences in the life
  of the celebrated COUNT PULASKI, well known as the champion of
  American Liberty, and who bravely fell in its defence before
  Savannah, 1779.

  _Interspersed with Anecdotes of the late unfortunate KING of POLAND,
  so recently dethroned._

  (Continued from page 166.)

Pulaski pressed me, but in vain, for I was unable to consent. As soon as
Lodoiska knew that I should depart alone, and perceived that we were
resolved not to inform her whither, she shed torrents of tears, and
strove to detain me. I began to hesitate.

Lovzinski, cries my father-in-law at this critical moment, Lovzinski,
depart! Wife, children, relations, all ought to be sacrificed, when it
is necessary for the salvation of your country.

I instantly mount my horse, and make such haste, that I arrive by the
middle of next day at Czenstachow. I here found forty brave men waiting
for me, and determined for the most hazardous enterprise.

"Gentlemen," said I to them, "we are now met on purpose to carry a king
out of the midst of his own capital. Those capable of attempting such a
bold enterprise, are alone capable of effecting it: either success or
death awaits on us!"

After this short harangue we prepare to depart. Kaluvski, forewarned of
our design, had already procured twelve waggons, loaded with hay and
straw, each of which was drawn by four good horses.

We instantly disguise ourselves as peasants; we hide our clothes, our
sabres, our pistols, and the saddles of our horses, in the hay with
which our waggons were partly filled; we agree upon certain signs, and I
give them a _watch-word_, to be used according to circumstances.--Twelve
of the conspirators, commanded by Kaluvski, enter into Warsaw,
accompanied by as many waggons, which they themselves conduct. I divide
the rest of my little troop into several brigades, on purpose to avert
suspicion: each is ordered to march at some distance from the other, and
to gain the capital by different gates.

We depart, and on Saturday the 2d of November, 1771, arrive at Warsaw,
and lodge together at a convent belonging to the Dominicans.

On the next day, which was Sunday, and which will for ever form a
memorable epoch in the annals of Poland, one of my people of the name of
Stravinski, being covered with rags, places himself near the collegiate
church, and soon after proceeds demanding charity even at the gates of
the royal palace, where he observes every thing that passed. Several of
the conspirators walked up and down the six narrow streets, in the
neighbourhood of the great square, where Kaluvski and myself were
posted. We remain in ambuscade during the whole day, and part of the
afternoon.

At six o'clock at night the king leaves the palace; he is followed, and
is seen to enter the hotel of his uncle, the grand chancellor of
Lithuania.

All our followers receive notice of this event, and assemble instantly:
they throw off their miserable clothes, saddle their horses, and prepare
their arms, in the large square belonging to the convent, where their
movements are entirely concealed. They then sally forth, one after the
other, under favour of the night. Too well known in Warsaw to hazard
appearing there, without disguising my self, I still wear my peasant's
dress, and I mount an excellent horse, caparisoned, however, after the
common manner.

I then point out my followers the different posts in the suburbs, which
I had assigned them before our departure from the convent, and they were
dispersed in such a manner, that all the avenues to the palace of the
grand chancellor were carefully and strictly guarded.

Between nine and ten o'clock at night, the king comes forth on purpose
to return home; and we remark, with joy, that his attendants were far
from being numerous.

The carriage was preceded by two men, who carried _flambeaux_, some
officers of his suit, two gentlemen and an esquire followed. I know not
what was the name of the grandee in the coach along with the king. There
were two pages, one to each door, two haydukes running by the side of
the equipage, and three footmen, in the royal livery behind.

The king proceeds slowly: part of my people assemble at some distance;
twelve of the most determined spring forward: I put myself at their
head, and we advance at a good pace.

As there was a Russian garrison at that very moment in Warsaw, we affect
to speak the language of those foreigners, so that our petty troop might
be mistaken for one of their patroles.

We overtake the carriage at about a hundred and fifty paces from the
grand chancellor's palace, and exactly between those of the bishop of
Cracow and of the late grand general of Poland.

All of a sudden we pass the heads of the foremost horses, so that those
who preceded, found themselves separated from those who surrounded the
royal equipage.

I instantly give the signal agreed upon. Kaluvski gallops up, with the
remainder of the conspirators: I present a pistol to the postillion, who
instantly stops; the coachman is fired upon, and precipitated beneath
the wheels. Of the two haydukes who endeavoured to defend their prince,
one drops, pierced with two balls; the other is overturned by means of a
backhanded stroke from a sabre, which he receives on the head; the steed
belonging to the esquire falls down covered with wounds; one of the
pages is dismounted, and his horse taken; pistol-balls fly about in all
directions--in short, the attack was so hot, and the fire so violent,
that I trembled for the king's life.

He himself, however, preserving the utmost coolness in the midst of the
danger, had now descended from his carriage, and was striving to regain
his uncle's palace on foot. Kaluvski arrests and seizes him by the hair;
seven or eight of the conspirators surround, disarm, overpower him, and,
pressing him between their horses, make off at a full gallop towards the
end of the street.

During this moment, I confess that I thought Pulaski had basely deceived
me; that the death of the monarch was resolved upon, and that a plot had
been formed to assassinate him.

All of a sudden I form my resolves; I clap spurs to my horse, overtake
the little band, cry out to them to stop, and threaten to kill the first
person who should dare to disobey me.

That God who is the protector of good kings, watched over the safety of
M. de P***! Kaluvski and his followers stop at the sound of my
well-known voice. We mount the king on horseback, make off at full
speed, and regain the ditch that surrounded the city, which the monarch
is constrained to leap, in company with us.

At that moment a panic terror takes possession of my troop; at fifty
paces distant from the ramparts, there were no more than seven who
surrounded the person of the king.

The night was dark and rainy, and it was necessary to dismount every
instant, on purpose to sound the morass with which we were surrounded.

The horse on which the monarch rode fell twice, and broke his leg at the
second fall: during these violent movements, his majesty lost his
_pelisse_, and the shoe belonging to his left foot.

"If you wish that I should follow you," says he to us, you must furnish
me with another horse and a pair of boots.

We remount him once more, and, on purpose to gain the road by which
Pulaski had promised me to advance, we resolve to pass through a village
called Burakow; but the king exclaims, "Do not go that way; there are
Russians there!"

I immediately change our _route_; but in proportion as we advance
through the wood of Beliany, our number continues to diminish. In a
short time, I perceive nobody around me but Kaluvski and Stravinski:
a few minutes after, we are challenged by a Russian sentinel on
horseback, at whose voice we instantly stop, greatly alarmed for our
safety.

"Let us kill him!" cries the ferocious Kaluvski, pointing to the king.
I instantly avow to him, without disguise, the horror which such a
proposition inspired me with. "Very well, you may then take upon you the
task of conducting him," adds this cruel hearted man, who immediately
after precipitates himself into the woods. Stravinski follows him, and I
alone remain with the king.

"Lovzinski," says he, addressing himself to me, as soon as they were out
of sight; "it is you, I can no longer doubt it; it is you, for I will
remember your voice!" I utter not a single word in reply. He then mildly
adds, "It is certainly you Lovzinski! Who would have thought this ten
years ago?"

We find ourselves at that moment near to the convent of Beliany, distant
no more than a single league from Warsaw.

"Lovzinski," continues the king, "permit me to enter this convent, and
save yourself."

"You must follow me," was my only answer.

"It is in vain," rejoins the monarch, "that you are disguised; it is in
vain that you endeavour to assume a feigned voice: I know you well, I am
fully assured that you are Lovzinski: ah, who would have said so ten
years since? You would then have lost your life, on condition of
preserving that of your friend."

His majesty now ceases to speak; we advance some time, in profound
silence, which he again breaking, exclaims. "I am overcome with
fatigue--_if you wish to carry me alive, permit me to repose myself for
a single moment_."

  (_To be continued._)




  ANECDOTE OF CAESARE ARETHUSI.

Caesare Arethusi, was invited by the duke of Ferrara, to visit his court,
and received there with extraordinary respect. That prince sat to him
for his portrait, admired the performance highly, gave him evident
proofs not only of his favour, but of his friendship and esteem; and
having, at last, concluded that his generous treatment must inevitably
have secured his gratitude (if not his affection) he freely acquainted
him with his real inducement for inviting him to Ferrara. Confiding in
the integrity of the painter, he told him there was a lady in the city
whose portrait he wished to possess; but that it was to be procured in a
manner so secret, as neither to be suspected by the lady herself, nor
any of her friends. He promised an immense reward to Arethusi, if he was
successful and retentive; he threatened him with the utmost severity of
his resentment, if ever he suffered the secret to transpire.

The artist watched a proper opportunity to sketch the likeness of the
lady, unnoticed by any; and having shewn it to the duke, he seemed
exceedingly struck with the resemblance, as well as the graceful air of
the figure, and ordered Arethusi to paint a portrait from that sketch,
as delicately as he possibly could, but, above all things, recommended
it to him, to keep it from every eye except his own.

When the picture was finished, the painter himself beheld it with
admiration, and thought it would be injurious to his fame to conceal
from the world, a performance which he accounted perfect; and through an
excess of pride and vanity shewed it privately to several of his
friends, who could not avoid commending the work, while they detested
the folly and ingratitude of the artist.

The secret thus divulged, circulated expeditiously; it soon reached the
ears of the lady, and her family, who were exceedingly irritated; and
the duke appeared so highly enraged at the treachery of Arethusi, that
he was almost provoked to put him to death; but he only banished him for
ever from his dominions.




  ADVICE.

When you come or find yourself coming full bat, it is called, against
another person, you endeavour to get out of the way. Let an old man
advise you not to do so. Stand still. He will endeavour to get out of
your way, and, by your standing still, he will effect it. If you both
endeavour to get by at the same time, as there are but two sides, it is
an even wager you run against each other.



           *       *       *       *

     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._



             ON THE ORIGIN OF LOVE.

Helvetius, who has scrutinised the effects of first impressions, with an
acuteness which few of our moral philosophers can boast, led me, the
other day, to consider on his theory, the origin of those refined and
delicate sensations, which, in the mutual attachment of the sexes, give
birth to the choicest blessings of humanity. According to his way of
reasoning, I should suppose our ideas of beauty, and those expressions
of the countenance which captivate the heart, should be ascribed to the
earliest impressions on the mind. Every one's experience will suggest to
him the proof of this assertion. The first impression I can recollect
when my eyes opened upon this world, was the sight of a beautiful
mother, who hung over me with looks of the most fervent love. A face
like hers, to me therefore, naturally became the most agreeable object
in nature: And it must be to some secret analogy of feature that I owe
that delirium of love, which I have since experienced from the charms of
a mistress, whose countenance bore all those striking expressions of
tenderness which characterised hers.

So much for the definition.---I cannot but add, how truly deplorable it
is, that a passion which constitutes almost the only honourable _trait_
in human nature, should now be every where trampled upon by avarice. For
my part, altho' I have suffered more from the _fancied_ than ever I
shall probably again from the real preference of a wealthy rival, yet,
I trust I shall not witness, as our country advances, the same instances
of legal prostitution as I have done in some other parts of the world.
With us it is still more unpardonable; as the means of bettering our
fortunes are so much more easy or certain. If there are those who are so
far insensible to the refinements of sentiment as to give a preference
to those enjoyments which are to be purchased, let them recollect, that
by renouncing an union of the same taste and disposition, they abandon
the only hope they can confidently entertain of nuptial constancy and
domestic sunshine. If any one objects to me, that I may frequently be
mistaken in this result of sincere love, I should still exclaim

  "O mentis gratissimus error!"--and wish for
  "Tribus _Anticyris_ caput insanabile nusquam."

    Yours, &c.

      PETRARCH.




  POLITICS.

"Politics," says the elegant and ingenious Mr. Grenville, in his Maxims,
"are the food of sense exposed to the hunger of folly." And indeed they
seem to be devoured with so voracious an appetite, that no good
assimilation or chylification of them takes place in the body politic in
consequence of it. The appetite is great, the digestion imperfect.



           *       *       *       *

  ANECDOTE.

No object can be more pleasing to a virtuous mind, than to behold a
well-directed benevolence, productive of a grateful and happy heart;
while the smiling scenes of cultivation and society succeed to the
solitary wastes of savage nature. Mr. Wood, a free merchant of Decca,
coming thence to Calcutta, where the Ganges flows thro' vast tracks of
uncultivated and marshy woods, which render the navigation peculiarly
difficult and dangerous, happened to fall in with a poor native
wood-cutter. In the course of conversation, the latter said, that if he
had but fifty rupees (5l.) he could make a comfortable settlement. The
fifty rupees Mr. Wood lent him. When this worthy man, after staying some
time at Calcutta, returned to Decca, he saw the pleasing effects of his
bounty in an advanced settlement, on a small eminence newly cleared from
standing trees. Unsolicited, he lent the wood-cutter fifty rupees more.
The next voyage, Mr. Wood was delighted to behold the rapid progress of
the settlement, and astonished to meet the wood-cutter offering to pay
half the small, but generous loan. Mr. Wood refused to receive it at
that time, and lent him 100 rupees more. About eighteen months after the
commencement of the settlement, he had the inexpressible satisfaction of
seeing his industrious wood-cutter at the head of five populous
villages, and a spacious tract of fine land under cultivation, drained
and cleared of swamps and woods. The woodcutter now repaid the principal
he had borrowed, and tendered the interest, while tears of gratitude and
humble affection stole down his venerable, his happy and expressive
countenance. But how inexpressible the feelings of the benevolent
merchant! Let those plunderers, who return with the wealth of nations
sinking under their cruelty and oppression, while they wanton in all the
luxuries of life---let them still

  In palaces lie straining their low thought
  To form unreal wants----

To sensations like his they must ever be strangers. An enjoyment so
exquisite, so pure, so permanent, not all the riches of the East can
purchase.




  _NEW-YORK._

  MARRIED,

On Saturday the 12th inst. at Schenectady, by the Rev. Dr. Smith, Mr.
JEREMIAH VAN RENSSELAER, son of Gen. Robert Van Rensselaer, of
Claverack, to Miss SIBELLA A. KANE, daughter of Mr. John Kane of that
place.

On Thursday evening the 17th inst. by the Rev. Dr. Foster, GEORGE
SIMPSON, Esq. to Miss MARY PENN, both of this city.

On Sunday evening the 20th inst. Mr. THOMAS MAHAN, to Miss HANNAH
CURTIS, both of this place.



           *       *       *       *

     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._



  The reader will easily recollect the addresses to Winter published
  in our two last numbers. The following forms

  ANOTHER WINTRY PROSPECT.

  The joys which summer lately gave,
    Autumnal winds have swept away;
  And Sol, in haste his steeds to lave,
    Flings to the earth the shorten'd day.

  Then let us leave these naked plains,
    And to the crowded town repair;
  Here frightful desolation reigns,
    But happier scenes await us there.

  When winter with tremendous ire
    Shall Heaven's enchanting face deform,
  The sheltering roof, the social fire,
    Shall shield us from the raging storm.

  And then affection's brightened chain,
    From long forgetfulness restor'd;
  Shall join our parted friends again
    Around the hospitable board.

  And oft to cheat the tedious hours,
    Shall knowledge spread "her ample page,"
  And from her undecaying bowers
    Produce the fruits of every age.

  But when with every comfort blest,
    That peace and plenty can bestow,
  Shall pity never be a guest,
    Nor lead us to the house of woe?

  Oh yes--we'll seek the dreary cell,
    Where helpless penury retires;
  Affliction's morbid glooms dispel,
    And kindle Hope's extinguish'd fires.

  Grateful for every blessing sent,
    We'll strive that blessing to impart;
  And with the balsam of content
    Restore to joy the wounded heart.

  Thus every pleasure sweetly shar'd
    A more delightful form shall wear,
  And Virtue's Heavenly smiles reward
    The deeds which her own impress bear.

  Then Winter, seal old Hudson's tides,
    Haspedoc's rapid course arrest;
  And where their streams triumphant glide,
    Be thy restricting powers confest.

  We then, from all intrusion free,
    Will consolation find in this,
  That thy severe, though kind decree,
    Confines us to ourselves and bliss.

    MONIMIA.

      New-York, Nov. 9th, 1796.

  [[The quoted words "her ample page" are from Gray's _Elegy_.]]



           *       *       *       *

  THE SEASON OF DELIGHT,
  A SONG.

  Recitative.

  Once, happy as the playful fawn,
    Which tastes no sorrow, knows no care,
  Fair Mira's heart was pleasure's throne,
    Till love usurp'd dominion there:
  Then oft its cares employ'd her tongue,
  And thus the alter'd Mira sung.

  Air.

  In youth, gay season of delight!
    How sweetly glide the hours along;
  Joy, mirth, and innocence unite,
    To prompt the care-untainted song.

  Yet e'en in youth a danger lies,
    For then the tend'rest passions move,
  Destructive to our sportive joys,
    Which fly before the cares of love.

  Thus oft beneath the smoothest seas,
    Where scarce an eddy plays around;
  Obedient to the flutt'ring breeze,
    The unsuspected rock is found.




  SONNET
  TO HELEN MARIA WILLIAMS.

  Enchanting Williams! Nature's darling child,
    Foster'd by Genius, and matur'd by Taste,
  Who kindly on thy earliest efforts smil'd,
    And with their choicest gifts thy fancy grac'd:

  Gave thee a pow'r to steal upon the soul,
    Mild as descend the evening's dewy stores,
  And yet resistless as the waves that roll
    O'er ocean's bed, when loud the tempest roars.

  Taught thee to form, beyond the pow'r of art,
  The tale that, as it melts, amends the heart--
  The tale that, spite of Envy's self shall live,
    Blest with th' approving Critic's smile benign;
  For O! dear maid, 'tis thine alone to give
    To energetic force a grace divine.




  TO MARIA.

  They tell me love's a transient flame,
    Just kept alive by beauty's ray,
  As fleeting as the breath of fame,
    Which meets the ear, then dies away.

  But if to beauty sense be join'd,
    Secure the hallow'd flame shall rest,
  Tho' time, and fell disease, combin'd,
    Assay to force it from the breast:

  As we then tread the vale of life,
    Our souls in unison shall move,
  Who most can please be all our strife,
    And rivet thus the chains of love.


NEW-YORK: _+Printed by JOHN BULL, No. 115, Cherry-Street+, where every
Kind of Printing work is executed with the utmost Accuracy and
Dispatch.--+Subscriptions+ for this +Magazine+ (at 2s. per month) are
taken in at the Printing-Office, and by E. MITCHELL, Bookseller, No. 9,
Maiden-Lane._



           *       *       *       *



  _UTILE DULCI._

  THE NEW-YORK WEEKLY MAGAZINE;
  or, Miscellaneous Repository.

  +Vol. II.+]  +Wednesday, December 7, 1796.+  [+No. 75.+


  +Extraordinary Intrepidity of the Jomsburgians.+

History informs us, that Harold, surnamed Blaatand, or Blue Tooth,
(a king of Denmark, who reigned in the middle of the tenth century) had
founded on the coast of Pomerania, which he had subdued, a city named
Julin or Jomsburg; where he sent a colony of young Danes, and bestowed
the government on a celebrated warrior named Palnatoko. This new
Lycurgus had made of that city a second Sparta, and every thing was
directed to this single end, to form complete soldiers. The author who
has left us the history of this colony, assures us, that "it was
forbidden them so much as to mention the name of fear, even in the most
imminent dangers." No citizen of Jomsburg was to yield to any number,
however great, but to fight intrepidly without flying, even from a very
superior force. The sight of present and inevitable death would have
been no excuse with them for making any the least complaint, or for
shewing the slightest apprehension. And this legislator really appears
to have eradicated from the minds of most of the youths bred up under
him, all traces of that sentiment so natural and so universal, which
makes men think on their destruction with horror. Nothing can shew this
better than a single fact in their history, which deserves to have place
here for its singularity. Some of them having made an irruption into the
territories of a powerful Norwegian lord, named Haquin, were overcome in
spite of the obstinacy of their resistance; and the most distinguished
among them being made prisoners, were, according to the custom of those
times, condemned to death. The news of this, far from afflicting them,
was, on the contrary, received with joy. The first who was led to
punishment was content to say, without changing countenance, "why should
not the same happen to me as did to my father? he died, and so must I."
A warrior named Thorchill, who was to cut off the head of the second,
having asked him what he felt at the sight of death, he answered, "that
he remembered too well the laws of Jomsburg to utter any words that
denoted fear." The third, in reply to the same question, said, "he
rejoiced to die in glory, and that he preferred such a death to an
infamous life like that of Thorchill's." The fourth made an answer much
longer and more extraordinary. "I suffer with a good heart; and the
present hour is to me very agreeable. I only beg of you," added he,
addressing himself to Thorchill, "to be very quick in cutting off my
head; for it is a question often debated by us at Jomsburg, whether one
retains any sense after being beheaded. I will therefore grasp this
knife in my hand; if, after my head is cut off, I strike it towards you,
it will shew I have not lost all sense; if I let it drop, it will be a
proof to the contrary. Make haste, therefore, and decide the dispute."
'Thorchill, adds the historian, cut off his head in the most expeditious
manner, but the knife, as might be expected, dropped from his hand.' The
fifth shewed the same tranquility, and died rallying and jeering his
enemies. The sixth begged of Thorchill that he might not be led to
punishment like a sheep; "strike the blow in my face," said he, "I will
sit still without shrinking; and take notice whether I once wink my eyes
or betray one sign of fear in my countenance. For we inhabitants of
Jomsburg are used to exercise ourselves in trials of this sort, so as to
meet the stroke of death without once moving." He kept his promise
before all the spectators, and received the blow without the least sign
of fear, or so much as winking his eyes. The seventh, says the
historian, was a very beautiful young man, in the flower of his age. His
long fair hair, as fine as silk, floated in curls and ringlets on his
shoulders. Thorchill asked him what he thought of death? "I receive it
willingly," said he, "since I have fulfilled the greatest duty of life,
and have seen all those put to death whom I would not survive. I only
beg of you one favour, not to let my hair be touched by a slave, or
stained with my blood."

  [[Notes:

  The place name is generally spelled Jomsborg (Denmark). This account
    is probably not historical.
  The "powerful Norwegian lord, named Haquin" is the historical Haakon
    Jarl.]]




  COMMUNION WITH OUR OWN HEARTS.

If we could but learn to commune with our own hearts, and know what
noble company we can make them, we should little regard the elegance and
the splendors of the worthless. Almost all men have been taught to call
life a passage, and themselves the travellers. The similitude still may
be improved, when we observe that the good are joyful and serene, like
travellers that are going towards home; the wicked but by intervals
happy, like travellers that are going into exile.



           *       *       *       *

  THE VICTIM OF MAGICAL DELUSION;
  _OR, INTERESTING MEMOIRS OF MIGUEL, DUKE DE CA*I*A._
  Unfolding Many Curious Unknown Historical Facts.

  _Translated from the German of Tschink._

  (Continued from page 171.)

The Duke wrote only the following few lines:

"My dearest love! I address myself to you on the brink of the grave;
your hand can save or hurl me down; my doom rests with you. O! come,
angelic woman, and lead me from the gate of death to a paradisiacal
life; come and reward my love, which alone supports my breaking heart."

P.S. "Vasconcel*os has bled under the avenging sword of the redeemers of
my country."

The answer of the Countess was to the following purport:

"O! that this letter could fly on the pinions of love, in order to carry
instantly to my friend health and joy. Yes, your request is granted.
Receive, my dearest Duke, to whom my HEART has yielded, receive my HAND
too, and the vow of eternal fidelity. My uncle having recovered his
health, nothing shall detain me from embarking in the first vessel which
shall sail for Port***l. The idea that your best wishes, the blessing of
your father and my uncle, and the guardian genius of love, will conduct
me on my voyage, will assist me to conquer my fear of the sea. I should
never have done writing if this letter did not require expedition, and
my friend, who arrived here the day before yesterday, insisted upon
adding a few words to those of

  "Your

    "AMELIA CLAIRVAL."

"Give me leave, my Lord, to add only my sincerest congratulations, and
to ask your Grace, whether you do not acknowledge now as a soothsayer

  "Your humble and obedient servant,

    ANNA DE DELIER."

The Duke had begun to mend rapidly ever since the Marquis consented to
his union with Amelia; the letter of the Countess restored his health
entirely. No mortal could be more happy and cheerful than the Duke of
Cami*a. It was natural that Alumbrado, who, as the author of his
happiness, had no small claim to his gratitude, should acquire in his
eyes a value, which entirely dispelled the antipathy he at first had
conceived against him. I soon was made sensible of that change, when I
took one time the opportunity of dropping a few words concerning
Alumbrado. "I cannot conceive," the Duke replied warmly, "why you are so
much prejudiced against that man; it is true his physiognomy does not
speak much in his recommendation; it is, however, very unphilosophical
to condemn a person merely on account of his features." "Say whatever
you will," I replied, "an undescribable repelling sensation, which
certainly does not deceive me--" "You have conceived an antipathy
against him," the Duke interrupted me, "and that cannot be refuted by
arguments; however, I will remind you of a fact, which here will be in
its proper place. Socrates, whose physiognomy, as you will recollect,
was very much to his disadvantage, happened once to be in a company of
friends, when a philosopher, who pretended to be a physiognomist, took
the word; he was requested to delineate the character of Socrates, who
was a stranger to him. The philosopher named several vices which he
pretended to read plainly in his face. A general laughter was the effect
of his judgment; however, Socrates remained serious, and declared that
he really had felt a natural propensity to those vices, but had got the
better of it by unremitted assiduity. The application of this instance,
I leave to your own good sense."

"How?" I exclaimed with surprise, "you compare Alumbrado with Socrates,
an absurd ascetic with a reverend sage, hypocrisy with virtue?" This
enormous infatuation vexed me to such a degree, that I could not help
giving vent to my just resentment. However, I perceived soon that my
words did not make the least impression on my misguided friend. Being
therefore obliged to desist from my endeavours to change the opinion of
the Duke, I strove with additional assiduity to cut off his connection
with Alumbrado, at least till he should be united to Amelia, expecting
that this angel would soon drive away that demon of darkness. I proposed
to the Duke a journey to **ina, for the benefit of his health, and
offered to accompany him. He consented to it without difficulty,
expecting to beguile by exercise and diversions, the time which, from
his impatience of seeing Amelia arrive, appeared to him to creep on with
snail-like slowness. My aim would however have been attained without
this expedient, Alumbrado leaving Li*bon unexpectedly; yet we set out on
our proposed journey.

We had not been seven days at **ina when the Duke was already impatient
to leave that place. However improbable it was Amelia could arrive so
soon, yet this idea left him no rest. We returned on the eighth day, and
travelled day and night.

It was five o'clock in the morning, when we alighted at his palace.
Scarcely had we entered his apartment when his Secretary brought a
letter which he said had been left by a pilot at a late hour last night.
The Duke reddened and grew pale alternately, while he opened it.---"She
is arrived, she is arrived!" he exclaimed, and the letter dropped out of
his hand trembling with rapture. "She is arrived!" he repeated, taking
it up and re-perusing the gladful lines. The emotions of his mind were
so violent, that he was obliged to sit down. "Amelia is arrived!" he
exclaimed again, rising and straining me to his bosom. The letter was
couched in the following words:

"Has not your heart told you, my dearest Duke that I am near you?
I should already have pressed you to my panting heart, if the Captain
had suffered me to go in the boat which will set the pilot on shore. But
he has opposed my design, on account of the swelling sea and the great
distance. If Heaven favours us you will see me to-morrow.

Your

  AMELIA."

"Well, my friend," said the Duke, when I returned the paper to him, "has
my presentiment deceived me? have not I done well to urge our
return?--But why do we tarry here? (he added) let us fly to the
harbour!"

The horses were instantly saddled, and we mounted them in our travelling
dress. We rode in full speed, and each of us indulged silently his
sentiments.--The sky was gloomy, and the universal stillness, not
interrupted by the least breeze of air, seemed to presage no good. At
length we fancied, with astonishment, we heard the distant rolling of
thunder; however we soon perceived that it was the echo caused by the
report of guns. The distant firing of cannon, and the forerunners of a
rising tempest, thrilled my heart with chilling anxiety, for I
apprehended the ship must be in great danger. Soon after the firing
ceased, but this calm was more dreadful to me than the report of the
cannon. We spurred our horses, without uttering a word, for neither of
us dared to confess his apprehensions. Being at length arrived at the
sea shore---Heavens! what a scene of horror did we behold! the surge was
dreadful, the cliffs and the strand were covered with a white spume. The
rays of the sun could not penetrate the fog which overspread the surface
of the sea. We could, therefore, not discover the island where the ship
was lying at anchor, it appearing to us in the shape of a black cloud,
which seemed to be a mile distant from the shore. The veil which
concealed the danger of the ship from our eyes only served to augment
our anxiety.

A troop of mariners and soldiers under the command of Men*os, were
arrived with us at the shore. The drums beat, and a general volley was
fired. A flash of lightning darted instantly over the sea, and
immediately after it the report of a gun was heard. We all hastened to
the side where we had perceived the signal, and observed, through the
fog, the body and the main-yard of a large ship. We were so near that we
could hear the whistling and the acclamations of the sailors, in spite
of the roaring of the mountainous billows. The ship's crew fired a gun
every three minutes, as soon as they perceived that assistance was near.

I admired my friend's firmness of mind with which he, at a sight that
ought to have rendered him almost distracted, shewed the greatest zeal
to save the crew, ordering a large fire to be lighted on the cliffs, and
boards, cables, empty casks and provisions to be kept in readiness.

An impending hurricane seemed to be lurking in the air. The middle of
the clouds was of a horrid blackness, and their edges were of a copper
colour. The leaves of the trees were moving, and yet not a breath of air
was felt. The cries of the sea fowls, who were resorting to the island
for protection, resounded through the air.

At length we heard suddenly a dreadful roaring, as if foaming torrents
were rushing down from the summit of a lofty mountain, and every one
exclaimed, this is the hurricane! In the same moment a violent whirlwind
removed the foggy veil which had concealed the island from our eyes. We
had now a clear view of the ship; her whole deck was covered with
people, her colours were hoisted, her fore-part was secured by four
anchors, and her stern by one. Her stem opposed the billowing waves
which came roaring from the sea, and was raised so high above the
surface of the water, that one could see her whole keel, while the stern
was almost entirely buried in the foaming billows. The dangerous
situation of the vessel rendered it impossible for her to put out to
sea, or to run on store.

The howling of the wind, and the roaring of the waves, which were
swelling higher every moment, was dreadful. The whole channel between
the island and the shore was a mass of white thick froth, cut through by
black and hollow waves. The appearance of the horizon prognosticated a
long lasting storm. Some waves of a dreadful shape separated from the
main every now and then, and darted with the velocity of lightning
across the channel, while others remained immoveable like enormous
rocks. Not one blue spot could be descried in the firmament; a pale
faint glimmer enlightened heaven, earth and sea.

  (_To be continued._)




  INSTANCE OF UNCOMMON FRIENDSHIP.

Two Jewish soldiers, in the time of _Vespasian_, had made many campaigns
together; and a participation of dangers, at length, bred an union of
hearts. They were remarked throughout the whole army, as the two
friendly brothers; they felt and fought for each other.--Their
friendship might have continued, without interruption, till death, had
not the good fortune of the one alarmed the pride of the other, which
was in his promotion to be a centurion under the famous _John_, who
headed a particular party of the Jewish male-contents.

From this moment their former love was converted into the most
inveterate enmity. They attached themselves to opposite factions, and
sought each other's lives in the conflict of adverse party. In this
manner they continued for more than two years, vowing mutual revenge,
and animated with an unconquerable spirit of aversion. At length,
however, that party of the _Jews_, to which the mean soldier belonged,
joining with the _Romans_, it became victorious, and drove _John_, with
all his adherents, into the temple. History has given us more than one
picture of the dreadful conflagration of that superb edifice. The
_Roman_ soldiers were gathered round it; the whole temple was in flames,
and thousands were seen amidst them, within its sacred circuit. It was
in this situation of things, that the now-successful soldier saw his
former friend upon the battlements of the highest tower, looking round
with horror, and just ready to be consumed with flames. All his former
tenderness now returned; he saw the man of his bosom just going to
perish; and, unable to withstand the impulse, he ran spreading his arms,
and crying out to his friend, to leap down from the top, and find safety
with him. The Centurion from above heard and obeyed; and, casting
himself from the top of the tower, into his fellow-soldier's arms, both
fell a sacrifice on the spot; one being crushed to death by the weight
of his companion, and the other dashed to pieces by the greatness of his
fall.



           *       *       *       *

  HISTORY OF THE BEARD.

The respect which has been shewn to the Beard in all parts of the
civilized, and in some parts of the uncivilized world, is well known to
the slightest erudition; nay, a certain prejudice in its favour still
exists, even in countries where the razor has long been omnipotent. This
impression seems to arise very naturally from the habit of associating
with it those ideas of experience and wisdom of which it is the emblem.
It cannot wait upon the follies of youth; its bushy and descending
honours are not known to grace the countenance of early life; and tho'
it may be said, in some degree, to grow with our growth, and strengthen
with our strength, it continues to flourish in our decline, and attains
its most honourable form and beauty when the knees tremble, the voice
grows shrill, and the pate is bare.

When the bold and almost blasphemous pencil of the enthusiastic painter
has aimed at representing the Creator of the world upon the canvass,
a flowing beard has ever been one of the characteristic and essential
marks of the Supreme Divinity. The Pagan Jupiter, and the graver
inhabitants of Olympus, would not be known without this majestic
ornament. Philosophy, till our smock faced days, has considered it as
the appropriate symbol of its profession. Judaic Superstition, Egyptian
Wisdom, Attic Elegance, and Roman Virtue, has been its fond protectors.
To make it an object of dissention, and alternately to consider it as a
sign of orthodoxy or the standard of heresy, was reserved for the
fantastical zeal of the Christian Church.

In more modern times, not only provincial and national, but general
Councils have been convened, Synods have been summoned, ecclesiastical
Congregations and cloistered Chapters of every denomination have been
assembled, to consider, at different periods, the character of this
venerable grown of the human visage. Infinite disputes have been, of
course, engendered, sometimes with respect to its form, at other times
with regard to its existence. Religion interested herself in one age, in
contending for that pointed form to which Nature conducts it: at a
succeeding period, anathemas have been denounced against those who
refused to give it a rounder shape; and to those, other denunciations
have followed, which changed it to the square or the scollop. But, while
religious caprice--for religion, sorry am I to say it, seems to be
troubled with caprices---quarrelled about form and shape, the disputes
were confined within the pale of the European Church: but, when the
beard lessened into whiskers, and the scythe of ecclesiastical
discipline threatened to mow down every hair from off the face, the East
sounded the alarm, and the churches of Asia and Africa took up the
cause, and supported, with all the violence of argument and
remonstrance, those honours of the chin that they still preserve, and to
which the existing inhabitants of those climates offer up a perpetual
incense.

In the history of the Gallic Church, the scenes of religious comedy
still live in description. For example:--a bearded Bishop appears at the
door of a Cathedral in all the pomp of Prelacy, and demands installation
to the diocese to which he is appointed. He is there met by a troop of
beardless Canons, and refused admittance, unless he will employ the
golden scissors they present to him, to cut that flowing ornament from
his face, which they would think a disgrace to their own, as well as to
the religion they profess. This same history, also, is not barren of
examples, where the sturdy prelate has turned indignant from the
disgraceful proposal, and sought the enforcing aid of sovereign power,
which has not always been able, without much difficulty, to compel the
reluctant chapter to acknowledge a bearded Diocesan. Others, unwilling
to risk or delay the power and wealth of an episcopal throne for the
sake of a cumbrous bush of hair, have, by the ready sacrifice of their
beards, been installed amid acclamations and hosannas, as disgraceful as
they were undeserved. It may appear still more ridiculous, but it is no
less true, that some of these bishops have compounded the matter with
their refractory clergy, in giving up the greater part of the beard, but
retaining the growth of the upper lip in the form of whiskers. The idea
of a bishop 'en moustaches' must trouble the spirit of a modern
christian; but such there have been, who, in the act of sacrificing to
the God of Peace, have exhibited the fierce terrific aspect of a German
Pioneer.

At length, the persecuted Beard, which has been the object of such
faithful veneration, finds in Europe, if we except part of Turkey, its
only asylum in the Capuchin Cloister; unless we add the casual
protection which is given to it by the fanatical Jew, or mendicant
Hermit.




  _The following beautiful character is extracted from Mrs. D'Arblay's
  new work, entitled Camilla, or a Picture of Youth; Publishing by
  the Editor on wove paper._

The form and the mind of Lavinia were in the most perfect harmony. Her
polished complexion was fair, clear, and transparent; her features were
of the extremest delicacy, her eyes of the softest blue, and her smile
displayed internal serenity. The unruffled sweetness of her disposition
bore the same character of modest excellence. Joy, hope, and prosperity,
sickness, sorrow, and disappointment, assailed alike in vain the uniform
gentleness of her temper: yet though thus exempt from all natural
turbulence, either of pleasure or of pain, the meekness of her
composition degenerated not into insensibility; it was open to all the
feminine feelings of pity, of sympathy, and of tenderness.




  REFLECTION ON THE EARTH.

The Earth, gentle and indulgent, ever subservient to the wants of man,
spreads his walks with flowers, and his table with plenty; returns with
interest every good committed to her care; and, though she produces the
poison, she still supplies the antidote; though constantly teazed more
to furnish the luxuries of man than his necessities, yet, even to the
last, she continues her kind indulgence, and, when life is over, she
piously covers his remains in her bosom.



           *       *       *       *

  Interesting History Of
  _THE BARON DE LOVZINSKI._

  With a relation of the most remarkable occurrences in the life
  of the celebrated COUNT PULASKI, well known as the champion of
  American Liberty, and who bravely fell in its defence before
  Savannah, 1779.

  _Interspersed with Anecdotes of the late unfortunate KING of POLAND,
  so recently dethroned._

  (Continued from page 174.)

I assist him to descend from his horse; he sits down upon the grass, and
making me sit down by his side, he takes one of my hands and presses it
between his own:

"Lovzinski, you whom I have so much loved, you who know better than any
one the purity of my intentions, how comes it about that you have taken
up arms against me? Ungrateful Lovzinski! shall I never find you but
amongst my most bitter enemies? Do you return but on purpose to
sacrifice me?"

He then, in the most affecting language, recapitulates the pleasures of
our early youth; our more intimate connection at an age approaching to
manhood, the tender friendship which we had sworn to each other, and the
regard which he had ever treated me with since that period. He spoke to
me of the honours with which he would have loaded me during his reign,
if I had been ambitious to merit them: he reproached me more
particularly respecting the unworthy enterprise of which I appeared to
be the leader, but of which, he said, he was well assured that I was no
more than the instrument.

He threw all the horror of the plot upon Pulaski, representing to me, at
the same time, that the author of such an attempt was not the sole
culpable person; that I could not charge myself with its execution
without committing a crime; and that this odious complaisance, so highly
treasonable in a subject, was infinitely more in a friend. He concluded
by pressing me to restore him to his liberty: "Fly," said he to me; "and
be assured, if I encounter any of the Russians patroles, I shall tell
them that you have pursued an opposite road from that which you have
taken."

The king continued to press me with the most earnest entreaties: his
natural eloquence, augmented by the danger of his situation, carried
persuasion to my heart, and awakened the most tender sentiments there.

I confess that I staggered; I balanced the circumstances for some time
in my own mind, but Pulaski at length triumphed.

I thought that I still heard the fierce republican reproaching me with
my pusillanimity. The love of one's country has perhaps its fanaticism
and its superstitions: but if I was then culpable, I am still so; I am
more than ever persuaded that in obliging the king to remount his horse
again, I performed an action that reflected honour on my patriotism.

"Is it thus," says he to me, in a melancholy accent, "that you reject
the prayer addressed to you by a friend? that you refuse the pardon
offered to you by your king? Well then, let us begone. I deliver myself
up to my unhappy fate, or rather, I abandon you to yours."

We now re-commence our journey once more; but the entreaties of the
monarch, his arguments, his reproaches, his very menaces, the struggles
which I felt within myself, affected me in such a manner, that I no
longer could discern my way. Wandering up and down the country, I kept
no one certain road: after half an hour's fatigue we found ourselves at
Marimont, and I was greatly alarmed at seeing us thus return towards
Warsaw, instead of leaving it at a distance.

At about a quarter of a league beyond this, we unfortunately fell in
with a party of Russians. The king immediately discovers himself to the
commanding officer, and then instantly adds. "In the course of the
preceding afternoon, I happened to bewilder myself during the chace;
this good peasant, whom you see here, insisted on my partaking a frugal
repast in his cottage; but as I thought that I perceived some of the
soldiers of Pulaski roaming in the neighbourhood, I was desirous of
returning to Warsaw immediately, and you will oblige me much by
instantly accompanying me thither.

"As to you, my friend," continues he, turning at the same time towards
me, "I am not at all sorry that you have given yourself this useless
trouble, for I am as much pleased at returning to my capital attended by
these gentlemen (pointing at the same time to the escort), as in
accompanying you any farther. However, it would be improper that I
should leave you without any recompence; what are you desirous of?
Speak--I will grant you any favour which you may demand of me!"

It will be easy to conceive hew much I was alarmed, for I was still
doubtful of the king's intentions. I endeavoured therefore to discover
the true meaning of his equivocal discourse, which must be either full
of a bitter irony, or a magnanimous address. M de P*** left me for some
time in this cruel uncertainty: "I behold you greatly embarrassed,"
continues he at length, with a gracious air; "you know not what to
choose! Come then, my friend, embrace me: there is indeed more honour
than profit in embracing a king (adds he with a smile); however, it must
be allowed, that, in my place, many monarchs would not be at this moment
so generous as myself!" On uttering these words, he instantly departs,
leaving me penetrated with gratitude, and confounded with so much true
greatness.

However the danger which the king had so generously relieved me from,
began every moment to assail me again. It was more than probable that a
great number of couriers expedited from Warsaw, had spread about on all
sides the astonishing news of the king's having been carried off.
Already, without doubt, the ravishers were warmly pursued. My remarkable
dress might betray me in my flight, and if I once more fell into the
hands of any of the Russians, better informed of the circumstance, all
the efforts of the king would not be able to save me. Supposing Pulaski
had obtained all the success which he expected, he must still be at a
great distance; a journey of ten more leagues at least regained for me
to perform, and my horse was entirely spent with fatigue: I endeavoured
however to spur him on, but he had not got five hundred paces before he
fell under me.

A cavalier, well mounted, happened to pass along the road by the side of
me, at this very moment; he perceived the poor animal tumble down, and,
thinking to amuse himself at the expence of an unfortunate peasant, he
began to banter me about my situation. Piqued at this buffoonery,
I resolved to punish him for his raillery, and secure my own flight at
one and the same time: I, therefore, instantly present one of my pistols
to his breast, and obliged him to surrender his own horse to me; nay,
I acknowledge to you, that, forced by the peculiarity of my situation,
I despoiled him even of his cloak, which being very large, hid all my
rags beneath it, which otherwise might have discovered me. I then cast
my purse full of gold at the feet of the astonished traveller, and
sprang forward as fast as my new horse could carry me.

Luckily for me, he was fresh and vigorous.---I dart forward twelve
leagues, with all the swiftness of an arrow: at length I think I hear
the firing of cannon, and I instantly conjecture that my father-in law
was at hand, and was employed in fighting the Russians.

I was not deceived---I arrive on the field of battle at the very moment
when one of our regiments had given way. I instantly discover myself to
the fugitives, and having rallied them beneath a neighbouring hill,
I attack the enemies in flank, while Pulaski charges them in front with
the remainder of his troops. Our manoeuvres were so well concerted, and
so admirably executed, that the Russians were entirely routed, after
experiencing a terrible carnage.

Pulaski deigned to attribute to me the honour of their defeat: "Ah!"
cries he, embracing me, after hearing the particulars of my
expedition---"ah! if your forty followers had but equalled you in
courage, the king would have been at this very moment in my camp! But
the Deity does not will it. I am grateful, however, that you have been
preserved to us; and I return you thanks for the important service which
you have rendered me: but for you, Kaluvski would have assassinated the
monarch, and my name would have been covered with an eternal opprobrium!

"I might have been able," added he, "to have advanced two miles farther;
but I rather chose to take possession of this respectable post, on
account of the security of my camp. Yesterday, in the course of my
march, I surprised, and cut in pieces, a party of Russians; this morning
I beat two more of their detachments; but another considerable corps
having collected the remainder of the vanquished, took advantage of the
night, on purpose to attack me. My soldiers, fatigued with the toil of a
long march, and three succeeding engagements, began to fly; but victory
returned to my camp at your approach. Let us entrench ourselves here; we
will wait for the Russian army, and fight while we yet have a drop of
blood remaining!"

  (To be continued.)



           *       *       *       *

  MILITARY ANECDOTE.

Gonsalvo, who was lieutenant-general to the celebrated Spanish general,
the marquis of Spinola, and governor of Milan, in 1624, intending to
take possession of a little walled village in the Palatine, called
Ogershiem, dispatched an officer, at the head of some troops upon that
errand. On the first alarm, nine tenths of the inhabitants removed to
Manheim, leaving behind them about twenty insignificant people, and a
poor shepherd, who, beside being a brave fellow, was a man of humour.
The shepherd in good time fastened the gates, let down the drawbridge,
and made a wonderful shew of resistance. A trumpeter summoned the
village in form, upon which the few inhabitants that remained made their
escape through a postern-gate, and left only the shepherd, and the
shepherdess, big with child. This unaccountable peasant, in a style of
the representative of a garrison, gave audience, from the walls, to the
military herald, and made his terms of capitulation, inch by inch,
stipulating, at the same time, for the preservation of the state, and
the free exercise of the protestant religion. Imagine, therefore, what
must be the surprise of the Spaniards, when they entered the village,
and found him and his wife only in it! Yet the droll peasant preserved
the muscles of his countenance inflexible; and, some weeks afterward,
when his wife lay in, he desired the great Gonsalvo to be godfather;
which honour the pompous Spaniard, for the jest's sake, could not
decline, but on the contrary, sent her some very handsome presents. This
account, the historian (_Mr. Spanheim, Hist. de l' Elect. Palet._) says,
might appear a little romantic to posterity, if the notoriety of it had
not been a circumstance indisputable at the time it happened.




  _SINGULAR ACCOUNT OF LA MAUPIN._

  From Burney's History of Music.

La Maupin seems to have been a most extraordinary personage. "She was
equally fond of both sexes, fought and lived like a man, and resisted
and fell like a woman. Her adventures are of a very romantic kind.
Married to a young husband, who soon was obliged to absent himself from
her, to enter on an office he had obtained in Provence, she ran away
with a fencing master, of whom she learnt the small sword, and became an
excellent fencer, which was afterwards a useful qualification to her on
several occasions. The lovers first retreated from persecution to
Marseilles; but necessity soon obliged them to solicit employment there,
at the opera; and, as both had by nature good voices, they were received
without difficulty. But soon after this she was seized with a passion
for a young person of her own sex, whom she seduced, but the object of
her whimsical affection being pursued by her friends, and taken, was
thrown into the convent at Avignon, where La Maupin soon followed her;
and having presented herself as a novice obtained admission. Some time
after, she set fire to the convent, and availing herself of the
confusion she had occasioned, carried off her favourite. But being
pursued and taken, she was condemned to the flames for contumacy:
a sentence, however, which was not executed, as the young Marseillaise
was found and restored to her friends.

"She then went to Paris, and made her first appearance on the opera
stage in 1695, when she performed the part of Pallas, in Cadmus, with
the greatest success. The applause was so violent, the she was obliged,
in her car, to take off her casque to salute and thank the public, which
redoubled their marks of approbation. From that time her success was
uninterrupted. Cumeni, the singer, having affronted her, she put on
men's clothes, watched for him in the Place des Victoires, and insisted
on his drawing his sword and fighting her, which he refusing, she caned
him, and took from him his watch and snuff-box. Next day, Dumeni, having
boasted at the opera-house, that he had defended himself against three
men who attempted to rob him, she related the whole story, and produced
his watch and snuff-box in proof of her having caned him for his
cowardice. Thevenard was nearly treated in the same manner, and had no
other way of escaping her chastisement, than by publicly asking her
pardon, after hiding himself at the Palace Royal during three weeks. At
a ball given by Monsieur, the brother of Louis XIV. she again put on
men's clothes, and having behaved impertinently to a lady, three of her
friends, supposing La Maupin to be a man, called her out. She might
easily have avoided the combat by discovering her sex, but she instantly
drew, and killed them all three. Afterwards returning very coolly to the
ball, she told the story to Monsieur, who obtained her pardon."




  ANECDOTE OF MONS. DE SARTINE.

An Irish gentleman, who wished to purchase an estate in France, lodged
his money in the hand of a banker, who took it, as common on the
continent, without giving the gentleman a voucher; but lodged it in an
iron chest, and gave to the gentleman the key. When the contract for the
purchase was made, he called on his banker to receive his cash, when the
latter peremptorily denied his having received any such sum, or having
any money transaction whatever with the gentleman.----In this dilemma
the injured party was advised to apply to M. de Sartine, and he
accordingly did so, and told him his story. The minister sent for the
banker, and asked him, if he had not received such a sum? The banker
steadily denied it. "Very well (replied M. de Sartine), then sit down
and write a letter which I shall dictate to you, and you shall continue
in the room with me, until the answer arrives." Paper was brought, and
Sartine dictated, and made him write a letter to his wife, to the
following effect:--"My dear wife, you must immediately send to me the
sum which Mons. ---- left in my hands, and which was deposited
originally in the iron chest, in the compting-house, but was removed you
know whither. You must send it instantly, or else I shall be sent to the
Bastile. I am already in the hands of justice." The banker
stared----"Mon Dieu! (says he) must I send this letter to my
wife?"----"You must (says the minister): I dare say, if you are guilty
of the robbery, your wife, who is remarkable for her ingenuity, was
privy to it, and she will obey your commands: if you are innocent, she
cannot comprehend the order which you send, and will say so in her
answer. We will make the experiment, and if you resist, you shall go
immediately to the Bastile."

The resolution was decisive. The letter was sent, and in less than an
hour the money was brought in the bags in which it was originally
sealed, and restored to the original owner. M. de Sartine discharged the
banker, telling him the matter should be kept a secret, provided he
acted with more faith and honesty for the future.




  _NEW-YORK._



    MARRIED,

On Saturday evening the 19th ult. at Florida, (Ulster County) by the
Rev. Mr. Jaline, Mr. BENONA BRADNER, of Sugar-Loaf, to Miss MARY JEANS,
of that place.

On Thursday evening the 24th ult. by the Rev. Dr. Linn, Mr. JOSHUA
PARKER, to Miss SALLY VAN AULEN, daughter of Mr. Cornelius Van Aulen,
both of this city.

On Monday evening last, by the Rev. Mr. Phoebus, Mr. JAMES WHITING, to
Miss DEBORA ALLEN both of this city.




  ON THE DEATH OF A BABY NINE DAYS OLD.

  The cup of life just to her lip she press'd,
  Found the taste bitter, and declind'd the rest;
  Averse, then turning from the face of day,
  She gently sigh'd her little soul away.




  _ON A BEE_
  Having Stung the Thigh of an Old Maid.

  On the annals of fame with Columbus you stand,
    Who sought the American shore;
  Advent'rous like him, you explore a new land,
    Where none ever travell'd before.




  _EPIGRAM._

  Women were born, so fate declares,
  To SMOOTH our linen and our cares;
  And 'tis but just, for, by my troth,
  They're very apt to RUFFLE both.



           *       *       *       *

  ODE TO POESY.

  I.

    Hail Poesy! celestial maid!
      Who loves, reclin'd near purling stream,
    To rest beneath the beachen shade,
      "Wrapt in some wild fantastic dream."
    Howe'er intent on other cares,
    Still deign to hear a suppliant's pray'rs!
    Who fain would view thy ample store,
    And all thy secret haunts explore,
    Where, as enraptur'd bards have told,
      Whose eyes have peer'd thy stores among,
    Gnomes, sylphs, and sprites, their dwelling hold,
      Till call'd by thee to grace their song;
    Where fairies, clad in bright attire,
    Faint lighted by the glow-worm's fire,
    Are seen to gambol to the breeze,
    Which nightly plays amongst the trees;
  And while, with silent step, their round they pace,
  The flitting dew-drops gem the consecrated place.

  II.

    Or, if thou rather chuse to dwell
      Intent to hear the beating wave,
    In sparry grot, or rocky cell,
      Or in the subterraneous cave,
    Where to relieve perpetual night,
    Dim lamps emit a feeble light;
    While bound with necromantic tie,
    A thousand weeping virgins lie,
    Who, to enjoy the blaze of day,
      To view once more the azure sky,
    And drink the sun's all-cheering ray,
      Oft heave the unavailing sigh;
    Till some advent'rous knight shall dare
    (Long try'd in tournaments and war)
    Assay to break the magic chain,
    And give them liberty again;
  In ruin wide the self-built structure spread,
  And bid despondency erect her drooping head.

  III.

    Or, if those scenes delight thee more,
      Which erst thy Ariosto drew,
    O teach my muse like his to soar,
      And ope thy treasures to her view!
    For all that captivates the mind,
    In his aspiring verse we find;
    Where, wrapt in fancy's pleasing guise
    Conceal'd, the useful moral lies;
    Where chivalry's proud hosts, array'd
      In all the dignity of war,
    Appear, a splendid cavalcade,
      Adorn'd with many a trophy'd car;
    Where fair Alcina's radiant charms,
    With lawless bliss the bosom warms,
    Till, in Atlanta's reverend form,
    Melissa abrogates the charm;
  Recals the soul, for nobler deeds design'd,
  And writes the glowing moral on the mind.



           *       *       *       *

  IV.

    If such thy votaries of old,
      Some portion of their fire impart;
    Then sportive fancy, uncontroll'd,
      Shall spurn the rigid rules of art:--
    But if in vain thy suppliant plead,
    And if thy mandate has decreed
    These magic stores conceal'd must lie,
    Impervious to another's eye;
    Still, O celestial maid! display
      Those tranquil scenes where beauty reigns,
    And triumphs, with unrivall'd sway,
      O'er rising hills and flow'ry plains,
    And streams that, murm'ring as they flow,
    Might lure the mourner from his woe;
    Let pointed satire too be mine,
    Aided by Johnson's nervous line:--
  And mine the pow'r to wake the tender sigh,
  And call the pearly tear from Pity's melting eye.

  V.

    Then lead me near some winding stream,
      Whose surface, ruffled by the breeze,
    Reflects chaste Dian's silver beam,
      Faintly beheld thro' shadowy trees:
    Then as I view, with joy serene,
    The beauties of this tranquil scene:
    If contrast aid the pow'rs of rhyme,
    To make the beautiful sublime--
    Bid the hoarse thunder loudly roar,
      And driving clouds invest the skies;
    While swelling torrents round me pour,
      From rugged rocks their fresh supplies;
    Which bursting on the plains below,
    The lightning's transient flashes shew,
    Unfolding to th' astonish'd sight
    A cataract of foaming light.--
  Be scenes like these thy suppliant's award!
  And give thine other stores to some more happy bard.




  _BEAUTY._
  A SONG.

  When fascinating beauty smiles,
    Tho' deem'd a transient flow'r,
  Vain man, with all his boasted might,
    Submissive owns its pow'r.

  Beauty makes misers quit their gold,
    And cruelty its rage,
  And gives the ardent fires of youth
    To antiquated age.

  Th' imposter Mahomet, who knew
    The sweets and pow'r of love,
  With ever-blooming beauties fill'd
    His blissful courts above.

  Aright this great observer judg'd
    That beauty's promis'd charms,
  Would lure whole millions to his aid,
    And bless his conqu'ring arms.


NEW-YORK: _+Printed by JOHN BULL, No. 115, Cherry-Street+, where every
Kind of Printing work is executed with the utmost Accuracy and
Dispatch.--+Subscriptions+ for this +Magazine+ (at 2s. per month) are
taken in at the Printing-Office, and by E. MITCHELL, Bookseller, No. 9,
Maiden-Lane._



           *       *       *       *



  _UTILE DULCI._

  THE NEW-YORK WEEKLY MAGAZINE;
  or, Miscellaneous Repository.

  +Vol. II.+]  +Wednesday, December 14, 1796.+  [+No. 76.+


  _From CAMILLA, or a Picture of Youth--just publishing by the EDITOR,
  are extracted the following striking observations on the superiority
  of mental accomplishments to personal attractions:--_

"Indeed, Sir--and pray believe me, I do not mean to repine I have not
the beauty of Indiana; I know and have always heard her loveliness is
beyond all comparison. I have no more, therefore, thought of envying it,
than of envying the brightness of the sun. I knew, too, I bore no
competition with my sisters; but I never dreamt of competition. I knew I
was not handsome, but I supposed many people besides not handsome, and
that I should pass with the rest; and I concluded the world to be full
of people who had been sufferers as well as myself, by disease or
accident. These have been occasionally my passing thoughts; but the
subject never seized my mind; I never reflected upon it at all, till
abuse, without provocation, all at once opened my eyes, and shewed me to
myself! Bear with me, then, my father, in this first dawn of terrible
conviction! Many have been unfortunate---but none unfortunate like me!
Many have met with evils---but who with an accumulation like mine!"

Mr. Tyrold, extremely affected, embraced her with the utmost tenderness:
"My dear, deserving, excellent child," he cried, "what would I not
endure, what sacrifice not make, to soothe this cruel disturbance, till
time and your own understanding can exert their powers?" Then, while
straining her to his breast with the fondest parental commiseration; the
tears, with which his eyes were overflowing, bedewed her cheeks.

Eugenia felt them, and sinking to the ground, pressed his knees. "O my
father," she cried, "a tear from your revered eyes afflicts me more than
all else! Let me not draw forth another, lest I should become not only
unhappy, but guilty. Dry them up, my dearest father; let me kiss them
away."

"Tell me, then, my poor girl, you will struggle against this ineffectual
sorrow! Tell me you will assert that fortitude which only waits for your
exertion; and tell me you will forgive the misjudging compassion which
feared to impress you earlier with pain!"

"I will do all, every thing you desire! my injustice is subdued! my
complaints shall be hushed! you have conquered me, my beloved father!
Your indulgence, your lenity shall take place of every hardship, and
leave me nothing but filial affection!"

Seizing this grateful moment, he then required of her to relinquish her
melancholy scheme of seclusion from the world: "The shyness and the
fears which gave birth to it," said he, "will but grow upon you if
listened to; and they are not worthy the courage I would instil into
your bosom---the courage, my Eugenia, of virtue---the courage to pass
by, as if unheard, the insolence of the hard-hearted, and ignorance of
the vulgar. Happiness is in your power, though beauty is not; and on
that to set too high a value would be pardonable only in a weak and
frivolous mind; since, whatever is the involuntary admiration with which
it meets, every estimable quality and accomplishment is attainable
without it: and though, which I cannot deny, its immediate influence is
universal, yet in every competition and in every decision of esteem, the
superior, the elegant, the better part of mankind give their suffrages
to merit alone. And you, in particular, will find yourself, through
life, rather the more than the less valued, by every mind capable of
justice and compassion, for misfortunes which no guilt has incurred."

Observing her now to be softened, though not absolutely consoled, he
rang the bell, and begged the servant, who answered it, to request his
brother would order the coach immediately, as he was obliged to return
home; "And you, my love," said he, "shall accompany me; it will be the
least exertion you can make in first breaking through your averseness to
quit the house."

Eugenia would not resist; but her compliance was evidently repugnant to
her inclination; and in going to the glass to put on her hat, she turned
aside from it in shuddering, and hid her face with both her hands.

"My dearest child," cried Mr. Tyrold, wrapping her again in his arms,
"this strong susceptibility will soon wear away; but you cannot be too
speedy nor too firm in resisting it. The omission of what never was in
our power cannot cause remorse, and the bewailing what never can become
in our power cannot afford comfort. Imagine but what would have been the
fate of Indiana, had your situations been reversed, and had she, who can
never acquire your capacity, and therefore never attain your knowledge,
lost that beauty which is her all; but which to you, even if retained,
could have been but a secondary gift. How short will be the reign of
that all! how useless in sickness! how unavailing in solitude! how
inadequate to long life! how forgotten, or repiningly remembered in old
age! You will live to feel pity for all you covet and admire; to grow
sensible to a lot more lastingly happy in your own acquirements and
powers; and to exclaim, with contrition and wonder, time was when I
would have changed with the poor mind-dependent Indiana!"

The carriage was now announced; Eugenia, with reluctant steps,
descended; Camilla was called to join them, and Sir Hugh saw them set
off with the utmost delight.




  THE VICTIM OF MAGICAL DELUSION;
  _OR, INTERESTING MEMOIRS OF MIGUEL, DUKE DE CA*I*A._
  Unfolding Many Curious Unknown Historical Facts.

  _Translated from the German of Tschink._

  (Continued from page 179.)

The death-like paleness of the Duke's countenance, his perturbated mien,
his steps now slow and now moving with vehemence, and the contortions of
his lips, bespoke the tempest raging in his soul, as exceeding the
violence of the hurricane that was lashing the ocean. The hapless man
now looked up to heaven, and now cast his anxious looks around, as if in
search of some person, and I heard him pronounce repeatedly the name of
Hiermanfor. This sight wounded my heart deeply, and pressed burning
tears from my eyes.

Meanwhile a dreadful accident happened on the sea. The anchors which the
fore-part of the ship was moored with were torn from the cables by the
violent agitation of the vessel, which, riding now only with the small
bower, was dashed against the adjacent rocks. A general piercing cry
filled the air when this lamentable incident happened. The Duke was
going to plunge into the sea, and I retained him with great difficulty
by his right arm. Seeing, however, that his despair rendered him callous
against our ardent prayers not to rush into the very jaws of death,
Pietro and myself tied a long rope round his body, taking hold of one
end. He now plunged into the boiling waves, which instantly devoured,
and soon after cast him up again. Thus he advanced daringly towards the
ship. He seemed several times to have a chance of forcing his way to the
vessel, the irregular motions of the sea leaving him on the dry rocks;
however the towering billows then returned with additional fury, and
buried him beneath an enormous mass of water, which flung the Duke half
dead upon the shore. But no sooner had he recovered his senses, than he
darted up, hastening with new courage towards the vessel, which,
however, began to separate, torn by the violence of the furious waves.
The ship's crew, who now despaired of saving their lives, plunged in
crowds into the sea, grasping in the agony of despondency the floating
chests, casks, and whatsoever they could lay hold on.

I shall never forget that horrid scene of woe! Two ladies now made their
appearance on the stern of the vessel: one of them was the Countess and
the other Lady Delier. Amelia expanded her arms towards her lover, who
exerted all his strength to join the darling of his soul.--She seemed to
have known the Duke by his undaunted courage. The baroness wrung her
hands looking anxiously at the spectators, and pointing at Amelia, as if
she wanted to say: leave me to my fate, but save my friend! Amelia was
standing on the deck without betraying the smallest sign of fear, and
seemed to be resigned to her impending deplorable doom, beckoning to us,
as if she wanted to bid us an eternal adieu. All the spectators wept,
and rent the air with doleful cries and lamentations. The Duke summoned
the last remains of his strength, struggling with the frothing waves, in
order to save his mistress from the brink of fell destruction; but a
mountainous billow of an enormous bulk forced its way through the space
betwixt the island and the coast, darting at the ship. In the same
moment Amelia rushed into Lady Delier's arms encircling her friend in
wild agony, and in that situation they were buried in the abyss along
with the vessel.

The stupefaction of horror which we were seized with, rendered us almost
incapable of dragging the Duke on shore. The spirit of the hapless man
seemed to have fled to better regions, along with that of his ill-fated
bride. He was stretched out on the ground, violently bleeding, and
seemingly a lifeless corpse.

I dropped down by his side, seized with terror and grief, imprinting
kisses on his ash-pale face, contorted by pains, I called his, mine, and
at last Amelia's name in his ear; but seeing him without the least
motion at the sound of the latter, I really feared that he was dead.
Pietro beat his breast, tore his hair, and rent the air with doleful
lamentations. The bye-standers crowded upon us, and perceiving, after
many fruitless trials, some faint vestiges of life in the Duke, we
carried him to the next house and put him to bed. The contusions and
wounds he had received, by having been dashed against the rocks, were
examined by a surgeon, who declared they were not mortal. I uttered a
loud shout, throwing myself on my knees, and offering fervent thanks to
God. The Duke opened his eyes and closed them again. The surgeon desired
us to retire, and not to disturb his rest.

While Pietro went on horseback to the house of the Marquis, in order to
inform him of the accident that had happened to his son, I repaired to
the strand, in hopes that the bodies of Amelia and Lady Delier would be
driven on shore. However the wind having shifted suddenly, as is usual
in hurricanes, I was obliged to give up the hope of procuring an
honourable burial to those unhappy ladies.

The Duke was in a senseless stupor, when I returned. Alas! his spirit
seemed to tarry reluctantly in a world which separated him from his
adored Amelia. But why should I tear open again my half-cicatrised
wounds? I shall not enter into a description of his situation, I still
fancy I hear the shrieks of horror, and the wild shouts which he uttered
during a burning fever, when he fancied he saw his Amelia either in
dangerous or in happy situations. His imagination and his lips were
constantly occupied with her. When, at length, his fever abated, and his
recollection returned, he really fancied the history of Amelia's hapless
fate to be the delusion of a feverish dream. Although I was very
cautious to dislodge this delusive opinion only gradually, yet the
discovery of his error affected him so violently, that I apprehended it
would deprive him, if not of his life, at least of his understanding.

Here I cannot omit mentioning a scene which happened at the beginning of
his amendment. The Marquis had ordered him to be carried to his house as
soon as he began to mend, and nursed him with paternal care. He came,
one day, when the Duke was sleeping, and I sitting by his bed-side, to
enquire how his son did; as he bent over the sleeper, and seemed to look
anxiously whether any signs of returning health appeared in his face, he
observed on the bosom of his son a blue ribbon. He pulled it carefully
out, and the picture of the Queen of Fr**ce was suspended to it. The
countenance of the Marquis resembled at first that of a person who is
dubious whether he is awake or dreaming; but soon after I saw his face
grow deadly pale, and his whole frame quiver violently. No sooner had he
recovered the power of utterance, then he begged me to retire. Two hours
after he left the apartment in violent agitation, without observing me.
On my entrance into the sick room I found the Duke bathed in tears. The
ribbon was still fastened round his neck, but the picture of the Queen
was taken from it.

I signified to him my astonishment. He squeezed my hand tenderly, and
said:--"You are my only friend, for whom I wish to have no secrets; and
yet I am so unhappy as to have this wish too denied me. Don't press me
to tell you what has been transacted between me and my father; I have
been obliged to promise with a dreadful oath to take the secret along
with me in my grave--In my grave!" he added a little while after, "I am
impatient to occupy that habitation ever since Amelia and Antonio have
made it their abode."

"Miguel" I exclaimed, straining him to my heart, "dispel these gloomy
thoughts. You shall learn that one has not lost every thing when in
possession of a friend like me."

"I know you, and I thank you," he replied, with emotion, "let us die
together; this world is not deserving to contain us. What business have
we in a world (he added with a ghastly look) in which vice only
triumphs, and good men find nothing but a grave?"

Reader, do not fancy this language to have originated merely from a
transient agitation of mind; alas! it originated from a heart
exasperated by the concurrence of the most melancholy misfortunes, and
this exasperation was rooted deeper than I had fancied at first. It
generated in his soul poisonous shoots which injured his religion. He
declared it to be impossible a good God could designedly make good men
so unhappy as he had been rendered. He ascribed the origin of his
misfortunes to a bad principle, which, having a share in the government
of the world, had appropriated his understanding merely to the execution
of its bad purposes. He maintained that it was contrary to the nature of
an infinitely good being to effect even the best purposes by bad means;
and if there were in this world as much disorder, imperfection, and
misfortune, as harmony, perfection and happiness, this would be an
undeniable proof that the world was governed, and had been created
jointly by a good and bad principle. In short, he subscribed entirely to
the system of the _Manichees_.

I perceived this new deviation of his mind with astonishment and grief,
and thought it my duty to lead him back in the path of truth as soon as
possible, because this error deprived him of the last consolation in his
sufferings. For which reason I endeavoured to convince him, that the
ideas of a bad and a good principle annul each other; that it is a
downright contradiction to believe in the existence of a bad God: that
consequently, the fundamental ideas of his system were absurd, and, of
course, the system itself unsupported. I proved to him that the evil in
this world is not inconsistent with the goodness and providence of God,
and that even the happiness of the wicked, and the sufferings of the
good, ought not to undermine our belief, but rather to strengthen our
hope of a life hereafter, in which every one will receive the just
reward of his actions. But how convincing soever my arguments would have
been to any unprejudiced person, yet they made very little impression on
the Duke, whom the disharmony and gloominess of his mind had too much
prepossessed for his comfortless system. Far from finding the least
contradiction in it, he was firmly persuaded that the belief in a bad
principle served to defend God against the complaints and reproaches of
the unfortunate, while he found a great consolation in venting his
resentment against the bad principle, whom he believed to be the author
of his sufferings. He was therefore firmly resolved to refute the
arguments which I had opposed to his system; and as soon as he was able
to leave his bed, began to arrange his ideas on that head, and to secure
them by a proper train of arguments against my objections. He had almost
finished his work when Alumbrado returned from his journey.

  (_To be continued._)



           *       *       *       *

  TO THE EDITOR OF

  _The +New-York Weekly Magazine.+_

  SIR,

Of a situation in life respectable only because it is honest, I am
neither depressed by a sense of inferiority nor elated with the idea of
superior importance--Of feelings, not yet blunted by habits of
depravity, I have a smile for beauty, and a tear for distress; and,
I trust, there are some who will bear me witness, that I have a heart
for friendship and for love--fond of society, and by no means an enemy
to study, my time is usually divided between mankind, my books, and my
thoughts. Of passions strong and lively, pleasure has to me peculiar
charms; and though my charitable dispositions may be often disobliged,
perhaps neither my mental nor corporeal constitution has cause to
complain, that my finances do not co-extend with my desires.
A commencement like this, may probably impress you with no very
favorable idea of the purport of this address; and, suspecting its
contents as no way likely to interest your readers, you may be induced
to throw by this paper as a tax upon your patience: but, if you can
summon fortitude sufficient to continue your perusal, I trust you will
find reason, not only to excuse, but even to approve the egotism of my
preamble.

To introduce their work with some account of the author, has, I believe,
been generally the practice of those who offer to the public what are
called periodical writings. I have conceived a similar design, and offer
this for your acceptance as introductory to a course of numbers, with
which, I hope, through the blessing of patience and the permission of
indolence, from time to time to present you. Yet, it was not to gratify
curiosity alone that I thought fit to delineate my conduct and my
feelings. I believed that, like the exordium of the orator, it might
prepare for my offspring a favorable reception.

The first and least interesting part of my egotistic narrative is my
situation in life: From this, the only recommendation I can hope to
derive is, that sentiment will at least not be corrupted by the habits
of profession.

Secondly--To an author of sensibility, surely no objection can be found;
a capacity to enjoy the sweets of friendship and the raptures of love
will be no disadvantage in the eyes of the virtuous and the fair.

Thirdly--From commerce with man I may gain some knowledge of his tempers
and propensities; from reading I will imbibe the sentiments of those
much wiser than myself; and by comparing my own deductions with their
abstract conclusions, I may, in converse with myself, give some degree
of clearness, correctness, and solidity to my conceptions.

To the last feature in my character, which is properly the result of
situation, I believe I may with truth ascribe the greater part of my
literary acquirements, and what is not quite so honourable to myself, my
presumption in becoming an author. To it I shall certainly be indebted
for opportunities to exert the attention necessary for the execution of
my design. And should not my papers afford instruction or entertainment
to others (a persuasion of which I am not vain enough to entertain) they
will at least procure improvement to myself. Convinced of the latter,
and with a wish to the former, I offer myself a candidate for an office
in your literary dispensary.

That subjecting one's-self to the odium of mankind is the infallible
consequence of reprobating his vices and ridiculing his follies, though
often asserted, is by no means the fact. In the moment of calmness,
uninfluenced by passion, man acknowledges and condemns his errors; and
they are not angels alone who _weep_ for the apishness of humanity. It
is in such a state of mind that we usually read; and the author need not
fear for his censures or his laugh---strange that he should, when he has
often occasion to expose those weaknesses in which he participates, and
those crimes which disgrace himself. If, therefore, from reflection on
my own conduct or observation of that of others in those hazardous
moments when reason leaves the helm, I should at any time be induced to
choose these themes, I shall have less reason to fear a frown for my
intentions than contempt for my incompetency. And should I not pay a
tribute to your fancy of one pathetic tale of hapless love, or of the
wondrous adventures of one heroic knight, look not ye fair with disdain
upon my labours. I love your sex, and deem their favour not the least of
those few blessings that raise a wish for life: And, though now a
hopeless thought, if in some happy hour I should conceive imagination
equal to the task, I may attempt to gratify myself by pleasing you.

  CANDIDUS,

    New-York, Dec. 10, 1796.




  MAN.

Man is the lord of all the sublunary creation; the howling savage, the
winding serpent, with all the untameable and rebellious offspring of
nature, are destroyed in the contest, or driven at a distance from his
habitations. The extensive and tempestuous ocean, instead of limiting or
dividing his power, only serves to assist his industry, and enlarge the
sphere of his enjoyments. Its billows, and its monsters, instead of
presenting a scene of terror, only call up the courage of this little
intrepid being; and the greatest danger that man now fears on the deep,
is from his fellow-creatures. Indeed, when I consider the human race as
Nature has formed them, there is but very little of the habitable globe
that seems made for them. But when I consider them as accumulating the
experience of ages, in commanding the earth, there is nothing so great,
or so terrible. What a poor contemptible being is the naked savage,
standing on the beach of the ocean, and trembling at its tumults! How
little capable is he of converting its terrors into benefits; or of
saying, behold an element made wholly for my enjoyment! He considers it
as an angry Deity, and pays it the homage of submission. But it is very
different when he has exercised his mental powers; when he has learned
to find his own superiority, and to make it subservient to his commands.
It is then that his dignity begins to appear, and that the true Deity is
justly praised for having been mindful of man; for having given him the
earth for his habitation, and the sea for an inheritance.



           *       *       *       *

  Interesting History Of
  _THE BARON DE LOVZINSKI._

  With a relation of the most remarkable occurrences in the life
  of the celebrated COUNT PULASKI, well known as the champion of
  American Liberty, and who bravely fell in its defence before
  Savannah, 1779.

  _Interspersed with Anecdotes of the late unfortunate KING of POLAND,
  so recently dethroned._

  (_Continued from page 182._)

In the mean time, the camp resounded with the cries of gladness, and our
victorious soldiers mingled my praises with those of Pulaski. At the
noise of my name, repeated by a thousand tongues, Lodoiska ran to her
father's tent. She convinced me of the excess of her tenderness, by the
excess of her joy at our meeting; and I was obliged once more to
commence the recital of the dangers from which I had escaped. She could
not hear of the singular generosity of the monarch, when I was in the
power of the Russians, without shedding tears: "How magnanimous he is!"
exclaims she, amidst a transport of joy; "how worthy of being a king, he
who so generously pardoned you! How many sighs has he spared a wife whom
you forsake! how many tears the loving wife whom you are not afraid of
sacrificing! Cruel Lovzinski, are not the dangers to which you daily
expose yourself sufficient----"

Pulaski here interrupts his daughter with a certain degree of harshness:
"Indiscreet and weak woman!" exclaims he, "is it before me that you dare
to hold such a discourse as this?"

"Alas!" replies she in a mild accent; "alas! must I forever tremble for
the life of a father and a husband?" Lodoiska also made the most
affecting complaints to me, and sighed after a more happy futurity,
while fortune was preparing for us the most cruel reverse.

Our Cossacks, placed at the out-posts, now came in from all parts, and
informed us that the Russian army was approaching. Pulaski reckoned on
being attacked at the break of day; but he was not: however, about the
middle of the following night I was informed that the enemy was
preparing to force our entrenchments.

Pulaski, always ready, always active, was actually defending them:
during the course of this fatal night, he achieved every thing that
might have been expected from his valour and experience.

We repel the assailants no less than five different times, but they
return unceasingly to the charge, pour in fresh troops at every new
attack, and, during the last one, penetrate into the heart of our very
camp by three different avenues, at one and the same time.

Zaremba was killed by my side; a crowd of nobles fell in this bloody
action; the enemy refused to give any quarter. Furious at seeing all my
friends perish before my eyes, I resolved to precipitate myself into the
midst of the Russian battalions.

"Heedless man!" exclaims Pulaski, "what blind fury urges you towards
your destruction? My army is entirely routed---destroyed---but my
courage still remains! Why should we perish uselessly here? Let us be
gone! I will conduct you into climes where we may raise up new enemies
against the Russian name. Let us live, since we can still serve our
country! Let us save ourselves, let us save Lodoiska."

"Lodoiska! am I capable of abandoning her?"

We instantly run to her tent--we are scarce in time: we carry her off,
precipitate ourselves into the neighbouring woods, and on the next
morning we venture to sally forth, and present ourselves before the gate
of a castle that was not altogether unknown to us.

It indeed belonged to a noble Pole, who had served during some time in
our army. Micislas instantly comes forth, and offers an asylum, which he
advises us, however, to make use of for a few hours only. He informs us,
that a very astonishing piece of news had spread abroad on the former
evening, and began to be confirmed, according to which the king himself
had been carried away out of Warsaw, that the Russians had pursued the
conspirators, and brought back the monarch to his capital; and that, in
fine, it was talked of putting a price upon the head of Pulaski, who was
suspected of being the author of this treason.

"Believe me," says he, "when I assure you, whether you have engaged or
not in this bold plot, that you ought to fly; leave your uniforms here,
which will assuredly betray you: I will instantly supply you with
clothes which are less remarkable: and as to Lodoiska, I myself will
conduct her to the place which you have chosen for your retreat."

Lodoiska now interrupts Micislas: "The place of my retreat shall be that
of their flight, for I will accompany them every where."

Pulaski represents to his daughter, that she was not able to sustain the
fatigue incident to such a long journey, and that besides we should be
liable to continual dangers.

"The greater the peril is," replies she, "the more I ought to partake it
with you. You have repeated to me a hundred times, that the daughter of
Pulaski ought not to be an ordinary woman. For the last eight years I
have constantly lived in the midst of alarms; I have seen nothing but
scenes of carnage and horror. Death has environed me on all sides, and
menaced me at every moment: will you not permit me to brave it now by
your side? Is not the life of Lodoiska connected with that of her
father? Lovzinski, will not the stroke that fells you to the ground send
your wife to the grave? and am I no longer worthy----"

I now interrupt Lodoiska, and join with her father, in stating the
reasons which determined us to leave her in Poland. She hears me with
impatience: "Ungrateful man," exclaims she at length, "will you fly
without me?" "You shall remain," replies Pulaski, "with Lovzinski's
sisters, and I prohibit you----"

His daughter, now frantic with grief, would not permit him to finish the
sentence.

"I know your rights, my father! I respect them; they shall always appear
sacred to me: but you do not possess that of separating a wife from her
husband."

"Ah, pardon me! I see that I offend you---my reason no longer maintains
its empire---"

"But pity my grief---"

"Excuse my despair---"

"My father! Lovzinski! hear me, both of you; I am determined to
accompany you every where!

"Yes, I will follow you every where, cruel men! I will follow you in
spite of yourselves!

"Lovzinski, if your wife has lost all the rights she had over your
heart, recollect at least her who was once the mistress of your
affections.

"Recal to your remembrance that frightful night, when I was about to
perish in the flames; that terrible moment when you ascended the burning
tower, crying out, let me live or die with Lodoiska!

"That which you felt at that terrible moment, I now experience! I know
no greater evil than that of being separated from you; and I now exclaim
in my turn, let me either live or die with my father and my husband!

"Unfortunate wretch! what will become of me, if you should forsake me.
Reduced to the cruel situation of bewailing you both, where shall I find
a solace for my miseries? Will my children console me? Alas! in two
years death hath snatched four away from me; and the Russians, equally
pitiless as death itself, have bereaved me of the last! I have only you
remaining in the world, and even you wish to abandon me! my father! my
husband! Will such dear connexions as these be insensible to my
sufferings! Have compassion, take pity on your own Lodoiska."
   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .
   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .

Her tears now intercepted her speech. Micislas wept; my heart was torn
with anguish. "You are resolved to accompany us, my daughter---be it so;
I consent," says Pulaski, "but I wish that heaven may not punish me for
my complaisance!"

Lodoiska now embraces us both with as much joy at if all our ills had
been at an end. I leave two letters with Micislas, which he undertook to
transmit according to the direction: the one was addressed to my
sisters, and the other to Boleslas. I bade them adieu, and I recommended
to them, to neglect no means to endeavour to recover my dear Dorliska!

It was necessary that I should disguise my wife---she assumes a
masculine dress; we change our own, and we employ all the means in our
power to disfigure ourselves in such a manner as to elude research, and
prevent discovery.

Thus altered in our appearance, armed with our sabres and our pistols,
provided with a considerable sum in gold, with some trinkets, and all
the jewels of Lodoiska, we take leave of Micislas, and make haste to
regain the woods.

  (To be continued.)




  OBSERVATION.

He whose passions are mild, whose fortune is equal to his desires and
situation, who passes his life with his relations and friends, and dies
in their arms without remorse, fear or pain, is a happy man.



           *       *       *       *

  PLEASURE.

The enthusiasm of pleasure charms only by intervals. The highest rapture
lasts only for a moment, and all the senses seem so combined, as to be
soon tired into languor by the gratification of any one of them. It is
only among the Poets we hear of men changing to one delight, when
satiated with another. In nature, it is very different; the glutton,
when sated with the full meal, is unqualified to feel the real pleasure
of drinking; the drunkard, in turn, finds few of those transports which
lovers boast in enjoyment; and the lover, when cloyed, finds a
diminution of every other appetite. Thus, after a full indulgence of any
one sense, the man of pleasure finds a languor in all, is placed in a
chasm between past and expected enjoyment, perceives an interval which
must be filled up. The present can give no satisfaction, because he has
already robbed it of every charm. A mind thus left without immediate
employment, naturally recurs to the past or the future: the reflector
finds that he was happy, and knows that he cannot be so now; he sees
that he may yet be happy, and wishes the hour was come: thus every
period of his continuance is miserable, except that very short one of
immediate gratification. Instead of a life of dissipation, none has more
frequent conversations with disagreeable _self_ than he: his enthusiasms
are but few and transient; his appetites, like angry creditors,
continually making fruitless demands for what he is unable to pay; and
the greater his former pleasure, the more strong his regret, the more
impatient his expectations. A life of pleasure is, therefore, the most
unpleasing life in the world.

Habit has rendered the man of business more cool in his desires; he
finds less regret for past pleasures, and less solicitude for those to
come. The life he now leads, though tainted in some measure with hope,
is yet not afflicted so strongly with regret, and is less divided
between shortlived rapture and lasting anguish. The pleasures he has
enjoyed are not so vivid, and those he has to expect cannot consequently
create so much anxiety.

The philosopher, who extends his regard to all mankind, must have still
a smaller concern for what has already affected, or may hereafter affect
himself; the concerns of others make his whole study, and that study is
his pleasure; and this pleasure is permanent in its nature, because it
can be changed at will, leaving but few of those anxious intervals which
are employed in remembrance or anticipation. The philosopher, by these
means, leads a life of almost continued dissipation; and reflection,
which makes the uneasiness and misery of others, serves as a companion
and instructor to him.




  CONVERSATION OF A FINE WOMAN.

There is something irresistibly pleasing in the conversation of a fine
woman; even though her tongue be silent, the eloquence of her eyes
teaches wisdom. The mind sympathises with the regularity of the object
in view, and, struck with external grace, vibrates into respondent
harmony.



           *       *       *       *

  PANEGYRIC ON MARRIAGE.

  "O time roll on thy sluggish wheels, and haste the day
  "When joys like these shall decorate MY way."

If it be true, that our pleasures are chiefly of a comparative or
reflected kind--How supreme must be theirs, who continually reflect on
each other, the portraitures of happiness---whose amusements---

  "Tho' varied still---are still the same---in infinite progression."

How tranquil is the state of that bosom, which has, as it were, a door
perpetually open to the reception of joy, or departure of pain, by
uninterrupted confidence in, and sympathy with, the object of its
affection! I know of no part of the single or bachelor's estate, more
irksome than the privation we feel by it, of any friendly breast in
which to pour our delights, or from whence to extract an antidote for
whatever may chance to give us pain---The mind of a good man, I believe
to be rather communicative than torpid:---If so, how often may a youth,
of even the best principles, expose himself to very disagreeable
sensations, from sentiments inadvertently dropped, or a confidence
improperly reposed!---What, but silence, can be recommended to them;
since, in breaking it: so much danger is incurred, among those little
interested in our welfare? A good heart, it is true, need not fear the
exposition of its amiable contents:---But, alas, is it always a security
for us, that we mean well, when our expressions are liable to be
misconstrued by such as appear to lie in wait only to pervert them to
some ungenerous purpose?

The charms, then, of social life, and the sweets of domestic
conversation, are no small incitements to the marriage state.--What more
agreeable than the conversation of an intelligent, amiable, and
interesting friend? But who more intelligent than a well-educated
female? What more amiable than gentleness and sensibility itself? Or
what friend more interesting than such a one as we have selected from
the whole world, to be our steady companion, in every vicissitude of
seasons or of life?

"Give me some companion," says Sterne, "in my journey, be it only to
remark to, how our shadows lengthen as the sun goes down; to whom I may
say, how fresh is the face of nature! How sweet the flowers of the
field! How delicious are these fruits!"

If either of these parties be versed in music, what a tide of innocent
delight must it prove,---to soothe in adversity, to humanize in
prosperity, to compose in noise, and to command serenity in every
situation. If books have any charms for them, (and must they not be
tasteless, if they have not) well might the poet of nature place them in
company like this:

  "An elegant sufficiency, content,
  "Retirement, rural quiet, friendship, books,
  "Ease, and alternate labour, useful life,
  "Progressive virtue, and approving heaven."

What a transition is it from what a Shakespear wrote, to what a Handel
played! How charming a relaxation from the necessary avocations of
business!----"Of business do you say?"---Yes; for I number this too,
among the pleasures of the happily married. Let the lady find agreeable
employment at home, in the domestic oeconomy of her household, but let
the gentleman be pursuing by unremitted and honest industry, new
comforts for her, for his children, and for himself.

Is there not some gratification too, in reflecting, that the blessings
of the marriage state, are more secure and permanent than most others,
which fall within the compass of human life?---it is the haven of a sea
of gallantries, of turbulence, and fears. Other friendships are seen to
fade, to languish, and to die, by removal of abode, by variance of
interest, by injuries, or even by mistakes: but this is co-equal with
life, the present existence has been called a state of trial, and of
preparation for a better, marriage is the perfection of it, here our
education is completed, all the sympathies and affections of the
citizen, the parent, and the friend, have their fullest spheres assigned
them; and, doubtless, that pair, who in this engagement, are truly happy
and irreproachable, must have so qualified themselves by a thousand
instances of mutual affection and forbearance, for an improved state of
manners and society, that they may be pronounced to have reached the
pinnacle of human felicity, from whence to Heaven, the transition will
neither be difficult nor strange; for that is the _home_ to which the
best improvements of social life are only framed to conduct us.---

    "Evening comes at last, serene and mild,
  "When after the long vernal day of life,
  "Enamour'd more, as more remembrance swells,
  "With many a proof of recollected love;
  "Together down they sink in social sleep;
  "Together freed, their gentle spirits fly
  "To scenes where love and bliss immortal reign."




  _NEW-YORK._

  MARRIED,

On Saturday evening last, by the Rev. Dr. Moore, Mr. JAMES HEWITT, to
the very amiable and accomplished Miss ELIZA KING, daughter of the late
Major King, of England.

  Lo, the lovely blooming maid,
  Full in beauty's grace array'd.
  Softly treads to Hymen's shrine,
  Radiant as the Ophirian mine.

  Happiest youth, with haste away,
  Seize the blushing, dazzling prey;
  Loves and graces all unite,
  Charm with rapturous delight.

  Bless, O bless, ye powers above,
  Each in others endless love;
  And when time dissolves the pair,
  Bliss eternal may they share!




  TO CORRESPONDENTS.

*** The beautiful lines of ALEXIS, on the Scottish Bard, are received,
and shall appear in our next. We flatter ourselves CANDIDUS will not
forget his promise to bring forward a series of Essays; we shall deem as
a high favour, a continuation of his correspondence.



           *       *       *       *

                _THE AMARANTH._*

                   TO MARIA.



  "Immortal Amaranth! a flow'r which once
  "In Paradise, fast by the tree of life,
  "Began to bloom; but soon, for man's offence,
  "To Heav'n remov'd, where first it grew, there grows,
  "And flowers aloft, shading the fount of life;
  "And where the river of bliss, thro' midst of Heav'n,
  "Rolls o'er Elysian flow'rs her amber stream:
  "With these, that never fade, the spirits elect
  "Bind their resplendent locks, inwreath'd with beams."

    MILTON'S PARADISE LOST.



  Say, lovely fair! whene'er you rove,
    Along the flow'r-enamell'd vale,
  Or, careless tread the perfum'd grove
    Whose sweets impregnate ev'ry gale:

  As then the varying scene you view,
    Does not instruction freely pour,
  From ev'ry shrub that tastes the dew,
    The treasures of his copious store?

  Let these attract the mental eye,
    These prompt Maria's thought profound
  To call the gems, which ambush'd lie
    In Nature's vegetable round.

  But then, as myriads confuse,
    And each the other's sweets annoy,
  Wilt thou condemn the friendly muse
    Who aids thee in the great employ?

  Who bids thee now neglect the rose,
    Which long has claim'd the moral lay,
  For the bright amaranth, that glows
    In regal purple ever gay--

  Bright boasted flow'r, of boasted plains!
    Whilst myriads around thee fade,
  Thy living lustre still remains
    Untainted by, or sun, or shade!

  The dappled pink, and lily pale,
    With ev'ry gaudy-tinted flow'r
  That decks the hill, or scents the dale,
    If gather'd, fade to bloom no more.

  But thou, Elysian flow'r divine!
    If sprinkled o'er with balmy dew,
  Again thy wonted colours shine,
    Again thy purple beams anew!

  --Let this instructive flow'r, my fair,
    A grateful secret thus impart,
  How you may beauty's charms repair,
    Unaided by cosmetic art.

  When time (that worst of female foes)
    Has torn, with ruthless hand, away
  From beauty's cheek the blushing rose,
    Which far outvies the blooms of May,

  For orient, renovating dew,
    Which purples o'er this regal flow'r;
  Let mild good humour beam in you,
    Aided by virtues magic pow'r.

  These, lasting beauties will create,
    These, give new lustre to the eye;
  The cheeks bright bloom reanimate,
    And plant the rose that ne'er will die.

  Thus, lovely maid, where'er you rove,
    'Cross verdant hill, or fragrant dale,
  Make the gay flowrets of the grove,
    More useful than to scent the gale.

  [* "A flower of purple velvet colour, which, though gathered,
  keeps its beauty; and when all other flowers fade, recovers
  its lustre by being sprinkled with a little water."

    NOTES ON MILTON.]




  VIRTUE AND ORNAMENT; AN ODE.
  TO THE LADIES.

  The diamond's and the ruby's rays
    Shine with a milder, finer flame,
  And more attract our love and praise
    Than Beauty's self, if lost to fame.

  But the sweet tear in Pity's eye,
    Transcends the diamond's brightest beams;
  And the soft blush of modesty
    More precious than the ruby seems.

  The glowing gem, the sparkling stone,
    May strike the sight with quick surprise,
  But Truth and Innocence alone
    Can still engage the good and wise.

  No glitt'ring ornament or show
    Will aught avail in grief or pain:
  Only from inward worth can flow
    Delight that ever shall remain.




  _On the recovery of an only Child from the Small-pox._

  When sickness pal'd thy rosy cheek,
    And stole the lustre from thine eye,
  The minutes of each tedious hour
    Were mark'd by sad anxiety.

  For all thy soft endearing smiles,
    Which spoke with such expressive grace,
  Alas! were fled, and only pain
    Was trac'd upon thy cherub face.

  When near the doubtful crisis drew,
    And keener anguish fill'd my breast;
  In trembling hope, the fervent prayer
    My agonising soul address'd.

  'Twas heard--and health again restores
    The sprightly look, the rosy hue:
  Father of Heaven, to thee alone,
    All gratitude, all praise is due.


NEW-YORK: _+Printed by JOHN BULL, No. 115, Cherry-Street+, where every
Kind of Printing work is executed with the utmost Accuracy and
Dispatch.--+Subscriptions+ for this +Magazine+ (at 2s. per month) are
taken in at the Printing-Office, and by E. MITCHELL, Bookseller, No. 9,
Maiden-Lane._



           *       *       *       *



  _UTILE DULCI._

  THE NEW-YORK WEEKLY MAGAZINE;
  or, Miscellaneous Repository.

  +Vol. II.+]  +Wednesday, December 21, 1796.+  [+No. 77.+


  +Animated Letter from the Hon. Miss B-- to Sir Richard P---+



            [From an English Paper.]



The various passions which agitated my distracted soul have subsided and
I now am calm. I am alone, and in no danger of interruption: the
insignificants that fluttered around me are fled; and their departure
gives me no uneasiness.

I am at leisure to consider what I have been, and what I am; admired,
applauded, courted; avoided, despised, pitied. However, when I take a
view of my own heart, the prospect is less gloomy. I have been
incautious, but not abandoned; indiscreet, but not vicious; faulty, but
not depraved. If female virtue consists, as I have sometimes been told,
in female reputation, my virtue is gone: but if, as my soberer reason
teaches, virtue is independent of human opinion, I feel myself its
ardent votary, and my heart is pregnant with its noblest principles. The
children of ignorance cannot, and the children of malevolence will not,
comprehend this; but I court not their approbation, nor fear their
censure.

My soul, it must be owned, was formed of sensibility, formed for all the
luxury of the melting passions; but it is equally true, that the
severest delicacy had ever a place there. The groves of Br-----n can
witness, that whenever the loves presided at the entertainment, the
graces were not absent: that in the very delirium of pleasure, the
rapture was chastened, and the transport restrained.

My understanding was never made the dupe to my fonder wishes; nor did I
ever call in the wretched aids of a sceptical and impious philosophy to
countenance my unhappy fall. Though nature was my goddess and my
law-giver, I never dreamt of appealing from the decisions of positive
institutions. My principles were uncorrupted, whilst my heart was warm;
and if I fell as a woman, you know at the same time that I fell, like
Caesar, with decent dignity.

I write not to justify myself to you; you deserve not, you desire not
any such justification; but whilst I open my heart, I beg of you to
examine your own. The hour of reflection seldom comes too soon; and what
must your sensations be, when you recollect that you have violated all
laws divine and human, broken through every principle of virtue, and
every tie of humanity; that you have offered an insult to the kind
genius of hospitality, the benevolent spirit of good neighbourhood, and
the sacred and dignified powers of friendship! I mean not to reproach
you, but suffer me to ask, was it not sufficient that you had added my
name to the list of your infamous triumphs (for infamous they are, in
spite of sophistry, gaiety, and the world), that you had ranked me among
the daughters of wretchedness and ignominy, deprived me of my father, my
all of comfort, and my all of hope; were not these things, I say,
sufficient, without adding to them the meanness and baseness of publicly
speaking of me, in language that a gentleman would not have used to the
vilest wanton? weak, unhappy man, I am now indeed ashamed of my defeat!

For myself, I am well aware that "the world is not my friend, nor the
world's law." I expect not nor desire its favour: it never forgives
offences of this kind. My own sex, in particular, is inexorable; for
never did female kindness shed a tear of genuine commiseration upon
misfortunes like mine. The insolent familiarity of some, and the
cautious reserve of others, the affected concern, the self-approving
condolence, sufficiently teach me what is the friendship of women. But I
have no anxiety on this account: the remainder of my days I give to
solitude: and if Heaven will hear my most ardent prayer, if my presaging
heart and declining strength deceive me not, this remainder will not be
long. Sister angels shall joyfully receive me into their happy choirs,
though my too virtuous sisters in this world avoid my company as
contagious. In the mean time, never shall the returning sun gild the
roof of my humble habitation, but I will drop a tear of deep repentance
to the fatal indiscretion which robbed me of my peace, and plunged a
whole family in misery: and, when the hour of my delivery comes, if an
offended parent will but take me in his arms, and pronounce me forgiven,
my heart shall again be sensible of comfort, joy shall once more sparkle
in the eyes of

  MARIA.



           *       *       *       *

  THE VICTIM OF MAGICAL DELUSION;
  _OR, INTERESTING MEMOIRS OF MIGUEL, DUKE DE CA*I*A._
  Unfolding Many Curious Unknown Historical Facts.

  _Translated from the German of Tschink._

  (Continued from page 187.)

It is almost incredible, with how much appearance of truth and
cordiality he manifested his grief at the hapless fate of the Duke. He
affected such a tender fellow-feeling, and so much friendship for
Miguel, that the latter was charmed with him, and fancied the favourable
opinion he had conceived of Alumbrado to be fully justified. The
hypocrite not only pitied him, but at the same time, endeavoured to
afford him comfort. Mentioning, however, among other arguments, how
wonderful the ways of Providence are, and how God promoted our
happiness, even through the evils of this world; the Duke shook his
head. Alumbrado was surprised at it, and enquired what objection he had
against that doctrine? The Duke, who thought him deserving of his
confidence, was so imprudent as to unfold to him his new creed; nay, he
carried his inconsideration so far as to read to him part of his tract
which he had wrote on that subject. Although I was very much terrified
at it, yet I was impatient to know Alumbrado's opinion and behaviour on
this occasion. My astonishment rose to the highest degree, when he
refuted the arguments of the Duke with a frankness which generally is
supposed to arise only from love of truth, and defended the goodness and
providence of God, with an evidence and warmth which can originate only
from the light of religion. The dignity and energy with which he spoke
had an irresistable effect on the Duke; he cast his eyes upon the ground
in dumb amazement, and appeared to be confounded and ashamed.

I cannot but confess that I myself began to believe I had been
egregiously mistaken in my opinion of Alumbrado's character. I begged
his pardon in my heart, and though I could not love him, yet I thought
it my duty not to refuse him my regard any longer.

However, soon after two accidents happened which gave me reason to
apprehend that I had changed my opinion too prematurely. I got
intelligence that Alumbrado visited the house of a man whose character
was very much suspected. Baeza was his name. The important office which
he kept at the custom-house, and the extensive trade he carried on all
over Europe, had rendered his house respected, wealthy, powerful, and
honoured. He was a Jew by birth, but changed his religion from political
motives. His conduct, at least, did not refute the opinion that he
confessed only with his lips the Roman Catholic religion, and it had
given rise to much scandal when Oliva*ez conferred on him the order of
Christ. The connection between him and this minister was very intimate
and not at all shaken by the revolution; but continued, only with more
assiduity and circumspection, which was no difficult task to a
consummate hypocrite like Baeza. It will be obvious that Alumbrado's
connection with this man displeased me for more than one reason. Another
circumstance contributed to strengthen my suspicion of Alumbrado's
honesty. The Duke missed a sheet of his tract on the system of the
_Manichees_. Alumbrado had visited him frequently, had been alone in his
study many a time where the manuscript was lying on the writing desk.
The Duke, far from suspecting him, fancied he had mislaid the paper, and
having renounced that system on Alumbrado's persuasion, did not care
much for that tract.

Although my repeated exhortations and my avowed antipathy had not been
able to prevail on my friend to drop all connections with that dangerous
man, yet they had retained him from being too intimate with him;
however, since he knew that I had conceived a more favourable opinion of
Alumbrado, he attached himself more closely to him. The old Marquis
observed this change with great satisfaction, but, at the same time, saw
with greater grief the recovery of his son's health make but very slow
progress. The cause of it was a secret, but rooted melancholy, into
which the overflowing exasperation of his heart and furious agony of
mind had changed ever since he had adopted the principles of the
Manichean system. This melancholy corroded his vitals like the slow
poison of a cancer, and stopped not only the circulation of the vital
powers, but also the energy of the soul of my unhappy friend in its
wonted activity. The situation of his mind was therefore merely passive,
which rendered him the more susceptible for those external impressions
which fitted the situation of his mind, the less power of resistance and
self-activity he possessed. Thus he was an instrument which Alumbrado
could play on at pleasure. The latter seemed, however, not yet
determined what measures he should take for attaining his aim; but,
unfortunately, the Duke himself put him afterwards on the right track.
He found particular pleasure in conversing with his new confidant on the
happiness which loving souls would derive from their reunion in a better
world, and he neglected me now for no other reason but because I could
say but very little on that subject, while Alumbrado's imagination and
eloquence were inexhaustible. I had no hope of giving the mind of the
Duke a different turn; his natural vivacity, which formerly so
frequently avocated his attention from one object, and oftentimes
directed it irresistably to another of a nature entirely opposite, this
vivacity was entirely extinguished; a gloomy sameness, which was
immoveably fixed to the object which once had attracted his attention,
having stept in its place. Every terrestrial joy had fled with Amelia,
Lady Delier and Antonio; the source from which he at present derived his
pleasure, originated beyond the grave. How joyfully would he have
overleaped the cleft which separated him from the darlings of his heart,
if he had not been kept back by mine and Alumbrado's persuasions. This
state of mind encreased his anxious desire of discovering an artificial
bridge of communication with the kingdom of spirits. In short, all the
ideas he had imbibed in the school of the Irishman awoke in his mind
with redoubled force. What at first had been to him a mere object of
knowledge, became now the most important concern of his heart. One time
he surprised Alumbrado with the question whether he thought it possible
to converse with spirits before our death? However the artful man
extricated his neck with great dexterity from the sling, replying, that
such a question could not be answered in general, nor with a few words.
I perceived that Alumbrado viewed the Duke attentively and began to
muse, although he had cut off abruptly the thread of the conversation.

No one can conceive how ardently the Duke longed for the arrival of the
Irishman, of whom he expected to receive the final solution of that
problem. One rather should think that the Irishman ought to have lost
all credit with him, on account of his treacherous behaviour; for not
only his first promise to put the Duke in possession of Amelia by means
of his supernatural power; but also the second, that he would initiate
him in the practical mysteries of his supernatural wisdom, as soon as
the revolution should have been accomplished, was still incompleted.
However, the Duke excused him, instead of suspecting his having deceived
him. "Hiermanfor," he said, "is not all powerful; how could he
therefore, avert that fatal blow from Amelia's head? Hiermanfor has not
fixed the day of his return; perhaps he has been detained by business of
the greatest consequence, or means to try the measure of my confidence
in him; but whatever may be the reason of his non-arrival, he certainly
will not omit to make good his word." Alumbrado asked him who that
Hiermanfor was? and the Duke related to him at large his adventures with
that man, without betraying the share he had had in the revolution.
I expected that Alumbrado, who at once was made acquainted with so
dangerous a rival, would do his utmost to ruin his credit; but I was
mistaken; all that he ventured to say, was, indeed, very much against
him; but he added, that one ought not to judge prematurely on so great
and deep a character.

This lenient judgment was not sufficient to cure the Duke of his
delusion; although his confidence in the Irishman was very strong, yet
his patience was very weak, and my reasoning against Hiermanfor began to
make him uneasy. Several times was he going to make public inquiries
after him, but the apprehension of offending him without being able to
find him out always prevented him from doing it. At last, when the
Irishman did not appear after a long and fruitless expectation, my
friend took it in his head to inquire after the Count de Clairval and in
case he should discover him, to seize him either by force or art,
because he expected to receive from him some information of Hiermanfor.
Alumbrado desired the Duke to give him a description of the Count. "He
is almost of my size," my friend replied, "but fair, of an interesting
countenance, and a tranquil, gentle seriousness, generally characterizes
his mien, which however, frequently bespeaks the most jovial humour; his
nose is rather of the aquiline kind, his mouth almost woman like
handsome, and his chin falls a little back, yet without disfiguring
him." "If you wish to get him in your power," Alumbrado replied, "I will
endeavour to _spell-bind him_; but then I shall want his picture; could
you delineate it on a piece of paper?" The Duke, who as little as myself
knew what to think of this offer, looked alternately at me and at
Alumbrado. "Indeed," the latter continued, "I wish to possess the
picture of the Count; leave the consequence to me."

"If you really wish to possess it," my friend replied. "you shall
have it."

Possessing a great skill in drawing striking likenesses, he finished the
portrait the day following, assisted by his imagination, and gave it to
Alumbrado. We were impatient to learn what he was going to do with it;
however, he visited the Duke four days without mentioning the picture;
but on the fifth day informed him in what hotel he would find the Count.
We were looking at him in dumb astonishment, when he added, "Make haste,
now you can surprise him and if he should refuse to follow you, you only
need to tell him that the guard is waiting for your order to seize him."

  (_To be continued._)




  _Anecdote of an Earl of Portland, Lord Treasurer.
  From a Manuscript in the British Museum._

When the Earl of Portland was Lord Treasurer of England (1634) he had,
like other great statesmen, a crowd of suitors; among others was Mr.
Caesar, Master of the Rolls, who had been soliciting the place of one of
the six clerks in Chancery for his son, Mr. Robt. Caesar, in the room of
Mr. D'Ewes, but was disappointed in his expectations; the Lord
Treasurer, although he had promised it to Mr. Caesar, having given it to
Mr. Keene; but promised to urge his Majesty in favour of Mr. Caesar the
next vacancy. That happened---the Treasurer was as negligent as
formerly; when Ld. Tillibarne eagerly solicited for Mr. Caesar, and was
promised. Tired with useless application, he desired the Treasurer to
declare his intentions;---he answered his intentions were for Mr. Caesar
but that he might not forget in future, he desired a token of
remembrance; which the other readily complied with, and wrote on a paper
"Remember Caesar!"---In the hurry of the Earl's business, even this was
forgot. Some time after, while he was looking over some loose papers, he
observed one, having written on it "Remember Caesar!" The former
circumstances had escaped his recollection; therefore, alarmed, he
summoned his friends, to have their opinion upon it; who all agreed, an
attempt on his life was in agitation, and desired him to use every
precaution---In consequence of this, his house was barricadoed, guards
were placed around, and all had the appearance of danger and
apprehension, when Ld. Tillibarne waited upon him again, but could not
gain admittance, till he informed one of the Treasurer's friends of the
circumstances of the note, which brought the whole to the Earl's
recollection, and he complied with Lord Tillibarne's request; Mr. Caesar
being appointed one of the Six Clerks.



           *       *       *       *

  _ABSTRACT of the ABBE BERTHOLON's PAPER on FIRES,
  and the MEANS of extinguishing them._

  Published in the Lausanne Memoirs.

This subject is important and interesting, although the Abbe has rather
collected the observations and experiments made by others, than conveyed
any new and original information. He ascribes the inflammability of
bodies to the inflammable gas which they contain, and which, on their
decomposition by heat, is let loose, and coming into contact with the
atmosphere is ignited, and bursts out into flame. The principal part of
the memoir is devoted to a detail of the means of preventing and
extinguishing fires; and here the author's chief advice, which is "in
the construction of buildings, to employ as little as possible of those
materials which yield inflammable air on their decomposition," will be
allowed to be perfectly just in theory, but will probably be little
followed in practice: nor is the security resulting from brick floors
likely to compensate, in this age of affected elegance, for their
appearance. He informs us, however, that M. Ango, an architect of Paris,
has contrived a method of constructing a floor with iron bars, instead
of timber joists, which is even less expensive than the common mode. The
wood used in buildings may be rendered uninflammable, by being steeped
in a saline solution, and by being prepared with allum, even canvass and
paper hangings may be made to burn without flame.

Many other precautions are mentioned by the Abbe, which we shall not
detail, as they are universally known, and we believe pretty generally
adopted. After describing the inventions of Mr. Hartly and Lord Mahon,
together with a preparation similar to that of Lord Mahon's recommended
by M. Frederic, of Vienna, the Abbe gives an account of a substance,
which he calls paper stone, invented by Dr. Faye, physician to the
Swedish admiralty: its composition is not known, but from a chemical
analysis it appears to consist of two parts of an earthly basis, and one
of animal oil, mixed up with two parts of some vegetable substance. At
Carlscrone a hut was built of dry wood, covered with this paper, which
is not more than two lines in thickness, it was then filled with
combustibles, which were set on fire and consumed without burning the
building: the paper, which had been pasted on boards, was reduced to a
cinder, and formed a kind of incrustation, which preserved them from the
effects of the flame. As this paper readily takes any colour, it may be
rendered ornamental as well as useful.

In his directions for extinguishing fires, the Abbe observes, that
water, in which a small quantity of potash has been dissolved, is more
efficacious than any other; he also recommends an engine called an
hydraulic ventilator, invented by M. Castelli, which is worked by vanes
instead of pistions, and may be managed by one person. The advantages
ascribed by our author to this machine are very considerable, but we
cannot suppress our astonishment on being told, that with a cylinder of
only three inches in diameter, it will throw up more water than the
largest fire engine; however, it certainly appears to be less expensive
and more portable than the common forcing pumps, and may be of use in
extinguishing a fire, before it has made any great progress. The utility
of garden mould with wet sand in this respect, is well known, but it can
seldom be applied, and we doubt the efficacy of the kind of catapult
which the author recommends, for throwing it so any distance.

The remainder of the memoir contains some very just and obvious remarks
on the necessity of a regular discipline among firemen, and it concludes
with a description of the engines, cisterns and pipes at the opera house
in Paris, the construction and arrangement of which the Abbe recommends
to be adopted in every public theatre.




  SPECIMENS OF SPEECH OR SPEAKINGS.
  _Imprimis. Oratio Floridensis._

  GENTLEMEN,

Though tautology is allowable in practice, I don't approve on't
theoretically; therefore I shall plainly, fully, openly, and concisely,
I hope, acquit myself, without being critical, or political, or
satyrical, or mystical, or rhetorical, or schismatical, or chimerical,
or whimsical.--I'll give no utterance to any arrogance, with dissonance
of deliverance, nor countenance any exorbitance of intemperance,
ignorance, or extravagance: what I communicate I shall authenticate, and
I beg you'll compassionate: I will not exaggerate, nor contaminate, nor
depreciate, nor discriminate, an intemperate candidate, at any rate. But
I prognosticate he must be a profligate, reprobate, and illiterate, apt
to prevaricate, hesitate, and degenerate.--I'll use no eloquence in this
conference, in confidence, the consequence of my diligence will evidence
the excellence of my innocence, with reference to your preference.

Let others, by a flourish of words, fancy it an accomplishment or an
embellishment, by the tongue's blandishment, it is an astonishment that
some speakers are so impertinent to the detriment of every eminent
fundament of rudiment.

I take this opportunity without ambiguity, void of incongruity, with
perspicuity by narrative, to assert my prerogative without preparative,
or provocative.

I shall now conclude without a multitude of solicitude; for the aptitude
of men to ingratitude is too plain, so I'll insist that Shakespeare, and
Milton, were sophistical scribblers, and bad luck to the man, who
invented the alphabet; oratory is composed of two parts, weeds and
flowers; the weeds of metaphor are the roots of Rhetorick; and the
flowers of phrase compose the nosegay of Eloquence. A set of
Philosophers are like a bundle of brushwood, when they are lighted up by
the fire of dispute, and put into the oven of altercation; then out
comes the crum and crust of fair argument.




  LIFE.

In considering the impatient ardour of the passions in youth, we might
be led to suppose that life was to last but for a day; but the
precautions of the aged seem to be such as if it was eternal.



           *       *       *       *

  Interesting History Of
  _THE BARON DE LOVZINSKI._

  With a relation of the most remarkable occurrences in the life
  of the celebrated COUNT PULASKI, well known as the champion of
  American Liberty, and who bravely fell in its defence before
  Savannah, 1779.

  _Interspersed with Anecdotes of the late unfortunate KING of POLAND,
  so recently dethroned._

  (Continued from page 190.)

Pulaski now communicates to us the design which he had formed of taking
refuge in Turkey. He hoped to be employed in a situation equal to his
rank and his abilities, in the armies of the grand signior, who had for
the two last years with some difficulty sustained a disastrous war
against the Russians.

Lodoiska did not appear in the least affrighted at the long journey
which we had to make; and as she could neither be known nor sought
after, she insisted upon going out to reconnoitre the adjacent country,
and at the same time charged herself with the fatiguing but important
task of bringing us the provisions which we stood in need of.

As soon as the day appeared, we retired into the wood: hid either in the
trunks of trees, or in the thick groves of pines, we waited impatiently
for the return of night, on purpose to continue our march. It was thus
that, during several weeks, we were enabled to escape from the search of
a multitude of different bodies of Russian troops, who were sent out on
purpose to discover us, and who pursued us like so many blood-hounds,
animated with the passions of hatred and revenge.

One day as Lodoiska, still disguised as a peasant, returned from a
neighbouring hamlet, where she had gone on purpose to purchase the
provisions which she was now conveying to us, two Russian marauders
attached her at the entry of the forest in which we were concealed.

After having robbed, they prepared to strip her. At the shrieks which
she uttered we hasten from our retreat, and the two ruffians immediately
betake themselves to flight upon our appearance; but we were greatly
alarmed lest they should recount this adventure to their companions,
whose suspicions aroused by this singular rencounter, might induce them
to come and drag us from our asylum.

After a most fatiguing journey, we enter Polesia*. Pulaski wept at
leaving his native country.

  [* Polesia is a name given to the palatinate of Breste in Lithuania;
  Breste, Briescia, or Bressici, is situated upon the banks of the
  river Bog. T.]

"At least," exclaims he with a mournful accent---"at least I have
faithfully served you, and I now only go into exile that I may be
enabled to serve you again."

So many fatigues had exhausted the strength of Lodoiska. Arrived at
Novogorod**, we resolve to stop there on purpose to give her time to
recover her strength. It was our design to remain some days, but some of
the country people whom we questioned, frankly informed us, that a
number of troops were in motion in that neighbourhood, on purpose to
arrest a certain person of the name of Pulaski, who had occasioned the
king of Poland to be taken prisoner, and carried off from the midst of
his own capital.

  [** There are several towns of this name in Russia. This seems to
  have been Novogorod Welicki, or Great Novogorod, the capital of
  a duchy of the same name. T.]

Justly alarmed at this intelligence, we remain but a few hours in this
town, where we, however, found means to purchase some horses without
being discovered.

We then pass the Desna above Czernicove*; and following the banks of the
Sula, we cross that river at Perevoloczna, where we learn that Pulaski,
who had been traced to Novogorod, had escaped as it were by miracle, and
that the Russian soldiers, indefatigable in their pursuit, were still
searching after him, and were in hopes of making him prisoner.

  [* Czernicove, or Czernikou, is a considerable town, and is the
  capital of the duchy of the same name. It is situate on the river
  Desna, 75 miles north-east of Kiow. T.]

It was now again become necessary to fly once more, and once more to
change our route; we therefore instantly made for the immense forests
which cover the face of the country between the Sula and the Zem, in the
dark retreats of which we hoped to find shelter from our foes.

We at length discover a cavern, in which we were reduced to the
necessity of taking up our abode. A she-bear disputes with us the
entrance into this asylum equally solitary and frightful: we assail, we
kill her, and devour her young.

Pulaski was wounded in this encounter: Lodoiska, worn out with fatigue
and distress, was scarcely able to support her existence: the winter was
approaching, and the cold was already excessive.

Pursued by the Russians in the inhabited parts; menaced by wild and
ferocious animals in this vast desart; destitute of any arms but our
swords; reduced in a short time to eat our very horses; what was to
become of us?

The danger of the situation to which my father-in-law and my wife were
reduced, had become so pressing, that no other fear any longer alarmed
me. My personal safety, hitherto so dear to me, did not now suggest
itself once to my mind: I felt only for theirs. I resolved, therefore,
to procure to them at any rate those succours which their situation
required, which was still more deplorable than my own; and leaving them
both with the promise of rejoining them in a short time, I take a few of
the diamonds belonging to Lodoiska, and follow the stream of the
Warsklo.

It is well known that a traveller, bewildered amidst those vast
countries, and reduced to the necessity of wandering about without a
compass, and without a guide, is obliged to follow the course of a
river, because it is upon its banks that the habitations of mankind are
most commonly to be met with.

It was necessary that I should gain, as soon at possible, some
considerable town in which a few merchants resided: I therefore
journeyed along the banks of the Warsklo, and travelling day and night,
found myself at Pultava* at the end of four days. During my residence in
this place, I pass for a trader belonging to Bielgorod. I there learn
that the Russian troops were still roaming about in pursuit of Pulaski,
and that the Empress had sent an exact description of his person every
where, with orders to seize him either dead or alive, wherever he might
be found.

  [* Pultoway, Pultowa, or Pultava, is a fortified town in the
  Ukraine, famous for a battle fought in its neighbourhood between
  Charles XII. of Sweden and Peter the Great of Russia. It is 100
  miles south-west of Bielgorod from which Lovzinski pretended to
  have come on purpose to purchase merchandize, &c. T.]

I make haste to sell my diamonds, to purchase powder, arms, and
provisions of all kinds, different utensils, and some coarse and
necessary furniture; every thing, in fine, which I judged most proper to
relieve our misery, and soften our misfortunes.---With these I load a
waggon, drawn by four good horses, of which I was the only conductor.

My return was equally tedious and difficult; no less than eight whole
days expired before I arrived at the entrance of the forest.

It was there that, terminating my disagreeable and dangerous journey,
I was about to succour my father-in-law and my wife; that I was about to
revisit all that was most dear to me in the world; and yet I felt none
of those transports of joy which such an event seemed likely to inspire.

Philosophers have no belief in forebodings.

Certain it is, however, that I experienced an involuntary uneasiness: my
mind became dispirited, dismayed, and something, I know not what, seemed
to whisper to me, that the most unhappy moment of my whole life was fast
approaching.

On my departure, I had placed several flint-stones at certain distances,
on purpose to enable me to retrace my road; but I could not now discover
them. I had also cut off with my sabre large pieces of the bark of
several trees, which I could not now perceive. I enter the forest,
however: I hollow with all my strength: I discharge my gun from time to
time, but nobody answers me. I dared not trust myself among the trees
and shrubs for fear of losing my way back again; neither could I wander
too far from my waggon, which was stored with provisions so necessary to
Pulaski, his daughter, and myself.

The night, which now approached, obliged me to give over my search, and
I pass it in the same manner as the former. Rolled up in my cloak, I lay
down beneath my waggon, which I had carefully surrounded with my larger
moveables, and which thus served me as a rampart against the wild
beasts.

I could not sleep; the cold was extremely intense; the snow fell in
great abundance; at break of day I looked around, and found all the
ground covered with it. From that moment I formed the most horrible and
the most sinister presages: the stones which might have pointed out the
path I was to have taken, were all buried, and it appeared impossible I
should ever be able to discover my father-in-law and my wife.

  (_To be continued._)



           *       *       *       *

  FRIENDSHIP.

There are few subjects which have been more written upon, and less
understood, than that of Friendship. To follow the dictates of some,
this virtue, instead of being the assuager of pain, becomes the source
of every inconvenience. Such speculatists, by expecting too much from
friendship, dissolve the connexion; and, by drawing the bands too
closely, at length break them. Almost all our romance and novel-writers
are of this kind; they persuade us to friendships, which we find
impossible to sustain to the last; so that this sweetener of life, under
proper regulations, is, by their means, rendered inaccessible or uneasy.

Friendship is like a debt of honour: the moment it is talked of, it
loses its real name, and assumes the more ungrateful form of obligation.
From hence we find, that those who regularly undertake to cultivate
friendship, find ingratitude generally repays their endeavours. That
circle of beings, which dependence gathers round us, is almost ever
unfriendly; they secretly wish the term of their connexions more nearly
equal; and, where they even have the most virtue, are prepared to
reserve all their affections for their patron, only in the hour of his
decline. Increasing the obligations which are laid upon such minds, only
increases their burthen; they feel themselves unable to repay the
immensity of their debt, and their bankrupt hearts are taught a latent
resentment at the hand that is stretched out with offers of service and
relief.

Plautinus was a man who thought that every good was bought from riches;
and as he was possessed of great wealth, and had a mind naturally formed
for virtue, he resolved to gather a circle of the best men round him.
Among the number of his dependents was Musidorus, with a mind just as
fond of virtue, yet not less proud than his patron. His circumstances,
however, were such as forced him to stoop to the good offices of his
superior, and he saw himself daily among a number of others loaded with
benefits and protections of friendship. These, in the usual course of
the world, he thought it prudent to accept; but, while he gave his
esteem, he could not give his heart. A want of affection breaks out in
the most trifling instances, and Plautinus had skill enough so observe
the minutest actions of the man he wished to make his friend. In these
he ever found his aim disappointed; for Musidorus claimed an exchange of
hearts, which Plautinus, solicited by a variety of claims, could never
think of bestowing.

It may be easily supposed, that the reserve of our poor proud man, was
soon construed into ingratitude; and such, indeed, in the common
acceptation of the world it was. Wherever Musidorus appeared, he was
remarked as the ungrateful man; he had accepted favours, it was said,
and had still the insolence to pretend to independence. The event,
however, justified his conduct. Plautinus, by misplaced liberality, at
length became poor; and it was then that Musidorus first thought of
making a friend of him. He flew to the man of fallen fortune with an
offer of all he had; wrought under his direction with assiduity; and by
uniting their talents, both were at length placed in that state of life
from which one of them had formerly fallen.




  NATURE.

An happy sensibility to the beauties of Nature should be cherished in
young persons. It engages them to contemplate the Creator in his
wonderful works; it purifies and harmonizes the soul, and prepares it
for moral and intellectual discipline; it supplies an endless source of
amusement; it contributes even to bodily health; and as a strict analogy
subsists between material and mortal beauty, it leads the heart by an
easy transition from the one to the other; and thus recommends virtue
for its transcendent loveliness and makes vice appear the object of
contempt and abomination.




  AFFECTION.

From the impassioned feelings of the mother, to him who stands joyless
on the verge of apathy, the tide of affection flows in a long and
devious course. Clear, full and vehement, it descends into the vale of
life, where, after a short time, becoming tranquil and serene, it
separates into many branches; and these, again dividing, wander in a
thousand streams, dispensing, as they move along, the sweets of health
and happiness. That no felicity exists independent of a susceptibility
for these emotions is a certain fact; for to the heart of him who hath
been cold to filial or fraternal duty, the soothing charm of friendship
and of love will ever be unknown. It is therefore evident, that to be
happy, man must invariably consult the well being of others; to his
fellow-creatures he must attribute the bliss which he enjoys; it is a
reward proportional to the exertion of his philanthropy. Abstract the
man of virtue and benevolence from society, and you cut off the prime
source of his happiness; he has no proper object on which to place his
affection, or exercise his humanity; the sudden rapture of the grateful
heart, the tender tones of friendship, and the melting sweetness of
expressive love, no longer thrill upon his ear, or swell his softened
soul; all is an aching void, a cheerless and almost unproductive waste:
yet even in this situation, barren as it is, where none are found to
pour the balm of pity, or listen to the plaint of sorrow, even here some
enjoyment is derived from letting loose our affections upon inanimate
nature. "Where in a desert (says Sterne) I could not do better, I would
fasten them on some sweet myrtle, or seek some melancholy cypress to
connect myself to. I would court their shade, and greet them kindly for
their protection. I would cut my name upon them, and swear they were the
loveliest trees throughout the desert. If their leaves withered, I would
teach myself to mourn, and when they rejoiced, I would rejoice with
them."



           *       *       *       *

   NEW-YORK.



    MARRIED,

On Monday the 28th ult. at Smith Town (L.I.) by the Rev. Mr. Hart, Mr.
ELKANAH SMITH, merchant, of this city, to Miss MARY ARTHUR, of that
place.

On Tuesday evening last, by the Rev. Dr. Moore, Mr. JAMES PARKIN, to
Mrs. REBECCA CLARKSON, both of this city.

At Boston, on the 11th inst. by the Rev. Dr. Thacher, EZEKIEL BRUSH,
Esq. merchant of New-York, to Miss SALLY SHATTUCK, daughter of Wm.
Shattuck, Esq. of that place.




  _METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS._
  _From the 20th ult. to the 10th inst._

    _Thermometor observed at 6, A.M. 3, P.M._
      _Prevailing winds._
        _OBSERVATIONS on the WEATHER._

          deg.  deg.    6. 3.  6. 3.
             100   100
  Nov. 20  54 75 55     ne. do.  cloudy high wind rain
       21  48 50 52 25  e. do.   foggy light wind do. do.
       22  46 50 45     ne. do.  cloudy rain do.
       23  36    36 50  nw. do.  clear lt. wind do. high wd.
       24  30 50 35 50  nw. do.  clear lt. wind do. do.
       25  28 50 32     w. do.   clear lt. wind do. do.
       26  22 50 29     w. do.   clear lt. wind do. do.
       27  21 50 27     w. nw.   clear high wind do. do.
       28  25    33 75  w. sw.   clear lt. wind cloudy do.
       29  27 50 37     n. nw.   clear lt. wind do. high do.
       30  33    40 50  sw. nw.  clear high wind do. do.
  Dec.  1  29 75 29 50  sw. nw.  cloudy light wind do. do.
        2  22 50 32 50  n. do.   cloudy light wind do. do.
        3  30 75 37     n. w.    clear light wind clear do.
        4  32    37 50  sw. w.   cr. h. wd. cloudy lt. wind
        5  36    44     w. do.   clear high wd. do. do.
        6  36    45 75  w. do.   rain light wind do. do.
        7  35 50 34     nw. se.  snow 3 inches deep
        8  28 50 31     nw. do.  clear light wind do. do.
        9  26 50 33     nw. do.  clear light wind do. do.
       10  29    34     w. do.   cloudy light wind do. do.



  RESULTS OF METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS.

  FOR NOVEMBER 1796.

  Mean temperature of the thermometer at sun-rise            38   74
  Do. do. of the do.  at 3 P.M.                              45   60
  Do. do. for the whole month                                42   34
  Greatest monthly range between the 19th and 27th           35   25
  Do. do. in 24 hours the 17                                 21   50
  Warmest day the 19                                         56   75
  Coldest do. the 27                                         21    5

  It rained a little, or rather misted four days.
  14 Days it was clear at sun-rise, and 3 o'clock
   8 Do. it was cloudy at do.    do.
  Two days it was foggy
  16 Do. the wind was light at do do.
   4 Do. the do.  was high at do.    do.
  23 Do. the wind was to the Westward of north and south.
   7 Do. the do.  was to the Eastward of do.  do.

The 9th, 10th, and 11th, the Atmosphere was darkened, with apparently
thick smoke, which for most of the time, obscured almost the sun, and
caused the sky to be very dark, a very uncommon phenomenon, and 8 days
the Mercury at sunrise, was below the freezing point.



           *       *       *       *

     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._



                     LINES
            ON THE LATE SCOTCH POET.



  "Full many a gem of purest ray serene,
  "The dark, unfathom'd caves of ocean bear;
  "Full many a flow'r is born to blush unseen,
  "And waste its sweetness on the desart air."

    GRAY.



  The brightest rays of genius fail
    To guard its sons from earthly grief,
  Wisdom alas! can naught avail,
    Or to the suff'rer yield relief.

  The sons of Genius hapless race,
    To often are the sons of woe;
  The dreary path of want they trace,
    Or to the grave unheeded go.

  Such, BURNS, was thy unhappy fate,
    Such the reward of worth like thine;
  The muse deplores thine humble state,
    Which thy bright talents could confine.

  Offspring of nature--self-taught Bard,
    Thy memory respect commands:
  And though on earth thy lot was hard,
    Thy shade th' applauding lay demands.

  To thee, the muses lov'd to bring,
    The sweets of Poetry refin'd;
  'Twas thine in humble strains to sing,
    The mild effusions of thy mind.

  Seduc'd by nature's pleasing sway,
    Her influence fashion'd ev'ry line--
  Her beauties shone throughout thy lay,
    Her beauties made the lay divine.

  But many a gem, both rich and bright,
    Th'unfathom'd caves of ocean bear:
  And dark seclusion hides from sight
    Full many a flow'ret, sweet and fair.

    ALEXIS.

      New-York, Dec. 6, 1796.




  _To a Gentleman who attempted drawing the Picture
  of a beautiful Young Lady:_

  Vain the attempt of Phoebus' darling boy,
  To guide the flaming chariot of the sky;
  Vain the attempt of Daedalus' favourite care,
  With artificial wing to cleave the air;
  But vainer still thy fond attempt to trace,
  The matchless beauties of that heavenly face:
  Where every grace, and every charm combin'd,
  Confess an angel's form, an angel's mind;
  How couldst thou then a likeness hope to strike?
  The task requires a Reubens or Vandyke!



           *       *       *       *

  MORAL VERSES, ADDRESSED TO YOUTH.

  Whilst early youth spreads smiling skies,
  While yet the golden prospects rise,
    Which glowing fancy forms:
  And yet your bark is seen to glide
  Down pleasure's smoothly passing tide,
    Nor fears impending storms.

  Attend a while the moral lay,
  Be wise, if possible, TO-DAY;
    No FUTURE period trust.
  TO-MORROW is beyond your pow'r;
  Perhaps the fondly-promis'd hour
    May lay you in the dust.

  If now with health your pulse beats high,
  And joy sits sparkling in your eye,
    Yet be the flame represt;
  Your sails, while fav'ring zephyrs kiss,
  With moderation taste the bliss,
    That warms your swelling breast.

  Nor deem fair virtue's rules severe,
  Ill habits make them so appear,
    Learn timely sloth to shun.
  Be then the shining track pursu'd,
  Nor follow the rash multitude,
    That rush to be undone.

  Where mad excess leads forth her hand,
  Think Circe waves her direful wand;
    Her poison'd cup beware;
  Still shun the insolently vain,
  And where you see the crew profane,
    Avoid the fatal snare.

  Be all your thoughts by conscience try'd;
  Let purity your actions guide;
    Fly ribaldry obscene.
  When ardent passion claims her sway,
  And to enjoyments points the way,
    Let Reason mark the mean.

  Dare to be good without a boast;
  The substance oft in forms is lost;
    Let truth direct your plan.
  The vaunt of Pride, while you disdain,
  In your deportment yet maintain
    THE DIGNITY OF MAN.




  AN EPIGRAM.

    [By Dr. Byrom.]

  What is more tender than a Mother's love
    To the sweet Infant fondling in her arms?
  What arguments need her compassion move,
    To hear its cries, and help it in its harms?
  Now, if the tenderest Mother was possest
    Of all the love, within her single breast,
  Of all the Mothers, since the world began,
    'Tis nothing to the Love of God to Man.


NEW-YORK: _+Printed by JOHN BULL, No. 115, Cherry-Street+, where every
Kind of Printing work is executed with the utmost Accuracy and
Dispatch.--+Subscriptions+ for this +Magazine+ (at 2s. per month) are
taken in at the Printing-Office, and by E. MITCHELL, Bookseller, No. 9,
Maiden-Lane._



           *       *       *       *



  _UTILE DULCI._

  THE NEW-YORK WEEKLY MAGAZINE;
  or, Miscellaneous Repository.

  +Vol. II.+]  +Wednesday, December 28, 1796.+  [+No. 78.+


  +Lamentations Of Panthea Over The Body Of Abradates.+*

Be the garland of hope withered by the sigh of disappointment; be the
lute of gladness no more responsive to the fingers of melody. What hast
thou to do with dreams of rapture, with scenes of visionary transport,
with the whispers of fancy that mock the ear of attention? Thou hast
nothing to do with them. O ill-fated Panthea! thy peace, thy loves, thy
joys are at an end: the howl of calamity has chased thy slumbers of
happiness, and doomed sorrow and solitude to be thy hapless handmaids.
How terrific is the brow of anguish to the eye of complaisance! to the
children of festivity how convulsive is the cup of astonishment! My
heart is as the heart of a babe that weeps bitterly; I have all the
weakness of childhood, and all the sorrows of age. As the patient whose
malady scoffs at physic, I am hopeless without a cure, I am disconsolate
as the ghost of midnight among the tombs of my forefathers. Why, O thou
nurse of my infancy, didst thou reserve me to such a date? why was I
ever lulled upon the lap of tenderness? Would that ere the dawning
irradiations of reason I had died, in the morning of existence thy
Panthea had died; thou hadst wept over her urn with less mortal anguish.
But cease, O thou nurse of my infancy, for the fault was not thine: thy
imagination was enraptured with the fictions of fondness, and painted
fairer prospects for thy much-loved Panthea: thy love reared around her
the pavilions of ease, plucked the thorns of adversity from the garden
of pleasure, and perfumed her paths with the incense of roses. It was
not thine to descend to the recesses of thought, and chase honour from
its abode as the assassin of peace. It was thy charm, O inhuman honour!
that made captive my discretion, and seduced me from the waters of
consolation to the precipices of despair. Why did I soar after thee on
the wings of ambition, and spurn at contentment for deriding thy deceit?
My fancy thought thee fairer than a studded diadem; more splendid than
the gold in the waves of Pactolus. Thou art fair, I said, and beautiful
beyond the visions of rapture; and the youth who holds my heart I will
endeavour to possess thee. I will enlarge upon thy glories that his soul
may catch thy fire; I will urge him to the plains of conquest; but, lo!
he bleeds beneath the spear.--Ye virgin daughters of Bactria, you have
seen the youth of my love: my love was foremost among the candidates for
honour, he was a hero without pre-eminence. His heart never fainted at
the clang of war; when the oriflamb of battle was erected in his view,
he stood strong as the gate of Susa, and immoveable as its battlements.
In the conflict he was dreadful as a host sheathed in terrors; rough and
terrible as a wave conflicting with the spirit of the blast. No force
dared oppose the burning flames of his wrath; he curbed the fury of the
sons of thunder in their midnight career, and waved the faulchion of
conquest over the heads of potentates. But when the Poeans of victory
have dismissed him from the plain, ye virgin daughters of Bactria, you
have seen him hasten to my arms, all placid as the smile of virginity in
the morning of youth; meek and gentle as a bride conducting to the
bowers of her bridegroom. When shall he exult at the voice of fame above
the shield of his might, and bear the wreath of glory from his warring
compeers? Alas! can the tear of evening resuscitate the broken primrose
of the vale, or shall the poplar once fallen grace the banks of
Zenderhoud; his shield of might is defenceless, his wreath of glory is
decayed, and the trumpet of fame has no music for his ear. Fool that I
was, why did I urge him to the fight? why did I arm his fortitude
against unequal slaughter! The burden of calamity presses heavy on my
soul---my spirit faints within me---I die, I die!---Is there no kind
consoler of another's anguish, in the tenderness of sympathy, to speak
peace to my grief?---Thou weepest in the bitterness of affliction,
O thou, whose hand dried the tear in the eye of infancy; but that
infancy in vain matured by youth, waits the offices of age---soon thy
charity shall accomplish what thy tenderness has begun, when the breast
that now heaves shall throb no more, and the breath that now murmers
shall be silent forever!

  [* See Xenophon's Cyropedia, or Life of Cyrus, in M. Rollin's
  Ancient History.]




  HAPPINESS.

There are happy days, but no happy lives; this would be an enchanting
dream, without once wakening to sorrow.



           *       *       *       *

  THE VICTIM OF MAGICAL DELUSION;
  _OR, INTERESTING MEMOIRS OF MIGUEL, DUKE DE CA*I*A._
  Unfolding Many Curious Unknown Historical Facts.

  _Translated from the German of Tschink._

  (Continued from page 195.)

Alumbrado had spoken the truth; the Duke found the Count in his
apartment. The latter was at first incapable of uttering a word, but
having recovered from his astonishment, he declined in a faltering
accent to accept the invitation of my friend. But when he heard the Duke
talk of the guard, and saw that he was a prisoner, he submitted to his
fate. The Duke ordered his trunk to be carried to his coach, and then
drove with him to his palace.

Apprehending that the Count would be reserved in the presence of a third
person, he had previously requested me to retire with Alumbrado to a
closet, where we could hear and see them without being observed. The
introduction to their discourse had already been finished in the
carriage, consequently we heard only the continuation. As soon as they
had entered the room, the Duke desired the Count to give him the key of
his trunk, which was delivered to him without hesitation. While he was
opening the trunk and searching for papers which he could not find, the
Count took his letter-case out of his pocket and threw it in the chimney
fire.

Although the Duke hastened to save it, yet a great part of it had
already been consumed by the flames. The rest he locked up in his
writing desk.

"Why have you done this?" he said to the Count with rising anger.

"Because I do not like to have my secrets wrested from me by force."

The Duke took several turns in his apartment in order to recover his
equanimity, and then rung the bell. "Wine," he called to the servant,
who brought it immediately and retired.

"Count," said the Duke in a mild accent, "the wine possesses the virtue
of rendering people communicative and sincere. Let us drink."

"You shall draw my secrets from me neither by force nor artifice.
I shall at least have the merit of confessing voluntarily, what I can,
and dare confess."

"Very well. However, wine possesses also the virtue of dispelling
animosity and perplexity. Come, let us drink."

The Count consented to it.

"First of all," said the Duke, after they had been seated, "tell me
where is Hiermanfor? He promised to pay me a visit as soon as Por***al
should be delivered from the Spa**sh yoke, but has not been as good as
his word."

"He could not. Affairs of the greatest importance have called him to
Brasil, where he very probably is at present."

"Do you think that he will fulfil his promise after his return?"

"Undoubtedly! but why do you wish for his visit?"

"He has promised to initiate me in the mysteries of an occult
philosophy. You are perhaps capable of supplying his place."

"No, my Lord."

"But you will be able to afford me some information with respect to
those illusions by which I have been put to the test?"

"Yes!" the Count replied, after a pause.

"I only desire you to explain to me the more intricate and most
important deceptions, for the rest I hope to unfold without your
assistance."

"Most of them you have already discovered by the papers which you have
ta--- found in my trunk."

"How do you know that?" The Duke asked with astonishment.

"I know it from Hiermanfor."

"And by whom has _he_ been informed of it?"

"By your Grace."

"By me? I do not recollect to have discovered to him any thing."

"Not directly; however, you have betrayed yourself."

"On what occasion?"

"When he paid you a visit at **ubia. Do you not recollect to have asked
him whether he had discovered to Amelia that your real father had not
been the murderer of her Lord? This you could not have known if you had
not seen my papers."

"It is true," the Duke replied after a short silence, "however, those
papers did not extend farther than to the time when Hiermanfor was taken
up in your and my tutor's presence. I was then going to descend into the
subterraneous vaults of a ruinous building, in order to take a brilliant
pin out of the hair of a sleeping virgin."

"I know it; but you would have found neither the sleeping virgin nor any
of those things which Hiermanfor told you you would meet with."

"Is it possible; should he have risked a fraud in which I so easily
could have found him out?"

"He knew before-hand that you would not get to the bottom of the
staircase, for it was settled previously that I should appear in time
with the officers of the police, and recall your Grace by firing a
pistol."

"Indeed!" said the Duke with astonishment, "now I recollect another very
strange incident. I should perhaps not have descended without your
interference, for I was seized with an uncommon anxiety, which increased
every step I proceeded. I cannot conceive what was the reason of it;
however it seemed as if an invisible power pushed me back."

"This I will explain to you. Don't you recollect that a thick smoke
ascended from the abyss? A stupifying incense which possessed the power
of straitening the breast, and creating anxiety, was burning at the
bottom of the stair-case."

"I cannot but confess," the Duke said, after a short pause, "that the
execution was not less cautious than the plan has been artful. I had
indeed been impelled, at that time, to believe Hiermanfor was not only
possessed of the knowledge of subterraneous treasures, but also of the
power and the inclination of affording me a share of them, and that it
had been merely my fault to have returned empty handed. His cursory
account of the wonderful things I should meet with in the abyss had
contributed to set my imagination at work, and I was more desirous to
see those miraculous things, than to get possession of the jewels."

"Your Grace resented it very much that I had interrupted that adventure
by the seizure of Hiermanfor."

"Indeed I did, but what view had you in doing it?"

"It was of great consequence to me, to prove myself to you and your
tutor, in an incontestible manner, an implacable enemy of Hiermanfor.
How could I have effected it better than by seizing him? the magistrate
was an intimate friend of mine, and the whole farce pre-concerted with
him."

"Then the Irishman has not been taken up seriously?"

"The officers of the police had been ordered to set him at liberty as
soon as he should be out of your sight."

"Now I can comprehend why you so obstinately opposed me when I intreated
my tutor to make an attempt at delivering Hiermanfor.----But what would
you have done, if I had persisted in my resolution of taking that step?"

"Then you should certainly not have done it alone; I would have
accompanied you to the magistrate, who undoubtedly would have found
means of consoling you with respect to Hiermanfor's fate. It seemed,
nevertheless, not to be advisable to suffer you to remain any longer in
the neighbourhood of the theatre where that scene had been performed.
You might have peeped behind the curtain without our knowledge, and your
tutor could have made secret enquiries. An accident might easily have
betrayed to you that the process against Hiermanfor was a fiction; in
short, we could not have acted with safety and liberty while you should
have been near the scene of action, and for that reason the magistrate
was suborned to endeavour to persuade you to a speedy flight, in which
he succeeded to our greatest satisfaction."

"Now it is evident how Hiermanfor could shew so much tranquility and
unconcern when he was taken up, how he could promise to see me at **n,
and make good his promise."

"The latter was indeed an easy matter; however he wanted to render his
re-appearance interesting by concomitant extraordinary circumstances.
A lamentable incident procured him the means of effecting his purpose.
You will recollect the execution of Franciska, the too late discovery of
her innocence, and the nocturnal funeral to which I invited
you.---Hiermanfor could not have re-appeared to you on a more remarkable
opportunity. At that period, when your soul was thrilled with gloomy
melancholy and chilling sensations, the sight of a man whom you supposed
to languish in a dungeon, or perhaps to have finished already his career
on the stake, could not but make the deepest impression on you. You know
that he omitted nothing that promised to enforce that impression."

"But how could he then already know that I had been raised to the ducal
dignity?"

"He had received early intelligence of it by a letter from a friend, who
was intimate with the secretary of your father."

"Let us drop the discourse on the scene of that night, it is accompanied
with too horrid and painful ideas. Let us repair to the retired cell of
the royal hermit, where no inferior miracles are crowding upon us. First
of all, tell me whether you really think him to be the old banished
King?"

"I do, indeed, not only because Hiermanfor has told me so, but also
because his whole form resembles in a most striking manner, the picture
of the real King."

"But when do you think he will ascend the throne of Port**al?"

"I suppose, very soon!"

"Do you, indeed? I can see, as yet, no preparations for it. They even do
not _talk_ of the old King; every one believes him to be dead; I think
it would be time to spread the news of his being still alive."

"I must confess that I have neither heard nor seen any thing of him
since we left him in his cell. I hope Hiermanfor's return will be the
period of his taking possession of the throne. Perhaps he intends to
introduce him in triumph in Port**al."

"It seems, at least, that they are very intimately connected. Do you
recollect how Hiermanfor appeared at night, in a manner equally
mysterious and surprizing, when he was summoned by the royal Hermit?"

"O! as for that juggling trick---"

The Duke started from his chair. "A juggling trick---this too should
have been a juggling trick?"

"How can you be surprized at this discovery?"

"The incident was indeed wonderful enough for giving reason to think it
supernatural."

"You are right. That artifice could not but produce an astonishing
effect on an uninformed spectator. The Hermit pronounces some
unintelligible words while he kisses the picture three times; the lamp
is extinguished and lighted again, as if it were by an invisible hand;
a sudden noise is heard, and a flame flashes over the picture. All this
is very surprising. However, if one knows that the altar, on which the
picture is placed, conceals a machine, that the Hermit's finger touches
a secret spring, and this puts the wheels of the machine in motion, that
the wick in the lamp is connected with it, and pulled down and up again
through the tube in which it is fixed; if one knows _how_ Hiermanfor
entered the cell, then the whole incident will be divested of its
supernatural appearance."

"But this very appearance of Hiermanfor is entirely mysterious to me."

  (_To be continued._)



           *       *       *       *

  THE STORY OF ALCANDER AND SEPTIMIUS.
  Taken from a Byzantine Historian.

Athens, long after the decline of the Roman empire, still continued the
seat of learning, politeness, and wisdom. Theodoric, the Ostrogoth,
repaired the schools which barbarity was suffering to fall into decay,
and continued those pensions to men of learning, which avaricious
governors had monopolized.

In this city, and about this period, Alcander and Septimius were fellow
students together; the one, the most subtle reasoner of all the Lyceum;
the other, the most eloquent speaker in the academic grove. Mutual
admiration soon begot friendship. Their fortunes were nearly equal, and
they were natives of the two most celebrated cities in the world; for
Alcander was of Athens, Septimius came from Rome.

In this state of harmony they lived for some time together, when
Alcander, after passing the first part of his youth in the indolence of
philosophy, thought at length of entering into the busy world; and, as a
step previous to this, placed his affections on Hypatia, a lady of
exquisite beauty. The day of their intended nuptials was fixed; the
previous ceremonies were performed; and nothing now remained but her
being conducted in triumph to the apartment of the intended bridegroom.

Alcander's exultation in his own happiness, or being unable to enjoy any
satisfaction without making his friend Septimius a partner, prevailed
upon him to introduce Hypatia to his fellow-student; which he did with
all the gaiety of a man who found himself equally happy in friendship
and love. But this was an interview fatal to the future peace of both;
for Septimius no sooner saw her, but he was smitten with an involuntary
passion; and, though he used every effort to suppress desires at once so
imprudent and unjust, the emotions of his mind in a short time became so
strong, that they brought on a fever, which the physicians judged
incurable.

During this illness, Alcander watched him with all the anxiety of
fondness, and brought his mistress to join in those amiable offices of
friendship. The sagacity of the physicians, by these means, soon
discovered that the cause of their patient's disorder was love; and
Alcander being apprised of their discovery, at length extorted a
confession from the reluctant dying lover.

It would but delay the narrative to describe the conflict between love
and friendship in the breast of Alcander on this occasion; it is enough
to say, that the Athenians were at that time arrived at such refinement
in morals, that every virtue was carried to excess. In short, forgetful
of his own felicity, he gave up his intended bride, in all her charms,
to the young Roman. They were married privately by his connivance, and
this unlooked for change of fortune wrought as unexpected a change in
the constitution of the now happy Septimius. In a few days he was
perfectly recovered, and set out with his fair partner for Rome. Here,
by an exertion of those talents which he was so eminently possessed of,
Septimius, in a few years, arrived at the highest dignities of the
state, and was constituted the city judge, or praetor.

In the mean time, Alcander not only felt the pain of being separated
from his friend and his mistress, but a prosecution was also commenced
against him, by the relations of Hypatia, for having basely given up his
bride, as was suggested, for money. His innocence of the crime laid to
his charge, and even his eloquence in his own defence, were not able to
withstand the influence of a powerful party. He was cast, and condemned
to pay an enormous fine. However, being unable to raise so large a sum
at the time appointed, his possessions were confiscated, he himself was
stripped of the habit of freedom, exposed as a slave in the
market-place, and sold to the highest bidder.

A merchant of Thrace becoming his purchaser, Alcander, with some other
companions of distress, was carried into that region of desolation and
sterility. His stated employment was to follow the herds of an imperious
master, and his success in hunting was all that was allowed him so
supply his precarious subsistence. Every morning waked him to a renewal
of famine or toil, and every change of season served but to aggravate
his unsheltered distress. After some years of bondage, however, an
opportunity of escaping offered; he embraced it with ardour; so that,
travelling by night, and lodging in caverns by day, to shorten a long
story, he at last arrived in Rome. The same day on which Alcander
arrived, Septimius sat administering justice in the forum, whither our
wanderer came, expecting to be instantly known, and publicly
acknowledged, by his former friend. Here he stood the whole day amongst
the crowd, watching the eyes of the judge, and expecting to be taken
notice of; but he was so much altered by a long succession of hardships,
that he continued unnoticed among the rest; and, in the evening, when he
was going up to the praetor's chair, he was brutally repulsed by the
attending lictors. The attention of the poor is generally driven from
one ungrateful object to another; for night coming on, he now found
himself under the necessity of seeking a place to lie in, and yet knew
not where to apply. All emaciated and in rags, as he was, none of the
citizens would harbour so much wretchedness; and sleeping in the streets
might be attended with interruption or danger: in short, he was obliged
to take up his lodging in one of the tombs without the city, the usual
retreat of guilt, poverty, and despair. In this mansion of horror,
laying his head upon an inverted urn, he forgot his miseries for a while
in sleep; and found, on his flinty couch, more ease than beds of down
can supply to the guilty.

As he continued here, about midnight, two robbers came to make this
their retreat; but, happening to disagree about the division of their
plunder, one of them stabbed the other to the heart, and left him
weltering in blood at the entrance. In these circumstances he was found
next morning, dead, at the mouth of the vault. This naturally inducing a
further enquiry, an alarm was spread; the cave was examined, and
Alcander being found, was immediately apprehended, and accused of
robbery and murder. The circumstances against him were strong, and the
wretchedness of his appearance confirmed suspicion. Misfortune and he
were now so long acquainted, that he at last became regardless of life.
He detested a world where he had found only ingratitude, falsehood, and
cruelty; he was determined to make no defence; and thus, lowering with
resolution, he was dragged, bound with cords, before the tribunal of
Septimius. As the proofs were positive against him, and he offered
nothing in his own vindication, the judge was proceeding to doom him to
a most cruel and ignominious death, when the attention of the multitude
was soon divided by another object. The robber, who had been really
guilty, was apprehended selling his plunder, and, struck with a panic,
had confessed his crime. He was brought bound to the same tribunal, and
acquitted every other person of any partnership in his guilt. Alcander's
innocence therefore appeared, but the sullen rashness of his conduct
remained a wonder to the surrounding multitude; but their astonishment
was still further increased, when they saw their judge start from his
tribunal to embrace the supposed criminal. Septimius recollected his
friend and former benefactor, and hung upon his neck with tears of pity
and of joy. Need the sequel be related? Alcander was acquitted; shared
the friendship and honours of the principal citizens of Rome; lived
afterwards in happiness and ease; and left it to be engraved on his
tomb, That no circumstances are so desperate, which Providence may not
relieve.




  Interesting History Of
  _THE BARON DE LOVZINSKI._

  With a relation of the most remarkable occurrences in the life
  of the celebrated COUNT PULASKI, well known as the champion of
  American Liberty, and who bravely fell in its defence before
  Savannah, 1779.

  _Interspersed with Anecdotes of the late unfortunate KING of POLAND,
  so recently dethroned._

  (Continued from page 198.)

Had the horse, which I had left with them at my departure, afforded them
sufficient sustenance ever since? Had not hunger, cruel hunger, obliged
them to fly from their retreat? Were they still concealed in those
frightful deserts? If they were not there, where should I be able to
find them? Where, without them, should I drag out my miserable
existence?
   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .
   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .
   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .

But could I believe that Pulaski had abandoned his son-in-law? that
Lodoiska had consented to separate herself from her husband?
No---undoubtedly not. They were still confined within the circle of this
frightful solitude; and if I abandoned them, they must die with famine
and cold!  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .
   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .
   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .

These desperate reflections at length determined my conduct, and I no
longer examined whether or not, in removing at a distance from my
waggon, I was in danger of never finding it again. To carry some
provisions to my father-in-law and wife, to succour Pulaski and
Lodoiska---these were now the only sentiments that occupied my mind.

I accordingly seize my fowling-piece, take some powder and shot, and
load one of my horses with necessaries: I pierce into the woods much
farther than during the former evening; I again hollow with all my
strength; I again make frequent discharges with my gun. The most
melancholy silence reigned all around me.

I now find myself in a part of the forest where the trees were so
extremely thick, that there was no longer any passage for my horse: I,
therefore, tie him to a tree, and my despair getting the better of every
other consideration, I still continue to advance with my gun, and part
of my provisions. I had now wandered about for two hours more, my
inquietude forcing me every moment to redouble my pace, when at length I
perceive human footsteps imprinted on the snow.

Hope gives me new strength, and I therefore instantly follow the traces
which were still fresh. Soon after I discover Pulaski almost naked,
emaciated with hunger, and so changed as scarce to be known even by me!

He makes all the efforts in his power to drag his limbs towards me, and
to reply to my enquiries. The moment that I had rejoined him, he seizes,
with avidity, on the victuals that I present to him, and devours them in
an instant. I then demand of him where Lodoiska is.

"Alas!" says he, "you will see her there!" The tone of voice in which he
pronounced these words made me tremble. I run to, I arrive at, the
cavern, but too well prepared for the melancholy spectacle that awaited
me. Lodoiska, wrapped up in her own clothes, and covered with those of
her father, was extended upon a bed of half rotten leaves!

She raises, with some difficulty, her weary head, and refusing the
aliments which I now offer her, addresses me as follows:---"I am not
hungry! The death of my children; the loss of Dorliska; our journeys, so
long, so laborious, so difficult; your dangers, which seemed to increase
daily---these have killed me! I was unable to resist fatigue and sorrow.
My friend, I am dying---I heard thy voice, and my soul was stopped in
its flight. We shall meet again! Lodoiska ought to die in the arms of a
husband whom she adores!---Assist my father! May he live! Live both of
you---console yourselves, and forget me!   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .
---Search every where for my dear   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .
   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   ."

She was unable to pronounce the name of her daughter, and instantly
expired!   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .
   .   .   .   .   .   .   .

Her father digs a grave for her at a little distance from the cavern;
and I behold the earth enclose all that I loved in this world!    .   .
   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .
   .   .   .   .   .   .   .

What a trying moment! Pulaski alone prevented me from becoming the
victim of despair: he forces me to survive Lodoiska!  .   .   .   .   .
   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .
   .   .   .   .

Pulaski, whose courage never abandoned him, and whose strength was by
this time restored, obliges me to occupy myself jointly with him, in the
business of procuring our subsistence.

By following along the snow the prints of my footsteps, we arrive at
length at the place where I had left my waggon, which we immediately
unload, and burn soon after, on purpose to withhold from our enemies the
most distant suspicion of the place of our retreat.

By the aid of our horses, for which we procure a passage, by making a
circuitous journey, instead of attempting to bring them straight to the
place of our retreat, we were at length able to transport those
provisions and moveables to our cavern, which it was so necessary for us
to procure, and to husband, if we resolved to remain much longer in this
solitude. We soon after killed our horses, which we were unable to
supply with food. We lived upon their flesh, which the rigour of the
season preserved for a considerable time; it corrupted, however, at
length; and our fire-arms being unable to procure us any other than a
scanty supply of game, we were obliged to have recourse to our
provisions; which at the end of three months, were entirely consumed.

Some gold, and the greater part of Lodoiska's diamonds still remained.
Should I make a second voyage to Pultava? Or should we both run the
hazard of such an undertaking, and quit our retreat in company? We had
already suffered so much, and so cruelly in this forest, that we
resolved to embrace the latter resolution.

We accordingly sally forth; we pass the Sem near Rylks; we purchase a
boat there, and, disguising ourselves in the dress of fishermen, we
descend that river, and enter the Desna.

Our boat was visited at Czernicove, but misery had so disfigured
Pulaski, that it was impossible any longer to recognize him. We then
enter the Dnieper; we cross from Kiof* to Krylow. There we were obliged
to receive into our boat, and carry to the other side, several Russian
soldiers who were on their march to join a small army employed against
Pugatchew.

  [* Kiof, or Kiow, is a palatinate, in which it situated a town of
  the same name, which is reckoned the capital of the Ukraine. It is
  built on the banks of the river Nieper, or Dnieper, as it is
  sometimes called. T.]

At Zoporiskaia we heard of the capture of Bender and Oczakow, the
conquest of the Crimea, the defeat and subsequent death of the Vizir
Oglou.

Pulaski, reduced to a state of desperation, was anxious to traverse the
vast deserts that separated him from Pugatchew, on purpose to join
himself to that enemy of the Russians; but the excess of our fatigues
obliged us to remain at Zaporiskaia.

The peace, which was soon after concluded between Russia and the Porte,
at length afforded us the means of entering Turkey.

On foot, and still disguised, we crossed the Boudziac, part of Moldavia
and Wallachia, and after a thousand unforeseen and unexpected
difficulties and fatigues, we at length arrive at Adrianople.

Having remained for some time at this place, on purpose to repair our
exhausted forces, we prepare to depart: but we are arrested, and being
carried before the Cadi, are accused of having sold several diamonds in
the course of our journey, which we had apparently stolen. The miserable
clothes with which we were covered, had given rise to this suspicion.

Pulaski discovers himself to the mussulman judge, and he sends us
immediately to Constantinople.

We are admitted shortly after to an audience of the grand signior. He
orders apartments to be prepared for us, and assigns us a liberal
pension upon his treasury.

I then write to my sisters, and to Boleslas: we learn, by their answers,
that all the property of Pulaski had been confiscated, that he was
degraded from his rank, and condemned to lose his head.

My father-in-law is in the utmost consternation on receiving this
intelligence: he is filled with indignation at being accused as a
regicide: he writes home in his own justification.

Constantly animated, and devoured as it were with the love of his
country, continually influenced by the mortal hatred which he had sworn
against its enemies, he never ceased, during the four whole years that
we remained in Turkey, to endeavour, by his intrigues, to oblige the
Porte to declare war against Russia.

In 1774, amidst a transport of rage, he receives intelligence of the
triple invasion,* which bereaved the republic of one third of its
possessions.

  [* The dismemberment of Poland, by the Empress of Russia, the
  emperor of Germany, and the king of Prussia. This event, which took
  place by the agreement of three royal robbers, is one of the most
  disgraceful actions that ever stained the page of humanity. T.]

It was in the spring of 1776, that the patriots of America, fearful of
the tyranny of an island which once boasted of its own liberties,
resolved to redeem their violated rights by force of arms. My country
hath lost her freedom, says Pulaski to me one day: but, ah, let us still
fight for that of a new people!

We pass into Spain, we embark on board a vessel bound for the Havannah,
from whence we repair to Philadelphia. The congress instantly presents
us with commissions, and employs us in the army of General Washington.

  (To be concluded in our next.)



           *       *       *       *

  EXTRAORDINARY RECOMPENCE ACCORDED TO MERIT.



  From a London News-paper of the 17th of last October,
  the following paragraph is extracted:

"We cannot refuse ourselves the happiness of recording a striking
instance of her Majesty's munificence. When Madame D'Arblay, ci-devant
Miss Burney, presented CAMILLA to her Royal Mistress--the Queen sent her
one thousand pounds!"

When it is considered that previous to the publication of a work, it
always undergoes the investigation of the person to whom it is
dedicated, it must be obvious that from the extraordinary merits of this
performance alone, the Queen could be induced to make so liberal a
display of approbation. Indeed, when the style, language, and general
object of the work is considered, no one will envy the writer the just
meed deservedly due to so inimitable a piece of composition. In this
work, the astonishing variety of characters, admirably supported,
discover a genius in the writer rarely to be met with. The reader is by
turns moved to tears, paled by apprehension, joyful at fortunate events,
or merry by the most ludicrous representations. Every passion is wrought
upon, every feeling is aroused to the most exquisite sensations. Vice
and wickedness do not alone undergo the lash of her pen, folly, levity,
thoughtlessness, inattention, and a numerous train of what are generally
termed venial improprieties are represented in their true and baneful
colours. The ills arising from these errors are often fatal; here youth,
in a picture drawn in the most masterly manner, are taught to avoid
those quicksands, on which the best constructed hearts have been too
often wrecked.

*** This very interesting work is now publishing by subscription, at the
office of J. BULL, No. 115, Cherry-Street.




  SOCIETY.

Every day's experience must convince the man of observation, that our
happiness depends upon the cultivation of our social duties, upon the
nurture of humanity and benevolence; that our crimes often proceed from
the want of domestic harmony, and that the flagitious deeds which glare
upon us with so horrid an aspect, are generally the consequences of a
deviation from the still small voice of duty and of love. He, who has
been accustomed to despise the feelings of the son, the husband, and the
friend, will not often be found proof again all the allurements of
interest and of vice. He, who (unless driven by hunger and despair)
lifts up his daring arm to arrest the property or the life of his
fellow-creature, never felt those soft sensations which arise from the
consciousness of being beloved; for let no man be called wretched who
has this in reserve, let no man be called poor who has a friend to
consult.



           *       *       *       *

   NEW-YORK.



    MARRIED,

On Saturday se'nnight, by the Rev. Mr. Phoebus, Mr. PHILIP GORRALL, late
of Dublin, to the very agreeable Miss ELIZA SHREEVE, daughter of the
Rev. Thomas Shreeve, late of this city.

On the 27th inst. by the Rev. Dr. Rodgers, the Rev. ABEL ROE, of
Woodbridge, N.J. to Mrs. BARRETT, relict of Nathaniel Barrett, Esq. of
Boston, late American Consul, at Rouen, in France.

On Wednesday evening, the 14th inst. at Aurora, in the county of
Onondaga, GLEN CUYLER, Esq. Attorney at Law, to Miss MARY F. LEDYARD,
daughter of Benjamin Ledyard, Esq. Clerk of that County.

A few weeks since, by the Rev. Dr. Beach, Mr. ALEXANDER P. WALDRON, to
Miss HANNAH ROBERTSON, both of this city.




  _METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS._
  _From the 11th to the 24th inst._

    _Thermometor observed at 6, A.M. 6, P.M._
      _Prevailing winds._
        _OBSERVATIONS on the WEATHER._

          deg.  deg.    6. 3.  6. 3._
             100   100
  Dec. 11  29 75 35     w. do.   clear do.  high wind do.
       12  31    38 50  w. do.   cloudy clear,  lt. wind do.
       13  30 50 39 50  w. e.    clear cloudy,  lt. wind do.
       14  36    38 50  n. w.    cloudy sm. rn.  lt. wd. do.
       15  35 25 39     w. sw.   clear do.  lt. wind do.
       16  33    39 50  w. se.   clear cloudy,  lt. wd. h. wd.
       17  35 25 40     nw. n.   sm. rn. at ni. cr. do. h. wd.
       18  36    40     ne. do.  rain do.  high wind do.
       19  36 75 43 50  ne. nw.  rain clear,  high wind do.
       20  22 25 27     nw. do.  clear do.  high wind do.
       21  25    31     nw. w.   cloudy do.  light wind do.
       22  21    22     w. nw.   snow cloudy, lt. wd. h. wd.
       23  11    15 75  w. do.   clear do.  high wind do.
       24  10 50 16 75  w. do.   cr. very sm. sn.  h. wd. do.




                    SONNET.



  Woman, thou sweet urbanity to guile
  Life's tedious course away--I love thy smile,
  Thy brow soft animated sweet to please,
    Thy full-bright-eye at vestal fire so chaste,
    Thy cheek like Hebe's bloom, and littling waist,
  With native movement, elegance and ease.
  Of these, the fair, from nature genuine boast,
  Whose charms replete with wonder strike the host,
  Yet when she meets my gaze, to sigh I'm prone,
    That peerless beauty, in a Paphian form,
    Like summer rose is tribute to the worm,
  Short boast that once inimitably shone.
  But truth predominating points the meed
  All here is short, whilst endless scenes succeed.



           *       *       *       *

     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._



                     SONG.

  How shall the simple-hearted maid
    Escape the treacherous wiles,
  By vain unfaithful man outspread,
    How shun the fatal toils?

  When ev'ry guile and ev'ry art
    Stand forth in readiness,
  T' ensnare the unsuspecting heart,
    And leave it to distress.

  Coldness or scorn ensures their love
    They sigh---they are undone;
  But oh, what pangs that heart must prove,
    Which owns it has been won!

  Then cease, ye gentle beings cease
    The insidious sex to trust,
  For ah, ye sacrifice your peace,
    When you believe them just.

    ANNA.

      NEW-YORK, DEC. 22, 1796.




  ON LOSING A FRIEND.

  The pangs I felt at parting thee my friend,
  May be conceiv'd but cannot well be penn'd;
  On this deceitful world's precarious stage,
  You stood my friend from youth to hoary age;
  _Upright_, and _firm_, _steady_ to thy trust,
  The actions _keen_, but still correctly just;
  The critic's malice, peace has oft destroy'd,
  But you _well tempered_, could not be annoy'd;
  Within thy mansion, peace and plenty dwelt,
  Your guests when pleas'd, what pleasure then you felt;
  A friend so rare to meet with now a days,
  All wish to know to whom is due such praise;
  'Tis due to one whose loss I'll long deplore,
  My friend's a TOOTH, alas just gone before.




  SONNET.

  Man stalks gigantic, lord in proud extreme,
    O'er all creations wond'rous scope can give,
  Bow'd by no yoke, scarce to the great supreme,
    Whose sanction bad mortality to live.

  Yet what pursues he? Lucre's molten pelf,
    Or pleaure's silken chain of visions dear,
  Of knowledge boasting, while unknown himself
    And loudly cavils at existence here.

  To be, and yet to be, is but the small demand,
    Seek then religion's purifying glow,
  It tranquilizes time, with stubborn hand,
    Whilst hoary age hopes endless life to know.

  Our utmost here fills but a requiem page,
  Poor, frail memorial of the passing age.



           *       *       *       *

  _The Bachelor's Soliloquy. In imitation of a celebrated Speech._

  To wed, or not to wed--That is the question;
  Whether 'tis happier in the mind to stifle
  The heats and tumults of outrageous passion,
  Or with some prudent fair in solemn contract
  Of matrimony join---to have---to hold---
  No more---and by that have to say we end
  The heart-ach, and the thousand love-sick pangs
  Of celibacy---'twere a consummation
  Devoutly to be wish'd.----In nuptial band
  To join till death dissolves;---Ay, there's the rub;
  For in that space what dull remorse may come,
  When we have taken our solemn leave of liberty,
  Must give us pause.----There's the respect
  That slacks our speed in suing for a change.
  Else---who would bear the scorns and sneers which bachelors
  When aged feel, the pains and flatt'ring fevers
  Which each new face must give to roving fancy,
  When he might rid himself at once of all
  By a bare Yes. Who would with patience bear
  To fret and linger out a single life,
  But that the dread of something yet untry'd,
  Some hazard in a state from whose strict bond
  Death only can release, puzzles the will,
  And makes us rather chuse those ills we have,
  Than fly to others which we fancy greater!
  This last reflection makes us slow and wary,
  Filling the dubious mind with dreadful thoughts
  Of curtain-lectures, jealousies, and cares
  Extravagantly great, entail'd on wedlock,
  Which to avoid the lover checks his passion,
  And, miserable, dies a BACHELOR.




  EPITAPH.

  Entomb'd beneath this lofty tree
  A mortal lies of low degree.
  A strict observer from his youth
  Of that important virtue, truth.
  He never with a selfish view
  Was known to speak a word untrue.
  His temper lively, yet as mild
  And harmless as a new-born child.
  He never slandered friend or foe,
  Nor triumph'd in another's woe;
  And tho', when young, he us'd to roam,
  For years he lov'd his little home:
  Securely there he laid him down,
  Nor fear'd the world's ill-natur'd frown;
  No wild ambitious thoughts possest
  His quiet, unaspiring breast.
  He envied neither wealth nor power,
  Enjoying still the present hour;
  Contented with his daily bread,
  Each night he sought his peaceful bed:
  Stranger to vice he knew no fear,
  As life's important end drew near;
  He breath'd his last without a sigh,
  And shew'd how Innocence shou'd die
  Blush, reader, while these lines you scan
  Here lies a MONKEY, not a man.


NEW-YORK: _+Printed by JOHN BULL, No. 115, Cherry-Street+, where every
Kind of Printing work is executed with the utmost Accuracy and
Dispatch.--+Subscriptions+ for this +Magazine+ (at 2s. per month) are
taken in at the Printing-Office, and by E. MITCHELL, Bookseller, No. 9,
Maiden-Lane._



           *       *       *       *



  _UTILE DULCI._

  THE NEW-YORK WEEKLY MAGAZINE;
  or, Miscellaneous Repository.

  +Vol. II.+]  +Wednesday, January 4, 1797.+  [+No. 79.+


  THE NETTLE AND THE ROSE:
  An Essay.

  Our bane and physic the same earth bestows,
  And near the noisome nettle blooms the rose.

We may consider human life as a garden, in which Roses and Nettles are
promiscuously scattered, and in which we as often feel the sting of the
wounding Nettle, as we enjoy the fragrance of the blooming Rose. Those
bowers of delight, entwined with the woodbine and jessamine, under whose
friendly umbrage we seek shelter from the noon-day sun, sometimes are
the abode of snakes, adders, and other venomous creatures, which wound
us in those unguarded scenes of delight. As the year has its seasons,
and winter and summer are constantly in pursuit of each other, so
changeable likewise is the condition of mortals; and as the elements are
frequently disturbed by storms, hurricanes, and tempests, so is the mind
of man frequently ruffled and discomposed, till the sunshine of reason
and philosophy bursts forth and dispels the gloom. Murmering brooks,
purling streams, and sequestered groves, whatever the fictions of a
poetical imagination may have advanced, are not always the seat of
unmingled pleasure, nor the abode of uninterrupted happiness.

The hapless Florio pined away some months on the delightful banks of the
Severn: he complained of the cruelty of the lovely Annabella, and told
his fond tale to the waters of that impetuous stream, which hurried
along regardless of his plaints. He gathered the lilies of the field:
but the lilies were not so fair as his Annabella, nor the fragrance of
the blushing rose so sweet as her breath; the lambs were not so
innocent, nor the sound of the tabour on the green half so melodious as
her voice. Time, however, has joined Florio and Annabella in the fetters
of wedlock, and the plaints of the swain are now changed. The delusion
of the enchantment is now vanished, and what he but lately considered as
the only object worthy of his sublunary pursuit, he now contemplates
with coolness, indifference, and disgust: enjoyment has metamorphosed
the Rose into a Nettle.

Ernestus, contrary to his inclination, was compelled by his parents to
marry the amiable Clara, whose sense, tenderness, and virtues, soon
fixed the heart of the roving Ernestus; and what at first gave him pain
and disgust, by degrees became familiar, pleasing, and delightful: the
Nettle was here changed to the Rose.

The wandering libertine, who pursues the Rose thro' the unlawful paths
of love, who tramples under foot every tender plant that comes within
his reach, and who roves from flower to flower, like the bee, only to
rob it of its sweets, will at last lose his way, and, when benighted, be
compelled to repose on the restless bed of wounding Nettles.

The blooming Rose is an utter stranger to the wilds of ambition, where
gloomy clouds perpetually obscure the beams of the joyful sun, where the
gentle zephyrs never waft thro' the groves, but discordant blasts are
perpetually howling, and where the climate produces only Thorns and
Nettles.

The Rose reaches its highest perfection in the garden of industry, where
the soil is neither too luxuriant, nor too much impoverished. Temperance
fans it with the gentlest zephyrs, and health and contentment sport
around it. Here the Nettle no sooner makes its appearance, than the
watchful eye of prudence espies it, and, though it may not be possible
totally to eradicate it, it is never suffered to reach to any height of
perfection.

Since then human life is but a garden, in which weeds and flowers
promiscuously shoot up and thrive, let us do what we can to encourage
the culture of the Rose, and guard against the spreading Nettle. However
barren may be the soil that falls to our lot, yet a careful and
assiduous culture will contribute not a little to make the garden, at
least, pleasing and cheerful.




  DISINTERESTED ACTION.

A disinterested action, if it be not conducted by justice, is, at best,
indifferent in its nature, and not unfrequently even turns to vice. The
expences of society, of presents, of entertainments, and the other helps
to chearfulness, are actions merely indifferent, when not repugnant to a
better method of disposing of our superfluities; but they become vicious
when they obstruct or exhaust our abilities from a more virtuous
disposition of our circumstances.



           *       *       *       *

  THE VICTIM OF MAGICAL DELUSION;
  _OR, INTERESTING MEMOIRS OF MIGUEL, DUKE DE CA*I*A._
  Unfolding Many Curious Unknown Historical Facts.

  _Translated from the German of Tschink._

  (Continued from page 203.)

"And yet it has been affected in a very simple manner. A moveable board,
which could be pushed to and fro without the least noise, was concealed
among those of which the cell was composed. Hiermanfor stole through
that hidden avenue as soon as he saw from without, through a small hole,
the lamp extinguished. He could enter without the least danger of
detection, because you have turned your back towards him, and fixed your
attention entirely on the altar."

"Then every thing had been previously prepared and pre-concerted with
the King?"

"Certainly!"

"And the whole conduct of the King has been regulated by Hiermanfor?"

"Yes, my Lord."

"The incident," the Duke replied, after a pause, "now ceases, indeed, to
appear miraculous to me; however, the behaviour of the king seems to me
so much the more mysterious. How is it possible that this reverend old
man could consent to deceive me in so degrading a manner?"

"It was no easy task to perswade him to it. However, after Hiermanfor
had exhorted his eloquence in vain, he declared at length proudly, that
no other choice was left him, than either leaving his crown forever in
the possession of an usurper, or to consent to that innocent artifice.
The King thought he was bound to choose the latter, for the benefit of
the empire and his private happiness."

A long silence on both sides. At length the Duke resumed: "Hiermanfor
showed me the ghost of my tutor at the church-yard; by what means has
that been effected?"

"Your Grace will allow me to leave this question unanswered!"

"For what reason?" the Duke asked with seeming coolness.

"Because my answer would explain nothing to you."

"Why do you think so? the explanations which you have given me, as yet,
have been very satisfactory to me."

"They concerned only things which you were able to comprehend."

"Indeed! you pay me a very bad compliment!"

"My Lord, do not misunderstand me, you have been telling me a little
while ago, that you have not yet been initiated by Hiermanfor in the
last mysteries of his philosophy!"

"I did, but what follows thence?"

"That you are still in want of the knowledge which will be requisite, if
you are to be capable of comprehending the appearance of your tutor."

"Don't pretend to persuade me that this apparition has been effected by
supernatural means."

"I will persuade you to nothing, I only tell you what I know."

"And I tell you only what I do not believe. All the other incidents
should have been effected by delusive arts, and Antonio's appearance
only be excepted?"

"The appearance of Antonio was no deception."

"You will never make me believe it."

"I cannot blame you for it."

"Why not?"

"Because I have forfeited the right of deserving credit."

The Duke was silent, viewing the Count attentively. The latter resumed:
"Besides, it is very indifferent to me what you think of the matter.
Hiermanfor may set you right."

"How far are you connected with Hiermanfor?"

"Very much like you. He has made himself my master, and I am subservient
to him."

"Do you serve him with reluctance?"

"With devotion."

"Then you will know to whom you are devoted?"

"I don't know much more of him than your Grace."

"Even that little which you know of him would be remarkable to me, if
authentic."

"I should tire your patience if I were to repeat to you all the
improbable stories which are related of him. There are, however, very
few credible accounts of him."

"I protest I should see glad to know them."

"Even the true family name of Hiermanfor is not known to me. He is said
to have been born in Ireland, of plebeian parents. A near relation who
professed astrology, had observed the stars on his birth, and prophesied
great things of him. The same man persuaded his parents to give him a
learned education, which they afterwards repented so much the less, when
they perceived the astonishing progress in learning which he made. When
he had attained the years of adolescence, his relation instructed him in
mathematics and astronomy. The fame of Hiermanfor's great learning
procured him the place of governor in a noble family. The eldest
daughter fell in love with him, and the language of her eyes soon
betrayed to him the impression he had made on her heart. She was a
blooming beauty, who had attracted by her uncommon charms, and rejected
many woers of high rank. It had been reserved for Hiermanfor to kindle
in her heart the first spark of love, and yet he appeared insensible of
his good fortune. But he was not. He entertained a high sense of the
preference given to him: honesty and prudence commanded him, however, to
conceal his sentiments for a person who was so far superior to him in
point of rank. Yet youthful age is not always capable of maintaining the
rigorous dictates of reason against the seducing voice of the passions,
and thus Hiermanfor betrayed, in an unguarded moment, the secret of his
heart, which was received with rapture by the young lady, and carefully
concealed in her bosom. But from that moment he resolved to endeavour to
rise to a situation which would permit him to woo the hand of his
mistress without blushing. This bold idea had no sooner taken place in
the soul of the resolute youth, than he began to delineate a plan for
the execution of it. Hiermanfor thought the naval service would be the
shortest way of attaining a splendid fortune, and instantly navigation
became the chief object of his study. He found very soon an opportunity
of putting his acquired knowledge in practice, which he chiefly owed to
the support of the family in which he had been tutor. The proofs of
uncommon skill which he gave in naval matters, soon raised him to the
rank of a captain, when his mistress died. Hiermanfor resigned his place
in the navy, and was received as _lay brother_ in the order of the
Carmelites. Having performed his vow he was sent to Rome, where he got
acquainted with a priest of the same order, whose name was Father
Gabriel, and who was famed for his great skill in physic and natural
knowledge. Instructed by that learned man, he improved rapidly, and
acquired at the same time great knowledge in natural magic, in which his
relation had already instructed him.

"A genius like his could not, however, confine himself for a length of
time to cloistered retirement and a speculative life. His superiors sent
a mission to the Indies, and Hiermanfor got leave to make that journey
with the missionaries. There he is said to have acquired among the
Bramins the knowledge of the occult sciences, in the mysteries of which
he has promised to initiate your Grace. I do not know what prompted him
to leave the order afterwards. His superiors parting with him
reluctantly, rendered it very difficult for him to procure dispensation
from his vows. At length he got leave to retire, under the condition
never to be inimical to the order.---This is all that I know of his
life."

"Then every thing the Magistrate and the hermit have related of him is a
fictition?" the Duke enquired after a short silence.

"Not at all!" the Count replied, "almost all those accounts are founded
on facts, though they have been embellished by fictitious episodes. The
surprising feats of Hiermanfor, of which you have been informed, were
however effected merely by means of natural magic."

"For instance, the delivery of the old King from the castle of St.
Lukar---how has it been effected?"

"It certainly has been performed by Hiermanfor's accuteness, though not
through him alone."

"And the apparition of Antonio at the church-yard---"

"Has been effected by his supernatural power."

"Count! by all that is dear to you, by Hiermanfor's friendship, by our
reconciliation, what is your real opinion of that apparition?"

"That it was affected by his supernatural power!"

The Duke rose and pressed the Count's hand. "Have you any secret wish
which I could satisfy? speak freely, and I will satisfy it, cost it what
it will, only make a frank and candid confession."

"I have confessed every thing already."

"If you, perhaps, hesitate to discover your real sentiments here, you
may fix some other place, and I pledge my honour, that no man living
shall be made acquainted with your secret."

"My dear Duke! I have indeed told you what I think."

"Count, I conjure you, by every thing sacred, by the horrors of
eternity!" here the Duke encircled him with his arms, "by Amelia's
spirit, tell we what do you think of that apparition?"

"I believe _that_ apparition to have been effected by Hiermanfor's
supernatural power," replied the Count after a short silence.

The Duke stepped a few paces back, and having viewed him some time with
a stern look, said, "You are my prisoner, do you know that I can send
you to the dungeon?"

"I am in your power."

"Where you will not be entreated to speak the truth?"

"Even on the rack I shall not contradict what I have said."

"Come," said the Duke, after he had walked up and down the room in
silent meditation; "Come, I will give you some time for
consideration."---So saying, he led the Count into another room where he
locked him up.

"What shall I do with that fellow?" he said to me when he returned to
us, "believe what he has said and set him at liberty; or mistrust and
retain him?"

"Retain him," my reply was: "if he sees that you are in earnest, he
certainly will confess."

  (To be continued.)




  _DIGNITY OF MAN._

Strength and majesty belong to the man; grace and softness are the
peculiar embellishments of the other sex. In both, every part of their
form declares their sovereignity over other creatures. Man supports his
body erect; his attitude is that of command; and his face, which is
turned towards the heavens, displays the dignity of his station. The
image of his soul is painted in his vissage; and the excellence of his
nature penetrates through the material form in which it is inclosed. His
majestic port, his sedate and resolute step, announce the nobleness of
his rank. He touches the earth only with his extremity, and beholds it
as if at a disdainful distance. His arms are not given him, as to other
creatures, for pillars of support; nor does he lose, by rendering them
callous against the ground, that delicacy of touch which furnishes him
with so many of his enjoyments.



           *       *       *       *

  Interesting History Of
  _THE BARON DE LOVZINSKI._

  With a relation of the most remarkable occurrences in the life
  of the celebrated COUNT PULASKI, well known as the champion of
  American Liberty, and who bravely fell in its defence before
  Savannah, 1779.

  _Interspersed with Anecdotes of the late unfortunate KING of POLAND,
  so recently dethroned._

  (Continued from page 206, and concluded.)

Pulaski, consumed with a black melancholy, exposes his life like a man
to whom life had become insupportable, is always to be found at the most
dangerous posts, and, towards the end of the fourth campaign, is
mortally wounded by my side. Being carried to his tent, I instantly
repair thither to console him.

"I find that my end approaches," says he, addressing himself to me. "Ah!
it is but too true, that I shall never see my native country again!

"Cruel, fantastical destiny! Pulaski falls a martyr to American liberty,
and the Poles still continue slaves!   .   .
   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .
   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .
My friend, my death would be indeed horrible, if a ray of hope did not
remain to cheer me! Ah! I hope I do not deceive myself----No, I am not
mistaken," adds he in a firmer accent.

"A consoling Deity discloses in my last thoughts a futurity, a happier
futurity which approaches!

"I behold one of the first nations in the world awakening from a long
and deep slumber, and re-demanding of its proud oppressors its violated
honours, and its ancient rights; its sacred, imprescriptible rights, the
rights of humanity.

"I behold in an immense capital, long dishonoured by every species of
servility, a crowd of soldiers discovering themselves to be citizens,
and millions of citizens becoming soldiers.

"Beneath their redoubled blows, the Bastille shall be overturned; the
signal is already given from one extremity of the empire to
another;---the reign of tyrants is no more!

"A neighbouring people, sometimes an enemy, but always generous, always
worthy of deciding upon great actions, shall applaud those unexpected
efforts, crowned with such a speedy success!

"Ah, may a reciprocal esteem commence and strengthen between these two
nations an unalterable friendship! May that horrible science of trick,
imposture, and treason, which courts denominate _politics_, hold out no
obstacle to prevent this fraternal re-union!

"Noble rivals, in talents and philosophy, Frenchmen! Englishmen! suspend
at length, and suspend for ever, those bloody discords, the fury of
which has but too often extended over the two hemispheres;---no longer
decide between you the empire of the universe, but by the force of your
example, and the ascendancy of your genius. Instead of the cruel
advantage of affrighting and subduing the nations around you, dispute
between yourselves the more solid glory of enlightening their ignorance,
and breaking their chains.

"Approach," adds Pulaski, "behold at a little distance from, and in the
midst of the carnage that surrounds us, among such a crowd of famous
warriors, a warrior celebrated even in the midst of them, by his
masculine courage, his early talents, and his virtues truly republican.
He is the heir of a name long illustrious; but he had no occasion for
the glory of his ancestors, to render himself celebrated.

"It is young FAYETTE, already an honour to France, and a scourge to
tyrants: but he has scarce begun his immortal labours!

"Envy his fate, Lovzinski; endeavour to imitate his virtues, and follow
as near as possible the steps of so great a man. He, the worthy pupil of
a Washington, shall soon be the Washington of his own country. It is
almost at the same time, my friend, it is at that memorable epoch of the
regeneration of nations, that the eternal justice shall also present to
our fellow-citizens, the days of vengeance and of liberty.

"Then Lovzinski, in whatever place thou mayest be, let thy hate
re-kindle! Again combat gloriously on the side of Poland.

"Let the remembrance of our injuries, and of our successes, call forth
thy courage! May thy sword, so many times empurpled with the blood of
our enemies, be still turned against those oppressors. May they tremble
while thinking on thy exploits! May they tremble in recalling the name
of Pulaski!

"They have ravished from us our property; they have assassinated thy
wife; they have robbed thee of thy daughter; they have dishonoured my
memory!

"The barbarians! They have dismembered our provinces! Lovzinski, these
are injuries which you ought never to forget.

"When our persecutors are those also of our country, vengeance becomes
at once sacred and indispensible.

"You owe to the Russians an eternal hatred! You owe to Poland the last
drop of your blood!"

Saying this he expires.*

  [* Pulaski was killed at the siege of Savannah, in 1779.]

Death, in snatching him from me, bereaved me of my last consolation.

I fought for the United States of America, until the happy peace which
ensured their independence. M. de C***, who had served along with me,
and who was attached to the _corps_ commanded by the Marquis de la
Fayette--- M. de C*** gave me letters of recommendation, to his friends
in Paris, and this capital I have chosen for my retreat in the meridian
of life, from the bustle of politics, and the clangor of arms.

Having informed my sisters, of the place of my residence, they collected
the small remains of my fortune, formerly immense, and hastened to
solace me after the distressing scenes I had unfortunately witnessed.


The affecting history of the Baron Lovzinski, which he relates to a
friend, breaks off, without giving any account of Dorliska, his darling
daughter, whom the Russians carried off, in one of their engagements
with Pulaski. It appears, from more recent accounts, given by an
acquaintance of the Baron's, that she fell into the hands of Count
Gorlitz, a German Nobleman, who placed her in a suitable seminary, where
she acquired every necessary accomplishment, and was by accident
restored to her father, and united to a branch of a very distinguished
family.




  _The candid acknowledgment of an Old Batchelor._

I am that insulated being called an Old Batchelor. A creature wearisome
to myself and beloved by no one, I have spent the noon of my days in a
single state, from the dread of incurring the expences incident to a
married life with a woman who had nothing, and now surely do I repent
that I had not generosity enough to overlook this consideration in
favour of a charming girl that I truly loved, and who wanted nothing but
fortune to recommend her. I was formerly clerk to her father, then a
mechanic of great respectability, but some years after greatly reduced
by the unfortunate turn of affairs in his business, incidents to many.
When he failed, I was settled in the world, and might have saved his
amiable girl from many a year of fatigue and distress into which their
poverty immersed them. But with _sang froid_, for which I now detest
myself, I then stood aloof, tore my thoughts from the sweet Eliza, and
driving forward into the heart of the city, determined to lose myself in
the recesses of counting-houses, and the accumulation of money. Thus
avoiding all the plagues and expences of a family, for which I deemed
the society of an elegant and affectionate woman by no means an
equivalent. Alas! I now see how I miscalculated; how much such a
partnership would have been for my advantage in the long run. I now put
the mutual participation of pleasure and pain, the endearments of our
children, that flattering interest which Eliza would have taken in me
(for whom by the way nobody now cares a straw,) I put all these on the
credit side of the ledger, and find in the opposite page, only such a
portion of expences as I have actually brought upon myself, by being
drawn in to give tavern dinners, and a thousand other extravagancies
that young men know not how to avoid. You will easily see, when a just
account is made out, what I have gained, or rather what I have lost.
Instead of the bright hearth and smiling faces of my family, instead of
sitting down in the midst of beings who owe life to me, and portioning
out their little meal with the delicious sensations of a father, I take
my solitary chop at a coffee-house and afterwards saunter to the
theatre, where venal beauty spreads her net and I am caught! Alas! here
is no mind, here is no modesty to make sentiment interesting. After
having seen a public entertainment with Eliza, with what delight might
we have passed the remainder of the evening. Her taste and sensibility
would have made us live the hours over again with additional pleasure.
Her bosom would have been my harbour in the storms of life, and there I
should have found resources from _ennui_ in the calm season of
prosperity. In the day of sickness her voice could have whispered
comfort, and in my dying hour the pure invocations of my children might
have availed me at the throne of grace. What a sad reckoner have I been,
I am now as grey as a badger, and have not a single relative in the
world. I have long retired from business, but my fortune brings me no
enjoyment, my dog leads nearly as rational a life: I eat and drink and
sleep alternately as he does, for I now fear to become the prey of some
indigent dame, who would overlook my grey hairs and infirmities in
consideration of coming in for a third of my wealth, and therefore avoid
much commerce with the sex, from which, though I might once have derived
happiness, I can now only expect trick, or at best ridicule. But what
can a man do who has let avarice run away with him in his youth, when
all the social affections should have been at their out-posts to prevent
it? All that remains for such a man (after the example of a culprit
going to execution) is to warn the multitude how they fall into this
error. To assure them that the good which is not participated is not
half enjoyed, and that those who abandon a young woman from motives like
mine, as they do not deserve happiness so they never will obtain it. And
moreover, if you print this, pause to add, that an equal mixture of love
and prudence forms the only, and most delicious conserve they will have
the faculty of relishing all their life long. Either, taken separately,
is prejudicial; one being too austere, and the other too sweet. They
must be blended to render them happily effective, and if any persons
have skill enough to make up the composition after my recipe, I shall
not have bemoaned myself, nor you have inserted this in vain.

  STEPHEN SORROWFUL.




  REMARKS.

Custom regulates our ideas of shame. In China, the emperor orders the
bastinado to be given to a minister or a mandarin; and afterward these
persons continue in their employments, without thinking themselves
dishonoured or degraded. They are like scholars who return to their
places after having been whipped.

The idea of virtue is become so effaced, that scarcely do we hear the
name of it pronounced. The usual expression now is, an _honest man_,
which contains but negative qualities; or sometimes qualities are
mentioned, as bravery, fidelity, &c. but a collective word which
expresses them all is seldom made use of.



           *       *       *       *

     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._



                   CANDIDUS.

                    No. I.

In an age when supernatural influence was universally acknowledged, in a
country where temples innumerable rose to the fancied deities of every
department of nature and of art; where even the different and opposite
combinations of accident and exertion were reverenced as the decrees of
a being divine and irresistable; convinced no less perhaps by self
experience than observation on others, discarding the prejudices of his
nation and his times, an historian published to the world and to
posterity, the opinion: "Fabrum esse suae quemque fortunae." Whatever
_then_ might have been the case, it would _now_ perhaps be impossible to
extend universally this proposition, and denying at once the influence
of accident and chance, to prove the power of man to accomplish his
wishes in every circumstance of situation and in every sphere of action.
The partiality of favours and the crash of unforeseen misfortune too
often expose neglected merit and ruined industry, as warning monitors in
the road to honour and to riches. While sudden unlooked for prosperity
not unfrequently demonstrates the best grounded fears of men unjustified
by events. But, however incompetent may be our power at all times to
acquire and confirm extraneous and adventitious greatness, or however
limited and erroneous our views of distant consequences in the common
affairs of life, as it respects the endowments of mind, it may with no
little propriety be averred, Fabrum else suae quemque fortunae. By the
great philosophers of nature, Newton and Buffon, genius was defined only
a superior degree of patience and perseverence, and at the present day
the advocates of this doctrine are not inconsiderable either in numbers
or in talents. True indeed it is, that they incur no disgrace by
entering the lists with many of their opponents. On the subject of
genius three distinct opinions appear to be entertained. By some it is
held to be an innate superiority of aptitude to knowledge, independent
of the labours of its possessor and unsubjected to the influence of
circumstance or situation. Others rejecting altogether the idea of
original difference in capacity, ascribe it to the co-operation of
accident and tuition confirming after years of infancy a greater or less
degree of comprehension. A third set denying at once innate distinction
and the agency of chance, give all the credit to assiduity and allow to
the mind no other wealth than the requisitions of its industry. Of these
opinions the first has long been upon the decline, and the sentiments of
the generality of speculative men, are now divided between the second
and the last. But on which ever side of this question we enlist our
conviction, we shall find an investigation, that so much is owing to
their own exertions as to afford to the present demonstration sufficient
for a moral proposition. Pity that a truth so grateful to the friend of
humanity, so encouraging to the aspiring mind, should be so seldom and
so feebly inculcated. Ardent in pursuit, sanguine in expectation, with
this impression what obstacles would obstruct what difficulties
dishearten the youthful devotee of science. On the improvement of mind
much has been written to enlarge its stores and strengthen its capacity,
many and different methods have been recommended; but if want of
attention to rules of acknowledged necessity can warrant a repetition,
a few hints on this subject will need no excuse. In nothing probably are
the generality of men more deceived than in the opinion they form of the
mental progress of different individuals. To the lifeless soul whose
diseased eyes bespeak his labours over the midnight lamp--who, secluded
from society in the solitude of a study, loses his vivacity beneath a
ponderous load of immethodized undigested matter; duped by specious
appearance they give without examination the palm of learning. But in
the hour of exigence, when the intellectual host is summoned to the
field; when profit to ourselves and benefit to mankind stand the
criterions of useful acquisitions, then will it uniformly be proved that
reading well is infinitely better than reading much. In many who have
formed a taste for reading, that taste so productive of benefit and
delight; curiosity active and aspiring, still urging on even to flights
beyond its sketch, hurries attention over the field of view. The
different objects are but transiently inspected, and a mass of faint and
indistinct impressions are mixed in the brain, of which each in
succession makes the last less clear. With far less rapidity must he
travel who would explore with advantage the land of knowledge. Selecting
from the multitude of objects those most worthy of examination, he
should with persevering care investigate their principles and structure
and leave them not till satisfied he possesses all the information they
can give. To read as we ought, we must read with attention and with
thought. Many there are who read with attention, but few with thought.
Simply to comprehend the meaning and keep in mind the connection of an
author's arguments is not sufficient, we must see and feel their force.
Never to take upon trust the sentiments of another, to examine with
minuteness his principles and his deductions, and to be assured of the
justness of the former and the accuracy of the latter, before he adopts
them as his own, should be the constant practice of him who would read
with real and permanent utility. In order to this, it is necessary to
form in youth a habit of deep severe persevering thought. To form this
habit is at first indeed difficult, nay painful. Inclined to ease, the
mind especially in early life, averts from the labour of reflection; but
when confirmed, it finds in it a never ending treasure: every
surrounding object affords it employment; the man who possesses it
discovers in the worlds of sentiment, of manners, of science and of art,
sources of continual unbounded improvement. An eminent instance of this
was the celebrated Gibbon, "I have been led by a novel (says that
elegant historian) into a deep and instructive train of thinking."

  (_To be concluded in our next._)

  [[Notes:

  "an historian published to the world and to posterity": Sallust,
    quoting Appius]]



           *       *       *       *

  ANECDOTE.

When Guido and Domenichino had each of them painted a picture in the
church of Saint Andrew, Annibal Carrache, their master, was pressed to
declare, or give his opinion, which of his two pupils had excelled. The
picture of Guido represented St. Andrew on his knees before the cross;
that of Domenichino represented the flagellation of the same Apostle.
Both of them in their different kinds were capital pieces, and were
painted in fresco, opposite each other, to eternize, as it were, their
rivalship and contention. 'Guido,' said Carrache, 'has performed as a
master, and Domenichino as a scholar. But,' added he, 'the work of the
scholar is more valuable than that of the master.' In truth, one may
perceive faults in the picture of Domenichino that Guido has avoided;
but then there are noble strokes, not to be found in that of his rival.
It was easy to discern a genius that promised to produce beauties, to
which the sweet, the gentle, and the graceful Guido would never aspire.




                   NEW-YORK.



[->] The Subscribers and Public in general are respectfully informed,
that JOHN BULL, late Editor and Publisher of this MAGAZINE, has disposed
of the establishment to Mr. THOMAS BURLING, Jun. from the 1st day of
January, 1797. In committing this publication to other hands J. Bull
feels assured, that the talents which are in future to be employed in
conducting it, are such as cannot fail to afford the fullest
satisfaction to its patrons, and must ensure an accession of that
celebrity which it has hitherto enjoyed.

At the moment of relinquishing so arduous a task, the grateful
recollection of the steady support and kindnesses of my numerous friends
in this undertaking, demand the warmest thanks. To those who have
favoured me with the productions of their pens, I beg leave to recommend
my successor; and to entreat for him a continuance of that friendship,
the remembrance of which can never be effaced from my mind.

In order fully to close the Accounts to this period, I must intreat,
that the bills for the small arrearages due to the 1st of January, 1797,
may be punctually honoured--each distinct sum is but trifling, while the
aggregate amounts to some hundred pounds; an exact compliance will add
to the obligations already heaped on

  The Public's obliged,

    Humble Servant,

      JOHN BULL.

P.S. Printing as usual executed by me at the Office No. 115,
Cherry-street. I have now in the press, publishing by subscription,
CAMILLA; or a Picture of Youth: by the author of Evelina and Cecilia.



           *       *       *       *

  _TO THE PUBLIC, AND PATRONS_
              of
  The New-York Weekly Magazine.

In becoming the Editor of so valuable a publication as The NEW-YORK
WEEKLY MAGAZINE, I cannot but feel sensations of gratitude to its
generous patronizers for the liberal encouragement it has heretofore
been favoured with; without which, there would not have been so great a
stimulus to my undertaking this arduous task.

Sensibly feeling the duty that is incumbent on me in conducting this
_Repository of Literary and Useful Knowledge_, all the attention and
assiduous circumspection which is requisite to make it useful,
entertaining and edifying to every capacity, may be relied on by a
generous public.

It would be useless for me to enlarge upon the merits of a work which
has so long received the approbation of an enlightened people.--Certain
it is, that every attentive and candid reader will confess, or at least
acknowledge the utility of this production, as the vehicle of refined
ideas and engaging principles; contributing to disseminate and establish
the most virtuous sentiments, while it stimulates to noble and generous
actions.

I humbly solicit the literary abilities of those kind Correspondents who
have hitherto come forward in support of this publication; and, shall
always gratefully acknowledge the productions of the candid and
sentimental writer.

Relying on the liberal support of my friends and a generous public, in
prosecuting this my undertaking to their general satisfaction and
entertainment,

  I am, with profound respect,

    Their Obedient, Humble Servant,

      +THOMAS BURLING, Jun.+

        New-York, Jan. 2, 1797.




  MARRIED,

On Thursday the 22d ult. by the Rev. Mr. Miller, Mr. THOMAS LOUTETTE, to
Miss CATHARINE M'KENZIE, both of this city.




  TO CORRESPONDENTS.

[->] The new Editor thankfully acknowledges the pieces of CLARA and
A. D. He is sorry they arrived too late for this publication, in the
next, however, they shall have a place.



           *       *       *       *

  WINTER; AN ODE.

  No more the morn, with tepid rays,
    Unfolds the flower of various hue;
  Noon spreads no more the genial blaze,
    Nor gentle eve distils the dew.

  The lingering hours prolong the night,
    Usurping darkness shares the day;
  Her mists restrain the force of light,
    And Phoebus holds a doubtful sway.

  By gloomy twilight half reveal'd,
    With sighs we view the hoary hill,
  The leafless wood, the naked field,
    The snow topt cot, the frozen rill.

  No musick warbles thro' the grove,
    No vivid colours paint the plain;
  No more with devious steps I rove
    Thro' verdant paths now sought in vain.

  Aloud the driving tempest roars,
    Congeal'd, impetuous showers descend;
  Haste, close the window, bar the doors,
    Fate leaves me Stella, and a friend.

  In nature's aid let art supply
    With light and heat my little sphere;
  Rouze, rouze the fire, and pile it high,
    Light up a constellation here.

  Let musick sound the voice of joy!
    Or mirth repeat the jocund tale;
  Let love his wanton wiles employ,
    And o'er the season wine prevail.

  Yet time life's dreary winter brings,
    When mirth's gay tale shall please no more;
  Nor musick charm--tho' Stella sings;
    Nor love, nor wine, the Spring restore.

  Catch then, O! catch the transient hour,
    Improve each moment as it flies;
  Life's a short summer--man a flower,
    He dies--alas! How soon he dies!




  DESPAIR.

  Condemn'd to nourish hope in vain,
  My breast shall never peace regain;
  The fair my soul ador'd the most,
  Is to my love for ever lost.

  Another--yes--and must we part?---
  Another triumphs in her heart:
  He tastes those humid lips, which I
  To taste, would gladly yield to die.

  Distraction---she---of all possest,
  He sinks upon her snowy breast:
  He clasps her in his eager arms;---
  He revels in her sweetest charms.

  I hear each soft extatic sigh,
  I see her rapture closing eye;
  She meets---she crowns his fierce desire,
  My brain, despair and madness fire!



           *       *       *       *

  ODE TO CONTEMPLATION.

  Come, contemplation! with celestial fire
  Warm the young bard, who drives thy heights to gain;
  So shall his muse obsequious strike the lyre,
  To sound thy bounty in his ardent strain.

  Thou lov'st to dwell where solemn, silent night
  Divests the mind of folly's frantic dream;
  Where heaven's grand canopy attracts the sight,
  And whispering breezes keep the soul serene.

  Ah! how I feel thy welcome power supreme,
  Whene'er I wander aged Humber's shore,
  Pensive beneath the moon's indulgent beam,
  At tir'd creation's universal snore.

  If I extend my views to distant skies,
  What sure conviction dawns upon my soul?
  Borne on a cherub's plume, it seems to rise,
  Seeking its destin'd reign, unconscious of controul.

  And not alone amazement finds employ;
  Here, pure devotion lends her awful ray,
  Without whose light proves lifeless ev'ry joy
  That decks the night, or ornaments the day.

  "But when I drop mine eye and look on man,"
  I see strong outlines of eternal peace;
  A Being form'd of intricate, nice plan,
  Spurning the confines or of time or place.

  Fain would I now retire from busy life,
  Sequester'd in some solitary cell,
  Alike unknown to envy and to strife,
  And bid all noisy scenes a long farewell.

  There no ambition should possess my mind,
  Or pleasure's gilded baits my heart betray;
  But, to religion perfectly resign'd,
  I'd pass my moments usefully away.

  How oft, directed by the friendly care,
  Silent, I'd range the church yard's awful gloom,
  Musing the fatal stroke I once must share,
  A wither'd victim to the cheerless tomb.

  "There weigh my dust:" prepare for that grand scene,
  When life's last blaze shall quiver to decay:
  Then I'd exult in thee, my sacred theme,
  And sure companion thro' the trackless way.

  E'en now with secret rapture I survey,
  When my freed soul shall break her chain, and rise
  Up to the regions of eternal day,
  From finite being to its native skies:

  With thee review with perspicacious eye,
  The long, long chain of Providence design;
  Conceive the attributes of deity,
  And hymn his praise ineffably divine.

  But cease my song! I hear the muse complain,
  How she has strove, and still may strive in vain,
  To tell the heart-felt pleasures of thy reign.




  +Epigram on a false mistress.+

  My heart still hovering round about you,
  I thought I could not live WITHOUT you;
  Now we have been two months asunder,
  How I liv'd WITH you--is the wonder!


NEW-YORK: _+Printed by THOMAS BURLING, No. 115, Cherry-street+--where
Subscriptions for this +Magazine+ (at 6s. per quarter) will be
gratefully received--And at No. 33, +Oliver-Street+._



           *       *       *       *



  _UTILE DULCI._

  THE NEW-YORK WEEKLY MAGAZINE;
  or, Miscellaneous Repository.

  +Vol. II.+]  +Wednesday, January 11, 1797.+  [+No. 80.+


      _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._



                     ESSAY.

                     No. I.

  "Variety we still pursue,
  "In pleasure seek for something new."

    SWIFT.

In man there is a natural love of change and variety: the mind is
wearied by continual succession of similar objects, those pleasures
which at first were capable of inspiring emotions of delight; which once
filled the heart with rapture and enthusiasm; as they become familiar,
fade by degrees, they lose their brilliancy, the charm of novelty is
gone, and soon they please no more. The sublimer works of nature, which
have roused the attention of the traveller, excite not similar
sensations in the bosoms of those who have been long acquainted with
their beauties: the lofty mountain "with its robe of mist," the
stupenduous cliff that overlooks the torrent, and the loud sounding
waters of the tremendous cataract, neither strike them with veneration
nor with awe. Their eyes wander with languor and indifference, over
those scenes in which nature has been most lavish of its beauties. The
mind is attracted by diversity, we follow with avidity any object which
appears fascinating and pleasing, until some fresh pursuit which fancy
has furnished with superior charms captivates the imagination. This love
of variety is predominant in the breast of every individual, it alike
exists in the lowly cottage and the splendid palace, in the circles of
business and in the vortex of pleasure, in the obscure paths of folly
and ignorance, and in the exalted walks of literature and science: and
although those objects which at a distance appeared dazling and
beautiful, may lose their brightness on a nearer approach, still the
acquirements which have cost us much labor and pain, have something in
them peculiarly grateful. Man has ever been considered as a fickle and
inconstant being, rarely content with his present situation, but
continually looking out for brighter and fairer prospects. This
restlessness of the human mind has been considered by some rigid
moralists, as a source of trouble and vexation to those who are under
its influence, but it is also a source of our greatest enjoyments: cold
must be that heart, which is insensible to all the charms of variety,
and but little calculated to partake of present joys, or to anticipate
the more sublime and exalted pleasures which are hid behind the
impenetrable veil of futurity.

  A. D.

    DECEMBER 31, 1796.

  [[Notes:

  The reference to "the lofty mountain 'with its robe of mist'," may
    be from an article on Ossian in the New-York Magazine, Vol. 5,
    1791.]]




  JUSTICE.

Justice may be defined that virtue which impels us to give to every
person what is his due. In this extended sense of the word, it
comprehends the practice of every virtue which reason prescribes, or
society should expect. Our duty to our Maker, to each other, and to
ourselves, are fully answered, if we give them what we owe them. Thus
justice, properly speaking, is the only virtue, and all the rest have
their origin in it.

The qualities of candour, fortitude, charity, and generosity, for
instance, are not in their own nature virtues: and, if ever they deserve
the title, it is owing only to justice, which impels and directs them.
Without such a moderator, candour might become indiscretion, fortitude
obstinacy, charity imprudence, and generosity mistaken profusion.




  +DEATH of a PHILOSOPHER.+

Let others bestrew the hearses of the great with panegyric. When a
philosopher dies, I consider myself as losing a patron, an instructor,
and a friend; I consider the world as losing one who might serve to
console her amidst the desolations of war and ambition. Nature every day
produces in abundance men capable of filling all the requisite duties of
authority; but she is a niggard in the birth of an exalted mind,
scarcely producing in a century a single genius to bless and enlighten a
degenerate age. Prodigal in the production of kings, governors,
mandarines, chams, and courtiers, she seems to have forgotten, for more
than three thousand years, the manner in which she once formed the brain
of a Confucius; and well it is she has forgotten, when a bad world gave
him so very bad a reception.



           *       *       *       *

  THE VICTIM OF MAGICAL DELUSION;
  _OR, INTERESTING MEMOIRS OF MIGUEL, DUKE DE CA*I*A._
  Unfolding Many Curious Unknown Historical Facts.

  _Translated from the German of Tschink._

  (Continued from page 211.)

Alumbrado was of the same opinion, our advice was however neglected, for
the next morning when I went to see the Duke, I found the Count had
already been liberated. The matter happened in the following manner:

The Duke had paid him one more visit at night, in order to get some
explanation of Amelia's history, asking the Count whether his account of
Amelia's adventures had been strictly true, or intermixed with fiction?
The Count confessed frankly that he had not been very conscientious in
his relation, but had added to his picture many fictitious strokes; nay,
that he had disfigured even the principal incidents by interpolation, in
order to encrease by his adventrous tale, the Duke's propensity to
wonderful incidents, and thus to render Amelia more interesting to him.
The Duke asked him how he could have risked a fraud which the first
meeting with the Countess could have laid open to him. "I was well
aware," the Count replied, "that you as well as Amelia would be prompted
by the tender harmony which made your hearts beat in unison, to avoid
speaking of incidents which would have introduced Amelia's late Lord and
her love for him." The Duke asked him whether the Irishman had not acted
in concert with Lady Delier? "Only as far as he made use of her to
direct the love that had taken place between your Grace and Amelia," the
Count answered; "the conditions and reflections under which the Baroness
was to assist in forwarding your mutual union are unknown to me." The
Count being asked, whether that wonderful note by which Amelia had been
released from her vow of eternal fidelity to her deceased Lord, had been
a contrivance of Hiermanfor's natural skill, or the effect of
supernatural power; the Count replied, the latter had been the case. The
Duke had been affected so much by the repeated mention of his Amelia,
that he began to melt in tears. The Count thought this state of mind
very propitious for regaining his liberty, and obtained it without
difficulty. What could the Duke have refused in that situation to
Amelia's brother-in-law?

Alumbrado seemed to be not less displeased with this event than myself.
My hope that the Count would entirely destroy, by an ample discovery of
the juggling tricks of the Irishman, the Duke's belief in the
supernatural skill of the latter was now utterly destroyed, for he had
not unfolded the most important mystery; the apparition of Antonio at
the church-yard. Yet I derived some consolation from the papers of
Clairval, which were still in the hands of the Duke, and proposed to
throw some light on that extraordinary incident. My friend himself
seemed to entertain the same hope, and although the papers had been
partly consumed by the fire, yet he was not discouraged, and undertook
the laborious task of decyphering them. We retired lest we should
disturb him.

The next morning Alumbrado came to my palace, informing me that he went
to pay a visit to the Duke, but had not been admitted. We concluded from
this, that he had not yet finished decyphering of the papers.

The Duke joined us about an hour after with gloomy looks, he gave me
some writings and said, "that is all that I could make out; read it and
edify yourself."---

I began to read aloud, "Beloved and trusty---" the Duke interrupted
me--"It is a letter to Hiermanfor, written by the Lady of the late Duke
of B----a, at a time when he had little hope of ascending the royal
throne of P--------l."

"Beloved and trusty! I have read all your letters to our Privy
Secretary, along with the note by which you acquaint him with your
intention of introducing Miguel to the Hermit. I always read your
letters with admiration, yet I cannot but confess that I have great
reason to suspect you have it more at heart to be admired, than to gain
Miguel over to our party. I should think Miguel could have been secured
to us in a safer, easier, and more expeditious manner, and you would
have saved yourself a great deal of time and trouble if you had
attempted it. Why those superfluous machinations, why those expensive,
intricate, artificial, and give me leave to add, those fragile machines
which so easily may be destroyed? You could certainly have ensnared
Miguel in a more simple and a less precarious manner. Machineries like
those which you have made use of are always liable to the danger of
being discovered by accident, which may ruin the whole plan.

"You will perhaps reply, that, if he should make such a discovery, it
would be of little consequence; that you know this Miguel too well, are
too sensible of your superiority, that he cannot do without you, and
that you keep him in chains which he will not be able to shake off,
though your whole miraculous web should be dissolved in smoke. But, if
so, wherefore those needless artifices? What benefit will arise from
your miracles and ghosts? The love intrigue with Amelia, and the charm
of your eloquence would have been sufficient for gaining Miguel over to
our party.

"I may be mistaken, your proceedings are however riddles to me, if I do
not suppose that an arrogant activity has prompted you to contrive
extraordinary intrigues, and to have recourse to marvellous machineries.
People of your genius are wont to do so. You despise the ways of common
men, force new roads through insurmountable rocks, entangle your man in
numberless magic fetters, with no other view, than to have the pleasure
of seeing your prisoner insnare himself deeper and deeper by his
attempts to regain his liberty. The simple, artless turn of a play, does
not suit a genius like your's, which delights only in knitting and
dissolving intricate knots, and in having recourse to artificial,
complicated machines; obstacles and dangers serve only to give
additional energy to your activity. Miguel was, perhaps, only an object
which was to serve you for trying your skill and art, in order to see
how far you could rely on your capacities for more important
opportunities.

"But however it be, I am rather bound to thank you for your zeal to
serve our cause, than to criticise the choice of the means you have made
use of. Accomplish what you have begun, and you may be sure of my favour
and active gratitude."

While I had been reading, the Duke walked up and down the room with
hasty strides. He now stopped. "Well, Marquis! well, Alumbrado!" said
he, "do I not act a charming part in this letter?"

We remained silent, became we saw that he was violently agitated.

"They treat me as a simpleton, as a blockhead. Is it not true?"

"How you exaggerate it!" said I. "They ascribe to you want of
experience, and that is all."

"O Marquis, don't you see in what a tone, and with how much contempt the
proud woman speaks of me?"

"She is a woman who mistakes you."

"Heavens and earth! and I should brook her injuries without taking
revenge?"

"My Lord!" Alumbrado said, "in what relation have you been to the
Dutchess? I cannot see the connection of the whole affair?"

The Duke explained this connection to him, by discovering the share he
had had in the revolution.

Alumbrado was all attention during this account, and when it was
finished seemed to be absorbed in profound meditation.

"Friend!" said I to the Duke, "there are some more written
leaves"--------

"It is Hiermanfor's answer to the letter you have been reading."

I read the letter aloud.

"It is with no I small astonishment that I find myself called to an
account, in the letter which your Grace did me the honour of writing to
me, for a point which I sincerely wish never had been mentioned. The
remarks you have made on it redound as much to the honour of your
Grace's penetration and sagacity, as they tend to mortify me by
betraying me into a confession, which I would have refused to make to
any mortal living, except to so noble a challenger.

"My second letter to your Privy Secretary, explaining sufficiently the
motives which have prompted me to gain Miguel over to our party by the
arts of natural magic, I think I need not add new arguments to those
contained in that letter, if your Grace will take the trouble to
re-peruse and to ponder them attentively. Besides the reprehension of
your Grace is directed less against the means which I have made use of,
than against the manner of their application. You ask in your letter,
why I have had recourse to such superfluous machinations, to such
expensive, intricate, artificial, and fragile machines? Indeed you think
too contemptibly of Miguel. His penetration, as well as his great
knowledge, raise him far above the common men of his age; his
understanding, which has been improved under the tuition of an Antonio
de Galvez, is not to be imposed upon so easily as you think. Besides,
you will have the goodness to consider that he was not the only person I
had to deal with, and that his tutor, who never stirred from his side,
was always ready to cut asunder the magical bonds in which I had
entangled him, but why do I hesitate any longer to tell you the plain
truth? My design was not directed against Miguel alone, but on his tutor
too. It was the most ardent wish of my heart to gain this man to our
party by my magical arts, and that it was which forced me to have
recourse to so many machinations, and such expensive and complicated
machines. If my design upon him had been crowned with success, Miguel
too would have been an easy and certain conquest.

"If your Grace should ask what has prompted me to form so daring a plan,
and what reasons I had to hope for success? I beg you will condescend to
ponder the following points: Count Galvez was an insurmountable obstacle
in my way to Miguel, which rendered it necessary either to draw him in
our interest, or to remove him from his pupil. It will be obvious to you
for what reason I resolved to attempt the former, if you will consider
how much advantage our affairs would have derived from so valuable a
conquest. If we could have made sure of Antonio, we then should also
have drawn the court of Rome in our interest by his intercession. Before
the present Pope was raised to the papal throne, he and a number of
persons of the highest rank were intimately connected with him. We
could, therefore, have expected to interest for our cause by his
influence a court, which will become our most dangerous enemy, if it
should not take our part; and I apprehend this will be the case."*

  [* On the margin of the manuscript, the following note was written
  by an unknown hand: "The Irishman has not been mistaken, for nine
  years are now past since the revolution has taken place, and the
  new king of Port***l has not yet been acknowledged by the court
  of Rome."]

  (To be continued.)




  ANECDOTE OF VOLTAIRE.

This extraordinary genius, in his younger life, wrote a very biting
satire against a man of considerable influence in France. The injured
gentleman, on meeting the poet one day in a narrow lane where it was
impossible to escape, gave him a severe drubbing. The enraged author
immediately made his complaint to the Regent, who very shrewdly
replied---"What would you have me do? justice certainly has been done
already,"



           *       *       *       *

  OSMIR.
  An Original Essay.

The predecessors of Osmir were ignoble and obscure. For a race of
generations they wept the conflicts of indigence, nor could the toils of
application crown their efforts with advantage, nor the utmost frugality
secure their labours from distress; the importance of command never
owned their authority, and the radiance of splendour never shone on
their dwelling. They eat of the bread of industry, they drank the waters
of perseverence, they lived unnoticed and undistinguished among the
children of poverty, as one atom in the sun-beam is undistinguished from
another, and as the ebullitions of a current which float for a moment on
its surface and die, even so they disappeared and were remembered no
more.

But the tempest of malediction began at length to subside, and the
severity of fortune to abate her resentment. Malevolence was wearied
with undeserved persecution, and prosperity beheld the cot of
wretchedness with an auspicious smile, and determined to lavish upon
Osmir what she had withheld from his ancestors. He was addicted to
industry, to perseverance and toil; his principles were therefore the
surest basis whereon time was to erect the superstructure of gilded
affluence. In a few years Osmir contemplated the fruits of his
application, which animated his endeavours to advance with more hasty
strides in the road of progressive grandeur; riches were accumulated,
possessions were established, his habitation surpassed the pomp of
oriental magnificence, and the report of his opulence was the talk of
every mouth, and wafted through every region on the pinions of fame. In
order to subdue the murmurs of repining adversity, and establish a
position, which though it was probable was yet untrue, that the bounties
of Heaven were bestowed upon deserving virtue alone, he resolved to
cover his imperfections with the mantle of devotion, by which more
liberty was allowed to the passions which lay lurking in secret within
the chambers of his heart. Confirmed in this disposition, he was
impartial and correct in his dealings with all men; the venom of slander
had no influence on his character; for he trod the paths of moral
rectitude with exact scrupulosity. Was propitiation ordained to avert
the wrath of omnipotence?--his head was covered with the ashes of
Bethulia, and his loins were mortified with the sack-cloth of Ninevah;
his piety refused the sustenance which human fragility demands for her
functions, and thrice a day he fell prostrate at the shrine of the God
of nature. Whenever Osmir walked the streets for the purpose of
recreation, he was begirt with attendants who showered gold on the
multitude, and whom he exhorted in their liberality to more extensive
profusion. The widow and the orphan, the desolate and the indigent, all
looked for succour from the bounty of his hand, and all felt the
influence of his generous condescension. Not an act that was performed
escaped the voice of applause, for if Osmir was liberal, compassionate
or just, his merit was instantly registered in the chronicles of fame,
who with her trump of seven thunders, blew a blast round the world which
was echoed through the universe.

Such was the life of a mortal whom prosperity delighted to elevate; such
was his journey through the vales of desolation, uninfested with the
thorns of accident or bitterness, and perfumed with the fragrance of the
rose-buds fortune scattered in his way. But whilst Osmir thus employed
the happy tenor of his days, now feasting on delicacies at the banquet
of plenty, now dancing to the song of happiness in the bowers of ease,
the iron hand of time laid its pressure on his temples, the frost of old
age was expanded through his veins, and the powers of animation hastened
quick to decline. It was in vain to bribe with riches the dreaded
minister of death; it was in vain to protract a moment the awful period
of dissolution. Summoned at the report of sickness his friends assembled
in his chamber, where stretched on the bed of sorrows, human nature was
to be dignified, and human weakness was to be confirmed by an
illustrious portrait of expiring virtue. But how great was the excess of
disappointment and surprize, when, instead of the tranquility of hope,
and ejaculations of charity, their ears were assaulted with the shrieks
of despair, and their eyes were affrighted with terrific wretchedness.
Osmir, whose visage was deformed with terrors, as the brow of heaven
with a tempest, was long unable to hearken to the remonstrances of his
friends; at length, however, collecting the feeble breath, which, like
the flame of a midnight taper, sat quivering on his lips, he uttered
these last accents with emphatic efforts, whilst every voice was
suspended in silence, and every ear was attention.

"Ye, whom vanity has influenced in the operation of good works, and whom
earthly approbation has taught to exult in their merit, let the example
of dying disquietudes abate the security of your confidence. Like you,
I have floated on the ocean of glory, I have felt my senses enraptured
with the melody of praise, and suffered my heart to receive plaudits
which my conscience condemned. Like you, I was liberal, because to be
liberal was to be eminent, and like you also, I estimated the advantages
of heaven by terrestial enjoyments. Prosperity shed around me the
partial beams of her favour, nor harboured a doubt, nor hesitated to
reflect, if the object of her veneration deserved contempt or esteem.
Avarice and vain glory were raging passions of my soul, to heat the
furnace of these desires was the sole object of my aim; by the one I was
rendered odious to the great dispenser of gifts, and by the other
detrimental to the sons and daughters of men. This, by the malignity of
its turpitude, which withheld what it had received with the rapacious
grasp of a vulture, effaced the character of the Deity imprinted by
nature in my soul; and the other by a cruelty more inhuman than murder,
has awakened passions in the breast of indigence, which had slept for
ever undisturbed, and for the mercenary tribute of undeserved
approbation has elevated for a moment to magnificence and state, only to
plunge with keener anguish into the gulphs of despair, the wretch whose
heart had never sickened for the splendours of pomp, and whose days had
moved calm in inglorious obscurity. Yet weak-sighted mortals viewed my
actions and admired, whilst the piercing eye of the everlasting beheld
their motives and abhorred. Happy should I be to amend the past by the
present, or to mitigate the fury of the indignation to come. But the
scymetar of vengeance hangs suspended in my view, I hear the sentence of
malediction which sounds as thunder in my ears, and I feel the last
horrors of agonizing despair. Insulting vanities of a faithless world!
why was my heart enamoured of the graces of thy deceit? Only to look
with pleasure on thy allurements, is to assume the chains of thy
bondage; to seek thy gratifications is to follow pain without profit,
and to persevere in thy pursuits is reprobation without hope. A few
moments space will evince the dreadful truth, for a few moments space
and the life of Osmir is no more. Happy shall you be, my friends, whose
errors are corrected by my fatal mistake, and whose minds shall be
imprinted with this important remembrance, that no action however
splendid can secure the favour of the Deity, unless it correspond with
good designs, which can alone stamp its value, and that though you
mislead the erring judgment of man by fallacious appearances, 'tis
impossible to mislead the unerring judgment of God."

The hand of the omnipotent sealed his lips at these words, and a
convulsive agony announced the approach of dissolution; his eyes were
averted with horror from the flying javelin of death, and expiring his
last groan, he slept the sleep of his fathers in the tomb of Mahaleel.




  SELECT REFLECTIONS ON EDUCATION.

A fortune acquired by commerce, when it is discreetly expended in
advancing learning, acquires a grace and elegance, which a life devoted
to the accumulation of money, for its own sake, can seldom possess.

Few of us are so improved by philosophy, though we study and admire it,
as not to feel the influence of interested motives. This insensibly
blinds the understanding, and often impels the judgment to decide
unjustly, without the guilt of intention.

Not only the taste, but the religion, the virtue, and even the liberties
of our country, greatly depend upon that discipline which lays the
foundation of improvement in ancient learning. True patriotism and true
valour, originate from that enlargement of mind, which the
well-regulated study of philosophy, poetry, and history, tends to
produce; and if we can recal the ancient discipline we may perhaps recal
the generous spirit of ancient virtue. He who is conversant with the
best Greek and Roman writers, with a Plato, a Xenophon, and a Cicero,
must imbibe, if he be not deficient in the powers of intellect,
sentiments no less liberal and enlarged than ingenious and elegant.

A certain enlargement, refinement, and embellishment of the mind, is the
best and noblest effect of classical instruction. It is not only
desirable, as it qualifies the mind for this or that profession, but as
it opens the source of pure pleasures, unknown to the vulgar. Its
tendency is to adorn and improve human nature, and to give the ideas a
noble elevation.

The possession of an elegant mind is greatly superior to the possession
of a fortune, and the enjoyment of a good conscience is far superior to
both.

The passions will sometimes ruffle the stream of happiness in every man;
but they are least likely to discompose him, who spends his time in
letters, and who at the same time studies virtue and innocence, which
indeed have a natural connexion with true learning.

He who has caught the spirit of the polite writers of the politest ages
and cities, must possess a peculiar degree of polish and comprehension
of mind.

The best kind of education is that which endeavours to improve the
powers of understanding for their own sake; for the sake of exalting the
endowments of human nature, and becoming capable of sublime and refined
contemplation. This furnishes a power of finding satisfactory amusement
for those hours of solitude, which every man must sometimes know in the
busiest walks of life; and it constitutes one of the best supports of
old age, as well as the most graceful ornament of manhood. Even in the
commercial department it is most desirable; for besides that it gives a
grace to the man in the active stage of life, and in the midst of his
negociations, it 'enables him to enjoy his retreat with elegance,' when
his industry has accumulated the object of his endeavours.

If taste, which classical learning immediately tends to produce, have no
influence in amending the heart, or in promoting virtuous affections; if
it contribute not to render men more humane, and more likely to be
disgusted with improper behaviour, as a deformed object, and pleased
with rectitude of conduct, as beautiful in itself; if it be merely an
ornamental appendage; it must be owned, that life is indeed too short to
admit of long attention to mere embellishment. Polite learning, on the
contrary, is found to be friendly to all that is amiable and laudible in
social intercourse; friendly to morality. It has a secret but powerful
influence in softening and meliorating the disposition. True and correct
taste directly tends to restrain the extravagancies of passion, by
regulating that nurse of passion, a discorded imagination.

To be completely skilled in ancient learning is by no means a work of
such insuperable pains. The very progress itself is attended with
delight, and resembles a journey through some pleasant country, where
every mile we advance new charms arise. It is certainly as easy to be a
scholar, as a gamester, or many other characters equally illiberal and
low. The same application, the same quantity of habit, will fit us for
one as well as for the other. As to those who tell us with an air of
seeming wisdom, that it is by men, not books, that we must study to
become knowing; repeated experience teaches this to be the common
consolation and language of dunces.

  [[Source:

  The article is a paraphrase of Vicesimus Knox, "Liberal Education".
    The phrase 'enables him to enjoy his retreat with elegance' is
    a direct quotation.]]



           *       *       *       *

     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._



                   CANDIDUS.

                     No. I.

  (Concluded from page 214.)

He that would rise superior to the common level of mankind, exalted in
knowledge, useful to himself and to mankind, must keep attention ever on
the watch to seize some subject worthy of reflection with a spirit of
investigation, which no difficulties can damp; he must suffer no
proposition, however obscure and intricate, to escape the grasp of his
mind till perseverance hath effected its solution: If any thing more
than another occasions man to differ more from man than man from beast,
it is this; and I have been often led to doubt, whether it will not
alone account for all that difference in mind which is commonly ascribed
to superiority in capacity. True indeed it is, that this improvement is
not always accompanied with delight. "Those reflections (says Burke) are
melancholy enough which carry us beyond the mere surface of things." The
world exhibits too much evil to the mind to permit its reflections to be
uniformly pleasant. But as the same author again observes, the same
philosophy which causes the grief, will administer the comfort; and
would not he or any other, who possesses this most valuable attainment,
prefer it, with all its sorrows, to a state of thoughtless inattention?
Of all the complaints of studious men, want of memory is the greatest
and the most frequent. So universal indeed is the expression of sorrow
for deficiency in retentive capacity, that this faculty would seem a
gift most sparingly bestowed: the distinguishing characteristic of a
few, the happy favorites of nature. But without favour and without
respect, nature holds the balance of being with impartial hand, and with
very few exceptions, every member of humanity is equal in the scale.

Man was endowed with the seeds of his faculties to be matured by his
cultivation and memory; not the least of those faculties is in the least
subject to his power. That men, when placed in similar circumstances,
will receive through the senses similar impressions, I trust will be
universally admitted. It appears to me no less evident, that such
impressions may be in all equally lasting. It is not then the want of
capacity in any to retain, but the want of exertion in most to imprint,
that occasions the former; and Man, not Nature, is deficient in duty.
Yet, this charge is not universally incurred; many there are who employ
much of their time in endeavouring to improve the faculty of
recollection, but in spite of their efforts, they still find ample cause
for complaint. If men (generally speaking) are equally fitted both to
receive and to retain, the charge must still revert upon themselves,
with the aggravation of time mispent in injudicious exertions. The
method generally pursued among young men to assist the memory, is to
enter into a common place book the most material observations and events
in the course of their reading; this, though stamped with the
approbation and deriving credit from the recommendation of the
philosophic Locke, is not without its imperfections. The practice
betrays the student into a prejudicial confidence, trusting to his
notes, he neglects to make the first impressions firm and lasting; and
in his recurrences to his book he distracts his attention with a vast
collection of heterogeneous matter; the different parts of which hold a
place in his recollection no longer than he reads them, each being
driven out by that which succeeds. "What is twice read (says the
judicious author of the Idler,) is commonly better remembered than what
is described:" and no little credit is due to this opinion, when
delivered by a man, the value and extent of whose literary acquisitions
deservedly gained him the appellation of the walking library. As the
impression made by one body on another is stronger or weaker in
proportion to the time of pressure, so the firmness with which an idea
is fixed in the memory, is in proportion to the weight applied by the
continuance of thought. Let the reader, before he changes his subjects,
revolve with patient attention in his mind the sentiments he would
imbibe, or the events he would remember, until he has thoroughly stamped
them with all the principles and consequences of the former, and the
causes, connections and effects of the latter. Let him in the solitary
hour when books are not near, and company do not interrupt by continued
reflection, firmly imprint spontaneous associations, and by studious
recollection renew and confirm the past. The knowledge so gained will be
far more solid and lasting than that for which we depend upon a few
uncorrected transcriptions. Conversation has with justice been called
the soul of society. Man must, in intercourse with his fellow creatures,
exercise and refine those passions and affections with which he is
endowed, and of which they are the subjects: and in the worlds of
business and of pleasure, the convenience and happiness of each state,
depends upon the united endeavours of the whole; so in the world of
literature, a mutual communication of ideas increases the stock of
individual knowledge. While the student disdains not to converse with
men in every rank, let him choose for his intimates the ingenious and
the learned. One great impediment in the way of mental improvement, is
the neglect of opportunities for study. Carpe diem, is an advice as
generally unattended to as its goodness is admitted. The state of the
mind is no more than that of the body is uniform and regular. Various as
the atmospheric changes, it is now dull, inapprehensive and listless;
now flighty and impatient, again in happier hour, fitted to imbibe with
avidity, comprehend with clearness, and retain with exactness. How often
in this vigorous and active state are its impulses neglected. How often
when disgust succeeds enjoyment, when satiated with pleasure, and
fatigued with the tumults of society, the mind is disengaged and vacant;
with an appetite whetted for the variety of solid entertainment, do we
instead of gratifying its propensity, seat ourselves down to indulge
idle regret, or to form still more idle schemes of future dissipation.
To seize such, and every opportune moment, we should be ever on the
watch, they will frequently occur, and if improved will always produce
present delight and permanent advantage. To complain of nature when
ourselves are in the fault, and to ascribe to deficiency of capacity,
what is the result of want of industry, is the common practice of
idleness in every condition of life. But in spite of the clamours of
men, it will ever remain an axiom in morals, that want of judgment in
acting, is the cause of embarrassment and confusion; and cessation from
labour, the death of body and mind.




  INDUSTRY.

Diligence, and proper improvement of time, are material duties of the
young. To no purpose are they endued with the best abilities, if they
want activity for exerting them. In youth the habits of industry are
most easily acquired.--In youth the incentives to it are the strongest;
from ambition and from duty, from emulation and hope, all the prospects
which the beginning of life affords.

Industry is not only the instrument of improvement, but the foundation
of pleasure. He who is a stranger to it may possess, but cannot enjoy;
for it is labour only which gives relish to pleasure.--It is the
indispensible condition of our possessing a sound mind in a sound body.

We should seek to fill our time with employments which may be reviewed
with satisfaction. The acquisition of knowledge is one of the most
honourable occupations of youth. The desire of it discovers a liberal
mind, and is connected with many accomplishments, and many virtues. But
though our train of life should not lead us to study, the course of
education always furnishes proper employments to a well-disposed mind.
Whatever we pursue, we should be emulous to excel.

Generous ambition and sensibility to praise, are, especially at the
youthful period, among the marks of virtue. We never ought to think that
any affluence of fortune, or any elevation of rank, exempts us from the
duties of application and industry: industry is the law of our being; it
is the demand of nature, of reason, and of God.




  SINCERITY.

How often is debility of mind, and even badness of heart, concealed
under a splendid exterior! The fairest of the species, and of the sex,
often want sincerity; and without it every other qualification is rather
a blemish than a virtue or excellence. Sincerity operates in the moral,
somewhat like the sun in the natural world; and produces nearly the same
effects on the dispositions of the human heart, which he does on
inanimate objects. Wherever sincerity prevails, and is felt, all the
smiling and benevolent virtues flourish most, disclose their sweetest
lustre, and diffuse their richest fragrance.



           *       *       *       *

  OBSERVATION.

The possession of knowledge, and an happy talent of communicating
knowledge, are qualifications seldom united in the same person; nor is
it altogether easy to determine from which of them, separately, a reader
would chuse to accept, with preference, a treatise upon any subject.
From the one we receive even little information with much satisfaction;
while any improvement extracted from the other is obtained with labour,
and, perhaps too, even with disgust.




   NEW-YORK.



    MARRIED,

On Thursday evening last, by the Rev. Mr. Peters, Captain THOMAS
BARNARD, of Boston, to Miss LOUISA HINCKLEY, of Konny-brook.

On Saturday evening last, by the Rev. Mr. Foster, Mr. PETER UTT, to the
amiable Miss AMELIA FAIRLEY, both of this city.




  _METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS._
  _From the 25th ult. to the 7th inst._

    _Thermometor observed at 6, A.M. 3, P.M._
      _Prevailing winds._
        _OBSERVATIONS on the WEATHER._

          deg.  deg.    6. 3.  6.  3._
             100   100
  Dec. 25  23    35     w. nw.   clear do. lt. wind do.
       26  20 50 33     n. w.    cloudy, do.  lt. wind do.
       27  26    35     sw. do.  clear do. lt. wind do.
       28  26    32 75  w. do.   clear do. lt. wind do.
       29  32    36 75  w. do.   clear do. lt. wind do.
       30  25 75 36     ne. se.  cloudy, lt. wd. snow h. do.
       31  36    40 50  sw. w.   sn. 2 in. deep. sm. rn. at nt.
                                 cloudy, lt. wd. clear do.
  Jan.  1  27    33     w. do.   clear light wind do do.
        2  23    28     nw. w.   clear h. wind do. lt. do.
        3  22    26     nw. do.  cloudy lt. wd. snow do. half
        4  19 50 30     nw. sw.  inch of snow on a level. clear
        5  23 50 28 50  w. do.   lt. wd. cloudy h. do. clear
        6  27 75 39 25  sw. w.   lt. wd. do. h. do clear lt. do.
        7  17    22 50  n. w.    cloudy lt. wd. clear do.



  RESULTS OF METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS.

  FOR DECEMBER 1796.

  Mean temperature of the thermometer at sun-rise            28    6
  Do. do. of the do. at 3 P.M.                               43   62
  Do. do. for the whole month                                30   34
  Greatest monthly range between the 6th and 24th            35   25
  Do. do. in 24 hours, between the 19th and 20th             21   30
  Warmest day the 6th                                        45   75
  Coldest do. the 24th                                       20   50

   5 Days it rained, and a considerable quantity has fallen.
   4 Do. it snowed, and nearly 6 inches has fallen.
  25 Do. the wind was at the observation hours, to the Westward
       of north and south.
   6 Do. the do.  do.  Eastward of do.
  13 Do. it was clear at the observation hours.
  10 Do. it was cloudy at the do.  do.
  21 Do. the Mercury was at or below freezing at sun-rise.

N.B. On the 6th inst. there was a plentifull rain, the first of any
consequence, since the 3d of October.



           *       *       *       *

     _For the +New-York Weekly Magazine+._



              TO THE SETTING SUN.

  I.

  Ah! whither fli'est thou, fair retiring light--
  Why fade those rays that shone 'ere while so bright?
  Now o'er the wave thy sinking glories stream,
  And now---ah now!---we lose thy latest beam.

  II.

  Dost thou to Neptune's pearly courts repair,
  And view the lovely Nereids sporting there;
  With thy fair beams illume the coral groves,
  Where Triton's wander and where Thetis roves.

  III.

  Or dost thou shed in other worlds thy ray,
  And give to other climes a new-born day?
  What joy, what transports wait thy glad return,
  When thro' the clouds of Night breaks forth the Morn.

  IV.

  Yet those there are who hate thy cheering beam---
  In whose dark breasts no rays of pleasure gleam:
  Who, from thy bright approach unwelcome run,
  "And sigh in shades, and sicken at the sun."

  V.

  Thus once was I, with heavy grief opprest,
  The morn no pleasure gave, the night no rest;
  Till cheering Friendship lent her beaming ray,
  And all was pleasure with the opening day.

    CLARA.

      New-York, Oct. 12, 1796.

  [[The quoted line "And sigh in shades, and sicken at the sun" is
  from Shenstone, _Elegy 26_ ("I sigh in...").]]




  THE ADIEU--TO A FAVOURITE GROVE.

  Whilst dreary Winter clothes the Landscape round,
    And sober Eve her dusky mantle veers;
  Here let me studious on this rising mound
    Recline, and give to yonder stream my tears.

  Yon pleasing plain, yon sweetly swelling hill,
    Which oft with rapture did my eyes invite;
  Yon dale irriguous, and yon purling rill
    Shall soon be vanish'd to my ravish'd sight.

  Yon shady bow'rs wherein I oft was wont,
    With sportive youths to spend some votive hours,
  Yon splendid mansion, and yon lovely font,
    No more are cheer'd by Sol's refulgent pow'rs.

  This lovely dome, this academic shade,
    This pleasing grove, O! I must bid adieu;
  But still each image shall be bright pourtray'd,
    Rush on the Muse in pleasing fancied view;

  Yes, yes, tho' to those scenes I bid farewel,
    In ocular sight perchance to view no more;
  Yet the mind's eye shall ever pleasing dwell,
    And paint each beauty with extatic lore.



           *       *       *       *

  _An Elegy to the Memory of a Friend._

  When worthless grandeur swells the trump of fame,
    And venal titles on the marble shine,
  To breathe its tribute to a worthy name,
    Should not the task, O, generous muse, be thine.

  If e'er the breast with pity prone to bleed,
    The gentle feelings, or the judgment strong,
  Deserv'd, sweet maid, the tribute of thy meed;
    'Tis due to him to whom these lines belong.

  Lamented shade! by thee was once possest
    Whate'er has genius on her sons bestow'd;
  The smoothest manners, and the tend'rest breast,
    The tonge, whence wisdom's purest dictates flow'd!

  'Twas thine, the seeds of modest worth to rear,
    And from misfortune's brow the cloud to chace,
  Of poverty the lonely cot to cheer.
    And to the troubled spirit whisper peace.

  Of truth thou boldly strove to spread the reign,
    Of superstition's night disperse the gloom,
  To virtue's noblest exercises train,
    And for a brighter world the soul to plume.

  But ah! full fast our sickly comforts fade,
    The brightest prospects bloom but to decay:
  Too soon for us heaven bade disease invade,
    And call'd to its bless'd scenes thy soul away.

  No more we hear thy voice, with comfort fraught,
    Nor in thy harmless wit soft pleasure find:
  Mule is that tongue, the noblest truths that taught,
    And cold the breast that warm'd for human kind.

  Yet ne'er shall time thy fond remembrance raze,
    Thy worth shall live in ev'ry virtuous breast;
  The spotless purity that mark'd thy days,
    A lasting epitaph hath there imprest.

  Full oft at eve, while social circles meet,
    And cheat with various lore the passing hour;
  With pensive eyes we mark thy vacant seat,
    And thy lost converse fruitlessly deplore.

  Tho' thy instructive voice no more we hear,
    Thy blameless life shall not unuseful teach;
  Thy gentle virtues, in remembrance dear,
    Shall yet thro' many a day persuasive preach.




  SONNET.--TO THE MOON.

  Regent of night, thy presence must I love,
    When from between the lowering clouds array'd,
  In mild effulgence, o'er the silver cove
    Thou spread'st a dubious light, and chequer'd shade:

  At such a time my visionary mind
    Thro' Fancy's glass sees forms aerial rise;
  'Tis then the breathings of the passing wind
    Seem to my listening ear Misfortune's sighs;--

  Nor only seem: for tho' at dead of night
    Labour recruits his strength in deepest sleep,
  And rosy Youth enjoys his slumbers light,
    Desponding Penury still wakes to weep.

  Regent of night! thy softest influence shed;
  Ye rising storms, oh! spare her houseless head!


NEW-YORK: _+Printed by THOMAS BURLING, Jun. No. 115, Cherry-street+--
where +Subscriptions+ for this +Magazine+ (at 6s. per quarter) will be
gratefully received--And at No. 33, +Oliver-Street+._



           *       *       *       *



  _UTILE DULCI._

  THE NEW-YORK WEEKLY MAGAZINE;
  or, Miscellaneous Repository.

  +Vol. II.+]  +Wednesday, January 18, 1797.+  [+No. 81.+


  HUMANITY.

Gentleness, which belongs to virtue, is to be carefully distinguished
from the mean spirit of cowards, and the fawning assent of
sycophants.--It renounces no just right from fear:---it gives up no
important truth from flattery:--it is indeed not only consistent with a
firm mind, but it necessarily requires a manly spirit and a fixed
principle in order to give it any real value.

It stands opposed to harshness and severity--to pride and arrogance--to
violence and oppression:--it is, properly, that part of the real virtue
charity, which makes us unwilling to give pain to any of our
brethren.----It corrects whatever is offensive in our manners, and, by a
constant train of humane attentions, studies to alleviate the burden of
common misery;--Its office is therefore extensive; it is continually in
action, when we are engaged in intercourse with men.--It ought to form
our address, to regulate our speech, and to diffuse itself over our
whole behaviour.

That gentleness which is a characteristic of a good man, has, like every
other virtue, its seat in the heart.----In that unaffected civility
which springs from a gentle mind, there is a charm infinitely more
powerful than in all the studied manners of the most finished courtier.

It is founded on a sense of what we owe to him who made us, and to the
common nature of which we all share.--It arises from reflection on our
own failings and wants, and from just views of the condition and duty of
man.---It is native feeling heightened and improved by principle. It is
the heart which easily resents; which feels for every thing that is
human; and is backward and slow to inflict the least wound. It is
affable in its address, and mild in its demeanour; ever ready to oblige,
and be obliged by others; breathing habitual kindness towards friends,
courtesy to strangers, long suffering to enemies.

It exercises authority with moderation;---administers reproof with
tenderness; confers favours with care and modesty.---It is unassuming in
opinion, and temperate in zeal.---It contends not eagerly about trifles;
slow to contradict, and still slower to blame; but prompt to allay
dissention and restore peace.---It neither intermeddles unnecessarily
with the affairs, nor pries inquisitively into the secrets of
others.---It delights above all things to alleviate distress; and, if it
cannot dry up the falling tear, to soothe at least the grieving heart.

Where it has not the power of being useful, it is never burdensome.---It
seeks to please rather than shine and dazzle, and conceals with care
that superiority, either of talents or of rank, which are oppressive to
those who are beneath it.---It is a great avenue to mutual enjoyment:
amidst the strife of interfering interests, it tempers the violence of
contention, and keeps alive the seeds of harmony.---It softens
animosities, renews endearments, and renders the countenance of a man a
refreshment to man.---It prepossesses and wins every heart.---It
persuades when every other argument fails; often disarms the fierce, and
melts the stubborn.

To the man of humanity the world is generally disposed to ascribe every
other good quality; of its influence all in some degree partake,
therefore all love it.

The man of this character rises in the world without struggle, and
flourishes without envy; his misfortunes are universally lamented, and
his failings are easily forgiven. The inward tranquility which it
promotes is the first requisite of every pleasurable feeling. It is the
calm and clear atmosphere, the serenity and sunshine of the mind.

Attacked by great injuries, the man of mild and gentle spirit will feel
what human nature feels; and will defend and resent as his duty allows
him: but to slight provocations he is happily superior. Inspired with
noble sentiments, taught to regard, with an indulgent eye, the frailties
of men, the omissions of the careless, the follies of the imprudent, and
the levity of the fickle; he retreats into the calmness of his spirit,
as into an undisturbed sanctuary, and quietly allows the usual current
of life to hold its course.




  FAITH, PIETY, AND ACTIVE VIRTUE.

Life passed under the influence of such dispositions naturally leads to
a happy end. It is not enough to say, faith and piety joined with active
virtue constitute the requisite preperation for heaven. They in truth
begin the enjoyment of heaven. In every state of our existence they form
the chief ingredients of felicity.



           *       *       *       *

  THE VICTIM OF MAGICAL DELUSION;
  _OR, INTERESTING MEMOIRS OF MIGUEL, DUKE DE CA*I*A._
  Unfolding Many Curious Unknown Historical Facts.

  _Translated from the German of Tschink._

  (Continued from page 219.)

"What a triumph would it have proved to me, if I had succeeded in my
attempt to subdue this man through my magical operations, and to catch
in _one_ snare two persons of so great an importance to our cause. The
idea of ensnaring the Count by means of miracles and ghosts, was indeed,
a very bold one, but not so inconsiderate as it may appear at first
sight. Antonio has spent the earlier years of his youth in a monastery
at Rome. It was not unknown to me, that experience and meditation have
enabled him afterwards to divest himself of the prejudices which there
have been instilled in his mind; I was, however, at the same time, well
aware that the impressions we receive in our juvenile days, are
re-produced with vivacity on certain occasions. I also knew that his
philosophy does not deny the existence of spirits, and the hope of
futurity which he defended with enthusiasm, renders the human mind but
too prone to give credit to the apparitions of spirits, if they have the
appearance of reality. Even his propensity to speculation, his fondness
of solitude, the interest he took in supersensitive objects, his
melancholy temper, prompted me to expect that my artifices would find
access to his heart; and if the heart is but interested for something,
then the understanding too is generally _half_ gained. However, he who
intends to gain it _entirely_, must take care not to expose his blind
side to a keen-sighted and pert genius, and for that reason I was
obliged to endeavour to carry the illusion to the highest degree of
probability; I was under the necessity of attempting to make it
impossible to Count Galvez to penetrate my delusions. This will convince
your Grace that my plan, how bold soever it might have been, has not
been formed without _probability of success_. However, when Count
Clairval began to cultivate a more intimate connexion with Antonio,
I was made sensible that my expectations have been too sanguine.

"He entreated me to give up a design that never could succeed. Prudence
commanded me to follow his advice, though it mortified my ambition
extremely. No other expedient was now left than to remove Count Galvez
from his pupil, because I apprehended that he would ruin my design on
Miguel. Your Grace knows how successfully this was executed.

"Perhaps you will ask, whether it would not have been possible to gain
Count Galvez for our cause by some other means? I must reply in the
negative. Miguel could indeed have been ensnared by other meant, but not
more _expeditiously_; (and every thing depended upon dispatch) but his
tutor never. The latter is attached to the King of Sp**n with unshaken
loyalty, because he thinks it his _duty_ to be loyal; and a man of fifty
years, of so firm and rooted principles, cannot be enticed from what he
thinks to be his duty, before it ceases to be duty to him. But what
power upon earth could absolve from _a duty such_ a man? Here
supernatural powers must interfere and absolve him, beings from another
world must appear as bails.

"I can scarcely think that the failure of this plan has originated from
a fault of mine, for I have tried every means of exhibiting my miracles
and ghosts in a shape of probability. Yet this has entangled me on the
other side in a very disagreeable dilemma. Miguel, to whom his tutor has
rendered suspected even my most consummate artifices, must be kept
steady in the course he once has taken. I shall, perhaps, be
necessitated to perform something quite extraordinary in order to fix
the mind of this wavering young man who is constantly pressing forwards.
Thus I think to have given a satisfactory answer to the question why I
have introduced so expensive, complicated and artificial machines.

"If your Grace should ask why I have kept my design on Miguel's tutor so
secret, then I must tell you, that I concealed it so carefully because I
intended to surprise the confederates unexpectedly by my valuable
acquisition, if I should have succeeded; and if not to spare myself the
mortification of having it said that I had undertaken a task to which my
powers were not equal. I hope your Grace will reward my frank and plain
confession by burying it in eternal secrecy."

I returned the letter to the Duke, and a long silence ensued. He broke
it first.

"My friend, you know my adventures with this Irishman, what do you think
of him?"

"How can you ask that question after all the discoveries we have already
made?"

"I wish to have it answered by you."

"I think," said I in a pathetic accent, "that Irishman must be a
supernatural being."

"Ridicule me as long as you please--I cannot but confess that he is,
nevertheless, incomprehensible to me."

"My dear Duke, I know what I am to think of the Irishman, but I scarcely
know what to think of you."

"You disapprove of my connection with that man."

"Very much."

"Tell me your sentiments without reserve; I know you have had a strong
desire for some time to come to an explanation with me."

"You have been ill, and I wish to spare you."

"I don't want your forbearance. Speak."

"At another time, my friend, at another time."

"No delay. Alumbrado is no stranger to my history, and consequently may
hear your observation on it."

"If you insist upon if, then I must tell you that I am extremely vexed
at the idea that the fellow, who dared to sport with your understanding
has enjoyed the triumph of guiding you in leading-strings whithersoever
he chose. I am glad that you have rendered his magical labours so
toilsome; I am rejoiced at the resistance which you have opposed to his
attacks; but it grieves me that he has conquered you so dishonestly and
artfully. I cannot but confess that the artifice to which your
penetration yielded, has been enormous; however, I am angry with you
because the man whom you really had discovered to be a cheat, succeeded
a second time in gaining your confidence."

"Do you then imagine that the Irishman has imposed on me in the latter
period of our connection as well as in the beginning of it?"

"Undoubtedly."

"That this occult science consists merely in juggling tricks?"

"In _natural_ arts of all kind."

"By what natural means could he have affected the apparition of Antonio
at the church-yard?"

"I cannot tell; however, we should probably have learned it from the
Count if he had not been suffered to escape."

"I am glad you remind me of the Count. Why did he refuse so obstinately
to explain that incident in spite of my prayers and menaces, declaring
solemnly that it had been effected by supernatural means, although he
has candidly discovered the rest of the delusions of the Irishman. What
benefit could he expect from deceiving me any longer, the revolution
being established, and consequently his end attained?"

"Has he not confessed that he is in the service of the Irishman? Can you
know what orders he has received from his employer? Was not the veil of
mystery which the Count has thrown over that incident, the only
remaining mean of supporting the authority of his lord and master? Who
knows what he would have confessed if you had shown a firm resolution to
enforce your menaces?"

"I confess I acted very weakly and rashly, in suffering him to escape so
soon."

"At bottom it matters very little. What confidence could you have
reposed in the confession of a man, who on a former occasion has imposed
on you in so shameless and daring a manner? And what will you say if
I prove to you that he has belied you the last time too?"

"You astonish me."

"Don't you recollect that he pretended the note through which Amelia has
been absolved from her vow by her late Lord, to have been the effect of
Hiermanfor's supernatural power?"

"Not only the Count, Hiermanfor too has made me believe it."

"Both of them has told you a barefaced lie."

"Friend, how will you be able to make good your charge?"

"By proving that pretended miracle to be a juggling trick."

"You have raised my expectation to the highest pitch."

"I have learned that trick of a juggler, and I am sure that which the
Irishman has made use of is the same. He gave Amelia a blank slip of
paper, and directed her to write the question on the upper part of it.
Here you must regard three points; first of all, that he _himself_ gave
the paper, to Amelia; secondly, that he desired the question to be
written on the upper part of it; and thirdly, that he dictated the
question to her; he then put the paper on the table, fumigated the
apartment with an incense of his own composition, and requested the
Countess to look at the paper in the morning. It was very natural that
the answer to the question was seen beneath it, having been previously
written with sympathetic ink the preceding evening, but first rendered
visible in the night by the fumigation. Very likely it had been written
by the Count, who could imitate the hand-writing of his brother."

The Duke gazed at me along while, seized with dumb astonishment. At
length he clapped his hands joyfully, exclaiming, "O! my friend, what a
light have you cast upon that dark mysterious affair."

"A light," my reply was, "that will assist you to see clearly how
dishonestly the Irishman and the Count have dealt with you to the last.
They endeavoured to persuade you that you had been deceived at first,
merely for the sake of probation, and that you had been paid with
sterling truth after Paleski's discovery. Poor deceived man; you have
always been beset with lies and delusions; the sole point in which they
differed from each other, consisting merely in the superior art which
the latter impositions were contrived with."

"Then you believe that the apparition at the church-yard has also been a
deception, like the incident with the miraculous note."

"Yes, I have every reason to think so. When I have once caught a person
in the act of committing a fraud, I then have the greatest right to
suppose that he has repeatedly imposed upon me; and when I am convinced
that he has frequently deceived me, I then have the greatest reason to
conclude that he has cheated me the last time also."

"Then you think a real apparition of a ghost to be impossible."

"Why do you ask that question? All that we have to decide at present,
is, whether the Irishman or any man living can effect such an
apparition."

"You want to evade my question."

"Indeed not!"

"Then tell me, do you think apparitions of ghosts to be possible?"

"Tell me, does not this question imply, that, are men capable of seeing
ghosts?"

"Certainly."

"That I deny."

"You think that no man living has that capacity."

"And not without reason. We can see only those objects which throw an
image on the retina of the eye, and consequently only expanded things;
a spirit has no expansion, and therefore cannot be seen by us."

"You cut it very short."

"My argument is valid."

  (To be continued.)



           *       *       *       *