It was often necessary to sell slaves in order to settle an estate. It
was seldom possible for a man to will his property in Negroes without
some divisions becoming necessary at the hands of the executor in the
just interest of the heirs. These public auctions usually took place
on court day, at the courthouse door and were conducted by the master
commissioner of the circuit court. The following advertisement reveals
the necessity and the procedure:

     SALE OF NEGROES

     By virtue of a decree of the Fayette Circuit, the undersigned
     will, as Commissioner to carry into effect said decree, sell to
     the highest bidder, on the public square in the city of
     Lexington, on Monday the 10th of March next, being county court
     day, the following slaves, to wit:

     Keiser, Carr, Sally, Bob, Susan, Sam, Sarah and Ben; belonging to
     the estate of Alexander Culbertson, deceased. The sale to be on a
     credit of three months, the purchaser to give bond with approved
     security. The sale to take place between the hours of 11 o'clock
     in the morning and 3 o'clock in the evening.

     February 26, 1834         JOHN CLARK, _Commissioner_[253]

On the same day the sheriff of the county might appear at the
courthouse door in accordance with a previous announcement and auction
off any unclaimed runaway that had been lodged in the county jail or
hired out under his authority for a period of a year or more. The
slaves thus sold were usually fugitives from the lower South who had
been apprehended on their way to Ohio or Indiana. Although the utmost
publicity would have been given to their capture, in accordance with
the law, few of the planters of the far South seem ever to have
claimed their property. The usual legal code in this matter is shown
by the notice below:

     NOTICE: Agreeably to an act of the General Assembly, passed
     January 11, 1845, I will, on the first Monday of May, 1846,
     before the Court House door, in the city of Louisville, sell to
     the highest bidder, on a credit of six months, the purchaser
     giving bond with good security, having the force and effect of a
     replevin bond, JOHN, a runaway slave, 18 or 19 years of age, 5
     feet 3 or 4 inches high, a rather heavy built, supposed to be the
     property of Daniel McCaleb or Calip, residing on the coast some
     twenty miles below New Orleans.

                         F. S. J. RONALD _Deputy Sheriff_
                  for JAMES HARRISON _Sheriff Jefferson Co_.[254]
     Feb. 25, 1846.

Under the three causes of sale thus far cited the blame would not be
placed upon the master. In the case of the unruly Negro the owner was
according to the ethics of that day not at fault. In the settlement of
an estate the slaveholder was no longer a factor, for his demise alone
had brought the sale. In the case of the runaway the owner was
unknown. Mrs. Stowe probably showed the attitude of the average
Kentucky master when she pictured Uncle Tom as being sold for the
southern market only because of the economic necessities of the owner.
When in such a position the master felt called upon to explain the
necessities of the case. He was very careful not to be cast under the
suspicion of public opinion as a "slave trader," which, as Shaler has
said, was the "last word of opprobrium." Witness a few instances in
evidence:

     NEGROES FOR SALE

     A yellow negro woman of fine constitution, and two children, from
     the country, and sold for no fault but to raise money. Will not
     be sold to go down the river. Her husband, a fine man, can be had
     also. Apply at the store of

                              JARVIS AND TRABUE--3rd & Main[255]

The editor of the _Lexington Reporter_ was very careful not to get
under the ban of his constituents when he was forced to sell a farm
hand and his wife.

     FOR SALE

     A negro man, a first rate farm hand, about 27 years of age; and a
     very likely woman, the wife of the man, about 22 years of age, a
     good house servant. They will not be sold separately, or to any
     person wishing to take them out of the State. Enquire at this
     office.[256]

In 1834 Thomas J. Allen, a citizen of Louisville, desired to exchange
his property in the city for 40 or 50 slaves, but he specifically
stated that they were to be for his own use and that he wanted them to
be "in families."[257] The same attitude appears in the case of a
house servant for sale with the reasons for such specifically stated:

     FOR SALE

     I wish to sell a negro woman, who has been accustomed to house
     work. She is an excellent cook, washes and scours, and is in
     every respect, an active and intelligent servant. I do not
     require her services, which is my only reason for wishing to
     dispose of her.

                                   MASLIN SMITH[258]

The prevalence of statements giving the reasons for and the
restrictions upon these sales should show beyond any reasonable doubt
that public opinion would not tolerate any suspicion of a heartless
traffic in slaves. These sentiments were especially prevalent in the
central portion of the State. The only case known to the writer where
a large number of slaves were sold without any qualification was near
Harrodsburg in August, 1845; but in this instance all the man's
property, including 450 acres of land, was sold at the same time.[259]

There were, naturally, some unscrupulous masters who cared little for
the fate of their slaves when sold. They placed no restrictions upon
the sale, either in destination or in the break-up of family ties. We
will cite only two, one for the earlier and one for the later period,
noticeable chiefly for the lack of regard for Negro family life.

     NEGROES FOR SALE

     The subscriber has for sale a negro man and woman, each about 24
     years of age, both are excellent plantation hands, together with
     two children. They will be sold separately or altogether.

                                   LUIDORES LUCAS[260]

     FOR SALE

     I wish to sell a negro woman and four children. The woman is 22
     years old, of good character, a good cook and washer. The
     children are very likely, from 6 years down to 1-1/2. I will sell
     them together or separately to suit purchasers.

                                   J. T. UNDERWOOD.[261]

The aggregate of all these causes was sufficient to bring about a
supply for the southern market. The question now arises as to how the
demand was met commercially. To what extent were there slave traders
in Kentucky? George Prentice, the famous editor of the _Louisville
Journal_, himself a loyal exponent of slavery, early pointed out that
Kentucky had an ample supply of Negroes and that they were being sent
south in large numbers. He further stated that any one who wanted
slaves could always purchase them by leaving an order in
Louisville.[262] This opinion was expressed at a time when the
non-importation act of 1833 had been in force for sixteen years, which
meant that Kentucky was producing slaves faster than she needed them.
It was only two months after this that Richard Henry Collins in an
editorial in the _Maysville Eagle_ gave a flagrant example of a slave
trader in Kentucky who violated the spirit as well as the letter of
the law. But the sentiment of the people on the slave dealer had been
expressed much earlier. In 1833 a Lexington editor felt exasperated
because of the appearance of a large group of slaves in the streets of
the city on their way to be sold south. When another trader appeared
with his Negro slaves held together with a chain he voiced his wrath
in this fashion:

     "A few weeks ago we gave an account of a company of men, women
     and children, part of them manacled, passing through the streets.
     Last week, a number of slaves were driven through the main street
     of our city, among them were a number manacled together, two
     abreast, all connected by, and supporting, a heavy iron chain,
     which extended the whole length of the line."[263]

About the same time a citizen of Danville sold a Negro woman to a
regular slave trader. The news spread around the town rapidly and to
save himself from the threats of the gathering mob the owner was
compelled for his own safety to follow the slave dealer and repurchase
the woman at a decided increase in price.[264]

It is very difficult to find out how many slave dealers there were in
the State, for few of them ever came out in the open and advertised
their trade. As would be expected from its size and situation
Louisville was the place where the dealer could ply his trade to the
best advantage. It was the central business point and the port from
which most slaves from Kentucky were shipped down the Ohio and
Mississippi. There is no mention in the newspapers of any dealers
there before the year 1845. Thereafter there were several who
advertised for any number of slaves and made no secret of the purpose
of purchase. In the _Journal_ for October 29, 1845, William Kelly
called for all persons who had slaves to sell to see him and offered
them the highest prices. He further stated that he had slaves for
sale. His name does not often appear in succeeding years. During the
next decade there were four regular dealers who apparently did
considerable business: T. Arterburn, J. Arterburn, William F. Talbott,
and Thomas Powell. Later John Mattingly came upon the scene presumably
from St. Louis. In July, 1845, the Arterburn brothers began a series
of advertisements which ran for several years. "We wish to purchase
100 negroes for the Southern market, for which we will pay the highest
prices in cash."[265] Talbott began his publicity in 1848 with these
words: "The subscriber wishes to purchase 100 negroes, for which he
will pay the highest cash prices. Can always be found at the
Louisville Hotel."[266] Two years later he was still advertising, but
had ceased placing any limit on the number to be bought and had moved
his quarters to the Hotel O'Rain.[267] Thomas Powell also began in
1848 with this stock phraseology--"Persons having negroes for sale can
find a purchaser at the highest cash prices by calling on the
subscriber, on Sixth Street, between Main and Market, adjoining H.
Duncan's stable."[268] This advertisement ran continually for a
period of two years. John Mattingly evidently came from Missouri in
the same year, and remained until 1852, when he returned to St. Louis
to ply his trade.[269] While he was in Louisville he ran an
advertisement in the _Journal_ after this fashion: "The undersigned
wishes to purchase 100 negroes both men and women, for which he will
pay the highest cash prices. Those who have negroes for sale would do
well to call on him at the Gait House."[270]

It is noticeable that none of the Louisville directories for this
period mention any slave dealers. This failure may have been due
merely to the fact that there were so few traders in the city and that
they were more or less transient residents. On the other hand, public
opinion apparently never acknowledged that there were any real
citizens of the city engaged in the slave trade. Beginning in 1840 the
_Louisville Journal_ published a weekly paper called _Louisville
Prices Current_. In 1855 this was succeeded by the _Commercial Review
and Louisville Prices Current_, which was published by the Louisville
Chamber of Commerce. These two papers devoted themselves exclusively
to the commercial transactions of the city and gave price quotations
weekly for every conceivable kind of goods in the market together with
the volume of sales. Strange to say, there has not been found a single
issue of either of these papers, which mentions the selling price of
slaves or any transaction in Negroes. If there was a trade in slaves
which was regarded purely as a commercial enterprise, as some would
have us think, then it is very hard to understand why these splendid
trade papers did not contain any account of the business.

There were some Louisville business men who bought and sold slaves as
only one of the branches of their commercial activities. This would
account to some extent for the failure to list traders in the local
directories for it is noticeable that such men never called themselves
slave dealers. As early as the year 1825 John Stickney established
the _Louisville Intelligence Office_ on Main Street, which was a sort
of labor and real estate exchange. He advertised that he sold books;
had money to loan; houses for rent and sale; horses and Negroes for
sale and hire; carriages for sale; conducted a labor exchange, and
recommended the best boarding houses.[271] A year later J. C. Gentry
opened the "Western Horse Market" at the corner of Market and Fourth
Streets. He advertised that he conducted a livery stable, and also
sold on commission, at public or private sale, horses, carriages,
cattle, wagons and slaves; and that he would conduct an auction on
Wednesdays and Saturdays.[272] A similar case was that of A. C. Scott,
who in 1854 opened a real estate and land office but who stated in the
press that he not only bought and sold land and rented houses but that
he would sell and hire slaves.[273] Consequently Scott was listed as a
real estate and land agent in the local directories. It is impossible
to determine how many of these occasional slave dealers there were,
but in so far as available material shows these three were the only
ones to announce their trade publicly.

It would appear from all the evidence at hand that while Kentucky
furnished many slaves for the southern market there was no general
internal slave trade, as a commercial enterprise. There were in
Louisville, however, a few heartless business men who took advantage
of the decreasing value of slave labor in Kentucky and the rising
prices of slaves in the far South. In this respect, Kentucky became a
field of supply for the slave markets of the lower South.

Unfortunately there are no statistics available by which the number of
slaves sent south can be computed. The most comprehensive anti-slavery
publication on the internal slave trade was unable to decide with
certainty what proportion of slaves for the southern market was
furnished by each of the so-called breeding States. The author of
_Slavery and Internal Slave Trade in the United States_ estimated
that 80,000 slaves were annually exported from seven States to the
South. He gave no figures that were not his own estimates. He ranked
the seven States, however, in the order of the number of slaves which
he thought they furnished as follows: Virginia, Maryland, North
Carolina, Kentucky, Tennessee, Missouri and Delaware.[274]

Martin estimates that Kentucky sent on the average about 5,000 slaves
to the southern market.[275] Again this must be considered purely
conjectural. It is reasonable to suppose that during the last two
decades of the slavery era there were few slaves imported into
Kentucky that were intended for the purely Kentucky market. What
Negroes came into Kentucky were for the most part on their way to the
more profitable southern trade. The average death rate among the
slaves during this period was 1.9 per one hundred and the birth rate
was 3.2, or an excess of births over deaths of 1.1 per hundred. This
would make the annual natural increase among the slave population
about 2,000 per year. Comparing this with the growth of the slave
group from 1840 to 1850 we find that the increase of slaves was much
more. But it was during the next decade that the slave trade reached
its height and here we find that the slave population increased
14,502, whereas the natural increase during that period should have
been 23,190. Hence the slaves failed to reach even their natural
increase by a deficiency of 8,688. Taken literally that would mean
that during the ten-year period that number of slaves were exported
from Kentucky. But it is reasonable to suppose that many more than
that were sent to the South. With the exception of the last decade,
however, the slave population of Kentucky increased faster than the
mere natural increase of the Negroes. The law would not permit of any
importation of slaves intended for Kentucky, so the export of purely
Kentucky slaves appears never to have been prominent except during the
decade from 1850 to 1860.

The selling price of slaves naturally presents itself at this point.
In Kentucky these records are very few because the tax books in
practically all the counties of the State have been destroyed. We have
no accurate statements extant before about the year 1855. The prices
which we have obtained are quotations from the auction of slaves of
estates to settle the interests of the heirs. On January court day, in
1855, there were sold in the settlement of estates in Bourbon,
Fayette, Clark and Franklin Counties Negro men who brought $1,260,
$1,175, $1,070, $1,378, $1,295, $1,015 and $1,505.[276] The county
commissioner of Harrison auctioned the slaves of the deceased George
Kirkpatrick with the following prices received:

     America     40 years of age  }
     Peggy        6 years of age  } all for $1,600
     Eliza        4 years of age  }
     Brown        6 months of age }

     Peter       23 years  of age      $1,290
     Emanuel     24 years  of age         750
     Tom         16 years  of age       1,015
     Ann         14 years  of age         775
     Emma        12 years  of age         865
     Sarah       26 years  of age         350[277]

The county commissioner at Henderson received the following prices for
slaves in the settlement of several estates on January 28, 1858:[278]

     Ruth          33 years of age        $   800
     Willis        59 years of age            475
     George        35 years of age          1,200
     Delphy        80 years of age             75
     Leila         65 years of age            282
     Clarissa      24 years of age          1,131
     Andrew        19 years of age          1,500
     Susan         17 years of age            470
     Jennie        17 years of age          1,100
     Cupid         85 years of age             74
     Eliza         32 years of age            500
     Bell          41 years of age          1,000

This sale is most significant for the cases of "Delphy," 80 years old,
and "Cupid," 85 years of age. It is difficult to account for such a
sale in any discussion of the slave trade, but it does show the
humanitarian side of Kentucky slavery. Negroes at such an age had no
economic value even if they were given away, because the expense of
their maintenance was more than the value of any possible labor they
could perform.

At Georgetown in December of the same year we have this record:[279]

     Griffin      45 years of age     $  640
     Mary         14 years of age      1,060
     Ellen        12 years of age        800
     Elizabeth    11 years of age        406 (one-eyed)
     Sanford       9 years of age        700
     Arabel       10 years of age        690
     Adam         41 years of age        700
     Bettie        3 years of age        260
     Aaron        28 years of age      1,191
     Sam          25 years of age      1,350

The auction of the slaves of the estate of Spencer C. Graves at
Lexington in April, 1859, brought these prices:[280]

     John       18 years of age                 $1,500
     Dick       21 years of age                  1,400
     Jerry      38 years of age                    700
     Major      50 years of age                    480
     Charles    31 years of age                  1,155
     John Jr    18 years of age                  1,140
     Billy      31 years of age                  1,100
     Isabella   40 years, with 3 children, ages
                   11, 5 and 2                   1,610
     Rebecca    30 years, with 3 children, ages
                   11, 6 and 4                   2,410
     Lucy       18 years of age, with infant     1,280
     Davidella  31 years of age                  1,220
     Mary Ann   31 years of age                    835
     Patience   18 years of age                  1,350
     Catharine  15 years of age                  1,130

Such a series of prices would show beyond a reasonable doubt that the
value of slaves was determined entirely by the increasing demand for
slaves in the lower South and was in no way an indication of the value
of slave labor within Kentucky. As was pointed out earlier in this
chapter, the labor value of an agricultural slave in the State
steadily decreased after about the year 1830.

Was slavery profitable to the Kentucky planters? In the many debates
on the slavery question which took place after 1830 no one ever stood
out in the affirmative. The only ones to discuss the economic side of
the issue were those in opposition to slavery. As has often been said
of the Kentucky situation, "the program was to use negroes to raise
corn to feed hogs to feed negroes, who raised more corn to feed more
hogs." Tobacco was the largest crop raised in the State and corn came
next. Neither proved to be peculiarly adapted to slave labor. There
were few large plantations in the State where it could be made
advantageous. What Negro work there was to be done was never confined
to any particular kind of cultivation but was used in the manner of
farm labor today in the State. Squire Turner, of Madison County, in
the Constitutional Convention of 1849 made a careful summary of the
existing economic problems of slavery. "There are," said he, "about
$61,000,000 worth of slave property in the state which produces less
than three per cent profit on the capital invested, or about half as
much as the moneyed capital would yield. There are about 200,000
slaves in Kentucky. Of these about seventy-five per cent are
superannuated, sick, women in unfit condition for labor, and infants
unable to work, who yield no profit. Show me a man that has forty or
fifty slaves on his estate, and if there are ten out of that number
who are available and valuable, it is as much as you can expect. But
my calculation allows you to have seventy-five per cent who are barely
able to maintain themselves, to pay for their own clothing, fuel,
house room and doctor's bills. Is there any gentleman who has a large
number of slaves, who will say that they are any more profitable than
that?"[281]

No one in the convention answered the last question put by Squire
Turner. But regardless of such an economic condition, not a single
piece of remedial legislation was passed and the members of the
Constitutional Convention added a provision to the Bill of Rights
which rooted the slavery system firmer than ever. That most admirable
of all southern characters, and at the same time the most difficult to
understand, the Kentucky master, took little heed of a question of
dollars and cents when it interfered with his moral and humanitarian
sentiments. He had inherited, in most cases, the slaves that were his.
He knew well enough that the system did not pay but supposing that he
should turn his slaves loose, what would become of them? What could
they do for a living? The experience of later years proved that his
apparently obstinate temperament was mixed with a good deal of wisdom,
for once the slaves were set free their status was not to any great
extent ameliorated if they went abroad from the plantation where they
had lived from childhood.

There was a certain amount of profit in the labor of able-bodied
slaves but they only represented a fraction of the Negroes whom the
master was called upon to support. The law compelled the owner to
maintain his old and helpless slaves and this represented the spirit
of the large majority of the slaveholders. Those were rare cases
indeed when an owner was hailed into court for failing to provide for
an infirm member of his slave household. The true Kentuckian never
begrudged the expense that such support incurred. One of the ablest
lawyers of the State, Benjamin Hardin, made the statement that "if it
were not for supporting my slaves, I would never go near a
courthouse."[282]

Rev. Stuart Robinson, speaking before the Kentucky Colonization
Society in 1849, gave another viewpoint of the economic value of the
slave. "The increase of slaves in Kentucky," said he, "has hardly
reached three thousand annually for eighteen years past. The increase
since 1840 has been 27,653--the increase for the year just closed
2,921. In twenty-six counties, embracing one fourth of the slave
population--some of them the largest slave-holding counties--there has
been an actual decrease in the last year of 881 slaves. In twelve
other counties the increase has been only twenty-three. There are ten
counties in the State, which contain one third of all the slave
population of Kentucky; in these ten counties, the increase of slaves
for five years past has been 2,728--an increase of less than one per
cent per annum. Nor is this slow increase of slavery to be attributed
to any stagnation or decline of public prosperity, for in the meantime
the state has been growing in population and wealth as heretofore.
During these five years the taxable property of the Commonwealth has
increased in value more than seventy-six millions. Now this decrease
of slaves while the other property of the commonwealth is increasing
must arise from one of three causes--and in either case the inference
is the same as to the fate of slavery in Kentucky. (1) Is it because
the climate is unhealthy to the African? If so then African labor
cannot continue. (2) Is it owing to emigration? Then something is
wrong in the system of labor, that causes the emigration of our
people--for no finer soil--no more desirable residence can be found in
the world. (3) Or is it owing to the domestic slave trade? Then for
some reason slave labor is less profitable here than elsewhere, and
must soon be given up."[283]

These figures quoted by the speaker on the slave population for year
by year are available in the auditor's tax books for the years 1840 to
1859:[284]

     1840      164,817
     1841      168,853
     1842      171,035
     1843      176,107
     1844      178,837
     1845      182,742
     1846      185,582
     1847      189,549
     1848      192,470
     1849      195,110
     1850      196,847
     1851      196,336
     1852      200,867
     1853      200,015
     1854      200,181
     1855      202,790
     1856      201,160
     1857      201,590
     1858      207,559
     1859      208,625

The very small growth shown here would barely account for the natural
increase among the slaves by virtue of the high birth rate. The
mortality rates were about the same for slaves as for whites. The
relative decline was undoubtedly due to the rising prices for slaves
which were sent to the South and the consequent decreasing value of a
slave's labor to the Kentuckian. He knew beyond a doubt that the time
would eventually come when he would have to part with his slave and
that portion of the holders who were not averse to selling their
chattels did so during this period.


FOOTNOTES:

[234] Hening's Statutes, Vol. X, p. 50.

[235] Hening's Statutes, Vol. XI, p. 309; Treat, P. J., _National Land
System_, p. 235.

[236] _Ibid._, Vol. X, pp. 35-45.

[237] Winterbotham, _An Historical Geographical Commercial and
Topographical View of the United States_, Vol. 3, pp. 156-157.

[238] Kentucky Land Grants, Book 13, p. 59.

[239] _Ibid._, Book 8, p. 228.

[240] Shaler's _Autobiography_, p. 33.

[241] Michaux (Thwaite's Reprint), _Travels to the West of the
Allegheny Mountains_, Vol. 3, p. 237.

[242] Shaler, N. S., _Kentucky_, p. 196.

[243] Includes 182 Indians.

[244] Includes 33 Indians.

[245] Greeley, Horace, _Writings, Speeches and Addresses of Cassius M.
Clay_, p. 177.

[246] _Collected Documents_, 1847, p. 581.

[247] De Bow's _Statistical Review_, p. 95.

[248] Adapted from De Bow's _Statistical Review_, pp. 67, 85, 99.

[249] Stowe, _Key to Uncle Tom's Cabin_, p. 143.

[250] _Louisville Weekly Journal_, October 17, 1849.

[251] Shaler's _Autobiography_, p. 36.

[252] _Louisville Public Advertiser_, December 24, 1829.

[253] _Lexington Observer and Kentucky Reporter_, February 27, 1834.

[254] _Louisville Weekly Journal_, March 4, 1846.

[255] _Louisville Weekly Journal_, September 3, 1845.

[256] _Lexington Observer_ and _Kentucky Reporter_, Jan. 28, 1835.

[257] _Ibid._, July 9, 1834.

[258] _Lexington Observer_ and _Kentucky Reporter_, Jan. 7, 1835.

[259] _Louisville Weekly Journal_, August 6, 1845.

[260] _Bairdstown Candid Review_, June 20, 1809.

[261] _Louisville Weekly Journal_, May 2, 1849.

[262] _Louisville Weekly Journal_, September 26, 1849.

[263] _Lexington Western Luminary_, June 5, 1833.

[264] Blanchard and Rice, _Debates on Slavery_, p. 133.

[265] _Louisville Weekly Journal_, July 30, 1845.

[266] _Ibid._, July 19, 1848.

[267] _Ibid._, August 14, 1850.

[268] _Ibid._, August 2, 1848.

[269] _St. Louis Daily Times_, October 14, 1852.

[270] _Louisville Daily Journal_, November 23, 1848.

[271] _Louisville Public Advertiser_, November 2, 1825.

[272] _Ibid._, September 13, 1826.

[273] _Louisville Daily Times_, March 1, 1854.

[274] _Slavery and Internal Slave Trade in the U. S._, p. 12.

[275] Martin, Asa E., _Anti-Slavery Movement in Kentucky_, p. 89.

[276] Collins, _History of Kentucky_, Vol. 1, p. 74.

[277] _Cynthiana News_, January 10, 1858.

[278] _Henderson Weekly Commercial_, January 29, 1858.

[279] _Georgetown Gazette_, December 23, 1858.

[280] _Weekly Free South_ (Newport), April 29, 1859.

[281] Debates of the Convention of 1849, p. 73.

[282] Little, L. P., _Ben Hardin, his Times and Contemporaries_, p.
544.

[283] _Presbyterian Herald_, April 12, 1849.

[284] _Collected Documents_, 1847, pp. 581-583; 1853, pp. 401-403;
1860, pp. 241-246.




CHAPTER III

THE LEGAL STATUS OF SLAVERY


Slavery in its more economic form naturally spread to the Kentucky
district as the western frontier of Virginia became settled. Of the
293,427 slaves which were held in the State of Virginia in the year
1790, however, only 11,830 were in the district of Kentucky, which at
that time had a total population of 73,077. Few thought, however, of
disputing the rights of the institution in the newly created State.
The final convention which met to form a constitution was held at
Danville, beginning on April 2, 1792, and in the course of its
proceedings it was apparent that there was no fundamental division
among the delegates regarding any of the proposed provisions with the
exception of the one dealing with slavery. Virginia had stipulated in
giving permission for the formation of the new State that slavery as
an established institution should not be disturbed, and this policy
had the support of a majority of the members of the constitutional
convention. George Nichols, a native of the Old Dominion, was the
leader of the assembly and had charge of most of the work which was
done and naturally was most interested in carrying out the wishes of
his native State in the formation of the new document. The only
serious opponent was David Rice, a noted Presbyterian minister, but,
having resigned on April 11, he was not present at the time when the
slavery issue came up for final settlement.

A separate vote was taken on Article IX, the slavery section, which
passed 26 to 19. It was finally provided that

     The legislature shall have no power to pass laws for the
     emancipation of slaves without the consent of their owners, or
     without paying their owners, previous to such emancipation, a
     full equivalent in money, for the slaves emancipated; they shall
     have no power to prevent immigrants to this state, from bringing
     with them such persons as are deemed slaves by the laws of any
     one of the United States, so long as any person of the same age
     or description shall be continued in slavery by the laws of this
     state: that they shall pass laws to permit the owners of slaves
     to emancipate them, saving the rights of creditors, and
     preventing them from becoming a charge to the county in which
     they reside; they shall have full power to prevent slaves from
     being brought into this state as merchandise; they shall have
     full power to prevent any slave being brought into this state
     from a foreign country, and to prevent those from being brought
     into this state, who have been since the first of January, 1789,
     or may hereafter be imported into any of the United States from a
     foreign country. And they shall have full power to pass such laws
     as may be necessary to oblige the owners of slaves to treat them
     with humanity, to provide for them necessary clothes and
     provisions, to abstain from all injuries to them extending to
     life or limb, and in case of their neglect or refusal to comply
     with the directions of such laws, to have such slave or slaves
     sold for the benefit of their owner or owners.[285]

In any discussion of the slavery question in Kentucky in its
historical aspects this article of the first constitution is
fundamental. It is evident that even at that early day the difficulty
of the slavery problem was already in the minds of the people in spite
of many other apparently more pressing issues. The article itself
remained practically intact throughout the existence of slavery in the
State. Were there ever in later years gathered within the confines of
the State any body of men who had a better grasp of the future? The
single instance of the recommendation that the legislature should pass
laws permitting the emancipation of slaves only under the provision
that they should be guaranteed from becoming a public charge to the
county shows the comprehension of a difficulty that could not at such
an early date have developed to any great degree, but which in later
decades was a formidable problem. We may well say with John Mason
Brown, however, that "the system of slavery thus contemplated was
designed to be as mild, as human, and as much protected from traffic
evils as possible, but it was to be emphatically perpetual, for no
emancipation could be had without the assent of each particular owner
of each individual slave."[286]

The session of the State assembly which met in November, 1792, only
attempted to carry out the constitutional provision prohibiting
commercial transactions with slaves. No person was permitted to buy
of, or sell to, any slave, any manner of thing whatsoever without a
written permit descriptive of the article under the penalty of four
times the value of the thing bought or sold. The jurisdiction of such
cases was given to the county court, if they concerned values of more
than five pounds. The slave was to receive ten lashes, which by the
standards of those days was a meager punishment for any offense.[287]
Whenever possible the slave was not brought into consideration as an
offender. The theory seems to have been that the slave was better off
when left alone. It was only when some unscrupulous outsider came in
to use the slave either as a victim or as an object of profit that it
was necessary to draw the strings tighter on the Negro, not because of
any inherent tendency to crime so much as to keep the slave from
becoming unruly when in the power of a superior influence.

It was not until the session of 1798 that the legislature drew up the
fundamental slave code which was to carry out all the recommendations
of the constitutional convention and which remained the basis of all
legal action throughout the entire period of slavery. Among the early
acts of the State had been the temporary adoption of the statutes of
Virginia on the treatment of slaves and slavery problems, which were
then in force.[288] These remained as a slave code for Kentucky until
the enactment in 1798 of these new laws, which contained forty-three
articles and involved almost every question that could come up for
legal consideration in connection with the institution. The experience
of six years as a separate State had served to show that many
existing provisions of the Virginia code were not readily adapted to
the rapidly growing State, and then too there was a decided tendency
to ameliorate the condition of the slave as much as possible. In
Kentucky they were not then, at least, confronted with such a large
mass of slaves that they could not meet problems in a much easier
manner than in the Old Dominion.

In the beginning, it was naturally found necessary to place some
restrictions on the slave and his movements. He was not allowed to
leave his master's plantation without written permission and if he did
go away, any person could apprehend the offender and take him before a
justice of the peace, who was empowered to order the infliction of
stripes at his discretion. Furthermore, he was not to wander off to
any other plantation without the written permission of his owner, with
the provision in this instance that he was not to be taken before a
justice of the peace, but before his owner, who was entitled to
inflict ten lashes upon the offender. Should the slave be found
carrying any powder, shot, a gun, club, or any weapon he could be
apprehended by any free person and taken before a justice and a much
severer penalty exacted in the form of thirty-nine lashes, "well laid
on, on the bare back."[289] It is clear that this law was drawn up to
keep the slave from becoming a public menace and not as a sign of
absolute restriction on the servant, for it was further provided in
Section 6 that in case the slave lived in a frontier community he
could go to the local justice of the peace and secure a permit to keep
and use guns, powder, shot and other weapons for either offensive or
defensive purposes. This permission was to be indorsed by any free
Negro, mulatto or Indian and did not necessarily involve the approval
of the owner of the slave.

It was declared unlawful for slaves to engage in riots, unlawful
assemblies, in trespasses or in seditious speech and, if so accused,
they were to be taken before the local justice who was to punish them
at his discretion. But the Negroes themselves were not to be
considered as the only guilty ones. In order to prevent any such
disorderly meetings no owner of slaves was to be allowed to permit any
slave not belonging to him to remain on his plantation for more than
four hours at any one time under a nominal penalty to such owner of
$2; but, if he allowed more than five such slaves to assemble on his
property, he was to be fined more severely. If such a group were
brought together by the written permission of the owner and for
business reasons, however, there was involved no offense
whatever.[290] It was realized that oftentimes the chief leaders in
the unlawful meetings of slaves were free Negroes and sympathetic
whites. Were any such to be found present they were to be arrested and
if found guilty when tried before a justice of the peace, should be
fined 15 shillings, to be paid, not to the court, but to the informer
and if the money was not forthcoming the court was to have twenty
lashes inflicted--no matter whether the convicted be white or black.
Inasmuch as the degree of punishment of the slaves for being present
at such a meeting was not specified it would seem that the legislature
meant that the free persons involved should be treated more severely
than slaves by the court.

The law of 1792 regarding trading with slaves had not proved to be
effective, for in many cases the owner for a stipulated wage paid by
the slave had permitted him to go at large and engage in trade as if
he were a free man. The legislature found that this encouraged the
slaves to commit thefts and engage in various evil practices and
naturally censured the owner. A fine of $50 was to be paid by the
master for each offending slave and no punishment whatever was to be
given the latter. But should the servant go so far as to hire himself
out, he would be imprisoned by order of the court and, at the next
session of the county court, he would be sold. One fourth of the money
thus received was to be applied to the county funds and 5 per cent was
to be given to the sheriff and the owner was to receive the remaining
70 per cent. Here too the slave was not punished and his condition of
servitude was not changed. It was merely a change of owners. Again the
offending owner was the victim and for his carelessness he was
deprived of 30 per cent of the money value of his slave.[291]

The leading Kentucky case bearing on slaves engaged in trade is that
of Bryant _vs._ Sheely (5 Dana, 530). Five of the main points are
worth mentioning here:

     1. To buy or receive any article from a slave, without the
     consent of his master, in writing, specifying the article, is a
     highly penal offense.

     2. A sale made by a slave, without such written consent, is void,
     and does not divest the master of his property; he may sue for,
     and recover it; or he may waive his right to the specific thing,
     affirm the sale, and recover the price or value, if it was not
     paid to the slave.

     3. A general permission to a slave to go at large and trade for
     himself as a free man, is contrary to public policy, and a
     violation of a penal statute. The owner or master of a slave
     could maintain no action for any claim acquired by a slave while
     acting under such illegal license.

     4. But a slave may be permitted by his master to buy or sell
     particular articles, and any form of consent or permission given
     by the master, or his assent after the fact, will give validity
     to the sale--though the purchaser may be liable to the penalty,
     if the consent be not in writing.

     5. A slave, being authorized by his master to sell any particular
     thing, becomes the agent of his master for that purpose; and from
     the authority to sell, an authority to transfer the property, and
     to fix and receive the price must be inferred; but the slave
     cannot exercise or receive an authority to maintain any action in
     relation to it; the right of action for the price belongs to the
     master, and if he sues, that fact itself is sufficient evidence
     that he authorized or approved and confirmed the sale.

Unlike the more southerly States, Kentucky did not leave the slave
helpless in the courts. If a slave were charged with a capital crime
he was brought before the court of quarter sessions, which was
composed of the various county justices of the peace. They were to
constitute a court of oyer and terminer. But they alone were not to
decide the fate of the Negro, for the sheriff was required to empanel
a jury of twelve men from among the bystanders, who were to constitute
the trial jury. It was explicitly stated that legal evidence in such a
case would be the confession of the offender, the oath of one or more
credible witnesses, or such testimony of Negroes, mulattoes, or
Indians as should seem convincing to the court. When a slave was
called upon to testify in such a case, the court, the witness "not
being a Christian," found it necessary to administer the following
charge that he might be under the greater obligation to declare the
truth: "You are brought hither as a witness, and by the direction of
the law I am to tell you, before you give your evidence, that you must
tell the truth and nothing but the truth, and that if it be found
hereafter that you tell a lie, and give false testimony in this
matter, you must, for so doing, receive thirty-nine lashes on your
bare back, well laid on, at the common whipping post."[292]

Section 22 of the law of 1798 provided that the master or owner of any
slave might appear in court at a trial of his servant and "make what
just defense he can for such slave." The only restriction was that
such defense should not interfere with the form of the trial.
Naturally the liberally disposed slaveholders interpreted this to mean
that they could employ counsel to defend their Negroes and it remained
a disputed question down to 1806, when the legislature made the
provisions more specific. By this new law it was provided that it was
not only the privilege but the duty of the owner of a slave who was
being prosecuted to employ an attorney to defend him. The owner
neglecting to do so the court must assign counsel to defend the slave
and the costs thereby incurred were to be charged to the owner. The
fee for defense was not to exceed $200 and if not forthcoming the
court was empowered to recover the amount in the manner of any other
debt of similar amount. It was plainly the intention of the
legislature to provide a just trial for any slave, for they even went
so far as to enact that the lawyer appointed by the court for the
prisoner should "defend such slave as in cases of free persons
prosecuted for felony by the laws of this state."[293]

When the slave was convicted of an offense which was punishable by
death but which was within the benefit of clergy the capital penalty
was not pronounced, but the offender was burnt in the hand or
inflicted with any other corporal penalty at the discretion of the
court. Should the criminal be sentenced to suffer death, thirty days
were to elapse before the execution, except where it was a case of
conspiracy, insurrection or rebellion. When the court had decided to
sentence the slave to the death penalty a valuation of the Negro was
made. This statement was to be turned over to the State auditor of
public accounts who was required to issue a warrant on the treasury
for the amount in favor of the owner of the convicted party. The owner
on his part was to turn over to the treasurer the certificate of the
clerk of the court showing that the slave had been condemned and the
statement of the sheriff that the offender had been executed or had
died before execution.[294]

This matter of the payment to the owner of the value of the executed
slave appears never to have been questioned to any extent even by the
abolitionists in the legislature until the session of 1830 when a bill
was introduced for the repeal of the law. The bill was lost but in the
course of the debate it was stated that while Kentucky contained over
160,000 slaves only about one fifth of the tax-paying whites were
slaveholders and that $68,000 had already been paid out of the State
treasury as indemnity for slaves executed. After the defeat of this
bill there was offered a substitute which proposed that a tax of one
fourth of one per cent should be levied upon the value of all slaves
in the State for the creation of a fund out of which to make such
disbursements, but this was likewise lost.[295]

Until 1811 there were no special enactments on slave crimes and their
punishments. The court had, therefore, more or less range in the
exactment of penalties but the legislature of 1811 passed during the
first fortnight of its session a specific law governing slave crimes.
Only four offenses were to be regarded as punishable by death: (1)
conspiracy and rebellion, (2) administering poison with intent to
kill, (3) voluntary manslaughter and (4) rape of a white woman. If any
slaves were to be found guilty of consulting or advising the murder of
any one, every such consultation was to constitute an offense and be
punishable by any number of stripes not exceeding one hundred.[296]

As time went on the list of capital crimes was increased as a natural
result of the growth of the slave population and their growing state
of unrest after the incoming of the anti-slavery propaganda. By the
close of the slavery era in Kentucky there were eleven offenses for
which slaves should suffer death: (1) murder, (2) arson, (3) rape of a
white woman, (4) robbery, (5) burglary, (6) conspiracy, (7)
administering poison with intent to kill, (8) manslaughter, (9)
attempting to commit rape on a white woman, (10) shooting at a white
person with intent to kill, and (11) wounding a white person with
intent to kill. It will readily be seen that from a practical
standpoint these eleven offenses can be narrowed down to eight. The
severity of the slave code can be shown by comparison of the capital
crimes for white persons at the same time. These were four in number,
(1) murder, (2) carnal abuse of a female under ten years of age, (3)
wilful burning of the penitentiary and (4) being an accessory to the
fact.[297]

Virginia had early enacted that slaves should be considered as real
estate in the settlement of inheritances. But the growing tendency to
look upon the slaves in all things else as personal chattels led to
such legal and popular confusion that the Virginia assembly often
observed that they were "real estate in some respects, personal in
others, and both in others." Regardless of such legal complexity it
was not until 1793 that it was enacted that "all negro and mulatto
slaves in all courts of judicature shall be held and adjudged to be
personal estate."

In drawing up the slave code of 1798 Kentucky disregarded the legal
experience of Virginia and her more recent remedial legislation and
enacted that "all negro, mulatto or Indian slaves, in all courts of
judicature and other places within this commonwealth, shall be held,
taken and adjudged to be real estate, and shall descend to the heirs
and widows of persons departing this life, as lands are directed to
descend." It was further provided, however, that "all such slaves
shall be liable to the payment of debts, and may be taken by execution
for that end, as other chattels, or personal estate may be."[298]

Such a law coupled with the legal precedents of Virginia served to
intensify the mixed property conception of the slave. The confusion,
however, was purely legal, for slaves were held in all other respects
as personalty; but in cases of inheritance and the probation of wills
the Kentucky Court of Appeals was often called upon to define clearly
the legal status of the Negro in bondage. The first important decision
was handed down in 1824 in the case of Chinn and wife _vs._ Respass,
in which it was pointed out that while slaves were by law made real
estate for the purpose of descent and dower, yet they had in law many
of the attributes of personal estate. They would pass by a nuncupative
will, and lands would not; they could be limited, in a grant or devise
no otherwise than personal chattels; and personal actions might be
brought to recover the possession of them. Furthermore "they were in
their nature personal estate, being moveable property, and as such
might attend the person of the proprietor wherever he went; and in
practice they were so considered by the people in general."[299]

Conversely, the court was often called upon to interpret the phrase
"personal estate" in wills and contracts, where it appeared without
any other restrictive expression or provision, and it consistently
held that the term should be construed as embracing slaves.[300]
Gradually the personal property conception began to secure even legal
precedence over that of real estate when the two interpretations came
into close conflict. This was accomplished by placing more stress on
the proviso in the original slave code, which placed slaves in the
hands of the administrator as assets for the payment of debts. This
led to increasing power for the executor who could even defeat the
title of the heirs, though the property may have been specifically
devised. Hence it was not surprising that in the Revised Statutes of
1852 it was provided that slaves should thereafter be deemed and held
as personal estate. Coming after all doubt of the personalty of slaves
had been removed by the decisions of the highest tribunal in the
State, this law meant little more than the repeal of the old statute
making slaves real estate.

The wonder is that Kentucky should have chosen to hold to an
antiquated legal conception for fifty years after Virginia had proved
its fallacy by her experience in the eighteenth century. While it did
little harm, it had few advantages. The existence of the theory was
chiefly noticeable in the frequent legal battles over technicalities
in the settlement of estates. In the popular mind slaves were always
considered personal property, and the spirit of the slave code itself
embodied that conception as regarded all things save the question of
inheritance.

With respect to the liberty of the slaves the code of 1798 clearly
shows that the existing type of slavery was purely rural, for the
restrictions on slaves concerned only the plantation Negroes. Strictly
understood, the slave was not to leave the farm of his owner without a
pass from his master, the main purpose being to keep the Negroes from
congregating on any one farm. Later when emissaries from the North
became unusually active the rights and privileges of the slaves were
further restricted. This change was due to the current belief that
these foreign individuals were bent upon stirring up strife among the
slaves and inciting them to insurrection. Once started such a scheme
would have resulted in anarchy especially in the towns. The real
curbing provisions were not started until along in the thirties when
these outside forces had begun to make their appearance in the urban
communities.[301]

In some parts of the State were instituted mounted patrols, who went
about at night and watched the movement of slaves. They were to
apprehend any servant who was caught away from his home plantation
without a pass from his master.[302] Such an institution was based on
good Negro psychology, for his fear of the spirits of night was well
known. Citizens of that time have told us many tales of the dread
which the slave had of meeting these night raiders whom they termed
"patter-rollers" and how they came to sing of them in true Negro
fashion:

    Over the fence and through the paster,
    Run, nigger, run, oh, run a little faster,
      Run, nigger, run,
    The patter-roller ketch you.

Such a system of county patrols did not prove to be sufficient as the
slave population grew and the towns became larger and more attractive
to the country slave. The legislature of 1834 in drawing up a law
concerning tavern keepers had this problem clearly in mind when they
provided that no person should sell, give or loan any spirituous
liquors to slaves, other than his own, under a penalty of $10 for
each offense. Furthermore, if the offender was a licensed liquor
dealer, he should have his license taken away from him for the term of
two years.[303] That even this measure did not prove effective enough
to curb the evil of Negroes congregating in the towns is shown by the
further provision passed March 6, 1850, to increase the fine to $50
for each offense.[304] A still further extension was that of February
27, 1856, which provided that free Negroes were to be included in the
restriction unless they presented a certificate from "some white
person of respectable character." No slaves or free Negroes were to be
employed in the selling or distribution of liquor nor were they to be
allowed to visit or even loaf around any place where intoxicants were
kept for sale.[305] The session of 1858 made the force of the law more
explicit by defining very clearly the jurisdiction in such cases.[306]

Not only the State authorities but the towns as well were active in
the measures adopted to meet the growing problem. The best available
sample of the many provisions which the town councils drew up is this
one which was passed by the trustees of Henderson in 1840:

     It shall be and is hereby made, the duty of the Town Sergeant or
     either of his assistants, to punish with any number of lashes not
     exceeding ten, all or any negro slave or slaves who may be found
     in any grog shop, grocery or other place where spirituous liquors
     are retailed in said town, or who may be found on the streets of
     said town after ten o'clock at night, unless it shall appear to
     the said Town Sergeant, or assistant, that said negro slave or
     slaves, are acting under the orders of his, her or their master
     or mistress, and it shall further be the duty of the Town
     Sergeant, or either of his assistants, to enter into any grog
     shop, grocery or other place where spirituous liquors are
     retailed, in said town, whenever he shall be informed that any
     negro slave or slaves are collected therein. Provided, said Town
     Sergeant, or assistant, can enter the same peaceably and without
     force.[307]

This town regulation offers perhaps another proof of the oft-repeated
statement regarding the slave laws of Kentucky that while they
appeared severe on the statute books they were always mild in the
enforcement. The regulation of the movement of slaves in the towns was
always subject to the local conditions. Beginning about 1850 there was
a growing feeling in some of the more thickly populated sections of
the State that the type of Negro slave who sought to frequent the
village saloons would sooner or later start an insurrection. But no
such uprising ever occurred and the fear of such seems to have been
due to the current animosity towards the activities of the
abolitionists, which was prevalent throughout the State.

In the course of time it was considered necessary to treat more
seriously also the importation of slaves. The advisability of
preventing the importation of bondmen had been foreseen in Kentucky
from the experience of the mother State of Virginia which had enacted
a stringent law in 1778 imposing a penalty of one thousand pounds and
the forfeiture of the slave upon the importer of any into that
commonwealth. The ninth article of the Kentucky Constitution of 1792
had provided that the legislature "shall have full power to prevent
slaves being brought into this commonwealth as merchandise; they shall
have full power to prevent any slave being brought into this state
from a foreign country, and to prevent those from being brought into
this state, who have been since the first of January, 1789, or may
hereafter be imported into any of the United States from a foreign
country."[308]

The session of the State assembly in 1794 drew up a law concerning the
importation and emancipation of slaves but it was largely a mere
modification of the law of the State of Virginia. It was not until the
adoption of the slave code of 1798 that the question was firmly
settled by a more definite statement. By article 25 of that act it was
provided "that no slave or slaves shall be imported into this state
from any foreign country, nor shall any slave who has been imported
into the United States from any foreign country since the first day of
January, 1789, or may hereafter be imported into the United States
from any foreign country under the penalty of $300."

This was merely carrying out the provisions of the constitution.
Section 26 provided that "no slave or slaves shall be imported into
this state as merchandise, and any person offending herein, shall
forfeit and pay the sum of $300 for each slave so imported, to be
recovered by action of debt or information, in any court having
cognizance of the same, one half to the prosecutor, the other half to
the use of the commonwealth." More significant was the proviso that
"this act shall not extend to prevent any citizen of this state
bringing for his own use, provided, they have not been brought into
the United States from any foreign country since January 1, 1789; nor
shall it be construed to prevent persons emigrating to this state
bringing their slaves with them, but either a citizen of this state or
persons emigrating to this state may bring slaves not prohibited by
this act."[309]

An act of 1814 amended the above by prohibiting the importation of
slaves by any of the emigrants if they did not intend to settle in
Kentucky.[310] An attempt was made by a law of February 8, 1815, to
remedy some of the defects which had been found. The legal penalty for
importation was increased to $600 for each slave imported and a fine
of $200 was added for every person buying or selling such slave. No
indictment was to be subject to a shorter limitation than five years
and once so accused no person was to be discharged or acquitted unless
he could produce evidence to show that within sixty days of his
arrival in Kentucky he had deposited the following oath, duly signed,
in the county clerk's office where he resides: "I, ...., do swear that
my removal to the state of Kentucky was with the intention of
becoming a citizen thereof, and that I have brought no slave or
slaves to this state, with the intention of selling them."[311]

It is evident from all contemporary discussions of the question of
importation that it was the firm conviction that in order to do
justice to the slave and the institution as a whole within the State
it was necessary to prevent the infusion of any foreign slave element.
Once such a policy had been carried out to a successful conclusion,
they would have been confronted only with a purely domestic type of
slavery and its increase. With such an ideal condition, for those
times, the institution eventually would have been easily handled. But
these early lawmakers, while no doubt honest in their intentions, did
not have the wisdom that was tempered with experience, and the
unscrupulous slave traders found further defects in the law and took
advantage of them. A careful examination of the law of 1794, the
codification of 1798, and the amendments of 1814 and 1815 will show
that the whole theory of non-importation is summed up in the word
_intent_. It was the intent with which the slaves were introduced, and
to this alone the penalty attached. They were not to be imported as
merchandise but every citizen could import slaves for his own use.
Once these slaves were within the State there was no penalty provided
if they were sold. There was nothing to prevent a man from selling
what slaves he had imported and later going without the confines of
the State and bringing in more. If he were brought before the court,
he would claim that he had not intended to sell them when they were
brought in, and no one could place a penalty on his intentions. It
seems that there were other violators of the spirit of the law, who
never sold any of the slaves but brought them into the State in large
numbers and then hired them out for such long terms as 99 years.[312]
The fundamental idea of the law had been to place a curb on the
increase of the slave population by importation and these acts were in
direct opposition to the intention of the enactments.

An index of the inefficiency of the existing provisions regarding
importation can be found in the figures on the growth of the slave
population during this period when it is borne in mind that legally
slaves could not be imported, except for personal use, after the year
1794. The slave population in 1790 had been 11,830 and by 1800 had
increased to 40,343 or at the rate of 241.02 per cent; in 1810 there
were 80,561 slaves or an increase of 99.69 per cent; in 1820 there
were 126,732, a gain of 57.31 per cent; and by 1830 they had increased
30.36 per cent to a total of 165,213. During the same period there was
a great increase in the white population but it was always from 20 per
cent to 40 per cent below that of the slaves. It appears that the law
prohibiting importation was not as effective as it should have been.
While none of the statesmen appear to have figured from the
statistical viewpoint there was no end of discussion regarding the
necessity of extending the law to include more than the question of
intent at the time of importation.

The avowed resolution of Kentucky to deal with the slavery question in
the most humane manner and to stop any unscrupulous dealing in slaves
for the mere sake of profit is nowhere more clearly shown than in the
firm action which was taken not only in the court room but in the
legislative halls when it was found that advantage had been taken of
the letter of the law at the expense of its spirit. On February 2,
1833, the legislature passed a law prohibiting all importation of
slaves even for personal use. The only exception provided in this case
was that emigrants were allowed to bring in slaves, if they took the
oath that had been provided in the law of 1815. The evil mentioned
above brought about by hiring slaves for excessively long terms was
prohibited by declaring illegal any contract which extended beyond one
year and exacting a penalty of $600 for each offense. This law of 1833
was destined to be the crux of many a heated argument for the
remainder of the slavery period. Many a candidate for office during
the next thirty years rose to victory or fell in defeat because of
his position with regard to this one statute of the State. It was the
briefest of all the enactments on the slavery question but it was by
far the most important and far-reaching provision that the legislature
ever enacted in connection with the institution.[313]

It is noticeable that this measure was not brought about in any sense
by the activities of the abolitionists, for they had not at that time
made their appearance in the State. It was an honest endeavor on
the part of the native population, slaveholding as well as
non-slaveholding, to carry out the spirit of their State constitution
which had been adopted back in 1792. Thomas F. Marshall, who later was
the leader of the Lexington group which removed Cassius M. Clay's
_True American_ to Cincinnati, has borne testimony to the fact that
the slaveholding element voted for the law of 1833. "At the time of
the passage of this law," said he, "the sect known by the title of
'abolitionists' had not made their appearance. And, as I was sworn
then upon the constitution of my country, by all the obligations of
that oath, I affirm now that I do not believe that the principles and
designs ascribed to that party were in the contemplation of any human
being who voted for the law. I was myself not only never an
abolitionist, but never an emancipationist upon any plan which I ever
heard proposed."[314]

But the question was not settled for all time, for with the coming of
the abolitionist element there was a general tendency throughout the
State to enact stricter laws governing slaves. Many who had voted for
the enactment began to cry for a repeal of the law, but it was not
until the session of 1841 that it was seriously debated in the general
assembly. Then after a long and ardent discussion in the House of
Representatives a vote was taken on the ninth of January--with 34 in
favor of the repeal and 53 against it. Never within the previous
decade had a bill before the House produced such popular
interest.[315] It came up in the Senate at the session of 1843 but
after another warm debate it failed by a vote of 14 to 21. Sentiment
for the repeal continued to grow and in 1849 the law was amended so as
"no longer to prohibit persons from purchasing and bringing into the
State slaves for their own use."[316] This changed the situation back
to what it was before 1833, for it will be recalled that the main
feature of the law of 1833 compared with that of 1815 was the
prohibition of importation even for personal use. It could easily have
been predicted that such an amendment would pass, for the legislature
of 1847 had passed 27 distinct resolutions granting to as many
individuals the right to import slaves for personal use. The session
of 1848 made 24 similar provisions.

This apparently radical swing towards the side of the slave owner in
1849 was more than likely brought about by the very intense campaign
which was carried on by the emancipationists. Such a movement served
to unite the slave forces against any attack upon the institution.
This tendency was shown not only in the halls of the State legislature
but in the constitutional convention which met later in the same year.
Although the abolitionists had looked forward to some advanced
constitutional provisions on emancipation and the inclusion of the law
of 1833 in the organic law of the State they were astounded to be met
with the virtual repeal of that statute by the legislature. On the
other hand the constitutional convention not only rejected bodily all
the reform measures but added to the Bill of Rights this extraordinary
amendment: "The right of property is before and higher than any
constitutional sanction, and the right of the owner of a slave to such
slave and its increase is the same and as inviolable as the right of
the owner of any property whatsoever."

The slave trader once more had the courage to appear in the State.
Richard Henry Collins in an editorial in the _Maysville Eagle_,
November 6, 1849, gives us some vivid evidence of the effect which the
repeal of the law of 1833 had had in a few weeks' time. "A remarkably
forcible and practical argument in favor of incorporating the negro
law of 1833 into the new constitution reached this city in bodily
shape on Sunday, per the steamer _Herman_ from Charleston, Virginia.
Forty-four negroes--men, women and children--of whom seventeen men had
handcuffs on one hand and were chained together, two and two, passed
through this city for the interior of the State, under charge of two
regular traders. We opine that few who saw the spectacle would
hereafter say aught against the readoption of the anti-importation act
of 1833." Such scenes as this were the result of the passage of an
innocent-looking measure which allowed citizens to import slaves for
their own use, but which could really be made to include almost any
influx of slaves.

No further change in the importation laws was made until the crisis
immediately preceding the Civil War, when practically all opposition
was removed and the law of 1833 was abolished in its entirety.[317]
Explanations of the sudden turn of mind are not hard to find for the
enactment was passed amid the turmoil and chaos brought on by an
impending war and the radical slaveholders found it easy to get votes
for their side in a last vain endeavor to save the institution, not so
much from an economic standpoint as from a matter of principle. The
last chapter in the legal history of the importation problem in
Kentucky, however, had not yet been written. After three years of the
armed conflict between the North and the South, Kentucky, which had
remained loyal to the Union and fought against the slave power of the
South, reenacted on February 2, 1864, the old law of 1798 on the
prohibition of the importation of slaves.[318] The wording was
somewhat different, but the essential provisions were the same.
Coming at such a time, it never had any significance in the slavery
problem in the State, but it is interesting as one of the last vain
efforts of the institution before it was mustered out of the State by
an amendment to the federal constitution, which was passed without the
assent of the State legislature of Kentucky.

No less serious than the question of importation was the problem of
the fugitive slave. This has been treated many times and every
discussion of it has involved much of what transpired in Kentucky or
on its borders. It is not the purpose here to repeat any of that story
because it belongs rather to the anti-slavery field, and, furthermore,
has been recently very well treated by A. E. Martin in his
_Anti-slavery Movement in Kentucky_. We are here concerned with the
legal phase of the fugitive problem as it existed in Kentucky
throughout this period, as an internal question; in the relation
between the State and other States; and between the State and the
federal authorities. In so far as it relates to the law within the
State such a discussion naturally divides itself into two
phases--those measures which affected the fugitive slave himself, and
those which were directed towards conspirators who might have brought
about the escape of slaves. The former group of laws were enacted, for
the most part, in the early days of statehood, for a runaway slave was
a natural evil in any condition of servitude. The latter group of
measures were passed in the later days of the institution when the
anti-slavery propagandists came in from the North, for until then
there were no cases of enticement. A large majority of those who were
placed on trial for conspiracy in the history of slavery in Kentucky
proved to be outsiders who had come into the State after 1835. The
citizens of the commonwealth who were opposed to the institution were
satisfied to confine themselves to mere words advocating the
emancipation of slaves.

The State early adopted the slave code of Virginia in regard to the
treatment of runaway slaves just as it did in regard to the general
legal rights of the bonded Negro but provided more drastic regulations
in 1798. Any person who suspected a Negro of being a runaway slave
could take him before a justice of the peace, and swear to his belief
in the guilt of the accused. Being provided with a certificate from
the justice where he found the slave, the apprehender could then take
the fugitive back to the owner and might collect ten shillings as a
reward and an additional shilling for each mile of travel necessary in
bringing the slave to the master. If the money should not be paid, the
person entitled to it could recover the sum in any court of record in
the State upon the production of his certificate of apprehension as
legal evidence.[319]

In many cases the runaway could not be identified as the property of
any particular owner, so provision was made for the commitment of the
offender to the county jail. The keeper was forthwith to post a
bulletin on the courthouse with a complete description of the Negro.
If at the end of two months no claimant appeared the sheriff was to
publish an advertisement in the _Lexington Gazette_ for three
consecutive months so that the news of capture would reach a larger
public. In the meantime the sheriff was authorized to hire out the
fugitive and the wages thus received were to pay for the reward of the
captor and the expenses incurred by the county officials. If the owner
appeared during the period and proved his property, he could have the
slave at once in spite of any labor contract, providing he would pay
any excess of expenses over wages received. But often the master never
appeared and if a year had expired since the last advertisement had
been published in the _Gazette_, the sheriff could sell the slave and
place the proceeds of the sale plus the wages received over the
expenses, in the county treasury. This sum was credited to the unknown
owner, for if he should appear at any future time the county would
reimburse him for his loss, otherwise the fund reverted to the
county.[320]

This legal code for the apprehension of runaway slaves remained
practically unchanged throughout the period of slavery. The only
amendments which were ever made were those for the increase of the
reward to the captor and it is significant that the first of these
changes did not come until more than a generation later in 1835. Then
the compensation was divided into three classes: for those captured in
their own county, $10; in another county, $20; out of the State,
$30.[321] Just three years later it was found necessary to increase
this by the following interesting law: "The compensation for
apprehending fugitive slaves taken without this commonwealth, and in a
State where slavery is not tolerated by law, shall be one hundred
dollars, on the delivery to the owner at his residence within this
commonwealth, and seventy-five dollars if lodged in the jail of any
county in this commonwealth, and the owner be notified so as to be
able to reclaim the slave."[322] There were no more advances until a
law of March 3, 1860, increased the reward to one hundred and fifty
dollars if the slave were caught outside the State and brought back to
the home county; one hundred and twenty-five dollars if caught outside
the State and brought back to any county in Kentucky; and twenty
dollars if caught anywhere in the home county.

The trend of these laws, from the viewpoint of the rewards alone,
shows the increasing importance of the fugitive problem to the
slaveholding group. It is noticeable that from the year 1798 until
1835 there was not sufficient pressure upon the State legislature to
increase the reward to the captor of a runaway. It is further evident
from the scarcity of contemporary advertisements that there were
comparatively few Negroes who ventured forth from the neighborhood of
their masters. But with the rise of the anti-slavery movement in the
North and the growth of abolition sentiment as expressed by the
apostles of Negro freedom who had come from across the Ohio, the
slaves tended to run away in ever-increasing numbers. This was soon
followed by a more rigid policy of apprehension upon the part of the
Kentucky legal authorities, apparent in the increasing reward.

Not all cases of fugitives were to be reached by a mere system of
capture and reward. Barely did a slave make his escape into a free
State without the aid of some one in sympathy with him. Hence the need
for legal machinery to punish those who assisted runaways. From a
chronological point of view the laws governing such cases divide
themselves into two parts; in the early days they refer to those who
would help a slave who had already escaped; in the later period they
were directed towards those who induced slaves to leave their home
plantations.

Whichever of the free States he tried to reach it was necessary for
the Negro to cross the Ohio River to get to his haven of refuge. If
the Kentucky authorities could prevent him from crossing the stream on
the northern and western boundary, they could prevent any slave from
making a successful escape. Consequently the legislature as early as
1823 attempted to solve the problem by passing a law forbidding
masters of vessels and others from employing and removing Negroes out
of the State.[323] This act prevented runaways from securing work on a
steamboat with the specific purpose of leaving once they were on free
soil. But as usual this enactment was not effective, because there was
a loop-hole in it. The State assembly in 1831, therefore, provided
that no ferryman on the Ohio River should transport slaves across from
Kentucky. No other person, not owning or keeping a ferry, was to be
permitted to set slaves over, or to loan them boats or watercraft.
Slaves could only cross the river when they had the written consent of
their masters. Each and every owner of a ferry was required to give
bond in the sum of $3,000 to carry out the spirit of the law; and for
every violation he was subject to a fine of $200.[324]

Not content with their previous efforts the general assembly of 1838
went still further and prohibited slaves from going as passengers on
mail stages or coaches anywhere within the State, except upon the
written request of their owners, or in the master's company. The
liability for the enforcement of the law rested upon the stage
proprietors, who were to be fined $100 for each slave illegally
transported.[325]

No stringent laws were made against the enticement of slaves to run
away until 1830 when the abolitionists first began to appear. Until
that time there seems to have been no need for any legal enactment
regarding the question. The only trouble previously had been with the
whites and free Negroes who aided a slave already on his way to the
North. It was in response to the popular demand that on January 28,
1830, the State legislature provided severe penalties for any person
found guilty of (1) enticing a slave to leave his owner, (2)
furnishing a forged paper of freedom, (3) assisting a slave to escape
out of the State, (4) enticing a slave to run away, or (5) concealing
a runaway slave. Should a person be suspected of any one of these
offenses and not be found guilty, he was to give security for his good
behavior to avoid all accusation in the future.[326]

The most interesting legal case based on this law was that of Delia
Webster, a young lady from Vermont, who was tried in the Fayette
Circuit Court in December, 1844, for the enticement of a Negro slave
boy from Lexington. The details of the trial show that the court was
just and fair in spite of the fact that both Miss Webster and her
copartner, Calvin Fairbank, were not citizens of the State and had
furthermore used all kinds of deceit to accomplish their purpose. For
the sake of aiding one Negro slave boy to reach freedom they went to
the expense and trouble to feign an elopement to Ohio via Maysville,
but the Lexington authorities caught them as they were coming back on
the Lexington Pike near Paris. At the trial it was shown that
Fairbank was in Kentucky for no other reason than to induce slaves to
escape to the North and that Miss Webster had come to Lexington as a
school teacher merely as a cloak for her abolitionist work. The
evidence offered by the prosecution was damaging in the extreme. The
defense put forth no data for her side at all, evidently preferring to
be hailed as a martyr to the cause for which she stood. The jury
brought in a verdict of guilty and she was sentenced to serve two
years in the State penitentiary.[327]

The young accomplice, Calvin Fairbank, proved to be the most
persistent abolitionist the Kentucky authorities ever encountered. He
pleaded guilty to the indictment as charged and was sentenced to serve
15 years in the penitentiary, to which he was taken February 18, 1845.
Evidently convinced that he had been punished sufficiently Governor
John J. Crittenden pardoned him August 23, 1849, on condition that he
leave the State at once.[328] But such an ardent young enthusiast for
the cause of Negro freedom soon found that there were other slaves who
were in need of his aid and on November 3, 1851, he came across from
Jeffersonville to Louisville under the cover of night and "kidnapped"
a young mulatto woman who had been doomed to be sold at auction.[329]
Presumably in the hope of rescuing other slaves he remained in the
vicinity for several days until on the morning of November 9 he was
arrested by the Kentucky authorities. Fairbank was placed in jail
pending his trial, which took place in the following March, when he
was again sentenced to serve 15 years at hard labor in the State
penitentiary. He began his term March 9, 1852.[330] This time he was
not so fortunate in an early release. The chief executives of the
State from time to time refused to pardon him. In April, 1864,
Governor Bramlette was called to Washington by President Lincoln for
a conference and Richard T. Jacobs, the Lieutenant-Governor, became
the acting Governor. This son-in-law of Thomas H. Benton had taken
more or less pity on Fairbank, for he had stated to the prisoner that
if he ever became the chief executive he would release him. The
opportunity thus being presented for the first time, Jacob pardoned
Fairbank on April 15, 1864, after a continuous imprisonment of twelve
years. Such was the experience in Kentucky of an ardent northern
abolitionist who boasted that he had "liberated forty-seven slaves
from hell."[331]

The systematic stealing of slaves from Kentucky had begun about 1841
and at the time of the Webster and Fairbank trial was at its height.
This movement was one of the results growing out of the animosity
created by another legal case which occurred in 1838--that of the Rev.
John B. Mahan of Brown County, Ohio. This Methodist minister, although
living in the State of Ohio, was indicted by the grand jury of Mason
County, Kentucky, for having aided in the escape of certain slaves.
Governor Clark, of Kentucky, then issued a requisition on the Governor
of Ohio for Mahan as a "fugitive from justice." Upon receipt of the
demand, the chief executive of Ohio immediately issued a warrant for
the arrest of the minister. A short time later he became convinced
that this step had been too hasty, because Mahan had never been in
Kentucky. His offense had merely consisted in helping runaways along
the "underground railroad," once they were on free soil.

Hence, Governor Vance sent a special messenger to the chief executive
of Kentucky redemanding the alleged fugitive from justice. Governor
Clark made this very cordial and diplomatic reply:

     The position assumed by you in relation to the fact of Mahan
     having never been within the limits of Kentucky is clearly
     correct, and if upon the legal investigation of the case it be
     found true, he will doubtless be acquitted. I feel great
     solicitude that this citizen of your state, who has been arrested
     and brought to Kentucky, upon my requisition, shall receive
     ample and full justice, and that, if upon legal investigation he
     be found innocent of the crime alleged against him, he shall be
     released and set at liberty. I will, therefore, address a letter
     to the judge and commonwealth attorney of the Mason Circuit,
     communicating to them the substance of your letter, and the
     evidence which you have transmitted to me.[332]

The efforts of the Governor of Ohio were eventually successful, for in
spite of his slaveholding sympathies Governor Clark wrote to the judge
of the Mason Circuit and the latter charged the jury in no uncertain
terms regarding the jurisdiction in the case. After a trial of six
days Mahan was acquitted.

The importance of this case does not rest in the trial and its events
but rather in the reactions which it had upon the Kentucky populace.
No one doubted that Mahan was guilty of aiding slaves; but it was seen
that he had been shrewd enough to confine his activities to the State
of Ohio, where the Kentucky authorities had no jurisdiction. In his
opening message to the State legislature, which met the next month
after the acquittal of Mahan, Governor Clark voiced the sentiment of a
large majority of Kentuckians. Bear in mind that these words came from
the same man who a month before had advised the Circuit judge of the
illegality of the Mahan indictment.

     Some of the abolitionists of an adjoining state, not contented
     with the mere promulgation of opinions and views calculated to
     excite a feeling of disaffection among our slave population, and
     to render this description of property insecure in the hands of
     its proprietors, have extended their operations so far as to
     mingle personally with our slaves, to enter into arrangements
     with them, and to afford them the means and facilities to escape
     from their owners. This flagitious conduct is not to be
     tolerated--it must be checked in its origin by the adoption of
     efficient and energetic measures, or it will, in all human
     probability, lead to results greatly to be deprecated by every
     friend to law and order. This demon-like spirit that rages
     uncontrolled by law, or sense of moral right, must be
     overcome--it must be subdued; its action in the state should be
     prohibited under such penalties as will effectually curb its
     lawlessness and disarm its power.[333]

In pursuance of this and similar recommendations the State legislature
early in 1839 despatched a delegation of members to the general
assembly of Ohio then meeting at Columbus. These men were charged to
secure a law in Ohio for the better security of Kentucky fugitive
slave property. The Kentucky officials had always been confronted with
the problem of recovering runaways captured in Ohio, even when they
personally knew the captive. The old law of 1807 in Ohio was never lax
in the enforcement, but the plea of habeas corpus was habitually used
for the defendant and, furthermore, it often happened that the
necessary proofs of ownership were not in evidence. These facts
coupled with the publicity of the Mahan trial brought about the
peculiar legislative commission from Kentucky.

Here was a delegation from a slave commonwealth sent to a free State
to demand a rigorous fugitive slave law for their own benefit. The
Kentucky committee went even further and suggested the provisions of
the proposed enactment--and the remarkable thing was that they
actually succeeded. Although Ohio was known to be the home of
anti-slavery interests the law passed without any difficulty. By its
provisions a slave owner or his agent could appear before any judge,
justice or mayor, who was authorized to issue a warrant to any sheriff
in Ohio calling upon him to arrest the fugitive and bring him before
any judge in the county where caught. Upon proof of his ownership to
the court the owner was entitled to a certificate for removal. A heavy
fine and imprisonment were the penalty for any interference with the
execution of either the warrant or the removal of the slave. The vote
on this measure in the House of Representatives was 53 to 15. There
has been made an analysis of this roll call, which shows that the
opposition all came from northern Ohio--whereas those in the southern
part of the State voted for it because they were not inclined to allow
any disturbance of the friendly commercial relationship which they had
with their neighbor State to the south. Moreover, they objected to
their locality being used as a place of refuge for unfortunate
Negroes.[334]

Henceforth Ohio became a veritable hunting ground for fugitive slaves,
but the wiser of the Negroes and the abolitionists diverted their
efforts to other fields of escape, especially through Indiana and
Illinois. The legal authorities at this time began to realize that
their hope lay in the enactment of a federal law but no definite steps
were taken until after the affair of Francis Troutman at Marshall,
Michigan, in January, 1847. Troutman came from Kentucky to Michigan to
bring back six runaways that had been located at Marshall. When he had
found them and was about to take them before a magistrate for
identification, a crowd of citizens of the town put in their
appearance and threatened injury to Troutman and his three Kentucky
companions. Although the latter were acting in accordance with the law
the mob would not let them proceed in any manner--not even to appear
before the magistrate--but demanded that they leave town within two
hours. In the meantime they were all four arrested, tried and found
guilty of trespass.[335] When these events were reported back to
Kentucky mass meetings were held throughout the State in protest
against the Michigan action. The State legislature drew up a
resolution calling upon Congress to enact a new fugitive slave
law.[336] The Senate referred the petition to the Committee on
Judiciary and they later reported a new fugitive slave bill which was
read twice and then pigeonholed. The same action was repeated at the
next session in 1849.

The general feeling in Kentucky was intensified just at this time by a
decision of the United States Supreme Court in the case of Jones _vs._
Van Zandt, which had been pending in various courts for five years. In
April, 1842, John Van Zandt, a former Kentuckian, then living in
Springdale just north of Cincinnati, was caught in the act of aiding
nine fugitive slaves to escape, and one of them got away even from the
slave catchers. Consequently Wharton Jones, the Kentucky owner,
brought suit against Van Zandt in the U. S. Circuit Court under the
federal fugitive slave act of 1793 for $500 for concealing and
harboring a fugitive slave. The jury returned a verdict for the
plaintiff in the sum of $1,200 as damages on two other counts in
addition to the penalty of $500 for concealing and harboring. Salmon
P. Chase was the lawyer for Van Zandt and in a violent attack on the
law 1793 he appealed to the U. S. Supreme Court on the grounds that
this statute was repugnant to the Constitution of the United States
and to the sixth article of the Ordinance of 1787. Van Zandt in the
appeal had the advantage of the services of William H. Seward in
addition to Chase while Jones was represented by Senator Morehead, of
Kentucky. Justice Levi Woodbury in rendering the decision of the court
sustained all the judgments against Van Zandt and denied that the law
of 1793 was opposed to either the Constitution or the Ordinance of
1787.[337]

At last the people of Kentucky had secured a firm ruling from the
highest judicial authority on the force of the existing laws. Cold
reason in the light of that day, apart from all anti-slavery
propaganda, justified them in making these demands. Henceforth, there
was no doubt about the legality of their position--it was a question
merely of the illegal opposition to the return of fugitives from the
States to the North. The Troutman case and many others, however, had
served as an index of northern sentiment in the matter, for the
troubles of the Kentucky slaveholder were just beginning. A year
later, in 1848, a requisition was issued on the Governor of Ohio for
the return of fifteen persons charged with aiding in the escape of
slaves. Imagine the feeling in Kentucky when Governor Bell of Ohio
positively refused to give these persons up, stating that the laws of
Ohio did not recognize man as property. It was apparently a political
move on his part, for there was no question of the property conception
of slavery involved whatsoever. He acted in direct opposition to the
laws of his State enacted in 1839 and to the federal fugitive slave
law of 1793.

After two decades of struggle the abolitionists had come into their
own and it was almost impossible to recover slaves who had run away in
spite of the legal machinery that had been set up. Furthermore, the
more extreme abolitionists had disregarded all law, orders and rights
of private property and had even gone so far as to proclaim that there
was a "higher law than the Constitution." Against such a powerful foe
the forces of all parties in Kentucky united in a firm stand,
demanding more stringent measures. The Supreme Court had decided that
the existing law was sufficient to recover fugitives and to demand and
secure damages for the interference with that right. With the coming
of new conditions, however, it was realized on all sides that new and
most extreme measures were necessary.

The existing circumstances are well shown by the attitude of Henry
Clay, senator from Kentucky as well as author of the Compromise of
1850. Noted for his leanings towards the North, throughout his public
career of more than half a century, and as far back as 1798 the
advocate of gradual emancipation in Kentucky, he felt called upon in
this crisis to express the irritation of his own people:

     I have very little doubt, indeed, that the extent of loss to the
     state of Kentucky, in consequence of the escape of her slaves is
     greater, at least in proportion to the total number of slaves
     that are held within that commonwealth, even than in Virginia. I
     know full well, and so does the honorable senator from Ohio know,
     that it is at the utmost hazard and insecurity to life itself,
     that a Kentuckian can cross the river and go into the interior to
     take back his fugitive slave from whence he fled. Recently an
     example occurred even in the city of Cincinnati in respect to one
     of our most respectable citizens. Not having visited Ohio at all,
     but Covington, on the opposite side of the river, a little slave
     of his escaped over to Cincinnati. He pursued it; he found it in
     the house in which it was concealed; he took it out, and it was
     rescued by the violence and force of a negro mob from his
     possession--the police of the city standing by, and either
     unwilling or unable to afford the assistance which was requisite
     to enable him to recover his property.

     Upon this subject I do think that we have just and serious cause
     of complaint against the free states. I think they fail in
     fulfilling a great obligation, and the failure is precisely upon
     one of those subjects which in its nature is the most irritating
     and inflaming to those who live in the slave states.[338]

The Fugitive Slave Law of 1793 was superseded by that of 1850 by a
sort of political bargaining on the other measures of the Compromise.
The letter of the new law was not much different from the one of
1793--the chief changes being in the exaction of severer penalties and
the transfer of jurisdiction to the federal courts. But even if
members from the North did vote for the new provision there was no
public sentiment in the North back of its enforcement. Everyone in
Kentucky was heartily in favor of it, but that mattered little. The
effectiveness of any fugitive slave law depended upon the spirit in
which it was met in the North, for it was there that the law was to be
applied. It remained for a more or less forgotten decision of the
Supreme Court in 1861 to show the greatest weakness of all laws for
the recovery of runaway slaves in the North.

In October, 1859, the Woodford County (Kentucky) grand jury returned
an indictment against Willis Lago, a free Negro, charging him with the
seduction and enticement of Charlotte, a Negro slave, from her owner,
C. W. Nickols. A copy of this indictment certified and authenticated
according to the federal law was presented to the Governor of Ohio by
the authorized agent of the Governor of Kentucky and the arrest and
delivery of the fugitive from justice demanded. The Governor of Ohio
referred the matter to the Attorney-General of the State and upon his
advice the chief executive refused to deliver up the Negro. The
Supreme Court having original jurisdiction in suits between two
States, the demand for a mandamus to compel the Governor of Ohio to
deliver Lago to the Kentucky authorities was heard by that body in a
suit under the title of Kentucky _vs._ Dennison (the Governor of
Ohio). The decision of the court was rendered by Chief Justice Taney
and it contained five important statements: (1) "It was the duty of
the executive authority of Ohio upon the demand made by the Governor
of Kentucky, and the production of the indictment, duly certified to
cause Lago to be delivered up to the agent of the Governor of
Kentucky, who was appointed to demand and receive him." (2) "The duty
of the Governor of Ohio was merely ministerial, and he had no right to
exercise any discretionary power as to the nature or character of the
crime charged in the indictment." (3) "The word 'duty' in the act of
1793 means the moral obligation of the state to perform the compact,
in the Constitution, when Congress had, by that act, regulated the
mode in which the duty should be performed." (4) "But Congress cannot
coerce a state officer, as such, to perform any duty by act of
Congress. The state officer may perform if he thinks proper, and it
may be a moral duty to perform it. But if he refuses, no law of
Congress can compel him." (5) "The Governor of Ohio cannot, through
the judiciary or any other department of the general government, be
compelled to deliver up Lago; and upon that ground only this motion
for a mandamus is overruled."[339]

This decision came as a fitting climax to the legal history of the
fugitive slave problem as it concerned Kentucky. Such an
interpretation placed by the highest judicial authority upon an act of
Congress which had stood throughout the slavery era in Kentucky showed
beyond any doubt whatever that the legal battle over slavery questions
was at an end. If any solution was to be found in the future it would
not be in the legislative halls nor in the court room.

Emancipation was an important question closely connected with that of
the fugitive. This was one of the problems to be discussed in the
Constitutional Convention of 1792. There were some few members who
were in favor of immediate liberation and others inclined towards a
scheme of gradual release of the Negro from bondage. But, as has been
shown in the early part of this chapter, the group in favor of the
existing institution easily dominated the convention and drew up the
famous article IX, which remained without change throughout the
slavery era as a part of the fundamental constitutional law. It is
significant that it was provided that the legislature should have no
power to pass laws for the emancipation of slaves without the consent
of their owners, or without paying their owners, previous to such
emancipation, a full equivalent in money, for the slaves so
emancipated: that the legislature should not pass laws to permit the
owners of slaves to emancipate them, saving the rights of creditors,
and preventing them from becoming a charge to the counties in which
they resided.

From a purely objective viewpoint it is doubtful if a fairer legal
guide for the institution of slavery in relation to the rights of
emancipation could have been drawn up. On one side, it prevented the
State authorities from depriving a slaveholder of his property without
due compensation. On the other hand, no unscrupulous master was to
free his old and invalid slaves and thereby inflict the burden of
their support upon the community as a whole. But this constitutional
provision had no legal force in itself. It was to serve as a guide for
the enactment of statute laws later.

The State assembly on December 17, 1794, proceeded to the enactment of
the first emancipation law of the State. The contents of Article IX of
the Constitution were carefully followed and the detailed legal code
of emancipation laid down in these words:

     It shall be lawful for any person by his or her last will and
     testament, or by any other instrument in writing, under his or
     her hand and seal, attested and proved in the county court by
     two witnesses, or acknowledged by the party in the court of the
     county where he or she resides, to emancipate or set free his or
     her slave or slaves: who shall thereupon be entirely and fully
     discharged from the performance of any contract entered into
     during servitude, and enjoy as full freedom as if they had been
     born free. And the said court shall have full power to demand
     bond and sufficient security of the emancipator, his or her
     executors or administrators, as the case may be, for the
     maintenance of any slave or slaves that may be aged or infirm,
     either of body or mind, to prevent their becoming chargeable to
     the county. And every slave so emancipated shall have a
     certificate of freedom from the clerk of such court on parchment
     with the county seal affixed thereto, for which the clerk shall
     charge the emancipator five shillings; saving, however, the
     rights of creditors and every person or persons, bodies politic
     and corporate, except the heirs or legal representatives of the
     person so emancipating their slaves.[340]

This law remained throughout the slavery period in Kentucky and the
only changes which were ever made in it were in the minor details to
untangle some legal ambiguities. The law of 1823, however, is
important in showing the discrepancies of the original provisions. By
this amendment it was enacted that when the county courts received
proof or acknowledgment of a deed of emancipation, or of a will
emancipating slaves, they were to note on their record a description
of any such slaves. The certificate of freedom which was given to the
Negro was also to contain this description and no other certificate
was to be issued except on the presentation of proof that the first
one had been lost or when such was required for use as evidence in
some suit. If any slave thus liberated was found to have presented his
certificate to another still held in bondage with a design of freeing
him, the emancipated slave was to suffer severe penalties.[341] These
added provisions apparently came to fill all the gaps in the previous
law and no further amendments of importance were needed to make the
laws of emancipation run smoothly.

Of all the many slavery cases which were brought before the Court of
Appeals in the next thirty years it is interesting to note that nearly
all of them concerned themselves more or less with the question of
freedom. The very fact that they reached the highest court is also
conclusive evidence that the law was not quite as clear as one would
at first suppose. Close study of the findings of the court will show
that the judiciary was always consistent in its interpretation of the
law and that most of the cases were carried up from the lower courts
because of disputes between the heirs of an estate and the
administrator as to their precedence in the matter of slaves. This
part of the controversy concerned itself with the property conception
of the slave, whether he was real or personal estate, which was
discussed earlier in this chapter. The purely emancipation cases
before the Court of Appeals divide themselves into three parts: (1)
those which concerned the interpretation of the statute law, (2) those
suits for freedom which were based on the question of residence and
(3) those which involved persons detained as slaves.

Most of the first class of cases concerned themselves with the
emancipation of slaves by will. The number of slaveholders who freed
their Negroes during their own lifetime seems to have been very small.
On the other hand, from a study of the slave cases in court it appears
to have been a very common thing for an owner to provide for the
freedom of his slaves in his will. The right of a master to dispose of
his own property was beyond dispute, but, as is often the case, the
heirs were seldom satisfied and they brought the will into court on
one or more technical grounds in an attempt to break the document
which freed so much valuable property. The court in every case held
that the right of the owner was absolute and that if by the letter of
his will his slaves were freed, that right was subject to no dispute.
Furthermore, when the Negroes were thus emancipated they did not pass
to the personal representatives of the deceased, as assets. They
passed by will just as land, and the devise took effect at the death
of the testator, whether it be a devise to the slave, of his freedom,
or of the slave, to another. The servant, thus affected, had only to
appear before the county court and establish his emancipation. This
accomplished, it was the duty of the court to give him a certificate
of freedom without the consent of the representatives of the
emancipator.[342] The right of disposal rested with the owner, who
could emancipate by act, or by will, and he who denied the right
or placed any claim against it was compelled to show the
prohibition.[343]

While the owner had absolute powers of disposal of his own slaves he
could not draw up a will of prospective freedom which would hold in
spite of the rights of his heirs. If a master desired to be very
lenient with his servants, he had to make their freedom absolute and
in writing. This was well brought out in the case of an apparently
kind-hearted Kentucky slaveholder who provided in his will that his
slaves were to select their own master without regard to price. They
chose as their future owner a man who did not need them, but who
offered to take them at about half their real value. The court held
that in such a case the executor was not bound to accept the offer,
since the interests of those entitled to the proceeds of the sale, as
well as the desire and comfort of the slaves, were to be
regarded.[344] Another owner had the right idea, but defeated his own
intentions by willing all his forty slaves to the Kentucky
Colonization Society. The court held that such an act by no means
freed the slaves and that by the laws of the State until they were
free they could be hired out and the proceeds considered as a part of
the estate.[345]

As in all border States there were many legal battles for freedom,
which involved the question of residence on free soil. These cases
were largely concerned with the question of the right of a citizen of
Kentucky to pass through a free State on business or pleasure attended
by his slaves or servants without losing his right of ownership over
such slaves. The principle involved was early considered in the
Kentucky Court of Appeals and faithfully carried out in succeeding
generations, viz.: that a "fixed residence" or being domiciled in a
non-slaveholding State would operate to release the slave from the
power of the master; but that the transient passing or sojourning
therein had no such effect. In an early case in 1820 involving a suit
for freedom the court held that a person of color from Kentucky who
was permitted to reside in a free State could prosecute his right to
freedom in any other State. It was held to be a vested right to
freedom, which existed wherever he went.[346] In another instance an
owner permitted his slave to go at large for twenty years, but the
court held that that alone did not give him freedom. Still under this
liberty of movement the slave went off into a free State to reside and
the court held that the Negro was then free because his right grew out
of the law of the free State and not out of that in which the owner
resided.[347] An owner permitted his slave to go to Pennsylvania and
remain there for a longer period than six months, with a knowledge of
the law passed in that State in 1780, and the Kentucky Court of
Appeals held that the slave was entitled to his freedom and that even
if the slave had returned to Kentucky his right could be asserted
there just as well as in Pennsylvania.[348] But should a slave go with
his master to a free State and later return to Kentucky with him,
whatever status he had then was to be determined by the law of
Kentucky and not by the rule of any State where the slave might have
been.[349] The fact that a slave stayed in New York for three months
before his return to Kentucky, his owner knowing he was there, and
making no effort to bring him away, did not give to such slave a right
to freedom.[350] A slaveholder sent one of his servants over into
Illinois to cut some wood for a few weeks and later the latter brought
suit for freedom on the grounds of residence in a free State but the
court denied any such right, since the slave returned to his master in
Kentucky voluntarily.[351]

If an emancipated Negro for any reason was held in slavery and later
established his right to freedom in court, he could not recover
compensation for his services or damages for his detention, unless he
could prove that he was held under full knowledge of his right or with
good reason to believe him free. If pending his suit for freedom he
should be hired out by order of the court, the net hire was to be
awarded to him if he succeeded.[352]

The actual number of manumissions which took place in Kentucky will no
doubt never be known. Among the few statistics are those of the
federal census for 1850 and 1860 and they include only the figures for
the one census year. According to this source in 1850 only 152 slaves
were voluntarily set free in the State or one slave out of every
1,388, a percentage of only .072; and in 1860 there were 170 Negroes
recorded as freed or one out of every 1,281 slaves, a percentage of
only .078. We can easily assume from the accounts which we have from
papers of that time that these numbers were far short of those that
were really set free by their masters. It was the custom of many
owners who were about to free their slaves to take them to Cincinnati
and there have them set free in the Probate Court.

Early in 1859, forty-nine slaves from Fayette County, mostly women and
children, were brought to Cincinnati and set free and later sent to a
colony of emancipated Negroes in Green County, Ohio.[353] In March of
the same year Robert Barnet of Lincoln County, Kentucky appeared with
eighteen slaves--a father, mother, nine children and three
grandchildren and another woman and four boys, who were all
emancipated in the Cincinnati Probate Court. Before crossing the
Ohio, while in Covington, he was offered $20,000 for all of them but
he stated that he would refuse even $50,000.[354] In January, 1860,
William McGinnis, of Bourbon County, appeared with fourteen slaves
before the same probate court and set them all free.[355]

The law of Kentucky plainly provided that no slave was to be
emancipated unless bond were given that he would immediately leave the
State. Hence it was but natural that a master who intended setting his
slaves free should take them as slaves to a free State and there give
them their freedom, thus satisfying his own conscience and at the same
time removing any future legal trouble that might ensue on account of
his former slaves being found in the State of Kentucky. For this
reason it would seem that a large number of the kind-hearted
slaveholders who freed their slaves did so outside the bounds of
Kentucky and thus that State was deprived of the credit for many
emancipations which took place voluntarily at the hands of her own
slaveholders.


FOOTNOTES:

[285] _Littell's Laws_, 1: 32.

[286] Brown, John Mason, _The Political Beginnings of Kentucky_, p.
229.

[287] _Littell's Laws_, 1: 44.

[288] _Ibid._, 1: 161.

[289] _Littell's Laws_, 2: 113.

[290] _Littell's Laws_, 2: 114.

[291] _Littell's Laws_, 2: 116-117.

[292] _Littell's Laws_, 2: 117-118.

[293] _Littell's Laws_, 3: 403.

[294] _Ibid._, 2: 117-118.

[295] _Niles' Register_, February 2, 1830.

[296] _Littell's Laws_, 4: 223-224.

[297] Stroud, _Laws relating to Slavery_, p. 86. Littell & Swigert, 2:
1066-9; 1060-4.

[298] It would perhaps be well to point out here the general
common-law difference between the treatment of real and personal
estate in a will. The title of the personal property of the deceased
is vested in the executor and he holds it for the payment of debts and
distribution according to the will of the testator. On the other hand
the real estate vests in the devisees or heirs and does not go to the
administrator, unless by statute enactment, which was in part true in
Kentucky, in the case above, where the slaves, although real estate,
were held liable for the debts of their master. _Littell's Laws_, 2:
120.

[299] _T. B. Monroe's Report I._, 23.

[300] Beatty _vs._ Judy, 1 Dana, 101. Plumpton _vs._ Cook, 2 A. K.
Marshall, 450.

[301] Rothert, _History of Muhlenburg County_, p. 343.

[302] Young, B. H., _History of Jessamine County_, p. 89.

[303] Session Laws, 1834, p. 726.

[304] _Ibid._, 1850, p. 51.

[305] _Ibid._, 1856, Vol. 1, pp. 42-44.

[306] _Ibid._, 1858, Vol. 1, pp. 47-48.

[307] Starling, p. 290.

[308] _Littell's Laws_, 1: 32.

[309] _Littell's Laws_, 2: 119.

[310] _Ibid._, 5: 293.

[311] _Ibid._, 5: 435-437.

[312] Barre, W. L., _Speeches and Writings of Thomas F. Marshall_, p.
115.

[313] Section 1 of the law 1833 read: "Each and every person or
persons who shall hereafter import into this state any slave or
slaves, or who shall sell or buy, or contract for the sale or
purchase, for a longer term than one year, of the service of any such
slave or slaves, knowing the same to have been imported, shall forfeit
and pay $600 for each slave so imported, sold, or bought, or whose
service has been so contracted for; recoverable by indictment of a
grand jury or any action of debt, in the name of the Commonwealth in
any circuit court, where the offenders may be found." Session Laws,
1833, pp. 258-261.

[314] Barre, W. L., p. 116.

[315] _Niles' Register_, January 23, 1841.

[316] Collins, Vol. 1, p. 83.

[317] Session Laws, 1860, Vol. 1, p. 104.

[318] _Ibid._, 1864, pp. 70-72.

[319] _Littell's Laws_, 2: 5-6.

[320] _Ibid._, 2: 5-6.

[321] Session Laws, 1835, pp. 82-83.

[322] _Ibid._, 1838, p. 158.

[323] Session Laws, 1823, p. 178.

[324] _Ibid._, 1831-2, pp. 54-55.

[325] Session Laws, 1838, p. 155.

[326] _Ibid._, 1830, pp. 173-175.

[327] _Western Law Journal_, 2: 232-235 (best report of the trial).
_Niles' Register_, December 21, 1844. Webster; Delia A., _Kentucky
Jurisprudence_, pp. 1-84.

[328] Fairbank, _How the Way was Prepared_, pp. 53, 57.

[329] _Ibid._, p. 85.

[330] _Ibid._, p. 103.

[331] Fairbank, pp. 144, 149.

[332] _American Anti-slavery Society Report_, 1839, p. 90.

[333] _American Anti-slavery Society Report_, 1839, pp. 93-94.

[334] Chaddock, F. E., _Ohio before 1850_, p. 86.

[335] McMaster, _History of the United States_, Vol. 7: 262-263.

[336] Senate Document No. 19, 30th Congress, 1st Session.

[337] 5 Howard's Reports, 215-232.

[338] Colton, Reed and McKinley, _Works of Henry Clay_, Vol. 3: 329.

[339] 24 Howard's Reports, 109-110.

[340] _Littell's Laws_, 2: 246-247.

[341] Session Laws, 1823, p. 563.

[342] Black _vs._ Meaux, 4 Dana, 189.

[343] Susan _vs._ Ladd, 6 Dana, 30

[344] Hopkins _vs._ Morgan's executor, 3 Dana, 17.

[345] Isaac et al. _vs._ Graves' executor, 16 Ben Monroe, 365.

[346] Rankin _vs._ Lydia, 2 A. K. Marshall, 467.

[347] 15 Ben Monroe, 328.

[348] 14 _Ibid._, 355.

[349] 12 _Ibid._, 542.

[350] 4 Metcalfe, 231.

[351] 11 Ben Monroe, 210.

[352] 4 Dana, 589, 7 Dana, 360.

[353] _American Anti-Slavery Society Report_, 1859, p. 79.

[354] _Weekly Free South_ (Newport), March 4, 1859.

[355] _American Anti-Slavery Society Report_, 1860, p. 44.




CHAPTER IV

THE SOCIAL STATUS OF THE SLAVE


As many of the slave regulations were enacted to deal with extreme
cases and some of them were not generally enforced, it is necessary to
consider also the social status of the blacks to determine exactly
what the institution was in Kentucky. In this commonwealth slavery was
decidedly patriarchal. The slave was not such an unfortunate creature
as some have pictured him. He usually had set apart for himself and
his family a house which was located near the master's mansion. While
this home may have been a rude cabin made of small logs, with a roof
covered with splits and an earthen floor, likely as not the master's
son was attending school a few weeks in the year in a neighboring log
cabin which boasted of no more luxuries than the humble slave
dwelling. The servant and his family were well fed and had plenty of
domestic cloth for all necessary wearing apparel.

The kind of clothing which the Kentucky slave had can be seen best by
a study of the runaway slave advertisements where a description of
apparel was often essential to the apprehension of the Negro. "Billy"
in 1803 ran away from his owner in Lexington and took such a variety
of clothing with him that the master was unable to give a description
of them.[356] "Jack," running away from his owner in Mercer County,
had on when he left and took with him "one pale blue jeans coat, one
gray jeans coat, and an old linsey coat; one pair of cloth pantaloons,
one pair of jeans, and one of linen."[357] "Thenton," when leaving his
master in Warren County, took with him "a new black smooth fur hat, a
yellow woollen jeans frock coat, more than half worn; three shirts,
two of coarse cotton and one entirely new, the third a bleached
domestic and new; one blanket; one pair of pantaloons, of cotton and
flax."[358] "Jarret," from Leitchfield, wore when he left "a smooth
black Russia hat" and took with him "a pair of buckskin saddle bags
... and a great deal of clothing, to wit: one brown jeans frock coat,
and pantaloons of the same; also, a brown jeans overcoat, with large
pockets in the side; a new dark colored overcoat, two pair blue cloth
pantaloons, and an old silver watch."[359] The clothing of "Esau,"
from Meade County, was described as "brown jeans pants, black cassinet
pants, blue cloth pants, three fine shirts, one black silk vest and
one green vest, one brown jeans frock coat, one pale blue coat, velvet
collar; coarse shoes and black hat."[360] "Stewart" left his master in
Bullitt County dressed in typical Negro attire--"a black luster coat,
made sack fashion, and a pair of snuff colored cassinet pantaloons;
also, a black fur hat with low crown and broad brim, and vest with
purple dots on it."[361] "George," living in Marion County, had an
outfit of "Brown jeans frock coat (skirt lined with home-made flannel
dyed with madder), a pair of new black and yellow twilled negro jeans
pantaloons, white socks, factory shirt with linen bosom, and black
wool hat."[362] An owner advertising in 1852 stated that his slave
"Andy" had three suits of clothes with him when he ran away.[363] It
is perfectly evident from the reading of these slave advertisements
that the male Negroes were as substantially clothed as any members of
their race could expect to be at that time even in a state of freedom.
The surplus clothing as described above was all a part of the slave's
own property and not taken from the master's wardrobe. There were many
cases of theft but they need not be considered in this discussion. A
large majority of all runaway slaves were men and even when
advertisements dealt with female fugitives it was only on rare
occasions that the owner attempted to give a description of the
clothing which was worn. Will Morton in 1806 gave a list of "Letty's"
clothing as "two or three white muslin dresses, one of fancy chintz,
salmon colored linsey petticoat, white yarn stockings, and good shoes,
with sundry other clothing of good quality."[364] At such an early
date in the history of Kentucky slavery the apparel of this young
slave woman compares very favorably with that which was worn by the
white people.

In sickness the slaves were cared for by the same physician who looked
after the master and his family and should occasion demand assistance
any member of the owner's household might be found nursing a sick
Negro. There was no limit to the supply of fuel for the winter, for
the slaves had the right to cut timber for their own use anywhere in
the woods of the estate.[365]

As in Virginia, the slave was permitted to have a little "truck-patch"
of half an acre or more, where he could raise any crop that he
desired. In Kentucky these small plots of ground were nearly always
filled with sweet potatoes, tobacco and watermelons. The soil was not
only conducive to their cultivation but they were the three favorite
agricultural products for personal consumption. These particular crops
needed little cultivation once they were planted and such as was
necessary could easily be done on Saturday afternoons, when the slave
was at leisure.

Historians have reminded us that in most of the Southern States there
was a tendency for the more energetic of the slaves to work for pay
during their idle hours and thus eventually secure a sufficient
surplus to buy their own freedom. In Kentucky such cases were very
rare. Most Negroes seem to have been content with their condition in
such bondage as existed in the State. There were many cases in which a
Negro refused to purchase his freedom although he had the necessary
amount of money. George Brown, the famous Negro author of
_Recollections of an Ex-slave_, published in the _Winchester
Democrat_, has given us some experiences which testify to the feeling
existing between master and slave. In 1857 his mistress was offered
$2,100 for George, but when talking the matter over with him she found
that he had serious objections to the prospective purchaser. She
showed an interest in Brown's welfare by refusing to sell him. In
later years when freedom was within his grasp for the asking, Brown
"bought himself" for $1,000 because, as he says in his own words, it
was not honorable for him to "swindle his young mistress out of her
slave." Such was the example of a Kentucky slave who purchased his own
freedom, not for his own benefit, but for that of his mistress.

Another factor entered into this question. In the later years, once a
slave secured his liberty, he was immediately required to leave the
State and if such a one had lived all his life in Kentucky, he would
naturally hesitate to depart into an unknown region. Many of the
slaves did earn considerable money by cobbling shoes, cutting wood,
and making brooms, but most of them showed little tendency to save
their earnings for any future deliverance from bondage. They were more
concerned then--as they often are even yet--with the pleasures of the
day. More often they were to be found wasting their spare change on
whisky, a problem which grew greater for the master with passing
years.

In addition to the regular Saturday afternoon and Sunday off every
week the slaves were given several other holidays throughout the year,
the most extensive being at Christmas time. At Easter they were
allowed two or three days rest and when an election was being held
there was no work done outside of the regular chores. The general
election day in those times was the first Monday in August and it was
the custom for most of the slaves throughout the "penny-royal" and
"bluegrass" to journey to the county seat, where they would all
congregate and have a general frolic in accordance with Negro
standards of a good time. In the later years of slavery the towns had
established sufficient control of the Negroes gathering in their
jurisdiction so that the drink evil was more or less mitigated. The
fear of the law was a great incentive to their proper conduct on those
rare occasions when they had a whole day in town to themselves without
any tasks to perform for their master. As Rothert has well observed,
however, the slave sometimes did have to care for his drunken owner
and take him home. To the student acquainted with Kentucky history and
social conditions such a brief statement suggests a wealth of material
on the local type of slavery.

That ardent abolitionist from across the sea, James Silk Buckingham,
has recorded a characteristic picture of the Kentucky slave at rest
and in gala attire:

     "We remained at Henderson the greater part of the day, it being a
     holiday with the negro slaves on the estate, so that it was
     difficult to get the requisite number of hands to complete the
     landing in a short time. Some of the female slaves were very
     gaily dressed, and many of them in good taste, with white muslin
     gowns, blue and pink waists, ribbons, silk handkerchiefs or
     scarfs, straw bonnets, and a reticule for the pocket handkerchief
     held on the arm. In talking with them, and inquiring the reason
     of the holiday, one said she believed it was Easter, another said
     it was Whitsuntide, and a third thought it was midsummer. They
     were chiefly the household slaves, who are always better treated,
     better dressed, and more indulgent than the field laborers. The
     men who were employed in landing the cargo appeared to be more
     cheerful in their general aspect and behavior than the field
     slaves I have seen at the South: and there is no doubt that in
     Kentucky their condition is very much better than in most other
     states, their work lighter, their food and clothing better, and
     their treatment more kind and humane."[366]

Legally, there were no marriages among the slaves. They were not
citizens, but property. The men were urged to take their "wives" from
among the women of the home estate, if a suitable companion could be
found. But if not they eventually secured one in the neighborhood and
the master usually allowed the slave a pass to see his wife every
night in the week. While such a cohabitation was not exactly a legal
affair most of them were held as sacred as those more legalized unions
among the master class. Many masters paid an unconscious tribute to
these unions. When there ran away a slave who had a wife living in the
neighborhood or even at a great distance the owner would make mention
of the exact locality of the wife in order that people in that region
would be on the lookout for the fugitive. J. C. Bucklin in 1824 did
not give much of a description of David, who had left his master, but
he very carefully stated that he had a "wife and children at William
Shirley's, about 16 miles from this place, on the Westport Road."[367]
An owner in Fayette county after giving a detailed picture of "Arthur"
added that "Capt. Peter Poindexter, eight miles from Lexington owns
his wife, and I expect that he will be in that neighborhood."[368] A
more extreme example was that of "Dick," a Lexington slave who ran
away to New Orleans, the owner thought, because "he has a wife living
in that city, and he has been heard to say frequently that he was
determined to go to New Orleans."[369] Such cases as this were the
logical consequence of the slavery system. They existed in Kentucky
just as in any other slave State, but they were few compared with
those slaves unions that were never broken.

It was to the economic as well as humanitarian interest of the master
to have sympathy with the peace and contentment of his servant. Thus
most of them took care that the family relationships of the slaves
should not be disturbed. Oftentimes when the owner of either a husband
or a wife was on the point of moving out of the county the masters
would get together and make a trade which would obviate any disruption
of the slave family. Under such conditions a man would part with a
servant who otherwise could not have been bought at any price. Such a
situation was possible only in a State where the personal interest in
a slave and his welfare took precedence over merely his economic value
to the owner.[370]

Charles Stewart in _My Life as a Slave_ has given us his own
experiences of home life and marriage among slaves in Kentucky. He
lived in Paris and was engaged in handling race horses. Soon after
coming from Virginia to Kentucky he fell in love with a young mulatto
girl, who was the property of a Mr. Robertson, who gave his consent to
their marriage, promising never to part them by his own free will. In
his own dialect Stewart dictated his story. "So I married her, an' tuk
her to a little house I had fixed up near de stables, an' she
clear-starched an' sewed an' broidered an' wukked wid de hand-loom,
an' made more pretty things dan I could count. She paid her marster,
en course, reg'lar, so much a month fur her hire, but, lor', she neber
touched her airnin's fur dat. I had plenty of money to hire as many
wives as I wanted, but dis one was de onliest one I eber did want, an'
so it was easy enough." After two years his wife became very sick and
died and the grief of the Negro man was touching in the extreme. "She
was jes' as fond o' me as I was of her, an' it did 'pear hard luck to
lose her jes' as I was makin' up my mind to buy her out and out, only
en course, it was a fortunate thing I hadn't bought her, as long as
she had to die, kase den I would ha' lost her an' de money too. Arter
she was in de ground it jes' 'peared to me like eberything was
different; I tuk a dislikement to Paris, an' I didn't feel like goin'
home to Virginny." His master agreed to let him go wherever he liked
if he could find an owner to suit him and finally Stewart went to
Louisiana after an interview with Senator Porter of that State. He was
to stay six months to see how he liked it and then if agreeable he was
to stay there. He must have been a rather unusual Negro, for his
selling price was finally fixed at $3,500.[371]

But life among the slaves of Kentucky was not by any means a path of
roses. Many anti-slavery leaders attested to this fact. The most
trustworthy statement that was ever made on this general subject was
that embodied in the pamphlet of the Presbyterian Synod of Kentucky in
1835 advocating gradual emancipation. The following brief extracts are
most significant:

     "The system produces general licentiousness among the slaves.
     Marriage, as a civil ordinance, they cannot enjoy. Until slavery
     waxeth old, and tendeth to decay, there cannot be any legal
     recognition of the marriage rite, or the enforcement of its
     consequent duties. For, all the regulations on this subject would
     limit the master's absolute right of property in the slaves. In
     his disposal of them he could no longer be at liberty to consult
     merely his own interest ... their present quasi-marriages are
     continually voided (at the master's pleasure).... They are in
     this way brought to consider their matrimonial alliances as
     things not binding, and act accordingly. We are then assured by
     the most unquestionable testimony that licentiousness is the
     necessary result of our system."

One would infer from this observation of apparently fair-minded men
that slave unions were not very sacred affairs and that any disruption
of them would amount to little, but in the same document these
Presbyterian preachers give a back-handed compliment to the stability,
at least in temperament, of the average slave marriage.

     "Brothers and sisters, parents and children, husbands and wives,
     are torn asunder and permitted to see each other no more. These
     acts are daily occurring in the midst of us. The shrieks and
     agony often witnessed on such occasions proclaim with a trumpet
     tongue, the iniquity of our system. There is not a neighborhood
     where these heartrending scenes are not displayed; there is not a
     village or road that does not behold the sad procession of
     manacled outcasts, whose mournful countenances tell that they are
     exiled by force, from all that their hearts hold dear."

It is strange that these two opposing views should appear in the same
pamphlet, but nevertheless they are both undoubtedly true pictures of
slavery in Kentucky. It is merely a question as to which of the two
represented the majority of cases. Licentiousness there was, but it
was certainly very much less among the slaves of Kentucky than in the
far South. Slave unions were treated with more respect by the masters
of Kentucky than in most slave States. As has been pointed out in a
previous chapter, the very fact that the few instances of inhuman
separation of slave families produced such a storm of public
disapproval shows that it was not a very general practice in the
State.

From the legal standpoint the slave had no rights or privileges in the
attainment of even a meager education. On the other hand Kentucky was
the only slave State, with the exception of Maryland and Tennessee,
which never passed any laws forbidding the instruction of slaves. Thus
no penalty was attached to Negro education, neither was any
encouragement given. Those slaves who learned to read were the
servants of masters who because of conscientious scruples taught them
how to read the Bible. Few slaves ever learned to write, for they
might then be tempted to serve as unofficial dispensers of passes in
the owner's name. The general objection to any reasonable amount of
education was the tendency towards dissatisfaction with the servile
status thereby aroused. If the slave could learn to read well, it was
feared that he would become a victim of the "filthy" abolitionist
literature, which through the resultant effect upon the Negroes would
have produced no end of trouble to the slavery system. Hence, for the
most part, the Kentucky slave remained in blissful ignorance, and well
for him as such and the institution he represented that his learning
was no greater.[372]

Out of a collection of some three hundred and fifty runaway slave
advertisements concerning Kentucky slaves the author has found 71
cases in which mention was made that the Negro could read and 37
instances in which he could write. The latter cases are all included
in the former classification also. On that basis a little over ten
per cent of the slaves could read and write and about twenty per cent
could read but were unable to write. There are, however, two strong
reasons against any such general conclusion. In the first place, the
more a slave learned the more liable he was to become dissatisfied and
run away; and secondly, the careful mention which was made in
advertisements of the Negro's ability to read or write would tend to
show that it was more or less an unusual accomplishment.

Taking up the question of the education of slaves in the State, the
Presbyterian Synod of Kentucky said in 1834 that "Slavery dooms
thousands of human beings to hopeless ignorance ... if slaves are
educated it must involve some outlay upon the part of the master....
It is inconsistent with our knowledge of human nature to suppose that
he will do this for them. The present state of instruction among this
race remains exactly what we might ... naturally anticipate.
Throughout the whole land (State), so far as we can learn, there is
but one school in which, during the week, slaves can be taught. The
light of three or four Sabbath schools is seen glimmering through the
darkness that covers the black population of the whole State. Here and
there a family is found where humanity and religion impel the
master, mistress or children to the laborious task of private
instruction."[373]

It should be added in this connection that the same statement would
hold true of the free Negro population of Kentucky at the same period.
Until long after the Civil War there was no provision made for their
education other than that of individual enterprise. The public
education of the whites was not on a plane comparable to that of any
of the Northern States until after the reconstruction period, and even
then Kentucky lagged behind for years.

The church and its influence for the betterment of society under the
slavery system was more effective than the school. The chief religious
paper of the State was the _Presbyterian Herald_ and one of its most
persistent pleas was that the proper religious instruction of the
Negro servant class would answer most of the objections to the
institution. "The most formidable weapon in the hands of the
abolitionist," said the editor, "is the indifference which he charges
to the Christian slaveholder toward the spiritual welfare of the slave
under his control. Disarm him of this weapon, and you have done much
to render him powerless."[374]

Religious instruction in families of Christian habits of life,
however, was not so sadly neglected. The household servants were
usually brought to the house during the family worship and the
scriptures were not merely read to them but explained. No restrictions
were ever placed on church attendance either by law or by custom. Many
slaves united with the white churches and throughout the State today
one may find any number of old churches whose records still show
several of these Negroes on the church rolls. Most of them are very
kindly remembered for their good moral character and abiding faith.
Such a condition was not so prevalent among the agricultural slaves,
except where they were few in numbers. Even here, however, the
religious instinct was not suppressed in any manner. Their religion at
the most was a very crude imitation of the worship of their masters.
They were not confined to the rear seats of the white churches for
their attendance at Sunday services. They could hold their own
meetings in schoolhouses and vacant church edifices.

It was these distinctively slave gatherings that gave rise to one of
the most interesting of all Negro characters--the preacher. Tradition
and story have related many a charming picture of this quaint
representative of Negro faith, but unfortunately few life stories of
any of them have ever been preserved. In nearly all the county
histories we find mention of several of these Negro exhorters who
seemingly were men of some degree of intelligence. The majority of
them were apparently themselves slaves, subject to the will of their
masters, and while the restrictions on their movements were very lax,
they seldom if ever spoke beyond the borders of their home
county.[375]

One of the famous Negro preachers of the early nineteenth-century
South was Josiah Henson. From 1825 to 1828 he was a slave in Daviess
County, Kentucky, and in his autobiography he has given us a picture
of the circumstances under which he became a slave preacher. "In
Kentucky," said he, "the opportunities of attending on the preaching
of whites, as well as of blacks, were more numerous; and partly
attended by them, and the campmeetings which occurred from time to
time, and partly from studying carefully my own heart, and observing
the developments of character around me, in all the stations of life
which I could watch, I became better acquainted with those religious
feelings which are deeply implanted in the breast of every human
being, and learnt by practice how best to arouse them, and keep them
excited, and in general to produce some good religious impressions on
the ignorant and thoughtless community by which I was surrounded.... I
cannot but derive some satisfaction, too, from the proofs I have had
that my services have been acceptable to those to whom they have been
rendered. In the course of the three years from 1825 to 1828 I availed
myself of all the opportunities of improvement which occurred and was
admitted as a preacher by a conference of the Methodist Episcopal
Church."[376]

In Ballard County there was another interesting exhorter. Advertising
for his Negro Jack who had run away in 1850, C. B. Young pointed out
that although he was a slave and the property of the "subscriber" he
was a well-educated Baptist preacher and in the pursuit of his
vocation he was well known by "many of the citizens of Paducah,
McCracken County, and also by citizens of Hickman and Fulton Counties,
and is thought by many to be a free man."[377]

The only credentials which the Negro preacher carried, according to
his own testimony, came directly from the Lord. His education was only
of a sufficient character to enable him to read the Bible and line out
the words of the hymns. His creed was never the creation of any school
of theology. It was usually an original interpretation of supernatural
phenomena varying widely even in one individual from time to time.
Convinced of his supernatural calling, he felt inferior to no one in
the power of exegesis. As long as he held his balance and remained on
terra firma his followers believed in him as he believed in himself.
But as Lucius Little has well said: "Once in a while a colored
preacher lost his influence with his congregation by drinking too
deeply of the Pierian spring. Too much learning raised him out of
their orbit. They fell on stony ground." Strange, yet how true, that
the more ignorant a slave minister was, the more power of influence
for good he had among his fellow human beings.[378]

James Lane Allen has given us a splendid little sketch of three of
these native characters whom he evidently knew in his younger days:

     "One of these negro preachers was allowed by his master to fill a
     distant appointment. Belated once, and returning home after the
     hour forbidden for slaves to be abroad, he was caught by the
     patrol and cruelly whipped. As the blows fell, his words were,
     'Jesus Christ suffered for righteousness' sake; so kin I."

     Another was recommended for deacon's orders and actually
     ordained. When liberty came, he refused to be free, and continued
     to work in his master's family until his death. With considerable
     knowledge of the Bible and a fluent tongue, he would nevertheless
     sometimes grow confused while preaching and lose his train of
     thought. At these embarrassing junctures it was his wont suddenly
     to call out at the top of his voice, "Saul, Saul. Why persecutest
     thou me?" The effect upon his hearers was electrifying:--as none
     but a very highly favored being could be thought worthy of
     enjoying this persecution. He thus converted his loss of mind
     into spiritual reputation.

     A third named Peter Cotton, united the vocations of exhorter and
     wood-chopper. He united them literally, for one moment Peter
     might be seen standing on his log chopping away, and the next
     kneeling down beside it praying. He got his mistress to make him
     a long jeans coat and on the ample tails of it to embroider, by
     his direction, sundry texts of scripture, such as "Come unto Me,
     all ye that are heavy laden." Thus literally clothed with
     righteousness, Peter went from cabin to cabin, preaching the
     Word. Well for him if that other Peter could have seen him."[379]

One of the dominant features of such a type of religion among the
Negroes was the resulting prevalence of superstition. It almost seems
that in their ignorance they adopted every form of supernatural fear
that was ever known among our ancestors. But if it had ended there the
matter would not have been so important socially. In their constant
association with white children they brought their fears of
"ghost-hauntings" and other fantastic ideas into the minds of the very
young. The peculiarity of the Negro slave as compared with the other
superstitious races was his own sinister imaginative productions. They
related none of the valuable tales of ancient mythology, but rather
did they fill the earth with goblins, witches and ghosts--the result
of their own dreams and fancies.[380]

The many stories of this sort which a "mammy" related to a child a
half century ago can be reproduced by the old man of the twentieth
century and the effect of the old ideas of magic is still with him.
The prevalence of superstitious ideas in Kentucky today might easily
be traced back to the associations of slavery times. But such a
weakness may not always have done harm; not every child was so
influenced. The natural play of the Negro instinct was worth much to
his peace and contentment. Here again Shaler has given us a rather
unique observation from his own experience:

     "The only movements of the spirit in the religious field that I
     can remember came from two sources: my mother's singing.... The
     other spiritual influence came from the negroes. A number of them
     used to meet at night to talk religion beneath a shed which lay
     open to the northern sky. One of them, well named "Old Daniel,"
     had a fervid imagination and excellent descriptive powers. He
     would picture the coming of the great angel as if it were before
     his eyes; the path of light shooting down from about the North
     star,--the majesty of his train. Then the rolling of the heavens
     "like a scroll"--I did not know what this process was like, but
     it seemed vaguely fine--and then the burning up of the world. I
     was always greatly moved when hearing these exhortations which
     must indeed have been rather wonderful things, but they made no
     permanent impression upon me. In fact I regarded them as 'nigger
     talk.'"[381]

The patriarchal character of slavery as it existed in Kentucky is best
shown in the relationship which generally existed between the master
and his slave. The pioneers who brought their slaves with them from
Virginia encountered many dangers not only in crossing the mountains
but after they had settled in the new State. Many were the times when
the slave proved himself a hero and even encountered death in order to
protect the master and his family. Tradition and history have handed
down many of these stories to us, but the most famous of all, as well
as the best authenticated, was the experience of Monk Estill, who was
the slave of Colonel James Estill, of Madison County. In a struggle
with the Indians in 1782 in the region where Mount Sterling is now
located Monk cried out to his master in the thick of the fray: "Don't
give way, Marse Jim; there's only twenty-five of the Injuns and you
can whip them." Colonel Estill was killed and Monk was taken prisoner
but he soon managed to escape, and after joining his comrades carried
one of the wounded men twenty-five miles. The young master was so
grateful to Monk that he gave him his freedom and kept him in the best
of comfort the rest of his life. This was the experience of what is
supposed to have been the first slave in the district of
Kentucky.[382]

Not only was the slave on a par with his master when it came to facing
dangers but even in the field of sports he had as pleasant an outing
as his overlord. While the one may have spent the day in fox hunting
or deer driving, when nightfall came the Negro was apt to emerge from
his quarters followed by his faithful dog in search of possum or coon.
While the master may have enjoyed a feast of venison at his table the
Negro was just as well satisfied with the less valuable but savory
game that graced his own meal.

With the exception of the house servants most of the slaves of the
State were employed in agricultural pursuits, but, as we have seen
elsewhere, even here they were not to be found in large droves as in
the States of the South. There were only a few big landed estates
which were cultivated by the owners under their own supervision and in
the large majority of cases the field slaves worked side by side with
the whites. Often an owner's circumstances compelled him to labor in
the fields with his slaves and when doing so he rarely demanded more
of them than he did himself. Such a condition was not only true in the
early days when there were few slaves but it extended throughout the
slavery era.[383] The stories of the mildness of the institution in
Kentucky which reached the North were little accredited by the radical
element, which could never see any virtue in servile labor. Perhaps
the most zealous abolitionist who visited the State was J. W.
Buckingham, who wrote in 1840 that the "condition of the Negroes, as
to food, clothing, and light labor struck me as being better in
Kentucky than in any other State."[384] While traveling in the heart
of the slave section of the State between Frankfort and Louisville he
saw many instances of black and white laborers, slave and free,
working side by side in the same field.[385]

The relation between the owner and the household type of slave was of
a more intimate nature and the master was careful to pick only the
best of the Negroes. In such an environment we see the picture of the
Kentucky gentleman of song and story, and the Negro in all the best
that tradition has related of him. The latter became identified with
the family of the master in sentiment and feeling. Under ordinary
circumstances he had nothing to worry about, and with no cares
pressing upon him, he became as happy as any Negro ever was. If the
crops failed, or the owner became bankrupt he had none of the anxiety
of his master, although he may have displayed the greatest sympathy
with the existing condition. It was his duty to give only his labor to
his master and in return he was sheltered, clothed and supported when
sick or too old to labor; and at last when his earthly toils were
over, he was given a Christian burial. The humble affection which the
slave had for his master in conjunction with the extreme confidence
which he held for the outcome of all pecuniary troubles is shown by
instances in the life history of every slaveholding family. No matter
what might be the circumstances and conditions of the estate the slave
could go on in his daily work without any fears or cares, except for
the one great cloud that in the event of a disruption of the estate
through a legal process he might be sold to satisfy his master's
creditors.

From our present viewpoint the treatment may have been at times rather
harsh but we must be careful to judge it from the general standard of
those times. It has been pointed out that it would bear "favorable
comparison with the treatment of the white sailors in the British and
American navies of the same period."[386] The slave code allowed a
much severer policy than was generally carried out, for it must be
considered that the law was made to fit the worst cases, where such
action was justifiable. Often the attitude of the master appeared
harsher than it was really meant to be. It may have been merely a
display of authority on his part when he reprimanded a servant who
had really committed only a minor indiscretion.[387]

There were naturally other scenes in which the treatment of slaves
would not appear in such a favorable light. The chronically bad
master, however, was at all times and under all circumstances under
the ban of a just public sentiment. Should, by chance, a slave under
such a one secure vengeance on his heartless overlord, the general
feeling of the community was on the side of the slave. Strange to say,
it was very often true that persons who had known little concerning
slavery until they came to Kentucky, as soon as they had accumulated a
sufficient surplus, became the owners of slaves and proved to be the
hardest taskmasters.[388] Much light is thrown on this situation by
Shaler. "There is a common opinion," said he, "that the slaves of the
Southern households were subjected in various ways to brutal
treatment. Such, in my experience, was not the case. Though the custom
of using the whip on white children was common enough, I never saw a
negro deliberately punished in that way until 1862, when, in military
service, I stayed at night at the house of a friend. This old man,
long a widower, had recently married a woman from the state of Maine,
who had been the governess of his children. In the early morning I
heard a tumult in the back yard, and on looking out saw a negro man,
his arms tied up to a limb of a tree, while the vigorous matron was
administering on his back with a cowhide whip. At breakfast I learned
that the man had well deserved the flogging, but it struck me as
curious that in the only instance of the kind that I had known the
punishment was from the hands of a Northern woman."[389] Shaler lived
in Campbell County in the extreme northern section of the State, where
there were only a few slaves and the treatment was milder perhaps than
in any other part of Kentucky.

The general attitude is best shown by the two laws passed in 1816 and
1830. It had always been considered that the slave, being the property
of his owner, it remained for him and for him alone to serve as the
disciplinarian of the Negro. The increasing abuse of this right by
outsiders led to a law in 1815 giving the owners a power of action
against persons abusing their slaves, and in February, 1816, the
provisions were made more specific. If any person should "whip, strike
or otherwise abuse the slave of another" without the owner's consent,
the latter could recover damages in any circuit court in the
commonwealth--regardless of whether or not the punishment so inflicted
injured the ability of the slave to render service to his master.[390]

Some of the contemporary comment would seem to imply that the theory
of the law was based on the property conception of the slave and not
upon humanitarian motives. In other words, it was perfectly proper to
punish any slave as one saw fit as long as one did not interfere with
the property value of the _servant_. Fearon, while visiting the State
in 1818, came across an example of this kind and after telling the
story of the punishment makes this comment: "It appears that this boy
(the one who had been whipped) was the property of a regular
slave-dealer, who was then absent at Natchez with a cargo. Mr. Lawe's
humanity fell lamentably in my estimation when he stated, that
'whipping niggers, if they were his own, was perfectly right, and they
perhaps deserved it; but what made him mad was, that the boy was left
under his care by a friend, and he did not like to have a friend's
property injured.'"[391] The conduct observed by Fearon was clearly in
violation of the law of 1816, unless the absent master had given over
his rights in full to the man Lawe, who administered the punishment.
It may have been the spirit of the laws of Kentucky that Lawe had in
mind when he spoke to Fearon. On the other hand, it could easily be
given the interpretation which Fearon made. The trend of public
opinion was more and more in the interest of justice for the slave as
the law of 1830 shows:

     If any owner of a slave shall treat such slave cruelly, so as in
     the opinion of the jury, to endanger the life or limb of such
     slave, or shall not supply his slave with sufficient food or
     raiment, it shall and may be lawful for any person acquainted
     with the fact or facts, to state and set forth in a petition to
     the Circuit Court, the facts, or any of them aforesaid, of which
     the defendant hath been guilty, and pray that such slave or
     slaves may be taken from the possession of the owner, and sold
     for the benefit of such owner, agreeably to the 7th article of
     the Constitution.[392]

In accordance with this law, if a jury of twelve men were convinced
that a master treated his slave cruelly, or failed to provide him the
proper food and clothing, the slave would be sold into better hands
and the master would have to pay the costs of the suit. Most assuredly
there was no place in the eyes of the law for an inhuman slaveholder.
Not only was such a one a criminal in the eyes of the courts but he
was socially ostracized in the ordinary circles of the community.[393]

Two instances of this kind in Lexington will show the public feeling.
In 1837 Mrs. Turner, the wife of a wealthy Lexington judge, was
accused of inhuman cruelty. Her own husband was the chief complainant,
stating that "that woman has been the cause of the death of six of my
servants by her severities." The trial caused intense excitement among
the people of Lexington, more so perhaps for the reason that the
defendant was a member of a prominent Boston family and her husband
was a former judge of the criminal court in New Orleans. The court
proceedings were brought to an end when the woman was pronounced
insane and placed in the asylum.[394]

Early in 1839 a Mr. and Mrs. Maxwell were tried in Lexington for the
inhuman treatment of a female slave servant. The indignation of the
citizens of Lexington is apparent from the publicity that was given to
the proceedings in the local papers. A Dr. Constant testified that he
saw Mrs. Maxwell whipping the Negro severely, without being particular
whether she struck her in the face or not. The lacerations had brought
blood in considerable quantities for he had found some on the steps.
He had noticed previously that the slave had been thinly clad and was
barefooted even in cold weather. During the previous months he had
noticed several scars on her and at one time she had had one eye tied
up for a week. A Mr. Winters was once passing along the street and saw
one of the boys whipping the slave girl with a cowhide. Whenever she
turned her face to him he would hit her across the face either with
the butt end or small end of the whip to make her turn around square
to the lash, in order that he might get a fair blow at her. A Mr. Say
had noticed several wounds on her person, chiefly bruises. Capt.
Porter, the keeper of the workhouse, thought the injuries on Milly's
person were very bad, some of them appeared to be burns, and some were
bruises or stripes from a cowhide whip. The trial was held amidst a
turmoil of resentment against the defendants and there was apparently
no one in sympathy with them whatever.[395]

Any discussion of the relationships in slavery times would be
incomplete without adding the characterisation of the Kentucky master
as drawn by a celebrated author who was born in the heart of the
bluegrass and was thoroughly familiar with the type:

     "The good in nature is irrepressible. Slavery, evil as it was,
     when looked at from the remoteness of human history as it is to
     be, will be judged an institution that gave development to a
     certain noble type of character.

     "Along with other social forces peculiar to the age, it produced
     in Kentucky a kind of farmer the like of which will never appear
     again. He had the aristocratic virtues: highest notions of
     personal liberty and personal honor, a fine especial scorn of
     anything that was little, mean, cowardly. As an agriculturist he
     was not driving or merciless or grasping; the rapid amassing of
     wealth was not among his passions, the contention of splendid
     living not among his thorns. To a certain carelessness of riches
     he added a certain profuseness of expenditure; and indulgent
     towards his own pleasures, towards others, his equals or
     dependents, he bore himself with a spirit of kindness and
     magnanimity. Intolerant of tyranny, he was no tyrant. To say of
     such a man, as Jefferson said of every slave-holder, that he
     lived in the perpetual exercise of the most boisterous passions
     and unremitting despotism, and in the exaction of the most
     degrading submission, was to pronounce judgment hasty and unfair.

     "Rather did Mrs. Stowe, while not blind to his faults, discern
     his virtues when she made him, embarrassed by death, exclaim: "If
     anybody had said to me that I should sell Tom down south to one
     of those rascally traders, I should have said, 'Is thy servant a
     dog that he should do this thing?'"[396]


FOOTNOTES:

[356] _Lexington Gazette_, August 23, 1803.

[357] _Louisville Public Advertiser_, July 10, 1824.

[358] _Louisville Weekly Journal_, October 15, 1845.

[359] _Ibid._, October 22, 1845.

[360] _Ibid._, September 27, 1848.

[361] _Ibid._, May 16, 1849.

[362] _Ibid._, December 10, 1851.

[363] _Ibid._, December 22, 1852.

[364] _Lexington Gazette_, April 12, 1806.

[365] The best contemporary treatment of this subject in general is by
Dr. R. J. Spurr--the sole printed text being in Perrin's _History of
Bourbon County_, pp. 59-60.

[366] Buckingham, _Eastern and Western States_, Vol. 3: 41.

[367] _Louisville Public Advertiser_, August 11, 1824.

[368] _Lexington Gazette_, June 14, 1803.

[369] _Lexington Intelligencer_, July 7, 1838.

[370] Perrin (Bourbon County), p. 60.

[371] _Harper's Magazine_, October, 1884, pp. 730-738.

[372] Clarke, _Sufferings of Lewis and Milton Clarke_, p. 104.
Rothert, _History of Muhlenburg County_, p. 104. Perrin (Bourbon
County), p. 60.

[373] _Address to the People of Kentucky_, p. 8.

[374] _Presbyterian Herald_, April 16, 1846. See especially the
editorial and articles in the issue of October 4, 1849.

[375] Rothert, _History of Muhlenburg County_, p. 340.

[376] Henson, _Life of Josiah Henson_, pp. 26-27.

[377] _Louisville Weekly Journal_, March 27, 1850.

[378] Little, L. P., _Ben Hardin, his Times and Contemporaries_, pp.
544-545.

[379] Allen, James Lane, _Blue Grass Region of Kentucky_, pp. 77-78.

[380] Robertson's _Autobiography_, pp. 124-125.

[381] Shaler's _Autobiography_, pp. 57-58.

[382] Collins, _History of Kentucky_, Vol. 2, pp. 634-636.

[383] Cotterill, _History of Pioneer Kentucky_, p. 245. Little, L. P.,
_Ben Hardin, his Times and Contemporaries_, p. 543.

[384] Buckingham, _Eastern and Western States_, Vol. 3: 7-8.

[385] _Op. cit._, Vol. 3: 8.

[386] Little, L. P., _Ben Hardin, his Times and Contemporaries_, pp.
541-2.

[387] A typical example of this has been related by one of Kentucky's
distinguished sons:

"In the households where I was intimate the slaves were about on the
same footing as the other members of the family; they were subjected
to sudden explosions of the master's temper much as were his children.
I well remember a frequent scene in my grandfather's house, where it
was the custom that I should go every Sunday afternoon for counsel and
instruction. They were at first somewhat fearsome occasions for a
little lad thus to be alone with an aged and stately grandfather. I
soon won his interest, in some measure by my fears, and came greatly
to enjoy the intercourse, for he knew how to talk to a boy, and we
became, in a way, boys together, in our sense of the funny side of
things. It was the custom, too, for him to divide the session of three
or four hours with a brief nap taken in his chair....

"As his rooms were near the negro quarter he would make ready for his
siesta by sending forth the servantman who waited on him, bidding him
tell the people that they were to keep quiet during the performance. I
can see him now with his pig-tail hanging down behind the back of the
easy chair and a handkerchief over his face as he courted slumber. For
a minute or two it would be still, then the hidden varlets would be as
noisy as before. Then the pig-tail would begin to twitch, and he would
mutter: 'Jim, tell those people they _must_ be still.' Again a minute
of quiet, and once more the jabbering and shouting. Now with a leap he
would clutch his long walking-stick and charge the crowd in the
quarter, laying about him with amazing nimbleness, until all the
offenders were run to their holes. Back he would come from his
excursion and settle himself to sleep. I could see that his rage was
merely on the surface and that he had used it for a corrective, for he
evidently took care not to hurt anyone." Shaler's _Autobiography_, p.
37.

[388] Little, L. P., _Ben Hardin, his Times and Contemporaries_, p.
543.

[389] Shaler's _Autobiography_, pp. 36-37.

[390] _Littell's Laws_, Vol. 5: 578-579.

[391] Fearon, _Sketches in America_, p. 241.

[392] Session Laws, 1830, p. 174.

[393] Blanchard and Rice, _Debate on Slavery_, p. 135.

[394] _American Slavery As It Is_, p. 87.

[395] _Lexington Reporter_, January 15, 1809.

[396] Allen, James Lane, _Blue Grass Region of Kentucky_, pp. 67-68.




CHAPTER V

PUBLIC OPINION REGARDING EMANCIPATION AND COLONIZATION


Although the facts herein set forth indicate that slavery in Kentucky
was a comparatively mild form of servitude it is not the aim here to
leave the impression that the anti-slavery element found no grounds
for attacking the institution. On the contrary, there were various
elements that devised schemes for exterminating the institution. This
was especially true of the churches, which represented more than any
other one force the sentiment of the State on the subject of
emancipation. The three prominent Protestant denominations of the
State were the Presbyterians, the Baptists, and the Methodists. The
only one of the three which maintained a general continuous policy
throughout the early nineteenth century on the question of slavery was
the Presbyterian.

It was on the eve of the first Constitutional Convention of 1792 that
David Rice, at that time the leader of the Presbyterians in Kentucky,
published a pamphlet under the nom-de-plume of PHILANTHROPOS entitled
_Slavery Inconsistent with Justice and Good Policy_. While the author
went into the general evils of slavery, such as the lack of protection
to female chastity, lack of religious and moral instruction, and the
comparative unproductiveness of slave labor, he was not one of those
violent opponents of the institution, who would abolish the whole
system without any constructive measures. A large part of his treatise
was devoted to the supposed sanction of the scriptures and his own
evidence that the same source was against rather than in favor of the
system then in vogue. It was but natural that Rice should recommend
that the convention should put an end to slavery in Kentucky in view
of his firm opinions in the matter, but he had a clear vision of the
future and he expressed his conviction that "a gradual emancipation
only can be advisable." He summed up his ideas in this sentence: "The
legislature, if they judged it expedient, would prevent the
importation of any more slaves; they would enact that all born after
such a date should be free; be qualified by proper education to make
useful citizens, and be actually freed at a proper age."[397] He put
these ideas forth as a citizen of Kentucky who was interested in its
welfare and as a prospective member of the constitutional convention.
When that body assembled at Danville he did not hesitate to voice his
views again but the forces of slavery were dominant and the majority
enacted the famous article IX, which determined the slave code of the
State until the institution was abolished by the 13th amendment to the
federal constitution. The significance of the attitude of David Rice
lies in the fact that as early as the year 1792 he put forth the idea
of gradual emancipation, a policy far in advance of his age but which
in the course of time was held by a large number of the fair-minded
statesmen of Kentucky.

In 1794 the Transylvania Presbytery, which was the governing body of
that sect at that time for the whole State, passed a resolution asking
that slaves should be instructed to read the Bible, having in view the
sole idea that when freedom did come to them they would be prepared
for it.[398] The same body in 1796 expressed the following fair-minded
attitude in the form of a resolution:

     Although the Presbytery are fully convinced of the great evil of
     slavery, yet they view the final remedy as alone belonging to the
     civil powers; and also do not think that they have sufficient
     authority from the word of God to make it a term of Christian
     communion. They, therefore, leave it to the consciences of the
     brethren to act as they may think proper; earnestly recommending
     to the people under their care to emancipate such of their slaves
     as they may think fit subjects of liberty; and that they also
     take every possible measure, by teaching their young slaves to
     read and give them such other instruction as may be in their
     power, to prepare them for the enjoyment of liberty, an event
     which they contemplate with the greatest pleasure, and which,
     they hope, will be accomplished as soon as the nature of things
     will admit.[399]

In the year 1797 the same organization decided that slavery was a
moral evil but on the question of whether those persons holding slaves
were guilty of a moral evil they decided in the negative. As to what
persons were guilty they were unable to decide and the matter was
postponed for future action.[400]

As early as 1800 the West Lexington Presbytery pointed to the trouble
and division which slavery was likely to cause among the churches, but
they were unable to come to any decision upon the exclusion of
slaveholding members from church privileges and in a letter to the
Synod of Virginia they asked for the judgment of higher ecclesiastical
authorities.[401] In 1802 the same body decided on a policy of
non-interference with the rights of the slaveholding members of the
church.[402]

Beginning in 1823 the Synod of Kentucky advocated the cause of the
American Colonization Society. Their general attitude on the slavery
question was an open one as late as the year 1833 when they adopted a
resolution to the effect that "inasmuch as in the judgment of the
Synod it is inexpedient to come to any decision on the very difficult
and delicate question of slavery as it is within our bounds;
therefore, resolved, that the whole matter be indefinitely
postponed."[403] The vote on this resolution stood 41 to 36.

The enactment of the law of 1833 forbidding the importation of slaves
into Kentucky seems to have induced the Synod to take a step in
advance, for when they next met in 1834 at Danville they adopted by
the decisive vote of 56 to 7 a resolution calling for the appointment
of a committee of ten to draw up a plan for the instruction and future
emancipation of slaves in the State.[404] The following year this
committee published a 64-page pamphlet entitled "An Address to the
Presbyterians of Kentucky proposing a plan for the instruction and
emancipation of their slaves." Many editions of this work were
published throughout the country even as late as 1862 when it was
issued by the United Presbyterian Board of Publication in Pittsburgh.
It was heralded throughout the northern section of the United States
as a very able document and was regarded all the more valuable because
it was published in a slaveholding State. The major portion of the
pamphlet was taken up with the general arguments setting forth the
evils of the slavery system but in the last few pages they set down
their plan for the gradual emancipation of the slaves in Kentucky--the
most able contribution towards a reconstruction of the existing social
system in the State which had been made up to that time.

"The plan, then, which we propose is, for the master to retain during
a limited period, and with regard to the welfare of the slave, that
authority which he before held, in perpetuity, and solely for his own
interest. Let the full liberty of the slave be secured against all
contingencies, by a recorded deed of emancipation, to take effect at a
specified time. In the meanwhile, let the servant be treated with
kindness--let all those things which degrade him be removed--let him
enjoy means of instruction, let his moral and religious improvement be
sought--let his prospects be presented before him, to stimulate him to
acquire those habits of foresight, economy, industry, activity, skill
and integrity, which will fit him for using well the liberty he is
soon to enjoy." The actual plan of potential freedom was stated
briefly in these words: "(1) We would recommend that all slaves now
under 20 years of age, and all those yet to be born in our possession,
be emancipated as they severally reach their 25th year. (2) We
recommend that deeds of emancipation be drawn up, and recorded in our
respective county courts, specifying the slaves whom we are about to
emancipate, and the age at which each is to be free. (3) We recommend
that our slaves be instructed in the common elementary branches of
education. (4) We recommend that strenuous and persevering efforts be
made to induce them to attend upon the ordinary services of religion,
both domestic and public. (5) We recommend that great pains be taken
to teach them the Holy Scriptures; and that, to effect this the
instrumentality of Sabbath Schools, wherever they can be enjoyed, be
united with that of domestic instruction."[405]

This appeal was not to the officials of the State but to the members
of a particular religious body by its governing organization. The
success or failure of the plan depended entirely upon the individual
slaveholder's attitude in the matter. The committee added this
sentence by way of explanation: "These are measures which all ought to
adopt; and we know of no peculiarity of circumstances in the case of
any individual which can free him from culpability if he neglects
them."[406]

The sentiments embodied in this appeal were not, however, any
indication of the feeling among the slaveholding Presbyterians of the
State nor were they expressive of the Synod itself, for that body
never took any action upon the address, it being the work of the
committee of ten entirely.[407] Davidson, writing in 1847, made the
following comment on the sentiment of the church people in Kentucky at
that time. "In the morbid and feverish state of the public mind, it is
not to be concealed, that by some they (the Committee) were considered
as going to an unwarrantable and imprudent length. The northern
abolitionists were waging a hot crusade against slavery, sending out
itinerant lecturers, and loading the mails with inflammatory
publications. Their measures were marked with a fanatical virulence
rarely exhibited, and the people were exasperated beyond forbearance
... the effects were truly disastrous. The prospect of emancipation
was retarded for years. The laws bearing on the slave population were
made more stringent than ever, and their privileges were curtailed.
In Kentucky, the religious meetings of the blacks were broken up or
interrupted and their Sabbath schools dispersed."[408]

When the subject of emancipation was under discussion in the Kentucky
Synod one of the elders arose and stated that he owned one hundred
slaves, nearly all of whom he had inherited. Many of them were so old
that they could not provide for themselves, others were women and
children whom no one was willing to feed and clothe for their labor.
He stated emphatically that he had no desire to hold them in bondage,
but that he was willing to do whatever was best for the slaves
themselves. If he should free them, what would become of the aged and
the women and children? Furthermore, it was a serious matter to give
bond and security for the support of so many slaves of different ages
and character. He could not send them out of the State, for they were
intermarried with the slaves of others; and as to giving them wages,
he could not, for they were eating him up as it was. With a feeling of
intense interest in the slave and anxiety on his own behalf to do the
right, he asked his brethren of the Synod, what he ought to do.[409]
The position of this kind-hearted Kentucky slaveholder shows more
clearly than any other picture we could draw the difficulties of
emancipation in Kentucky even when one was convinced of the evils of
the slavery system.

The final word of the Presbyterian Church on the whole subject of
slavery was sounded at its General Assembly in Cincinnati in 1845,
when a resolution was adopted, as submitted by Nathan L. Rice, of
Kentucky, stating that it was not competent for the church to
legislate where Christ and his apostles had not legislated. This, at
least for the time being, proved acceptable to the churches south of
the Ohio and avoided a breach in the Presbyterians such as had just
taken place among the Methodists and Baptists.

The Baptists as a State organization did not pursue a policy
similar to that of the Presbyterians. After the failure of the
emancipationist campaign in 1792 and again at the constitutional
convention in 1799 a few members of the Baptist Church began a
movement for immediate abolition under the lead of several
ministers--Tarrent, Barrow, Sutton, Holmes and others. The policy
which they advocated was not only one of immediate abolition but of
non-fellowship with the slaveholders within their own denomination.
There was no general governing body for the State, as the Baptists had
several so-called associations which covered only a few counties each.
The trend of opinion throughout the various commonwealth organizations
was apparently against the position held by the emancipationist group,
for the latter in 1807 withdrew from the regular organizations and
established an association of their own which they called the Licking
Locust Association. They were only able to muster the assent of twelve
churches to their newer group and soon died out in importance.[410]
The real sentiment of the Baptists was no doubt much like that of the
Presbyterians, but these early advocates of Negro freedom in their own
organization were entirely too radical even for their own church
membership. Had they followed a course of action and policy more in
keeping with their own constituents they might have accomplished much
good, whereas, as it was, they only stirred up the feeling within
their own denomination to such an extent that thereafter little
progress was made towards a policy of even gradual emancipation of the
slave.

Throughout the slavery era, however, the Baptists in the State were
divided into the "regular" and the "separatists," the former being in
favor of non-interference with the question and the latter
representing the advocates of emancipation in one form or another.
Both agreed that slavery was an evil, but the regular group was
unwilling to make it the cause of the expulsion of a slaveholder from
the church. In May, 1845, a "Southern Baptist Convention" was held at
Augusta, Georgia. The meeting had been hastily called and
representatives were present only from Maryland, South Carolina,
North Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Louisiana, Kentucky, and the
District of Columbia. Mississippi, Arkansas, Tennessee and Florida
were represented only by letters. The convention had been summoned as
a protest against the action of the "Acting Board" of the church in
the country in refusing to consent to the appointment of a slaveholder
to any field of foreign missionary labors.[411] In June of the same
year the Kentucky Baptists for the most part withdrew from the
northern organization and pledged themselves to this newly formed
southern convention. The creed was not changed. It was simply a matter
of rebuke toward the northern section's attitude on the slavery
question.[412]

The Methodists had also struggled to find a peaceful solution of the
problem of harmonizing Christianity with slavery. At the meeting of
the General Conference of the Methodist Church in 1845, several days
were taken up in the debate over the status of Bishop James Osgood
Andrew, of Kentucky. By inheritance and marriage he was a slaveholder.
Finally he was requested by a vote of 110 to 68 "to desist from the
exercise of the office of Bishop while this impediment remained." The
southerners in the convention became unusually indignant, declaring
that the infliction of such a stigma upon Bishop Andrew would make it
impossible for them to maintain the influence of Methodism in the
South.[413] So they withdrew from the convention and in May, 1845,
held a convention of the Methodist churches of the Southern States in
Louisville. After a nineteen-days' session they decided to set up an
organization of their own to be known as the "Methodist Episcopal
Church South" and to have their first meeting at Petersburg, Virginia,
in May, 1846.[414]

The Kentucky Methodist Conference met at Frankfort on September 17,
1845, and the entire attention of the meeting was given over to the
question of whether they would adhere to the general conference or
would pledge themselves to the newly formed southern organization.
Bishop Andrew appeared at Frankfort at the crucial moment and stated
all the facts concerning himself and the action which the Louisville
Conference had taken as a result of the trouble in the previous
General Conference. By a vote of 146 to 5 they then declared that
henceforth they would adhere to the Methodist Episcopal Church South,
and that all proceedings, records and official acts would thereafter
be in the name of the "Kentucky Conference of the Methodist Episcopal
Church South."[415]

At its annual conference in 1858 held in Hopkinsville the Louisville
Conference held a very heated debate over the rules of the church
regarding slaveholders. Finally they voted to expunge from the General
Rules the one which forbade "the buying and selling of men, women and
children, with the intention to enslave them."[416] The regulation
thus repealed, although it was a part of the rules of Methodism, was
just another indication of the sentiment in Kentucky at that time to
resent more and more the encroachments of the North on the slave
system of the South and to hang on to the institution with a grim
determination. But they were not willing to go to unwarrantable
lengths, for at the Kentucky Conference held in Germantown in March,
1860, a proposition submitted by the sister conferences to the South
with a view to further altering the rules on slavery was denied.[417]

The churches of Kentucky for the most part pursued a policy of
benevolent neutrality in the struggle which the slave forces of the
State were having with their neighbors to the North. The Baptists and
Methodists within the commonwealth officially never made any positive
contribution to the forces of either side, and they took no definite
stand until the whole southern division of their general national
organization withdrew from membership in the national conventions and
set up an organization of their own. When this much had been done
both the Methodists and Baptists of Kentucky pledged their allegiance
to their respective newly formed southern conventions. On the other
hand the Presbyterians of the State maintained a policy that was
distinctively their own, separate and apart from any acts of their
national organization. They were the only religious body in Kentucky
to issue officially a constructive plan for the betterment of social
and economic conditions under slavery. When it came to the advocacy of
even gradual emancipation they were careful to state that the plan was
only published for the benefit of the slaveholding members of their
own religious body. The Presbyterians went further in their
interference with the institution of slavery in the State than any
other religious body, but even they were not willing to try to extend
their home missionary field beyond their own membership. On the whole,
the churches in Kentucky merely followed the dictates of public
opinion on the subject of slavery, trying to pursue a policy of
neutrality as long as possible and then when it was no longer
feasible, most of them sided with the slaveholding group. The northern
section of none of these religious bodies, however, was driven out of
the State. There were a good many of the so-called "northern" churches
which remained loyal to the old national organizations.

The summary of the actions of the three principal religious bodies of
the State shows that there was a growing sentiment against the
institution of slavery. Kentucky being a slaveholding State, the
significance of this attitude was very important. While it may be true
that the majority sentiment even among the churches was not in favor
of the elimination of slavery the very fact that even a minority were
coming to the front unmolested by violence and threats and favoring
the gradual elimination of the established institution revealed the
general trend of public opinion among the people of Kentucky. These
measures were taken entirely upon their own initiative and were not
prompted by an outside anti-slavery influence.

Any discussion of the evolution of public opinion in Kentucky on the
subject of emancipation and of slavery in general would be incomplete
without describing the attitude of Henry Clay toward the institution
in Kentucky. During almost the entire period of slavery in Kentucky he
was the foremost citizen of the State and one of the principal
slaveholders. From those two viewpoints alone anything that he had to
say on the local type and problems of slavery is valuable in this
connection.

The general position of Clay on the subject of Negro servitude has
never been very widely understood. Among the radical abolitionists of
the North he was looked upon as a friend of slavery for the sake of
political advancement and among the slaveholders in some parts of the
South he was regarded as almost a member of the Garrisonian group of
the enemies of slavery. To understand Clay's real position we need
only to consider his relation to the institution as it existed in his
native State.

Coming from Virginia to Lexington in 1797, Clay soon found ample
opportunities for a public career. He first came into prominence as a
writer on slavery in the columns of the _Lexington Gazette_ and the
_Kentucky Reporter_. When the constitutional convention of 1799 was
called for a revision of the fundamental law of the State Clay bent
all his efforts towards the adoption of a system of gradual
emancipation for the slaves of Kentucky. It was pointed out that there
were relatively few slaves in the State and that a progressive plan of
liberation would be much easier than at any future time.

The consensus of opinion at the time was that the emancipationists led
by this young man from Virginia would have been successful, had it not
been for the intervening excitement produced by the Alien and Sedition
Laws and the resulting famous Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions of
1798. Clay threw himself heart and soul into the newer campaign
against the mistakes of the Federalists and the former enthusiasm for
the gradual freedom of the slaves seems to have died down in his
thought as well as among the Kentucky people in general. Thus the
constitutional convention of 1799 left the conditions of slavery as
they were.

In a speech delivered three decades later before the Kentucky
Colonization Society, Clay said in commenting on his position in 1798:
"More than thirty years ago, an attempt was made, in this
commonwealth, to adopt a system of gradual emancipation, similar to
that which the illustrious Franklin had mainly contributed to
introduce in 1780, in the state founded by the benevolent Penn. And
among the facts of my life which I look back to with most satisfaction
is that of my having cooperated, with other zealous and intelligent
friends, to procure the establishment of that system in this state. We
were overpowered by numbers, but submitted to the decision of the
majority with that grace which the minority in a republic should ever
yield to that decision. I have, nevertheless, never ceased, and shall
never cease, to regret a decision, the effects of which have been to
place us in the rear of our neighbors, who are exempt from slavery, in
the state of agriculture, the progress of manufactures, the advance of
improvements, and the general progress of society."[418] In his famous
speech in the Senate on Abolition in 1839, referring further to his
activities in 1798, Clay stated that "no one was rash enough to
propose or think of immediate abolition. No one was rash enough to
think of throwing loose upon the community, ignorant and unprepared,
the untutored slaves of the state."[419]

Clay's private dealings with the institution were always consistent
with his political principles on the subject of slavery. He bought
many slaves during his lifetime but he never sold any.[420] Clay
believed that the slaves should be freed, but at the same time
considered the difficulties attendant upon instant emancipation. Among
the mass of the slaveholders of the State, Clay was one of the very
few who held a perfectly consistent attitude on gradual emancipation
as was finally shown by his will.[421]

With a more radical policy than that of Henry Clay the Kentucky
Abolition Society had been established as early as 1807, but its
membership was composed largely of Presbyterian and Baptist preachers
who were not in sympathy with the stand taken by the constitutional
convention of 1799. It was not until about 1830 that there began in
the State any real movement which was wide enough in influence to be
taken as an indication of the trend of public opinion. It will be
recalled that it was not until 1835 that the Presbyterian Synod was
able to decide on a plan of gradual emancipation.

It was in 1831 that some 48 slaveholders of Kentucky met and declared
themselves in favor of the gradual liberation of the slaves.[422]
James G. Birney, who was at that time living in Danville, took this
statement of the slave owners rather seriously and sent out an
invitation to the prominent men of the State to attend an
emancipation convention on December 6, 1831. After several months of
determined effort Birney only succeeded in getting together nine men,
all slaveholders. It is evident from the writings of Birney that he
thought these men were all determined to free their slaves and that
whatever plan he should propose would be accepted. But when the nine
slaveholders began to talk about the existing conditions in Kentucky
Birney's eyes were opened. It was pointed out that those who advocated
immediate emancipation were coming more and more to be victims of
social ostracism. Furthermore, Birney learned that there was among the
prominent slaveholders of the State a sort of secret organization
which had been formed to protect the constitutional rights of Kentucky
slaveholders against the encroachments of the people from the North.
James G. Birney was one of the most intelligent of the Kentuckians who
favored emancipation, but the ardent enthusiasm which he had hitherto
held for the future of his cause in Kentucky was decidedly cooled by
this little gathering of nine slaveholders. These men showed him a
point of view about which he had thought very little. Outside of the
new vision which this conference gave to Birney the only result of the
deliberations was that there was formed a society of slaveholders
which advocated the gradual emancipation of the future offspring of
slaves when they reached the age of twenty-one.[423]

Soon after this episode Birney came out in opposition to both gradual
emancipation and colonization. The majority of liberal-minded
Kentuckians were coming more and more to believe in these two
propositions as the ultimate solution of the slave problems of the
State and once Birney came out in opposition to them he was put down
as a radical abolitionist. In July, 1835, the feeling of the people of
Danville was aroused to the highest pitch and his anti-slavery paper
_The Philanthropist_ was forced to suspend publication when the local
printer was bought out.[424] The feeling of the people throughout the
State, however, was well shown by the fact that for the next two
months Birney made personal visits to Lexington, Frankfort and
Louisville in an attempt to get a printer to issue his newspaper. He
was entirely unsuccessful and on September 13 he wrote to Gerrit Smith
that he had determined to move to Cincinnati.[425] While the people of
the State could not agree with Birney's attitude on slavery they were
the first to admire his courage. George D. Prentice, the pro-slavery
editor of the _Louisville Journal_, had this comment to make:

     "He is an enthusiastic, but, in our opinion, a visionary
     philanthropist, whose efforts, though well intended, are likely
     to be of no real service to the cause of humanity. He at least
     shows, however, that he has the courage to reside among the
     people whose institutions he assails. He is not like William
     Lloyd Garrison living in Massachusetts, and opening the battery
     upon the states five hundred or one thousand miles off. He is not
     such a coward or fool as to think of cannonading the South from
     the steeple of a New England meeting house."

The climax of Birney's career in Kentucky had been reached in the
early part of 1835 when he split with the Kentucky Colonization
Society. Judge Underwood in the annual colonization address at
Frankfort had attempted to show that the only way to exterminate
slavery in the State was by African colonization. He advocated the
expenditure of $140,000 annually for the transportation of four
thousand Negroes between the ages of seventeen and twenty. The plan if
followed for fifty years he stated would rid the State of all
slaves.[426] In a letter to Gerrit Smith on January 31, 1835, Birney
voiced his opposition to the plan of Judge Underwood and to any scheme
of colonization. Thus on another point he was to be classed as a
radical abolitionist and his career of usefulness in Kentucky was at
an end. If he had chosen a more middle ground and aided the cause of
colonization, he would no doubt have accomplished much good. As it
was, he was forced to leave the State after many threats and
thereafter he stormed the institution of slavery in his native State
from a safe region north of the Ohio River. From that time on
everything that he uttered in opposition to slavery in Kentucky was
met with a strong current of opposition. Where Birney might have
accomplished much for his native State he really did harm because he
went beyond the point where the people would listen to his advice. In
September, 1834, he visited Henry Clay and that most liberal of all
Kentucky slaveholders pointed out to Birney the error of his ways but
the latter showed no signs of listening to advice and thereafter Clay
and Birney were sworn political antagonists. Had Birney joined with
Clay at this time there might have been a much brighter future in
Kentucky for the cause of emancipation. As it was, Birney never
receded from his position and when the Presbyterian Synod came out
with its plan of gradual emancipation Birney voiced his determined
opposition to the scheme because it did not favor the immediate
liberation of the slaves.[427] With the advent of the abolition
movement most of the Kentucky masters who were in favor of gradual
emancipation receded from their position and held on firmly to the
existing institution.[428]

The series of events from 1831 to 1835, centering around the
activities of Birney, brought the attention of the public to the
slavery question more than ever. As was common in all other movements
of popular interest it became the custom for local gatherings to be
held to discuss the problem. It was always customary at the conclusion
of these meetings to draw up a series of resolutions and it is
noticeable that they all voiced a similarity of sentiment on the
slavery question. A typical set of resolves were those drawn up at a
gathering held in Shelbyville in June, 1835:

     "_Resolved_, that the system of domestic slavery as it now exists
     in this commonwealth, is both a moral and a political evil, and
     in violation of the rights of man.

     "_Resolved_, as the opinion of this meeting, that the additional
     value which would be given to our property, and its products by
     the introduction of free white labor, would in itself be
     sufficient, under a system of gradual emancipation, to transport
     the whole of our colored population.

     "_Resolved_, that no system of emancipation will meet with our
     approbation, unless colonization be inseparably connected with
     it, and that any scheme of emancipation which will leave the
     blacks within our borders, is more to be deprecated than slavery
     itself."[429]

These resolutions were just another indication that the sentiment of
the people of Kentucky during the decade from 1830 to 1840 was in
favor of gradual emancipation of the slaves and their colonization in
Africa. We have seen that this was the plan of the various church
bodies, and also of Kentucky's greatest statesman, Henry Clay. Added
to this we find that the majority of the liberal-minded people of the
State held to the same conviction. But why, one asks, did all this
feeling come to naught. The answer can be better expressed in the
words of a contemporary Kentuckian, Nathaniel Shaler: "From the local
histories the deliberate student will easily become convinced that if
there had been no external pressure against slavery at this time there
would still have been a progressive elimination of the slave element
from the population by emancipation on the soil, by the sale of slaves
to the planters of the Southern States, and by their colonization in
foreign parts."[430]

During the decade from 1840 to 1850 this outside pressure of which
Shaler speaks was at its height. We have seen typical examples of it
within the borders of Kentucky in the discussion of the cases of Delia
Webster, Calvin Fairbank and John B. Mahan. The change in the trend of
popular thought during this period does not show itself much in the
open until 1849, when the third constitutional convention was about to
assemble. It was then that all phases of the problem of slavery were
discussed, in the press, in the pulpit, on the platform and in the
elections. George IX Prentice in an editorial gave the best exposition
of Kentucky sentiment. He said: "The sentiment of Kentucky we believe
to be, that slavery is an evil which must be borne with patience,
simply because there is no known plan for its rapid extinction which
would not produce incalculable sacrifices and appalling risks. At the
same time we think the people of Kentucky are not inclined to increase
the evil, but are inclined to favor its gradual emancipation and
remote termination, by prohibiting the further introduction of slaves
and by some provision tending to encourage voluntary emancipation with
colonization. These measures they believe, taken in connection with
the known tendency in widening circles to substitute free for slave
labor, will hasten the social revolution in question as fast as it can
be carried with safety to the Commonwealth or with benefit to the
colonized negro."[431]

So universal was this feeling that even Cassius M. Clay, the only real
abolitionist left in the State, came out more or less in favor of it.
Under his leadership there was held at Frankfort, April 25, 1849, an
emancipation convention to which all the more radical element were
invited. Clay himself proved to be the most radical member of the
convention but when they came to draw up a series of resolutions the
only ones to pass were those which favored the absolute prohibition of
the importation of any more slaves into Kentucky and the complete
power to enforce and perfect, under the new constitution, whenever the
people desired it, a system of gradual emancipation of the
slaves.[432] Here we are confronted with the unusual fact that the
radical element of the State agreed with the plan of George D.
Prentice, one of the chief pro-slavery men of Kentucky, and with that
of Henry Clay.

While sojourning for his health in New Orleans in February, 1849, Clay
sent Richard Pindell for publication a letter on the gradual
emancipation of slavery in Kentucky, as the State at that time was
about to hold another constitutional convention. This long and able
document constitutes the most constructive program for the progressive
elimination of slavery from the State that was ever drawn up. It
embodied not only the fundamental principles of Clay's attitude on the
Kentucky slavery question but it undoubtedly typified the real
position of the average high-minded Kentucky slaveholder of that day.
Clay frankly admitted that he had little hope of the immediate success
of the plan, but he thought it was his duty to present the facts of
the problem to the people of his own State, at a time when they were
about to alter the existing constitution. The spirit of the plan as
well as its context shows that Clay had thoroughly considered the
emancipation question from all aspects, especially in relation to its
practical operation. The actual plan was based on three principles:
(1) that any gradual emancipation should be slow in its operation, so
as not to disturb the existing habits of society; (2) as an
indispensable condition the liberated slaves were to be sent out of
the State and colonized in Africa; (3) and the expenses of their
transportation and six months subsistence were to be borne by a fund
supplied by the labor of the freed negro.

Regarding the progressive plan of liberation, Clay suggested that a
certain date, January 1, 1855 or 1860, be fixed for the commencement
of the plan. All slaves born after that date were to be free at the
age of twenty-five; but they were liable thereafter to be hired out
under State authority for a period of not more than three years, in
order to raise money to pay for their expenses of transportation to
their colony and their subsistence for the term of six months. It was
suggested that the offspring of those who were to be free at
twenty-five should be free at their birth, but subject to
apprenticeship until they reached their majority and then to be hired
out as in the case of the parent to pay the expenses of transportation
to the colony and their settlement there. In the meanwhile the master
would have the usual legal rights over the slaves and could sell,
devise or remove them out of the State.

Clay considered colonization to be an indispensable part of his scheme
and went so far as to say that he would be "utterly opposed" to any
system of emancipation without it. He firmly believed that the nearly
two hundred thousand blacks along with their descendants "could never
live in peace and harmony and equality with the residue of the
population" if they were free. He thought the expense of colonizing
should be borne by a fund from the labor of the liberated Negro
because he was the individual who secured the most benefit thereby.
The non-slaveholder should not be taxed for any share in the expense
and the slaveholder would have enough sacrifices to make without any
additional financial burdens. Clay figured that the average annual
hire of each slave would be about fifty dollars, or one hundred and
fifty dollars for the whole period of three years. One third of this
sum would be required for the transportation of the Negro to Africa
and the other two thirds would go towards a fund to establish him in
his new country.[433]

The persistence of Clay in his avowed convictions on the subject of
slavery and emancipation in Kentucky was kept up in spite of the fact
that within a few days after the publication of his plan of
emancipation throughout Kentucky the House of Representatives at
Frankfort by the unanimous vote of 93 to 0 declared that "we the
representatives of the people of Kentucky, are opposed to abolition or
emancipation of slavery in any shape or form whatever, except as now
provided by the laws and constitution of the state."[434] This was
their answer to the plea set forth by Clay and strange to say the same
group of men voted unanimously at the same session to return Clay for
six years more to the United States Senate.

A convention of the so-called "Friends of Constitutional Reform" had
been held at the State capital on February 5, 1849, and had drawn up a
series of twelve resolutions on the several questions which were to be
debated in the constitutional convention. They made mention
incidentally of the desired reforms in connection with slavery stating
"that we do not desire or contemplate any change in the relative
condition of master and slave in the new Constitution, and intend a
firm and decided resistance to any such change. We have no objection
to a proper provision for colonizing the present free blacks, and
those who shall hereafter be set free, but protest against abolition
or emancipation without the consent of the owner, unless upon full
compensation and colonization."[435]

This element dominated the convention. The body not only ignored any
plan of emancipation but drew the reins of the existing institution
tighter than ever before by incorporating in the Bill of Rights the
famous phrase that "the right of property is before and higher than
any constitutional sanction, and the right of the owner of a slave to
such slave and its increase is the same and as inviolable as the right
of the owner of any property whatsoever." Such a statement was,
however, not brought on by the words of Clay, but was a direct
answer to the "higher law than the constitution" plea of the
abolitionists.[436] The convention amended the standard article on
slavery with a section to the effect that the "General Assembly should
pass laws providing that any free negro or mulatto immigrating to,
and any slave thereafter emancipated in, and refusing to leave that
State, should be deemed guilty of a felony, punished by confinement in
the penitentiary."

The obvious purpose of this amendment was to reduce the number of
Negroes in the State. Accordingly every slave emancipated was forced
to leave the State and the Negro population was decreased just so much
every time any slaves were set free. The convention was thus willing
to do something towards eliminating the Negro, but was not in favor of
any scheme of a general gradual liberation of the slaves. The
necessary legislative act for carrying out the provision of the
constitution was enacted March 24, 1851.[437] This law only went half
way in that it only prevented those Negroes who had been freed in
Kentucky from living in the State. It was not until March 3, 1860,
that the prohibition was extended to all free Negro immigration into
the State.[438] An interesting development of this policy was shown in
the enactment of the legislature in 1863 which declared it unlawful
for any Negro or mulatto claiming to be free under the Emancipation
Proclamation to migrate to or remain in the State. Any Negro violating
this law was to be treated as a runaway slave.[439]

The desire of the State authorities to eliminate the free Negro was
accompanied by constructive measures in behalf of the emancipated
slave. On March 3, 1856, the State legislature passed a law
appropriating $5,000 annually to aid the Kentucky Colonization Society
in the transportation of free Negroes to Liberia.[440] The universal
sentiment of the time was that the salvation of the Negro race rested
in their elimination from the State even as free men and their
transportation to their native African soil. Henry Clay of all others
was the most persistent advocate of colonization.

We have seen that the general trend of public opinion from about 1798
had been progressively in favor of gradual emancipation provided it
was coupled with some form of colonization which would remove the
liberated Negroes from the State. Public sentiment, however, received
a serious set-back about 1838 with the beginning of the Underground
Railroad system and the incoming of the abolitionist literature. In a
speech in the Kentucky legislature of 1838 James T. Morehead, one of
the leading anti-slavery statesmen of the State, portrayed the coming
of the newer era in the history of Kentucky slavery when the people
would make more strenuous efforts to hold firmly to the slavery
institution. Morehead pictured the popular mind in these words: "Any
man who desires to see slavery abolished--any friend of emancipation,
gradual or immediate--- who supposes for a moment that now is the time
to carry out this favorite policy, must be blind to the prognostics
that lower from every quarter of the political sky. Sir, the present
is not the period to unmanacle the slave in this or any other state of
the Union. Four years ago you might have had some hope. But the wild
spirit of fanaticism has done much to retard the work of emancipation
and to rivet the fetters of slavery in Kentucky.... The advocates of
abolition--the phrenzied fanatics of the North, neither sleep nor
slumber. Their footsteps are even now to be seen wherever mischief can
be perpetrated--and it may be that while the people of Kentucky are
reposing in the confidence of fancied security, the tocsin of
rebellion may resound through the land--the firebrand of the
incendiary may wrap their dwellings in flames--their towns and cities
may become heaps of ashes before their eyes and their minds drawn off
from all thoughts of reforming the government to consider the means
necessary for their self-preservation--the protection of their
families and all that is dear to men."[441]

Such was the idea of one of the most prominent public men of Kentucky
and such became in time the opinion of the average citizen who had
come to believe in gradual emancipation as the hope and solution of
the Negro problem in the State. The future course of events regarding
slavery in Kentucky is to be explained by this radical change of
mind. Thus did the wise and constructive plans of the gradual
emancipationists come to naught with the incoming of the radical
abolitionist movement which the Kentucky populace thought would bring
about a civil insurrection among the slaves in their own State. The
abolitionists misunderstood the gradual emancipation movement in
Kentucky and really fanned the flame of the pro-slavery sentiment that
came in its place.


FOOTNOTES:

[397] Davidson, _History of the Presbyterian Church in Kentucky_, p.
336.

[398] _Minutes of Transylvania Presbytery_, Vol. 1, p. 147.

[399] _Minutes of Transylvania Presbytery_, Vol. 2, pp. 102-3.

[400] _Ibid._, Vol. 2, pp. 163, 224.

[401] _Minutes W. Lexington Presbytery_, Vol. 1, p. 38.

[402] _Ibid._, p. 81.

[403] _Minutes of Kentucky Synod_, Vol. 5, pp. 28, 31.

[404] _Minutes of Kentucky Synod_, Vol. 5, pp. 50-52.

[405] _Address to Presbyterians of Kentucky_, pp. 33-34.

[406] _Ibid._, p. 34.

[407] Davidson, _History of the Presbyterian Church in Kentucky_, p.
340.

[408] _Op. cit._, p. 340.

[409] Blanchard and Rice, _Debate on Slavery_, p. 88.

[410] Spencer, _History of the Baptists in Kentucky_, Vol. 1, p. 186.

[411] _Niles' Register_, May 24, 1845.

[412] _Ibid._, June 28, 1845.

[413] _Ibid._, June 8, 1844.

[414] _Ibid._, May 17, 24, 31, 1845.

[415] _Niles' Register_, September 27, 1845.

[416] Collins, _History of Kentucky_, Vol. 1, p. 81.

[417] _Ibid._, Vol. 1, p. 83.

[418] Schurz, Carl, _Henry Clay_, Vol. 1, p. 31.

[419] Colton, _Works of Clay_, Vol. 6, p. 153.

[420] His attitude was perhaps best shown when, on a visit to
Richmond, Indiana, in the fall of 1846, he was presented with a
petition by a Quaker by the name of Mendenhall asking him to liberate
all the slaves he owned. Clay made a rather lengthy speech to the
gentleman on the general principles of the question and then, came
down to the practical side of the problem:

"Without any knowledge of the relation in which I stand to my slaves,
or their individual condition, you, Mr. Mendenhall, and your
associates, who have been active in getting up this petition, call
upon me forthwith to liberate the whole of them. Now let me tell you,
that some half a dozen of them, from age, decrepitude, or infirmity,
are wholly unable to gain a livelihood for themselves, and are a heavy
charge upon me. Do you think that I should conform to the dictates of
humanity by ridding myself of that charge, and sending them forth into
the world with the boon of liberty, to end a wretched existence in
starvation? Another class is composed of helpless infants, with or
without improvident mothers. Do you believe as a Christian, that I
should perform my duty toward them by abandoning them to their fate?
Then there is another class who would not accept their freedom if I
would give it to them. I have for many years owned a slave that I
wished would leave me, but he would not. What shall I do with that
class?"

"What my treatment of my slaves is you can learn from Charles, who
accompanies me on this journey, and who has traveled with me over the
greater part of the United States, and in both the Canadas, and has
had a thousand opportunities, if he had chosen to embrace them, to
leave me. Excuse me, Mr. Mendenhall, for saying that my slaves are as
well fed and clad, look as sleek and hearty, and are quite as civil
and respectful in their demeanor, and as little disposed to wound the
feelings of any one, as you are."



"I shall, Mr. Mendenhall, take your petition into respectful and
deliberate consideration; but before I come to a final decision, I
should like to know what you and your associates are willing to do for
the slaves in my possession, if I should think proper to liberate
them. I own about fifty, who are probably worth about fifteen thousand
dollars. To turn them loose upon society without any means of
subsistence or support would be an act of cruelty. Are you willing to
raise and secure the payment of fifteen thousand dollars for their
benefit, if I should be induced to free them? The security of the
payment of that sum would materially lessen the obstacle in the way of
their emancipation."--Colton, Reed & McKinley, _Works of Henry Clay_,
Vol. 6, pp. 388-390.

This sums up in Clay's own words his treatment of the slaves that were
under his control. It is not to be presumed in any case that general
conditions in the State were like this. There were obvious reasons why
Clay couldn't get one or two of his slaves to accept freedom when he
offered it, for they realized that they were far better off under his
own particular care than they could ever hope to be under an
absolutely free status in society.

[421] So consistent was Clay in deed as well as words in spite of all
that the opposing forces had accomplished in the "State of Kentucky
that when he died he left a will which did for his own slaves just
what he would have had others do in his lifetime. As long as he lived
he refused to emancipate his slaves but when he passed away he left a
written document, the following portion of which forms the eminent
climax to a career of continuous labors for the eventual good of the
Kentucky slave owners as well as the slaves themselves.

"In the sale of any of my slaves, I direct that members of families
shall not be separated without their consent.

"My will is, and I accordingly direct, that the issue of all my female
slaves, which shall be born after the first day of January, 1850,
shall be free at the respective ages, of the males at twenty-eight,
and of the females at twenty-five; and that the three years next
preceding their arrival at the age of freedom, they shall be entitled
to their hire or wages for those years, or of the fair value of their
services, to defray the expense of transporting them to one of the
African colonies and of furnishing them with an outfit on their
arrival there.

"And I further direct, that they be taught to read, to write, and to
cipher, and that they be sent to Africa. I further will and direct,
that the issue of any of the females, who are so to be entitled to
their freedom, at the age of twenty-five, shall be free at their
birth, and that they be bound out as apprentices to learn farming, or
some useful trade, upon the condition also, of being taught to read,
to write, and to cipher. And I direct also, that the age of twenty-one
having been attained, they shall be sent to one of the African
colonies, to raise the necessary funds for which purpose, if they
shall not have previously earned them, they must be hired out for a
sufficient length of time.

"I require and enjoin my executors and descendants to pay particular
attention to the execution of this provision of my will. And if they
should sell any of the females who or whose issue are to be free, I
especially desire them to guard carefully the rights of such issue by
all suitable stipulations and sanctions in the contract of sale. But I
hope that it may not be necessary to sell any such persons who are to
be entitled to their freedom, but that they may be retained in the
possession of some of my descendants."--Colton, Reed & McKinley, Vol.
3, p. 153.

[422] Birney, William, _James G. Birney and his Times_, p. 132.

[423] Birney, William, _James G. Birney and his Times_, p. 133.

[424] _Ibid._, p. 182. The interesting story of Birney and his
troubles with his fellow townsmen does not come within the scope of
this investigation and will be found treated at length in William
Birney's _James G. Birney and His Times_.

[425] Birney, William, _James G. Birney and his Times_, p. 185.

[426] _Ibid._, p. 155.

[427] Birney, William, _James G. Birney and his Times_, p. 156.

[428] Quick to recognize this tendency, Clay referred to it in his
Senate speech of February 7, 1839:

"The proposition in Kentucky for gradual emancipation did not prevail,
but it was sustained by a large and respectable minority. That
minority had increased, and was increasing, until the abolitionists
commenced their operations. The effect has been to dissipate all
prospects whatever, for the present, of any scheme of gradual or other
emancipation. The people of that state have been shocked and alarmed
by these abolition movements, and the number who would now favor a
system even of gradual emancipation is probably less than it was in
the years 1798-9. At the session of the legislature held in 1837-8 the
question of calling a convention was submitted to a consideration of
the people by a law passed in conformity with the Constitution of that
state. Many motives existed for the passage of the law, and among them
that of emancipation had its influence. When the question was passed
upon by the people at their last annual election, only about one
fourth of the whole voters of the state supported a call of a
convention. The apprehension of the danger of abolition was the
leading consideration among the people for opposing the call. But for
that, but for the agitation of the question of abolition in states
whose population had no right, in the opinion of the people of
Kentucky, to interfere in the matter, the vote for a convention would
have been much larger, if it had not been carried.... Prior to the
agitation of this subject of abolition, there was a progressive
melioration in the condition of the slaves--schools of instruction
were opened by humane and religious persons. These are now all
checked, and a spirit of insubordination having shown itself in some
localities, traceable, it is believed, to abolition movements and
exertions, the legislative authority has found it expedient to infuse
fresh vigor into the police and the laws which regulate the conduct of
the slaves."--Colton, Reed & McKinley, _Works of Henry Clay_, Vol. 6,
pp. 153-154.

[429] _Niles' Register_, July 4, 1835.

[430] Shaler, N. S., _Kentucky_, p. 197.

[431] _Louisville Weekly Journal_, September 26, 1849.

[432] _Niles' Register_, May 9, 1849. Clay, Cassius, _Memoirs_, pp.
175-178. Collins, _History of Kentucky_, Vol. 1, p. 59.

[433] Clay endeavored in his plan to be fair to all parties concerned,
not only the Negro but the slave owner as well, as is well evident in
the following paragraph, in which he sought to show the justice of his
scheme to the holders of Negroes in the State:

"That the system, will be attended with some sacrifices on the part of
the slaveholders, which are to be regretted, need not be denied. What
great and beneficent enterprise was ever accomplished without risk and
sacrifice! But these sacrifices are distant, contingent, and
inconsiderable. Assuming the year 1860 for the commencement of the
system, all slaves born prior to that time would remain such during
their lives, and the present loss of the slaveholder would be only the
difference in value of the female slave whose offspring, if she had
any, born after the first day of January, 1860, should be free at the
age of twenty-five or should be slaves for life. In the meantime, if
the right to remove or sell the slave out of the State should be
exercised, that trifling loss would not be incurred. The slaveholder,
after the commencement of the system, would lose the difference
between the value of the slaves for life and slaves until the age of
twenty-five years. He might also incur some inconsiderable expense in
rearing from their birth the issue of those who were to be free at
twenty-five, until they were old enough to be apprenticed out; but as
it is probable that they would be most generally bound to him, he
would receive some indemnity from their services until they attained
their majority."

[434] Collins, _History of Kentucky_, Vol. 1, p. 58.

[435] _Niles' Register_, February 21, 1849.

[436] We know how Clay felt about this matter, for he referred to it
at length in his speech in the Senate on February 20, 3850, in the
debate on the Compromise resolutions. Speaking particularly of his
letter of emancipation he declared: "I knew at the moment that I wrote
that letter in New Orleans, as well as I know at this moment, that a
majority of the people of Kentucky would not adopt my scheme, or
probably any project whatever of gradual emancipation. Perfectly well
did I know it; but I was anxious that, if any of my posterity, or any
human being who comes after me, should have occasion to look into my
sentiments, and ascertain what they were on this great institution of
slavery; to put them on record then; and ineffectual as I saw the
project would be, I felt it was a duty which I owed to myself, to
truth, to my country, and to my God, to record my sentiments. The
State of Kentucky has decided as I anticipated she would do. I regret
it; but I acquiesce in her decision." --Colton, Reed & McKinley,
_Works of Henry Clay_, Vol. 3, p. 353

[437] Collins, _History of Kentucky_, Vol. 1, p. 61.

[438] _Ibid._, Vol. 1, p. 83.

[439] Session Laws of 1863, p. 366.

[440] _Ibid._, 1856, Vol. 1, p. 50.

[441] _Maysville Eagle_, April 11, 1838.




BOOK REVIEWS


_The Negro in Literature and Art._ By BENJAMIN BRAWLEY. Duffield and
Company, New York, 1918. Pp. 176. Price $1.25.

This is an effort to put in succinct form an estimate of the Negro's
efforts in the creative world. The style of the book is largely
biographical. The opening chapter deals with Negro genius. Then around
such Negroes as Phyllis Wheatley, Paul Laurence Dunbar, Charles W.
Chestnutt, W. E. B. DuBois, William Stanley Braithwaite, Meta Warrick
Fuller, Henry O. Tanner, Frederick Douglass, and Booker T. Washington
are grouped most of the facts as to the achievements of the Negroes in
art, literature, and science. In the appendix there is a dissertation
on the Negro in American fiction. A helpful bibliography and a short
index are also added.

This book is unique in that it is the first work devoted exclusively
to this aspect of Negro history. It undertakes "to treat somewhat more
thoroughly than has ever before been attempted the achievement of the
Negro in the United States along literary and artistic lines, judging
this by absolute rather than by partial or limited standards." The
work is the result of studies begun by the author years ago and
published in booklet form in 1910 as _The Negro in Literature and
Art_. The substance of this treatise is found also in Professor
Brawley's _A Short History of the American Negro_. Certain articles
included therein have already been published in the _Springfield
Republican_, _The Southern Workman_, and the _Dial_. The appearance of
this work in the new form is justified by the author on the ground
that the constantly increasing material in this field has so changed
his viewpoint that the time seemed ripe for a more intensive review.

The purpose of the author is a lofty one. Here we see the effort to
inform the public that there is among Negroes a growing scholarship
which must be reckoned with in determining the thought of this
country. It is to convince the public that the Negro mind is
functioning along all lines of thought known to other races of
achievement. The purpose, too, is to set forth to Negroes examples of
successful men and women in this field to serve them as an incentive
to contribute to thought. Professor Brawley has, therefore, written an
interesting book which should attract all persons desiring to
understand those forces at work in the Negro mind and the manner in
which they have found expression.

                                   C. G. WOODSON



_Negro Folk Songs._ By NATALIE CURTIS BURLIN. Book I. New York and
Boston, G. Schirmer. Pp. 42. Price 50 cents.

The unique features of Natalie Curtis Burlin's notation of Negro
folk-songs, collected in the South, are their complete truth to the
original folk-song, spirit and letter. The spontaneous part-singing of
groups of Negroes is a rare phenomenon in folk-music, for most simple
people sing only a unisono melody. Mrs. Curtis Burlin, unlike most
former collectors, has recorded not only the melody and words, but the
whole _choral_ folk-song, as sung in the South, with all its different
voices. To secure entire accuracy in so difficult a task, a phonograph
was used and the work was mainly accomplished in all its wealth of
octave at Hampton Institute, Virginia, under the auspices of which the
collection was undertaken and for the benefit of which the
publications are made. Not content with a by-ear approximation only of
the folk-song, Mrs. Burlin gave especial care to the notation of every
nuance of Negro singing--organic and rhythmic. The changing nuance
syncopations that give such expressive accent to the different solo
verses sung by the Negro "leader" have all been caught and put upon
paper. Doctor Talcott Williams, of the New York School of Journalism,
says that the example of this reverent and scholarly work marks a new
era in the collecting of Negro folk-music in this country.

The words of the songs--true folk-poems--have been noted in dialect
with the same truth to Negro rendering as the music. Furthermore, the
syllables stressed in the music are stressed in the written poem as
well; for in the mind of the Negro authors, words and music were one
spontaneous creation, and it is the _music_ that gives to the words
the accent, instead of the words forming the basis of the accentuation
of the music, as with us. This reproduction in verse of the original
Negro rhythms which are full of unexpected emphasis and captivating
syncopation forms a new departure in the manner of writing Negro poems
and it is believed that modern poets and writers of vers libre will
find interest in the richness and variety of Negro rhythms here shown.

Each song is prefaced by a few paragraphs of descriptive text and the
dedications of the different records to men who have helped to advance
the Negro summarize, in a sense, the progress of the race since
emancipation.

The recording of Negro folk-songs was prefaced by Mrs. Burlin by a
year's study of the native music of Africa. Doubleday, Page & Co. will
bring out in the autumn her book entitled _Songs From the Dark
Continent_, containing the results of careful study of native
folk-lore and music told and sung by two African boys (one a Zulu and
the other from the Ndan tribe) who had come directly to Hampton
Institute from the Dark Continent. This book plainly proves the
relationship of American Negro music to its parent stem in Africa, and
reveals the poetic as well as musical gifts latent in the black race.



_The Black Man's Part in the War._ By SIR H. H. JOHNSTON. Simpkin
Marshall, London, 1917.

Taking into consideration that the United Kingdom now rules 50,000,000
of Africans who are well represented in the battle line by the
thousands of Negroes fighting to make democracy safe in the world of
the white man, from which the blacks are excluded, this sympathetic
writer here endeavors to give these soldiers of color credit for their
unselfish services. The highest tribute which he pays them is that
their loyalty is incontestable. The writer, therefore, makes an appeal
in behalf of safeguarding their interests and reasonably preserving
their independence after the war. Having in mind the new alignments of
trade, he sees the Africans as the producers of the tropical products
which white men will need. Their future loyalty in the competitive
commercial world after the war is also necessary to the salvation of
the English people in the tropics and at home.

The writer believes too that to secure this necessary loyalty the
natives must be given political recognition. The rights of the black
man as a citizen of the empire must be affirmed wherever the
territories have been under British rule long enough to acquire a very
British tone in language, education and ideals. He hopes also that the
present tendency of the natives of the late German possessions to
prefer the rule of the British to that of their former masters may be
further accentuated by the efforts of Englishmen to treat these
natives with more consideration. The writer advocates also a fair
division of land where the two races are brought into contact with
each other as in Rhodesia.

To strengthen the claims he makes for the recognition of the black man
the writer has well illustrated his book with plates showing the
advancement of Negroes to arouse interest in their behalf. The book
is, of necessity, incomplete, as the war has not yet ended; but, on
the whole, students of Negro life and history will find it profitable
to read this broad enlightened working program for changing the white
man's attitude toward a large part of the human family which not only
has done him no great wrong, but has borne his burdens when he has
been about to fall beneath the load.



_History of the Civil War._ By JAMES FORD RHODES, LL.D., D.Litt.
McMillan Company, New York. 1861-1865. Pp. 454.

Mr. Rhodes has covered this ground in detail in his _History of the
United States_ in seven volumes. But this work is not an abridgment of
the three volumes of that history dealing with the Civil War. Since
writing his first history he has had access to much new material and
many valuable treatments of certain periods of the Civil War. He has,
therefore, considered it necessary to bring out this new volume that
he may show the bearing of these new facts on his grasp of this period
of our history.

Influenced by the dominant thought of the present war, Mr. Rhodes
treats such conditions as unpreparedness, the privations of the war,
lack of tea and coffee, the lack of bread and meat, the difficulty of
transportation, conscription, high prices, loans, high taxation, and
consequent distress. The Negroes are necessarily mentioned in the
discussion of slavery in the territories, the attempted slavery
compromises, Lincoln's handling of the question, the effect on them of
the movements of the armies, and the efforts at emancipation leading
up to the ratification of the Thirteenth Amendment. Mention is also
made of the conduct of the slaves who accompanied the Confederates and
of those who followed and fought with the Union army.

Mr. Rhodes is here at his best, that is, when writing on the Civil
War. But this seems to be mere chance. He writes a good history of the
Civil War because he happens to be a Unionist, and no one has yet
proved that the Union cause was wrong. He is after all an
impressionable historian, accepting almost anything he picks up, but
embellishing it so well as to win the American public, whose
scholarship has not yet performed the task of publishing an authentic
history of the Civil War from the viewpoint of treating the records
scientifically. When Rhodes elsewhere takes up the Negro in the
Reconstruction he shows his lack of ability as an historian in
accepting almost everything which he has heard or read about the Negro
and in branding, therefore, as mistakes and failures all of the
efforts to elevate the Negro to the dignity of citizenship and to deal
with him as a human being.




NOTES


William Bernard Hartgrove, one of the five members who participated in
the organization of the Association for the Study of Negro Life and
History in Chicago in 1915, died at Albuquerque, New Mexico, on the
twenty-fourth of April. In his death the Association lost a
substantial supporter and friend. He was an unselfish, wide-awake and
enterprising teacher, endeavoring always to be instrumental in the
uplift of the Negro. During the last ten years of his life he devoted
much of his time and means to the work of the National Association for
the Advancement of Colored People, serving the local branch most of
that period as secretary. When the Association for the Study of Negro
Life and History was organized he was among the first to see its
possibilities and to give it financial as well as moral support. He
made himself useful in assisting the editor in his arduous duties
during the days when the work was in the making. He contributed to the
JOURNAL OF NEGRO HISTORY, moreover, a number of articles, among which
are: _The Story of Maria Louise Moore and Fannie M. Richards_, _The
Negro Soldier in the American Revolution_, and _The Story of Josiah
Henson_.



Mention of the slave Archy in Miss Beasley's _Slavery in California_
has called forth from a relative of his the following short sketch:

Archy's mother was named Maria. Maria had four children: Archy,
Candace, Pompey and Quitman. (I am the daughter of Candace.) At the
time Charles A. Stoval took Archy to California, Maria with her other
children were with Simeon Stoval, the father of Chas. A. Stoval.

Chas. A. Stoval had been graduated in medicine and had returned home
to begin practice, but his health having failed him, he went to
California, taking my Uncle Archy with him. My grandmother Maria heard
through the relatives of Stoval of Archy during the time Stoval
remained in California. But near the close of the Civil War, Chas. A.
Stoval returned to Mississippi and remained there until his death a
few years later. After Stoval came back from California, my
grandmother never heard any more of her son Archy, except when she
once heard that he was with the Indians, who were treating him for
some kind of sickness. Whether he died or whether this rumor was put
out to keep the Stovals from trying to steal him and bring him back to
Mississippi I have never been able to learn. My grandmother Maria
continued to search for Archy, by writing several times to San
Francisco, but without success. She died in 1884. Pompey and Quitman
continued to live near Jackson, Miss., where Quitman died some time
ago. Pompey was still alive when I last heard of him.

                                   MRS. R. A. HUNT



_German East Africa_, by A. F. Calvert, has been published by Werner
Laurie, London.

Messrs. Routledge, of London, will soon bring out a volume of _Select
Constitutional Documents Illustrating the History of South Africa_.

Dr. H. K. W. Kumm's history of modern missionary work has appeared
with imprint of MacMillan with the title _African Missionary Heroes
and Heroines_.

Doubleday, Page and Company announce the appearance of _Education and
Life_, by Doctor Francis Greenwood Peabody, of Harvard University.
This is a short history of Hampton Institute during the last fifty
years, prepared at the request of the trustees.




THE JOURNAL

OF

NEGRO HISTORY

VOL. III--OCTOBER, 1918--NO. 4




THE BEGINNINGS OF THE MISCEGENATION OF THE WHITES AND BLACKS


Although science has uprooted the theory, a number of writers are
loath to give up the contention that the white race is superior to
others, as it is still hoped that the Caucasian race may be preserved
in its purity, especially so far as it means miscegenation with the
blacks. But there are others who express doubt that the integrity of
the dominant race has been maintained.[442] Scholars have for
centuries differed as to the composition of the mixed breed stock
constituting the Mediterranean race and especially about that in Egypt
and the Barbary States. In that part of the dark continent many
inhabitants have certain characteristics which are more Caucasian than
negroid and have achieved more than investigators have been willing to
consider the civilization of the Negro. It is clear, however, that
although the people of northern Africa cannot be classed as Negroes,
being bounded on the south by the masses of African blacks, they have
so generally mixed their blood with that of the blacks that in many
parts they are no nearer to any white stock than the Negroes of the
United States.

This miscegenation, to be sure, increased toward the south into
central Africa, but it has extended also to the north and east into
Asia and Europe. Traces of Negro blood have been found in the Malay
States, India and Polynesia. In the Arabian Peninsula it has been so
extensive as to constitute a large group there called the Arabised
Negroes. But most significant of all has been the invasion of Europe
by persons of African blood. Professor Sergi leads one to conclude
that the ancient Pelasgii were of African origin or probably the
descendants of the race which settled northern Africa and southern
Europe, and are therefore due credit for the achievements of the early
Greek and Italian civilizations.[443]

There is much evidence of a further extension of this infusion in the
Mediterranean world.

     "Recent discoveries made in the vicinity of the principality of
     Monaco and others in Italy and western France," says MacDonald,
     "would seem to reveal ... the actual fact that many thousand
     years ago a negroid race had penetrated through Italy into
     France, leaving traces at the present day in the physiognomy of
     the peoples of southern Italy, Sicily, Sardinia and western
     France, and even in the western parts of the United Kingdom of
     Great Britain and Ireland. There are even at the present day some
     examples of the Keltiberian peoples of western Scotland, southern
     and western Wales, southern and western Ireland, of distinctly
     negroid aspect, and in whose ancestry there is no indication
     whatever of any connection with the West Indies or with Modern
     Africa. Still more marked is this feature in the peoples of
     southern and western France and of the other parts of the
     Mediterranean already mentioned."[444]

Because of the temperament of the Portugese this infusion of African
blood was still more striking in their country. As the Portugese are a
good-natured people void of race hate they did not dread the
miscegenation of the races. One finds in southern Portugal a "strong
Moorish, North African element" and also an "old intermixture with
those Negroes who were imported thither from Northwest Africa to till
the scantily populated southern provinces."[445] This miscegenation
among the Portugese easily extended to the New World. Then followed
the story of the Caramarii, the descendants of the Portugese, who
after being shipwrecked near Bahia arose to prominence among the
Tupinambo Indians and produced a clan of half-castes by taking to
himself numerous native women.[446] This admixture served as a
stepping stone to the assimilation of the Negroes when they came.

There immigrated later into Brazil other settlers who, mixing eagerly
with the Amerindians, gave rise to a race called Mamelucos who began
to mix maritally with the imported Negro women. The French and Dutch
too in caring for their offspring by native women promoted the same.
"They educated them, set them free, lifted them above servitude, and
raised them socially to the level of the whites"[447] so that today
generally speaking there are no distinctions in society or politics in
Brazil. Commenting on this condition in Brazil, Agassiz said: "This
hybrid class, although more marked here because the Indian is added,
is very numerous in all cities; perhaps, the fact, so honorable to
Brazil, that the free Negro has full access to all privileges of any
free citizen, rather tends to increase than to dimmish that number."
After emancipation in Brazil in 1888, the already marked tendency
toward this fusion of the slave and the master classes gradually
increased.[448]

The Spaniards mixed less freely with the Negroes than did the
Portugese but mixed just the same. At first they seriously considered
the inconveniences which might arise from miscegenation under frontier
conditions and generally refrained from extensive intermingling. But
men are but men and as Spanish women were far too few in the New
World at that time, the other sex of their race soon yielded to the
charms of women of African blood. The rise of the mixed breeds too
further facilitated the movement. Spaniards who refused to intermingle
with the blacks found it convenient to approach the hybrids who showed
less color. In the course of time, therefore, the assimilation of the
blacks was as pronounced in some of the Spanish colonies as in those
which originally exhibited less race antipathy. There are millions of
Hispanicized Negroes in Latin America. Many of the mixed breeds,
however, have Indian rather than Negro blood.[449]

Miscegenation had its best chance among the French. Not being
disinclined to mingle with Negroes, the French early faced the problem
of the half caste, which was given consideration in the most human of
all slave regulations, the _Code Noir_.[450] It provided that free men
who had children from their concubinage with women-slaves (if they
consented to such concubinage) should be punished by a fine of two
thousand pounds of sugar. But if the offender was the master himself,
in addition to the fine, the slave should be taken from him, sold for
the benefit of the hospital and never be allowed to be freed;
excepting, that, if the man was not married to another person at the
time of his concubinage, he was to marry the woman slave, who,
together with her children, should thereby become free. Masters were
forbidden to constrain slaves to marry against their will. Many
Frenchmen like those in Haiti married their Negro mistresses,
producing attractive half caste women who because of their wealth were
sought by gentlemen in preference to their own women without dot.

Among the English the situation was decidedly different. There was not
so much need for the use of Negro women by Englishmen in the New
World, but there was the same tendency to cohabit with them. In the
end, however, the English, unlike the Latins, disowned their offspring
by slave women, leaving these children to follow the condition of
their mother. There was, therefore, not so much less miscegenation
among the English but there remained the natural tendency so to
denounce these unions as eventually to restrict the custom, as it is
today, to the weaker types of both races, the offspring of whom in the
case of slave mothers became a commodity in the commercial world.

There was extensive miscegenation in the English colonies, however,
before the race as a majority could realize the apparent need for
maintaining its integrity. With the development of the industries came
the use of the white servants as well as the slaves. The status of the
one differed from that of the other in that the former at the
expiration of his term of service could become free whereas the latter
was doomed to servitude for life. In the absence of social
distinctions between these two classes of laborers there arose
considerable intermingling growing out of a community of interests. In
the colonies in which the laborers were largely of one class or the
other not so much of this admixture was feared, but in the plantations
having a considerable sprinkling of the two miscegenation usually
ensued.

The following, therefore, was enacted in Maryland in 1661 as a
response to the question of the council to the lower house as to what
it intended should become of such free women of the English or other
Christian nations as married Negroes or other slaves.[451] The
preamble reads: "And forasmuch as divers freeborn _English_ women,
forgetful of their free condition, and to the disgrace of our nation,
do intermarry with negro slaves,[452] by which also divers suits may
arise, touching the issue of such women, and a great damage doth
befall the master of such negroes, for preservation whereof for
deterring such free-born women from such shameful matches, _be it
enacted_: That whatsoever free-born woman shall intermarry with any
slave, from and after the last day of the present assembly, shall
serve the master of such slave during the life of her husband; and
that all the issues of such free-born women, so married, shall be
slaves as their fathers were." "And be it further enacted: That all
the issues of _English_, or other free-born women, that have already
married negroes, shall serve the master of their parents, till they be
thirty years of age and no longer."[453]

According to A. J. Calhoun, however, all planters of Maryland did not
manifest so much ire because of this custom among indentured servants.
"Planters, said he, "sometimes married white women servants to Negroes
in order to transform the Negroes and their offspring into
slaves.[454] This was in violation of the ancient unwritten law that
the children of a free woman, the father being a slave, follow the
status of their mother and are free. The custom gave rise to an
interesting case. "Irish Nell," one of the servants brought to
Maryland by Lord Baltimore, was sold by him to a planter when he
returned to England. Following the custom of other masters who held
white women as servants, he soon married her to a Negro named Butler
to produce slaves. Upon hearing this, Baltimore used his influence to
have the law repealed but the abrogation of it was construed by the
Court of Appeals not to have any effect on the status of her offspring
almost a century later when William and Mary Butler sued for their
freedom on the ground that they descended from this white woman. The
Provincial Court had granted them freedom but in this decision the
Court of Appeals reversed the lower tribunal on the ground that "Irish
Nell" was a slave before the measure repealing the act had been
passed. This case came up again 1787 when Mary, the daughter of
William and Mary Butler, petitioned the State for freedom. Both
tribunals then decided to grant this petition.[455]

The act of repeal of 1681, therefore, is self explanatory. The
preamble reads: "Forasmuch as, divers free-born _English_, or white
women, sometimes by the instigation, procurement or connivance of
their masters, mistresses, or dames, and always to the satisfaction of
their lascivious and lustful desires, and to the disgrace not only of
the _English_, but also of many other Christian nations, do intermarry
with Negroes and slaves, by which means, divers inconveniences,
controversies, and suits may arise, touching the issue or children of
such free-born women aforesaid; for the prevention whereof for the
future, _Be it enacted_: That if the marriage of any woman-servant
with any slave shall take place by the procurement of permission of
the master, such woman and her issue shall be free." It enacted a
penalty by fine on the master or mistress and on the person joining
the parties in marriage.[456]

The effect of this law was merely to prevent masters from prostituting
white women to an economic purpose. It did not prevent the
miscegenation of the two races. McCormac says: "Mingling of the races
in Maryland continued during the eighteenth century, in spite of all
laws against it. Preventing marriages of white servants with slaves
only led to a greater social evil, which caused a reaction of public
sentiment against the servant. Masters and society in general were
burdened with the care of illegitimate mulatto children, and it became
necessary to frame laws compelling the guilty parties to reimburse the
masters for the maintenance of these unfortunate waifs."[457] To
remedy this laws were passed in 1715 and 1717 to reduce to the status
of a servant for seven years any white man or white woman who
cohabited with any Negro, free or slave. Their children were made
servants for thirty-one years, a black thus concerned was reduced to
slavery for life and the maintenance of the bastard children of women
servants was made incumbent upon masters. If the father of an
illegitimate child could be discovered, he would have to support his
offspring. If not this duty fell upon the mother who had to discharge
it by servitude or otherwise.[458]

As what had been done to prevent the admixture was not sufficient, the
Maryland General Assembly took the following action in 1728:

     "Whereas by the act of assembly relating to servants and slaves,
     there is no provision made for the punishment of free mulatto
     women, having bastard children by negroes and other slaves, nor
     is there any provision made in the said act for the punishment of
     free negro women, having bastard children by white men; and
     forasmuch as such copulations are as unnatural and inordinate as
     between white women and negro men, or other slaves.

     "_Be it enacted_, That from and after the end of this present
     session of assembly, that all such free mulatto women, having
     bastard children, either within or after the time of their
     service, (_and their issue_,) shall be subject to the same
     penalties that white women and their issue are, for having
     mulatto bastards, by the act, entitled, An act relating to
     servants and slaves.

     "_And be it further enacted, by the authority aforesaid, by and
     with the advice and consent aforesaid_, that from and after the
     end of this present session of assembly, that all free negro
     women, having bastard children by white men, (_and their issue_,)
     shall be subject to the same penalties that white women are, by
     the act aforesaid, for having bastards by negro men."[459]

Virginia which faced the same problem did not lag far behind Maryland.
In 1630 the Governor and Council in Court ordered Hugh Davis to be
soundly whipped before an assembly of Negroes and others for abusing
himself to the dishonor of God and shame of a Christian by defiling
his body in lying with a Negro, which he was to acknowledge next
Sabbath day. In 1662 the colony imposed double fines for fornication
with a Negro, but did not restrict intermarriage until 1691.[460] The
words of the preamble give the reasons for this action. It says:

     "And for the prevention of that abominable mixture and spurious
     issue which hereafter may increase in this dominion, as well by
     negroes, mulattoes, and Indians intermarrying with English, or
     other white women, as by their unlawful accompanying with one
     another, _Be it enacted by the authoritie aforesaid, and it is
     hereby enacted_, That for the time to come, whatsoever English or
     other white man or woman being free shall intermarry with a
     negro, mulatto, or Indian man or woman bond or free shall within
     three months after such marriage be banished and removed from
     this dominion forever, and that the justices of each respective
     countie within this dominion make it their perticular care, that
     this act be put in effectuall execution."

If any free English woman should have a bastard child by any Negro or
mulatto, she should pay the sum of fifteen pounds sterling, within one
month after such bastard child should be born, to the church wardens
of the parish where she should be delivered of such child, and in
default of such payment she should be taken into the possession of the
said church wardens and disposed of for five years, and such bastard
child should be bound out as a servant by the church wardens until he
or she should attain the age of thirty years, and in case such English
woman that should have such bastard child be a servant, she should be
sold by the church wardens (after her time is expired that she ought
by law to serve her master) for five years, and the money she should
be sold for divided as before appointed, and the child should serve as
aforesaid.[461]

It was further provided in 1753 that if any woman servant should have
a bastard child by a Negro or mulatto, over and above the year's
service due to her master or owner, she should immediately upon the
expiration of her time, to her then present master, or owner, pay down
to the church wardens of the parish wherein such child should be born
for the use of the said parish, fifteen pounds current money of
Virginia, or be sold for five years to the use aforesaid; and if a
free Christian white woman should have such bastard child by a Negro,
or mulatto, for every such offence, she should within one month after
her delivery of such bastard child, pay to the church wardens for the
time being, of the parish wherein such child should be born, for the
use of the said parish, fifteen pounds current money of Virginia, or
be by them sold for five years to the use aforesaid; and in both the
said cases, the church wardens should bind the said child to be a
servant until it should be of thirty-one years of age.

And for a further prevention of that "abominable mixture, and the
spurious issue, which may hereafter increase in this his majesty's
colony and dominion as well by English, and other white men and women,
intermarrying with Negroes or mulattoes, as by their unlawful coition
with them" it was enacted that whatsoever English, or other white man
or woman, being free, should intermarry with a Negro, or mulatto man
or woman bond or free, should by judgment of the county court, be
committed to prison and there remain during the space of six months,
without bail or main-prize, and should forfeit and pay ten pounds
current money of Virginia, to the use of the parish as aforesaid. It
was further enacted that no minister of the Church of England, or
other minister or person whatsoever, within that colony and dominion,
should thereafter presume to marry a white man with a Negro, or
mulatto woman, or to marry a white woman with a Negro or mulatto man,
upon pain of forfeiting and paying for every such marriage, the sum of
ten thousand pounds of tobacco.[462]

It developed later that these laws did not meet all requirements, for
there were in subsequent years so many illegitimate children born of
such mothers that they became a public charge.[463] Those of Negro
blood were bound out by law. According to Russell, "In 1727 it was
ordered that David James a free negro boy, be bound to Mr. James Isdel
'who is to teach him to read ye bible distinctly also ye trade of a
gunsmith that he carry him to ye Clark's office & take Indenture to
that purpose.' "By the Warwick County court it was 'ordered that
Malacai, a mulatto boy, son of mulatto Betty be, by the Church Wardens
of this Parish bound to Thomas Hobday to learn the art of a planter
according to law.' By order of the Norfolk County court, about 1770, a
free negro was bound out 'to learn the trade of a tanner.'"[464]

In making more stringent regulations for servants and slaves, North
Carolina provided in 1715 that if a white servant woman had a child by
a Negro, mulatto or Indian, she must serve her master two years extra
and should pay to the Church wardens immediately on the expiration of
that time six pounds for the use of the parish or be sold four years
for the use aforesaid.[465] A clergyman found guilty of officiating at
such a marriage should be fined fifty pounds. This law, according to
Bassett, did not succeed in preventing such unions. Two ministers were
indicted within two years for performing such a marriage ceremony. "In
one case the suit was dropped, in the other case the clergyman went
before the Chief Justice and confessed as it seems of his own
accord.... In 1727 a white woman was indicted in the General Court
because she had left her husband and was cohabiting with a negro
slave.... So far as general looseness was concerned this law of 1715
had no force. Brickell, who was a physician, says that white men of
the colony suffered a great deal from a malignant kind of venereal
disease which they took from the slaves."[466]

By the law of 1741 therefore the colony endeavored to prevent what the
General Assembly called "that abominable mixture and spurious issue,
which hereafter may increase in this government, by white men and
women intermarrying with Indians, Negroes, mustees, or mulattoes." It
was enacted that if any man or woman, being free, should intermarry
with an Indian, Negro, mustee or mulatto man or woman, or any person
of mixed blood, to the third generation, bond or free, he should, by
judgment of the county court forfeit and pay the sum of fifty pounds,
proclamation money, to the use of the parish.[467] It was also
provided that if any white servant woman should during the time of her
servitude, be delivered of a child, begotten by any Negro, mulatto or
Indian, such servant, over and above the time she was by this act to
serve her master or owner for such offence, should be sold by the
Church wardens of the parish, for two years, after the time by
indenture or otherwise had expired.[468]

The miscegenation of the whites and blacks extended so widely that it
became a matter of concern to the colonies farther north where the
Negro population was not considerable. Seeking also to prevent this
"spurious mixt issue" Massachusetts enacted in 1705 that a Negro or
mulatto man committing fornication with an "English woman, or a woman
of any other Christian nation," should be sold out of the province."
"An English man, or man of any other Christian nation committing
fornication with a Negro or mulatto woman," should be whipped, and the
woman sold out of the province. None of her Majesty's English or
Scottish subjects, nor of any other Christian nation within that
province should contract matrimony with any Negro or mulatto, under a
penalty imposed on the person joining them in marriage. No master
should unreasonably deny marriage to his Negro with one of the same
nation; any law, usage or custom to the contrary notwithstanding.[469]

There was much social contact between the white servants and the
Negroes in Pennsylvania, where the number of the latter greatly
increased during the first quarter of the nineteenth century. Turner
says a white servant was indicted for this offence in Sussex County in
1677 and a tract of land there bore the name of "Mulatto Hall."[470]
According to the same writer Chester County seemed to have a large
number of these cases and laid down the principle that such admixture
should be prohibited,

     "For that hee," referring to a white man, "Contrary to his
     Masters Consent hath ... got wth child a certaine molato wooman
     Called Swart anna." "David Lewis Constable of Haverford Returned
     a Negro man of his And a white woman for having a Bastard Childe
     ... the Negroe said she Intised him and promised him to marry
     him: she being examined, Confest the same: the Court ordered that
     she shall receive Twenty one lashes on her bare Backe ... and the
     Court ordered the negroe never more to meddle with any white
     woman more uppon paine of his life."[471]

Advertising for Richard Molson in Philadelphia in 1720, his master
said, "He is in company with a white woman named Mary, who is supposed
now goes for his wife"; "and a white man named Garrett Choise, and
Jane his wife, which said white people are servants to some neighbors
of the said Richard Tilghman."[472] In 1722 a woman was punished for
abetting a clandestine marriage between a white woman and a Negro. In
the _Pennsylvania Gazette_, June 1, 1749, appeared the notice of the
departure of Isaac Cromwell, a mulatto, who ran away with an English
servant woman named Anne Greene.[473]

The Assembly, therefore, upon a petition from inhabitants inveighing
against this custom enacted a prohibitory law in 1725. This law
provided that no minister, pastor or magistrate or other person
whatsover who according to the laws of that province usually joined
people in marriage should upon any pretence whatever join in marriage
any Negro with any white person on the penalty of one hundred pounds.
And it was further enacted that if any white man or woman should
cohabit or dwell with any Negro under pretense of being married, such
white man or woman should be put out of service as above directed
until they come to the age of thirty-one years; and if any free Negro
man or woman should intermarry with a white man or woman, such Negro
should become a slave during life to be sold by order of the justice
of the quarter sessions of the respective county; and if any free
Negro man or woman should commit fornication or adultery with any
white man or woman, such Negro or Negroes should be sold as a servant
for seven years and the white man or woman should be punished as the
law directs in cases of adultery or fornication.[474]

This law seemed to have very little effect on the miscegenation of the
races in certain parts. In Chester County, according to the records of
1780, mulattoes constituted one fifth of the Negro population.[475]
Furthermore, that very year when the State of Pennsylvania had grown
sufficiently liberal to provide for gradual emancipation the law
against the mingling of the races was repealed. Mixed marriages
thereafter became common as the white and the blacks in the light of
the American Revolution realized liberty in its full meaning. Thomas
Branagan said:

     "There are many, very many blacks who ... begin to feel
     themselves consequential, ... will not be satisfied unless they
     get white women for wives, and are likewise exceedingly
     impertinent to white people in low circumstances.... I solemnly
     swear, I have seen more white women married to, and deluded
     through the arts of seduction by negroes in one year in
     Philadelphia, than for eight years I was visiting (West Indies
     and the Southern States). I know a black man who seduced a young
     white girl ... who soon after married him, and died with a broken
     heart. On her death he said that he would not disgrace himself to
     have a negro wife and acted accordingly, for he soon after
     married a white woman. ... There are perhaps hundreds of white
     women thus fascinated by black men in this city, and there are
     thousands of black children by them at present."[476]

A reaction thereafter set in against this custom during the first
decade of the nineteenth century, when fugitives in the rough were
rushing to that State, and culminated in an actual campaign against it
by 1820. That year a petition from Greene County said that many
Negroes had settled in Pennsylvania and had been able to seduce into
marriage "the minor children of the white inhabitants."[477] This
county, therefore, asked that these marriages be made an offence
against the laws of the State. Such a marriage was the cause of a riot
in Columbia in 1834 and in 1838 the members of the Constitutional
Convention engaged in a heated discussion of the custom.[478]
Petitions were frequently sent to the legislature asking that this
admixture be penalized by law, but no such action was ever taken.
Relying upon public opinion, however, the advocates of racial
integrity practically succeeded. Marriages of whites and blacks
eventually became so odious that they led to disturbances as in the
case of the riot of 1849, one of the causes of which was that a white
man was living with a Negro wife.[479] This was almost ineffective,
however, in the prevention of race admixture. Clandestine
intermingling went on and tended to increase in enormous proportions.
The conclusive proof of this is that in 1860 mulattoes constituted one
third of the Negro population of Pennsylvania.

Persons who professed seriously to consider the future of slavery,
therefore, saw that miscegenation and especially the general
connection of white men with their female slaves introduced a mulatto
race whose numbers would become dangerous, if the affections of their
white parents were permitted to render them free.[480] The Americans
of the future would thereby become a race of mixed breeds rather than
a white and a black population. As the lust of white persons for those
of color was too strong to prevent this miscegenation, the liberty of
emancipating their mulatto offspring was restricted in the slave
States but that of selling them remained.[481]

These laws eventually, therefore, had their desired effect. They were
never intended to prevent the miscegenation of the races but to debase
to a still lower status the offspring of the blacks who in spite of
public opinion might intermarry with the poor white women and to leave
women of color without protection against white men, who might use
them for convenience, whereas white women and black men would
gradually grow separate and distinct in their social relations.
Although thereafter the offspring of blacks and whites did not
diminish, instead of being gradually assimilated to the type of the
Caucasian they tended to constitute a peculiar class commonly called
people of color having a higher social status than that of the blacks
but finally classified with all other persons of African blood as
Negroes.

While it later became a capital offence in some of the slave States
for a Negro man to cohabit with a white woman, Abdy who toured this
country from 1833 to 1834 doubted that such laws were enforced. "A
man," said he, "was hanged not long ago for this crime at New Orleans.
The partner of his guilt--his master's daughter--endeavored to save
his life, by avowing that she alone was to blame. She died shortly
after his execution."[482] With the white man and the Negro woman the
situation was different. A sister of President Madison once said to
the Reverend George Bourne, then a Presbyterian minister in Virginia:
"We Southern ladies are complimented with the name of wives; but we
are only the mistresses of seraglios." The masters of the female
slaves, however, were not always the only persons of loose morals.
Many women of color were also prostituted to the purposes of
young white men[483] and overseers.[484] Goodell reports a
well-authenticated account of a respectable Christian lady at the
South who kept a handsome mulatto female for the use of her genteel
son, as a method of deterring him, as she said, "from indiscriminate
and vulgar indulgences."[485] Harriet Martineau discovered a young
white man who on visiting a southern lady became insanely enamored of
her intelligent quadroon maid. He sought to purchase her but the owner
refused to sell the slave because of her unusual worth. The young
white man persisted in trying to effect this purchase and finally
informed her owner that he could not live without this attractive
slave. Thereupon the white lady sold the woman of color to satisfy the
lust of her friend.[486]

The accomplishment of this task of reducing the free people of color
to the status of the blacks, however, was not easy. In the first
place, so many persons of color had risen to positions of usefulness
among progressive people and had formed connections with them that an
abrupt separation was both inexpedient and undesirable. Exceptions to
the hard and fast rules of caste were often made to relieve the people
of color. Moreover, the miscegenation of the races in the South and
especially in large cities like Charleston and New Orleans had gone to
the extent that from these centers eventually went, as they do now, a
large number of quadroons and octoroons,[487] who elsewhere crossed
over to the other race.

White men ashamed of the planters who abused helpless black women are
now trying to minimize the prevalence of this custom. Such an effort,
however, means little in the face of the facts that one seventh of the
Negroes in the United States had in their veins any amount of
Caucasian blood in 1860 and according to the last census more than one
fifth of them have this infusion. Furthermore the testimony of
travelers in this country during the slavery period support the
contention that race admixture was common.[488]

So extensive did it become that the most prominent white men in the
country did not escape. Benjamin Franklin seems to have made no secret
of his associations with Negro women.[490] Russell connects many of
these cases with the master class in Virginia.[491] There are now in
Washington Negroes who call themselves the descendants of two
Virginians who attained the presidency of the United States.

The abolitionists made positive statements about the mulatto offspring
of Thomas Jefferson. Goodell lamented the fact that Jefferson in his
will had to entreat the legislature of Virginia to confirm his bequest
of freedom to his own reputed enslaved offspring that they might
remain in the State of their nativity, where their families and
connections were.[492] Writing in 1845, the editor of the _Cleveland
American_ expressed regret that notwithstanding all the services and
sacrifices of Jefferson in the establishment of the freedom of this
country, his own son then living in Ohio was not allowed to vote or
bear witness in a court of justice. The editor of the _Ohio Star_
said: "We are not sure whether this is intended as a statement of
actual fact, or of what might possibly and naturally enough be true."
_The Cincinnati Herald_ inquired: "Is this a fact? If so, it ought to
be known. Perhaps 'the Democracy' might be induced to pass a special
act in his favor." _The Cleveland American_, therefore, added: "We are
credibly informed that a natural son of Jefferson by the celebrated
'Black Sal,' a person of no little renown in the politics of 1800 and
thereafter, is now living in a central county of Ohio. We shall
endeavor to get at the truth of the matter and make public the result
of our inquiries."[493]

A later report of miscegenation of this kind was recorded by Jane Grey
Swisshelm in her _Half a Century_, where she states that a daughter of
President John Tyler "ran away with the man she loved in order that
she might be married, but for this they must reach foreign soil. A
young lady of the White House could not marry the man of her choice in
the United States. The lovers were captured and she was brought to His
Excellency, her father, who sold her to a slave-trader. From that
Washington slave-pen she was taken to New Orleans by a man who
expected to get twenty-five hundred dollars for her on account of her
great beauty.[494]

                                   CARTER G. WOODSON


FOOTNOTES:

[442] MacDonald, _Trade, Politics and Christianity in Africa and the
East_, Chapter on inter-racial marriage, p. 239; and THE JOURNAL OF
NEGRO HISTORY, pp. 329, 334-344.

[443] _Report of First Race Congress_, 1911, p. 330; MacDonald,
_Trade, Politics, and Christianity_, p. 235; and _Contemporary
Review_, August, 1911.

[444] _Report of First Races Congress_, 1911, p. 330.

[445] Johnston, _The Negro in the New World_, p. 98.

[446] _Ibid._, p. 78.

[447] _Ibid._, pp. 98-99.

[448] Authorities consider the Amerindians the most fecund stock in
the country, especially when mixed with an effusion of white or black
blood. Agassiz, _A Journey in Brazil in 1868_.

[449] Johnston, _The Negro in the New World_, p. 135.

[450] _Code Noir._

[451] Brackett, _The Negro in Maryland_, pp. 32-33.

[452] Benjamin Banneker's mother was a white woman who married one of
her own slaves. See Tyson, _Benjamin Banneker_, p. 3.

[453] _Archives of Maryland, Proceedings of the General Assembly_,
1637-1664, pp. 533-534.

[454] Calhoun, _A Social History of the American Family_, p. 94.

[455] Harris and McHenry Reports, I, pp. 374, 376; II, pp. 26, 38,
214, 233.

[456] Hurd, _Law of Freedom and Bondage_, VI, pp. 249-250.

[457] McCormac, _White Servitude in Maryland_, p. 70.

[458] Act of Assembly, Oct., 1727.

[459] Dorsey, _The General Public Statutory Law and Public Local Law
of State of Maryland_, from 1692-1839, p. 79.

[460] Bullagh, _White Servitude in the Colony of Virginia_, pp. 72,
73.

[461] Hening, _The Statutes at Large_, I, pp. 146, 532. II, 170; III,
pp. 86-88, 252.

[462] Hening, _Statutes at Large_, VI, pp. 360-362.

[463] Meade, _Old Churches and Families of Virginia_, I, p. 366.

[464] Russell, _Free Negro in Virginia_, pp. 138-139.

[465] Bassett, _Slavery and Servitude in North Carolina_, p. 83.

[466] _Ibid._, pp. 58-59. See also _Natural History of North
Carolina_, p. 48; and Hawk's _History of North Carolina_, II, pp.
126-127.

[467] Potter, _Revised Laws of North Carolina_, I, p. 130.

[468] _Ibid._, I, p. 157.

[469] _Massachusetts Charters, etc._, p. 747; Hurd, _Law of Freedom
and Bondage_, VI, p. 262.

[470] Turner, _The Negro in Pennsylvania_, pp. 29-30.

[471] _Ibid._, p. 30.

[472] _The American Weekly Mercury_ (Philadelphia), August 20, 1720.

[473] _The Pennsylvania Gazette_, June 1, 1749.

[474] _Statutes at Large_, IV, p. 62.

[475] Turner, _The Negro in Pennsylvania_, p. 31.

[476] Branagan, _Serious Remonstrances_, pp. 68, 69, 70, 71, 73, 74,
75, 102; _Somerset Whig_, March 12, 1818, and _Union Times_, August
15, 1834.

[477] _Journal of Senate_, 1820-1821, p. 213; and _American Daily
Advertiser_, January 23, 1821.

[478] _Proceedings and Debates of the Convention of 1838_, X, p. 230.

[479] _The Spirit of the Times_, October 10, 11, 12, 13, 17, 19, 1849.

[480] Harriet Martineau, _Views of Slavery and Emancipation_, p. 10.

[481] Hart, _Slavery and Abolition_, p. 182; _Censuses of the United
States_.

[482] Abdy, _North America_, I, p. 160.

[483] Child, _Anti-slavery Catechism_, p. 17; 2 _Howard Mississippi
Reports_, p. 837.

[484] Kemble, _Georgian Plantation_, pp. 140, 162, 199, 208-210;
Olmstead, _Seaboard States_, pp. 599-600; Rhodes, _United States_, I,
pp. 341-343.

[485] Goodell, _Slave Code_, pp. 111-112.

[486] Harriet Martineau, _Views of Slavery and Emancipation_, p. 13.

[487] Featherstonaugh, _Excursion_, p. 141; Buckingham, _Slave
States_, I, p. 358.

[488] Writing of conditions in this country prior to the American
Revolution, Anne Grant found only two cases of miscegenation in Albany
before this period but saw it well established later by the British
soldiers. Johann Schoepf--witnessed this situation in Charleston in
1784. J. P. Brissot saw this tendency toward miscegenation as a
striking feature of society among the French in the Ohio Valley in
1788. The Duke of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach was very much impressed with
the numerous quadroons and octoroons of New Orleans in 1825 and
Charles Gayarré portrayed the same conditions there in 1830. Frederika
Bremer frequently met with this class while touring the South in 1850.
See Grant, _Memoirs of An American Lady_, p. 28; Schoepf, _Travels in
the Confederation_, II, p. 382; Brissot, _Travels_, II, p. 61;
Saxe-Weimar, _Travels_, II, p. 69; Grace King, _New Orleans_, pp.
346-349; Frederika Bremer, _Homes of the New World_, I, pp. 325, 326,
382, 385.

[489] _The American Journal of Sociology_, XXII, p. 98.

[490] _Ibid._, XXII, p. 98.

[491] See Russell, _Free Negro in Virginia_, p. 127.

[492] Goodell, _Slave Code_, p. 376.

[493] _The Liberator_, December 19, 1845.

[494] Swisshelm, _Half a Century_, p. 129.




GERRIT SMITH'S EFFORT IN BEHALF OF THE NEGROES IN NEW YORK


During the first half of the nineteenth century, the condition of the
free Negroes in the Southern States became more and more critical. The
doctrine of the rights of man, which had swept over the world in the
latter part of the eighteenth century had had its effect on the
colonists and resulted in the manumission of many slaves. These
freedmen taking advantage of their economic and educational
opportunities became an ever increasing menace to the social
institutions that had no foundation except that of slavery. Ambitious,
often aggressive, they were a constant source of dissatisfaction
because of the unhappy comparison of their lot with that of the
slaves. They, moreover, encouraged the slaves to improve their
condition and to escape to the North. This situation was rendered
still more critical for the reason that the South, considering slavery
indispensable to its economic life, was already being lashed into a
frenzy to gain new slave territory and to strengthen the institution
by every possible method of oppression of the blacks. Measures
inimical to the economic progress of freedmen were enacted.[495] Many
who had been manumitted were seized and again reduced to slavery.
Educational opportunities were restricted or denied. Legally they were
without voice and hence could secure no redress when wronged.[496]

This economic poverty, insecurity of personal liberty, and absolutely
negative political status, impelled the freedmen to find better
conditions in the North. The reaction against plantation life and the
glittering attractions of the large city with the prospect of earning
money less arduously no doubt account for their influx into the
industrial centers.[497] These free blacks migrated in great numbers
especially to New York and Philadelphia. The Colonization Society
attempted to solve the problem by effecting the colonization of the
free Negroes somewhere either within or without the United States.
Many friends of the Negroes and even some of the Negroes themselves
thought favorably of the idea and a few small colonies were formed in
the Western States and in Liberia.[498]

Among the anti-slavery men who at first saw no fault in the aims of
the Colonization Society was Gerrit Smith. The son of a slave owner in
the State of New York, he was acquainted with slavery in the milder
form in which it existed in the North. It was just two years before
his birth that the legislature of New York passed its act of
emancipation providing that all children after the year 1799 should be
free, the males on reaching the age of twenty-eight years and the
female twenty-five. His father, Peter Smith, was a slaveholder and the
owner of extensive lands in the counties of northern New York; and
even before his death the management of these vast properties devolved
upon his son.

He soon became deeply interested in the uplift of the slaves and
endeavored to improve their condition by gradual emancipation looking
forward to colonization. As early as 1834, his diary shows a growing
belief in the universal right to liberty. Years ripened this belief
and also developed his anti-land-monopolist principles, both of which
reached fruition in his act of 1846, by which he gave away thousands
of acres of land. He severed his connection with the Colonization
Society when that body overtly declared that it was not a society for
the abolition of slavery nor for the improvement of the blacks nor for
the suppression of the slave trade, and he threw his energy into the
work of abolition as fervently, if not as drastically, as
Garrison.[499]

Anti-land-monopolist as he was, Gerrit Smith believed that the life of
the small free farmer was calculated to develop thrift and self
respect in the character of the colored freedmen that he saw crowded
in sections of the large cities. For although enjoying greater
security of personal liberty, the mass of colored people in New York
State had not made much economic progress, even to the extent of
possessing property valued at two hundred and fifty dollars, which in
that State would have entitled them to the right to vote.[500] He said
that he had for years indulged the thought that when he had sold
enough land to pay his debts, he would give away the remainder to the
poor. He was an Agrarian, who wanted every man desirous to own a farm
to have one. He, therefore, felt that it was safe to make a beginning
in the work of distributing land to individuals. He had theretofore
given tracts of land to public institutions and a few small parcels to
individuals, but had not entered upon the larger task of making large
donations of land to the poor.

He then planned to transfer three thousand parcels of land of forty to
sixty acres each during the following three years. To whom among the
poor he should make these deeds, was a question he could not hastily
solve. He was sure, however, that, inasmuch as his home and the land
were both in the State of New York, it would be very suitable to
select his beneficiaries from among the people of that State. But for
a long time, he was at a loss to decide, whether to take his
beneficiaries generally from the meritorious poor or only from the
deserving Negroes. He said, "I could not put a bounty on color. I
shrank from the least appearance of doing so, and if I know my heart,
it was equally compassionate toward such white and black men as are
equal sufferers."[501] In the end, however, he concluded to confine
his gifts to Negroes.

He would not have come to this conclusion he said, if the land he had
to give away had been several times as much as it was, nor if the
Negroes, the poorest of the poor, had not been the most deeply wronged
class of the citizens. "That they are so," said he, "is evident, if
only from the fact, that the cruel, killing, Heaven-defying prejudice
of which they are victims, has closed against them the avenues to
riches and respectability--to happiness and usefulness. That they are
so, is also evident from the fact, that, whilst white men in this
State, however destitute of property, are allowed to vote for Civil
Rulers, every colored man in it who does not own landed estate to the
value of two-hundred and fifty dollars, is excluded from the exercise
of this natural and indispensably protective right."[502] He confessed
that he was influenced by the consideration that there was great
encouragement to improve the condition of the Negroes, because every
amelioration in it contributed to loosen the bands of the enslaved
portion of their outraged and afflicted race.

He, therefore, requested Reverend Theodore S. Wright, Reverend Charles
B. Ray, and Dr. J. McCune Smith, three representative Negroes of New
York City, to make out a list of the Negroes who should receive from
him parcels of land. His only restrictions upon them in making this
selection were that they should choose no person younger than
twenty-one and no person older than sixty; that they accept no person
who was in easy circumstances as to property; and no one who was
already the owner of land, and no drunkards.[503] He further promised
to pay all taxes as well as purchase money and interest due to the
State of New York hoping that none of the parcels would be sold for
the nonpayment of taxes.[504] The total number of colonists were to be
one thousand nine hundred and eighty-five, to be distributed as
follows: in the county of Suffolk, 127; Queens, 215; Kings, 197; New
York, 861; Richmond, 832; Rockland, 331; Westchester, 115; Dutchess,
150; Sullivan, 5; Ulster, 106; Orange, 136; and Putnam, 10. Although
this distribution was suggested the actual grants seem to have been
made in the counties of Franklin, Essex, Hamilton, Fulton, Oneida,
Delaware, Madison and Ulster.

On September 9, 1846, he wrote again to three gentlemen of color,
saying that a thousand of the deeds were already in the hands of the
committee for distribution. He had saved them the expense of securing
the certificate of the County Clerk by having the acknowledgment of
the execution taken by a Supreme Court judge. The only expense left
for the beneficiaries to bear was the recording of the deed. The
letter closed with a request that the three gentlemen prepare and send
out a circular among the persons receiving the deeds, making known to
them the conditions and reasons which actuated him in bestowing the
land. This was done and the recipients were exhorted to profit by the
chance to become land owners and thereby secure their right to vote.

These lands, as Smith realized and admitted, were not all arable but
many of them had considerable timber. Such property today would be
considered valuable, but in those days of plentitude it passed as
undesirable. Some of his enemies accused him of making for himself a
reputation for generosity by giving away useless land. There is no
evidence, however, that such accusations were made by the
Negroes.[505] But be that as it may, the experiment was a failure. It
was not successful because of the intractability of the land, the
harshness of the climate, and in a great measure, the inefficiency of
the settlers. They had none of the qualities of farmers. Furthermore,
having been disabled by infirmities and vices they could not as
beneficiaries answer the call of the benefactor. Peterboro, the town
opened to Negroes in this section did maintain a school and served as
a station of the underground railroad but the agricultural results
expected of the enterprise never materialized.[506] The main trouble
in this case was the impossibility of substituting something foreign
for individual enterprise.

The failure of the enterprise did not cause this philanthropist to
cease his activities in behalf of freedom and justice to the Negroes.
He continued a staunch abolitionist, demanding unconditional
emancipation of the slaves and leaving undone nothing which might
effect this change. He was once intimately associated with John Brown,
who at one time left his home and purchased from Smith a farm in the
Negro colony in order to live with the blacks and help them to improve
their economic condition. Smith lived until 1874, long enough to see
the Negroes freed and many of them making elsewhere that economic
progress which was the dream of his earlier years.

                                   ZITA DYSON


FOOTNOTES:

[495] See the session laws of the State Legislatures, and Woodson's
_Education of the Negro Prior to 1861_, pp. 151-178.

[496] Goodell, _Slave Code_, and Hurd, _The Law of Freedom and
Bondage_, II, pp. 1-218.

[497] Woodson, _A Century of Negro Migration_, Chapter II.

[498] The JOURNAL OF NEGRO HISTORY, I, p. 276; II, p. 209.

[499] Frothingham, _Gerrit Smith_, pp. 94-143.

[500] Hurd, _Law of Freedom and Bondage_, II, p. 56.

[501] Frothingham, _Gerrit Smith_, p. 103.

[502] Frothingham, _Gerrit Smith_, 104.

[503] _Letter of Gerrit Smith to Theodore S. Wright, Charles B. Ray,
and J. McCune Smith._

[504] _Ibid._

[505] _Special Report of the U. S. Commissioner of Education on the
Schools of the District of Columbia_, 1871, p. 367; _The African
Repository_, X. p. 312.

[506] Frothingham, _Gerrit Smith_, p. 73.




THE BUXTON SETTLEMENT IN CANADA


The Buxton, or Elgin Association Settlement, in Kent county, western
Ontario, was in many respects the most important attempt made before
the Civil War to found a Negro refugee colony in Canada. In
population, material wealth and general organization it was
outstanding, and the firm foundation upon which it was established is
shown by the fact that today, more than half a century after
emancipation, it is still a prosperous and distinctly Negro
settlement.

The western peninsula of Ontario, lying between Lakes Huron and Erie,
was long the Mecca of the fugitive slave. Bounded on the east by the
State of New York, on the west by Michigan, and on the south by Ohio
and northwestern Pennsylvania, this was the part of Canada most easily
reached by the fugitive; and Niagara, Cleveland, Detroit and other
lake ports saw thousands of refugees cross narrow strips of water to
"shake the lion's paw" and find freedom in the British queen's
dominions. During the forties and fifties there was a constant stream
of refugees into Canada. As many as thirty in a day would cross the
Detroit River at Fort Malden alone. Many of these went to the cities
and towns, but others found greater happiness in the separate Negro
communities which grew up here and there.

The history of the Buxton settlement, one of these, is closely linked
with the name of Rev. William King. King was a native of Londonderry,
Ireland, a graduate of Glasgow College, who had emigrated to the
United States and become rector of a college in Louisiana. Later he
returned to Scotland, studied theology in the Free Church College,
Edinburgh, and in 1846 was sent out to Canada as a missionary of the
Free Church of Scotland. While he was living in Louisiana he became,
through marriage, the owner of fifteen slaves of an estimated value
of $9,000. For a time he placed them on a neighboring plantation and
gave them the proceeds of their labor but that did not satisfy his
conscience and in 1848 he brought them to Canada, thereby
automatically giving them their freedom. His effort on their behalf
did not end here. Having brought them to this new country, he felt it
a duty to look after them, to educate and make of them useful
citizens. The same thing, he believed, could be done for others in
like circumstance.

The first effort to secure a tract of land for the refugees was made
by the Rev. Mr. King as the representative of the Presbyterian Church.
This application was before the Executive Council of the Canadian
Government in September, 1848, but was not successful. Steps were at
once taken to organize a non-sectarian body to deal with the
government and this new body took the name of the Elgin Association in
honor of the then governor-general of the Canadas who seems to have
been well disposed toward the refugees. The Elgin Association was
legally incorporated "for the settlement and moral improvement of the
colored population of Canada, for the purpose of purchasing crown or
clergy reserve lands in the township of Raleigh and settling the same
with colored families resident in Canada of approved moral
character."[507] Rev. Dr. Connor was the first president; Rev. Dr.
Willis, of Knox College, Toronto, first vice-president, and Rev.
William King, second vice-president. J. T. Matthews was the secretary,
J. S. Howard, treasurer, while the original directors were E. A. T.
McCord, Walter McFarland, Peter Freland, Charles Bercsy, W. R. Abbott,
John Laidlaw, E. F. Whittesend and James Brown. These are the names
that appear upon the petition to the government for lands, the
original of which is in the Dominion Archives.

There were difficulties in securing the land. Decided opposition to
the whole project made itself manifest in Kent county.[508] In
Chatham, the county town, a meeting of protest was held. The plans of
the Elgin Association were condemned and a resolution was passed
setting forth objections to selling any of the public domain "to
foreigners, the more so when such persons belong to a different branch
of the human family and are black." A vigilance committee was
appointed to watch the operations of the Elgin Association while the
various township councils interested were requested to advance the
necessary funds for carrying on the campaign. That there was some
dissent, however, even in Chatham is shown by the fact that one Henry
Gouins was allowed to speak in favor of the Association. The vigilance
committee soon issued a small pamphlet, made up chiefly of the
speeches and resolutions of the public meeting. The name of Edwin
Larwill, member of Parliament for the county of Kent, appears as one
of those most active in opposition to the settlement plan. Larwill had
a record for hostility to the colored people though at election times
he was accustomed to parade as their friend. In 1856 he introduced in
the House of Assembly a most insulting resolution[509] calling for a
report from the government on "all negro or colored, male or female
quadroon, mulatto, samboes, half breeds or mules, mongrels or
conglomerates" in public institutions. Larwill was at once called to
account for his action and a resolution was introduced calling upon
him to retract.

The opposition of Larwill and his supporters failed to impede the
progress of the Association and a tract of about 9000 acres, lying to
the south of Chatham and within a mile or two of Lake Erie, was
purchased. This was surveyed and divided into small farms of fifty
acres each, roads were cut through the dense forest and the first
settlers began the arduous work of clearing. The colonists were
allowed to take up fifty acres each at a price of $2.50 per acre,
payable in ten annual instalments.[510] Each settler was bound within
a certain period to build a house at least as good as the model house
set up by the Association, to provide himself with necessary
implements and to proceed with the work of clearing land. The model
house after which nearly all the dwellings were copied was 18 by 24
feet, 12 feet in height and with a stoop running the length of the
front. Some of the settlers were ambitious enough to build larger and
better houses but there were none inferior to the model. The tract of
country upon which the settlers were located was an almost unbroken
forest. The ground was level, heavily timbered with oak, hickory,
beech, elm, etc. Part of the soil was a deep rich black loam. Trees
two to four feet in diameter were common and the roads cut through to
open up settlement were hardly more than wide lanes. Rev. Mr. King
thought that one reason for the colony's success was the fact that so
many of the settlers were good axe men. Their industry was remarkable
and some of the more industrious paid for their land in five or six
years and took up more to clear.[511]

There are several contemporary references to the sobriety and morality
of the colonists. The _New York Tribune_ correspondent in 1857 was
able to report that liquor was neither made nor sold in the colony and
that drunkenness was unknown. There was no illegitimacy and there had
been but one arrest for violation of the Canadian laws in the seven
years of the colony's history. Though the Presbyterian church gave
special attention to the Buxton colony this did not hinder the growth
of other sects, Methodists and Baptists both being numerous, though
the best of feeling seems to have prevailed and many who retained
their own connection were fairly regular attendants at Mr. King's
services.

The _Tribune_ article gives an interesting description of the homes.
The cabins, though rough and rude, were covered with vines and
creepers with bright flowers and vegetable gardens round about.
Despite the pioneer conditions there abounded comfort and plenty of
plain homemade furniture. Pork, potatoes and green corn were staple
items of the menu. Of King's former slaves the _Tribune_ reports that
three had died, nine were at Buxton, one was married and living in
Chatham and two others in Detroit were about to return. The _Tribune_
reports on one case as typical of what was being achieved by the
colony. A colored man, fourteen years before a slave in Missouri and
who had been at Buxton six years, reported that he had 24 acres out
of his plot cleared, fenced and under cultivation. On six acres more
the trees were felled. He had paid four installments on his farm,
owned a yoke of oxen, a wagon and a mare and two colts. His
fourteen-year-old boy was at school and was reading Virgil. In the
home, besides bed and bedding, chairs and tables, there was a rocking
chair and a large, new safe. Water was brought to the visitor in a
clean tumbler, set upon a plate. A neighboring cabin had carpet on the
floor and some crude prints on the walls. All the cabins had large
brick fireplaces. Rev. Mr. King's own house, built of logs with high
steep roof, dormer windows and a porch the whole length, was somewhat
larger than the others.[512]

What these people actually accomplished at Buxton amid conditions so
different from what they had known in the past is altogether
remarkable. Some had known little of farm work before coming to the
colony while all of them must have found the Canadian climate
something of a hardship even in the summer. Outside of the farm work
they showed ability as mechanics and tradesmen. One who visited them
in the fifties says:[513]

     "The best country tavern in Kent is kept by Mr. West, at Buxton.
     Mr. T. Stringer is one of the most enterprising tradesmen in the
     county, and he is a Buxtonian, a colored man. I broke my carriage
     near there. The woodwork, as well as the iron, was broken. I
     never had better repairing done to either the woodwork or the
     ironwork of my carriage, I never had better shoeing than was done
     to my horses, in Buxton, in Feb., 1852, by a black man, a native
     of Kentucky--in a word, the work was done after the pattern of
     Charles Peyton Lucas. They are blessed with able mechanics, good
     farmers, enterprising men, and women worthy of them and they are
     training the rising generation to principles such as will give
     them the best places in the esteem and the service of their
     countrymen at some day not far distant."

A few years sufficed to remove most of the prejudice that had shown
itself in the opposition of the Larwill faction at Chatham at the
inception of the colony. When Rev. S. R. Ward visited the colony in
the early fifties he found that instead of lowering land values of
adjoining property as some had predicted would result from
establishing a Negro colony in Kent county, the Buxton settlement had
actually raised the value of adjoining farms. The Buxton settlers were
spoken of by the white people as good farmers, good customers and good
neighbors. There were white children attending the Buxton school and
white people in their Sunday church services.

Perhaps no finer testimony to the success of the whole undertaking is
recorded than that of Dr. Samuel R. Howe who came to Canada for the
Freedmen's Inquiry Committee.

     "Buxton is certainly a very interesting place," he wrote.
     "Sixteen years ago it was a wilderness. Now, good highways are
     laid out in all directions through the forest, and by their side,
     standing back 33 feet from the road, are about 200 cottages, all
     built in the same pattern, all looking neat and comfortable;
     around each one is a cleared place of several acres which is well
     cultivated. The fences are in good order, the barns seem well
     filled, and cattle and horses, and pigs and poultry, abound.
     There are signs of industry and thrift and comfort everywhere;
     signs of intemperance, of idleness, of want nowhere. There is no
     tavern and no groggery; but there is a chapel and a schoolhouse.
     Most interesting of all are the inhabitants. Twenty years ago
     most of them were slaves, who owned nothing, not even their
     children. Now they own themselves; they own their houses and
     farms; and they have their wives and children about them. They
     are enfranchised citizens of a government which protects their
     rights.... The present condition of all these colonists as
     compared with their former one is remarkable.... This settlement
     is a perfect success. Here are men who were bred in slavery, who
     came here and purchased land at the government price, cleared it,
     bought their own implements, built their own houses after a model
     and have supported themselves in all material circumstances and
     now support their schools in part.... I consider that this
     settlement has done as well as a white settlement would have
     done under the same circumstances."[514]

The Buxton settlement had its part in the John Brown affair. A letter
written by John Brown, Jr., from Sandusky, Ohio, August 27, 1859, and
addressed to "Friend Henrie," (Kagi), speaks of men in Hamilton,
Chatham, Buxton, etc., suitable for the enterprise.

     "At Dr. W's house (presumably in Hamilton) we formed an
     association," he says, "the officers consisting of chairman,
     treasurer and corresponding secretary, the business of which is
     to hunt up good workmen and raise the means among themselves to
     send them forward.... No minutes of the organization nor any of
     its proceedings are or will be preserved in writing. I formed
     similar associations in Chat--and also at B-x-t-n."

John Brown, Jr., also speaks of going to Buxton where he found "the
man, the leading spirit in that affair."

     "On Thursday night last" said he, "I went with him on foot 12
     miles; much of the way through mere paths and sought out in the
     bush some of the choicest. Had a meeting after ten o'clock at
     night in his house. His wife is a heroine and he will be on hand
     as soon as his family can be provided for."[515]

Such is the earlier history of the experiment in Canada of taking
bondmen and placing before them the opportunity not alone to make a
living in freedom but also to rise in the social scale. How well these
people took advantage of their opportunity is shown not only by the
material progress they made but by the fact that they gained for
themselves the respect of their white neighbors, a respect that
continues today for their many descendants who still comprise the
Buxton community in Kent county, Ontario.

                                   FRED LANDON

PUBLIC LIBRARIAN, LONDON, CANADA, AND LECTURER IN AMERICAN HISTORY IN
WESTERN UNIVERSITY, LONDON.


FOOTNOTES:

[507] Drew, _A North-Side View of Slavery_, 1856, p. 292.

[508] Documents in Canadian Archives Department.

[509] _Toronto Weekly Globe_, January 1, 1858.

[510] Drew, _A North-Side View of Slavery_, 1856, pp. 292-293.

[511] The slaves who had been freed by Mr. King formed the nucleus of
the colony but others came as soon as the land was thrown open. The
advances made by this colony during the first years of its existence
were remarkable. The third annual report for the year 1852, showed a
population of 75 families or 400 inhabitants, with 350 acres of land
cleared and 204 acres under cultivation. A year later, the fourth
annual report showed 130 families or 520 persons, with 500 acres of
land cleared and 135 partially cleared, 415 acres being under
cultivation in 1853. The live stock was given as 128 cattle, 15
horses, 30 sheep and 250 hogs. The day school had 112 children
enrolled and the Sabbath School 80.

The fifth report, for the year 1854, showed 150 families in the colony
or immediately adjoining it, 726 acres of land cleared, 174 acres
partially cleared and 577 acres under cultivation. In the year there
had been an increase of cleared land amounting to 226 acres and of
land under cultivation of 162 acres. The livestock consisted of 150
cattle and oxen, 38 horses, 25 sheep and 700 hogs. The day school had
147 on the roll and the Sabbath School 120. A second day school was
opened that year.

The sixth annual report (1855) shows 827 acres of land cleared and
fenced and 216 acres chopped and to go under cultivation in 1856.
There were 810 acres cultivated that year while the live stock
consisted of 190 cattle and oxen, 40 horses, 38 sheep and 600 hogs.
The day school had an enrollment of 150. Among the advances of this
year was the erection of a saw and grist mill which supplied the
colony with lumber and with flour and feed. The building of the saw
mill meant added prosperity, for an estimate made in 1854 placed the
value of the standing timber at $127,000.

A representative of the _New York Tribune_ visited the colony in 1857
and his description of what he saw was reprinted in the _Toronto
Globe_ of November 20, 1857. The colony was then seven years old and
had a population of about 200 families or 800 souls. More than 1,000
acres had been completely cleared while on 200 acres more the trees
had been felled and the land would be put under cultivation the next
spring. The acreage under cultivation in the season of 1857 he gives
as follows: corn, 354 acres; wheat, 200 acres; oats, 70 acres;
potatoes, 80 acres; other crops, 120 acres. The live stock consisted
of 200 cows, 80 oxen, 300 hogs, 52 horses and a small number of sheep.
The industries included a steam sawmill, a brickyard, pearl ash
factory, blacksmith, carpenter and shoe shops as well as a good
general store. There were two schools, one male and one female. The
latter, which had been open only about a year, taught plain sewing and
other domestic subjects. The two schools had a combined enrollment of
140 with average attendance of 58. It was being proposed to require a
small payment in order to make the schools self-supporting. The
Sabbath school had an enrollment of 112 and an average attendance of
52.--Drew, _A North-Side View of Slavery_, pp. 293-297.

[512] _The New York Tribune._

[513] Ward, _Autobiography of a Fugitive Negro_, 1855, p. 214.

[514] Howe, _Refugees from Slavery in Canada West_, 1864, pp. 70-71.

[515] _Toronto Weekly Globe_, November 4, 1859.




FIFTY YEARS OF HOWARD UNIVERSITY[516]

PART II


The crisis in the financial affairs of the University, already
mentioned, was the natural result of over confidence in the readiness
of philanthropists to rally to the aid of a needy cause. This
disappointment, however, was a valuable experience, for it became
clear that philanthropists were not inclined to grant very generous
aid to an institution established under the patronage of the Federal
Government, especially in the face of the frequent and insistent
appeals from less fortunate institutions serving the same people. It
was an incorrect assumption, however, that the United States Treasury
was paying the current expenses, for it must be remembered that no
part of the original grants of the Freedmen's Bureau was or could be
invested as permanent endowment or used for salaries, equipment or
maintenance; and that during the first decade of the existence of the
University no public funds were appropriated for these purposes. In
spite of this, its reputation as a ward of the United States
Government was, to its great disadvantage, accepted by philanthropists
as justified.

When, in 1873, the Freedmen's Bureau was abolished, General Howard
resigned from the presidency of the University to enter the army. Not
desiring to accept his resignation immediately, however, the trustees
granted him an indefinite leave of absence.[517] At the same meeting
it was decided to revive the office of Vice-President, which had been
discontinued and John M. Langston, then Dean of the Howard Law School,
was elected to that position. "It had been hoped," says one, "that
the experiment of placing an able colored man in this high position
would stimulate his own race and the minds of white philanthropists to
sustain the institution in its perilous struggles." But the lack of
funds continued. Convinced that a permanent president must be at once
secured, Mr. Langston resigned the vice-presidency in 1875.

An unfortunate combination of conditions that might well baffle the
ablest administrators then obtained. The outlook was so gloomy that it
was difficult to find a person both capable and willing to succeed to
the position left vacant. Upon Mr. Langston's resignation, Reverend
George Whipple, Secretary of the American Missionary Association was
elected president but after due consideration declined the honor. On
December 16, 1875, Edward P. Smith, a trustee of the University and a
member of the Executive Committee, was elected. After serving a few
weeks he departed on an expedition for the American Missionary
Association to the west coast of Africa where he died, June 15, 1875.
Meanwhile Senator Pomeroy acted as chairman of the board of trustees
and Professor Frederick W. Fairfield served efficiently as acting
president, having supervision over matters purely educational. This
was the period of the most rigid retrenchment in expenses.

But Howard was to find a way out of this difficulty and move onward.
The second epoch in the history of the University began when, on April
25, 1876, the Reverend Doctor William W. Patton was elected president.
His administration, lasting over a term of twelve years, was a period
of recovery and consolidation, and an era of good feeling. Dr. Patton
came to his task equipped with just the qualities needed at that time.
He possessed intense sympathy for the ideals for which the University
stands; sufficient business ability to keep its finances safe; and a
personality that inspired respect, confidence and love.

Carefully administering the affairs of the institution, Dr. Patton was
able to restore confidence in the minds of the public and of Congress.
This accomplished, he was justified in arguing for federal aid on the
ground that through this means alone was it possible to make the best
use of the large and expensive plant which the Government had already
provided. The result was that for the year beginning July 1, 1879,
Congress appropriated $10,000 toward current expenses. Since that date
appropriations have been regularly made and have so increased that the
institution now receives from the United States Government an annual
allowance of over $100,000.

It was during the administration of Dr. Patton that Howard University
rounded out its organization and developed as a university.
Previously, however, the various departments particularly had made
interesting history. An active faculty was organized in the Medical
School, June 17, 1867, and the first session opened in November, 1868,
in the same rented building already referred to as housing the first
academic classes of the University.[518] Here lectures were given in
the evening to a class of eight students. The permanent Medical
Building was then in the course of erection. Under an able faculty and
with excellent facilities it is not surprising that the Medical School
has been able to maintain a very high standard of efficiency and that
it now meets fully the requirements of the Association of American
Medical Colleges.

The Law Department was organized October 12, 1868, with Mr. John M.
Langston[519] as professor and dean. In December of the same year, A.
G. Riddle was associated with him on the faculty and the school began
actual instruction on January 6, 1869.[520] During the years of the
financial difficulties of the University, however, the Law School
passed through a distressing experience. The attendance of the
students was uncertain, falling off rapidly when the Freedmen's Bureau
passed out of existence; for many of the students who were employees
serving the Bureau during the day attended lectures at night. These
left in large numbers when the Bureau closed, depriving the Law School
of a part of its estimated income. Losing thus this revenue, this
department was either actually suspended or barely kept open with a
single teacher and a handful of students. Mr. Langston retained his
position as dean under the then trying conditions until 1874, when he
resigned.

The department gradually recovered with the mending fortunes of the
University under President Patton and as a result of the demand in the
District of Columbia for a school of law admitting students without
racial restrictions. In 1881 B. F. Leighton was appointed to the
deanship of this department, a position which he has to the present
time filled with marked success. He took charge of the department when
it was barely existing and brought it to its present position of
usefulness. For many years he had associated with him A. A. Birney one
of the most distinguished members of the District of Columbia bar.
From that reconstruction of the department dates the period of its
real growth. In 1881 these two professors lectured to a class of seven
students, five of whom were graduated at the close of the session.
Since that time the courses have been broadened in keeping with the
advancing standards of legal study, the student body has increased ten
fold and the faculty has been strengthened in accordance with these
demands.

Although the Theological Department was the first in the plan of the
founders of the University, it was not put into operation until
January 6, 1868, when D. B. Nichols and E. W. Robinson, both
clergymen, began without pay, to give theological instruction twice a
week to a number of men already accredited as preachers and others
looking forward to that work. Shortly afterwards, at the request of
the Board of Trustees, a course of study was drawn up and adopted.
Lectures in accordance with this plan were started immediately
thereafter by General Eliphalet Whittlesey.[521] It was not until
1871, however, that the Theological Department was officially
announced by the University as actively in operation. In this
announcement, Dr. John B. Reeve is named as dean, supported by a
faculty of four lecturers and a roster of twelve students. Three years
later in 1874, seven of these twelve students received their
certificates of graduation.

The Theological Department has always been barred from the use of
United States funds for its current expenses and has, therefore,
depended upon scholarships and special contributions made by
individuals and philanthropic organizations. The American Missionary
Association has always been its chief support since the crisis of
1873. Because of the financial stress under which the University was
working at that time, the first act of Dr. Lorenzo Wescott, the new
dean appointed in 1875, was to make arrangements to have the
Presbytery of Washington assume the responsibility of the school. This
appeal was favorably acted upon and a committee of the Presbytery took
charge of the affairs of the department in December, 1875. This step
was rendered necessary because, from 1872 to 1874 the American
Missionary Association, on account of financial embarrassment, was
compelled, temporarily, to withdraw its support. In November, 1877,
this organization was again able to resume part of the responsibility
and the bodies worked in harmony until June, 1887, when the American
Missionary Association was again ready to bear the entire
expense.[522]

Dr. Patton resigned in May, 1889, but consented to continue in office
until the end of the year or until his successor should be elected.
The selection of his successor was made in November and Dr. Patton
retired, hoping to rest and do literary work. He died, however, on the
last day of the year 1889. On November 15, 1889, the trustees elected
the Reverend Doctor Jeremiah E. Rankin[523] to the presidency, taking
him from the pastorate of the First Congregational Church of
Washington. His term of office extended through thirteen years, a
period of slow but steady growth.

Under President Rankin other changes were made in the course of the
development of the University. At the close of the session in 1899 the
University altered its policy with reference to the work of training
teachers. To this end the work of the Normal Department, at first
provided for this purpose, was reorganized as the pedagogical
department of the college under the deanship of Professor Lewis B.
Moore who had come to the faculty five years prior to this time from
the University of Pennsylvania, where he had pursued graduate studies
and obtained the degree of Doctor of Philosophy. After several years
of growth the department was designated as the Teachers College and
given academic rank with the College of Arts and Sciences. When the
Normal Department was discontinued the English Department was
established to care for those who wished to pursue the common branches
without professional aim. In 1903, it was merged with the newly
established Commercial Department under Dean George W. Cook.

It was during this administration that with funds obtained as private
donations the permanent residence for the president and the Andrew
Rankin Memorial Chapel were erected, the former costing approximately
$20,000 and the latter $22,000. The chapel is a memorial to the one
whose name it bears, Andrew E. Rankin, the brother of President Rankin
and the deceased husband of Mrs. H. T. Cushman of Boston, a generous
donor toward its erection.

Because of failing health Doctor Rankin resigned in 1903. Reverend
Teunis N. Hamlin, pastor of the Church of the Covenant, Washington,
District of Columbia, and the president of the board of trustees,
served as acting president for a short time pending the selection of a
permanent incumbent. The Reverend Doctor John Gordon, the president of
Tabor College in Iowa was selected for the presidency and was formally
inaugurated in 1904. It was hoped that the incoming president would
infuse new life into the institution, for the occasion demanded a
successful administrator, an efficient educator and a man able to
command increased financial support for the institution. As Doctor
Gordon had none of these qualities, it soon became evident that he
would be able to accomplish little of benefit to the University. He
failed entirely to understand its mission and its ideals. Serious
friction between the president on the one hand and the faculty and
students on the other grew to such proportions that Dr. Gordon, after
a term of office covering a little over two years, resigned.

After an examination of available material in the search for a
suitable man for this position, the trustees were happy in the
selection of the Reverend Doctor Wilbur P. Thirkield[524] who accepted
the offer and took up the duties of president in 1906. He was
inaugurated November 15, 1907, on the occasion of the fortieth
anniversary of the founding of the institution. With this ceremony
began an infusion of new life into Howard University. Advantage of
this occasion was taken to introduce the institution concretely to a
group of notables who had hitherto known of it only in a casual way.
And having once brought the institution to the attention of the world,
President Thirkield never allowed the world to forget it.

With keen insight he realized at the very beginning of his term of
office that the great and basic need of the University was material
expansion. He saw the need of a more extensive plant with modern
equipment and served by a larger faculty. With characteristic energy
he sought to bring the University into a still closer alliance with
the Federal Government. So successfully was the case presented that
during his administration of six years he succeeded in raising the
annual Congressional appropriation for current expenses from less than
$50,000 in 1906 to over $100,000 in 1912. The pressing need for
facilities in the teaching of the sciences was met by the erection in
1910 of a science hall from special appropriations amounting to
$80,000.[525] In 1909, the Carnegie Library was erected. This building
was the gift of Mr. Andrew Carnegie and cost $50,000.

About this time the improvement of the dormitories was begun by the
installation of adequate systems of sanitary plumbing and electric
lights. By arrangement with Freedmen's Hospital the heating and
lighting plant was enlarged at a cost of approximately $100,000 to
such capacity that steam and current were supplied to all the
University buildings. In addition to these improvements in housing and
equipment, the grounds were improved and beautified in accordance with
a definite scheme.[526] To provide for the constantly growing work in
technical and industrial branches the Hall of Applied Sciences was
built in 1913 at a cost of $25,000 thus releasing the old Spaulding
Hall for other purposes. A special department of music under Miss Lulu
Vere Childers was established in 1909 and given a building in 1916.

Possibly the most striking result of the educational awakening under
President Thirkield was the rapid growth of the College Department. In
1876 for example, the roster of the department shows thirty-five
students and four graduates. In 1907, forty years later, the
corresponding figures were, seventy-five and eight, a gain of about
one hundred per cent in forty years or two and a half per cent a year.
In 1911 these figures had grown to two hundred and forty-three, and
thirty-one respectively, a gain during the period of six years covered
by this administration, of about two hundred and forty per cent in
students and nearly three hundred per cent in graduates. This is
approximately a gain per year of forty per cent in enrollment and
forty-eight per cent in graduates. While much of this remarkable
growth is due to the general awakening of the University, yet no small
part of the credit belongs to the inspiration of Professor Kelly
Miller who became Dean of the College of Arts and Sciences in 1907
near the beginning of the period under consideration. Through his
efforts and reputation as a writer the claims of the University and
the College of Arts and Sciences were brought to the attention of
aspiring youth throughout the country.[527] Upon the resignation of
Dr. Thirkield to become Bishop of the Methodist Church in 1912, the
Reverend Doctor Stephen M. Newman was chosen as the head of the
university. He has served in that position for five years.[528]

Serviceable as have been many of the educators connected with Howard
University it has had and still has many problems. Its chief
difficulty, however, is a financial one. Although it is impossible to
figure out how the University could have succeeded without the aid of
the United States Government, this connection of the institution has
been in some respects a handicap. National aid seems to have
permanently excluded the institution from the circle of the
beneficiaries of those great philanthropic agencies which have played
such a prominent part in the support of education during the last half
century. With the exception of the Theological Department, which
receives no part whatever of the Congressional appropriation, the
income to the institution from benevolent sources has played but a
minor part in its development. On the other hand, the United States
Government has never appropriated sufficient funds to maintain the
University as a first class institution. The present appropriation of
$100,000 a year falls far short of what the school needs to function
properly. It seems, therefore, that the United States Government,
should adequately support the institution and make its appropriations
legally permanent.[529]

Some remarks about the general policy of Howard University may be
enlightening. The idea of racial representation among the
administrative officers and faculty is indicated by the fact that
membership in a particular race has never been considered a
qualification for any position in the University. For many years the
board of trustees has had persons of both races as members. No colored
man has served a regular term as president, however, unless we include
the short experience of Professor Langston already referred to. The
treasurer has always been white but the office of secretary has been
filled by members of both races. Neither the Theological nor the
Medical School has had a Negro as dean although Dr. Charles B. Purvis
was elected to that office in the latter in 1900 but declined it.

The faculties of all departments are mixed, the proportion of Negroes
growing as available material from which to choose becomes more
abundant. The policy of maintaining mixed faculties, however, is not
dictated entirely by the lack of men and women of color competent to
fill all positions on the faculty; for today the supply of such
material is adequate. It seems that the governing body considers it in
the best interest of the University to preserve the racial mixture in
the offices and faculties in order that the students may receive the
peculiar contribution of both races and that the institution may have
its interests concretely connected with those of the dominant race.

Whether or not Howard has amply justified its existence during its
first half century; whether its ideals have been the best for the race
whose interests it primarily serves; whether its administrative
policies have been wise--these are questions whose answers lie outside
the scope of this sketch. As institutions of learning go, fifty years
is a short time upon which to base conclusions. It is a period of
beginnings. With schools of the character of Howard, with its peculiar
duties to perform and its peculiar problems to solve in a field
entirely new, these fifty years make up a period of experiment.
Whatever the future relative to this educational experiment may be,
Howard has given to America nearly four thousand graduates from its
various departments most of whom are now doing the class of work in
all fields of endeavor which demand trained minds, broad human
sympathy and the spirit of service.

                                   DWIGHT O. W. HOLMES.


FOOTNOTES:

[516] Part I of _Fifty Years of Howard University_ appeared in the
April Number of the JOURNAL OF NEGRO HISTORY.

[517] The resignation was accepted the following year after General
Howard had been appointed to the command of the Department of the
Columbia.

[518] It was realized at the beginning that a hospital in connection
with the department was an absolute necessity. This was provided for
through the relationship established between the Medical School and
Freedmen's Hospital. The Campbell Hospital, as it was formerly called,
was located, at the close of the war, at what is now the northeast
corner of Seventh Street and Florida Avenue. Prior to that time it was
directly connected with the War Department. In 1865, in connection
with the various hospitals and camps for freedmen in the several
States, it was placed under the Freedmen's Bureau. In 1869 it was
moved to buildings expressly erected for it by the Bureau upon ground
belonging to the University on Pomeroy Street, including and adjacent
to the site of the Medical Building. This new home consisted of four
large frame buildings of two stories each to be used as wards; and in
addition the Medical Building itself, a brick structure of four and
one half stories, quite commodious and well arranged with lecture
halls and laboratories for medical instruction. Dr. Robert Reyburn,
who was chief medical officer of the Freedmen's Bureau from 1870 to
1872 was surgeon in chief, from 1868 to 1875. He was followed in order
by Drs. Gideon S. Palmer, Charles B. Purvis, Daniel H. Williams,
Austin M. Curtis and Wm. H. Warfield. Dr. Warfield, the present
incumbent was appointed in 1901 and is the first graduate of the
Howard University Medical School to hold this position. Only the first
two named, however, were white. In 1907 the hospital was moved to its
new home in the reservation lying on the south side of College Street
between Fourth and Sixth Streets, the property of the University.

"The new Freedmen's Hospital was then built at a cost of $600,000. It
has the great advantage of being designed primarily for teaching
purposes, as practically all the patients admitted are utilized freely
for instruction. The hospital has about three hundred beds and
contains two clinical amphitheatres, a pathological laboratory,
clinical laboratory and a room for X-Ray diagnostic work and X-Ray
therapy. The Medical Faculty practically constitutes the Hospital
Staff."--_Howard University Catalog_, 1916-17, p. 163; 1917-18, p.
168.

[519] Mr. Langston was graduated at Oberlin with the degree of A.B. in
1852 and in theology in 1853. He studied law privately and was
admitted to practice in Ohio in 1854. In April, 1867, he was appointed
general inspector of the Freedmen's Bureau, serving for two years,
during which he travelled extensively through the South. From 1877 to
1885 he was Minister to Haiti and from 1885 to 1887 President of the
Virginia Normal and Collegiate Institute. He was elected to Congress
from the Fourth District of Virginia and seated, September 23, 1890,
after a contest. He died November 15, 1897, at his home near Howard
University.

[520] For a number of years after its organization the school held its
sessions in the main building of the University. Later a more
convenient location was secured in the building occupied by the Second
National Bank on Seventh Street. After remaining there for a
considerable period, it moved to Lincoln Hall, at Ninth and D Streets,
where it remained until 1887 when the building was destroyed by fire.
The authorities then decided to purchase for the department a
permanent home conveniently located and adequate to its accommodation.
As a result the present Law Building on Fifth Street, opposite the
District Court House, was purchased, and fitted up for school
purposes.

[521] General Eliphalet Whittlesey was Colonel of the 46th United
States Colored Regiment in 1865. He had been on the staff of General
Howard during the last year of the campaign through the South and was
brevetted Brigadier General at the close of the war. He was Assistant
Commissioner of the Freedmen's Bureau and later Adjutant General under
General Howard at Washington. He assisted in the selection of the site
for the University, was the first professor in the College Department
and organized the Department of Theology.

Reverend Danforth B. Nichols, whose name has appeared frequently in
this sketch, was, at the close of the war, engaged in missionary work
among the "contrabands" who tilled the abandoned lands just across the
Potomac from Washington. When Howard University was founded he was one
of the most active and enthusiastic workers for the successful
launching of the venture. Beside being a founder, a trustee and a
professor, he received the degree of M.D. with the first class
graduated by its medical department.

[522] While the Presbytery was in charge the department received a
gift or $5,000 from Mrs. Hannah B. Toland. In 1879 Reverend J. G.
Craighead became dean of the department and filled the position until
his resignation in 1891. During his administration the department
received $5,000 from the estate of Wm. E. Dodge of New York. On
October 1, 1883, the treasurer of the University was authorized to pay
the American Missionary Association $15,000, "out of moneys due from
the United States as compensation for University land taken for the
reservoir," or such part as might be requisite to complete the
endowment of the "Stone Professorship" in the Theological Department.
This amount was added to a fund of $25,000 which came from the estate
of Daniel P. Stone, of Boston, Massachusetts, upon the fulfillment of
the term of the gift.

[523] Dr. Rankin was a writer and poet of note, his most famous
production being the hymn, "God be with you till we meet again."

[524] Dr. Thirkield received his A.M. degree from Ohio Wesleyan in
1879. He studied theology at Boston University, graduating with the
degree of S.T.B. in 1881. He entered the ministry in the M. E. Church
in 1878. As the first president of Gammon Theological Seminary,
Atlanta, Georgia, from 1883 to 1899 he secured endowment for that
institution to the amount of $600,000. He was called to the presidency
of Howard after several years of successful service first as General
Secretary of the Epworth League and later as General Secretary of the
Freedmen's Aid and Southern Educational Society.

[525] This building was dedicated as "Science Hall" but by vote of the
trustees the name was changed to "Thirkield Hall" in honor of
President Thirkield when the latter resigned in 1912.

[526] Much of the credit for the improvements to grounds and buildings
is due to the experience and business acumen of Professor George W.
Cook who became secretary and business manager in 1908. Professor Cook
has enjoyed an extensive and unique connection with the University
from his matriculation in the Preparatory Department in 1873 to the
present. He is a graduate of three departments and holds the degrees
of A.B., A.M., LL.B. and LL.M. He has been dean of the Normal, the
English and the Commercial Departments successively. Since 1908 he has
been secretary and business manager of the University.

[527] Professor Miller is a product of Howard and one of her most
distinguished sons. He was graduated from Preparatory Department in
1882 and from College in 1886 after which he pursued advanced studies
at Johns Hopkins University. He is one of the most conspicuous
publicists of the race, being the author of several books and numerous
pamphlets, beside making frequent contributions to periodicals, both
in America and abroad. His most important books are _Race Adjustment_
and _Out of the House of Bondage. The Disgrace of Democracy_, an open
letter to President Wilson, published in 1917, has been pronounced one
of the most important documents produced by the great war.

[528] Dr. Newman was graduated from Bowdoin College, the alma mater of
General Howard, in 1867, with the A.B. degree, receiving the A.M. in
1870 and D.D. in 1877. He studied theology at Andover, finishing in
1871. He served as pastor in Taunton, Massachusetts, Ripon, Wisconsin
and the First Congregational Church of Washington, District of
Columbia. He was president of Eastern College, Fort Royal, Virginia,
1908-9, and Kee Mar College for Women, Hagerstown, Maryland, 1909-11.
He is a member of a number of learned societies and a distinguished
pulpit orator.

[529] President Taft considered the support of the University a
national obligation. In his address at the commencement exercises, May
26, 1909, he said, in part:

"Everything that I can do as an executive in the way of helping along
the University I expect to do. I expect to do it because I believe it
is a debt of the people of the United States, it is an obligation of
the Government of the United States, and it is money constitutionally
applied to that which shall work out in the end the solution of one of
the greatest problems that God has put upon the people of the United
States."




DOCUMENTS

WHAT THE FRAMERS OF THE FEDERAL CONSTITUTION THOUGHT OF THE NEGRO


The first important discussion in the Convention of 1787 to reflect
the attitude of the framers of the Federal Constitution toward the
Negro, was whether or not slaves should be considered a part of the
population in apportioning representation in Congress on that basis. A
precedent had been set in the Articles of Confederation in the
provision for counting five slaves as three whites to determine the
rate of taxation on the population basis. The free States contended
that only the free inhabitants should be counted, but the slave States
urged the recognition of slaves as a part of the population to secure
to the South the power which it wielded until the Civil War.[530]

Taking up this important question soon after the convention assembled,

     The following resolution was then moved by Mr. Randolph, Resolved
     that the rights of suffrage in the national legislature ought to
     be proportioned to the quotas of contribution, or to the number
     of free inhabitants, as the one or the other rule may seem best
     in different cases.

     It was moved by Mr. Hamilton seconded by Mr. Spaight that the
     resolution be altered so as to read

     Resolved that the rights of suffrage in the national legislature
     ought to be proportioned to the number of free inhabitants

     It was moved and seconded that the resolution be postponed--and
     on the question to postpone it passed in the affirmative

     The following resolution was moved by Mr. Randolph seconded by Mr
     Madison Resolved that the rights of suffrage in the national
     legislature ought to be proportioned--it was moved and seconded
     to add the words "and not according to the present system"--On
     the question to agree to the amendment it passed in the
     affirmative. (Ayes--7 noes--0.)[531]

     It was then moved and seconded so to alter the resolution that it
     should read

     Resolved that the rights of suffrage in the national legislature
     ought not to be according

     It was then moved and seconded to postpone the consideration of
     the last resolution--And, on the question to postpone, it passed
     in the affirmative The following resolution was then moved by Mr
     Madison seconded by Mr. G Morris.

     Resolved that the equality of suffrage established by the
     articles of confederation ought not to prevail in the national
     legislature and that an equitable ratio of representation ought
     to be substituted.

     It was moved and seconded to postpone the consideration of the
     last resolution.

     (The following Resolution being the 2d. of those proposed by Mr.
     Randolph was taken up. viz--"that the rights of suffrage in the
     National Legislature ought to be proportioned to the quotas of
     contribution, or to the number of free inhabitants, as the one or
     the other rule may seem best in different cases.")

     Mr. M(adison) observing that the words ("_or to the number of_)
     _free inhabitants_." might occasion debates which would divert
     the Committee from the general question whether the principle of
     representation should be changed, moved that they might be struck
     out.

     Mr King observed that the quotas of contribution which would
     alone remain as the measure of representation, would not answer;
     because waving every other view of the matter, the revenue might
     hereafter be so collected by the general Govt. that the sums
     respectively drawn from the States would (not) appear; and would
     besides be continually varying.

     Mr. Madison admitted the propriety of the observation, and that
     some better rule ought to be found.

     Col. Hamilton moved to alter the resolution so as to read "that
     the rights of suffrage in the national Legislature ought to be
     proportioned to the number of free inhabitants. Mr. Spaight
     2ded. the motion.

     It was then moved that the Resolution be postponed, which was
     agreed to.

     Mr. Randolph and Mr. Madison then moved the following
     resolution--"that the rights of suffrage in the national
     Legislature ought to be proportioned."

     It was moved and 2ded to amend it by adding "and not according to
     the present system"--which was agreed to.

     It was then moved and 2ded. to alter the resolution so as to read
     "that the rights of suffrage in the national Legislature ought
     not to be according to the present system."

     It was then moved & 2ded. to postpone the Resolution moved by Mr.
     Randolph & Mr. Madison, which being agreed to;

     Mr. Madison, moved, in order to get over the difficulties, the
     following resolution--"that the equality of suffrage established
     by the articles of Confederation ought not to prevail in the
     national Legislature, and that an equitable ratio of
     representation ought to be submitted" This was 2ded. by Mr. Govr.
     Morris, (and being generally relished, would have been agreed to
     when,)

     Mr. Reed moved that the whole clause relating to the point of
     Representation be postponed; reminding the Come. that the
     deputies from Delaware were restrained by their commission from
     assenting to any change of the rule of suffrage, and in case a
     change should be fixed on, it might become their duty to retire
     from the Convention.

     Mr. Govr. Morris observed that the valuable assistance of those
     members could not be lost without real concern, and that so early
     a proof of discord in the convention as a secession of a State,
     would add much to the regret; that the change proposed was
     however so fundamental an article in a national Govt. that it
     could not be dispensed with.

     Mr. M(adison) observed that whatever reason might have existed
     for the equality of suffrage when the Union was a federal one
     among sovereign States, it must cease when a national Governt.
     should be put into the place. In the former case, the acts of
     Congs. depended so much for their efficacy on the cooperation of
     the States, that these had a weight both within & without
     Congress, nearly in proportion to their extent and importance. In
     the latter case, as the acts of the Genl. Govt. would take effect
     without the intervention of the State legislatures, a vote from
     a small State wd. have the same efficacy & importance as (a vote)
     from a large one, and there was the same reason for (different
     numbers) of representatives from different States, as from
     Counties of different extents within particular States. He
     suggested as an expedient for at once taking the sense of the
     members on this point and saving the Delaware deputies from
     embarrassment, that the question should be taken in Committee,
     and the clause on report to the House (be postponed without a
     question there). This however did not appear to satisfy Mr. Read.

     By several it was observed that no just construction of the Act
     of Delaware, could require or justify a secession of her
     deputies, even if the resolution were to be carried thro' the
     House as well as the Committee. It was finally agreed however
     that the clause should be postponed: it being understood that in
     the event the proposed change of representation would certainly
     be agreed to, no objection or difficulty being started from any
     other quarter (than from Delaware).

     The motion of Mr. Read to postpone being agreed to

     The Committee then rose. The chairman reported progress, and the
     House having resolved to resume the subject in Committee
     tomorrow,[532]

               (Adjourned to 10 OClock)



The next question was on the following resolve:

     In substance that the mode of the present representation was
     unjust--the suffrage ought to be in proportion to number or
     property.

     To this Delaware objected, in consequence of the restrictions in
     their credentials, and moved to have the consideration thereof
     postponed, to which the house agreed.[533]

McHenry records for the thirtieth of May that the Committee then
proceeded to consider the second resolution in Mr. Randolph's paper.

     That the rights of suffrage in the national legislature ought to
     be proportioned to the quotas of contribution or to the number
     of free inhabitants as the one or the other rule may seem best
     in different cases.

     As this gave the large States the most absolute controul over the
     lesser ones it met with opposition which produced an adjournment
     without any determination.[534]

After frequent discussion and the failure to reach an agreement to
safeguard the interests of the small States while giving due weight to
the population of the large the effort to apportion representation in
the national legislature assumed this form in the Committee of the
Whole:

     It was moved by Mr. King, seconded by Mr Rutledge to agree to the
     following resolution, namely:

     Resolved that the right of suffrage in the first branch of the
     national Legislature ought not to be according to the rule
     established in the articles of confederation; but according to
     some equitable ratio of representation

     And on the question to agree to the same

     it passed in the affirmative (Ayes--7; noes--3; divided--1.)

     It was then moved by Mr. Rutledge seconded by Mr Butler to add
     the following words to the last resolution

     "namely, according to the quotas of contribution"

     It was moved by Mr Wilson seconded by Mr C. Pinckney to postpone
     the consideration of the last motion in order to introduce the
     following words, after the words "equitable ratio of
     representation" namely.

     "in proportion to the whole number of white and other 'free
     Citizens' and inhabitants of every age, sex and condition,
     'including those bound to servitude for a term of years', and
     three fifths of all other persons not comprehended in the
     foregoing description, except Indians, not paying taxes 'in each
     State.'"

     On the question to postpone

     it passed in the affirmative. (Ayes--10; noes--1.)

     On the question to agree to Mr Wilson's motion

     It passed in the affirmative (Ayes--9; noes--2.)

     It was then moved by Mr Wilson seconded by Mr Hamilton to adopt
     the following resolution, namely,

     "resolved that the right of suffrage in the second branch "of the
     national Legislature ought to be according to the rule
     "established for the first"

     On the question to agree to the same it passed in the affirmative
     (Ayes--6; noes--5.)[535]

In the Committee of the Whole on the eleventh of June:

     It was then moved by Mr. Rutlidge 2ded. by Mr. Butler to add to
     the words "equitable ratio of representation" at the end of the
     motion just agreed to, the words "according to the quotas of
     Contribution. On motion of

     _Mr. Wilson_ seconded by Mr. C. Pinckney, this was postponed; in
     order to add, after, after the words "equitable ratio of
     representation" the words following "in proportion to the whole
     number of white & other free Citizens & inhabitants of every age
     sex & condition including those bound to servitude for a term of
     years and three fifths of all other persons not comprehended in
     the foregoing description, except Indians not paying taxes, in
     each State." this being the rule in the Act of Congress agreed to
     by eleven States, for apportioning quotas of revenue on the
     States, and requiring a census only every 5--7, or 10 years.

     Mr. Gerry thought property not the rule of representation. Why
     then shd, the blacks, who were property in the South be in the
     rule of representation more than the cattle & horses of the
     North.

     On the question.

     Mass: Con: N. Y. Pen: Maryd. Virga. N. C. S. C. and Geo: were in
     the affirmative: N. J. & Del: in the negative. (Ayes--9;
     noes--2.) Mr. Sherman moved that a question be taken whether each
     State shall have (one) vote in the 2d. branch. Every thing he
     said depended on this. The smaller States would never agree to
     the plan on any other principle (than an equality of suffrage in
     this branch. Mr. Ellsworth seconded the motion.) On the question
     for allowing each State (one) vote in the 2d. branch.

     Massts, no. Cont, ay. N. Y. ay. N. J. ay. Pa. no. Del. ay Md. ay.
     Va. no. N. C. no. S. C. no. Geo. no. (Ayes--5; noes--6.)

     (Mr. Wilson & Mr. Hamilton moved that the right of suffrage in
     the 2d. branch ought to be according to the same rule as in the
     1st. branch.)

     On this question for making the ratio of representation the same
     in the 2d. as in the 1st. branch (it passed in the affirmative:)
     Massts. ay. Cont. no. N. Y. no. N. J. no. Pa. ay. Del. no. Md.
     no. Va. ay. N. C. ay. S. C. ay. Geo. ay. (Ayes--6; noes--5.)[536]

On the same day

     Mr. Wilson was of opinion, and therefore moved, _that the mode of
     representation of each of the states ought to be from the number
     of its free inhabitants, and of every other description three
     fifths to one free inhabitant_. He supposed that the impost will
     not be the only revenue--the post office he supposes would be
     another substantial source of revenue. He observed further, that
     this mode had already received the approbation of eleven states
     in their acquiescence to the quota made by congress. He admitted
     that this resolve would require further restrictions, for where
     numbers determined the representation a census at different
     periods of 5, 7 or 10 years, ought to be taken.

     Mr. Gerry. The idea of property ought not to be the rule of
     representation. Blacks are property, and are used to the
     southward as horses and cattle to the northward; and why should
     their representation be increased to the southward on account of
     the number of slaves, than horses or oxen to the north?

     Mr. Madison was of opinion at present, to fix the standard of
     representation, and let the detail be the business of a
     sub-committee.

     Mr. Rutledge's motion was postponed.[537]

Discussing whether the apportionment should be according to taxation
or numbers, Wilson considered

     Either Rule good--by Numbers best to ascertain the Right of
     Representn. this agreeably to the Sentiments of 11 States--Impost
     alone will not be sufficient to answer the national
     Exigencies--Revenues arising from Postage--The present Quota not
     a lasting Rule--People to be numbered at fixed Periods--A Rule
     arising from Property and Numbers--

     Gerry. Rule of Taxation not the Rule of Representation--4 might
     then have more Voices than ten--Slaves not to be put upon the
     Footing of freemen--Freemen of Massts. not to be put upon a
     Footing with the Slaves of other States--Horses and Cattle ought
     to have the Right of Representn. Negroes--Whites--[538]

On the thirteenth of June Randolph submitted another resolution agreed
to in the Committee of the Whole.

  Resolved that the right of suffrage in the first branch of the
     national Legislature ought not to be according to the rule
     established in the articles of confederation; but according to
     some equitable ratio of representation--namely in proportion to
     the whole number of whites and other free citizens and
     inhabitants, of every age, sex and condition, including those
     bound to servitude for a term of years and three fifths of all
     other persons not comprehended in the foregoing description,
     except Indians, not paying taxes in each State.[539]

The following propositions from New Jersey moved by Patterson closely
connected the apportionment of requisitions with that of
representation:

     3. Resd. that whenever requisitions shall be necessary, instead
     of the rule for making requisitions mentioned in the articles of
     Confederation, the United States in Congs. be authorized to make
     such requisitions in proportion to the whole number of white &
     other free citizens & inhabitants of every age sex and condition
     including those bound to servitude for a term of years & three
     fifths of all other persons not comprehended in the foregoing
     description, except Indians not paying taxes; that if such
     requisitions be not compiled with, in the time specified therein,
     to direct the collection thereof in the non complying States &
     for that purpose to devise and pass acts directing & authorizing
     the same; provided that none of the powers hereby vested in the
     U. States in Congs. shall be exercised without the consent of at
     least[540]

Again on the fifteenth of June it was suggested that

     3. The rule of apportioning Requis: on the States shall be the
     Whites 3/5 of all others--if the Req. is in arrear in any State,
     Congress shall have authority to devise & pass acts remedial in
     such case.

On the fifth of July the committee considering the question of
representation reported on the 40,000 basis which repeatedly came
before the Convention. It provided:

     That in the first branch of the legislature, each of the states
     now in the union, be allowed one member for every 40,000
     inhabitants, of the description reported in the seventh
     resolution of the committee of the whole house--That each state,
     not containing that number, shall be allowed one member.[541]

Reporting on this question the fifth of July, the Committee of the
Whole decided to submit:

     That the subsequent propositions be recommended to the
     Convention, on condition that both shall be generally adopted.

     1st That in the first branch of the Legislature each of the
     States now in the Union be allowed one Member for every forty
     thousand inhabitants of the description reported in the seventh
     resolution of the Committee of the whole House. That each State
     not containing that number shall be allowed one Member--That all
     Bills for raising or appropriating money and for fixing the
     salaries of the Officers of the Government of the United States,
     shall originate in the first Branch of the Legislature, and shall
     not be altered or amended by the second Branch and that no money
     shall be drawn from the public Treasury but in pursuance of
     appropriations to be originated by the first Branch. 2ndly That
     in the second Branch of the Legislature each State shall have an
     equal Veto.

Discussing this question on the sixth of July:

     Mr. Pinkney saw no good reason for committing. The value of land
     had been found on full investigation to be an impracticable rule.
     The contributions of revenue including imports & exports, must be
     too changeable in their amount; too difficult to be adjusted; and
     too injurious to the non-commercial States. The number of
     inhabitants appeared to him the only just & practicable rule. He
     thought the blacks ought to stand on an equality with whites: But
     wd.--agree to the ratio settled by Congs. He contended that
     Congs. had no right under the articles of Confederation to
     authorize the admission of new States; no such cases having been
     provided for.[542]

On the ninth of July, according to Madison, Mr. Gorham said:

     Some provision of this sort was necessary in the outset. The
     number of blacks & whites with some regard to supposed wealth
     was the general guide. Fractions could not be observed. The
     Legislre. is to make alterations from time to time as justice &
     propriety may require. Two objections prevailed agst. the rate of
     1 member for every 40,000 inhts. The 1st. was that the
     Representation would soon be too numerous: the 2d. that the
     Western States who may have a different interest, might if
     admitted on that principal by degrees, out-vote the Atlantic.
     Both these objections are removed. The number will be small in
     the first instance and maybe continued so, and the Atlantic
     States having ye Govt. in their own hands, may take care of their
     own interest by dealing out the right of Representation in safe
     proportions to the Western States. These were the views of the
     Committee.[543]

On the tenth of July the following interesting comment was made.

     Mr. Dayton observed that the line between the Northn. & Southern
     interest had been improperly drawn: that Pa. was the dividing
     State, there being six on each side of her.

     Genl. Pinkney urged the reduction, dwelt on the superior wealth
     of the Southern States, and insisted on its having its due weight
     in the Government.

     Mr. Govr. Morris regretted the turn of the debate. The States he
     found had many Representatives on the floor. Few he fears were to
     be deemed the Representatives of America. He thought the Southern
     States have by the report more than their share of
     representation. Property ought to have its weight; but not all
     the weight. If the (Southn. States are to) supply money. The
     Northn. States are to spill their blood. Besides, the probable
     Revenue to be expected from the S. States has been greatly
     overrated. He was agst. reducing N. Hampshire.[544]

In connection with determining the basis of representation the
following was offered on the eleventh of July:

     "Resolved That in order to ascertain the alterations that may
     happen in the population and wealth of the several States a
     census shall be taken of the free inhabitants of each State, and
     three fifths of the inhabitants of other description on the first
     year after this form of Government shall have been adopted--and
     afterwards on every term of ____ years; and the Legislature shall
     alter or augment the representation accordingly"

     It was moved and seconded to strike out the words

     "three fifths of"

     which passed in the negative. (Ayes--3; noes--7.)

     It was moved and seconded to postpone the consideration of the
     resolution proposed in order to take up the following namely.

     Resolved That at the end of ____ years from the meeting of the
     Legislature of the United-States and at the expiration of every
     ____ years thereafter the Legislature of the United States be
     required to apportion the representation of the several States
     according to the principles of their wealth and population.

     On the question to postpone, it passed in the negative (Ayes--5;
     noes--5;)

     It was moved and seconded to agree to the first clause of the
     resolution namely.

     "That in order to ascertain the alterations that may happen in
     the population and wealth of the several States a "Census shall
     be taken of each State"

     which passed in the affirmative (Ayes--6; noes--4.)

     (To adjourn. Ayes--1; noes--9.)

     It was moved and seconded to agree to the following clause of the
     resolution, namely

     "and three fifths of the inhabitants of other description"

     which passed in the negative. (Ayes--4; noes--6.)

     It was moved and seconded to agree to the following clause of the
     resolution, namely

     "On the first year after this form of government shall "have been
     adopted"

     which passed in the affirmative (Ayes--7; noes--3.)

     It was moved and seconded to fill up the blank with the word
     "fifteen" which passed unanimously in the affirmative (Ayes--10;
     noes--0.)

     It was moved and seconded to add after the words fifteen years
     the words "at least"

     which passed in the negative (Ayes--5; noes--5.)

     It was moved and seconded to agree to the following clause of the
     resolution namely

     "and the Legislature shall alter or augment the representation
     accordingly"

     which passed unanimously in the affirmative (Ayes--10; noes--0.)
     On the question to agree to the resolution as amended it passed
     unanimously in the negative. (Ayes--0; noes--10.) and then the
     House adjourned till tomorrow at 11 o'clock A.M.[545]

Taking up the question, Mr. Williamson urged again on the eleventh of
July the counting of five Negroes as three white persons.

     Mr. Williamson was for making it the duty of the Legislature to
     do what was right & not leaving it at liberty to do or not do it.
     He moved that Mr. Randolph's proposition be postponed, in order
     to consider the following "that in order to ascertain the
     alterations that may happen in the population & wealth of the
     several States, a census shall be taken of the free white
     inhabitants and 3/5ths of those of other descriptions on the 1st
     year (after this Government shall have been adopted) and every
     year thereafter; and that the Representation be regulated
     accordingly.[546]



     Mr. Butler & Genl. Pinkney insisted that blacks be included in
     the rule of Representation, _equally_ with the whites: (and for
     that purpose moved that the words "three fifths" be struck
     out.)[547]

     Mr. Gerry though that 3/5 of them was to say the least the full
     proportion that could be admitted.

     Mr. Ghorum. This ratio was fixed by Congs. as a rule of taxation.
     Then it was urged by the Delegates representing the States having
     slaves that the blacks were still more inferior to freemen. At
     present when the ratio of representation is to be established, we
     are assured that they are equal to freemen. The arguments on ye.
     former occasion had convinced him that 3/5 was pretty near the
     just proportion and he should vote according to the same opinion
     now.

     Mr. Butler insisted that the labour of a slave in S. Carola. was
     as productive & valuable as that of a freeman in Massts., that as
     wealth was the great means of defence and utility to the Nation
     they are equally valuable to it with freemen; and that
     consequently an equal representation ought to be allowed for them
     in a Government which was instituted principally for the
     protection of property, and was itself to be supported by
     property.

     Mr. Mason could not agree to the motion, notwithstanding it was
     favorable to Virga. because he thought it unjust. It was certain
     that the slaves were valuable, as they raised the value of land,
     increased the exports & imports, and of course the revenue, would
     supply the means of feeding and supporting an army, and might in
     cases of emergency become themselves soldiers. As in these
     important respects they were useful to the community at large,
     they ought not to be excluded from the estimate of
     Representation. He could not, however, regard them as equal to
     freemen and could not vote for them as such. He added as worthy
     of remark, that the Southern States have this peculiar species of
     property over & above the other species of property common to all
     the States.

     Mr. Williamson reminded Mr. Ghorum that if the Southn. States
     contended for the inferiority of blacks to whites when taxation
     was in view, the Eastern States on the same occasion contended
     for their equality. He did (not) however either then or now,
     concur in either extreme, but approved of the ratio of 3/5.

     On Mr. Butlers motion for considering blacks as equal to Whites
     in the apportionment for Representation

     Massts. no. Cont. no. (N. Y. not on floor.) N. J. no. Pa. no.
     Del. ay. Md. No. (Va. no) N. C. no. S. C. ay. Geo. ay. (Ayes--3;
     noes--7.)

     Mr. Govr. Morris said he had several objections to the
     proposition of Mr. Williamson. 1. It fettered the Legislature too
     much. 2. It would exclude some States altogether who would not
     have a sufficient number to entitle them to a single
     Representative. 3. It will not consist with the Resolution passed
     on Saturday last authorizing the Legislature to adjust the
     Representation from time to time on the principles of population
     & wealth or with the principles of equity. If slaves were to be
     considered as inhabitants, not as wealth, then the sd Resolution
     would not be pursued: If as wealth, then why is no other wealth
     but slaves included? These objections may perhaps be removed by
     amendments. His great objection was that the number of
     inhabitants was not a proper standard of wealth. The amazing
     difference between the comparative numbers & wealth of different
     Countries, renderd all reasoning superfluous on the subject.
     Numbers might with greater propriety be deemed a measure of
     strength, than of wealth, yet the late defence made by G. Britain
     agst. her numerous enemies proved in the clearest manner, that it
     is entirely fallacious even in this respect.

     Mr. King thought there was great force in the objections of Mr.
     Govr. Morris: he would however accede to the proposition for the
     sake of doing something.

     Mr. Rutlidge contended for the admission of wealth in the
     estimate by which Representation should be regulated. The Western
     States will not be able to contribute in proportion to their
     numbers, they shd. not therefore be represented in that
     proportion. The Atlantic States will not concur in such a plan.
     He moved that "at the end of ____ years after the 1st meeting of
     the Legislature, and of every ____ years thereafter, the
     Legislature shall proportion the Representation according to the
     principles of wealth & population"

     Mr. Sherman thought the number of people alone the best rule for
     measuring wealth as well as representation; and that if the
     Legislature were to be governed by wealth, they would be obliged
     to estimate it by numbers. He was at first for leaving the matter
     wholly to the discretion of the Legislature; but he had been
     convinced by the observations of (Mr. Randolph & Mr. Mason) that
     the _periods_ & the _rule_ of revising the Representation ought
     to be fixt by the Constitution

     Mr. Reid thought the Legislature ought not to be too much
     shackled. It would make the Constitution like Religious Creeds,
     embarrassing to those bound to conform to them & more likely to
     produce dissatisfaction and Scism, than harmony and union.

     Mr. Mason objected to Mr. Rutlidge motion, as requiring of the
     Legislature something too indefinite & impracticable, and leaving
     them a pretext for doing nothing.

     Mr. Wilson had himself no objection to leaving the Legislature
     entirely at liberty. But considered wealth as an impracticable
     rule.

     Mr. Ghorum. If the Convention who are comparatively so little
     biased by local views are so much perplexed, How can it be
     expected that the Legislature hereafter under the full biass of
     those views, will be able to settle a standard. He was convinced
     by the argument of others & his own reflections, that the
     Convention ought to fix some standard or other.

     Mr. Govr. Morris. The argts. of others & his own reflections had
     led him to a very different conclusion. If we can't agree on a
     rule that will be just at this time, how can we expect to find
     one that will be just in all times to come. Surely those who come
     after us will judge better of things present, than we can of
     things future. He could not persuade himself that numbers would
     be a just rule at any time. * * * * * * * Another objection with
     him agst admitting the blacks into the census, was that the
     people of Pena. would revolt at the idea of being put on a
     footing with slaves. They would reject any plan that was to have
     such an effect. Two objections had been raised agst. leaving the
     adjustment of the Representation from time to time, to the
     discretion of the Legislature.[548]

The question of counting three-fifths of the Negroes as whites,
however, would not down. According to Madison:

     Mr. King, being much opposed to fixing numbers as the rule of
     representation, was particularly so on account of the blacks. He
     thought the admission of them along with Whites at all, would
     excite great discontents among the States having no slaves. He
     had never said as to any particular point that he would in no
     event acquiesce in & support it; but he wd. say that if in any
     case such a declaration was to be made by him, it would be in
     this. He remarked that in the (temporary) allotment of
     Representatives made by the Committee, the Southern States had
     received more than the number of their white & three fifths of
     their black inhabitants entitled them to.

     Mr. Sherman. S. Carola. had not more beyond her proportion than
     N. York & N. Hampshire, nor either of them more than was
     necessary in order to avoid fractions or reducing them below
     their proportion. Georgia had more; but the rapid growth of that
     State seemed to justify it. In general the allotment might not be
     just, but considering all circumstances, he was satisfied with
     it.

     Mr. Ghorum supported the propriety of establishing numbers as the
     rule. He said that in Massts. estimates had been taken in the
     different towns, and that persons had been curious enough to
     compare these estimates with the respective numbers of people;
     and it had been found even including Boston, that the most exact
     proportion prevailed between numbers and property. He was aware
     that there might be some weight in what had fallen from his
     colleague, as to the umbrage which might be taken by the people
     of the Eastern States. But he recollected that when the
     proposition of Congs for changing the 8th art. of Confedn. was
     before the Legislature of Massts. the only difficulty then was to
     satisfy them that the negroes ought not to have been counted
     equally with whites instead of being counted in the ratio of
     three fifths only.

     Mr. Wilson did not well see on what principle the admission of
     blacks in the proportion of three fifths could be explained. Are
     they admitted as Citizens? Then why are they not admitted on an
     equality with White Citizens? Are they admitted as property, then
     why is not other property admitted into the computation? These
     were difficulties however which he thought must be overruled by
     the necessity of compromise. He had some apprehensions also from
     the tendency of the blending of the blacks with the whites, to
     give disgust to the people of Pena. as had been intimated by his
     colleagues (Mr. Govr. Morris). But he differed from him in
     thinking numbers of inhabts. so incorrect a measure of wealth. He
     had seen the Western settlemts. of Pa. and on a comparison of
     them with the City of Philada. could discover little other
     difference, than that property was more unequally divided among
     individuals here than there. Taking the same number in the
     aggregate in the two situations he believed there could be little
     difference in their wealth and ability to contribute to the
     public wants.

     Mr. Govr. Morris was compelled to declare himself reduced to the
     dilemma of doing injustice to the Southern States or to human
     nature, and he must therefore do it to the former. For he could
     never agree to give such encouragement to the slave trade as
     would be given by allowing them a representation for their
     negroes, and he did not believe those States would ever
     confederate on terms that would deprive them of that trade.

     On question for agreeing to include 3/5 of the blacks Masts, no
     Cont. ay N. J. no. Pa. no Del. no. Mard. no Va. ay. N. C. ay. S.
     C. no. Geo. ay (Ayes--6; noes--4.)[549]

On the twelfth of July the following clause was proposed:

     "Provided always that direct Taxation ought to be proportioned
     according to representation"

     which passed unanimously in the affirmative.

     It was moved and seconded to postpone the consideration of the
     first clause in the report from the first grand Committee

     which passed in the affirmative.

     It was moved and seconded to add the following amendment to the
     last clause adopted by the House namely "and that the rule of
     contribution by direct taxation for the support of the government
     of the United States shall be the number of white inhabitants,
     and three fifths of every other description in the several
     States, until some other rule that shall more accurately
     ascertain the wealth of the several States can be devised and
     adopted by the Legislature[550]



     On the motion of Mr. Randolph, the vote of Saturday last (July 7)
     authorizing the Legislre. to adjust from time to time, the
     representation upon the principles of _Wealth_ and numbers of
     inhabitants was (reconsidered by common consent in order to
     strike our "Wealth" and adjust the resolution to that requiring
     periodical revisions according to the number of whites & three
     fifths of the blacks: the motion was in the words following--"But
     as the present situation of the States may probably alter in the
     number of their inhabitants, that the Legislature of the U. S. be
     authorized from time to time to apportion the number of
     representatives: and in case any of the States shall hereafter be
     divided or any two or more States united or new States created
     within the limits of the U. S. shall hereafter be divided or any
     two or more States united or new States created within the limits
     of the U. S. the Legislature of U. S. shall possess authority to
     regulate the number of Representatives in any of the foregoing
     cases, upon the principle of their number of inhabitants;
     according to the provisions hereafter mentioned.")

     Mr. Govr. Morris opposed the alteration as leaving still an
     incoherence. If Negroes were to be viewed as inhabitants, and the
     revision was to proceed on the principle of numbers of inhbts.
     they ought to be added in their entire number, and not in the
     proportion of 3/5. If as property, the word wealth was right, and
     striking it out would produce the very inconsistency which it was
     meant to get rid of.--The train of business & the late turn which
     it had taken, had led him he said, into deep meditation on it,
     and He wd. candidly state the result. A distinction had been set
     up & urged between the Nn. & Southn. States. He had hitherto
     considered this doctrine as heretical. He still thought the
     distinction groundless. He sees however that it is persisted in;
     and that the Southn. Gentleman will not be satisfied unless they
     see the way open to their gaining a majority in the public
     Councils. The consequence of such a transfer of power from the
     maritime to the interior & landed interests will he forsees be
     such an oppression of commerce, that he shall be obliged to vote
     for ye. vicious principle of equality in the 2d. branch in order
     to provide for some defence for the N. States agst. it. But to
     come now more to the point, either this distinction is fictitious
     or real: if fictitious let it be dismissed & let us proceed with
     due confidence. If it be real, instead of attempting to blend
     incompatible things, let us at once take a friendly leave of each
     other. There can be no end of demands for security if every
     particular interest is to be entitled to it. The Eastern States
     may claim it for their fishery, and for other objects, as the
     Southn. States claim it for their peculiar objects. In this
     struggle between the two ends of the Union, what part ought the
     Middle States in point of policy to take; to join their Eastern
     brethren according to his ideas. If the Southn. States get the
     power into their hands, and be joined as they will be the
     interior Country they will inevitably bring on a war with Spain
     for the Mississippi. This language is already held. The interior
     Country having no property nor interest exposed on the sea, will
     be little affected by such a war. He wished to know what security
     the Northn. & middle States will have agst. this danger. It has
     been said that N. C. S. C. and Georgia only will in a little time
     have a majority of the people of America. They must in that case
     include the great interior Country, and every thing was to be
     apprehended from their getting the power into their hands.[551]

The Committee of Detail finally brought forward for the apportionment
of direct taxes and representation in the House a plan for taking the
Negroes into account.

     (Direct Taxation shall always be in Proportion to Representation
     in the House of Representatives.)

     The proportions of direct Taxation shall be regulated by the
     whole Number of white and other free Citizens and Inhabitants, of
     every Age, Sex and Condition, including those bound to Servitude
     for a Term of Years, and three fifths of all other Persons not
     comprehended in the foregoing Description; which Number shall,
     within the Term of every ten Years afterwards, be taken in such
     manner as the said Legislature shall direct.[552]

This, as is shown below, is substantially what Rutledge as Chairman of
the committee to report a constitution reported.

     Sect. 3. The proportions of direct taxation shall be regulated by
     the whole number of white and other free citizens and
     inhabitants, of every age, sex and condition, including those
     bound to servitude for a term of years, and three fifths of all
     other persons not comprehended in the foregoing description,
     (except Indians not paying taxes) which number shall, within six
     years after the first meeting of the Legislature, and within the
     term of every ten years afterwards, be taken in such manner as
     the said Legislature shall direct.[553]

The same appears also in the report of the Committee on Style.

     Sect. 3. The proportions of direct taxation shall be regulated by
     the whole number of free citizens and inhabitants, of every age,
     sex and condition, including those bound to servitude for a term
     of years, and three fifths of all other persons not comprehended
     in the foregoing description, (except Indians not paying taxes)
     which number shall, within three years after the first meeting of
     the Legislature, and within the term of every ten years
     afterwards, be taken in such manner as the said Legislature shall
     direct.

     (b) Representatives and direct taxes shall be apportioned among
     the several states which may be included within this Union,
     according to their respective numbers, which shall be determined
     by adding to the whole number of free persons, including those
     bound to servitude for a term of years, and excluding Indians not
     taxed, three fifths of all other persons. The actual enumeration
     shall be made within three years after the first meeting of the
     Congress of the United States, and within every subsequent term
     of ten years, in such manner as they shall by law direct. The
     number of representatives shall not exceed one for every forty
     thousand, but each state shall have at least one representative:
     and until such enumeration shall be made, the state of
     New-Hampshire shall be entitled to chuse three, Massachusetts
     eight, Rhode-Island and Providence Plantation one, Connecticut
     five, New-York six, New-Jersey, four, Pennsylvania eight,
     Delaware one, Maryland six, Virginia ten, North-Carolina five,
     South-Carolina five and Georgia three.[554]

What these framers said in explaining their intentions thereafter when
discussing the constitution in ratifying conventions, legislatures and
Congress, is further illuminating. Before the Maryland convention
called to ratify the constitution Luther Martin said:

     S: 2. Slaves ought never to be considered in Representation,
     because they are property. They afford a rule as such in
     Taxation; but are Citizens intrusted in the General Government,
     no more than Cattle, Horses, Mules or Asses: and a Gentleman in
     Debate very pertinently observed that he would as soon enter into
     Compacts, with the Asses Mules, or Horses of the Ancient Dominion
     as with their Slaves--When there is power to raise a revenue by
     direct Taxation, each State ought to pay an equal Ratio; Whereas
     by taxing Commerce some States pay greatly more than others,[555]

Before the South Carolina House of Representatives C. C. Pinckney
said:

     We are at a loss, for some time, for a rule to ascertain the
     proportionate wealth of the states. At last we thought that the
     productive labor of the inhabitants was the best rule for
     ascertaining their wealth. In conformity to this rule, joined to
     a spirit of concession, we determined that representatives should
     be apportioned among the several states, by adding to the whole
     number of free persons three fifths of the slaves. We thus
     obtained a representation for our property; and I confess I did
     not expect that we had conceded too much to the Eastern States,
     when they allowed us a representation for a species of property
     which they have not among them.[556]

In the New York Convention considering the ratification of the
constitution, Hamilton said:

     The first thing objected to is that clause which allows a
     representation for three fifths of the negroes.... The regulation
     complained of was one result of the spirit of accommodation
     which governed the Convention; and without this indulgence no
     union could possibly have been formed.[557]

On July 24, 1788, in the North Carolina convention, Davie said:

     ... The gentleman "does not wish to be represented with negroes."
     This, sir, is an unhappy species of population; but we cannot at
     present alter their situation. The Eastern States had great
     jealousies on this subject. They insisted that their cows and
     horses were equally entitled to representation; that the one was
     property as well as the other. It became our duty, on the other
     hand, to acquire as much weight as possible in the legislation of
     the Union; and, as the Northern States were more populous in
     whites, this only could be done by insisting that a certain
     proportion of our slaves should make a part of the computed
     population. It was attempted to form a rule of representation
     from a compound ratio of wealth and population; but, on
     consideration, it was found impracticable to determine the
     comparative value of lands and other property, in so extensive a
     territory, with any degree of accuracy; and population alone was
     adopted as the only practicable rule or criterion of
     representation. It was urged by the deputies of the Eastern
     States, that a representation would be unequal and
     burdensome--that, in a time of war, slaves rendered a country
     more vulnerable, while its defence devolved upon its free
     inhabitants. On the other hand, we insisted that, in time of
     peace, they contributed by their labor, to the general wealth, as
     well as other members of the community--that, as rational beings,
     they had a right of representation, and, in some instances, might
     be highly useful in war. On these principles the Eastern States
     gave the matter up, and consented to the regulation as it has
     been read. I hope these reasons will appear satisfactory. It is
     the same rule or principle which was proposed some years ago by
     Congress, and assented to by twelve of the States....[558]

In the House of Representatives in 1820 C. C. Pinckney of South
Carolina said:

     Among the reasons which have induced me to rise, one is to
     express my surprise. Surprise, did I say? I ought rather to have
     said, my extreme astonishment, at the assertion I heard made on
     both floors of Congress, that, in forming the Constitution of the
     United States, and particularly that part of it which respects
     the representation on this floor, the Northern and Eastern
     States, or, as they are now called, the non-slaveholding States,
     have made a great concession to the Southern in granting them a
     representation of three-fifths of their slaves; that they saw the
     concession was a very great and important one at the time, but
     that they had no idea it would so soon have proved itself of such
     consequence; that it would so soon have proved itself to be by
     far the most important concession that had been made. They say,
     that it was wrung from them by their affection to the Union, and
     their wish to preserve it from dissolution or disunion; that they
     had, for a long time, lamented they had made it; and that, if it
     was to do over, no earthly consideration should again tempt them
     to agree to so unequal and so ruinous a compromise....

     It was, sir, for the purpose of correcting this great and
     unpardonable error; unpardonable, because it is a wilful one, and
     the error of it is well known to the ablest of those who make it;
     of denying the assertion, and proving that the contrary is the
     fact, and that the concession, on that occasion, was from the
     Southern and the Northern States, that, among others, I have
     risen.

     It is of the greatest consequence that the proof I am about to
     give should be laid before this nation; for, as the inequality of
     representation is the great ground on which the Northern and
     Eastern States have always, and now more particularly and
     forcibly than ever, raised all their complaints on this subject,
     if I can show and prove that they have not even a shadow of right
     to make pretences or complaints; that they are as fully
     represented as they ought to be; while, we, the Southern members,
     are unjustly deprived of any representation for a large and
     important part of our population, more valuable to the Union, as
     can be shown, than any equal number of inhabitants in the
     Northern and Eastern States, can, from their situation, climate,
     and productions, possibly be. If I can prove this, I think I
     shall be able to show most clearly the true motives which have
     given rise to this measure; to strip the thin, the cobweb veil
     from it, as well as the pretended ones of religion, humanity, and
     love of liberty; and to show, to use the soft terms the decorum
     of debate oblige me to use, the extreme want of modesty in those
     who are already as fully represented here as they can be, to go
     the great lengths they do in endeavoring, by every effort in
     their power, public and private, to take from the Southern and
     Western States, which are already so greatly and unjustly
     deprived of an important part of the representation, a still
     greater share; to endeavor to establish the first precedent,
     which extreme rashness and temerity have ever presumed, that
     Congress has a right to touch the question and legislate on
     slavery; thereby shaking the property in them, in the Southern
     and Western States, to its very foundation, and making an attack
     which, if successful, must convince them that the Northern and
     Eastern States are their greatest enemies; that they are
     preparing measures for them which even Great Britain in the heat
     of the Revolutionary War, and when all her passions were roused
     by hatred and revenge to the highest pitch never ventured to
     inflict upon them. Instead of a course like this, they ought, in
     my judgment, sir, to be highly pleased with their present
     situation; that they are fully represented, while we have lost so
     great a share of our representation; they ought sir, to be highly
     pleased at the dexterity and management of their members in the
     Convention, who obtained for them this great advantage; and,
     above all, with the moderation and forbearance with which the
     Southern and Western States have always borne their many bitter
     provocations on this subject, and now bear the open, avowed, and,
     by many of the ablest men among them, undisguised attack on our
     most valuable rights and properties....



     Before I proceed to the other parts of this question, I have thus
     endeavored to give a new view of the subject of representation in
     this House; to show how much more the Eastern and Northern States
     are represented than the Southern and Western....

     The supporters of the amendment contend that Congress have the
     right to insist on the prevention of involuntary servitude in
     Missouri; and found the right on the ninth section of the first
     article, which says "the migration or importation of such persons
     as the States now existing may think proper to admit, shall not
     be prohibited by the Congress prior to the year 1808, but a tax
     or duty may be imposed on such importation not exceeding ten
     dollars."

     In considering this article, I will detail, as far as at this
     distant period is possible, what was the intention of the
     Convention that formed the Constitution in this article. The
     intention was, to give Congress a power, after the year 1808, to
     prevent the importation of slaves either by land or water from
     other countries. The word _import_, includes both, and applies
     wholly to slaves. Without this limitation Congress might have
     stopped it sooner under their general power to regulate commerce;
     and it was an agreed point, a solemnly understood compact, that,
     on the Southern States consenting to shut their ports against the
     importation of Africans, no power was to be delegated to
     Congress, nor were they ever to be authorized to touch the
     question of slavery; that the property of the Southern States in
     slaves was to be as sacredly preserved, and protected to them, as
     that of land, or any other kind of property in the Eastern States
     were to be to their citizens.

     The term, or word, migration, applies wholly to free whites; in
     its Constitutional sense, as intended by the Convention, it means
     "voluntary change of servitude," from one country to another. The
     reasons of its being adopted and used in the Constitution, as far
     as I can recollect, were these; that the Constitution being a
     frame of government, consisting wholly of delegated powers, all
     power, not expressly delegated, being reserved to the people or
     the States, it was supposed, that, without some express grant to
     them of power on the subject, Congress would not be authorized
     ever to touch the question of migration hither, or emigration to
     this country, however pressing or urgent the necessity for such a
     measure might be; that they could derive no such power from the
     usages of nations, or even the laws of war; that the latter would
     only enable them to make prisoners of alien enemies, which would
     not be sufficient, as spies or other dangerous emigrants, who
     were not alien enemies, might enter the country for treasonable
     purposes, and do great injury; that, as all governments possessed
     this power, it was necessary to give it to our own, which could
     alone exercise it, and where, on other and much greater points,
     we had placed unlimited confidence; it was, therefore, agreed
     that, in the same article, the word migration should be placed;
     and that, from the year 1808, Congress should possess the
     complete power to stop either or both, as they might suppose the
     public interest required; the article, therefore, is a _negative
     pregnant_, restraining for twenty years, and giving the power
     after.

     The reasons for restraining the power to prevent migration hither
     for twenty years, were, to the best of my recollections, these;
     That, as at this time, we had immense and almost immeasurable
     territory, peopled by not more than two millions and a half of
     inhabitants, it was of very great consequence to encourage the
     emigration of able, skilful, and industrious Europeans. The wise
     conduct of William Penn, and the unexampled growth of
     Pennsylvania, were cited. It was said, that the portals of the
     only temple of true freedom now existing on earth should be
     thrown open to all mankind; that all foreigners of industrious
     habits should be welcome, and none more so than men of science,
     and such as may bring to us arts we are unacquainted with, or the
     means of perfecting those in which we are not yet sufficiently
     skilled--capitalists whose wealth may add to our commerce or
     domestic improvements; let the door be ever and most
     affectionately open to illustrious exiles and sufferers in the
     cause of liberty; in short, open it liberally to science, to
     merit, and talents, wherever found, and receive and make them
     your own. That the safest mode would be to pursue the course for
     twenty years, and not, before that period, put it at all into the
     power of Congress to shut it; that, by that time, the Union would
     be so settled, and our population would be so much increased, we
     could proceed on our own stock, without the farther accession of
     foreigners; that as Congress were to be prohibited from stopping
     the importation of slaves to settle the Southern States, as no
     obstacles was to be thrown in the way of their increase and
     settlement for that period, let it be so with the Northern and
     Eastern, to which, particularly New York and Philadelphia it was
     expected most of the emigrants would go from Europe: and it so
     happened, for, previous to the year 1808, more than double as
     many Europeans emigrated to these States, as of Africans were
     imported into the Southern States.



Connecting the question of importing slaves with that of counting them
to determine the representation in the national legislature, the
framers engaged in a heated debate as to whether or not the Southern
States would always have a majority in that body by encouraging the
slave trade. Carolina and Georgia, however, stood firm for the right
to import slaves.

     On July 23 General Pinckney reminded the Convention that if the
     Committee should fail to insert some security to the Southern
     States agst. an emancipation of slaves, and taxes on exports, he
     shd. be bound by duty to his State to vote agst. their
     Report--The appt. of a Come. as moved by Mr. Gerry, Agd. to nem.
     con.[559]

The Committee of Detail, therefore, reported:

     2 no prohibitions or (such) (ye) Importations of such inhabitants
     (or people as the sevl. States think proper to admit)

     No Tax or Duty shall be laid by the Legislature, on Articles
     exported from any State; nor on the emigration or importation of
     such Persons as the several States shall think proper to admit;
     nor shall such emigration or importation be prohibited.

     No Capitation Tax shall be laid, unless in Proportion to the
     Census herein before directed to be taken.

The draft of the constitution reported on August 6 carried:[32]

     Sect. 4. No tax or duty shall be laid by the Legislature on
     articles exported from any State; nor on the migration or
     importation of such persons as the several States shall think
     proper to admit; nor shall such migration or importation be
     prohibited.

On the eighth of August, King remarked:[560]

     Mr. King wished to know what influence the vote just passed was
     meant have on the succeeding part of the Report, concerning the
     admission of slaves into the rule of Representation. He could not
     reconcile his mind to the article if it was to prevent objections
     to the latter part. The admission of slaves was a most grating
     circumstance to his mind, & he believed would be so to a great
     part of the people of America. He had not made a strenuous
     opposition to it heretofore because he had hoped that this
     concession would have produced a readiness which had not been
     manifested, to strengthen the Genl. Govt. and to mark a full
     confidence in it. The Report under consideration had by the tenor
     of it, put an end to all these hopes. In two great points the
     hands of the Legislature were absolutely tied. The importation of
     slaves could not be prohibited--exports could not be taxed. Is
     this reasonable? What are the great objects of the Genl. System?
     1. defence agst. foreign invasion. 2 agst. internal sedition.
     Shall all the States then be bound to defend each; & shall each
     be at liberty to introduce a weakness which will render defence
     more difficult? Shall one part of the U. S. be bound to defend
     another part, and that other part be at liberty not only to
     increase its own danger, but to withhold the compensation for the
     burden? If slaves are to be imported shall not the exports
     produced by their labor, supply a revenue the better to enable
     the Genl. Govt. to defend their masters?--There was so much
     inequality & unreasonableness in all this, that the people of the
     N(orthern) States could never be reconciled (to it). No candid
     man could undertake to justify it to them. He had hoped that some
     accommodation wd. have taken place on this subject; that at least
     a time wd. have been limited for the importation of slaves. He
     never could agree to let them be imported without limitation &
     then be represented in the Natl. Legislature. Indeed he could so
     little persuade himself of the rectitude of such a practice, that
     he was not sure he could assent to it under any circumstances. At
     all events, either slaves should not be represented, or exports
     should be taxable.

     Mr. Sherman regarded the slave-trade as iniquitous; but the point
     of representation having been settled after much difficuty &
     deliberation, he did not think himself bound to make opposition;
     especially as the present articles as amended did not preclude
     any arrangement whatever on that point in another place of the
     Report.

     Mr. Govr. Morris moved to insert "free" before the word
     "inhabitants." Much he said would depend on this point. He never
     would concur in upholding domestic slavery. It was a nefarious
     institution--It was the curse of heaven on the States where it
     prevailed. Compare the free regions of the Middle States, where a
     rich & noble cultivation marks the prosperity & happiness of the
     people, with the misery & poverty which overspread the barren
     wastes of Va. Maryd & the other States having slaves. (Travel
     thro' ye whold Continent & you behold the prospect continually
     varying with the appearance and disappearance of slavery. The
     moment you leave ye E Sts. & enter N. York, the effects of the
     institution become visible; Passing thro' the Jerseys and
     entering Pa--every criterion of superior improvement witnesses
     the change. Proceed Southwdly, & every step you take thro' ye
     great regions of slaves, presents a desert increasing with ye
     increasing proportion of these wretched beings.)

     Upon what principle is it that the slaves shall be computed in
     the representation? Are they men? Then make them Citizens & let
     them vote? Are they property? Why then is no other property
     included? The Houses in this City (Philada.) are worth more than
     all the wretched slaves which cover the rice swamps of South
     Carolina. The admission of slaves into the Representation when
     fairly explained comes to this: that inhabitant of Georgia and S.
     C. who goes to the Coast of Africa and in defiance of the most
     sacred laws of humanity tears away his fellow creatures from
     their dearest connections & dam(n)s them to the most cruel
     bondages, shall have more votes in a Govt. instituted for
     protection of the rights of mankind, than the Citizens of Pa or
     N. Jersey who views with a laudable horror, so nefarious a
     practice. He would add that Domestic slavery is the most
     prominent feature in the aristocratic countenance of the proposed
     Constitution. The vassalage of the poor has ever been the
     favorite offspring of Aristocracy. And What is the proposed
     compensation to the Northern States for a sacrifice of every
     principle of right, of every impulse of humanity. They are to
     bind themselves to march their militia for the defence of the S.
     States; for their defence agst those very slaves of whom they
     complain. They must supply vessels & seamen, in case of foreign
     Attack. The Legislature will have indefinite power to tax them by
     excises, and duties on imports; both of which will fall heavier
     on them than on the Southern inhabitants; for the bohea tea used
     by a Northern freeman, will pay more tax than the whole
     consumption of the miserable slave, which consists of nothing
     more than his physical subsistence and the rag that covers his
     nakedness. On the other side the Southern States are not to be
     restrained from importing fresh supplies of wretched Africans, at
     once to increase the danger of attack, and the difficulty of
     defence; nay they are to be encouraged to it by an assurance of
     having their votes in the Natl Govt increased in proportion, and
     are at the same time to have their exports & their slaves exempt
     from all contributions for the public service. Let it not be said
     that direct taxation is to be proportioned to representation. It
     is idle to suppose that the Genl Govt. can stretch its hand
     directly into the pockets of the people scattered over so vast a
     Country. They can only do it through the medium of exports
     imports & excises. For what then are all these sacrifices to be
     made? He would sooner submit himself to a tax for paying for all
     the Negroes in the U. States, than saddle posterity with such a
     Constitution.

     Mr. Dayton 2ded. the motion. He did it he said that his
     sentiments on the subject might appear whatever might be the fate
     of the amendment.

     Mr. Sherman, did not regard the admission of the Negroes into the
     ratio of representation, as liable to such insuperable
     objections. It was the freemen of the Southn. States who were in
     fact to be represented according to the taxes paid by them, and
     the Negroes are only included in the Estimate of the taxes. This
     was his idea of the matter.

     Mr. Pinkney, considered the fisheries & the Western frontier as
     more burdensome to the U. S. than the slaves--He thought this
     could be demonstrated if the occasion were a proper one.

     Mr Wilson, thought the motion premature--An agreement to the
     clause would be no bar to the object of it.

     Question On Motion to insert "free" before "inhabitants."

     N. H.--no. Mas. no. Ct. no. N. J. ay. Pa. no. Del. no. Md. no.
     Va. no. S. C. no. N. C. no. Geo. no. (Ayes--1; noes--10.)[561]



     Luther Martin (some days thereafter), proposed to vary the sect:
     4. art VII so as to allow a prohibition or tax on the importation
     of slaves,

     1. As five slaves are to be counted as 3 free men in the
     apportionment of Representatives; such a clause wd. leave an
     encouragement to this traffic.

     2. slaves weakened one part of the Union which the other parts
     were bound to protect: the privilege of importing them was
     therefore unreasonable--

     3. it was inconsistent with the principles of the revolution and
     dishonorable to the American character to have such a feature in
     the Constitution.

     Mr Rutlidge did not see how the importation of slaves could be
     encouraged by this section. He was not apprehensive of
     insurrections and would readily exempt the other States from the
     (obligation to protect the Southern against them.).--Religions &
     humanity had nothing to do with this question--Interest alone is
     the governing principle with Nations--The true question at
     present is whether the Southn. States shall or shall not be
     parties to the Union. If the Northern States consult their
     interest, they will not oppose the increase of Slaves which will
     increase the commodities of which they will become the carriers.

     Mr. Ellsworth was for leaving the clause as it stands, let every
     State import what it pleases. The morality or wisdom of slavery
     are considerations belonging to the States themselves--What
     enriches a part enriches the whole, and the States are the best
     judges of their particular interest. The old confederation had
     not meddled with this point, and he did not see any greater
     necessity for bringing it within the policy of the new one:

     Mr Pinkney. South Carolina can never receive the plan if it
     prohibits the slave trade. In every proposed extension of the
     powers of Congress, that State has expressly & watchfully
     excepted that of meddling with the importation of negroes. If the
     States be all left at liberty on this subject, S. Carolina may
     perhaps by degrees do of herself what is wished, as Virginia &
     Maryland have already done.[562]

  Adjourned

     Art. VII sect 4. resumed. Mr. Sherman was for leaving the clause
     as it stands. He disapproved of the slave trade: yet as the
     States were now possessed of the right to import slaves, as the
     public good did not require it to be taken from them, & as it was
     expedient to have as few objections as possible to the proposed
     scheme of Government, he thought it best to leave the matter as
     we find it.[34] He observed that the abolition of slavery seemed
     to be going on in the U. S. & that the good sense of the several
     States would probably by degrees complete it. He urged on the
     Convention the necessity of despatch(ing its business.)

     Col. Mason. This infernal trafic originated in the avarice of
     British Merchants. The British Govt. constantly checked the
     attempts of Virginia to put a stop to it. The present question
     concerns not the importing States alone but the whole Union. The
     evil of having slaves was experienced during the late war. Had
     slaves been treated as they might have been by the Enemy, they
     would have proved dangerous instruments in their hands. But their
     folly dealt by the slaves, as it did by the Tories. He mentioned
     the dangerous insurrections of the slaves in Greece and Sicily;
     and the instructions given by Cromwell to the Commissioners sent
     to Virginia to arm the servants & slaves, in case other means of
     obtaining its submission should fail. Maryland & Virginia he said
     had already prohibited the importation of slaves expressly. N.
     Carolina had done the same in substance. All this would be in
     vain if S. Carolina & Georgia be at liberty to import. The
     Western people are already calling out for slaves for their new
     lands; and will fill that Country with slaves if they can be got
     thro' S. Carolina & Georgia. Slavery discourages arts &
     manufactures. The poor despise labor when performed by slaves.
     They prevent the immigration of Whites, who really enrich &
     strengthen a Country. They produce the most pernicious effect on
     manners. Every master of slaves is born a petty tyrant. They
     bring the judgment of heaven on a Country. As nations can not be
     rewarded or punished in the next world they must be in this. By
     an inevitable chain of causes & effects providence punishes
     national calamities. He lamented that some of our Eastern
     brethren had from a lust of gain embarked in this nefarious
     traffic. As to the States being in possession of the Right to
     import, this was the case with many other rights, now to be
     properly given up. He held it essential in every point of view,
     that the Genl. Govt. should have power to prevent the increase of
     slavery.

     Mr. Ellsworth. As he had never owned a slave could not judge of
     the effects of slavery on character. He said however that if it
     was to be considered in a moral light we ought to go farther and
     free those already in the Country.--As slaves also multiply so
     fast in Virginia & Maryland that it is cheaper to raise than
     import them, whilst in the sickly rice swamps foreign supplies
     are necessary, if we go no farther than is urged, we shall be
     unjust towards S. Carolina & Georgia--Let us not intermeddle. As
     population increases; poor laborers will be so plenty as to
     render slaves useless. Slavery in time will not be a speck in our
     Country. Provision is already taken place in Connecticut for
     abolishing it. And the abolition has already taken place in
     Massachusetts. As to the danger of insurrection from foreign
     influence, that will become a motive to kind treatment of the
     slaves.

     Mr. Pinkney--If slavery be wrong, it is justified by the example
     of the world. He cited the case of Greece, Rome & other ancient
     States; the sanction given by France, England, Holland & other
     modern States. In all ages one half of mankind have been slaves.
     If the S. States were let alone they will probably of themselves
     stop importations. He wd. himself as a Citizen of S. Carolina
     vote for it. An attempt to take away the right as proposed will
     produce serious objections to the Constitution which he wished to
     see adopted.

     General Pinkney declared it to be his firm opinion that if
     himself & all his colleagues were to sign the Constitution & use
     their personal influence, it would be of no avail towards
     obtaining the assent of their Constituents. S. Carolina & Georgia
     cannot do without slaves. As to Virginia she will gain by
     stopping the importations. Her slaves will rise in value, & she
     has more than she wants. It would be unequal to require S. C. &
     Georgia to confederate on such unequal terms. He said the Royal
     assent before the Revolution had never been refused to S.
     Carolina as to Virginia. He contended that the importation of
     slaves would be for the interest of the whole Union. The more
     slaves, the more produce to employ the carrying trade; the more
     consumption also, and the more of this, the more of revenue for
     the common treasury. He admitted it to be reasonable that slaves
     should be dutied like other imports, but should consider a
     rejection of the clause as an exclusion of S. Carola from the
     Union.

     Mr. Baldwin had conceived national object alone to be before the
     Convention, not such as like the present were of a local nature.
     Georgia was decided on this point. That State has always hitherto
     supposed a Genl Government to be the pursuit of the central
     States who wished to have a vortex for every thing--that her
     distance would preclude her from equal advantage--& that she
     could not prudently purchase it by yielding national powers. From
     this it might be understood in what light she would view an
     attempt to abridge one of her favorite prerogatives. If left to
     herself, she may probably put a stop to the evil. As one ground
     for this conjecture, he took notice of the sect of which he said
     was a respectable class of people, who carryed their ethics
     beyond the mere _equality of men_, extending their humanity to
     the claims of the whole animal creation.

     Mr. Wilson observed that if S. C. & Georgia were themselves
     disposed to get rid of the importation of slaves in a short time
     as had been suggested, they would never refuse to unite because
     the importation might be prohibited. As the Section now stands
     all articles imported are to be taxed. Slaves alone are exempt.
     This is in fact a bounty on that article.

     Mr. Gerry thought we had nothing to do with the conduct of the
     States as to Slaves, but ought to be careful not to give any
     sanction to it.

     Mr. Dickinson considered it as inadmissible on every principle of
     honor & safety that the importation of slaves should be
     authorized to the States by the Constitution. The true question
     was whether the national happiness would be promoted or impeded
     by the importation, and this question ought to be left to the
     National Govt. not to the States particularly interested. If
     Engd. & France permit slavery, slaves are at the same time
     excluded from both those kingdoms. Greece and Rome were made
     unhappy by their slaves. He could not believe that the Southn.
     States would refuse to confederate on the account apprehended;
     especially as the power was not likely to be immediately
     exercised by the Genl. Government.

     Mr Williamson stated the law of N. Carolina on the subject, to
     wit that it did not directly prohibit the importation of slaves.
     It imposed a duty of £5. on each slave imported from Africa. £10.
     on each from elsewhere, & £50 on each from a State licensing
     manumission. He thought the S. States could not be members of the
     Union if the clause should be rejected, and that it was wrong to
     force any thing down, not absolutely necessary, and which any
     State must disagree to.

     Mr. King thought the subject should be considered in a political
     light only. If two States will not agree to the Constitution as
     stated on one side, he could affirm with equal belief on the
     other, that great & equal opposition would be experienced from
     the other States. He remarked on the exemption of slaves from
     duty whilst every other import was subjected to it, as an
     inequality that could not fail to strike the commercial sagacity
     of the Northn. & middle States.

     Mr. Langdon was strenuous for giving the power to the Genl Govt.
     He cd. not with a good conscience leave it with the States who
     could then go on with the traffic, without being restrained by
     the opinions here given that they will themselves cease to import
     slaves.

     Genl. Pinkney thought himself bound to declare candidly that he
     did not think S. Carolina would stop her importations of slaves
     in any short time, but only stop them occasionally as she now
     does. He moved to commit the clause that slaves might be made
     liable to an equal tax with other imports which he thought right
     & wh. wd. remove one difficulty that had been started.

     Mr. Rutlidge. If the Convention thinks that N. C.; S. C. &
     Georgia will ever agree to the plan, unless their right to import
     slaves be untouched, the expectation is vain. The people of those
     States will never be such fools as to give up so important an
     interest. He was strenuous agst. striking out the Section, and
     seconded the motion of Genl. Pinkney for a commitment.

     Mr. Govr. Morris wished the whole subject to be committed
     including the clauses relating to taxes on exports & to a
     navigation act. These things may form a bargain among the
     Northern & Southern States.

     Mr. Butler declared that he never would agree to the power of
     taxing exports.

     Mr. Sherman said it was better to let the S. States import slaves
     than to part with them, if they made that a sine qua non. He was
     opposed to a tax on slaves imported as making the matter worse,
     because it implied they were _property_. He acknowledged that if
     the power of prohibiting the importation should be given to the
     Genl. Government that it would be exercised. He thought it would
     be its duty to exercise the power.

     Mr. Read was for the commitment provided the clause concerning
     taxes on exports should also be committed.

     Mr. Sherman, observed that that clause had been agreed to &
     therefore could not committed.

     Mr. Randolph was for committing in order that some middle ground
     might, if possible, be found. He could never agree to the clause
     as it stands. He wd. sooner risk the constitution--He dwelt on
     the dilemma to which the Convention was exposed. By agreeing to
     the clause, it would revolt the Quakers, the Methodists, and many
     others in the State having no slaves. On the other hand, two
     States might be lost to the Union. Let us then, he said, try the
     chance of a commitment.

     On the question for committing the remaining part of Sect. 4 & 5.
     of art: 7. N. H. no. Mas. abst. Cont. ay N. J. ay Pa. no. Del. no
     Maryd. ay. Va. ay. N. C. ay S. C. ay. Geo. ay. Geo. ay. (Ayes--7;
     noes--3; absent--1.)

     Mr. Pinkney & Mr. Langdon moved to commit sect. 6. as to
     navigation act (by two thirds of each House.)

     Mr. Gorham did not see the propriety of it. Is it meant to
     require a greater proportion of votes? He desired it to be
     remembered that the Eastern States had no motive to Union but a
     commercial one. They were able to protect themselves. They were
     not afraid of external danger, and did not need the aid of the
     Southn. States.

     Mr. Wilson wished for a commitment in order to reduce the
     proportion of votes required.

     Mr. Ellsworth was for taking the plan as it is. This widening of
     opinions has a threatening aspect. If we do not agree on this
     middle & moderate ground he was afraid we should lose two States,
     with such others as may be disposed to stand aloof, should fly
     into a variety of shapes & directions, and most probably into
     several confederations and not without bloodshed.

     On Question for committing 6 sect. as to navigation Act to a
     member from each State--N. H. ay--Mas. ay. Ct. no. N. J. no. Pa.
     ay. Del. ay. Md. ay. Va. ay. N. C. ay. S. C. ay. Geo. ay.
     (Ayes--9; noes--2;)[563]

McHenry has the following note on slavery for the twenty-second of
August:

     Committed the remainder of the 4 sect. with the 5 and 6.

     The 4 sect promitting the importation of Slaves gave rise to much
     desultory debate.

     Every 5 slaves counted in representation as one elector without
     being equal in point of strength to one _white_ inhabitant.

     This gave the slave States an advantage in representation over
     the others.

     The slaves were moreover exempt from duty on importation.

     They served to render the representation from such States
     aristocratical.

     It was replied--That the population or increase of slaves in
     Virginia exceeded their calls for their services--That a
     prohibition of Slaves into S. Carolina Georgia etc--would be a
     monopoly in their favor. These States could not do without
     Slaves--Virginia etc would make their own terms for such as they
     might sell.

     Such was the situation of the country that it could not exist
     without slaves--That they could confederate on no other
     condition.

     They had enjoyed the right of importing slaves when colonies.

     They enjoyed it as States under the confederation--And if they
     could not enjoy it under the proposed government, they could not
     associate or make a part of it.

     Several additions were reported by the Committee.[564]

Upon taking up the report of the Committee of Eleven on the
twenty-fifth of August

     Genl Pinkney moved to strike out the words "the year eighteen
     hundred" (as the year limiting the importation of slaves,) and to
     insert the words "the year eighteen hundred and eight"

     Mr. Ghorum 2ded the motion

     Mr. Madison. Twenty years will produce all the mischief that can
     be apprehended from the liberty to import slaves. So long a term
     will be more dishonorable to the National character than to say
     nothing about it in the Constitution.

     On the motion; (which passed in the affirmative.) N--H ay. Mas.
     ay--Ct. ay. N. J. no. Pa. no Del--no. Md. ay. Va. no. N--C. ay.
     S--C. ay. Geo. ay. (Ayes--7; noes--4.)

     Mr. Govr. Morris was for making the clause read at once,
     "importation of slaves into N. Carolina, S--Carolina & Georgia."
     (shall not be prohibited &c.) This he said would be most fair and
     would avoid the abiguity by which, under the power with regard to
     naturalization, the liberty reserved to the States might be
     defeated. He wished it to be known also that this part of the
     Constitution was a compliance with those States. If the change of
     language however should be objected to by the members from those
     States, he should not urge it.

     Col. Mason was not against using the term "slaves" but agst
     naming N--C--S--C. & Georgia, lest it should give offence to the
     people of those States.

     Mr Sherman liked a description better than the terms proposed,
     which had been declined by the old Congs & were not pleasing to
     some people. Mr. Clymer concurred with Mr. Sherman.

     Mr. Williamson said that both in opinion & practice he was,
     against slavery; but thought it more in favor of humanity, from a
     view of all circumstances, to let in S--C & Georgia on those
     terms, than to exclude them from the Union--

     Mr. Govr. Morris withdrew his motion.

     Mr. Dickenson wished the clause to be confined to the States
     which had not themselves prohibited the importation of slaves,
     and for that purpose moved to amend the clause so as to read "The
     importation of slaves into such of the States as shall permit the
     same shall not be prohibited by the Legislature of the
     U--S--until the year 1808".--which was agreed to nem: cont:

     The first part of the report was then agreed to, amended as
     follows. "The migration or importation of such persons as the
     several States now existing shall think proper to admit shall not
     be prohibited by the Legislature prior to the year 1808." N. H.
     Mas. Con. Md. N. C. S. C. Geo: ... ay N. J. Pa. Del Virga ... no.
     (Ayes--7; noes--4).

     Mr. Baldwin in order to restrain & more explicitly define "the
     average duty" moved to strike out of the 2d. part the words
     "average of the duties laid on imports" and insert "common impost
     on articles not enumerated" which was agreed to nem: cont:

     Mr. Sherman was agst. this 2d part, as acknowledging men to be
     property, by taxing them as such under the character of slaves.

     Mr. King & Mr. Langdon considered this as the price of the 1st
     part.

     Genl. Pinkney admitted that it was so.

     Col. Mason. Not to tax, will be equivalent to a bounty on the
     importation of slaves.

     Mr. Ghorum thought that Mr. Sherman should consider the duty, not
     as implying that slaves are property, but as a discouragement to
     the importation of them.

     Mr. Govr, Morris remarked that as the clause now stands it
     implies that the Legislature may tax freemen imported.

     Mr. Sherman in answer to Mr. Ghorum observed that the smallness
     of the duty shewed revenue to be the object, not the
     discouragement of the importation.

     Mr. Madison thought it wrong to admit in the Constitution the
     idea that there could be property in men. The reason of duties
     did not hold, as slaves are not like merchandise, consumed &c.

     Col. Mason (in answr. to Govr. Morris) the provision as it stands
     was necessary for the case of Convicts in order to prevent the
     introduction of them.

     It was finally agreed nem: contrad: to make the clause read "but
     a tax or duty may be imposed on such importation not exceeding
     ten dollars for each person", and then the 2d. part as amended
     was agreed to.

     Sect 5--art--VII was agreed to nem: con: as reported.

     Sect 6. art. VII. in the Report was, postponed.

     Section 9. The Migration or Importation of such Persons as any of
     the States now existing shall think proper to admit, shall not be
     prohibited by the Congress prior to the Year one thousand eight
     hundred and eight, but a Tax or duty may be imposed on such
     Importation, not exceeding ten dollars for each Person.[565]

James McHenry said before the Maryland House of Delegates in November
29, 1787:

     Conventions were anxious to procure a perpetual decree against
     the importation of Slaves; but the Southern States could not be
     brought to consent to it--All that could possible be obtained was
     a temporary regulation which the Congress may vary
     hereafter.[566]

     In 1787 James Wilson said before the Convention called in
     Pennsylvania to ratify the constitution:

     With respect to the clause restricting Congress from prohibiting
     the migration or importation of such persons as any of the States
     now existing shall think proper to admit, prior to the year 1808,
     the honorable gentleman says that this clause is not only dark,
     but intended to grant to Congress, for that time, the power to
     admit the importation of slaves. No such thing was intended; but
     I will tell you what was done, and it gives me high pleasure that
     so much was done. Under the present confederation, the States may
     admit the importation of the slaves as long as they please; but
     by this article, after the year 1808, the Congress will have
     power to prohibit such importation, notwithstanding the
     disposition of any State to the contrary. I consider this as
     laying the foundation for banishing slavery out of this country;
     and though the period is more distant than I could wish, yet it
     will produce the same kind, gradual change which was pursued in
     Pennsylvania. It is with much satisfaction I view this power in
     the general government, where by they may lay an interdiction on
     this reproachful trade. But an immediate advantage is also
     obtained for a tax or duty may be imposed on such importation not
     exceeding ten dollars for each person; and this, Sir, operates as
     a partial prohibition. It was all that could be obtained. I am
     sorry it was no more; but from this I think there is reason to
     hope that yet a few years, and it will be prohibited altogether.
     And in the meantime, the new States which are to be formed will
     be under the control of Congress in this particular, and slaves
     will never be introduced amongst them. The gentleman says that it
     is unfortunate in another point of view: it means to prohibit the
     introduction of white people from Europe, as this may deter them
     from coming amongst us. A little impartiality and attention will
     discover the care that the convention took in selecting their
     language. The words are, the _migration or_ IMPORTATION of such
     persons, etc., shall not be prohibited by Congress prior to the
     year 1808, but a tax or duty may be imposed on such IMPORTATION.
     It is observable here that the term migration is dropped when a
     tax or duty is mentioned, so that Congress have power to impose
     the tax only on those imported.[567]

Referring to George Mason's objections to the Constitution, Oliver
Ellsworth said:

     _The general Legislature is restrained from prohibiting the
     further importation of slaves for twenty odd years_.... His
     objections are ... that such importations render the United
     States weaker, more vulnerable, and less capable of defence. To
     this I readily agree, and all good men wish the entire abolition
     of slavery, as soon as it can take place with safety to the
     public, and for the lasting good of the present wretched race of
     slaves. The only possible step that could be taken towards it by
     the convention was to fix a period after which they should not be
     imported.[568]

In his "Genuine Information" delivered before the Maryland Legislature
November 29, 1787, Luther Martin said:

     (56) By the _ninth_ section of this article, the importation of
     such persons as any of the states now existing shall think proper
     to admit, shall not be prohibited prior to the year one thousand
     eight hundred and eight; but a duty may be imposed on such
     importation, not exceeding ten dollars for each person.

     (57) The design of this clause is to prevent the general
     government from prohibiting the importation of slaves; but the
     same reasons which caused them to strike out the word
     "_national_," and not admit the word "_stamps_," influenced them
     here to guard against the word "_slaves_." They anxiously sought
     to avoid the admission of expressions which might be odious in
     the ears of of Americans, although they were willing to admit
     into their system those _things_ which the _expressions_
     signified. And hence it is, that the clause is so worded, as
     really to authorize the general government to impose a duty of
     ten dollars on every foreigner who comes into a State to become a
     citizen, whether he comes _absolutely_ free, or _qualifiedly_ so,
     as a servant; although this is contrary to the design of the
     framers, and the duty was only meant to extend to the importation
     of _slaves_.

     (58) This clause was the subject of a great diversity of
     sentiment in the convention. As the system was reported by the
     committee of detail, the provision was general, that such
     importation should not be prohibited, without confining it to any
     particular period. This was rejected by eight States,--Georgia,
     South Carolina, and I think North Carolina, voting for it.

     (59) We were then told by the delegates of the two first of
     those States, that their States would never agree to a _system_,
     which put in it the power of the general government to prevent
     the importation of slaves, and that they, as delegates from those
     States, must withhold their assent from such a system.

     (60) A committee of one member from each State was chosen by
     ballot, to take this part of the system under their
     consideration, and to endeavor to agree upon some report, which
     should reconcile those States. To this committee also was
     referred the following proposition, which had been reported by
     the committee of detail, to wit; "No _navigation_ act shall be
     passed without the assent of _two thirds_ of the members present
     in each House;" a proposition which the _staple_ and _commercial
     States_ were solicitous to _retain_, lest their _commerce_ should
     be placed too much under the power of the _eastern_ States; but
     which these last States were as anxious to _reject_. This
     committee, of which also I had the honor to be a member, met and
     took under their consideration the subjects committed to them. I
     found the _eastern_ States, notwithstanding their _aversion to
     slavery_, were very willing to indulge the southern States, at
     least with a temporary liberty to prosecute the _slave-trade_,
     provided the southern States would, in their turn, gratify them,
     by laying _no restrictions on navigation acts_; and after a very
     little time the committee, by a great majority agreed on a
     report, by which the general government was to be prohibited from
     preventing the importation of slaves for a limited time, and the
     restrictive clause relative to navigation acts was to be omitted.

     (61) This report was adopted by a majority of the convention but
     not without considerable opposition. It was said, that we had
     just assumed a place among independent nations, in consequence of
     our opposition to the attempts of Great Britain to _enslave us_;
     that this opposition was grounded upon the preservation of _those
     rights_ to which God and nature had entitled _us_, not in
     _particular_, but in _common_ with _all the rest of mankind_;
     that we had _appealed_ to the _Supreme Being_ for his
     _assistance_, as the _God of freedom_, who could not but
     _approve_ our efforts to preserve the _rights_ which he had thus
     _imparted to his creatures_; that, now, when we scarcely had
     risen from our _knees_, from _supplicating_ his _aid_ and
     _protection_, in _forming our government_ over a _free people_, a
     government formed pretendedly on the _principles_ of _liberty_
     and for _its preservation_,--in _that_ government, to have a
     provision not only putting it out of _its_ power to _restrain_
     and _prevent_ the _slave-trade_, but _even encouraging that most
     infamous traffic_, by giving the _States power_ and _influence_
     in the _Union, in proportion_ as _cruelly and wantonly sport with
     the rights of their fellow creatures, ought_ to be considered as
     a _solemn mockery_, of an _insult to that God_ whose protection
     we had then implored, and could not fail to hold us up in
     _detestation_, and render us _contemptible_ to every _true
     friend_ of liberty in the world. It was said, it ought to be
     considered that national _crimes_ can only be, and _frequently
     are punished_ in this world, by national punishments; and that
     the _continuance_ of the slave-trade, and thus giving it a
     _national sanction_ and _encouragement_, ought to be considered
     as _justly exposing_ us to the _displeasure_ and _vengeance_ of
     _Him_, who is equally Lord of all, and who views with equal eye
     the poor _African slave_ and his _American master_.

     (62) It was urged, that, by this system, we were giving the
     general government full and absolute power to regulate commerce,
     under which general power it would have a right to _restrain_, or
     _totally prohibit_, the _slave-trade_; it must, therefore, appear
     to the world absurd and disgraceful to the last degree, that we
     should _except_ from the exercise of that power, the _only
     branch_ of _commerce_ which is _unjustifiable in its nature_, and
     _contrary_ to the rights of _mankind_; that, on the contrary, we
     ought _rather to prohibit expressly_ in our _constitution_, the
     _further importation of slaves_; and to _authorize_ the general
     government, from time to time, to make such regulations as should
     be thought most advantageous for the _gradual abolition of
     slavery_, and the _emancipation_ of the _slaves_ which are
     already in the States: That _slavery_ is _inconsistent_ with the
     _genius_ of _republicanism_, and has a tendency to _destroy_
     those _principles_ on which it is _supported_, as it _lessens_
     the _sense_ of the _equal rights of mankind_, and habituates us
     to _tyranny_ and _oppression_.

     (63) It was further urged that, by this system of government,
     every State is to be protected both from _foreign invasion_ and
     from _domestic insurrections_; that, from this consideration, it
     was of the _utmost importance_ it should have a power to restrain
     the importation of slaves; since in _proportion_ as the number of
     slaves are increased in any State, in the _same_ proportion the
     State is _weakened_, and _exposed_ to foreign invasion or
     domestic insurrection, and _by so much less_ will it be able to
     protect itself against _either_; and, therefore will by so much
     the more want aid from, and be a burden to the Union. It was
     further said, that as, in this system, we were giving the general
     government a power under the idea of national character, or
     national interest, to regulate even our _weights_ and
     _measures_, and have prohibited all possibility of _emitting
     paper money_, and _passing instalment laws_, &c., it must appear
     still more extraordinary, that we should prohibit the government
     from interfering with the slave-trade than which, _nothing_ could
     so _materially affect_ both our _national honor_ and _interest_.
     These reasons influenced me, both on the committee and in
     convention, most decidedly to oppose and vote against the clause
     as it now makes a part of the system.

     (64). You will perceive, Sir, not only that the general
     government is prohibited from interfering in the slave-trade
     _before_ the year eighteen hundred and eight, but that there is
     no provision in the constitution that it shall _afterwards_ be
     prohibited, nor any security that such prohibition will ever take
     place; and I think there is great reason to believe, that, if the
     importation of slaves is permitted until the year eighteen
     hundred and eight, it will not be prohibited afterwards. At _this
     time_, we do not generally hold this commerce in so great
     _abhorrence_ as we have done. When our _own_ liberties were at
     stake, we _warmly_ felt for the _common rights of men_. The
     danger being thought to be past, which threatened ourselves, we
     are daily growing _more insensible_ to those rights. In those
     States which have restrained or prohibited the importation of
     slaves, it is only done by legislative acts, which may be
     repealed. When those States find, that they must, in their
     _national character_ and _connexion_, suffer in the _disgrace_,
     and share in the _inconveniences_ attendant upon that detestable
     and iniquitous traffic, they may be desirous also to share in the
     _benefits_ arising from it; and the odium attending it will be
     greatly effaced by the sanction which is given to it in the
     general government.[569]

In Elliot's Debates we find the following accredited to General
Pinckney.

     ... The general then said he would make a few observations on the
     objections which the gentleman had thrown out on the restrictions
     that might be laid on the African trade after the year 1808. On
     this point your delegates had to contend with the religious and
     political prejudices of the Eastern and Middle States, and with
     the interested and inconsistent opinion of Virginia, who was
     warmly opposed to our importing more slaves. I am of the same
     opinion now as I was two years ago, when I used the expressions
     the gentleman has quoted--that, while there remained one acre of
     swampland uncleared of South Carolina, I would raise my voice
     against restricting the importation of negroes. I am so
     thoroughly convinced as that gentleman is, that the nature of our
     climate, and the flat, swampy situation of our country, obliges
     us to cultivate our lands with negroes, and that without them
     South Carolina would soon be a desert waste.

     You have so frequently heard my sentiments on this subject that I
     need not now repeat them. It was alleged, by some of the members
     who opposed an unlimited importation, that slaves increased the
     weakness of any state who admitted them; that they were a
     dangerous species of property, which an invading enemy could
     easily turn against ourselves and the neighboring states; and
     that, as we were allowed a representation for them in the House
     of Representatives, our influence in government would be
     increased in proportion as we were less able to defend ourselves.
     "Show some period," said the members from the Eastern States,
     "when it may be in our power to put a stop, if we please, to the
     importation of this weakness, and we will endeavor, for your
     convenience, to restrain the religious and political prejudices
     of our people on this subject." The Middle States and Virginia
     made us no such proposition; they were for an immediate and total
     prohibition. We endeavored to obviate the objections that were
     made in the best manner we could, and assigned reasons for our
     insisting on the importation, which there is no occasion to
     repeat, as they must occur to every gentleman in the house; a
     committee of the states was appointed in order to accommodate
     this matter, and, after a great deal of difficulty, it was
     settled on the footing recited in the Constitution.

     By this settlement we have secured an unlimited importation of
     negroes for twenty years. Nor is it declared that the importation
     shall be then stopped; it may be continued. We have a security
     that the general government can never emancipate them, for no
     such authority is granted; and it is admitted, on all hands, that
     the general government has no powers but what are expressly
     granted by the Constitution, and that all rights not expressed
     were reserved by the several states. We have obtained a right to
     recover our slaves in whatever part of America they may take
     refuge, which is a right we had not before. In short, considering
     all circumstances, we have made the best terms for the security
     of this species of property it was in our power to make. We would
     have made better if we could; but, on the whole, I do not think
     them bad.[570]

Mr. Madison said in the Virginia ratifying Convention, June 17, 1787:

     Mr. Chairman--I should conceive this clause to be impolitic, if
     it were one of those things which could be excluded without
     encountering greater evils.--The southern states would not have
     entered into the union of America, without the temporary
     permission of that trade. And if they were excluded from the
     union, the consequences might be dreadful to them and to us. We
     are not in a worse situation than before. That traffic is
     prohibited by our laws, and we may continue the prohibition. The
     union in general is not in a worse situation. Under the articles
     of confederation, it might be continued forever: But by this
     clause an end may be put to it after twenty years. There is
     therefore an amelioration of our circumstances. A tax may be laid
     in the mean time; but it is limited, otherwise congress might lay
     such a tax on slaves as will amount to manumission. Another
     clause secures us that property which we now possess. At present,
     if any slave elopes to any of those states where slaves are free,
     he becomes emancipated by their laws. For the laws of the states
     are uncharitable to one another in this respect. But in this
     constitution, "no person held to service, or labor, in one state,
     under the laws thereof, escaping into another, shall in
     consequence of any law or regulation therein, be discharged from
     such service or labor; but shall be delivered up on claim of the
     party to whom such service or labor may be due."--This clause was
     expressly inserted to enable owners of slaves to reclaim them.
     This is a better security than any that now exists. No power is
     given to the general government to interpose with respect to the
     property in slaves now held by the states. The taxation of this
     state being equal only to its representation, such a tax cannot
     be laid as he supposes. They cannot prevent the importation of
     slaves for twenty years; but after that period they can. The
     gentlemen from South-Carolina and Georgia argued in this
     manner:--"We have now liberty to import this species of property,
     and much of the property now possessed has been purchased, or
     otherwise acquired, in contemplation of improving it by the
     assistance of imported slaves. What would be the consequence of
     hindering us from it? The slaves of Virginia would rise in
     value, and we would be obliged to go to your markets." I need
     not expatiate on this subject. Great as the evil is, a
     dismemberment of the union would be worse. If those states should
     disunite from the other states, for not indulging them in the
     temporary continuance of this traffic, they might solicit and
     obtain aid from foreign powers....

  (_The 2d, 3d, and 4th clauses read._)

     ... Mr. _Madison_ replied, that even the southern states, who
     were most affected, were perfectly satisfied with this provision,
     and dreaded no danger to the property they now hold. It appeared
     to him, that the general government would not intermeddle with
     that property for twenty years, but to lay a tax on every slave
     imported, not exceeding ten dollars; and that after the
     expiration of that period they may prohibit the traffic
     altogether. The census in the constitution was intended to
     introduce equality in the burdens to be laid on the
     community.--No gentleman objected to laying duties, imposts, and
     exercises, uniformly. But uniformity of taxes would be subversive
     of the principles of equality: For that it was not possible to
     select any article which would be easy for one state, but what
     would be heavy for another.--...[571]

In 1789 Madison said:

     I conceive the constitution, in this particular, was formed in
     order that the Government, whilst it was restrained from laying a
     total prohibition, might be able to give some testimony of the
     sense of America with respect to the African trade. We have
     liberty to impose a tax or duty upon the importation of such
     persons, as any of the States now existing shall think proper to
     admit; and this liberty was granted, I presume, upon two
     considerations: The first was, that until the time arrived when
     they might abolish the importation of slaves, they might have an
     opportunity of evidencing their sentiments on the policy and
     humanity of such a trade. The other was, that they might be taxed
     in due proportion with other articles imported; for if the
     possessor will consider them as property, of course they are of
     value, and ought to be paid for.[572]

According to Elliot, Spaight said on July 26, 1787:

     Mr. Spaight answered, that there was a contest between the
     Northern and Southern States; that the Southern States, whose
     principal support depended on the labor of slaves, would not
     consent to the desire of the Northern States to exclude the
     importation of slaves absolutely; that South Carolina and Georgia
     insisted on this clause, as they were now in want of hands to
     cultivate their lands; that in the course of twenty years they
     would be fully supplied; that the trade would be abolished then,
     and that, in the mean time, some tax or duty might be laid on....

     Mr. Spaight further explained the clause. That the limitation of
     this trade to the term of twenty years was a compromise between
     the Eastern States and the Southern States. South Carolina and
     Georgia wished to extend the term. The Eastern States insisted on
     the entire abolition of the trade. That the state of North
     Carolina had not thought proper to pass any law prohibiting the
     importation of slaves, and therefore its delegation in the
     Convention did not think themselves authorized to contend for an
     immediate prohibition of it....[573]

In the House of Representatives on February 12, 1790:

     Mr. Baldwin was sorry the subject had ever been brought before
     Congress, because it was of a delicate nature as it respected
     some of the States. Gentlemen who had been present at the
     formation of the Constitution could not avoid the recollection of
     the pain and difficulty which the subject caused in that body.
     The members from the Southern States were so tender upon this
     point, that they had well nigh broken up without coming to any
     determination; however, from the extreme desire of preserving the
     Union, and obtaining an efficient Government, they were induced
     mutually to concede, and the Constitution jealously guarded what
     they agreed to. If gentlemen look over the footsteps of that
     body, they will find the greatest degree of caution used to
     imprint them, so as not to be easily eradicated; but the moment
     we go to jostle on that ground, I fear we shall feel it tremble
     under our feet. Congress have no power to interfere with the
     importation of slaves beyond what is given in the ninth section
     of the 1st article of the Constitution; everything else is
     interdicted to them in the strongest terms. If we examine the
     constitution, we shall find the expressions relative to this
     subject cautiously expressed, and more punctiliously guarded than
     any other part, "The migration or importation of such persons
     shall not be prohibited by Congress." But lest this should not
     have secured the object sufficiently, it is declared, in the
     same section, "That no capitation or direct tax shall be laid,
     unless in proportion to the census;" this was intended to prevent
     Congress from laying any special tax upon negro slaves, as they
     might, in this way, so burthen the possessors of them as to
     induce a general emancipation. If we go on to the fifth article,
     we shall find the first and fifth clauses of the ninth section of
     the first article restrained from being altered before the year
     1808.[574]

According to George Mason's Account:

     The constn as agreed to till a fortnight before the convention
     rose was such a one as he wd have set his hand & heart to....
     with respect to the importn of slaves it was left to Congress,
     this disturbed the 2 Souther-most states who knew that Congress
     would immediately suppress the importn of slaves, those 2 states
     therefore struck up a bargain with the 3. N. Engld, states, if
     they would join to admit slaves for some years, the 2
     Southernmost states wd join in changing the clause which required
     2/3 of the legislature in any vote. It was done, these articles
     were changed accordingly, & from that moment the two S. states
     and the 3 Northern ones joined Pen. Jers. & Del. & made the
     majority 8. to 3. against us instead of 8. to 3. for us as it had
     been thro' the whole Convention. under this coalition the great
     principles of the Constn were changed in the last days of the
     Convention.[575]

The following debate on this subject took place in the House of
Representatives, June 16-20, 1798:

     Mr. B(aldwin). thought the 9th section, forbidding Congress to
     prohibit the migration, &c., was directly opposed to the
     principles of this bill. He recollected very well that when the
     9th section of the Constitution was under consideration in the
     Convention, the delegates from some of the Southern States
     insisted that the prohibition of the introduction of slaves
     should be left to the State Governments; it was found expedient
     to make this provision in the Constitution; there was an
     objection to the use of the word slaves, as Congress by none of
     their acts had ever acknowledged the existence of such a
     condition. It was at length settled on the words as they now
     stand, "that the migration or importation of such persons as the
     several States shall think proper to admit, should not be
     prohibited till the year 1808." It was observed by some
     gentlemen present that this expression would extend to other
     persons besides slaves, which was not denied, but this did not
     produce any alteration of it....

     Mr. Dayton (the Speaker) commenced his observations with
     declaring that he should not have risen on this occasion, if no
     allusion had been made to the proceedings in the Federal
     Convention which framed the Constitution of the United States, or
     if the representation which was given of what passed in that
     body, had been a perfectly correct and candid one. He expressed
     his surprise at what had fallen from the gentleman from Georgia
     (Mr. Baldwin) relatively to that part of the Constitution, which
     had been selected as the text of opposition to the bill under
     consideration, viz: "The migration or importation of such persons
     as any of the States now existing 'shall think proper to admit,
     shall not be prohibited by Congress, 'prior to the year 1808." He
     could only ascribe either to absolute forgetfulness, or to
     willful misrepresentation, the assertion of the member from
     Georgia, that it was understood and intended by the General
     Convention that the article in question should extend to the
     importation or introduction of citizens from foreign countries.
     As that gentleman and himself were the only two members of the
     House of Representatives who had the honor of a seat in that
     body, he deemed it his indispensable duty to correct the
     misstatement that had thus been made. He did not therefore,
     hesitate to say, in direct contradiction to this novel
     construction of the article (made as it would seem to suit the
     particular purposes of the opponents of the Alien bill) that the
     proposition itself was originally drawn up and moved in the
     Convention, by the deputies from South Carolina, for the express
     purpose of preventing Congress from interfering with the
     introduction of slaves into the United States, within the time
     specified. He recollected also, that in the discussion of its
     merits no question arose, or was agitated respecting the
     admission of foreigners but, on the contrary, that it was
     confined simply to slaves, and was first voted upon and carried
     with that word expressed in it, which was afterwards upon
     reconsideration changed for '_such persons_,' as it now stands,
     upon the suggestion of one of the Deputies from Connecticut. The
     sole reason assigned for changing it was, that it would be better
     not to stain the Constitutional code with such a term, since it
     could be avoided by the introduction of other equally
     intelligible words, as had been done in the former part of the
     same instrument, where the same sense was conveyed by the
     circuitous expression of 'three fifths of all other persons.'
     Mr. Dayton said that at that time he was far from believing, and
     that indeed until the present debate arose, he had never heard,
     that any one member supposed that the simple change of the term
     would enlarge the construction of this prohibitory provision, as
     it was now contended for. If it could have been conceived to be
     really liable to such interpretation, he was convinced that it
     would not have been adopted, for it would then carry with it a
     strong injunction upon Congress to prohibit the introduction of
     foreigners into newly erected States immediately, and into the
     then existing States after the year 1808, as it undoubtedly does,
     that of slaves after that period....

     Mr. Baldwin ... observed that he was yesterday obliged to leave
     the House a little before adjournment, and he had understood
     that, in his absence, the remarks which he had made on that point
     a few days ago, in Committee of the Whole, had been controverted,
     and that it had been done with some degree of harshness and
     personal disrespect. What he had before asserted was, that the
     clause respecting migration and importation was not considered at
     the time when it passed in the Convention as confined entirely to
     the subject of slaves. He spoke with the more confidence on this
     point, as there was scarcely one to which his attention had been
     so particularly called at the time. In making the Federal
     Constitution, when it was determined that it should be a
     Government possessing Legislative powers, the delegates from the
     two Southern States, of which he was one, were so fully persuaded
     that those powers would be used to the destruction of their
     property in slaves, that for some time they thought it would not
     be possible for them to be members of it: to that interesting
     state of the subject he had before alluded. In the progress of
     the business, other obstacles occurring, which he need not
     repeat, it was concluded to give to the delegates of those States
     the offer of preparing a clause to their own minds, to secure
     that species of property. He well remembered that when the clause
     was first prepared, it differed in two respects from the form in
     which it now stands. It used the word "slaves" instead of
     "migration", or "importation," or persons, and instead of "ten
     dollars," it was expressed "five percent ad valorem on their
     importation," which it was supposed would be about the average
     rate of duties under this Government. Several persons had
     objections to the use of the word "slaves, as Congress had
     hitherto avoided the use of it in their acts, and not
     acknowledged the existence of such a condition. It was expressly
     observed at the time, that making use of the form of expression
     as it now stands, instead of the word slaves, would make the
     meaning more general, and include what we now consider as
     included; this did not appear to be denied, but still it was
     preferred in its present form. He had more confidence than common
     in his recollection on this point, for the reasons which he had
     before stated. He gave it as the result of his very clear
     recollection. Any other member of that body was doubtless at
     liberty to say he did not recollect it. Still that would not
     diminish the confidence he felt on this occasion....[576]

In a letter to Robert Walsh November 27, 1817, Madison said:

     Your letter of the 11th was duly recd, and I should have given it
     a less tardy answer, but for a succession of particular demands
     on my attention, and a wish to assist my recollections, by
     consulting both manuscript & printed sources of information on
     the subjects of your enquiry. Of these, however, I have not been
     able to avail myself, but very partially.

     As to the intention of the framers of the Constitution in the
     clause relating to "the migration and importation of persons &c"
     the best key may perhaps be found in the case which produced it.
     The African trade in slaves had long been odious to most of the
     States, and the importation of slaves into them had been
     prohibited. Particular States however continued the importation,
     and were extremely adverse to any restriction on their power to
     do so. In the Convention the former States were anxious, in
     framing a new constitution, to insert a provision for an
     immediate and absolute stop to the trade. The latter were not
     only averse to any interference on the subject; but solemnly
     declared that their constituents would never accede to a
     constitution containing such an article. Out of this conflict
     grew the middle measure providing that Congress should not
     interfere until the year 1808; with an implication, that after
     that date, they might prohibit the importation of slaves into the
     States then existing, & previous thereto, into the States not
     then existing. Such was the tone of opposition in the States of
     S. Carolina & Georgia, & such the desire to gain their
     acquiescence in a prohibitory power, that on a question between
     the epochs of 1800 & 1808, the States of N. Hampshire, Massatts,
     & Connecticut, (all the eastern States in the convention); joined
     in the vote for the latter, influenced by the collateral motive
     of reconciling those particular States to the power over commerce
     & navigation; against which they felt, as did some other States,
     a very strong repugnance. The earnestness of S. Carolina &
     Georgia was further manifested by their insisting on the security
     in the V. article against any amendment to the Constitution
     affecting the right reserved to them, & their uniting with the
     small states who insisted on a like security for their equality
     in the Senate.

     But some of the States were not only anxious for a constitutional
     provision against the introduction of Slaves. They had scruples
     against admitting the term "Slaves" into the Instrument. Hence
     the descriptive phrase "migration or importation of persons"; the
     term migration allowing those who were scrupulous of
     acknowledging expressly a property in human beings, to view
     _imported_ persons as a species of emigrants, whilst others might
     apply the term to foreign malefactors sent or coming into the
     country. It is possible tho' not recollected, that some might
     have had an eye to the case of freed blacks, as well as
     malefactors.

     But whatever may have been intended by the term "migration" or
     the term "persons", it is most certain, that they referred,
     exclusively, to a migration or importation from other countries
     into the U. States; and not to a removal, voluntary or
     involuntary, of Slaves or freemen, from one to another part of
     the U. States. Nothing appears or is recollected that warrants
     this latter intention. Nothing in the proceedings of the State
     conventions indicate such a construction there. Had such been in
     the construction it is easy to imagine the figure it would have
     made in many of the states, among the objections to the
     constitution, and among the numerous amendments to it proposed by
     the state conventions, not one of which amendments refers to the
     clause in question.... It falls within the scope of your enquiry,
     to state the fact, that there was a proposition in the
     convention, to discriminate between the old and new States, by an
     article in the Constitution declaring that the aggregate number
     of representatives from the states thereafter to be admitted,
     should never exceed that of the states originally adopting the
     Constitution. The proposition happily was rejected. The effect of
     such a descrimination, is sufficiently evident.[577]

Speaking about the meaning of migration, Walter Lowrie of Pennsylvania
said in the United States Senate:

     In the Constitution it is provided that "the migration or
     importation of such persons as any of the States now existing
     shall think proper to admit, shall not be prohibited by the
     Congress prior to the year 1808, but a tax," etc. In this debate
     it seems generally to be admitted, by gentlemen on the opposite
     side, that these two words are not synonomous; but what their
     meaning is, they are not so well agreed. One gentlemen tells us,
     it was intended to prevent slaves from being brought in by land;
     another gentleman says, it was intended to restrain Congress from
     interfering with emigration from Europe.

     These constructions cannot both be right. The gentlemen who have
     preceded me on the same side, have advanced a number of pertinent
     arguments to settle the proper meaning of these words. I, sir,
     shall not repeat them. Indeed, to me, there is nothing more dry
     and uninteresting, than discussions to explain the meaning of
     single words. In the present case, I will only refer to the
     authority of Mr. Madison and Judge Wilson, who were both members
     of the Convention, and who gave their construction to these
     words, long before this question was agitated. Mr. Madison
     observes, that, to say this clause was intended to prevent
     emigration does not deserve an answer. And Judge Wilson says,
     expressly, it was intended to place the new States under the
     control of Congress, as to the introduction of slaves. The
     opinion of this latter gentleman is entitled to peculiar weight.
     After the Convention had labored for weeks on the subject of
     representation and direct taxes--when those great men were like
     to separate without obtaining their object, Judge Wilson
     submitted the provision on this subject, which now stands as a
     part of your Constitution. Sir, there is no man, from any part of
     the nation, who understood the system of our Government better
     than him; not even excepting Virginia, from whence the gentleman
     from Georgia (Mr. Walker) tells us, we have all our great
     men.[578]

Madison wrote on the same question that year in a letter to Monroe:

     I have been truly astonished at some of the doctrines and
     declarations to which the Missouri question has led; and
     particularly so at the interpretation put on the terms "migration
     or importation &c." Judging from my own impressions I shd. deem
     it impossible that the memory of any one who was a member of the
     Genl. Convention, could favor an opinion that the terms did not
     _exclusively_ refer to migration & importation, _into the_ U. S.
     Had they been understood in that Body in the sense now put on
     them, it is easy to conceive the alienation they would have there
     created in certain States: and no one can decide better than
     yourself the effect they would had in the State conventions, if
     such a meaning had been avowed by the advocates of the
     Constitution. If a suspicion had existed of such a construction,
     it wd. at least have made a conspicuous figure among the
     amendments proposed to the Instrument.[579]

There was very little objection to the provision for the return of
fugitive slaves. On the twenty-ninth of August, it was agreed that:

     "If any Person bound to service or labor in any of the United
     States shall escape into another State, He or She shall not be
     discharged from such services or labor in consequence of any
     regulations subsisting in the State to which they escape; but
     shall be delivered up to the person justly claiming their service
     or labor."

     which passed in the affirmative (Ayes--11; noes--0.)

     It was moved and seconded to strike out the two last clauses of
     the 17 article[580]

On the same day when the question came up again:

     Mr. Butler moved to insert after art: XV. "If any person bound to
     service or labor in any of the U--States shall escape into
     another State, he or she shall not be discharged from such
     service or labor, in consequence of any regulation subsisting in
     the State to which they escape, but shall be delivered up to the
     person justly claiming their service or labor," which was agreed
     to nem: con:[581]

The Committee of Style reported:

     No person legally held to service or labour in one state,
     escaping into another, shall in consequence of regulations
     subsisting therein be discharged from such service or labor, but
     shall be delivered up on claim of the party to whom such service
     or labour may be due.[582]

On the thirteenth of September,

     On motion of Mr. Randolph the word "servitude" was struck out,
     and "service" (unanimously) inserted, the former being thought to
     express the condition of slaves, & the latter the obligations of
     free persons.[583]

Two days later:

     Art. IV. sect 2. parag: 3. the term "legally" was struck out, and
     "under the laws thereof" inserted (after the word "State,") in
     compliance with the wish of some who thought the term (legal)
     equivocal, and favoring the idea that slavery was legal in a
     moral view----[584]

The Constitution provided then:

     No Person held to Service or Labour in one State, under the Laws
     thereof, escaping into another, shall, in Consequence of any Law
     of Regulation therein, be discharged from such Service or Labour,
     but shall be delivered up on Claim of the Party to whom such
     Service or Labour may be due.[585]


FOOTNOTES:

[530] In the preparation of these documents we used the notes and
journals of Yates, McHenry and Madison and the subsequent writings of
the framers of the Federal Constitution, but these extracts of the
actual proceedings are copied from Farrand's _Records of the Federal
Convention_.

[531] _Records of the Federal Convention_, I, pp. 31-32.

[532] _Records of the Federal Convention_, I, pp. 35-38.

[533] _Ibid._, I, pp. 39-40.

[534] _Records of the Federal Convention_, I, p. 40.

[535] _Records of the Federal Convention_, I, pp. 152-153.

[536] _Ibid._, I, pp. 200-202.

[537] _Records of the Federal Convention_, I, pp. 205-206.

[538] _Ibid._, p. 208.

[539] _Records of the Federal Convention_, I, p. 227.

[540] _Ibid._, I, p. 243.

[541] _Records of the Federal Convention_, I, pp. 523, 524.

[542] _Ibid._, I. p. 542.

[543] _Records of the Federal Convention_, I, pp. 559-560.

[544] _Ibid._, I, p. 567.

[545] _Records of the Federal Convention_, pp. 575-576.

[546] _Ibid._, I, p. 579.

[547] _Ibid._, pp. 580-583.

[548] _Records of the Federal Convention_, I, pp. 580-583.

[549] _Records of the Federal Convention_, I, pp. 586-588.

[550] _Records of the Federal Convention_, I, pp. 589-590.

[551] _Records of the Federal Convention_, pp. 603--605.

[552] _Ibid._, II, p. 168.

[553] _Records of the Federal Convention_, pp. 182-183.

[554] Dickenson thought that unless the number of representatives
given the large States was reduced the smaller ones would be
encouraged to import slaves.

Art: VII. sect. 3. resumed.--Mr. Dickenson moved to postpone this in
order to reconsider Art: Iv. sect. 4. and to _limit_ the number of
representatives to be allowed to the large States. Unless this were
done the small States would be reduced to entire insignificancy, and
encouragement given to the importation of slaves. _Records of the
Federal Convention_, II, 356, 570, 590.

[555] _Ibid._, III, p. 253.

[556] _Ibid._, III., pp. 155-156.

[557] _Records of the Federal Convention_, III, p. 333.

[558] _Ibid._, III, pp. 342-343.

[559] _Records of the Federal Convention_, II, p. 95.

[560] _Records of the Federal Convention_, p. 183.

[561] _Records of the Federal Convention_, II, pp. 220-221.

[562] _Records of the Federal Convention_, II, pp. 364-365.

[563] _Records of the Federal Convention_, II, pp. 369-375.

[564] _Ibid._, II, p. 378.

[565] _Records of the Federal Convention_, II, pp. 415-417.

[566] _Maryland Historical Magazine_, December, 1909.

[567] McMaster and Stone, _Pennsylvania and the Federal Constitution_,
pp. 311-313.

[568] P. L. Ford, _Essay on the Convention_, pp. 161-166.

[569] _Records of the Federal Convention_, III, pp. 210-213.

[570] Elliot, _Debates_, IV, pp. 277-286.

[571] Robertson, _Debates of the Convention of Virginia_, pp. 321-345.

[572] _Annals of Congress_, 1st session, I, pp. 339-340.

[573] Elliot, _Debates_, IX, pp. 72-104.

[574] _Annals of Congress_, 1st session, II, pp. 1200-1201.

[575] _Records of the Federal Convention_, III, p. 367.

[576] _Annals of Congress_, Fifth Cong., 2d Session, II, pp. 1660,
1968-2005.

[577] _Documentary History of the Constitution_, V, pp. 303-306.

[578] _Annals of Congress_, Sixteenth Cong., 1st Session, I, pp,
202-203.

[579] _Documentary History of the Constitution_, V, p. 307.

[580] _Records of the Federal Convention_, II, p. 446.

[581] _Ibid._, pp. 453-454.

[582] _Ibid._, pp. 601-602.

[583] _Records of the Federal Convention_, II, p. 607.

[584] _Ibid._, p. 628.

[585] _Ibid._, p. 662.




SOME UNDISTINGUISHED NEGROES


PATRICK SNEAD.--Among the most interesting of all fugitive slaves who
escaped into Canada was Patrick Snead of Savannah, Georgia. He was as
white as his master, but was born a slave. Upon the death of his first
master he fell into the hands of one of the sons who died when Snead
was about fifteen. His next master was a rather reckless man. Snead's
master always promised the slave's mother to give him his freedom as
soon as the boy could take care of himself, but this was never done.
Snead was sent to school a little by his mother so that he could spell
quite well. He had no religious training but was allowed to attend a
Sunday school for colored children. Upon approaching manhood Snead was
put to the cooper's trade, which he learned in five years.

Up to this time Snead had fared well, but at length his master fell
sick and died without freeing the slave according to his promise.
Snead was then sold to pay the fees of his master's physician, who
later sold him to a wholesale merchant for $500. In the service of
this merchant Snead proved to be a much smarter man than many of those
who worked with him. In later years, however, he had to work so hard
as to injure his health to the extent that he suffered considerably.
Moreover, Snead was never allowed any money and was restricted in his
social contact with the people of his group in other parts of the
community.

He was later sold to another master, being given in exchange for a
woman, two children and $100. He was still employed in the cooper's
trade. Required to make only 18 barrels a week and capable of making
more than twice as many, he began to receive an income of his own
under the good treatment of his last master. During this period,
however, his desire for liberty grew stronger and stronger because of
the hardships of his people and then he heard of their opportunities
in the free States and in Liberia. He, therefore, made his escape in
July, 1851, and reached Canada in safety. After remaining two years in
Canada he decided to enter the employ of the proprietor of the
Cataract House on the American side of Niagara Falls. What happened
then is best told in his own language. He says:

"Then a constable of Buffalo came in, on Sunday after dinner, and sent
the barkeeper into the dining-room for me. I went into the hall, and
met the constable,--I had my jacket in my hand, and was going to put
it up. He stepped up to me. 'Here, Watson,' (this was the name I
assumed on escaping,) 'you waited on me, and I'll give you some
change.' His fingers were then in his pocket, and he dropped a quarter
dollar on the floor. I told him, 'I have not waited on you--you must
be mistaken in the man, and I don't want another waiter's money.' He
approached,--I suspected, and stepped back toward the dining-room
door. By that time he made a grab at me, caught me by the collar of my
shirt and vest,--then four more constables, he had brought with him,
sprung on me,--they dragged me to the street door--there was a jamb--I
hung on by the doorway. The head constable shackled my left hand. I
had on a new silk cravat twice around my neck; he hung on to this,
twisting it till my toungue lolled out of my mouth, but he could not
start me through the door. By this time the waiters pushed through the
crowd,--there were three hundred visitors there at the time,--and
Smith and Graves, colored waiters, caught me by the hands,--then the
others came on, and dragged me from the officers by main force. They
dragged me over chairs and everything, down to the ferry way. I got
into the cars, and the waiters were lowering me down, when the
constables came and stopped them, saying, 'Stop that murderer!'--they
called me a _murderer_! Then I was dragged down the steps by the
waiters, and flung into the ferry boat. The boatmen rowed me to within
fifty feet of the Canada shore--into Canada water--when the head
boatman in the other boat gave the word to row back. They did
accordingly,--but they could not land me at the usual place on account
of the waiters. So they had to go down to Suspension Bridge; they
landed me, opened a way through the crowd--shackled me, pushed me into
a carriage, and away we went. The head constable then asked me 'if I
knew any person in Lockport.' I told him 'no,' Then, 'In Buffalo?'
'No.' 'Well then,' said he, 'let's go to Buffalo--Lockport is too
far.' We reached Buffalo at ten o'clock at night, when I was put in
jail. I told the jailer I wished he would be so good as to tell a
lawyer--to come round to the jail. Mr.---- came, and I engaged him for
my lawyer. When the constables saw that pretending to know no one in
Buffalo, I had engaged one of the best lawyers in the place, they were
astonished. I told them that 'as scared as they thought I was, I
wanted them to know that I had my senses about me.' The court was not
opened until nine days; the tenth day my trial commenced. The object
was, to show some evidence as if of murder, so that they could take me
to _Baltimore_. On the eleventh day the claimant was defeated, and I
was cleared at 10 A.M. After I was cleared, and while I was yet in the
court room, a telegraphic despatch came from a Judge in Savannah,
saying that I was no murderer, but a fugitive slave. However, before a
new warrant could be got out, I was in a carriage and on my way. I
crossed over into Canada, and walked thirty miles to the Clifton
House."--Benjamin Drew, _A North-Side View of Slavery_, pp. 102-104.

WHITE WOMEN ENSLAVED.--"A New Hampshire gentleman went down into
Louisiana, many years ago, to take a plantation. He pursued the usual
method; borrowing money largely to begin with, paying high interest,
and clearing off his debt, year by year, as his crops were sold. He
followed another custom there; taking a Quadroon wife: a mistress, in
the eye of the law, since there can be no legal marriage between the
whites and persons of any degree of color: but, in nature and
in reason, the woman he took home was his wife. She was a
well-principled, amiable, well-educated woman; and they lived happily
together for twenty years. She had only the slightest possible tinge
of color. Knowing the law, that the children of slaves are to follow
the fortunes of the mother, she warned her husband that she was not
free, an ancestress having been a slave, and the legal act of
manumission having never been performed. The husband promised to look
to it: but neglected it. At the end of twenty years, one died, and the
other shortly followed, leaving daughters; whether two or three, I
have not been able to ascertain with positive certainty; but I have
reason to believe three, of the ages of fifteen, seventeen, and
eighteen; beautiful girls, with no perceptible mulatto tinge. The
brother of their father came down from New Hampshire to settle the
affairs; and he supposed, as every one else did, that the deceased had
been wealthy. He was pleased with his nieces, and promised to carry
them back with him into New Hampshire, and (as they were to all
appearance perfectly white) to introduce them into the society which
by education they were fitted for. It appeared, however, that their
father had died insolvent. The deficiency was very small: but it was
necessary to make an inventory of the effects, to deliver to the
creditors. This was done by the brother,--the executor. Some of the
creditors called on him, and complained that he had not delivered in
a faithful inventory. He declared he had. No: the number of slaves was
not accurately set down: he had omitted the daughters. The executor
was overwhelmed with horror, and asked time for thought. He went round
among the creditors, appealing to their mercy: but they answered that
these young ladies were 'a first-rate article,' too valuable to be
relinquished. He next offered, (though he had himself six children,
and very little money,) all he had for the redemption of his nieces;
alleging that it was more than they would bring in the market for
house or field labor. This was refused with scorn. It was said that
there were other purposes for which the girls would bring more than
for field or house labor. The uncle was in despair, and felt strongly
tempted to wish their death, rather than their surrender to such a
fate as was before them. He told them, abruptly, what was their
prospect. He declares that he never before beheld human grief; never
before heard the voice of anguish. They never ate, nor slept, nor
separated from each other, till the day when they were taken into the
New Orleans slave market. There they were sold, separately, at high
prices, for the vilest of purposes: and where each is gone, no one
knows. They are for the present, lost. But they will arise to the
light in the day of retribution."--Harriet Martineau, _Views on
Slavery and Emancipation_, pp. 8-9.

THE WHITE SLAVE.--"A slaveholder, living in Virginia, owned a
beautiful slave woman, who was almost white. She became the mother of
a child, a little boy, in whose veins ran the blood of her master, and
the closest observer could not detect in its appearance any trace of
African descent. He grew to be two or three years of age, a most
beautiful child and the idol of his mother's heart, when the master
concluded, for family reasons, to send him away. He placed him in the
care of a friend living in Guilford County, North Carolina, and made
an agreement that he should receive a common-school education, and at
a suitable age be taught some useful trade. Years passed; the child
grew to manhood, and having received a good common-school education,
and learned the shoemaker's trade, he married an estimable young white
woman, and had a family of five or six children. He had not the
slightest knowledge of the taint of African blood in his veins, and no
one in the neighborhood knew that he was the son of an octoroon slave
woman. He made a comfortable living for his family, was a good
citizen, a member of the Methodist Church, and was much respected by
all who knew him. In course of time his father, the Virginian
slaveholder, died, and when the executors came to settle up the
estate, they remembered the little white boy, the son of the slave
woman, and knowing that by law--such law!--he belonged to the estate,
and must be by this time a valuable piece of property, they resolved
to gain possession of him. After much inquiry and search they learned
of his whereabouts, and the heir of the estate, accompanied by an
administrator, went to Guilford County, North Carolina, to claim his
half-brother as a slave. Without making themselves known to him, they
sold him to a negro trader, and gave a bill of sale, preferring to
have a sum in ready money instead of a servant who might prove very
valuable, but who would, without doubt, give them a great deal of
trouble. He had been free all his life, and they knew he would not
readily yield to the yoke of bondage. All this time the victim was
entirely unconscious of the cruel fate in store for him.

"His wife had been prostrated by a fever then prevalent in the
neighborhood, and he had waited upon her and watched by her bedside,
until he was worn out with exhaustion and loss of sleep. Several
neighbor women coming in one evening to watch with the invalid, he
surrendered her to their care, and retired to seek the rest he so much
needed. That night the slave-dealer came with a gang of ruffians,
burst into the house and seized their victim as he lay asleep, bound
him, after heroic struggles on his part, and dragged him away. When he
demanded the cause of his seizure, they showed him the bill of sale
they had received, and informed him that he was a slave. In this rude,
heartless manner the intelligence that he belonged to the African race
was first imparted to him, and the crushing weight of his cruel
destiny came upon him when totally unprepared. His captors hurried him
out of the neighborhood, and took him toward the Southern slave
markets. To get him black enough to sell without question, they washed
his face in tan ooze, and kept him tied in the sun, and to complete
his resemblance to a mulatto, they cut his heir short and seared it
with a hot iron to make it curly. He was sold in Georgia or Alabama,
to a hard master, by whom he was cruelly treated.

"Several months afterward he succeeded in escaping, and made his way
back to Guilford County, North Carolina. Here he learned that his wife
had died a few days after his capture, the shock of that calamity
having hastened her death, and that his children were scattered among
the neighbors. His master, thinking that he would return to his old
home, came in pursuit of him with hounds, and chased him through the
thickets and swamps. He evaded the dogs by wading in a mill-pond, and
climbing a tree, where he remained several days. Dr. George Swain, a
man of much influence in the community, had an interview with him,
and, hearing the particulars of his seizure, said he thought the
proceedings were illegal. He held a consultation with several lawyers,
and instituted proceedings in his behalf. But the unfortunate victim
of man's cruelty did not live to regain his freedom. He had been
exposed and worried so much, trailed by dogs and forced to lie in
swamps and thickets, that his health was broken down and he died
before the next term of court."--Levi Coffin, _Reminiscences_, pp.
29-31.

A SLAVE OF ROYAL BLOOD.--"Among the many persons of color whom I
visited at Philadelphia, was a woman of singular intelligence and good
breeding. A friend was with me. She received us with the courtesy and
easy manners of a gentlewoman. She appeared to be between thirty and
forty years of age--of pure African descent, with a handsome
expressive countenance and a graceful person. Her mother, who had been
stolen from her native land at an early age, was the daughter of a
king, and is now, in her eighty-fifth year, the parent stem of no less
than 182 living branches. When taken by the slavers, she had with her
a piece of gold as an ornament, to denote her rank. Of this she was of
course deprived; and a solid bar of the same metal, which her parent
sent over to America for the purchase of her freedom, shared the same
fate. Christiana Gibbons, who is thus the granddaughter of a prince of
the Ebo tribe, was bought when about fifteen years of age, by a woman
who was struck by her interesting appearance, and emancipated her. Her
benefactress left her, at her death, a legacy of 8,000 dollars. The
whole of this money was lost by the failure of a bank, in which her
legal trustee (a man of the name of James Morrison, since dead) had
placed it in his own name. She had other property, acquired by her own
industry, and affording a rent of 500 dollars a year. Her agent,
however, Colonel Myers, though indebted to her for many attentions and
marks of kindness during sickness, had neglected to remit her the
money from Savannah, in Georgia, where the estate is situated; and,
when I saw her, she was living, with her husband and son, on the
fruits of her labor.

"She had not been long resident in Philadelphia, whither she had come
to escape the numerous impositions and annoyances to which she was
exposed in Georgia. Her husband was owner of a wharf in Savannah,
worth eight or ten thousand dollars. It is much feared that the
greater part of this property will be lost, or not recovered without
great difficulty. I was induced to call upon her, in consequence of a
letter I had received from Mr. Kingsley, of whom I have before spoken.
He had long been acquainted with her, and spoke of her to me in the
highest terms; wishing that I should see what he considered a 'good
specimen of the race.'

"We found her, indeed, a very remarkable woman; though it is probable
that there are many among the despised slaves as amiable and
accomplished as herself. Such, at least, was the account she gave us
of their condition, that we felt convinced of the superiority
possessed by many, in moral worth and intellectual acuteness, above
their oppressors."--E. S. Abdy, _Journal of a Residence and Tour in
the United States of America from April, 1833, to October, 1834_, pp.
346-348.




BOOK REVIEWS


_The Virgin Islands of the United States of America._ By LUTHER K.
ZABRISKIE, Former Vice-Consul of the United States at St. Thomas. G.
P. Putnam's Sons, New York and London, 1918. Pp. 339. Price $4.00.

This is an historical and descriptive work containing facts, figures
and resources about a country ninety per cent of the population of
which belongs to the Negro race. It is a detailed account of
practically every interest of concern to the tourist, the merchant,
the geographer and the historian. It is made still more valuable by
its one hundred and nine illustrations and two maps which clearly
demonstrate what the United States Government has received in return
for the purchase price of $25,000,000.

The first effort of the author is to give a short sketch of the
history of the Virgin Islands. He then takes up the question of
purchasing the islands. In discussing these political and historic
questions, however, the author is too brief and neglectful of
important problems which the student of history would like to know.
The author no doubt carefully avoided these questions for the reasons
that he was then and still is in the diplomatic service of the United
States. The book is chiefly concerned with the actual government of
the group, the occupations of the people, and the place of the islands
in the commerce of the world.

Largely interested, therefore, in those things which generally concern
a consul, Mr. Zabriskie has written a valuable commercial treatise. He
explains such things as steamer service, harbor facilities, banking,
currency, sanitation, transportation, cattle raising, agriculture,
manufactures, imports and exports. The last part of the book is
exclusively devoted to the most recent history of the Virgin Islands.
There is a discussion of the sale negotiations, the convention between
the United States and Denmark, the announcement of the sale, the
formal transfer of the islands, the farewell service and the temporary
government provided. This part of the book is not merely descriptive.
It contains the actual documents as in the case of the convention
between the United States and Denmark, which is given in the English
and Danish languages.



_Your Negro Neighbor._ By BENJAMIN BRAWLEY. The Macmillan Company, New
York, 1918. Pp. 100. Price 60 cents.

In this book Dean Brawley does not reach the standard set in some of
his other works, but he has here some facts and suggestions which are
worth while. The book begins with an appeal to the people of the
United States in behalf of the Negroes who, despite their many
grievances, are now fighting to make the world safe for democracy
although their own country is not safe for them. In directing these
remarks to the citizens of this country the author gives in detail the
Negroes' grounds for complaint and shows how because of the unjust
treatment of the blacks in the United States this country has become
an object of suspicion in South America, where the color line is not
known.

The second chapter of the book is a statement of the Negroes' place in
history. This, however, is too brief and unscientific to be of much
value to one in quest of facts of Negro history. It seems unnecessary
here also to devote a special chapter to such isolated facts of
history in writing a book dealing with a social problem.

The chapter bearing on the Negro as an industrial factor contains
interesting material taken from statistical reports. The author
discusses such questions as the reliability of Negro laborers, the
antagonism of the labor unions, housing conditions, and the like.
Taking up the institution of lynching, Dean Brawley goes over old
ground but gives striking facts to portray this blot on the American
civilization. Then without showing any close connection between the
two the author takes up Negro education since the Civil War. Here we
see another failure to treat an important question intensively and
scientifically. He then gives a sketch of Joanna P. Moore, a
missionary of much worth, takes up certain critics and their
fallacies, asserts the possibility of the race and closes with a plea
for a moralist.

This in brief is the work recently produced by a man who is
undertaking to address the American people on almost every phase of
Negro life and history. This work, however, is merely the author's
observations or impressions of the Negroes among the whites. The very
work itself shows that Dean Brawley is undertaking too much. He is
best as a literary critic but in sociology and history his works do
not measure up to standard.

                                   ORVILLE HOLLIDAY.



_The American Cavalryman._ By HENRY F. DOWNING. The Neale Publishing
Company, New York, 1917. Pp. 306. Price $1.50.

This is a Liberian romance written by Henry F. Downing, a colored man
who evidently spent some years in Liberia. The diction is good, the
style pleasing, and the story interesting, but it is not a sympathetic
portrayal of African character and customs. It is written from a white
man's point of view and shows a tendency to regard the white man's
civilization of today as the only true standard. He shows, however,
that he does not always approve of the European method of dealing with
the African. While describing an unequal contest between the
cavalryman and natives, he says: "But alas! in war, as in finance and
love, victory does not always smile upon the most deserving. She
usually favors the numerically stronger side; that is, unless the less
numerous party is armed with quick firing guns, dumdum bullet, and
other harmless weapons that Europeans think it criminal to employ
against one another, but cheerfully use to Christianize and civilize
the poor helpless black African."

The chief value of the work lies in its portrayal of native customs,
some of which are beautiful, some wholly barbarous and all more or
less tinctured with superstition. But, when we pause to think how rife
superstition still is among all so-called civilized peoples, we
conclude that it is a belief hard to eradicate from human nature. Even
in our own country people were hanged as witches a little over a
hundred years ago.

While cunning and shrewdness are shown to hold an exalted place in the
native character, still lying and cheating, when discovered, are
severely punished. Loyalty to friends and fidelity to pledges are held
in great esteem. Human life does not seem to be valued very highly
judging from the readiness with which a chief extinguished it by
having all disloyal or disobedient followers beheaded at a moment's
notice. It is evident throughout, however, that human nature is the
same in civilized and uncivilized peoples.

There is no attempt to portray the history of Liberia in these pages,
a thing which in my opinion would have made the work stronger and far
more valuable. It does give a fair picture of Monrovia, the capital
city, and presents, to some extent, the need for wise and just
administration and the necessity of funds to improve the city and
endow it with parks, libraries, and places of amusement. The value of
the American constabulary force is felt and the importance of
increased communications, union and helpfulness between the
government and the tribes are emphasized. Altogether it is a work
worth writing and worth reading, although it does not give enough
prominence to the nobler traits of the native character.

                                   IDA GIBBS HUNT.



_Education for Life._ By FRANCIS G. PEABODY, Vice-President of the
Board of Trustees. The Story of Hampton Institute, told in Connection
with the Fiftieth Anniversary of the School. Doubleday, Page and
Company, New York, 1918. Pp. 393. Price $2.50.

This work has for its background a brief account of the Negro during
the Civil War and the Reconstruction, serving as the occasion for the
beginning of the successful career of General Samuel Chapman
Armstrong, the founder of Hampton Institute. The actual history of the
institution appears under such captions as the beginnings of Hampton,
the years of promise, the coming of the Indian, the years of
fulfilment, the end of an era, the coming of Frissell, and the
expansion of Hampton. The author has endeavored also to explain the
relations of Hampton and the South and to forecast the future
possibilities of this school. The work is well printed and beautifully
illustrated.

In the _Springfield Republican_ of July 6, 1918, A. L. Dawes said in
her review of this work:

"Hampton institute has chosen a fitting occasion, the completion of
fifty years of life and work, to issue the history of its achievement.
It comes at the end of one distinct epoch, and the beginning of
another, when it is of much value to consider the results which make a
foundation for new progress. It is a record of wonderful achievement,
and this amazing institution may well be proud of it. We are led from
the huddled camp of contrabands in 1868 to the allied armies in 1918;
from a crowd of men and women without a past and seemingly without a
future--even a possibility only to the eyes of patriotism and
faith--we are led in these pages to the ranks of efficient soldiers
and brilliant officers fighting with southern men whose grandfathers
called their grandfathers slaves!

"Faith has become pride and patriotism has become an individual
possession in a resurrected race. The book might well have been called
by that title--'The Resurrection of a Race'--but its distinguished
author, in calling it 'Education for Life,' has chosen to consider
Hampton's double mission to the race and to the world in connection
with education. This latter aspect of its work makes the book
particularly pertinent at this time of world reconstruction. This
attractive volume will be read with interest and satisfaction by the
many widespread friends of Hampton Institute, and it will also be
sought with eagerness by another audience, the large public, which is
seeking new theories of education for a new world. This group will
find it a clear and compelling statement of a new philosophy of
education worked out there, heretofore neither recognized nor
understood outside, but limited either to manual training or
vocational education.

"Hampton has been fortunate in its biographer. It is a labor of love,
by Rev. Francis G. Peabody, one of the few remaining trustees whose
service covers its three epochs and whose friendship has inspired its
three principals. Perhaps no one else has so entered into the life of
the place. He has made himself one with pupils and faculty and
trustees and public in such friendly fashion that he may rightly say
'we' from any point of view. His many readers will look for noteworthy
diction amounting to a new use of words, grace of speech and charm of
phrase, a startling power of insight, a passion for social service and
the revelation of the spiritual in all human affairs, with the
inspiration which compels. These things Dr. Peabody's readers expect
of him, but it might have been questioned whether he could write a
history. In this book he has shown us that history is the story of
life, and he has used all these abilities to discover and fitly
express the life which has become Hampton Institute. Not the least of
all his skill has appeared in what he has left out--so that the book
is never dull though it is crowded with facts. Everything is here that
is needed to answer the questions of any objector, and what is more
difficult, of any friend. The illustrations are not only interesting,
but valuable footnotes to history, and there are a number of
collections of statistics at the end of the book of incomparable worth
to the student of these subjects; we cannot enough commend their range
and selection.

"Among the rest, we notice a just commendation of the Hampton Club in
this city. All through the book explanation forestalls objection,
while old friends find new information and new reasons for
half-understood methods. Such are the accumulating exposition of the
Hampton idea, and the description of circumstances and resources which
condition all action, and determine the measure of progress. Those who
know and love this wonderful place will be gratified at the stress
laid on the 'Hampton spirit' of service as the explanation of its
success, as well as the constant recognition of the spiritual in the
methods as well as the aims of this hothouse of missionary effort. No
one familiar with the school would have found the record complete
without the stressing of this element at once its motive and its life.
Few could have so well defined that elusive but forceful thing--'the
Hampton spirit.'

"It needed all the writer's ability to set forth fitly the ardent
Armstrong and the able Frissell--witness his success in this
characterization of them:

"'Never were two administrative officers more unlike each other.
Armstrong was impetuous, magnetic, volcanic; Frissell was reserved,
sagacious, prudent. The gifts of the one were those of action; the
strength of the other was in discretion.'

"He has given us all fresh knowledge of both men. By his choice and
collocation of extracts he shows Armstrong not only to have had the
enthusiastic impact on his world known to all men, but also a
forelooking philosophy which guided him to a definite end. He brings
out the long line of unusual circumstances which prepared him for this
work, and in repeating the vision in which like a Hebrew prophet the
young officer was called to teach the Negroes, the writer shows that
work to have been a definite growth. No one who knew Samuel C.
Armstrong can ever forget him, or ever describe him, but not one of
his wide circle ever failed to be moved by any contact with him to put
forth his own powers to their full measure.

"Dr. Peabody does full justice to the help and service of the
Freedmen's Bureau, which from the first linked the institution with
the government, and to the American Missionary Association, which made
its beginning possible. He further shows many missionary and
philanthropic sources upon which it has always drawn. If he halts a
little in enthusiastic justice to Gen. Benjamin F. Butler, who began
this crusade, he has evidently done it best--an unexpected best it
must be said, from a Harvard professor! Samuel Armstrong was moved by
his Christian impulses and missionary inheritance to help these needy
people, but there could hardly have been a more unpromising
opportunity.

"The task which Armstrong took up was greater than the present
generation can imagine. Dr. Peabody has recognized this by a clear and
dispassionate description of the situation in 1868, an analysis of the
greatest value to the present-day reader. Armstrong's high courage
and faith brought him to the day when he saw the race well on the high
road to its place in the sun, before he dropped his mantle on the
shoulders of his successor. It is doubtful, perhaps, whether he saw
clearly how much he had done nor how firmly he had established his
principles of the necessity of work and respect for it. Dr. Peabody
brings out very distinctly this his great achievement, but it is
superfluous to quote from a story which everyone will want to read for
himself.

"Mindful of the fact that education depends upon personal contact,
this book deals largely with the work of the two outstanding
personalities, who have made the institution what it is. Hollis Burke
Frissell, who took up the work of principal when Armstrong left it
twenty-five years ago--'Dr. Frissell' as everyone knew him--proved to
be in some ways one of the great men of his time, certainly so if you
give a high value to education. As one of his close friends has said
of him, 'He invariably grew to the measure of the stature that his
work called for.'

"If Dr. Peabody has failed at all in the hard task of describing one
in whom the full round of qualities blended into the white light of
simplicity it is perhaps in not making his virility sufficiently
evident. The first and last impression Frissell made was of
lovableness, and he was so intent on getting work done that he never
cared to be known as its author. Therefore, even his friends did not
always discover his strength or sometimes his greatness. He carried on
the school to a phenominal success and he developed more than one
beginning to a definite policy.

"In the latter part of Gen. Armstrong's career a simple occurrence
changed the whole character of the school. From it the school
developed into a world institution. When the government asked Gen.
Armstrong to continue the education of seventeen Indians already begun
by Capt. Pratt, the task was undertaken as a civil and Christian duty,
but thus was started a government policy, and an educational
experiment which, carried on and broadened to other races under Dr.
Frissell, has changed the face of our own land and altered the
conditions of backward races the world over. Because of this great
historical fact, Hampton should always keep up its Indian department,
which witnesses to the beginning of its world relation.

"The passing of time after the Civil War and emancipation also made
possible to Dr. Frissell the development of another policy, that of
the unification of the North and the South. This was something very
near his heart, and for it he started the southern education
board--which was his creation more fully than Dr. Peabody
explains--the Jeans board, much of the southern work of the
Rockefeller or general educational board and other well-known agencies
to this end. And to accomplish the reconciliation of the races and the
regions he gave the vital force which finally cost him his life. The
future will render this service its due meed of praise, as the writer
so well sets forth, a service carried on in the midst of
misunderstanding and sharp criticism.

"Dr. Peabody has devoted himself especially on bringing out the growth
of Dr. Frissell's carefully-thought-out educational ideals, whereby he
added the value of work to the necessity of it in a complete
education. Under Frissell, as is so well shown, Hampton entered on its
second stage, its relation to the philosophy of education. Men came
from all over the world to study the question of the training of
native races. Inspired by his work, Frissell saw the possibilities on
every side, and looked far into the future. Thus, as has been said,
his set purpose broadened the school to include Porto Rico, Cuba, the
Philippines, and even Africa, making it what he loved to call it, a
'race laboratory.' That he succeeded appears in the constant stream of
officials, educators and philanthropists from all over the globe
coming to Hampton that they may study and copy its methods. The vision
of the future which was given to Dr. Frissell was not so much a vision
of a new race, as with Armstrong; it was for Frissell a vision of a
new humanity.

"It is this vision of 'Education for life' which Dr. Peabody brings
out so clearly--both its meaning and its value. The oldest friends of
Hampton have hardly understood it before, so well does he explain it,
and so thoroughly does he show that its purpose is to make men and
women. Artisans and skilled workmen come out of it, but its first
purpose is to develop individuals and all its interests tend to this
end. This explains its limitations also, and answers many complaints.
The white teacher who recently left because there was 'no future' for
her own career; the educator who complained of a system which
continued to educate on general lines when some vocational diversion
would be more profitable; those who support the objections of the
'Crisis' that Hampton is not a university--all these critics fail to
understand the new philosophy of Hampton and its dominant human
motive. It would be a great mistake if, as appears to be hinted here,
any concessions should be made to the demand of these last critics,
whose aims would destroy the whole idea of Hampton, and its value as
a world experiment. The author of the book and distinguished student
of social ethics so strongly brings out its claim to a new education,
for a new world that (to repeat) the reader cannot fail to inquire if
this is the solution of the future in our forthcoming new world.

"Dr. Peabody brings us to the beginning of the third era and pays a
deserved tribute to the new principal. Rev. James E. Gregg, who enters
on the task at a critical time. Just now, when the race question is
acute both here and everywhere, and when the new democracy is
demanding a new education, there could hardly be a greater opportunity
for the man or the school.

This inadequate sketch of a most informing and inspiring book may well
be closed with a few paragraphs which sum up the aims of Hampton
Institute:

"'In short, the fundamental issue in all education for life is between
a training to make things and a training to make character. Is a man
to be taught carpentering primarily that a house shall be well built,
or that in the building the man himself shall get intelligence,
self-mastery and skill?'

"'The principle was definitely accepted that these shops and classes
were maintained, not as sources of profit, but as factors in an
education for life. Young men and women were not to be regarded as
satisfactory products of Hampton Institute because each could do one
thing and get good wages for doing it, but because each had been
trained to apply mind and will to the single task, and had made it not
only a way of living, but a way of life.'

"'Trade education as conceived gradually developed and finally
realized at Hampton Institute is a development of the person through
the trade, rather than a development of the trade through the person.
The product is not primarily goods, but goodness; not so much profit
as personality.... These students become delivered from the benumbing
conditions of modern industry by the emancipating and humanizing
effect of the Hampton scheme of industrial training, and those who are
thus initiated in a large view of their small opportunities are likely
to find their way, not only to those occupations, which are still open
at the top, but to those resources of happiness which are discovered
when work has become a vocation, and labor has contributed to life.'"




NOTES


In the introduction to Book II of _Negro Folk-Songs_ the author, Mrs.
Natalie Curtis Burlin, has some interesting paragraphs showing the
connection of this music with certain origins in Africa. She says:

"That Negro folk-song is indeed an offshoot from an African root,
nobody who has heard Africans sing or even beat the drum can deny. The
American Negroes are sprung, of course, from many tribes; but whereas
the native traffic in slaves and captives brought individuals from
widely separated parts of the continent to the coasts and thus to the
European slavers, the great mass of Negroes that filled the slave
ships destined for America probably belonged--according to some
authorities--to the big linguistic stock called Bantu, comprising some
fifty million people south of the equator. The Zulu and Ndau tribes,
whose songs I studied, are of this stock. Yet, as there are over a
hundred million Negroes on the Dark Continent, whose different traits
are probably represented in some form in this country, all statements
as to musical derivations could be made with final authority only by
one who had studied comprehensively the music of many different tribes
_in Africa_. This much, however, one may most emphatically affirm:
though the Negro, transplanted to other lands, absorbed much musically
from a surrounding civilization, yet the characteristics which give to
his music an interest worthy of particular study are precisely those
which differentiate Negro songs from the songs of the neighboring
white man; they are racial traits, and the black man brought them from
the Dark Continent.

"The most obvious point of demarcation between Negro music and
European is found, of course, in the rhythm. The simpler rhythms
natural to the white man (I speak of folk-music, the people's song,
not of the elaborate creations of trained musicians) are usually even
and symmetrical. Throughout western Europe and in English and Latin
countries, the accents fall as a rule on the stressed syllables of the
spoken tongue and on the regular beats of the music. The opposite is
the case in Negro songs: here the rhythms are uneven, jagged, and, at
a first hearing, eccentric, for the accents fall most frequently on
the short notes and on the naturally _unstressed_ beats, producing
what we call 'syncopation' of a very intricate and highly developed
order. The peculiarity of this syncopation is best explained to the
layman by drawing attention to the way in which the natural rhythms of
the English language are distorted to fit the rhythm of Negro music:
where the white man would sing, '_Go down Moses_,' the Negro chants,
'_Go down, Moses_,' while a phrase like '_See my Mother_,' becomes in
the mouth of the colored singer '_See my Mother_.' These identical
accents are found in even the wordless vowel refrains of native
African songs. Rhythmically the Negro folk-song has far more variety
of accent than the European; it captivates the ear and the imagination
with its exciting vitality and with its sense of alertness and
movement. For this reason Negro rhythms and white man imitations of
them popularized as 'rag-time' have spread far and wide and have
conquered the world to-day. The black man has by nature a highly
organized rhythmic sense. A totally uneducated Negro, dancing or
playing the bones, is often a consummate artist in rhythm, performing
with utter abandon and yet with flawless accuracy. My African
informant, Kamba Simango, thought nothing of singing one rhythm,
beating another with his hands and dancing a third--and all at once!

"Melodically as well as rhythmically, American Negro songs possess
distinct characteristics. One of these is a very prevalent use of the
pentatonic or five-tone scale, corresponding to the black keys of the
piano. If one comes upon a group of colored men unconsciously humming
or whistling at work, most often it is the five-tone scale that utters
their musical thoughts. This scale--along with other scales--is heard
in black Africa also, and in the music of many simple peoples in
different parts of the world. Indeed, just as totally unrelated races
at certain stages of culture seem to trace many of the same
rudimentary symbols and designs on pottery and in textiles, so in
music, the archaic simplicity of the five-tone scale would seem almost
a basic human art-instinct. Yet the highly developed civilization and
the carefully defined musical systems of China and other nations of
the farthest East retain the pentatonic scale in wide use, the Chinese
in their philosophical and mystical theories of music, linking the
five-tones symbolically with the heavenly bodies. It is surprising how
much variety can be achieved with those five tones. One of the most
graceful melodies that I know in all music is the popular Chinese
'lily Song' which I recorded from a Chinese actor and which possesses
the sheer beauty of outline and the firm delicacy of a Chinese
drawing. Indeed, the melodic possibilities of the five-tone scale,
containing a charm absolutely peculiar to that scale, instead of being
limited, seem almost endless.

"American Negro music, is however, by no means restricted to this
tonality, for we find a broad indulgence in the major and minor modes
of modern art, and also there are many songs in which occur tones
foreign to those scales most common of which is perhaps the minor, or
flat, seventh. Then, too, there are songs framed in the scale with a
sharp fourth; and we also find, though more rarely in Negro music, the
augmented interval of three semitones. Those of us who have noted
Arabic folk-songs are accustomed to associate this latter interval
with Semitic music; occurring as it does in African music also it
reminds us of the contact between the black population of Africa and
the Semitic peoples in the white north of the continent whose caravan
trade brought them into communication with the more savage interior,
while their ships touched at ports along the coasts and even landed
colonists on the Eastern shores, where Arab trade across the Red Sea
must have existed since early Bible times. As the age-old slave
traffic brought captives from African tribes out from the heart of
black Africa to the north, we can readily see how, since the very dawn
of history, Negro and Semitic cultures must have touched. One of the
Bantu legends in my collection from Portuguese East Africa is probably
of Semitic origin, and the song which it embodies seems also tinged
with foreign color. Without doubt, Semitic tunes and musical intervals
found their way to African ears, while, on the other side, African
Negro drum-beats and syncopations must have influenced Berber, Moorish
and thus perhaps even Spanish rhythms.

"Another characteristic of the Negro, musically, is a harmonic sense
indicating musical intuition of a high order. This instinct for
natural polyphony is made clear in the recording of the Negro songs in
this collection, wherein I have noted the four-part harmony as sung
extemporaneously by colored boys who had had no musical training
whatever. Some of the most beautiful improvisational part-singing that
I ever heard arose from the throats of utterly illiterate black
laborers in a tobacco factory. One has but to attend a colored church,
whether North or South, to hear men and women break naturally into
alto, tenor or bass parts (and even subdivisions of these), to realize
how instinctively the Negro musical mind thinks harmonies. I have
heard players in colored bands perform one part on an instrument and
sing another while all those around him were playing and singing still
different parts. Yet it has been asserted by some people that the
harmonic sense of the Negro is a product of white environment and that
the black man owes his intuitive gift to the slave-holders who sang
hymns, ballads and popular songs in his hearing! With all due
allowance for white influence, which has been great, of course, the
fact remains that in savage Africa, remote from European culture, many
of the most primitive pagan songs are sung in parts with elaborate
interludes on drums tuned to different pitches. Indeed the music of
the Dark Continent is rich in polyphonic as well as rhythmic
suggestions for the European. Perhaps the war may help to prick some
of the vanity of the white race, which, looking down with self-assumed
superiority upon other races, is quick to condemn delinquencies as
native characteristics, and to ascribe to its own influences anything
worthy; whereas the reverse is, alas, all too often the case.
Certainly the art of Africa, of India, of the Orient and of North
America owes to the Anglo-Saxon only corruption and commercialization.
As for American Negro music, those songs that are most like the music
of the white people--and they are not few--are the least interesting;
they are sentimental, tame, and uneventful both in melody and rhythm.
On the other hand, such melodies as 'Go down Moses,' 'Four and Twenty
Eiders on Their Knees,' 'Run, Mary, Run,' these speak from the very
soul of the black race and no white man could have conceived them.
They have a dignity barbaric, aloof and wholly individual which lifts
them cloud-high above any 'White' hymns that the Negro might have
overheard. Austere as Egyptian bas-relief, simple as Congo sculpture,
they are mighty melodies, and they are Negro."



D. Appleton and Company have published for Professor Ulrich B.
Phillips of the University of Michigan a volume entitled _American
Negro Slavery_.

_Lincoln, the Politician_, by T. Aaron Levy, and _Latest Lights on
Abraham Lincoln_, and _War Time Memories_, works published by Badger
and Revell respectively, are two important volumes throwing light on
the Civil War.

Among the Washington University Studies has appeared a monograph by C.
S. Boucher entitled _The Secession and Cooperation Movements in South
Carolina, 1848 to 1852_.