He stated also that 900 manufacturers had taken contracts in all the
Provinces except Prince Edward Island.  The great ex-Minister of
Munitions himself, reading that report, might have said: "Flavelle?
Yes--he is mighty clever."  And Flavelle had been for one year then a
baronet.  That also was clever; and just in time.  The man who happened
to be in England when war was declared and sold war bacon in August,
1914, was not to be caught napping in 1917; neither after he had got
his title was he to be found slacking in his marvellous work in 1918.
Flavelle earned a title--even after he had taken it.

"Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do!"  Yea, verily.  I have been fairly
well acquainted with Sir Joseph for a good many years.  I do not know
him.  Yet his altogether uncommon personality has almost frozen itself
into my memory.  Whenever I see that thick-shouldered,
whitening-whiskered man of sixty-three hastening afoot up the street,
or driving his little runabout, or wiping his glasses every minute in
some office, or coming becaped and crush-hatted to a concert, I can
hear that high-keyed, slow voice, the calm dispassionate utterance with
never a syllable misplaced, and feel the energy of a nature that of all
men I ever met is the oddest compend of clear thinking, cool judgment,
strength of grip and juvenility of impulse.

The story of his struggle to affluence is not much different in basic
outlines from that of any average, self-made man; differing vastly in
the character of the man.  A year after he was forced out of Lindsay by
boycott because of his Scott Act campaign, the freezing of a car of
potatoes on a Toronto siding almost wiped out his business.  Frankly
and modestly, yet with a sort of fatalistic assurance, he discusses the
kind of man he thinks himself to have become since he lost those
potatoes.  He denies that he has ever been interesting; rather
bewildered that at one time or another people have taken such a
peculiar interest in him.  He talks of his early struggles, the economy
of bacon, and the bigotries of Old Testamentarians in the same concise
language set to the same unvaried monotony of voice.  If you should
fail to follow him, he would almost chide you for not paying attention.

Nearly twenty years ago I met a preacher keenly interested in Flavelle.
He told me a story repeated to him in a sort of admiring deprecation
that very day by a Methodist preacher from Toronto who had a gift for
elevated gossip.  This story was probably out of the Apocrypha, as it
concerned a very worldly episode in the joint experiences of Mr.
Flavelle and another Canadian financier on a visit to Chicago, when the
latter got a wire stating that a certain conditional donation of his to
a small church in Ontario had been unexpectedly covered by the
congregation with the stipulated equal amount, and that it was time to
send the money.  It was said that he showed the wire to Flavelle; that
the two financiers took joint action on the Stock Exchange; and that
the money was wired immediately.  The little details about the
transaction I omit, partly out of deference to the preacher who bandied
the yarn--wherever he got it.  He probably only half believed it
himself.  Even ministers will gossip.

Much has been said about Sir Joseph's religious affairs.  He has had
many.  He has been in publicity over a few, such as the controversy
between the late Dr. Carman, his old adversary, and Rev. George
Jackson, his then pastor, whom he defended.  Flavelle has never
concealed his enthusiasm for the church.  He has entertained many a
celebrated minister.  He has been prominently identified with Missions,
with the Methodist Book Room--that sadly unecclesiastical
corporation--with debates in Conference on amusements and other things,
with Methodist education.  In all these he has practised the text,
"Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do."  The church needed Flavelle's
organizing hand.  He generously lent it.  He could not do otherwise
without being untrue to his own prodigious and inherited passion for a
certain kind of organized religion.

The personal faith of a public man is no business for the critic,
except where that faith becomes public works.  Sir Joseph has been
conspicuously aligned with the militant work of the Church.  It has
been the belief of those who know him, casually or intimately, that his
philanthropic works were inspired by his faith.  But many men have had
as much faith with less works, because of too much dissipating emotion.
Sir Joseph with all his juvenility of impulse had a way of hitching his
emotions up to a job.  The church needed organization.  Other
wealth-getting Methodists were prominent in pews, public donations and
conferences.  Flavelle believed in the seven days' work.  He had a
programme of action for the Sabbath.  Church, social work, business,
were to him very much one thing; all in need of organization to get
results.  He had no use for the idle church and less for what he called
"the dead hand"--referring to the influence of his old adversary, Dr.
Carman, who thought it presumption in a wealthy pork-packer to regard
himself as a critic of clerical authority.

It is tolerably certain that had Flavelle made less of a business of
religion, the public would have had less business condemning him on the
bacon inquiry evidence.  Here was a man who all his life had been a
tremendous organizer of the church and a professor of a peculiarly
active faith, president of a company which in one year had made an
alleged profit of $5,000,000 on a capital investment of less than
$14,000,000.  Bacon at that time--1917--cost the consumer 50 cents a
pound.  The price was considered outrageous.  Bacon afterwards went to
80 cents at a time when nobody blamed Sir Joseph; and when he had
disposed of his interest in bacon altogether.  But the alleged
extortion of this powerful and baroneted Christian stuck in the public
mind.  Bacon was the pioneer in exposed "profiteering."  O'Connor's
report was made public at a time when it was yet the private property
of the Cabinet.  There was politics here.  And the Premier was away.
Other men afterwards made much more amazing profits that never were
mentioned in the press; men who never went to church; who had never in
public said such words as "let war profits go to the hell where they
belong."

It was not the actual profit, but the alleged hypocrisy of Flavelle
that roused the detestation of a large section of the public.  And to
the end of his life this man will never erase from the minds of many
people the notion that he was of all profiteers the worst, because the
most hypocritical.

Then there was the baronetcy.  For a man who had preached Christ so
much this seemed a thin business.  A man's Christianity, if he works
hard at it, becomes advertised without posters.  The world that
mistrusts the church on principle, that only waits the chance itself to
profiteer and to get social preferment, is quick to anathematize the
man who in a big way seems to corelate church, profits and society.

The public are no longer concerned, neither did they understand at the
time, whether the Davies Co. made 5.05 cents a pound on bacon or 5.05
minus overhead charges, 4.1.  Here was the first "sinner" caught;
sentimentally lynch him.  It made no difference then what had been the
man's serious work in philanthropic organization and in public service;
or that for war production he had offered the Wm. Davies plant to the
Government to operate at so much percentage to the company; or that
Flavelle himself had no connection with the management and at the time
concerned knew very little about it.  The public appetite did not want
extenuating facts.  It wanted a victim.  Certain other interests,
curbed by Sir Joseph in the matter of prices for munition contracts,
wanted revenge.  Under the old system of contracts these men had made a
fairly good start at plundering the nation in its extremity.  Between
the long-suffering public, who thought they had a reason for hating
Flavelle, and the profiteers who really had such a reason, Sir Joseph
had an experience that would have tested any man's Christianity.

However, he made no protest; did not resign his post or leave the
country, but worked on.  The time came when he could have said, "Et tu,
Brute!" to men who with no record for helping the church or organizing
to help humanity had profited far more prodigally than the Wm. Davies
Co.  But he kept silence.  He believed in his conscience that the
company buying hogs at competitive prices, and selling in a protected
market was ethically A1 at Lloyds.  He still believes so.  His
enthusiasm for the company has not waned.  He admires it even to a
point of emotion.  The company was not his, but he had made it.  From
the day that William Davies drove to Flavelle's house in an old open
buggy and asked him to sell out his provision business to manage the
company, till the day it produced about 100 million pounds of bacon
alone, in a year, he had been its energizing head.  The Wm. Davies Co.
was but the main thing from which he made his money.  Its stock was not
sold on the markets.  There was never any need of capital except what
came from the business conducted by Flavelle.  There was no wit and
philosophy in "The Letters of a Pork Packer to His Son" that could have
instructed him in the shrewd business of making a great commercial
concern out of a little business.  His success in Canada was relatively
equal to that of any Swift in Chicago.  Multiply it by the ratio of
population and see.  In one year during the war the Wm. Davies Co. had
a bacon output of forty million dollars.

But Flavelle never can be judged by bacon.  He could have done as well
at railways or banking or law.  He did even better at munitions when
there were no profits, not even a salary.  He did as well at any other
form of public service.  No man can justly judge him by commercial
success.  He invested--himself--in everything to which he set his hand,
with the one exception of the now defunct _Toronto News_, which he left
to the management of other people.  He invested the same self capital
in the commercial concern and in public service.

Any patient who has been in the Toronto General Hospital will tell you
what a wonderful institution it is.  He may not know who made it
possible, or whose genius for order and perfection of mechanism it
expresses.  Without Flavelle, Toronto, instead of one of the greatest
hospitals in the world, would have had just a good hospital.  Almost a
village was pulled down to make room for it, on a site that would suit
the medical needs of the University.  It needed a strong will to put it
there, against the opinions of other people; a great hospital on the
end of a slum!  The same will put the great "Methodist Book Room" where
it is--against the wish of a majority.

Flavelle was Chairman of the Commission that reorganized the University
of Toronto.  He had no desire for the work.  The late Goldwin Smith was
already chairman, much disliking Flavelle for some editorial about him
in the _Toronto News_.  The old professor was feeble.  The Commission
asked Flavelle to replace him.  He consented.  If they thought he was
the man, he was willing to do the work.  And it was thoroughly done, so
far as a business brain could direct the reconstruction of a concern in
which business system is the anatomy, not the life.

No man could sit at a conference with Flavelle and not think hard; or
accept a duty from his committee and not discharge it.  He demanded on
behalf of the public--service.  No man ever sat on a committee with him
who had time for badinage.  That man with the slow, high voice and the
steady look was judging other men by results.  Men came to believe that
when there was a public task to perform, Flavelle was the man to take
it.  He was almost forced into service, often by the public indolence
of other men.  Canada has always played the professional grandstand
method of getting things done for the public.  Before the advent of
Rotary and Kiwanis Clubs our two chief cities systematically advised
the humble philanthropist without pull to go to such men as Flavelle,
Edmund Walker, one of the Masseys, E. R. Wood, J. C. Eaton, Thomas
Shaughnessy, Herbert Ames and P. S. Meighen--because these men were in
the habit of doing or giving or organizing for the public interest,
which is supposed to be a game for experts, not amateurs.

Flavelle's investment in things that made him no money was one of great
ability, hard work and conscience.  His returns on such capital were in
the efficiency and usefulness of things which he had helped to create;
the need for which he had observed as clearly and calmly as ever he had
foreseen the scope of a great business.

Yet for much of his life he has been a creature of impulse, powerfully
attracted by things not in business.  He left his seat once in a great
Buffalo hall to stand at the door that he might judge the effect of a
certain decrescendo from a choir.  To a group of musical enthusiasts in
Chicago he suddenly suggested a trip to the Cincinnati May Festival.
Speaking to the boys of Upper Canada College, he drew from his pocket a
piece of putty to illustrate the plasticity of character.  Standing
amid heaps of luggage at the docks in St. John, he looked at the
immigrant sheds and said, "What a very human picture!"  Pocketing the
proof of an hospital article, which as proprietor of the _Toronto News_
and Chairman of the Hospital Board he had withdrawn from publication,
he said to the reporter, "Old man, a place of suffering should not be
described in the language of the racetrack."  When Pastor Wagner,
author of "The Simple Life", was in Toronto, he was the guest of Mr.
Flavelle, who for a time was as much absorbed in the peasant
philosopher as he often was in the "Meditations" of Thomas à Kempis.

Considering these impulses to express himself, it is not hard to
understand how Sir Joseph came to say to the Toronto Board of Trade
that war profits should go to the hell to which they belonged.  He was
speaking under a sense of emotion.  All through his enormously
successful career he had been energized by a sudden enthusiasm to take
hold of something, and afterwards to make it go.  "Whatsoever thy hand
findeth."

Flavelle's hand found many things.  Among them was the _Toronto News_,
his one recorded failure.  This also was an impulse; precisely the same
as had led him years before to subscribe $5,000 to a fund for the
better education of the Tory party.  The _News_ cost him one hundred
times as much, for much the same reason on a larger scale; and he lost
it.  But he has never regretted the loss, because he gained the
experience.  The _News_ did a valuable work.  But its rather Utopian
resurrection had a sad sequel in Toryism such as Flavelle never could
have endorsed, and its ultimate extinction seemed to prove that
newspapers cannot be operated by ideals.

Again, reconstructing enthusiasm followed him to Ottawa.  He went there
at the instigation of the Imperial Government.  Whether he himself made
the original suggestion of the need, I do not know.  But he obeyed the
need when he saw it.  Impulse drove him to meet it in the greatest work
of public organization ever done in so short a time in this country,
except the sending of the First Contingent.

Flavelle had never liked Ottawa.  Ordinarily he had a sort of contempt
for its waste of time and its dissipation of morality.  It is not
conceivable that he would have taken Munitions under any Canadian
department.  Nor was it necessary.  Canada was to produce munitions for
much more than the Canadian Army.

The work was vast and varied; the man at the head of it capable,
exacting and impartial.  His sole aim was to produce and to export
munitions at a price high enough to attract industry and low enough to
prevent profiteering.  For three years he was the superman of Canada's
industrial fabric.  The C.M.A. and the Department of Trade became mere
annexes to munitions, at a time when Davies' bacon clamoured for
ship-room needed by Flavelle munitions.

Official Ottawa had never known a man like this.  He was not popular.
The Government had no control of him.  Ottawa had never cared for
super-men.  Flavelle was there without politics.  He had a department
greater than any in the Administration.  He was never responsible to
Parliament.  Ministers to him were not necessary.  He had no favours to
ask of members.  He never even looked in at the Commons which he would
like to have reformed.  People sometimes ask why such a man does not go
into Parliament.  Impossible.  He regards government as sheer business,
when it is often a passing show.  Foster's Business Conference that
never met would have caused him to discharge the department for
incompetency.  Sir Thomas White had no desire to lift his eyes unto the
hill Flavelle, the super-Minister who for years had been a critic of
his own party, and now believed it more inept than ever in spite of the
great work of the Finance Minister.  Sir Sam Hughes had never wanted
Flavelle.  There was a good reason.  Sir Sam had started the munition
industry in Canada as a branch of war, not as a department of mere
business.  Flavelle was all business.  War was business.  There was the
rub.  The nearer the war came to a climax, the more men like Flavelle
at home became part of the machinery.  Foster never could have salaamed
to this super-man of trade and commerce.  Did even Sir Robert Borden
ever feel comfortable with him?  Back from Europe in a fit of impulse
more powerful than he had ever known, impressed by the success of
Coalition in England, Sir Joseph wanted to see it established in
Canada.  The nation was united for munitions; why not for national
business?  The Premier was away in the West.  Sir Joseph wired him
asking permission to urge coalition at a certain public dinner.  There
was no response.  Evidently the Government wanted no advice from a man
who had nothing whatever to do with it and represented merely big
business.

Something must have caused the Premier to treat Sir Joseph coolly.
Afterwards at the bacon investigation there was cause for a change in
temperature.  The Premier had been negligent about some documentary
evidence extenuating to the Flavelle presentation of the case.  The two
had warm words.  Sir Joseph told the Premier one thing which, as it was
repeated to me without reference to use in publication, had better be
omitted here.  But it was scathing.  Sir Joseph is no mean master of
the kind of language that hurts.  But he has the Christian
spirit--which in this case he laid aside.  I should like to know what
the Premier said to Sir Joseph; and precisely what were the Premier's
opinions, before and after, concerning the baronetcy.

In his quiet moments Sir Joseph does not rebuke himself more than he
regrets the moral myopia of other people.  I think he is somewhat
disillusioned as to what it is worth to gain a good deal of the world
at the risk of a lot of people thinking he has lost his soul.  He does
not believe that his soul was ever in danger of being lost.  Often he
goes to rugby games.  In this he sees again the virtue of struggle,
probably wishing he himself had played rugby in youth.

"When a man gets old," he said lately, "he loves to sit at home."

But Sir Joseph, for all his whitening whiskers and his impatience with
the shortcomings and animosities of the world, is not yet old.  He has
the strength of two men, and a power of administration possessed by few
men in public office in any country.  He has lost some of his bubbling
enthusiasm for the humanities.  The last thing he will lose must be his
faith in himself: and that is very far off.

"Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do . . . ."

Sir Joseph Flavelle has yet a strong hand.  What remains that he will
do with all his might?  If he so desires, more of service on behalf of
the public good in the ten years he has left than many men accomplish
in a strenuous lifetime.

It is time we learned the difference between a public pirate and an
organizing servant of the public.  Take away from this man his public
church business, his power to make money, his human vanity over an
hereditary title, and we still have left the story of a big life, much
of it spent in doing good for the sake of other people.  You cannot
efface that strange personality; that desire after all the admiration
of his wonderful ability to administer him mentally "one good swift
kick."  But you will never mentally kick a man of such powerful good to
his country.




NO FATTED CALVES FOR PRODIGAL SONS

HON. SIR HENRY DRAYTON

Were I a novelist sketching a character for Henry Herbert Drayton I
would have him, except in one item, just about all that he is not.  He
should be unmarried, live with his maiden aunt, most of his time make
very little money and depend for his income upon winning about three
good criminal prosecutions a year; the rest of his time to be spent
reading up criminal psychology and taking his aunt to see pictures.
The commonplace scene-shifter who places behind people the scenery of
real life has bungled Sir Henry, thereby robbing him of much interest.
What a net a man with his classic patience and enormous ferret instinct
for minutiae could have woven about some cunning but once too often
embezzler!  Instead we have Drayton, K.C., pushing himself methodically
through a series of legal metamorphoses, at each change getting one
convolution higher, by public corporation solicitorships and county
attorneyships, burrowing into hydro-electric affairs for Toronto until
he becomes Dominion Railway Commission chairman--seven years at
that--and at last steps out into the full glare of undramatic notoriety
by taking office as Minister of Finance in 1919.

Well, in that capacity he has rubber-stamped millions of people in the
region of their pockets whom he would have missed altogether had he
been taking his maiden aunt to the picture galleries between detective
cases.  Besides, he has three or four children, and I'm sure that when
some lady writes the cinema of his life she will portray him as a
hugely devoted papa with perfect young geniuses of children who yearn
to spend papa's money upon the very luxuries against which he is
warning the parents of other young people.

Once,--it was something to do with Niagara power--I heard Mr. Drayton
weaving a dull dry web of apparently trivial evidence about some very
important people.  It seems to me that one William Mackenzie was a
particular object; if not he should have been.  Once you admit that
Drayton belongs to corporation instead of criminal law--though
sometimes there's precious little difference--Mackenzie and Adam Beck
are just the sort of audacious public-interest performers that a man
like him should be after.  He seemed to have an insatiable capacity for
picking out little filaments of dry-as-dust technique from which on
behalf of an impersonal client like the city of Toronto he could manage
to inveigle a web of silk about any anti-civic despot who regards a
city as a thing to be worked for dividends, and people merely as common
economic dots and carry ones.

He impressed me then as a born Englishman.  He had the neat, chiseled
accents and the imperturbable air of a perfect gentleman, with a touch
of nonchalance and the suggestion that if at the time of adjournment he
had just got to the up stroke of a small "i", he could leave it there
and come back to-morrow, beginning precisely where he had left off.
But he was not born in England; only educated there--which is
something.  A few more of our public men would be the better for a
little Harrowing.

Once into public finance, Sir Henry does not propose to be a mere
reverberation of Sir Thomas White.  Never have we had two such drastic
highwayman budgets as those which Drayton flung at the people in 1920
and 1921.  From the tone of any supplementary remarks which he feels
like making in order to amuse us while he lightens our pockets, it may
be worse next year and thereafter unless we have a care.  This man has
never uttered a soothing phrase since he took office.  He has made no
attempt to furbelow our finances.  He is not even concerned about the
precise political effect of his taxes and tariffs.  We never had a
Finance Minister who so disregarded the Gladstonian principle, that if
figures cannot lie they may at least make interesting romances of the
truth.  In the two years that he has been budgeteering, this dapper,
tailored man with the sailor hat and the truculent jaw and the heavy
outskirts to his eyes has treated a budget as though it were a Santa
Claus stocking to be talked about a long while in advance, so that when
it comes it may be all the more significant.

Such budgets as he gives us are not the work of a true Conservative.
They bear no interesting bigotries of the party.  They deal only
secondarily with tariffs.  I believe Sir Henry knows that most people
regard a tariff as a very oblique way of reaching the pocket.  People
compute tariffs and argue about them.  Only the farmers can make them
into frightful realities.  Nobody understands a tariff anyway when it
comes to the schedule.  Its chief use is for winning and losing
elections.

But Sir Henry's admonishing finger goes up, and we are hushed to see
what is the really cruel thing he intends to show us next, that will
hurt just like a thumbscrew.  He smiles and flips down a long scroll
of--direct and drastic taxes quite shocking to contemplate.

"This is going to hurt you all, good people," he says.  "But I may as
well be honest about it.  I am not a financial Christian Scientist.
You will all feel better after you are properly hurt."

Thus far we remember chiefly how it hurt.  We are still hoping to feel
better.

Drayton had some grounding in practical finance long before he took any
of the detail jobs that have had so much to do with computations and
costs.  We are reminded of a little episode of his early youth in
Toronto.

Harry Drayton and Frank Baillie were schoolboys together.  They lived
on the same street.  A neighbour was about to have an auction sale of
his goods, but looking over the lot he made a present of a punching bag
to Harry and Frank, no doubt because he foresaw that they would both
have strenuous lives.  The boys thanked him and took away the bag.  On
the way home Harry said to Frank:

"Do you really want a share in that punching bag?"

"Not so keen as I might be," said Frank.  "Why?"

"Because he had something else I'd rather have.  Remember that little
printing press?"

"Oh, what he uses to print calling cards on?"

"How would you like to go snooks with me and get that, Frank?"

"Well, it certainly would be swell to print our own calling cards,
Harry."

"He wants $6.50 for it, though."

"Oh!  That's different.  Here, let me sell the bag, anyhow.  That'll be
a start."

Frank, already budding into finance, sold the bag for one dollar and
twenty-five cents.

"Well, we're still shy $5.25, Frank," said the coming Finance Minister
of Canada.

"Yes, and it's your move, Harry."

"All right, I've got an idea.  You wait."

Next day the sprouting financiers met, when Harry had a fine steel
trout rod.

"See that, Frank?  Got that from dad.  Made me a present of it--at my
own suggestion.  What is she worth?"

"Don't you want to fish, Harry?"

"Not if you can sell the rod."

Frank took it and looked it over.

"Sure!" he said.  "I'll sell that for the company."

There being no guile in either of these young men, the sequel is that
Frank sold the trout rod for $5.25 and Harry proudly took the entire
$6.50 to the neighbour, paid for the press and had it taken home to his
attic, where it must be presumed the two of them spent rainy days
printing calling cards for Draytons and Baillies.

Canada took very little interest in Drayton till he came to be Chairman
of the Railway Commission.  But by that time the said Commission was no
longer the grand court it had been in the days of J. Pitt Mabee.  It
settled more disputes than ever and settled them as well as ever.
Drayton had almost twice the mileage to cover that Mabee had in 1903.
He did it with tireless exactitude.  He was less concerned with the
ethical issues at stake in decisions between railways and communities
than with the unethical fact of such a prodigal lot of lines having
been built at all to give trouble to the nation.  We were just getting
to the end of the race of the railroads, when thousands of foreigners
had been dumped into the country with shovel and pick, and thousands of
miles of new railway built that would shortly be a charge on the
country.

An able writer a few years ago wrote a series of articles in a Canadian
publication headed, "Is there a Railway Muddle?"  Being himself a
railwayman he seemed to think that the muddle, if any, was chargeable
to conditions over which the railways had little or no control.

Mr. Drayton, shrewdly traversing the network of those prodigally built
railways, felt no need of asking any such question.  He carried on into
the slump in business, and on into the war when the Railway War Board,
practising a sort of church union by cutting out competition and
re-routeing traffic for the sake of getting war haulage done as quickly
as possible, left very little for the Drayton court to settle.  But
there was a bigger settlement to come later, and Drayton was to have a
hand in it.

As Chairman of the Commission he never made a statement that was good
for a headline, or coined an epigram, or lost his temper, or spluttered
into print.  But on a certain occasion, before retiring from the
Commission, Sir Henry put on record a number of things that the people
of this country read with acute and sustained interest.  This was the
report of the Smith-Drayton-Acworth Commission for the purpose of
finding out whether the Canadian Northern and the Grand Trunk Pacific
could ever manage to pay their own debts, including interest on
multi-millions borrowed from abroad, or whether, debts and all, they
should be handed over to the people of Canada?

During the war this nation had many commissions.  Their very names are
mostly forgotten.  Most of them committed themselves to nothing.  This
commission to investigate railroad bankruptcy was fated to be very
different.  Much of the difference was in Sir Henry Drayton who, had he
been asked the question, might have saved the country the cost of the
Commission.

But of course he was prejudiced, and against the roads.  He knew those
roads.  The minority report of the chief of the New York Central made
no difference to the grim bulldog judgment of the Chief Railway
Commissioner--that the two secondary systems of Canadian railways were
alike and for much the same causes constitutionally bankrupt, and
should therefore be given the nationalizing cure.

What more disagreeable qualification could a man have for being made
Minister of Finance?  The air holes that White had skated around,
Drayton proposed to go right over and to take the people with him.
What the common stock of these roads might be worth was for Sir Thomas
to find out.  By the time Sir Henry went to the national ledger that
matter was all adjusted and the thing left was to raise the money.

There's a divinity that shapes our ends even when they do not meet.
The little Houdini of calculations was at last into a predicament where
it seemed that he never could figure himself out.  One fancies him
gazing intently over the Finance Department of whose precise technique
he knew nothing as yet, and saying to himself:

"Well, White did a wonderful turn.  I don't believe the audience will
like mine half as well--at first.  No audiences ever do.  I'm bound to
be more or less unpopular because I don't know how to act a bit like
Tetrazzini."

The great organized orgy was over, when the dollars followed the drum
and the drum thumped at every crossroad; when a Victory Bond in every
top commode drawer was more necessary than a bottle in every cellar.
The whole nation, four times tagged for Victory, was once more tagged
for reconstruction.  Done with credits to England for purchase of war
material in Canada, we were invited to extend credits to war-swept
nations in Europe who would be sure to want things made in Canada to
help put them on President Wilson's new map of self-determination.
Even profiteers now admitted everything to be abnormal.  The whole
country was like a milkfed pumpkin at the fair.  War wages inclined
every man to become a profiteer.  The land was teeming with war money
and denuded of necessary goods.  People who used to be content with
good wages, a plain rented home and a bottle of beer, went out after
short hours, high wages, French heels, $300 coats and motor-cars.  It
was part of the emancipation of people for which soldiers had not died.

"Er--if you need me, telephone, old chap," one fancies Sir Thomas
saying as he carried Sir Henry's luggage to his room.  "But I'm sure
you are the man for the job.  I really have to go back to private
finance.  However, the super-tariff on imports of luxuries is one thing
with which you will feel at home, I am sure.  Quite suited to your
temperament, Sir Henry."

In one of Scott's novels a gentleman named Front de Boeuf pulls out a
Jew's tooth every time he wants more money.  Both our national dentists
knew that a super-tariff on anything is the very thing that makes a
large number of well-to-do people want it.  People bought luxuries in
this country and growled at the high cost of necessities.  Most folk
feel rather proud of a big price for a coat or a gown or a
Chesterfield, if they can get even by skimping on the price of butter
and potatoes.  Low-value money and visions of Utopia had played far
worse havoc with the people than legalized liquor had ever done.  And
one of the worst features of the situation was that the bulk of our
luxury buying was done in the country which had the only remaining
standard of value on the exchanges.  Canada had convenient access to
the country which alone had a surplus of factory goods.  Our tremendous
buying average in the American market was even used as propaganda in
the interest of keeping the peace with Britain.

Hence the devil of exchange and Drayton's dilemma.  The things Drayton
said to this country even before he presented his first budget were as
comfortable as what the doctor prescribes when you are overfed.  On
went the unpopular luxury tax and sales tax.  The general principle was
that the more people bought, the more they got out of living, and the
more they should pay for the privilege.  It was not merely a tax on
improvements, but an impost on being alive.  Accustomed as we had been
to war taxes which never came off, this was a sanctioned way of
"passing the buck" such as we had never known.  The advantage is that
when we pay 14 cents for a box of matches that used to cost five cents,
we can read "5 cents War Excise Tax Paid" on the wrapper.

Sir Henry Drayton had no superb suavity with which to beguile those who
made complaints.  He heard the howlings of all the babies in the
national dormitory and went ahead.  He did not impress us as a
financier, but as a plain doctor of homely common sense.  He said in
public many things which threw much instructive light upon our buying
and selling.  He spoke some blunt but kindly truths even in the United
States at whose supremacy in our markets his policy was aimed.

"The men who save the world," says _The Onlooker_, "are those who work
by rule of thumb; who do the day's work by the day's light and advance
on chaos and the painful dark by inches; in other words, the practical
men."

Such a motto might be Drayton's crest.  He is very practical; too much
so to be an interesting personality to the average man.  But by his
dull and diligent practicality he has done rather more than his bit in
helping to re-establish Canada.  He would, if he could, cut our imports
from the United States in half in order to rectify exchange.  Whenever
he dies the Canadian $ par on exchange will be found graven upon his
heart.

Drayton's tariff tour was one of the most characteristic things he ever
did.  In this, however, there may have been an element of politics.  A
travelling tariff commission taking evidence in almost every village
with a smokestack from coast to coast must have had some real object.
But Sir Henry had cleaned up most of the possibilities in direct
taxation; it was time he tackled the tariff, even though he knew it was
largely a show to satisfy the people that the most patient investigator
in the world at the head of a small court had taken evidence on what
every Tom and Dick had to say for and against in any part of the
country outside of the Yukon.  Had it been practicable to hold a
session on Great Bear Lake, to determine the trade relations between
the copper-kniving Eskimos and the meat-swapping Yellow Knife Indians,
Sir Henry would have done it.

Such vast patience is phenomenal even in Drayton.  One almost fears
that he is becoming interested in a Federal election.  If so, the end
is in sight.  The day we partyize Sir Henry we shall lose one of the
oddest and rarest personal identities we ever had.  But we can better
afford to lose his personal identity in his party service than to lose
both in putting into the Finance Department in 1922 some idealistic
experimenter in the efficacy of Free Trade.




THE PERSONAL EQUATION IN RAILROADING

EDWARD WENTWORTH BEATTY, K.C.

The main thing that E. W. Beatty, K.C., did to help win the war was to
become President of the C.P.R.  And he did it well.  A glance at this
polished pony engine of a chief executive suggests that he has never
done anything but well, and that he is the kind of man likely without
preachments to stimulate well-doing in other people.

I first met this self-controlled master of executives not long after he
became President.  He was most cordial; as Shaughnessy had been
austere.  Under such a direct impression it seemed that I had at last
found a man who would make the inexorable old C.P.R. become a golden
door to humanity.  Of course I was mistaken.  That kind of man is born
often enough, but he seldom stays with his birthright.  I knew that the
railway of railways was no school for the humanities; but this
university graduate, Chancellor of Queen's, distinguished counsel and
potential eminent judge, bachelor, Canadian born, every inch an athlete
and as rugged as Carpentier, seemed to my aroused imagination one who
would be as much bigger than the stodgy C.P.R. as that system was
greater than others of its kind.

Beatty has not been at his new job long enough yet to prove what I
suspect--that I was wrong.  But he has been long enough with it to know
that the surging ideals and aspirations of a young, healthy man in his
own office are pretty rudely shaken down by the practical operation of
a great system in a time of financial difficulty.

We talked for nearly an hour.  He seemed to have the time and the
interest.  His big office was as quiet as a library.  His desk was
almost devoid of signs of labour.  Not a paper to be seen that required
immediate attention; every item neatly disposed; himself smoking--a
fairly strong pipe; scarcely a telephone call to interrupt.  He seemed
the sculptor's embodiment of strength in reserve; a man who never could
be tuckered or peevish or unable to detect either the weakness of an
opponent, the penetration of a critic or the need of a man who came to
ask him for advice.  There was a big instant kindliness about him that
would have won the cordiality of the stolidest of interviewers, as we
talked about railways, government ownership, the needs of journalism
and the value in business of the personal equation--his own phrase
which he repeated so often that it seemed to contain something of
prophetic intention.  He paid his venerating respects to the founders
of the C.P.R., but he seemed to have more enthusiasm for Lord
Mountstephen than for Van Horne.

I heard him say some strong, sincere things about the uselessness of
rich men who would sooner use their money on the gratification of
vanity than upon public service.  He meant that.  He repeated such
things at various interviews.  In doing so he proved that he himself
had always made a god of very hard work, discipline and self-denial,
for the sake of giving his own personality a square deal, without
regard to the money he could make.  He had the strength and he used it.
As solicitor and chief counsel he became almost a machine to win cases
for the railway.  He must win, and know how to lose.  Fighting a
corporation's battles is a good way to believe that the system can do
no wrong.  But I don't think Beatty was ever blind to the native
defects of the C.P.R.

Railroading is a great university of character.  Nothing else in our
practical affairs attracts such a variety of men.  None of our
railwaymen have climbed to the peak of the railway operation business
quite so successfully and so Canadianly as E. W. Beatty.  Most other
transportation magnates we have imported from either Scotland or the
United States.  This one is Canadian from his cradle up.  He embodies
the best characteristics of the average Canadian in a very high degree.
He is an amateur athlete whom hard work has never been known to make
weary.  At the end of any perfect day of hard work he has as much
strength in reserve as he had in the morning when he came to it.  Even
in his talk he wastes never a word, states everything clearly and in
forcible language, but is seldom curt at the expense of courtesy.  He
does not talk like any big American executive whose equal or superior
he may be in administration.  He copies nobody.  The day's work has
always been his exemplar.  He has no desire for mere personal success.
Years ago he could have made more money by exporting his brains to the
United States.  But he preferred Canada where he has made less money,
justly earned more fame, and where he can continue to do more work that
counts for efficiency in himself and in other people.  He is the kind
of man--like Arthur Meighen--who inspires other men to go in with him
on a heavy task to get it done in a big way.

Beatty's type of mind, though somewhat dry and legal and at times
judicial, is also capable of an immensely quiet enthusiasm that
transmits itself to other people.  He invites discussion, but not
familiarity.  Not personally careful just to maintain traditions, he
profoundly respects the men who created them--and goes ahead to
transact business now, and to hand out decisions immediately, that get
to-day ahead of yesterday and as near as possible to the day after.  He
believes in the square deal in action and in the high common sense of a
decision.  There is no public question upon which his opinion might not
be sanely valuable, though one would never expect him to succeed as a
leader in politics.  As a business reorganizer of McGill University he
is bound to consider a college as a "going concern".  As Chancellor of
Queen's, he upsets all traditions as to the dignity of pure scholarship.

It seemed like a long stride from being Chief Railway Counsel to
becoming Chief Executive.  But to his practical personality the stride
was only a step.  On an average this is no lawyer's job.  Judges in the
United States can preside over big corporations.  The chief executive
of the C.P.R. works.  He must know the system, its men, its technique.
Railroading is a complex of specialities.  A good president must enter
into the spirit of the man who builds a locomotive and of one who
constructs a timetable.

It fell to this first Canadian President that the road ever had to
shoulder a load which would have made the wizard Van Horne read up
Hercules.  Beatty holds the record for getting through with a programme
that would have puzzled either of his two eminent predecessors in that
office.  Shaughnessy at the same age might have done it.  Van Horne
never.  Yet Beatty never could have built the C.P.R.  His brain has no
wizardry in it.  He is a co-ordination of facts that knows not the
meaning of magic.  He is the most matter-of-fact man in any high
executive position in Canada.  The task he undertook was all cut out
for him.  Fate decreed that he should take it.  He never dreamed of
refusing.  And what a task!

The greatest trouble Beatty had to face when he became President was
too much traffic, too little rolling stock, an almost tragic scarcity
of labour and the McAdoo award in wages.  Railroading costs were at an
apex before even munitions costs began to be.  The collapse of railways
in the United States drove a vast amount of traffic over Canadian
roads.  The two younger transcontinental systems were on the verge of
receiverships.  The brunt of the burden fell upon the old C.P.R., which
at that time, in spite of the McAdoo awards was making a heavy profit.
The cash value of traffic handled was colossal.  War work was wearing
the railways down.  New locomotives and cars were hard to get.  Orders
could not be placed outside.  Canada's railways had to depend on
Canada.  Ships could not wait, though submarines could.  Freight must
move.  Two hard winters nearly paralyzed all the systems.  No new lines
were being built.  The old lines were wearing out.  Canada had the
longest hauls of any nation in the world.  Our systems were built for
the long haul.  The railway systems of other countries were demoralized
with wastage, low repairs and enormous traffic.  Even in short-haul
England of the easy climate, there was railway paralysis.  But England
had great gasoline highways and coastal routes when Canada had neither.
It is said in a report of that period, "General Superintendents in
charge of some of the "key" divisions of the big roads have had to work
from 12 to 20 hours a day to keep roadbed, rolling stock and crews up
to top mark."  22,000 Canadian cars were "lost" in the United States in
one winter.  What war left of the railways winter did its best to
debilitate.  Industry stole transportation labour at high wages and
rolled out vast quantities of material that had to be moved, when even
C.P.R. efficiency seemed to be just about obliterated from the chart of
the world's work.

This was no time for any man to pray that he might be made chief
executive of the greatest transportation system in the world; nor a
time for Lord Shaughnessy to continue in that office.  The work was now
too heavy for the autocrat and for a man whose eyesight was bad.  A
successor had to be found.  The directors did it almost automatically.
There was but one man to consider; and he had no experience in any of
the mechanical departments.

Beatty was the man.  The old autocrat himself had said so; and he knew.
Shaughnessy had taken the road from its wizard creator, and made it the
size and efficiency that it was.  There was almost apostolic
succession.  Stories that the Montreal directors favoured one man, the
Toronto directors another, and that Shaughnessy gave the casting vote,
were mere fabrications.  Yet Beatty stated that never in his long years
of experience with the system had he a clear ambition to climb up its
ladder.  He never wanted anything but a large day's work--and he got
many.  But, when he was made Vice-President, he must have known that he
was the man.  Vice-Presidents on the C.P.R. are not necessarily
presidents to be.  One of Beatty's friends travelling with him up from
Three Rivers once bought him a picture postcard with the legend, "No
mother ever picks her son to be a Vice-President."  Beatty smiled it
off.  He probably knew.  This was one of the rare bits of humour that
illustrated the Shaughnessy regime.  His lordship, fond enough of Irish
jokes outside, was never humourous inside the system.  All the humour
in Canadian Pacific was supposed to have died when Van Horne left it.

But now and again a gleam of human insight came from the grim
efficiency of the great system, and at least upon one occasion it
flashed from the legal department.  When the Railway Commission was
almost a new thing under that remarkable square-deal chairman, Joseph
Pitt Mabee, the town of Trois Rivieres, Que., had a suit, through its
Board of Trade, against the C.P.R., involving discrimination in rates.
The counsel for the plaintiff was a French-Canadian who could read, but
not comfortably speak, English.  The further he went the more
bewildered the chairman became, until he ventured to interrupt:

"I have a suggestion to make to my hon. friend who is having difficulty
in getting me to understand the case."

The suggestion was that the solicitor for the railway who had made a
special study of the Board of Trade's argument for the sake of
demolishing it, should himself present that side of the argument in the
clear, concise English of which he is a master; that wherever necessary
the French counsel should correct the statement; and that afterwards
Mr. Beatty should proceed to demolish the argument which he himself had
put up.  The counsel was agreeable.  Mr. Beatty rose to the occasion.
His statement of the case was so satisfactory to the counsel for Trois
Rivieres that he afterwards wondered how Beatty was ever able to
demolish it and win the case.

Beatty has no hobbies.  He cares for no art, collects no curios, has no
great house, drives no big cars; cares not at all for society; thinks
more of the Amateur Athletic Association and the Navy League and the
boys of the Y.M.C.A., the athletic equipment of Queen's University and
the success of Sir Arthur Currie as President of McGill.  He never
travels for pleasure.  When he goes over the C.P.R., expect results.
The average Montrealer does not even know where he lives.  He is said
to spend forty minutes a day, indoor weather, at basketball.  In summer
he camps.  Snapshotted in a sweater he looks like a compromise between
Babe Ruth batting a home run and Hofmann playing the piano.

When Beatty was first a young lawyer in Montreal he was so lonesome for
the city he came from that he used to go down to the station to see the
Toronto train pull in.  He did not dream then that some day he would be
the man that pulls all the trains in; that from his desk he should have
a periscope on the world--every day--the greatest intelligence
department in America.  When he was a school lad in Thorold, afterwards
at the Upper Canada "Prep." (where he got so bad a report that his
father was advised to take him out of school), he had no idea that he
would be Chancellor of Queen's University.

The system and the man.  Determining which most affects the other is
like the old problem of the hen and the egg.  But here, anyhow, is a
great system.  No man venerates it more than Beatty.  He does not even
consent to call it a corporation; prefers to think of it as an
association, imbued with enthusiasm and loyalty.  Now and then he
publicly discusses national ownership; none can do it better.  He did
it at Thorold soon after he was appointed.  He argued it in Ottawa with
Cabinet Ministers.  He did it in Winnipeg.  One suspects that Beatty's
ability to do this was one of his qualifications for the presidency.

A year before Beatty became president a man high up in the system
predicted that the C.P.R. would spend a million dollars to campaign
against Bolshevism.  He failed to foresee that the stolid old bulwark
of things as they are would never need to do any such thing.  All it
needed to spend was Beatty who, within six months of the time he
changed the sign on his door, had convinced the system that a sort of
new optimistic vitality had got hold of it.  There was once a cynical
proverb around those offices: "It's cheaper to buy editors than
newspapers."  One hears very little of it now.  The annual meeting of
the Directors may be fine copy for the _Montreal Gazette_, but the
yearly banquet of the officials is a matter of real public interest,
especially to the young President.  There is a psychology in
this--"association"--that is not a corporation.  How does he gauge it?
From the officials.  He does not visit the Angus shops; though if he
did he would be welcome.  It was an old axiom of Van Horne that what
the head is, so also will the system be.  Beatty extends the axiom--to
include the officials.  He would have them radiate optimism, not
particularly caring that they get it from him.

For the past two years optimism has been needed.  C.P. reports are not
what they used to be.  Even the stock exchanges tell the tale.  But in
comparison with American lines, with other Canadian systems--ah! here
is always some comfort.  Trust Beatty to miss no chance of intimating
that he would much prefer to have real competition from Government
roads.  He fervently hopes for Government ownership to succeed.  C.P.
cannot thrive on weak competition.  He has no fear that any sane
Government will try absorbing the C.P.R.  Even farmers, he thinks,
would soon settle down to a sense of responsibility.  The old pioneer
is a hard organization to make into a tail that does not wag the dog.
Steadily he has advertised to the public that the system is still the
handbook of efficiency; let Government roads imitate.  National
ownership, being impersonal, somewhat Bolshevistic, and very vague,
cannot develop the intensive "super-loyalty" of the big private system
vested in a board of directors, and the chief.

Since ever he became chief Beatty has made this clear; for a purpose.
Did I omit to say that he is the first C.P.R. president without
whiskers; the first with a college degree; the first Canadian born, the
first lawyer, the first bachelor and the first man from Toronto who had
occupied that position; the youngest of all the presidents; that he
used to be an expert at college Rugby; that at Upper Canada "Prep." he
was much addicted to pugilism; not to mention the discarded tilt of his
Fedora?  If so it is because the man himself sets no value on these
things.  His faith is in the collective personality, called the
Canadian Pacific, built up on the Personal Equation.

But Ottawa--what of that?  Almost ever since Ottawa was, the C.P.R. has
been said to own it.  Governments of either party have never been
inhospitable to the benign octopus--centipede it became--that had its
origin in the Parliament of Canada and wrecked one Tory Government.
The penalty of transcontinental railways is that they require to have
mortgages on governments.  Presently the worm turns.  But that usually
costs more money than the mortgage.  We are now paying off the
mortgages of two great systems.  The C.P.R. mortgage was paid long ago.
The President of the C.P.R. is usually regarded as second only to the
Premier in point of national management.  But Premiers and governments
come and go; the President stays on.  Suppose that in the year 19--
there should be a Cabinet mainly of farmers.  Alberta has a farmer
government.  Saskatchewan with a "Liberal" government has a Cabinet
mainly of farmers.  Manitoba sometimes has to remind herself that
Premier Norris is a kind of farmer.  Ontario has a farmer Premier and
more than half a Cabinet of farmers.

This is the age of the farmers' innings.  Suppose that a Cabinet of
super-Agriculturists at the Capital some day should not agree with Mr.
Beatty that farmers when they get responsibilities measure up and
settle down to conservatism.  Such a Cabinet might not remember that
the C.P.R. had really done so very much for the prairies in comparison
with what it has got from the West.  It might decree that a lawyer
President should be called upon to elucidate why he judges that so
efficient a Personal Equation as the C.P.R. should not be
"nationalized", if not government-owned, for the good of the whole
people, and especially of the people whose traffic creates most of the
revenues?

This is merely supposing.  In any case Mr. Beatty would be master of
the occasion.  The lawyer who argued against himself and won at Three
Rivers might be able to put up a more convincing argument to Ottawa
Farmers than Lord Shaughnessy did to the Union Government when he
offered to amalgamate the C.P.R. with the Government roads providing
the management should be C.P.R. and the dividends guaranteed.

But of course this is a merely hypothetical argument.  There may never
be a Farmer Administration in Ottawa.  And if there ever should be, we
may trust to conservative and progressive old C.P.R. to do its share of
injecting a "sense of responsibility" into a Farmer Cabinet to help it
measure up and settle down, even if some farmer should buy C.P. shares
enough to get himself elected as a director.  As it stands to-day in
the estimation of the travelling public, who may or may not care a
copper about the personality of its rugged and efficient lawyer
president, the Canadian Pacific is the one greatest proof that Canada
needs no revolution which will interfere with the morale of that
system.  In fact so long as the C.P.R. holds its own an economic
revolution in Canada is impossible.




A BOURGEOIS MASTER OF QUEBEC

SIR LOMER GOUIN

Early in January, 1917, a remarkable dinner was held in Toronto, the
first of its kind ever held in that city of Orange Walks.  Protestants
and Catholics sat side by side.  They applauded the same sentiments.
Orator after orator dug into the mines of national idioms.  They
cracked jokes and told stories and worked up climaxes.  The three
hundred rose again and again with glasses of orangeade, and
Apollinaris, toasting--Quebec, Ontario, and United Canada.  They waved
napkins and cheered and sang again and again "For he's a jolly good
fellow".  A Methodist minister sat at the back of the room next a
Congregationalist preacher and pretended to unwrap a _de luxe_ cigar.
Orangemen sat at the same table with Catholics.  Macs hobnobbed with
'eaus.  They autographed one another's menus.  The books of songs were
bilingual--French and English.  "God Save the King" was sung in both
languages.  "O Canada" was done in French.  Methodist orators vied with
French speakers.  Col. George Denison sat next Gen. Lessard.  They
fraternized as soldiers.  The Methodist local-preacher Premier of
Ontario sat with the Roman Catholic Premier of Quebec.  Sentiment ran
high.  But no French-Canadian was so emotional as N. W. Rowell, who
glorified the heroes of Courcellette; and no Anglo-Canadian was quite
so stolid, serious and impressive with homely common sense as Sir Lomer
Gouin, the Premier of Quebec.  This man spoke slowly, massively, almost
gutturally like a Saxon, in fluent but accented English.  He was far
less excitable than the Premier of Ontario on the same subject:

  THE RACE UNITY OF CANADA
      PREFIGURED IN
    THE BONNE ENTENTE

Three hundred public-spirited men of whom eighty came from Quebec were
as one family on this.

At one in the morning the concomity broke up.  Not a drop of vin or
liqueur in any form had been served.  The enthusiasm was, therefore, as
natural as the tide of the St. Lawrence, which in the form of the great
lakes and Niagara does its best to put its arms round the neck of
Ontario before it cuts through the heart of Quebec.  To the pure
imagination it was somewhat as though a procession of St. Jean Baptiste
had suddenly dreamed it was an Orange Walk.

This unusual Entente was held between the rancours of the bilingual
dispute of 1916 and the Quebec revolt against conscription in 1917.
Those present who doubted the sincerity of passionate speakers anchored
a timidly steadfast hope to the practical, broad-angled Premier of
Quebec, who, had he sat between Mr. Bourassa and the Premier of
Ontario, would have inclined his ear to Ontario.

Nothing is more certain than that four French-Canadian leaders, had
they been given or had they asked for the opportunity and had acted
together, could have put a different face on Quebec's relation to the
war.  Four men namable in that capacity are, Sir Lomer Gouin, Sir
Wilfrid Laurier, Ernest Lapointe, and Cardinal Begin.  Of these, Gouin
was at that time the most able.  For ten years he had been
uninterruptedly Premier of Quebec with a moral guarantee that he could
occupy the Premiership by an overwhelming majority until he should be
gathered to his fathers.

Again and again rumour slated Sir Lomer for Ottawa.  He wisely
declined.  He had a peasant's attachment to "le pays" and its white
villages.  In Quebec he was the Chief of Ministers, the little elected
father of his country.  In Ottawa he would have been perhaps a grand
Minister of Public Works building docks in Halifax, customs houses in
British Columbia, post-offices on the prairies, armouries in Ontario
and court-houses in Quebec.  Yes, there would be surely armouries in
Ontario.

I met Sir Lomer but once, in his office in the Parliament Buildings.
There was no particular reason for seeing him except the pleasure of
encountering a descendant of the people who so gallantly fought under
Montcalm so that posterity could enjoy a city in part exclusively
English and for the most part idiomatically French.  A few evenings
previous I had talked on the Terrace to a glowing Nationalist, a young
expert in cynical idealism, who spoke very curtly about the Premier.
An ardent patriot, he talked freely and interestingly, as we gazed out
at the blue-hazed domes of the noble hills that mark the valley of St.
Lawrence.  The roofs of Old Lower Town were sizzling in heat.  Drowsy,
lumber-laden bateaux and ocean-liners crept and smoked about the docks.
Beyond the grey-scarped citadel the vesper bells of parish after parish
clanged a divine discord into the calm of the great river.

"What do you think of Gouin?" I asked him.

A cynical smile flicked over the Nationalist's face.  For a moment he
did not answer.

"Pardonnez-moi," I mumbled.  "I am Anglais."

"Oh!" he said, sharply, laughing.  "Have you seen the Montcalm suite in
the Chateau here?  Do so.  The C.P.R. discovered an old bed and some
creaky chairs said to have been used by the great general.  They placed
them in a suite of rooms which they rent to curiosity-hunting Americans
who sentimentalize over history at twenty-five dollars a day.  Such is
Quebec when she is commercialized into a highway for tourists."

"But what has that to do with Sir Lomer Gouin?"

"Directly--nothing.  Sir Lomer is not even a director of the C.P.R., or
of the Bank of Montreal, though one never knows what he may do with his
money and his talents when he gets tired of manipulating elections."

"Oh, you mean that Gouin--does not reflect the idealism of Quebec; its
love of the land that bore our fathers, its poetic isolation among the
provinces----?"

He blew a shaft of cigarette smoke.

"Sir Lomer," he said, "is Chairman of the Board of Directors of the
Province of Quebec.  His chief duty is to go about inspecting and
improving properties and to sit at directors' meetings declaring
provincial dividends instead of deficits."

I remarked that since Quebec is so prosperous and so large and populous
with so many cradles, the Premier need not perhaps vex himself deeply
about ideals such as the French language in schools outside the
province.

"What!" was the reply, as a glass banged upon the table.  "Would you
cage us in here like Indians on a reservation?  Has the French-Canadian
nation no rights outside Quebec?"

"What would you do?" I asked him.  "What could you do?"

"Secede!" he exclaimed.  "Become the Sinn Fein of Canada."

"What about the Pope of Rome?"

"Has as much to do with Quebec," he laughed icily, "as the President of
France.  If the Pope should issue instructions to the bishops of
Quebec, asking the clergy to educate the people of Quebec on their duty
to go to war or to vote for either of the old line parties, the people
would openly disregard them.  We would as much resent the interference
of Rome in our affairs as the American colonies did the tyranny of
George the Third."

Here was the superb inconsistency of the French mind wedded to a single
magnificent idea.  This Nationalist admitting the possibility of
secession, made sure that it would not be to the United States which
puts the French language on a par with Choctaw.  When I suggested as a
recipe for national unity that French and English be learned by both
English and French all over Canada, he flouted the idea of
French-Canadians learning more English than they needed in business,
and of English-Canadians learning French at all.  He fervently held to
the Keltic notion of making a preserve of the French-Canadian race,
language, literature and customs whatever may become of the religion;
yet he objected to penning the race into a reservation like the
Indians.  He observed that in 1911 the Nationalists bucked reciprocity
with the United States.

"I think we should become an independent republic," he said as he
plopped a fresh cigarette.  "We have the main part of the St. Lawrence.
No, you will not find Gouin say so.  Gouin is a Tory prefect.  He plays
politics, not nationalism."

I observed that the band was about to play.

"Ha!" he exclaimed, stretching his legs with a yawn.  "And the concert
will conclude with that amiable farce, 'O Canada,' followed by 'God
Save the King.'"

This Nationalist interview is given at some length because it
illustrates much of what Sir Lomer Gouin is not, and if he were would
not openly say so, because he stands for a majority the watchword of
which is "Stop, Look, Listen".  I went at once to see the Premier.  He
was closeted with confiding--perhaps confederate--priests, and with
simple habitant folk who stood, not in awe but in affection, of the
Premier.  He might have been himself a father confessor.

Talking to him I found Gouin peculiarly on his guard; broad-faced,
heavy-jawed, slow of speech, almost devoid of gesticulation, he was as
unamiably dispassionate as a bank manager.  There was no militant
passion of the minority in this man; no heroic tilting against
windmills; no expression of ideals; no suggestion of a delightful
outlaw.  He was amazingly practical, with no inclination to discuss
freely the native peculiarities of either race.  He understood
Ontario--as a politician only; England as a democracy and a form of
government.  He had no absorbing idiosyncracies and made no attempt to
pose or even to be interesting.  After the bounce of the young
Nationalist he was as tame as a grandfather's clock.

I felt that Sir Lomer was asking himself--what did the stranger want?
He would have been infinitely more at ease discussing with a bishop how
to prevent a strike in a cotton mill; or with a political outposter
what to do to keep some seat for the Administration.  If I had made to
him such a statement as once I had made with such volcanic results to
Bourassa, that nine-tenths of the population in a village like Nicolet
could speak no Anglais, he would have been eloquent.  Had I observed
that 70 per cent of the operatives in a great Quebec industry cannot
read and write French, that Ontario has a policy of good roads
comparable to that of Quebec, that Orangemen do not dominate Toronto,
that the Ontario farmer is a better producer than the habitant, or that
Protestant clerics do not interfere in politics, he would have bristled
with information to set me profoundly right.  But he created no
atmosphere of free discussion with a stranger.  He was coldly aloof,
yet earnestly endeavouring to say something worth while.

What I really wanted to tell Gouin was that he was personally very much
like the late great Tory, Sir James Whitney.  But he did not warm up to
personal comment.  The bilingual question was too complicated.  The
atmosphere of the Bonne Entente was lacking.  Gouin and myself were in
different envelopes.  He was the Premier.

From what is said of him I am sure most of the fault was my own.  I did
not understand him.  He was too much the Premier; the master executive.
The Nationalist was almost right; Gouin suggested the dividend and the
census.  He was the chief executive of a Province larger than almost
any country in Europe but Russia, and with a population about half that
of Roumania, of whom about one-sixth are the Anglo-Saxon minority.  He
seemed to know Quebec from Montreal to the edge of Labrador almost by
telegraph poles.  You recall that the French in Canada evolved the
modern census with its intimate penetration into the affairs of the
people, some time before the Germans did it.  The Premier of Quebec was
a handbook encyclopaedia of Quebec.  He knew the precise location by
the roads of almost any white village, pulp-mill, water-power, mine,
timber limit; knew as much as a man can about the number of horses and
cattle and cradles to a township; could talk with enthusiasm about the
pioneer arts of the habitant--the rugs, the baskets, the furniture, the
hand-made churns, the open-air bake-ovens.  He could give the address
and the full name of many and many a priest.

But beyond this there is a Quebec which Sir Lomer Gouin did not know,
because he himself with his _bourgeois_ excellences and his great good
citizenship has not the Gallic sparkle in his mentality.  He never
deeply knew the soul of Quebec.  He was too much concerned with its
practical and useful politics to be conscious of its passions.  From
the shrug of his shoulder, and a certain twinkle in his eye when he
mentioned diplomacy with clerics, one surmised that among the clergy he
was the master among politicians who must walk warily.  But he was too
stout, too thrifty, too much of a high type of budgeteer to be
spiritually informed of the crude but basically beautiful passions that
undercurrent all peasant communities.  There was no poetry in Gouin.
No fire.  Little imagination.

"Those Nationalists?" he repeated shrewdly, slowly.  "Yes, I know their
talk.  Oh, they are not so dangerous, but a troublesome minority.  I
think--I know Quebec better than they do.  You have, I daresay,
Nationalists in Ontario?"

What he perhaps expected was some statement about Orangemen, who of
course are nearly all Imperialists.  Yet these very Orangemen represent
an intense phase of Canadian life; the backwoods era, the simple
industries, the old villages, the quaint settlements of the U.E.
Loyalists as picturesque on the Upper, as the dormer-windowed villages
of the French are on the Lower St. Lawrence.  To these men the Empire
is as visual, as to the intense Quebecker it is nebulous.  And as the
politician in Ontario has to regard carefully the Orange vote, so the
Premier of Quebec had to be wary of the franchises of his emotional
friends, the Nationalists.  He was somewhat afraid of the minority as
all masters of majorities are.  Clearly--it was Gouin's main business
to continue being elected.  Had he gone out on behalf of enlistments,
to educate his people, even to speak for France, he would have been in
danger of converting Gouin Liberals into Nationalists.

Ontario cannot fail to make an asset of Gouin's anti-Nationalism.  He
was never for any of the violent doctrines propounded by my friend on
the Terrace.  He would not oppose Quebec going to war.  I am sure he
God-speeded the 22nd who died at Courcellette.  He was the Premier of a
free Province.  Those men had freely gone.  Others--the majority--had
freely stayed.  But an election was coming; where everybody would be
free to vote.

Then there were the clergy; most of them friends of Gouin.  The
Cardinal at Quebec had been interviewed by Sir Sam Hughes on aid to
enlistments.  Gouin could have told Hughes that he would fail; that
Begin, though not a Nationalist, was a reactionary.  The bilingual
controversy was still acute.  Gouin could not have gone out or sent
emissaries out, to reason with French-Canadians about marching with a
Province which had denied the French language rights in contrast to the
Government's own claim that it had given rights to the Anglo minority
in Quebec.

Conscription was coming.  It was a precarious time.  The master of
Quebec had to move cautiously.  His loyalty to Britain was never
questioned.  His faith in a United Canada was never doubted.  Had
Quebec been all for Gouin instead of Gouin all for Quebec, the
Premier's way would have been easier.  Better let well enough alone;
encourage those to enlist who really wanted to go--because Quebec was a
free country.

Then there was the Laurier influence.  Had the old man gone in with the
Premier to help the Ottawa Government--

Impossible.  Neither of them was asked before Coalition came on the
heels of conscription.  And when conscription came, the minority of
Nationalists opposed to the war became the majority of Quebeckers who
preferred not to comply with the law.  From disregarding the law to
rebellion, to Nationalism was not far.  Gouin had the balance to hold.

The Cardinal's attitude on conscription made Gouin's position still
more difficult.  His letter to the press bluntly put the Roman Catholic
Church above temporal law.  One heard of no rebuke from the Premier of
Quebec to the Cardinal.  A Cardinal may be above politics.

Sir Lomer was playing the game of safety, when from his own temperament
and position and unbacked by other leaders he could do little more.  He
stood for the law and did not hinder its operation.  But if there was a
chief executive in Canada who wished the war were righteously over, it
was Sir Lomer Gouin.  No Premier had such a predicament; so much at the
end to lose; so much at first to have gained--if only he could have
foreseen, as nobody did, that conscription was coming and that law
would be more awkward than liberty.

The Premier of Quebec had experience in keeping his Government immune
from agitators.  It was not alone the Nationalists who had made him
uneasy.  On the other extreme there had been for some time one Godefroi
Langlois, former editor of _La Patrie_, and later founder and editor of
_Le Pays_, whose platform was compulsory State education away from
control of the clergy and in defiance of the Archbishops.  Gouin did
not endorse Langlois.  How could he?  _Le Pays_, when it condemned
clerical schools, attacked the Administration.  Politically Gouin was
right in opposing Langlois.  Nationally he was playing provincial.
Langlois had a mission, in line with a broader, nationalized Canada;
the same mission which is now being reflected in the National Council
of Education.

So, between the reactionism of Bourassa and the radicalism of Langlois,
Gouin was the compromise; and Langlois was conveniently given an
official post in Europe.

Gouin has compromised his whole political career.  With the leverage of
enormous success in elections and administration, he never had the
vision to declare himself in favour of a bigger Quebec than could be
got by extending its boundaries to Ungava.

He was too old to begin.  Quebec to him was a vast prefecture to be
administered; not a vision to be realized.  Ontario--except
politically--was almost as far away as British Columbia.  He was seldom
in Toronto.  Montreal was as a rule the last west for this voyageur.
He seldom or never went to the Maritimes.  He knew the people down
there regarded the _bloc_ Quebec as a denationalizer.  He had little or
no desire to see the prairies.  He wanted Quebec to prosper.  He
delighted to see pulp mills and cotton factories and power plants and
railways and trolleys vibrating along the St. Lawrence.  He loved to
dream of the great unpeopled hinterland--all Quebec; of the other
hinterland--all the rest of Canada; of the transcontinentals converging
at Montreal; of the steamship lines terminating there; of a land where
there are few empty cradles or idle factories or wasting farms.

All these things Gouin, growing stout and somewhat heavy of face, loved
to behold; and out of that grew all the vision he seemed to have.  In
this enormous prefecture within the Empire he beheld a far more
comfortable State than the Nationalist dream of a separative Quebec;
glad when he could find time to motor grandly and amiably out among the
villages and be greeted as _le grand seigneur_ of politics, even when
he lacked the grand manners of the eminent patrician.

At any conference of Premiers in Ottawa he held himself somewhat aloof,
studying the lot, respecting them all, cordial with all, anxious to do
all that constitutionally in him lay to further co-ordination.  But
Gouin always sagaciously knew that there was no Premier in the pack who
already had so much, with so little to ask, from Federalism as he.  His
was the pivotal province of Confederation, the grand compromise of Old
Macdonald with Cartier; the basic sixty-five members of Parliament,
unchangeable except by ripping up the B.N.A. Act, an instrument of
Empire.  He could wink the other eye and reflect that from the
political concessions of the Act in official bilingualism and a fixed
representation, in the outlet of the St. Lawrence, in the possession of
the historic city, in the control of ocean navigation, in a solid
clergy, in fundamental virtues of thrift and an established
peasantry--he and his had more than any of the others could ever ask.

"Ah!" he said eloquently, with a fine twinkle of his eyes to the
interviewer at Quebec, "you have not seen our Province?  Then you must
come down again, when I am not busy, and let me take you to see--all we
have down here!"




A POLITICAL MATTAWA OF THE WEST

JOHN WESLEY DAFOE

First impressions are always tyrants.  The first time I heard John
Wesley Dafoe talk he was in his large sanctum of the _Manitoba Free
Press_, in the summer of 1916.  He was without a collar, his shirt
loose at the neck, and his hair like a windrow of hay.  He reminded me
of some superb blacksmith hammering out irons of thought, never done
mending the political waggons of other people, and from his many talks
to the waggoners knowing more about all the roads than any of them.
The wheat on a thousand fields was baking that day, and the 'Peg was
roasting alive.  Since that I have always pictured Dafoe sweltering,
terribly in earnest, whittling the legs of the Round Table and telling
somebody how it is that west of the lakes neither of the old Ottawa
parties has now any grip on the people.

Dafoe talked that way in 1916.  He was beginning to lisp a little along
that restless line of thought in 1910.  And in 1940 he may be sitting
in that same sanctum with walls of heavy books on two sides of him,
telling somebody just how it came to be that an economic cyclone on the
prairies once caught up all the Grits and Tories and nothing was ever
heard or seen of them again.

When Kipling wrote, "Oh, east is east and west is west, and never the
twain shall meet," he had never met Dafoe.  Some directive angel
planted him at Winnipeg shortly after Clifford Sifton crowded the gate
there with people going in that they might choke it again with wheat
coming out; and while people went in and wheat came out through this
spout of the great prairie hopper, Dafoe dug himself a little ship
canal which as it grew bigger sluiced the political rivers of the West
into his sanctum before he lifted the lock and let them on down to the
sea at Ottawa.  The West as he saw it was a place of coming mighty
changes.  His own party was pushing the transformations.  The prairies
were due to become the mother of great forces.  You could not be always
herding people into a land like that from south, east and west and not
come within an ace of fostering some revolution.

And of all cities west of the lakes, Winnipeg was the clearing-house,
as much for policies and programmes as for wheat and money and people.
No political cloud ever gathered on the prairies that did not get blown
into Winnipeg before it burst.  Dafoe stood ready for them all.  He
believed that no change had happened yet to the Liberal party
comparable with the changes yet to come.  He saw that party chaining
itself to tariffs and big interests and he said:

"Believe me, that won't forever do.  There's something just short of a
revolution going to happen to this party before the West gets done with
it; and if the party isn't ready for the West, so much the worse for
the party."

Just to get ahead of mere chronology, the bane of many a good man's
life.  In 1919 the most complete imitation of a little Moscow ever seen
on this continent was set up in Winnipeg.  For many weeks it looked to
some hopefuls as though the Wheat City would reconstruct the whole
economic structure of the nation to suit the ideas of a violent
minority.  The main recorded issue was "collective bargaining".  The
real issue was direct action in the form of the sympathetic strike.  By
its expected control of urban centres the Soviet organization aimed to
throttle big utilities, finance, shipping, railroads, telegraphs.  The
United Grain Growers were to be but a helpless giant in the hands of
Jack Proletariat.  Parliament was to be superseded by Direct Action.
The A.F.L. was to become obsolete.  Trades Unions were to be taken over
and painted red.  Citizens in starched collars were to become comrades
in shirt sleeves, or enemies.  Political parties would be
reconstructed.  The "workers" would own the country.  The British
Empire would be shaken into Soviets.  The Army and the Navy would be
internationalized.  The real Capital of Canada outside of Winnipeg
would be, not London, but Moscow.  The International would supplant
national anthems.  Public opinion would be exterminated except as
revised by the Red leaders on the Red River at its junction with the
Assiniboine.

In the unfolding of this Great Adventure we pause here to observe that
it was a newspaper which behind the Citizens' Committee administered a
black eye to this attempt to make Winnipeg the Soviet headquarters of
North America and 120 millions of people.  The name of the paper was
the _Manitoba Free Press_.

And the _Free Press_ was seeing Red.  What business had the Red Flag in
a city like Winnipeg at all?  If anywhere in Canada, why not in the
industrial, big-interest East--in Montreal or Toronto?

"One revolution at a time, please," we almost hear the _Free Press_
saying.  "Now the war is done the West has to settle the fate of
Government at Ottawa in its own way.  And the way of the West is not
with the Red Flag; not with Direct Action.  This city is a headquarters
of evolutionaries, not of outlaws.  You people of the Strike Committee
are trying to get the spot-light when you've no business anywhere
except right at back stage."

A perfectly straight argument, though not couched in those words.
Dafoe and his associates were profoundly busy with what to them was a
ten times greater issue than any form of Soviet anywhere in Canada.  As
a matter of record the paper did admit that the metal workers had a
right to strike for collective bargaining.

"But no other Union here or elsewhere," it thundered "has any right to
a sympathetic strike to help the metal workers.  This city is not going
to be throttled by a thug minority, who want to exercise governing
power as a revolutionary usurpation of authority."

A minority always leads.  Majorities follow.  The position of the _Free
Press_ was, that it is only a minority able to command a majority that
should rule; and the Soviet was no such minority--while the _Free
Press_ was.

A clear grasp of this is necessary in the business of judging Mr. Dafoe
and his coming influence upon Canadian affairs.  What Dafoe enunciated
about the strike will have a strong bearing in the case upon what he
thinks about the Agrarians.  The judge must get a fair judgment.  But
of this later.

Dafoe was, so far as we know, the first editor in Canada to advocate
from the beginning of the war a Coalition Government.  This was
natural.  The _Free Press_ had no faith in the Borden administration of
Bob Rogers, owner of the _Winnipeg Telegram_.  By the summer of 1916 it
was into a Coalition campaign.  A year later when the Premier came back
from England declaring for conscription and inviting Laurier to join in
a Coalition, the _Free Press_ supported him.

Why this anxiety?  We must pull off a bit of the makeup to find out.
The _Free Press_ was a Liberal paper.  It supported Laurier in the
West.  But the older it grew the more clearly Dafoe and his associates
saw that the man who had created the two new Western Provinces could
not hold them.  Other gods were now arising.  Their organ was the
_Grain Growers' Guide_; their parliaments were in grain growers'
conventions; their policy was radical Liberalism.  The Liberal organ of
a Wheat City could not consistently antagonize this radical movement.
The farmers must be studied.  So far as they could strengthen
Liberalism by becoming a Radical wing, they must be encouraged.  At the
point where they developed an extreme left away from the party they
must be checked.  The _Free Press_ which was yet to fight an economic
revolution must not itself be revolutionary.

This leads up to policy in Empire.  The paper had gone against Borden
in 1911.  It was against the taxation Navy of Borden even though it
could see the danger of war ahead.  It was opposed to the whole
super-Tory idea of a centralized British commonwealth of nations.  It
"hung the hide" of Lionel Curtis and his Round Table propaganda clubs
to the Canadian National fence.  It argued for "a progressive
development in Canadian self-government to the point of the attainment
of sovereign power to be followed by an alliance with the other British
nations", who it was assumed would do likewise.  For years before the
war the _Free Press_ had talked of this evolutionary Empire, deeply
regretting that Mr. Bourassa had coined the word "Nationalist" and made
it obnoxious.

Winnipeg seldom does things one half at a time.  In the summer of 1917
J. W. Dafoe was one of the most astounded men in Canada.  The other one
was Sir Wilfrid Laurier.  That was the year of the famous Liberal
Convention.  Had such a Convention happened in Chicago with such a man
as Roosevelt as the centre-piece, its doings would have been cabled the
world over.  In its small way the Winnipeg Convention was more
sensational than the Big Strike two years later.  Mr. Dafoe was in
Ottawa that summer.  He was needed there.  The Premier had come back
from England primed with a policy of conscription to be enforced by a
possible Coalition Government, an offer of which was made to the
Opposition leader.  Since early in the war the _Free Press_ had argued
for coalition, but opposed conscription until after the United States
entered the struggle because of the inevitable exodus of slackers
across the border.

There was a strong conscriptionist group of Liberals in Ottawa.  We
must assume that Mr. Dafoe, though not a member of Parliament, was
strongly behind them; his presence in Ottawa indicates that his
counsels were needed in view of the attitude to be taken by Western
Liberals.  It was the conscriptionist group of Liberals in Ottawa that
decided upon the Convention, whether on the advice of Mr. Dafoe is not
generally known.  The intention was to create a Western Liberal group
free from Laurier control, prepared to consider coalition--involving
conscription--on its merits.  So far, the policy of the Convention was
in line with the previous programme of Mr. Dafoe.  But the Liberal
machine in the West--which was not Mr. Dafoe's party at all, because
for some time he had been working on the principle that both the old
parties as such had lost their grip on the West--went out and captured
the delegates.  The Convention was suddenly stampeded for Laurier, a
result which Mr. Dafoe never expected but against which he had strongly
urged, the Liberal Unionist leaders.  The _Free Press_ thereafter
thundered against the Convention as entirely misrepresenting Western
Liberalism.  The subsequent South Winnipeg convention shewed that the
_Free Press_ was right.  Almost the entire strength of Western
Liberalism swung into the Union movement and the Coalition, and the
_Free Press_ became a temporary, though independent, supporter of the
Union Government for the purpose of winning the war.

Now for the larger front stage view; how does Mr. Dafoe's attitude in
the defeat of the Winnipeg Soviet idea of government and his former
campaign against Laurier Liberals match with his attitude towards the
Farmer Movement as embodied by Mr. Crerar?  The leader of the Agrarian
movement is a friend of the _Free Press_ for much the same reason that
the strike leaders in 1919 were a foe to it.  Crerarism in the West
looks for the support of that paper in its drive upon Ottawa.  From his
experience outwardly to the public, and intimately behind the scenes,
always concerned with building up a new Liberalism on the wreck of the
old, Dafoe endorses Crerar and his movement.  When Crerar went into the
Government the _Free Press_ favoured his going.  Mr. Dafoe clearly
states that, "if the Union movement could retain its Liberal elements
and produce an economic and taxation policy acceptable to Western
opinion, we could continue to support it."  In contemplating such a
miracle, did he expect that the ultra-Tories would lop away from the
Union, making a "rump" party to match the Laurier Liberals, and leaving
the Union Government free to make an alliance with the Farmer Group?
This we do not profess to know.  In a political age like this almost
any sort of alliance may be made for the purpose of capturing
Parliament.  But a permanent alliance between Western Liberalism
represented by Mr. Crerar and the Government by Coalition looks now as
fantastic as a Coalition between Lloyd George and de Valera.  Mr. Dafoe
probably knew that the Government and Mr. Crerar would lock horns over
the tariff--since any species of protection and free trade never could
sleep together.  When Mr. Crerar left the Government on the budget
issue, the _Free Press_ ceased its active support of the Government and
moved its guns to a detached position.  When Meighen became Premier and
in his programme speech at Stirling outlined his policy, Dafoe
definitely declared himself as no longer in support of the Union
Government.  As he could not support the Laurier Liberal party, which
he had formerly opposed, the only thing left was to make an active and
open alliance with Mr. Crerar.

Such a mobile course of action is incomprehensible unless we keep in
mind the fact that Mr. Dafoe has long found it impossible to support
either of the old parties.  The Coalition was a new one which he
consistently supported on its merits and up to a point.  The point was
reached.  Unionism and Agrarianism were incompatible.  Therefore
Unionism was a Tory institution; and the only Liberal programme left
for the _Free Press_ was to form an alliance with Mr. Crerar and his
great group of class-conscious Agrarians.

By this time, if he reads this, Mr. Dafoe will have observed that we
are trying to corner him on the question:

If you were opposed to a Labor Soviet which aimed at making a little
Moscow of Winnipeg, what are you going to do about a Farmer Soviet that
aims to capture Ottawa?

Already he has begun to answer.  He uses a label for the party led by
Mr. Crerar and evolved with the aid of Mr. Dafoe:

The National Progressive Party.

A good name, even if not new.  What is behind the label?  That the
party so named has now taken over all the Liberal economic traditions
in the West and after the next general election will become the real
Liberal Party of Canada.  In the opinion of Dafoe, Mackenzie King
should keep out of the West in the coming election in order to let Mr.
Crerar romp home with three-fourths of the entire representation in
Parliament.  He alleges that Laurier destroyed the old Western Liberal
party in 1917; that King has not revived it--though Mr. Fielding might
have done so; that Western Liberals have become Progressive except in
the cities, where some have become Unionists.  In making this statement
he probably reckoned on Michael Clark becoming a Progressive.  But
Michael Clark has turned out to be one species of even Free Trade
Liberal which Crerarism cannot absorb.

Let us concede that here is one of the most absorbing problems in
Canada.  If Dafoe backs Crerar in the effort to get that preponderant
majority away from Meighen and King, then he is afterwards committed to
Crerarism.  Dafoe cannot afford to take Crerar and abandon the
traditions of the _Free Press_.  If he is so keen about real
"nationalism" in this country as to regret that Bourassa made the word
obnoxious, he has surely decided that the policy of the N.P.P. must be
to build up a true national life in Canada.  And the man who was
Canada's press representative at the Peace Conference, with such
exceptional facilities for focussing Canadian national sentiment among
other nations, will not dare to countenance in Mr. Crerar and his
followers any policy that will open the gates for the United States to
walk in and walk over this nation as twenty years ago his _Free Press_
associate, Clifford Sifton, opened the doors to let Europe inundate us
with a polyglot, un-national flood.

No Canadian journalist has shouldered so perilous a responsibility.
Dafoe knows what a struggle it is to preserve national identity on a
basis of one to twelve against us.  Born in Ontario and experienced in
the East as few editors have ever been, he surely knows the value of
not surrendering our national birthright for a mess of free-trade
pottage.

If he knows this as well as we think he should, will he uphold the
_Free Press_ as the constant critic of Mr. Crerar if he attempts to
denationalize this country; or will he accept a portfolio of Minister
of the Interior in the Cabinet dominated by Messrs. Crerar and Drury,
and in his haste to establish the new Liberalism of the National
Progressive Party help to strike out the meaning of the word "National"
in the label?

Can a man who fought a Direct Action Strike because it aimed at
revolution, consistently endorse, lock, stock and barrel, a movement
which aims at a revolution by Indirect Action through Parliament?

Is government by a "National Progressive Party" Agrarian Group with a
business-farmer Premier and a farmer-dominated Cabinet any less of a
group government in principle than the One Big Union, even though it
does not tie up the nerve centres of the country by a minority general
strike, but merely throttles Parliament, which is supposed to be the
national brain, by the use of the group minority in voting?

Mr. Dafoe has already begun to answer.  Again we see him sweltering in
his sanctum, his hair like a windrow of hay, as he dictates something
like this to his stenographer:

"Your logic is good except that your major premiss is a case of being
off to a bad start.  The National Progressive Party is not a group; it
is a business majority.  It contains the people who produce the
majority of the nation's wealth for consumption and export and
therefore enable the nation to pay its bills.  It is Liberal because it
advocates free-trade and is opposed to big monopolies, and there is no
other Liberalism in Canada left worthy the name.  The N.P.P. is the new
Liberalism, not for the West alone, but for the whole country.  It
depends upon the franchise of the people, not upon the strike action of
revolutionary groups.  Agriculture, not industry, is the basis of
Canada's economics.  Even labour as embodied in the Trade Unions does
not aim at revolution: Only the Reds want that.  And the Reds are a
hopeless minority.  The farmers are not as yet a popular, though they
are an economic, majority; but the future of this nation depends upon a
voting as well as a producing majority of farmers."

This may not be the exact way in which Mr. Dafoe would state the case,
but it expresses the fact that sound economics are at the root of all
ideas which have to do with fair government.  And it suggests that J.
W. Dafoe with his _Free Press_ has more to do than the _Grain Growers'
Guide_ with what the people think about the N.P.P.

For this reason we hope that Mr. Dafoe, the judge and the advocate as
well, will always stay "behind the scenes" to keep Mr. Crerar on the
right track if ever he gets the right of way.




HEADMASTER OF THE MANCHESTER SCHOOL

MICHAEL CLARK, M.P.

The eminent headmaster of the Manchester School in Canada is one of the
few M.P.'s who know how to build a wheat stack.  He farms in the spot
north of Calgary where the poplar bluffs begin to mark that you are in
the black loam of wonderful crops at a maximum distance from Liverpool.
It is an art to build a wheat stack.  Michael Clark--so we believe--knows
exactly how many tiers to lay before he begins the "belly"; how to fill
up the middle so that the butts of the sheaves droop to run off the rain;
and how high to go with the bulge before he begins to draw in with the
roof.  All day long as he worked on his knees, not in prayer, he had
mental leisure to think about one vast, fructifying theme; which of
course is Free-Trade as they had it in England; unrestricted trade
according to the Manchester School.  And when he got his stack done he
could tell to a ten-dollar bill how much tariff the railways and
steamships would levy on that stack by the time the wheat got to
Liverpool.

During the War, Clark was a win-the-war Liberal.  He broke away from
Laurier on conscription, which he openly supported.  In July this year he
was scheduled in the press--another of those wish-father-to-the-thought
news items--to join Messrs. Drury and Crerar in an anti-tariff tour of
Ontario.  He did not go.  He probably never had the slightest intention
of going.  Michael Clark had other wheat to stack.  An Alberta election
was coming.  It came.  When it was all over Alberta was in the grip of
the Agrarians.  Liberalism by constituencies was swept out as clean as a
barn floor at fanning-mill time.  And Michael Clark sat down to think it
over.  He had half expected that tornado.  But he refused to like it.
The farmers had stolen his own programme of free trade and by means of it
had stampeded his Province for the sake of using it as a spring-broad to
make the grand jump into the Federal arena.  The apostle of free trade,
himself as good a farmer as any of them, was now regarded as a chip on
the Agrarian stream at high tide.

Wherefore Michael Clark, after certain "conversations" with Mr. Crerar,
wrote the letter which, if Mackenzie King is as wise as he is hopeful,
will be used to flood the country.  Hoardings and electric signs in the
interests of true-Liberalism should blazon abroad such sentences as these:

"The House of Lords, the Family Compact, the Manufacturers' Association
and the junkers and militarists of Germany are each and all examples of
group government."

"Class consciousness is none the less class selfishness, and therefore
doomed to die, because it suddenly appears in Farmer and Labour parties."

"The apostles of progress must unite upon common principles, sincerely
held to resist reaction, which is ever present like a dead weight to drag
down the aspirations of the race for freedom, justice and democracy."

"These were the things for which sixty thousand Canadians died in the
recent war. . . .  I have been fighting 'class' for forty years.  It
would be quite impossible for me to turn my back on my past and the right
in this election."

Our political history contains no declaration of independence more
significant, manly and sensational.  Repudiation of the Free Trade,
group-governed, National Progressives by Michael Clark, the farmer and
the apostle of Canadian Free Trade, is the first truly emancipating note
that has been struck in all this pre-election barrage of group against
group.  Michael Clark may be no bigger as a Canadian for such a stand,
but he is true to his own form as one of the rarest and manliest Radicals
that Canada ever had.  And his declaration should be of immense value to
the Government, which confesses that its real fear is, not of Liberals,
but of Agrarians.

The headmaster of the Manchester School in Canada has had a multitude of
pupils; none more brilliant than Mr. Crerar, who seems to have made Free
Trade a species of bondage.  In no other land could Michael Clark so well
have demonstrated the virtues of Free-Trade.  On those plains, buffaloes
worth multi-millions of dollars in trade annually migrated across
"Parallel 49" into Montana and back again into the Territories.  The
prairie schooner trekked northward over the border carrying migrants in
search of homes when there was no government official to turn them back
or to question the terminus of their travels.  The freight wagons creaked
up from the south into MacLeod and past it into the valley of
Saskatchewan, carrying goods made and bought in the land of the Western
Yankee long before the great antidote to Free Trade, the Transcontinental
Railway, put those crooked trails out of business.

Clark was spouting free-trade on the prairies at a time when many men in
the West scarcely knew that trade had any restrictions except in the
matter of beverages.  He was an apostle of Cobdenism almost before the
Territories were baptized into party politics at all; when Regina was the
home of a Territorial County Council that had neither Tories nor Grits.
He was farming and prophesying commercial union before James J. Hill
began to compete with the protective C.P.R. for trade north and south
instead of the long-haul east and west.  Before ever a real Agrarian
began to head out on the plains he was contending like a tribune of the
plebs, that unrestricted reciprocity between two halves of a great
productive continent, of which one-half contains nine-tenths of the
people, was not a prelude to annexation away from the grand old Empire.
And when he got into Parliament the voice that had been so mighty in the
trail-side school houses and the little town-halls became more potent
than ever as "Red Michael" went full tilt in the House against the high
protectionists.

High courage was here.  Bucking bronchos from the West who had gone to
Ottawa were duly corralled, haltered, hobbled, surcingled and thrown,
finally harnessed and driven by either of the old parties.  In breaking a
political broncho the Liberal party was as good as the other.  But the
House is full of insurgents now, lining up into a tyrannized and
tyrannous group organizing as a party.  In Clark's inaugural days, and
for years after, there was but one real solo voice calling like a
trombone from a high tower for Free Trade as the Kingdom of God which, if
they would first seek it, all other things would be added unto them.

French psychology traces certain forms of insanity to the fixed idea.
There have been times when Parliament has regarded Michael Clark as a
melancholy victim of this big idea that warped his whole political
mentality.  But it was a grand form of insanity.  Nobody ever heard Clark
in the House who did not realize that here was a fine British rebel whose
brain should be a great hope to his party.  The old chief knew that.  He
kept his ear towards Clark when he was sometimes deaf to his ministers.

Clark was the mountain peak which the party had left for its fleshly
sojourn in Egypt.  The Liberal party in Canada had once been a free trade
party--somewhat before Clark's time.  In free trade and the universal
franchise had been its life.  But Liberalism before 1896 was one thing;
afterwards another.  Laurier in practice knew that Clark was
magnificently wrong; in theory superbly right.  Therefore he indulged and
admired him; sometimes playing with him, conscious that Liberalism was
the only show in which Clark could be a national performer.

In truth Michael Clark was for long enough a man without a party.  But
from the benches of the Liberals he could stand and preach his Manchester
doctrines to Hansard and the nation, even when the party yawned and held
dangerously on to the tariff.

It was always a tonic to hear Clark in the House.  Like Carlyle he
breathed a certain inexorable vitality into public affairs.  To meet
Clark in the corridors was to get a breeze that swept like a chinook
across the frozen waste of old-line politics.  In the gloom of the lobby
this apostle of red hair and rubicund visage was a beacon light.  I have
met him so, of a Saturday afternoon when the House was out of session,
and when the member for Red Deer was ripe for a free talk to any
stranger.  A great friendliness possessed him always.  He could laugh at
the besetments of party and the tyranny that opportunism imposes on great
minds.  He himself was free.  He wanted others to be free.  He could
stand for half an hour in one gloomy crypt of those corridors in the old
Parliament and talk of the power of being that kind of Liberal.

It was the wheat that helped to keep Clark where he was on the outpost of
Liberalism.  When his old leader became enswathed with election bandages,
Clark looked out upon the landscapes of the wheat, not so long ago the
limitless pasture of the free-trade buffaloes, and felt again the vision
of the life that is Liberal but is sometimes called another name.

Alberta was leaping to a great life.  Almost in the middle of it north
and south is the town of Red Deer.  All about it were the settlements of
"nationals" emancipated from bondage in Europe.  What was the use, quoth
Clark, of bringing such people to a country of free homestead land, of
alleged free institutions and making them the slaves, first of political
machines, second of protected interests in the East?  If enslaved people
were to become free in a new land why should the wheat and the oats and
the cattle which they raised not be made free to move for a market as
naturally as the wind blows across the borders?

This may not have been the precise order in which such ideas generated in
the mind of Michael Clark; but it is the way those ideas confronting such
a man strike a contemporary.  I have lived in the land where Clark lives,
though not at Red Deer, and remember well the burning desire of twenty
years ago in that far northwest for economic emancipation.  Then at any
meeting, no matter what, any little dinner to a citizen no matter whom,
men rose to talk about the need of conquering the isolation of the
country.  They remembered the tyranny of the old Trading Company into
Hudson's Bay.  They clamoured for more people, more farms, more towns,
more railways, more life--from the East.  And when it came they said the
East was a tyrant, an economic monster to bleed them white.  Clark, as
one remembers him best, has not been so much a foe to the East as he has
wanted to be a friend to the South.

But a new oligarchy was arising on the great prairies.  As official
liberalism got its grip on the three Provinces and became itself a
tyrant, while unofficial Toryism in league with the big railways got a
stranglehold on British Columbia, and when even "Honest" Frank Oliver
ceased to be an independent Liberal and became a red-taped Minister of
the Interior, Clark the Free Trader in Parliament found himself striking
hands with a sect mainly of Liberal Radicals first called Grain Growers,
next Agrarians, and by some the very devil.  With official Liberalism as
expressed by Scott, Sifton, Cross, Norris and Martin he had only
superficial sympathy.  These men were more or less on masquerade.  The
Agrarians were barefaced, one-faced Radicals who would open the borders,
and abolish the customs houses, and set up a sort of Western political
autonomy whose root idea was that trade should be as free as
grasshoppers.  These people were not raising Old Flag wheat.

How far Clark fell in line with all the doctrines of the United Grain
Growers, I do not know.  But one thing clear about this insurgent is that
he has always stood four-square for the British connection--and for all
that it means to Canada.  Clark is a Britisher.  He still has his English
accent.  You would spot him at once as a transplanted Englishman.  He is
prouder of being a Briton in Canada than he ever would have been in
England.  Clark never forgot--Manchester and Cobden.  He stood among the
wheat and saw the Empire.

When the War came and his adopted Province of Alberta for a long while
held the lead in enlistments for war, no man was happier in the grim
outlook than the member for Red Deer.  The War to him was a great
emergence of Liberalism the world over when Peace should bring Free
Humanity, Free wheat, Free trade.  Why not?  His son went to the war--and
he lost him.  His speech on the Military Service Act was in many respects
the best of all in that debate, not in rhetoric, but in logical virility.
It was a howitzer broadside, slow, deliberate, but every shot a hit.  His
old leader had already declined a belated offer of Coalition and was now
opposing conscription and arguing for amendment by Referendum.  In all
his life he never got from a political foe such a searchlight on his soul
as his once devoted follower gave him in this speech.

Laurier had previously executed the Nationalist dodge of taking refuge
behind the Militia Act, asserting that it was right to enforce that Act
calling out the Militia for the defence of Canada; to which Clark replied:

"England is fighting this war wherever she sees the turban of a Turk or
the helmet of a Teuton.  She is fighting it in Egypt, Mesopotamia, in
Macedonia, in Belgium--most of all in France. . . .  America, whose
independence had been fought in a struggle of blood for sound fiscal
ideas was now immortalizing her reunion with Britain, her old
enemy. . . .  If organized labour was opposed to conscription, so much
the worse for labour, whose own trades unions were a form of
conscription; in England he had never named either lord or labour with a
capital L. . . .  Canada should be in the war to her last man and her
last dollar. . . .  As to the referendum amendment, it was fathered by
the man who down to his attitude on this question had gone into history
as the greatest of all Canadians, but who had applauded Pugsley when he
argued against extending the life of this Parliament, and who in the
matter of sending men to fight, in organizing the whole nation for war,
in conserving national unity, and in making an election a smaller matter
than the honour of a nation was opposed to the Government.  If the
amendment should carry, and the Referendum show a majority against the
Government measure by omitting the soldier vote and piling up the vote
from the Province which had given birth to the Referendum, then when the
author of that measure should be returned to power on a no-conscription
issue what chance was there for Canada to win her part of the war with
the lion Laurier and the lamb Oliver lying down together--and a little
child--Macdonald from Pictou--leading them?"

Not as a climax, but as a mere personal note midway in his speech, he had
said:

"I have a little toddling grandson on my farm out West to-day whose
father was killed with a gunshot wound in his neck two weeks ago.  I say
to you, sir, on my soul and conscience I support this Bill, because I
believe it to be a part of the necessary machinery which can save that
little fellow, born a Canadian, and thousands of others like him from
ever going through what his father and his uncles have gone through."

Parliamentary debate has risen to much higher levels of oratory, but
seldom to such a height of accusing vindication and personal affection
for the accused from whom an insurgent is driven to sever his allegiance.
Clark can always make some sort of big human speech with a natural knack
of getting at the vitals of a subject in simple, dignified language and a
searching logic--once you admit his major premiss.  That one speech flung
into bold relief, almost as the No Man's Land under a flare of a great
barrage, the issues between men who for so many years had been political
confederates.

A couple of years later I again met Clark when he was speaking guest at
an Empire Club luncheon.  His topic was--the Empire.  His brand of
political ideas was vastly different from those of the average man in his
audience, and he knew it.  The Club had invited him, because he was
Michael Clark.  He said not a word about trade.  He uttered no
propaganda.  He talked simply and strongly about the race that had made
the Empire which to him was a commonwealth of neither trade nor conquest
but of liberating ideas.

I don't think that any of the Chamberlain-Foster school could have
uttered quite so broad and noble a tribute to the inner vitality of the
British League of Nations.  And not even Mr. Rowell could have surpassed
it for breadth of view on that subject, Clark looked at the Empire from
within outwards.  He saw in it the expression of a great race of people
working the leaven upon other races; a mighty confederacy of free nations.

Red Michael has been a great informing Liberal, and a big illuminating
Canadian.  Whether grandly right or magnificently wrong, he is never
uninteresting; a man who could come off a stack of wheat, wash himself up
bare-armed, and in Sunday clothes but seldom well-dressed and never
groomed, step on to a platform over in the schoolhouse or the town hall
and make a great speech to men who believe in the simplicity of a big
mind that thinks hard on the welfare of the majority.  John Bright would
have loved such a man.  Even John Macdonald might have loved him.  And
the one regret among those who value the power of a big free nature in a
nation is, that owing to some fatalistic streak in his genius, Michael
Clark has not risen to the inspiring height from which the country might
get the best that he has to give.  Never cured of his insurgency in
Parliament, he has become an uncompromising conformist to one big and
bigoted idea that universal Free-Trade is the need of the world, and
especially of Canada.  He persists in the delusion that what has been
good for Britain must be good for Canada; not only is Canada at war when
Britain fights, but when Britain has no tariff Canada must have free
trade.

All which is freely forgiven this stalwart on account of his challenge to
the group who took his Free Trade luggage and attempted to label it
National Progressive.  The Free Trader who could watch that caravan of
adventurers going down the trail and stoutly tell them all to keep on
going to the devil, deserves well of his country.  Michael Clark's
advocacy of Progressivism might have got him the promise of a Cabinet
position.  His rejection of it is the proof that the free-man who
believes in great parties can never be bound by a class-conscious group.
"Better a dinner of herbs . . . ."  Michael Clark, whether M.P. or not,
is free to consider himself if need be a party of one man--without a
platform, but not devoid of a cause.

Whatever Michael Clark knows about the benefits of Free Trade and its
effect upon the exchanges, he knows peculiarly well the danger of
unrestricted reciprocity in sentiment between Canada and the United
States.




THE SPHINX FROM SASKATCHEWAN

HON. J. A. CALDER

The Hon. J. A. Calder has never seen the Sphinx.  But he has a looking
glass.  He has never been in Egypt.  But he has lived a long while in
Saskatchewan.  A man who can continue to know as much as he knows about
the confessional side of government, and who can say so little, has
some claim to be considered--Canada's political Sphinx.

Such a reputation is sometimes enviable.  The average public man
babbles.  Often he talks to conceal thought or as a substitute for
action.  The mental energy needed to turn end for end what some of
these garrulous people say, in order to decipher just what they mean,
is usually more than the wisdom is worth.  Calder spares us.  He tells
us nothing.  His silence may be golden, or it may be just a habit; but
from the known character of Calder it is never the omniscience of
stupidity.

A Sphinx in action may sometimes give himself away.  It is not usual
for a Sphinx to do anything except to conceal the riddle.  Calder has
all his life been a busy man.  He is still in middle age.  All but
fourteen years of his life up till 1917 he spent in the West, most of
it in the part now known as Saskatchewan.  Ten years ago he was
furtively discussed as successor to Laurier.  He is now a
Unionist-Liberal.  To give him work in the administration commensurate
with his ability--or somewhere near it--a new department was created in
Immigration.  Now he is slated for the Senate!

Little was heard about Calder's department.  He had a publicity bureau
which did not spend vast amounts of money on diffusing information.
The department is said to contain a moving picture section, some of
whose films probably creep into Canadian movie houses.  But nobody ever
saw a picture of J. A. Calder on a screen.  He had a Canadian novelist
as chief of publicity.  That novelist might have yearned for the chance
to immortalize his chief in a story, but so long as he is in the pay of
Mr. Calder's department he will continue to yearn.  And not even he has
been given to understand why when a reconstructed Liberal like Mr.
Rowell left the Cabinet at the appointment of Premier Meighen, the
Minister of Immigration stayed on.  One might surmise that the man who,
a decade ago, looked to some people like an Elisha to Laurier, would
run again in Moosejaw as a National Liberal Conservative with the
expectation of re-entering the Cabinet, probably as Minister of the
Interior.  But he was suddenly and humdrumly designated for the Senate.

Apparently the Sphinx is not a great deal concerned over the fact that
his action in the case would throw some light on the sort of government
we may expect, and the kind of man we are privileged to conjecture Mr.
Calder to be.  He seems to take very little interest in what any one
thinks about him.  He accompanied the Premier on his Western trip.  Now
and then he made a speech.  He was heckled.  He was in the land of his
critics, where he was unofficially known as "Jim".  What did he mean by
staying in a Government which was supposed to have finished its work in
1919?  Was he coming back as a Liberal?  Had he no longer any
fellow-feeling for the farmers among whom he had lived for so long?
The Sphinx did not directly say.  He was publicly and conventionally
endorsing the Premier, who was well able to speak for himself on behalf
of the administration.

Calder was headmaster of Moosejaw High School when he was twenty-three,
in the year 1891.  He must have learned reticence then.  Up in
Edmonton, a few years later one heard considerably of Goggin, the
speechmaking educationist of the prairie; rarely or never of Calder,
who about that time was Inspector of Schools for the Territories, not
yet provinces.  The silent young inspector must have looked like the
reincarnation of Socrates as he drove--sometimes a four-horse team on a
buckboard--through the sloughs of the Northwest.  No prairie doctor
with a radius of fifty miles, none but a pioneer missionary like
McDougall or Robertson, ever had so glorious a chance to study what the
life of a new country was going to be, as this inspector toiling
hundreds of miles over a land, where, if he stopped at three
school-houses a week, he was doing a good average in bad weather.

Regina had no party politics then.  All it had was the mounted police
and a leg-boot legislature.  Every man was then a trailsman.  In
Calder's time as Inspector, there were only 400 miles of railway north
of the C.P.R. main line--the two branches to Prince Albert and to
Edmonton.  It was only in the last year or two of this buckboard and
broncho inspectorate that there were even any Doukhobors in that part
of the world to bring back the days of Adam and Eve.  He saw all the
"nationals" beginning to arrive.  He could put his finger on a gaunt
anemic map of the Territories and point out just where there was
beginning to be some nucleus of a foreign settlement.  He could talk a
little Cree and he learned the jargon of several countries in Europe.
He saw the farmers arise, and railways begin, and little villages dot
the skyline, and here and there an elevator, when a box car was looked
at by a trailsman as a small boy gapes at a circus parade.

Calder lived in Regina when politics was born.  He shares with Frank
Oliver the memory of the day when Nicholas Flood Davin was the wonder
orator of the West, and when freight-carters from Winnipeg to Edmonton
via Saskatoon, which was then a temperance colony, carried demijohns of
whisky on traders' permits to make everybody at home ingloriously
drunk, including the mounted police.  He recalls the day when the first
lieutenant-governor was inaugurated in Regina and what Frank Oliver
said about it.  Four years he was Deputy Commissioner of Education for
the Territories up till the inauguration of two new Provinces when,
travelling on a thousand miles of new railway and over the old main
line of the C.P.R., Laurier paid his first visit to the Great West and
discovered as one of its greatest potentialities J. A. Calder, who
under Premier Scott became Provincial Treasurer and Commissioner of
Education.

To people outside Saskatchewan--even in Alberta, he was very little
known--Calder has always been a somewhat nebulous figure; to some
critics, a rather suspicious character; but always--clever.  Being a
Sphinx he never courted popularity and seldom got it.  Scott was
brilliant, popular and impulsive.  His chief executive in Education,
Railways and Telephones and Premier _de facto_ during more than half of
Scott's term, was cold and calculating.  The West prefers warm-blooded
politicians.  Calder succeeded in spite of his manner, or his mask, or
whatever it may have been; and he did it by a penetrating knowledge of
the country, a superb capacity as administrator and a talent for
keeping out of trouble.  He was no man for prima donna scenes.  Even
the Education Department, a witch's cauldron of troubles over the
Separate School question in the new provinces, never entangled him in
theatricals.  He was unpopular with the Opposition as soon as the new
Government began, because he was regarded as a Civil Service
interloper.  What business had a school inspector in politics, and in a
Cabinet?

Calder demonstrated that best when he handed over the educational
cauldron to Scott and became Minister of Railways and Telephones.  Here
was a department of utility administration in which he shone.  He had
great political executive ability.  When Scott was absent more than
half his time through illness, Calder was Premier.  There was no other
man to choose.  The liquor problem was more his to handle than the
Premier's.  Calder did not share the popular enthusiasm for
Government-dispensed liquor.  He knew the weaknesses of officials and
the historic thirst of the prairie.  The Opposition constantly accused
him of being in league with the liquor men.  Calder made no denial or
affirmation.  He was Mephisto enough to let people wonder whether he
was one thing or the opposite.

A man who knew Calder twenty-two years ago gave, not long ago, some
impressions of the Minister in connections with the liquor
administration.

"About two weeks after Saskatchewan went dry," he said, "I was spending
a night in one of the larger towns in the Province.  Among the other
guests at the hotel was a member of the Government.  In the lobby an
interesting argument waged throughout the evening, the Minister of
course, defending the action of the Government in closing the bars.
Among other things he told us about the relief work carried on by the
Dominion and Provincial Governments in certain districts where there
had been crop failures, in order that the destitute settlers might earn
or borrow enough to keep themselves and their families through the
winter.  He emphasized one mistake the Government had made in not first
closing every bar in the districts affected, because there were many
instances where every dollar that had been earned or borrowed had been
spent in the bars on the very day that it was received, by the men
whose families it was intended to save from freezing and starvation.

"I was telling this afterwards to one of the leading social reformers
of Saskatchewan, and a smile played over his face as I was speaking.
When I had finished he said:

"'He didn't tell you the whole story.  We recognized the necessity of
closing those bars before that relief work was started, and urged it so
strongly on the Government that they agreed to do it.  The
Orders-in-Council were drawn up and ready to be signed when Calder, who
had been absent from the Province on business, returned and immediately
it was all off.'"

Calder has a sister who is one of the leading social workers in Regina.
She has a profound regard for her talented brother Jim.

The liquor did more than even Separate Schools to disrupt Government
forces in Saskatchewan.  Calder was no hypocrite to weep over the moral
issues in prohibition.  He was not a profound governmentarian or a
champion of enforced morality.  A Government might own and operate
telephones, but not so well consciences.  The liquor administration
turned out to be a mess in Saskatchewan, largely because the
administration did not unanimously believe in the thing that the
majority seemed to want.  Calder was no more to blame than anybody
else, except that he was highest in the Government when the Premier was
away.

The reformers said that Calder was pro-liquor in the administration.
He seemed to have no opinions about that--at least for publication.
Ideals often run away with communities.  If he had only spouted a
little now and then he would have given people a chance to bring
something home to him, and himself a chance to get near the people.
Two or three scandals came up in departments over which he had control.
Commissions were appointed to investigate; they always exonerated
Calder.  Even in the search-light on liquor--as many as four, one after
another--no technical blame attached to the silent Minister.  Calder
may have had a contempt for either commissions or public opinion.  A
Sphinx is as a rule not much of a burning avenger of wrongs to the
community.  Besides Scott was continually running into emotional
trouble.  The Premier _de facto_ had the balance to keep.  He must work
while other people talked.

A German-born but thoroughly loyal detective engaged by the Borden
Government to report upon seditious activities of the German element
who were so badly disgruntled over the Wartime Elections Act, repeated
to the writer more than once with great vehemence that Mr. Calder had a
special interest in the _Regina Leader_, which was used to get votes
for the Administration, particularly among the German element.
Governments had been known to own newspapers before Calder ever began.
_The Leader_ was naturally a Government organ and may have needed pap.
This is a form of patronage hard to uproot.

When Scott finally retired the chief administrator did not succeed him.
Martin was picked, a safe, genial and popular man.  The Sphinx, it is
said, might have had the post; but he preferred to stay behind the
scenes.  Before that he had been much talked about as a possible
successor to Laurier--but with not much hope of succeeding.  There are
probably a number of reasons why Mr. Calder did not take the Provincial
Premiership.  Dig them out of Calder if you may.  He has never
explained.  He leaves it to his commentators.

We are privileged therefore to conjecture that:

Mr. Calder was pretty well sick of Saskatchewan politics and was
looking hard in almost any direction for a good way out;

Mr. Calder could see far enough into the near future of prairie
politics to know that Liberalism was becoming a label for something
else; and he was not disposed to come out as an Agrarian Liberal;

Mr. Calder wanted a chance to begin politics all over again, because
with all his practical success he felt that he had travelled some wrong
trails.

Possibly all of these had something to do with the case.  At the
Winnipeg Liberal Convention in 1917 he was a coalition-conscription
Liberal.  He worked against the Liberal machine that captured the
Convention by a fluke for Laurier.  Before that he was known to believe
in Union Government.  It was only common sense to make him one of the
Prairie triumvirate--Calder, Sifton, Crerar, who carried the West into
the Union.  Cloudy as his career has been, for no reason that anyone
specially cared to name, he might in Ottawa be a big force for the
Government.  He was a behind-the-scenes actor.  He knew something about
the art of winning elections and converting immigrants into voters.  He
was practical.  He would be needed in Ottawa--more than he could see
any use for his talent in Saskatchewan with its farmer-dominated
Cabinets.

Alberta has gone Agrarian.  All Saskatchewan needs is a change of
label.  Some psychological morning Premier Martin will get up and rub
out "Liberal" after his name, buy a big farm and set up as a National
Progressive.  Provincial Legislatures are things to be captured.  The
old parties shrewdly used them in the Ottawa game.  The new ones are
just as apt.  Too long these Western elective bodies have been on the
switch.  It is time to shunt them, once more, on to the main line that
leads to Ottawa--with a different company label on the cars.

By no exercise of the imagination can one behold Jim Calder becoming a
Grain-Grower Progressive.  The thing is anomalous.

On the other side of the Sphinx he is credited by those also who know
him well in Regina with going to Ottawa purely as a patriotic duty.  He
wanted some work to do for the whole country bigger than any he had
done in Regina.  The authority formerly quoted in this article had this
to say about Calder in 1917 when Calder took office in Ottawa:

"About the time of the Winnipeg Convention I was talking with the same
man whom I have already quoted, and we were discussing the enigma which
Calder's character and public record seemed to present.  I knew that my
friend was not especially a friend of Calder's, so his words seemed to
carry greater weight.

"'There is no person in Canadian public life,' he said, 'who has been
trying more conscientiously and consistently to be good than Calder.  I
will not say that his motive may be higher than that of political
expediency; but he has been and is more scrupulously careful to do
nothing that may reflect in any way upon his honour and integrity.  I
believe that he has set before him the highest possible ideal of public
service and that he is doing everything he can to live up to it.'"

A prominent citizen of Regina who has seen a good deal of Calder, both
in his home city and in Ottawa, has the same opinion; adding that
Calder never bamboozles a deputation with suave words or false hopes;
what the Cabinet thinks about any particular programme of a deputation
he already knows and suggests that a typed memo, which he will present,
will be as good as waiting days for a personal appeal.  In 1919 he
informed the writer that he proposed to enact much-needed reforms in
immigrating Canada, especially as to the quality of new-comers.

Why has Mr. Calder never made a big study of this absorbing question?
When the Premier went to the Imperial Conference, with his mind pretty
well made up on the Anglo-Japanese Alliance, why had he not in his
grip, to show the Conference, one common sense, powerful little book
signed by Hon. J. A. Calder, Minister of Immigration, giving a complete
exposition of Japanese life in Canada?  When we are all talking about
the good _entente_ with the United States why can't we get from the
Immigration Department in Ottawa a hand-book giving a complete picture
of what Americans have done in the West?

However, the Sphinx may have the best of reasons for not doing these
simple things.  But there is scarcely a Department of administration
that does not regard itself as a machine for winning elections as much
as for serving the people who pay for it.  Apart from all he has not
told us, I have no doubt Mr. Calder is doing a big reforming work on
immigration in Ottawa.

The Immigration Minister should be our leading sociologist.  He should
be able to diagnose communities.  He might easily begin upon Ottawa.
What a study a cross section of the Smart Set would be, especially upon
the arrival of a new king at Rideau Hall!  There's nothing in other
democracies quite like that.  Washington has a White House, but the
inmate is merely an elected servant of the State.  Rideau Hall is an
endowment, a gift of the gods.  The 30,000 people of greater and lesser
degree in Ottawa who normally or abnormally live by the Civil Service
are profoundly affected by the arrival, sojourn and departure of the
Governor-General.  They are vitally influenced and entertained by the
Parliamentary restaurant, even without the bar.  The social show
provided by Ministers' and members' wives and their visiting friends is
itself a subtle study in the art of getting on in the new world, which
is at the root of all immigration.  Bridge for money and dining out
with your friend's wife are within the reach of any ambitious
immigrant.  The Smart Set in Ottawa is an exotic colony all by itself.
Montreal and Toronto and Winnipeg can merely copy it.  Some of the
farmers have their eye on the Set; no, not to abolish it.  Women must
have their share in the Government.  Petticoats and politics are
affinities.  Farmers are no more necessarily immune from what is said
to have corrupted the Roman Empire than Tories or Grits.  Farmers in
fact, as Mr. Calder knows, are not the hope of the world; neither are
lawyers nor manufacturers.

Suppose we ask the Sphinx about this.  Listen in imagination to this
once Liberal, as with an astounding burst of candour he says:

"My friend, your description of my make-up may be as right or as
foolish as anybody feels disposed to think.  None of it bothers me.
What does bother me is the law of compensation.  Agree with me that the
manufacturer had his drastic innings with Canadian governments; that
tariffs and protected industries are the result; that lawyers--yes, I'm
a lawyer--have had a big day in our affairs because they had the talent
for schemes and speeches.  Admit that and conclude--that the very human
farmer thinks his turn is coming, and rather soon.  But--somebody who
was never educated as a Tory has got to help the
National-Liberal-Conservative Government to get an even chance to
administer this nation after the upheavals of war.  Somebody who moves
silently while others are talking their tongues loose may be needed to
manipulate----"

Before the Sphinx could complete his statement of the case he was
politely asked if he would care to inter his talents in the Canadian
Senate, and he suavely answered that such a thing might be a good way
to solve the conundrum, even though it would make a thoroughly stupid
last act in the play.




A TRUE VOICE OF LABOUR

MR. TOM MOORE

Many years ago an Irish poet visiting Canada and voyaging down the
Ottawa wrote a poem of which may people recall only the lines--

  "Row, brothers, row, the stream runs fast,
  The rapids are near, the daylight's past."


The Tom Moore about whom this article is sketched is not a poet.  He
is, in fact, one of the prosiest public men in Canada.  But we may
leave it to any of those who have known him during the past three years
when he has been President of the Trades and Labour Congress, if many
and many a time he has not felt some such sentiment as--

  "Row, brothers, row, the stream runs fast,
  The rapids are near, the daylight's past."


Since Mr. Charles Draper first became Secretary of that Congress he has
never known a period when so much was expected of a President by way of
limitless patience, statesmanship and self-control as has been shown by
Tom Moore.  The rapids were always close to this man, and there were
rocks under the rapids.  It took steady piloting by the captain to keep
the crew of the labour ship from getting holes in her bottom and going
down.

So far as one has been able to follow the career of Moore at the head
of the Congress, and as reported in the public press, he stands now and
always for adherence to the principle of Union in evolution.  He
believes in labour getting ahead; but not by the method of upturning
everything that is established just to see what kinds of crawling
things there may be underneath.

When we reflect that Canada is not primarily an industrial so much as
an agricultural country, it is startling to remember that two years ago
it was the home of the only organized attempt ever made in America on a
scale of efficiency to establish something closely resembling a Soviet
government.  The big Winnipeg Strike was a lurid menace to the
solidarity of labour in Canada.  West of Winnipeg, once the Red River
Soviet had been set up, there was a chain of inflammable centres to
link up with the revolution.  Calgary was the scene of one convention
which had sent a cable of sympathy to Moscow.  British Columbia was
full of seething susceptible elements, regarded by some of the Reds
across the border as the real centre rather than Winnipeg, of the One
Big Union idea.  The mines of Alberta were dominated by swaggering
foreigners who owed no allegiance to the British or any other flag
except the Red emblem.  Long ago under the influence of the clergy and
the Archbishop of Montreal, Quebec had created a Canadian Labour
movement intended to cut Canadian labour away from the American
Federation.  This was a phase of the Nationalism that had its
headquarters in Quebec, but had spread in various strange guises to
other parts of the country, when none of the clergy or intellectuals
behind the movement dreamed that the One Big Union insurgent against
the A.F.L. would be the most theatrical result.  Once get the O.B.U.
idea rampant in Quebec with its scores of big industries and its
thousands of poorly educated workers, and the Red movement was due to
spread faster than the United Farmers' programme had ever done.

In the propagation of the Red programme Ontario, and especially
industrial Toronto, was regarded as the buffer state.  But if the
Soviet had succeeded in Winnipeg and further West, then the whole
weight of that success marching upon Ontario, with Quebec bringing up
the eastern end, would form a sort of nutcracker device from which
Ontario would have had a hard time to escape.

This was the dazzling formula propounded at a time when every nation in
the world was in a state of ferment, and when the vast loose-jointed
nation known as Canada was in a condition of instability unknown since
it became a Confederation.  The apostles of the Red programme had all
the advantages of being able to sling the paint on to the canvas of the
future without caring overmuch about the drawing.  Men in large numbers
everywhere seemed ready to grasp at and embrace the unusual.  People
who for years had been ground down by high prices for the commonest
necessities, considered seriously the question of the "salariat"
joining forces with organizing labour under a banner that might be red.
Civilization, physically shattered by the war and hysterically
stampeded by the doctrine of self-determination of peoples--a high form
of Bolshevism--stood ready to inquire whether the theories being tried
in Russia were not, after all, right, no matter what butchery might be
perpetrated in working them out.

Revolutionary ideas were everywhere.

Everything prepared the public mind.

A barrage of propaganda had been set up--and kept up.

Legitimate Trades Unionism itself in Britain had subscribed to The Aims
of Labour put forth by Arthur Henderson, who foreshadowed barricades
and bayonets in London streets if the proletariat did not get their
"rights".

Canada did not surely escape.  We had the Winnipeg flare-up, which was
watched by legitimate labour across the border.  The A.F.L. was
challenged for authority in this country.  It came to the peculiar
pass, that in order to maintain the solidarity of Canada as constituted
by Government under the Old Flag, the legitimate leaders of labour had
to fall back upon the one continental organization which makes
brotherhoods, not across the seas, nor so much across Canada, but
across the border.

It was Ontario's opportunity; the steady old Province of some bigotry,
great industry, many labour unions, and more or less fixed ideas
regarding the function of Government.  The office of Tom Moore is in
Ottawa.  There the President of the Trades and Labour Congress is in
close touch with the Labour Department, with the _Labour Gazette_, with
the Government in Council.  We shall never know just how much of the
steady conservatism of Moore at the first Congress following the
Winnipeg strike, as well as at other Congresses later, was developed
and held steady by association with Government.

But whether or no, even though it was nothing but loyalty to the
established brotherhoods of the A.F.L. or a deeper loyalty to his own
ideas of the case, the rock-steady influence of Tom Moore at the
conventions was the one biggest hope of the indirect action element
winning out.  He was not opposed to Socialism.  He has to work with
Socialists--of many sorts.  The whole basic idea of the Federation of
Labour is a degree of Socialism.  But it was the Marxian brand of
Socialism born in Germany and transplanted to Russia to which Moore was
opposed.  He saw no field for this in Canada.  He believed that Canada
had a right to freedom of action.  At least if it came to a choice
between authority from the Gompers organization in the United States,
and the Lenine tyranny in Russia, the course was clear.  Time and time
again he was bombarded and machine-gunned by the Red elements in
Congress and Convention.  As often he solidly stood his ground, based
upon the older idea of labour getting its rights through negotiation
and later through the ballot.

  "Row, brothers, row, the stream runs fast,
  The rapids are near----"


But the daylight was not yet past for this Tom Moore.  He could see
ahead.

"I have seen Moore," says a close observer of him for two years, "faced
by labour opponents in a number of Western cities.  In all the howling
he has never lost his temper or his dignity."

It would have been so much easier for this man to lose his temper,
except that he knew it would be harder at the end when he had to face
his own steady rank and file accusing him of poor chieftainship.  It
would have been so much easier to compromise with the preachers of
glittering formulae, except that in the settling up he would have to
justify himself to those who suspected him of defection.

Moore stuck to the commonplace business of wages and hours and
agreements.  He had no head for the poetry of Utopias.  He knew, as he
knows, that wages are the chief item of cost in all commodities, and
that no matter what form of capitalism you choose, whether embodied in
a Soviet or in a close corporation of dividends, wages of labour must
be paid.  He knows that prices of living and of labour are almost
convertible.  Amid all the howling and paeaning for a better day, for
the new life, for the heaven upon earth, for the glorification of the
proletariat, he could stand hard and fast by the common necessity of
sticking to an agreement and as fast as possible bettering conditions.

We have heard independent observers say that the Reds have always shown
a grasp of the new life, while the Trades Union men were crawling along
with the uninspired programme of wages and hours; that the Reds were
the sacrificing idealists and the Unionists the selfish Tories who
wanted nothing more than to slowly improve their condition.  Well, the
logic of events seems to show that in the long run the Moores have the
gospel.  One scarcely cares to think what might have happened in
Canadian industry and common living had Tom Moore given way to the Reds
who came at him from almost every quarter.

At the 1920 Congress Moore had the old-fashioned courage to ask the new
Premier of Canada, Arthur Meighen, to address the delegates.  Of all
men, the man who prosecuted the leaders of the Winnipeg Strike was the
last to say anything to organized labour about milleniums or about
anything more Utopian than a common agreement between labour and
capital for the good of all.  Moore had no fear.  He believed that he
was right.  Had he invited Mackenzie King he would have got a speech
with more in it about the philosophy of Industry and Humanity, and
perhaps more to the point in the practical study of the labour
question.  By inviting the Premier, Moore paid respect to government.
Even Mr. Crerar might have made a more sympathetic speech.  But in the
Moore philosophy there is no radical connection between Crerar and
Labour.  In the organization of the Drury coalition between Labour and
the Farm he can see one way of getting the rights of each incorporated
into legislation.

But the Government is the final thing.  Statesmanship is bigger than
programmes painted on the clouds.  There's a vast deal to be done yet
in this country for the enfranchisement of labour in industry as it is
franchised in government.  There are pig-headed Tories of industry who
will have to illustrate tombstones before some of the old spirit of
repression of labour will die out in the nation.  But the die-hards are
fewer every year.  Some wages had to come down to get everything else
down.  But we believe also, as Moore probably does, that wages which
are the chief item of cost in all commodities ought to be as high as
production will stand and pay reasonable profits on investment; that
collective bargaining is sound as applied to individual industries, but
a form of bigoted tyranny when extended to the whole group or to the
sympathetic strike; and that the slogan, "Union is Strength", does not
mean levelling efficiency to the lowest common denominator.

The day may come in the recorded minutes of Trades and Labour
Congresses in Canada when a man of broader and more constructive vision
may be needed to build the brotherhood out into labour statesmanship.
But for the past few years, and for the few to come, Canadian labour
and common weal may well arise to thank Tom Moore, who, when the rapids
were near and the rocks were under the rapids, kept his craft rowing
into safe water.  Tom Moore of Ireland was a poet.  Tom Moore of Canada
is not.  The play on the names is only an accident.  The parallel
holds.  May we never again need such a man in this country to be sure
that labour does not run us all on the rocks under the Red rapids.




A MAN WITHOUT A PUBLIC

SIR WILLIAM MACKENZIE

A few years ago, before Stefansson reported on the blond Eskimos, the
first Eskimo movie ever taken was shown in Toronto to a small audience
who waited an hour for the film, which did not begin until a thick,
grizzly man with shrewish, penetrating eyes came in with his party.

"Sir William Mackenzie, late as usual," whispered one.  "He never
arrives on time at a public function, often sleeps at a play, and
sometimes when his family invite musicians to his home he plays bridge
in a distant room so as not to hear the music."

"Oh, yes," nudged the other; "but Sir William, you see, owns this film.
It was taken by his own exploration party."

"Oh!  Then the last scene will probably be Eskimos laying railway ties."

"Oh, no.  Digging up mineral deposits.  Iron--Sh!"

It was a wonderful film full of epical energy and primitive beauty;
picturing one of the few kinds of people in Canada that Mackenzie had
never been able to link up to civilization.  The room was hung with
costumes, curios and weapons of these folk, all of which were
afterwards presented to the Royal Ontario Museum by Sir William, who
was never enormously interested in ethnology.  And that exploration of
the far North was the last act in the complicated drama of William
Mackenzie's great discoveries in Canada.

A study of Mackenzie is useful under the head:

    WHAT DID YOU--NOT--DO TO WIN THE WAR?


He was appointed in 1915 on an "Economic Commission" which seems to
have practised a rigid economy on what it did for the country, because
it was never heard of again.  However, it was No. 1A of the 46 war-time
commissions, and because Mackenzie was a member it should have a
memorial.

There is one man in Germany something like William Mackenzie, who makes
money almost by magic out of utilities and buys up concerns in other
countries with money which he made in his own.  His name is Hugo
Stinnes.  Mackenzie is a bigger man and a higher type than Stinnes; but
each man regards his country as a commercial asset to be developed;
each is a wizard of a species of applied finance.  For years Mackenzie
was of speculative interest in Canada to people who had never even seen
his photograph.  He was the man who had a second headquarters in Ottawa
and a branch office in every provincial legislature except Prince
Edward Island.  We almost had Provincial Premiers lullabying to their
Cabinets:

  "Hush ye, hush ye, do not fret ye,
  The Black Douglas shall not get ye."


Mackenzie seemed to arise about twenty-five years ago from some magic
mountain and to stride down upon the plains with the momentum of a Goth
army.  He was a contractor who became for ten years a demigod.
Sometimes before the war when people saw him on the street they paused
to watch him walking as though a black bear had suddenly wandered down
from Muskoka.

"By Jove!  Mackenzie's back again."

"And is that William Mackenzie?"

"Did you never see him before?"

"No, sir, I never saw him before."

"Well, take a good look.  He's just going to lunch.  That man brought
back sixty million dollars this time from Threadneedle Street.  A gang
of reporters met him at Montreal to get the good news---more money for
Canada.  Great game!  He got forty millions a year ago or so."

"Who's that benign man with him?"

"That's a Provincial Premier.  His province wants more railways and the
Government has to guarantee more bonds----"

"Oh, then he sells bonds with Provinces for security?"

"That's the big idea.  Why, what's wrong with it?"

"Oh, I guess it's all right."

"Of course it is.  Railways can't be built out of earnings of lines
built last year.  Traffic's too thin; has to be developed.  Mackenzie's
building lines for a real population Canada, my boy, is a terrific
country to railroad.  The C.P.R. got land and cash grants.  Mackenzie
takes Government-guaranteed bonds.  The whole country is on the same
road.  We import people on to homestead land and we have to borrow
money to set the people up so that they'll become real Canadians----"

"Yes, especially at election time.  But tell me--who finally owns these
railroads?"

"Well, you've got me.  Nobody has figured that out yet.  Everything is
too new.  All I know is that Governments are behind Mackenzie, and the
people elect the Governments, and the people want the roads, and if
they don't get 'em the Government probably goes out.  Anyhow I take off
my hat to Sir William Mackenzie as a great man."

Nine-tenths of Canada used to think that Mackenzie was a great man.
The more he borrowed in England on Government-guaranteed bonds, and the
more he invested in Mexico and South America, and the greater number of
street railways, power plants, transmission lines, ore mountains, new
towns, smelters, docks, ships, whale fisheries, coal mines and land
companies that he and his able partner Mann were able to octopize, the
greater the country thought both these men were--and especially
Mackenzie.

Toronto Board of Trade once gave a dinner to these men to celebrate the
fact that by the building of the new line to Sudbury at a cost of about
fifteen millions, Toronto was at last actually located on a Mackenzie
road and had a right to be made the headquarters of the system.  A deer
in some places could have jumped from that line to the new line of the
C.P.R. built at the same time--and about the same cost.  There was no
farmer in Ottawa to prevent the C.P.R. from getting a charter to
double-track this line.  It was the same year that Mackenzie
inaugurated the Canadian Northern line of steamships, the two Royals,
and for lack of tidewater was compelled to dock them at Montreal under
the shadow of the C.P.R., who of course did not join in the civic
welcome.  And in the same year people were talking--as they are now
again--about Toronto and Port Arthur becoming ocean ports.  The wonder
was that Mackenzie did not see to it.  But he was fairly busy, tying
Halifax to Vancouver by the Yellowhead Pass, and giving Provincial
Cabinets new ideas about government.

Without a doubt William Mackenzie had a mandate from this country to do
a great work--and he overdid it.  Bankers and other financiers agreed
that he had found new ways of investing creative money.  Scarcely a
teacher of geography but admitted that Mackenzie was changing the map
of this country so fast that a new one became necessary every three
years.  New towns sprang up at the rate of a mile a day of new railway
built by Mackenzie.  Every new town became a monument to this man's
faith in the future of Canada.  Even the old city of Montreal, preserve
of the C.P.R., lent its mountain to Mackenzie for a tunnel and a "Model
City" on the hinter side.

There was always money to be had.  A map of Canada in Mackenzie's
satchel when he went to England to see money lenders seemed under his
talk as big as the whole British Empire.  It was not common Empire
patriotism to refuse either the money or the guarantees for the bonds.
The whole of Canada backed Mackenzie's notes.  It was he, not Sir
Thomas White, who invented the principle of Victory Loans whereby the
nation becomes your banker.  Between building a new line and operating
a line built last year, there was no system of accounting that could
audit his books.  The centipede became so vast and complex that no
banker could begin to understand it.  Mackenzie never made the effort.
He was developing Canada.

The Saskatchewan valley was the one great trunk Eldorado, the greatest
discovery of natural resources ever made in Canada.  The settlers in
that valley wanted more people, the people wanted the railways, the
Government needed the voters, and Mackenzie wanted settlers, people,
voters, Government and all.  If a Government was obstreperous,
Mackenzie might lend a heavy hand to help turn it out at the next
election.  It was not proper for a Government to obstruct him.  He was
the over-man.

In no other nation has there ever been a man who could play such a
prodigious and prodigal game with the resources of the whole country.
Mackenzie mobilized the nation before the war.  Millions of people in
Canada used to regard him as a sort of magnified Daniel Drew--the
father of Wall Street and watered stock and corrupt-contract railways.
But Mackenzie was a broader man than Drew, with a much higher sense of
honour.  Drew admitted that he was a wonderful Methodist, that he had
been a profiteer of the Civil War, and that he had starved a railway of
rails so that it killed a large number of people in an accident.
Mackenzie was no Methodist; and he never was a profiteer from any
emergency of the people.  He wanted Canada to prosper.  All his profits
must come from greater wealth in Canada, which he did much to produce.

Mackenzie had more faith in Canada than most of the politicians had.
He wanted a great Canada, chief Dominion in a great Empire, The best
way to conserve a nation's wealth, he said once, is to develop its
resources.  We never had such a developer.  He never was a born
railwayman, any more than he was a pure financier.  He was a colossal
exploiter of national resources by means of borrowed money.  In the era
before Mackenzie we had Clergue at the Soo.  Clergue was a pigmy
forerunner of Mackenzie.  What Clergue did in Algoma the other man
aimed to do for the whole country, And he almost did it.

Asked once why he gave so much leeway to men like Mackenzie and Mann,
Sir Wilfrid Laurier is reported to have said:

"Well, what other kind of men could you have to do such remarkable
work?"

Beaverbrook said at a dinner in Canada not long ago:

"I never was a William Mackenzie.  I created nothing as he did."

The debacle of Mackenzie railways was never contemplated by Mackenzie.
He did not even imagine that it was possible--except that he was
prophetically troubled by the ambition of Laurier to create a third
transcontinental.  He had the right of way in this.  He and Mann had
developed the Canadian Northern out of a little stub line in Dauphin,
Manitoba.  The thing grew because it served the people, and the people
lived in a fertile country that needed a road to market.  The whole
basic idea of the Mackenzie roads was to give more and more people a
road to market.  The original idea of the Grand Trunk Pacific and the
National Transcontinental was to rival the Canadian Pacific monument to
John A. Macdonald by erecting a railway monument to Wilfrid Laurier.

The race of the railways just about broke the nation's neck.  It was
not all the fault of Mackenzie that the race ever began, or that it was
carried on to insanity.  He was a practical philosopher to perceive
that a Government is an elective corporation capable of manipulation in
the interest of an all-Canada enterprise needed and wanted by the
people.  He was a master cynic to surmise that when the future came to
balance the accounts, Father Time would be a very bewildered assignee.

The war was very ill advised.  Mackenzie had no use for war.  He never
could see in the predicament of a nation any chance to profit for
himself.  He wanted perpetual prosperity.  It never occurred to him,
perhaps, that some day critics would arise to say that the country
called Canada had done more for William Mackenzie than he had ever done
for the country; and that when the parent utility of the cycle which he
had helped to create was declared bankrupt, he had no rights in the
case whatever and never should have been paid a dollar of indemnity for
the common stock.

But as the country had submitted to Mackenzie's system of building
railways, so it was compelled to be content with the Royal Commission
method of adjudicating what the builders should get out of the wreck.

Financiers and politicians and common citizens may wrangle till
doomsday about the ethics of this debacle.  They will never get anybody
to understand it.  The thing is an economic outlaw like its author.
Mackenzie as a common storekeeper would have been sold for taxes.  As a
railway builder he staged the greatest pageant of industry ever known
in Canada, and when the show went off the road because it was no longer
able to pay its bills, took what he could salvage of the properties and
left other men to wrestle with the reconstruction.

We shall never have another Mackenzie.  Bigger men may arise.  More
unusual characters may stalk out of obscurity into places of eminence
and power.  But there never again can be an era like the Mackenzie
epoch, because that kind of experience is suffered and enjoyed but once
in a nation's lifetime.  He still has big interests, some of them
gradually being taken over by governments and municipal corporations.
But he has shot his bolt, and it was a Jovian big one.  No doubt he is
enormously rich.  That does not matter.  Canada no longer cares whether
he is rich or poor.  Once a demigod in our national ledgers, he is now
a grizzled relique of his former energy.  He used to be a despot feared
by those who had to work under him, admired for his superhuman audacity
and power to get what he wanted just because he knew why and when he
wanted it, and capable of inspiring an almost insane loyalty to a
man-made system that never was anything at all but an economic mirage.
He is now just William Mackenzie, more or less a citizen, now and then
interviewed laconically by a reporter who never can extract anything
but arid commonplaces from what he says to the public.

Because, to William Mackenzie there never was any real public.  What he
cared about was the prosperous nation upon which he could build and
build without limit till he died.  When the nation came to a crisis in
the war he did nothing to help it, except to let the Railway War Board
pool his lines for traffic and the Government commandeer his ships.
The man who years before had been regarded as the greatest doer in
Canada, when the country and all Mackenzie's works along with it came
to the great test, never so much as lifted a personal finger to help in
the work that had to be done.  Mackenzie had done his work in
prosperity.  In the great predicament he had no function.  The nation
paid him his ducats and let him go.

This, if we are concerned about the man value of Canada, is a tragedy.
For there was in William Mackenzie somehow, with all his ruthlessness
and audacity and semi-piratical creed, the element of a kind of great
man.  There is in his uncommon face the look of a man who with less
excess of one quality might have become a wonderful citizen.  Nature
made him vastly selfish on a scale big enough to devise a totally new
scheme for over-capitalizing Canada.  She denied him the commoner human
qualities that make a man a constructive citizen whether his country is
in weal or woe.

The epic which Mackenzie and his partner achieved in this country
out-bid in dimensions, variety and the use of practical imagination,
even the work of Rhodes in South Africa.  It was a feat of economic and
financial engineering which but for its peculiarly selfish energy and
ruthless characteristics, might have become a monumental contribution
to the human welfare of Canada.  No man of common brain or conventional
ethics could have been the dynamic head of such a work.  For years,
decades, this astounding adventurer exercised his precarious despotism
over the country that he might make its prosperity a factor in his own
success.  In gambling with its securities he hoped to multiply its
wealth without diminishing its happiness.  The constructive imagination
and tireless energy that he expended on his great cycle of utilities,
had it been spent by a poet would have produced epics and dramas.  But
in all the things he did and the words he said, there is no record of
any sentiment of sacrifice for the good of a nation.

William Mackenzie had his day, while Governments rose and fell.  His
day is done.  The public which he dazzled and outwardly despised has no
credulity left for any further hero-worship of such a man.  "Well, what
does Mr. Mackenzie want now?" was the oft-repeated query of the
bewildered Laurier to Mackenzie agents in Ottawa.  No Canadian Premier
will ever ask such a question again.  Ottawa has no further
possibilities for William Mackenzie of any interest to the public.  The
kind of prosperity created by such men as he is played out in Canada
forever.

The forecast than Mackenzie and Flavelle might form a new two-man junta
to operate National railways was too absurd even to merit denial.  Such
a partnership would merely revive the old Schoolman debate of the
Middle Ages--What happens when an irresistible force meets an immovable
object?  The two mentalities are incompatible.  For twenty years the
chief common ground between them was the Canadian Bank of Commerce, of
which Sir Joseph is a director, who long ago discovered that the total
assets of the bank were but a turbine in the Niagara of Mackenzie
finance.

And William Mackenzie who built the conspiracy of enormous interests
with which his name is identified, was never meant to be a railway
operator at all.  One might as well expect Lloyd George to be a
successful manager of Sunlight Soap and of Lord Leverhulme.




THE IMPERIAL BRAINSTORM

LORD BEAVERBROOK

Lord Beaverbrook could stroll into an Arab camp and in five minutes be
psychologically persona grata as the man who could make something out of
almost nothing.  He could learn the Arab language, adopt their customs,
interpret their ideas, transact their tribal business, and go away
without an Arab to admit that the strange new chief--or whatever they
might call him--would ever learn to be a true Arab.

This man without a congenial country has an unlimited talent for adapting
himself to the necessities of time, place and opportunity.  He has little
or no power to assimilate himself to the real life of the people.  He
trailed like a comet through the land of his birth and left it in a
mirage of finance before Canada had made him a citizen.  He went to
England where in a few months he had made himself intimate with public
affairs; and in ten years, "with all his honours thick upon him," he has
not yet become an Englishman.

Once only I met this extraordinary man, at close range, for a number of
hours.  He was a most absorbing study; and he knew it.  There never was a
moment when Beaverbrook could not consciously estimate the effect of his
actions upon some other man, or group of men.  As an actor he is not a
mediocrity.

A personal friend vividly describes meeting him at a small semi-private
dinner in a Canadian city.  The ostensible occasion was a mere
complimentary affair to his lordship.  The psychological objective
was--something else.  There began the conjecture.  What was it?

It must be inferred.  There are some men who study the effect of
themselves upon a group.  The group method of psychology is essentially
Beaverbrookian.

A number of speeches had been pre-arranged for this dinner on behalf of
various interests.  At the close of the talks Beaverbrook was asked to
respond to a toast of his own health.  He did so in a perfectly amazing
confessional of a speech, saying things which he said he felt sure no
journalist present would publish.  He was asked questions.  Each question
meant one more speech.  He made four in all, occupying much more than an
hour of time in a most graphic and humanly interesting account of things
that had happened behind the curtain in British politics, shrewd
estimates of the signs of the times, forecasts of coming events and vivid
delineations of great men whom he had intimately met in various parts of
Europe.

In all this there was not a trace of embarrassment or of suspicion.  The
little dynamo with the prodigious head and the baby mouth and the
intense, deepset, restless eyes stood by his chair, and with knuckles on
the table much of the time, talked down into the flowers directly in
front of him.  He spoke sometimes in a husky, low voice, now and again in
a smothered shriek, again in a tragic whisper.  He was in a small
gathering and he seemed to know that though the dingy, mysterious room
was somewhat high, he had no need to lift his voice to the shrill
impetuous discord that is said to characterize his speeches in Commons or
Lords.  He was carried away by some indefinable atmosphere.  What it was
he scarcely knew.  After the dinner he shook hands with people, delivered
himself of a number of snappy brusqueries, laughed a good bit and, almost
the last to leave the charmed precinct where he had unbosomed himself
among "congenial" souls, he wandered out.

Next day, lying poseurishly on a lounge in his room at the hotel, he said
to a confidante who had been with him at the dinner:

"Bunting!" (that is not the true name) "Will you kindly repeat to me some
of the things I seem to have said last evening.  I know I talked an
unconscionably great deal.  What on earth did I say?"

As it had been a perfectly abstemious occasion, one imagines that
Beaverbrook at the dinner was sincere, though playing the actor, and that
in his room he was both theatrical and insincere.

This man has a confusing, but in his own mind seldom confused, orbit of
his own.  He was a conundrum in Canada.  He is an enigma in England.
That he still considers himself a Canadian, because he was born here,
fortuned here and voluntarily exiled from here after he had completely
mystified a large number of people as to his working psychology, is
proved by the fact that he continues to come back here.  He also
professes to be manning the _Daily Express_ with Canadians.  He has been
for ten years the intimate of Bonar Law, also a distinguished Canadian of
sorts.  And a few months ago there was a rumour, which no one remembers
him to have refuted, that he was a likely candidate for the
Governor-Generalship of Canada.  Of course if ever Rideau Hall should
take Beaverbrook for a tenant, it will be time to take refuge in a
Canadian republic.

It is easy to think disagreeable things about Beaverbrook, because he is
so enormously interesting, so pathologically unusual, and altogether so
brilliant and resourceful a phenomenon.  I have called him the Imperial
brainstorm.  A dozen other titles would fit him as well.  There are times
when one almost imagines himself mingling an element of real liking for
the man with one's unfailing admiration of his remarkable ability.  But
always when you feel like that cordial handshake and talking to him with
brusque familiarity, there is the intuitive feeling that one of the two,
perhaps both, might live to regret it.

You cannot absorb the atmosphere of such a man.  Whatever the sterling
qualities of his character, the approximate miracles of his achievements,
the warlike strategy of his career, you judge him at last by that
indefinable but inexorable law of common congeniality.  To live at close
range with Beaverbrook, to become part of his daily scheme of vibrations,
to work either with, or for, or even over him as a regular part of one's
programme would be to a normal man a penalty almost amounting to a crime.

Though of course tastes differ, even in companions.  There are people who
rather like hobnobbing with Beaverbrook.  Some are interested in his
idiosyncrasies, as though he were a good subject for a novel.  Some enjoy
the sensation of playing moth to a social flame.  Others--perhaps--have a
deep respect for his money which, like Carnegie's, is supposed to be a
perplexity to himself to know how to spend it that he may die poor.

Well, the noble lord has his idioms.  Discussing the details of the
little dinner already referred to a flippant but devoted critic said:

"I think he would enjoy speaking right in front of that huge fireplace.
He would consider it Napoleonic."

As to the social orbit of Beaverbrook, one may suspect that it is a
rather exotic atmosphere in which the sense of true human equation is
lost in a jumble.  A man who can entertain almost simultaneously, at his
country home, financiers, politicians, authors, and actresses from his
own theatre at Hammersmith, may be regarded as a shrewd social mergerist
but scarcely as a subtle entertainer of congenial souls.  As for the
discomfort of knowing what to do with his money, Beaverbrook has never
complained; during his latest visit to Canada he was offered and he
refused the purchase of two bankrupt newspapers each of which thought
that the acquisition of such a side line to the _Daily Express_ might
enable him to do some of the good in this country which he failed to
achieve while he lived here.

Estimating this man by the superficial but rather subtle qualities by
which he has achieved success, it seems a sort of irony to think what he
might have done and did not do for the country of his birth.  What did he
ever do for Canada?  Before the war--nothing.  He made huge fortunes
here.  He created mergers here.  He started consolidated companies here
that in time fought their way into the appreciated valuations of the
stock market.  He became Canada's greatest adventurer in creating a sort
of "wealth" from the merging of small, sometimes decrepit, concerns under
a new name and new issues of stock; just as Mackenzie was our greatest
adventurer in creating wealth from borrowed money.  Beaverbrook worked
mainly with small groups to whom he left the task of raising most of the
capital.  Thus his personal gains came neither from the immediately
increased earnings of companies which he amalgamated, nor directly from
the pockets of the shareholders.  Beaverbrook never made a dollar by
defrauding a director or luring unsuspicious dollars out of the pockets
of common people.  That species of tactics so often practised by men who
are near criminals was quite beneath him.  The laboratory where he got
his results was the stock market, which of course has its own codes of
ethics and plays its own remorseless game of making or breaking men.

His career here had most of the elements of romance.  Son of a poor
parson born in a cross-roads Ontario hamlet, brilliant but erratic
student at Dalhousie University, down-at-the-heels insurance agent in
Halifax, youthful merger of two small banks at a time when he was unable
to pay for his own clothes--we have here symptoms of a career which might
have turned into a character of high value in Canadian politics, public
service or social reform.

But Nature thrives on migrations.  Even a man sometimes takes better root
when he is transplanted.  The Beaverbrook that England has is a more
unusual character than the Max Aitken that Canada lost.  Canada to be
sure had lost enough brilliant men to other nations and imported enough
able men from abroad.  It was time to produce and to keep our own.  There
was national work for them all to do.  Aitken came up in the boom time of
Canada.  He fitted the time.  A nation's financial adversity was no
occasion for him.  He followed the wake and profited by the experiences
of builders of railways, industries, banks and provinces.  Every move
forward of the country in commercial expansion was a nudge ahead for his
chariot of fortune.  He was the most successful "bull" factor Canada ever
had.  But in all probability, were he to be flung into one of the
demoralized nations of democratized Europe he could make money even in
disaster.

Before he was thirty-five Max Aitken had become a multi-millionaire.  He
worked much as clever but humbler men have invented formulae to beat
bookmakers at the races.  Having done all this, at so early an age, what
was left?  Superficially we should have said--public life.  He had the
money, the talent, the leisure.  Canada had the need.

But Max Aitken never so much as became a pound-keeper in Canada, not
because he had not the opportunity, but because he had the shrewd sense
to feel that the land where he had made "his pile" was not the land in
which to serve his country.  To serve a nation means as a rule to deal
directly with the public.  Max Aitken had never dealt with the public.
Neither does he yet--except indirectly through a big daily newspaper of
phenomenal circulation.  On his last visit to Canada he was invited to
public functions.  He consistently declined; not because he shunned
popularity or hated the limelight, but because he would not have felt
comfortable.  In one of his speeches he pointed out that the securities
which he put on the market years ago were all now listed as paying
ventures.  It was more comfortable to make that remark as a returned
celebrity than to have made it as a citizen.

His own story of why he went to England, and stayed there, is ingenuous.
He said that he went in order to do business; that he tried to talk
business; that the public men with whom he had conference insisted on
talking politics; that he succumbed and stayed, winning a seat in the
Commons, and almost before an ordinary man could have said "Jack
Robinson", he was hobnobbing with men the calibre of Bonar Law, Lloyd
George, Northcliffe.

Only fragmentary accounts of Beaverbrook's political history in England
have as a rule drifted over here.  To show what an amazing story it is,
nothing can be better than to quote a curiously apt summary written for
two Canadian periodicals by Arthur Baxter, who for some years now has
been a sort of Boswell to Beaverbrook.



In 1910 captured the seat for Ashton-under-Lyne.

In 1912 a vigorous and successful attack on Lloyd George concerning
finance matters in the House.

From 1911 to 1914 he entered parliamentary intrigue and gradually his
home at Leatherhead became a Mecca for puzzled politicians.

During this time somebody made him a Knight.

The Irish situation was more than threatening; the tariff issue was
causing bitterness; Austen Chamberlain with a minority following was
fighting Walter Long to lead the Tories and on this troublesome sea Sir
Max Aitken's barque bobbed up and down with the skipper's eyes keenly
alert.  He saw the possibilities in Bonar Law.  When Chamberlain and Long
created a deadlock, Beaverbrook advocated Bonar Law as leader of the Tory
Party.  To make his voice heard more distinctly he purchased the _Daily
Express_ and backed his candidate with a powerful but (then) not very
profitable newspaper.  Law has the reputation for modesty, but his
fellow-Canadian led him to the barrier, started him off and when he
stopped running he found himself leader.

For some time it had seemed as if Asquith's Coalition Government would
survive the war, but late in 1917 it was obvious that the old ship was
leaking badly.  Carson was the first to propose scuttling the frigate.
The others argued that even a sinking ship was better than no ship at
all, so the Irishman went overboard and sailed away on his own raft.
Bonar Law representing the good old Tory element kept on working the
pumps; Mr. Asquith kept on assuring the crew that all they needed was to
"wait and see"; and Lloyd George was wondering whether he had better take
a hand at the pumps as well or throw both Asquith and Bonar Law into the
sea.

At this juncture a sail was sighted.  It was Max Aitken's barque that
"hopped aboard" and took in the spectacle of his old Maritimian sweating
at the pumps; and noticed with a critical eye the extremely able
appearance of that able-bodied politician, Lloyd George.

Beaverbrook thought the situation over--swiftly.  He saw that the genial
Micawber on the Bridge could not be routed as long as Bonar Law and Lloyd
George stuck to him.  But even if they could be persuaded to heave the
skipper overboard, could they sail the ship and keep the crew loyal as
well?

He decided that Carson had to be brought back to the fold, so jumping
into his little craft he scoured the political sea and returned shortly
with the uncrowned king of Ireland on board.

But Lloyd George, Bonar Law and Sir Edward Carson loved each other as
much as three Prima Donnas.  They all agreed that Asquith was sailing to
disaster, but they weren't sure that they didn't prefer disaster under
the Old Chief to prolonged life in each other's company.

Beaverbrook had seen a vision and he knew that Lloyd George was the only
man in England capable of forming a ministry that would last six months.
Day after day the Canadian stuck to his task and gradually the three men,
all smarting from old political quarrels, agreed to send an ultimatum to
the skipper that they demanded a sailing committee under the leadership
of "Pincher" Lloyd George.

In other words they demanded a War Cabinet with the Welshman as Chairman.

Finally, in desperation, Lloyd George called for a mutiny.  Bonar Law
summoned all the Tory crew around him.  They went to the bridge and told
the Skipper that they were sorry to break the news to him, but it had
been decided that, all things considered, he had better walk the plank.

Mr. Asquith was dismayed, blustered, then resigned--defying the mutineer
Welshman to do any better.  His Majesty called on Bonar Law to form a
cabinet; the Canadian declined with thanks but mentioned the name of a
certain Welshman as a likely candidate for the job.  The Welshman was
asked--and accepted.  Two days later his Cabinet was formed.  Carson took
over the pumps; Bonar Law went up to the bridge and Lloyd George
delegated to himself the rank of Commander and Pilot of Britain's ship of
State.

And that is the story of Beaverbrook's tremendous contribution to winning
the war.  He secured most of the Labour Party, the Tories, and Carson for
Lloyd George; without them the Prime Minister could never have formed a
government.

Sir Max Aitken wanted more than a Peerage for his work; he had hoped for
a position of tremendous power, but the Government made him a Lord and he
went back to Canadian publicity.



Imagination tries to conceive of any Englishman coming over here to merge
Borden, Laurier and Crerar.  Imagination fails.  Not even Aitken could
have done it.  That he succeeded in England where he must have failed in
Canada must have reasons.

1. Experience in mergers.

2. Prestige as a Canadian.

3. Advantage of being--Max Aitken.

The first we understand.  The second involves the Empire.  Aitken was--if
anything that could be labelled--a Tory.  He had no trouble becoming a
Unionist.  His success with Bonar Law made it possible in getting rid of
Asquith.  He could call Carson "Edward".  He could think as fast as Lloyd
George.  It was a time for quick thinking--and action.  He had opened all
the heavy doors in Montreal--and closed them upon all but those he wanted
inside.  He tried the same thing in England.  His audacity was inspired.
Something had to be done.  Somebody must be the middleman.  Aitken had an
uncanny faculty for sizing up situations; for manipulating men; for
interpreting ambition--because no man in England had an ambition
surpassing his own.  He could play political chess and absorb superficial
culture at the same time.  Books, plays, authors, artists, manners,
accent--all were grist to his mill.  He was an astute actor.  He could
assume a virtue; simulate anxiety; hover about closed doors on tiptoe;
speak in the awed whisper; in the event of a crisis peer tragically into
men's faces.

England knew she had taken a queer character to bosom; a child who was
growing up at Gargantuan speed, an _enfant terrible_ of sudden and
prodigious experience; a creature who could sit up o' nights and plot and
organize and cabal and next morning rub out the wrinkles at tennis,
amiable if he beat his opponent, growling and savage if beaten, ready for
a campaign in the afternoon, a speech in the evening and a conference at
midnight.  Or he could plunge into polite arts, talk familiarly of
literature with duchesses, undergo a surgical operation to-day and sit up
for correspondence to-morrow.  He has a brain whose recipe for complete
rest is "change of work"!  Barring Lloyd George and De Valera, he has
perhaps the most unusual brain in Great Britain.

No Canadian, already a millionaire, had ever done these things.  Not even
Gilbert Parker had so amazingly cultivated the accent.  Greenwood,
diligent and talented, had been slow and determined.  Aitken--opened the
heavy doors.  As in Canada, he was at last able to close out all but
those who could play the game of the hour.  This Canadian could not only
talk, but act, Empire; not merely ape, but superficially assimilate,
England; and he understood the United States--because he was
temperamentally something of an American.

His success on the surface is incomprehensible.  The one key to it is his
persistent cultivation of Bonar Law, who in the Coalition was the great
prop to the Premier.  Beaverbrook hugely admires Lloyd George.  He
reverences Bonar Law.  The Premier and himself had too many points,
though not characteristics, in common to become running mates.
Intimately congenial to the Unionist leader, Aitken was never allowed to
become indispensable to the Premier.  His brief term as member of the War
Cabinet terminated almost suddenly.  Was it voluntary?  Or ambitious?
What did this Warwick want as reward more than the peerage which may have
been designed to chloroform an electric battery?

We are not told.  Once during the second year of war he offered to raise
and equip and command a battalion from New Brunswick.  His offer was not
accepted.  He went to Sam Hughes.  "Sam," he said, "I want a job in the
Canadian Army!"

He got it.  Aitken's work as Eye Witness to the Canadian troops and the
publication of "Canada in Flanders" was the performance of a man who in
the great crisis of war had found a sudden and sincere interest in his
native land that he had never exhibited while he was a citizen of this
country.  He showed a grasp of the human as well as the technical side of
war.  A man who could so rediscover his own nation could surely do
something new in helping to co-ordinate the Empire.  He has an
astonishing knowledge of great public men in all countries, a thorough
commercial knowledge of Europe and Asia, and--may we say a genius for a
sort of secret diplomacy?  His war record demonstrates most of these
qualities.  His Canadian War Memorials are a proof that he understands
how to make his own country useful to British artists.

What then did Beaverbrook expect as reward for his political services,
beyond a peerage and the sublime sense of having "done his duty" where he
saw it?

Governor-Generalship of Canada?

Ambassadorship to the United States?

Secretaryship of State for the "Colonies"?

Or the Chancellorship of the Exchequer?

There is really nothing else left for an ambition like this except the
Premiership of Great Britain.  Brilliant, plotting, crafty and
phenomenal, this young man has still the spirit of the corsair.  England
has not absorbed him.  But there is a general election pending over
there.  The Coalition is not on Gibraltar.  Party cleavages are rife.
Labour, Liberals, Socialists, Syndicalists, Bolshevists and old-line
Unionists are all pitching camps about the Premier's Verdun.  When the
battle really begins will Gen. Beaverbrook be in the citadel, or working
in a headquarters tent to merge any three of the common enemy into a
force that will haul down the Coalition flag?

"Why do you think Lloyd George will come back as powerfully as ever?" he
was asked here, after his admission that for the time being the Premier
was in the doldrums of unpopularity.

"Because--he always does!" was his cautious reply; in which one almost
detected the suspicion that he might not; and if so--what?

These are some of the unpredictables.  Even the answer Beaverbrook
himself might give to-day might be challenged by his action of to-morrow.
But this man has always succeeded in finance when a country was
prosperous, and in politics when the nation was confronted by emergency.
He is still too ambitious to adjourn permanently to Leatherhead, Surrey;
too young to write his memoirs.  England is a new world.  And it may
be--unless he has already alienated his personality from his genius--that
one of its picturesque discoverers will be Lord Beaverbrook.

Meanwhile he remarks that most of his friends are in Canada.  One misses
at least a fumbling guess, if in the days to come he will not value those
friends, whoever they may be, more than he ever did when he was making
millions here or merging politicians over there.  Such a man seldom moves
his forces just for parade.  As Aitken used this country to get himself
preferment in England on account of the Empire, so it may be suspected
that he has used England--not impossibly--to reclaim in this country
whatever credit he lost some time before he left it.

Meanwhile until the Government of Great Britain finds some better
function for this phenomenon, we recommend that he be made the official
economic investigator of the Empire.  Up to the present this has been a
pastime for leisured travellers like Lord Southesk, Sir Charles Dilke,
and Rider Haggard.  A man with Beaverbrook's ability to analyze economic
conditions and gain the confidence of men in high positions could be of
incalculable value in getting a thorough survey of the commercial and
political resources of a commonwealth which as yet nobody seems to
understand.  After that the Government might well make him Viceroy of
India, where he might apply his talent for group-coalition to the great
problem of constitutional Home Rule.




CONCLUSION

A Canadian newspaperman once flippantly asked the late W. T. Stead:

"What do you think about continentalism in North America?"

The answer came just as flippantly:

"Every nation has a right to go to the devil in its own way.  Canada
should not be denied the privilege."

There was a blunt candour about the reply that even from an egotist like
Stead meant infinitely more than the soothing-syrup idealism dispensed by
some of the visiting prophets to this country.  Stead did not mean that
in establishing independence of the United States, Canada should cut the
painter from the Great British Commonwealth.  But he was a trifle cynical
about the young nation, just as Disraeli was fifty years ago when he said
that "these colonies would yet be a millstone about Britain's neck".
Neither of them was more cynical about us than we usually are about
ourselves, never in theory, but in practice.

Most of the men sketched in the foregoing pages, as well as hundreds of
others in public life, realize that Parliament and Legislatures have a
hard time to keep themselves from going to the devil, and that so far as
they go along that road the nation travels with them.  As an experiment
in nationhood we have some peculiar and original weaknesses, as well as
strengths.  Belgium, for instance, could be tacked by Atlas overnight on
to one of our northward coasts, or set down as an island in some of our
northern waters, when only a geographer would notice the difference.
Belgium has a king and two million more people than Canada.  We have
slightly more territory than the United States, when New York State alone
has as many people as our whole country.  We are as big as many Britains
and we have enough railway mileage to make Britain a spider-web, when our
population is about one-fifth of hers and our ultimate authority in
democratic government comes from Downing Street.  Yet there are prophets
among us who predict that we shall yet be the pivot of the Empire.

Once you begin to speculate about the future of this country there is no
end.  And the past of the nation has rather little to do with estimating
its future.  We have been a wide-open immigration country.  In twenty
years we have transformed ourselves by a foreign policy with which
Britain had nothing to do.  Twenty years more and we could do it again
with even more disastrous results.  In 1867 the great compromise known as
Confederation tied four and a half millions of people into a political
unity.  In half a century we doubled our population; built 30,000 miles
of transcontinental and branch lines of railway; made ourselves a race
congress imitation of the United States; enacted a National Policy of
protective tariffs that failed to protect us from ourselves; created an
Oriental problem on the Pacific, exaggerated a race problem on the
Ottawa, and developed an American-penetration system clear across the
country; sent a small army to help establish a similar government and
dual problem to our own in South Africa and a huge army to Europe to help
make the world safe for the kind of democracy of which we consider
ourselves a fair sample; created a small army of millionaires and had
bestowed upon us about an equal number of knighthoods as well as a number
of peerages, and four years ago petitioned the King through Parliament to
abolish the practice; gave a first mortgage on the country to one great
transcontinental railway, and a second and a third to two more which we
have since nationalized into government ownership because the roads were
bankrupt for the present and built for the future, which is yet a long
way off; developed a cycle of quite remarkable big industries and
federalized banks which a large element of our heterogeneous democracy
now consider a menace to the nation; and on the prairies which, shortly
after Confederation, we bought for a few millions sterling from the
Hudson's Bay Company, a Liberal Government, never contemplated by the
Fathers of Confederation, carved out two new great Provinces which for
ten years have tried to kill the Tory Party which gave the Northwest its
birth, all Liberalism that does not go back to the furrow, and aims to
abolish even the moderately successful economic system by which we have
come to our present state of comparative prosperity.

If that is the kind of thing that Stead meant by "every nation going to
the devil in its own way" it must be conceded that we have lost no time
over the going.  We are among the forward nations, even though we are
less radical than Australia.  No young nation ever accomplished visibly
and materially so much in so brief a period.  We had the enormous
scientific resources of the 20th century to give us momentum.  Perhaps we
were a little too fast on the down grade.  We still take some inspiration
from looking at the map to reflect that no other part of the British
Empire occupies so strategic a position as Canada.  We note that Canada
is not only the natural interpreter between Britain and the United
States--which it took some of our far-seeing statesmen a long while to
discover--but that we are also a transformer between the power-house at
Downing Street and the one at Tokio; that we are fair on the highway of
traffic and travel between London and Yokohama; that we have room within
a reasonable time for as many people as are now living in Britain, and
that if we are not too awfully anxious about going to the devil we can
make that population one of the most potential in the world for its size,
not only in producing things to eat and wear and export, but in helping
to hold the British Commonwealth steady long enough to let the old thing
work out its big share of the world's salvation.

Such is the outlook.  Meanwhile we have our innate defects, the first of
which arises from the vastness of geography and the littleness of
politicians.  Little politics in Canada are pocketed away in sections.
Some of our native born are the most parochial.  There are groups in
Canada as un-national as Eskimos who in some respects are our best
citizens because they owe nothing to, and expect nothing from, any
Government.

People shout about assimilation, not knowing to what pattern, if any,
foreign peoples should be assimilated.  The missionary goes abroad and
extracts from the heathen even the nobilities of his own faith and leaves
him often the miserable animosities of a creed.  Political and social
missionaries in Canada make the same mistake about foreigners.  It is a
great thing to Canadianize a race.  But we ought to begin by
Canadianizing some of our native-born.

Even our public men believe in political servitude.  A man goes to Ottawa
burning with zeal to inaugurate political liberation.  Six months or a
year produces sleeping-sickness.  He is given a hyperdemic [Transcriber's
note: hypodermic?] of conformity.  He gravitates into the formula of a
group.  His message is muzzled.  If not, it too often breaks loose in a
tirade on behalf of some section littler than even any of the groups in
Ottawa.

Big men do not, as is often said, go into Parliament.  There is a great
reason.  The wonder is that the few big men we elect stay there so long.
Government is supposed to be business.  But the business takes a long
while to do--even badly.  Ottawa is the place where the national
field-glasses too often get turned wrong end about.

We are seldom honest about public men.  A man's own party praises, the
opposite party damns him.  In an old nation this intellectual strabismus
is pardonable.  In a young nation it is a form of political suicide.  We
too often wait for a man to make a great speech before admitting
independent of party, that he is anything great as a man.

Because Canada is so vast, political leaders find it necessary to
enunciate one doctrine here, another one there.  This is an old trick;
playing the lights on stage when the spot-light is reserved for the big
local issues.  We are constantly besieged by "national policies".  Many
of them have very little to do with national citizenship.  Most of them
sketch out milleniums that are never realized.  We are a people of
extremisms.  When national prosperity is the objective we tolerate, and
even idolize, any man who is bold and big enough to capture the country
with his special-interest programme.  Then the delirium is over, heyday
is done, and the nation wakes up to classify as public plunderers the
very men whom it once regarded as the economic saviours of the country.

Our faculty of national criticism is not as yet strongly developed.
Thank heaven, we are not cynical; but it is better to be a hopeful cynic
than a disgruntled idealist.  Men will arise with specious programmes by
means of which they can hypnotize a group and aim at capturing the
country.  Progress carries on by means of such men and such groups.  But
the devil himself stands behind the stage bush to prod these zealots into
the limelight and the next moment to lead the claque in the gallery.  We
are carried away by the act, afterwards find that we have been duped and
hold indignation meetings after the show is safely ten miles down the
line.

Like all other nations we have had our share of "the new time coming".
During the war we had all the old parties dead and buried along with
patronage and race cries and public graft.  But while the preacher was
busy over the funeral rites a number of chief mourners were somewhere
"making hay".  A nation's adversity is too often some man's opportunity.
In moneymaking this is even worse than in politics.  It is too easy to
shout and to shed tears.  We deplore the past, suspect the future and
work hard to make ourselves solid for the present.

Many men in Canada do not regard public life as public service.  There is
little or no preparation for doing the nation's business.  Men are
log-rolled into Parliament and pitchforked into Cabinets.  The work they
are expected to do has little or no relation to the work for which nature
and experience intended them.  It is regarded a simpler matter to
administer a great State department than to manage a big industry.

Ottawa is the natural objective of all those who "want" something.  When
interests camp on the trail of Governments and of Parliament, the
interest of the nation is going to suffer--and it always has.  We are
paying in taxes now for the lobbying that went on ten years ago.  No
Government is ever considered so patriotic and humanly powerful that can
resist the inroad of "big interests".

Bigger interests arise.  In a storm of newly patented virtue they declaim
against the "big" ones.  They fail to admit that they merely want to
usurp instead of to magnify Government.  The political machine of the
country is regarded as a part of the machine by which special interests
prosper.  In its efforts to repudiate such a connection Governments
resort to the trick of clamouring on behalf of "the people".

Presently even the people lose faith in Government.  They come to believe
only in class-conscious groups.  No nation can be big whose parties are
small.  No parties can be great whose platforms are for the good of a
class or the veneration of what "my grandfather" used to think.

Elections are eternally war.  A general election has for a sure sign the
prediction on the part of the Opposition that the Government intend to
"put one over" in order to grab another lease of power.  Experience has
taught us that the prediction is too often true.  It does not teach us
that it is time to abandon the expectation or the practice.  Men who in
party bondage have helped to win elections by redistribution after a
census, and to award patronage to the victors, arise years later in
Opposition to denounce such practices when carried on by the present
Government.  The pot usually succeeds in calling the kettle black.  Hence
a bad black eye to political sincerity.

The average parliamentarian knows very little about Canada; much about
his own Province, or his own constituency, or his own group.  Politicians
do not even travel except on business.  A country of vast and variegated
human interest, of wonderful charm even for scenery, without considering
people at all, is the home of a large number of people burning to do
national work who know little or nothing about the life of the nation,
historically or otherwise.

President Harding solemnly predicts that the United States will produce a
race of supermen.  He does not say how.  He merely observes the need.  He
knows that his country has gone the pace that will take generations of
coming back before any superman nation can begin to be.  In Canada we
have not gone so far that we cannot easily come back.  But we have no
vision of any future for this nation except a larger instalment of what
we have been.

We talk about being a nation when we ignore the very disadvantages that
militate against true nationalism.  We bluster about national sentiment
and spend our money on paying to have ourselves Americanized.  When we
are tired trying to explain that, we fall back into dithyrambics on the
Old Flag and the great British Empire.

But if we are ever going to be anything but a national and polyglot
sandwich between the United States and Great Britain, it is time we paid
some respect to the innate democracy of the British idea by developing
our own national identity.  Our strategic position in the Empire will be
worth no more to us than our great native resources, or our bilingual
nationalism, or our pioneering history, or all combined, unless we elect
to make the biggest and best we have dominate our national life.  This is
a big country that must become a great nation if those who aim to lead it
will abstain from little ways.  We need more poetry in our public
affairs.  More imagination in Parliament.  More vision in the
Administration.  More faith in the country.  Less sectionalizing
propaganda everywhere.  If we rise to the measure of opportunity, we may
yet prove that when the Fathers of Confederation hung our national future
on a great compromise and a transcontinental railway they were not
talking in their sleep; and that when Empire statesmen look to our
leaders for counsel we shall not send unto them any man who represents a
class-conscious economic group instead of a nation.

It is true that Governments have always capitulated to groups.  We have
sacrificed a great deal for the sake of protection when that was merely a
tariff to keep certain industries from obliteration.  But a nation cannot
be forever built upon smoke-stacks and blue-books.  We can better afford
to have continental free trade and spiritual freedom as a nation, than a
high tariff and bondage to an industrial-financial-transportation group.
But if we gobble the bait of free trade, and find ourselves on the hook
of economic and national domination by the United States, our last state
will surely be worse than our first.