_III.--A Political Reason_

Authority and liberty are the two poles on which revolves Society.  The
perfect equilibrium of these two contending forces, one centripetal,
the other centrifugal, make for its safety and welfare.  The
encroachment of one upon the other displaces the social axis and throws
a nation out of its natural orbit.  Political Society then oscillates
between autocracy and anarchy.  The infringement of this supreme law of
moral gravitation has strewn the paths of history with the ruins of
kingdoms and empires.  The violation of a natural law bears always with
itself its own punishment.  For, society is not the conventional
creation of man; it is governed by laws that man does not make, but,
which his reason and experience discover and to which he must submit.

This perfect equilibrium of authority and liberty is perfectly
expressed in Lincoln's famous definition: "A sane democracy is one of
the people, by the people and for the people."  The reason of this law
of the political order is that liberty is previous to authority, for
authority only exists to protect liberty against tyranny and to
safeguard it against its own excesses.  He is best governed who is
least governed.  LePlay, the celebrated French economist, made this
just and pertinent remark: "The truly free nations are those who,
without compromising this prosperity, extend the benefices of private
life at the expense of public life."  (Réforme Sociale II, page 92.)

Therefore the ideal State exists when all civil or social rights--which
stand for the _public enjoyment_ of all natural rights--are fully
protected by political rights.  These political liberties moreover
claim not only the negative protection or non-interference of
authority, but also its positive financial help.  For political liberty
exists for the protection of civil liberty, and not _vice versa_.  The
collective forces of a society are for the benefit of the individual
and not the individual for them.  A State is an institution for the
protection of rights inherent to a free people.

The negation of this principle leads to the State paternalism which
stands for the interference of State in matters which by right belong
to the individual and the family.  Never has State interference and
State protection been more exaggerated than they are nowadays.  The
passing and pressing emergencies of the great war have accentuated
these tendencies.  The nations have kept the habit of being governed by
orders-in-council, by arbitrary censorship and dictatorial methods.
"The Executive has usurped the functions that rightly belong to the
legislative assembly, with a virtual dictatorship as the inevitable
result."  The consequence of State Paternalism is the death of
individual liberty either through socialism or autocracy.  Man becomes
the chattel of a bureaucratic government.

Of all civil liberties there is none more sacred, more fundamental than
that of education.  The freedom of education means the right of a
parent to give to his offspring an education in harmony with his
concept of life, with the dictates of his conscience.  As education is
nothing but a preparation for life, its theory goes hand in hand with
the theory of life.  To this liberty of the parent should correspond in
society a political right.  To deprive a free citizen of this right is
to penalize him and oblige him--as is the case in Manitoba--to buy
twice over a right of conscience.  This condition wherever it exists is
a flagrant abuse of political authority and consequently a social
disorder.

Some may object to our argumentation and answer that in a modern
democracy the majority rules, and the majority in the West are against
"separate schools."  The political right of the majority cannot cancel
a moral right of the minority.  It is a case here of repeating the
statement of Burke: "The tyranny of a democracy is the most dangerous
of all tyrannies because it allows no appeal against itself."  This
autocracy of numbers is often more dangerous and more brutal than that
of a caste, of a czar, or of a king.  Russia is giving us an
illustration of this autocracy of number.  Did not Germany use the same
argument to crush Belgium and to try to dominate the World?  Our sons
have fought and died in this war against Prussianism and yet some of
our Canadians--not worthy of the name--would willingly vote drastic
measures of governmental repression which would make the Kaiser smile
and the Czar Nicholas turn in his grave.  The velvet glove may cover
the mail-fist, but the blow is the same.

Others may claim that the State has a right to "Uniformity in the
education of its citizens."  This is the pretension of those who now
are advocating so strongly and so widely the "federalization of our
schools."  We will not discuss the value of this plea for uniformity.
It would open a very interesting pedagogical debate and we are inclined
to believe that the "anti-uniformists" would carry away the honors.  We
do not pretend that the State has no rights in matters of education.
But its interference should be consistent with the prior and more
fundamental rights of the individual and the family and not become a
usurpation or abrogation of them.  Otherwise it would be the wrong way
of doing the right thing.


_IV.--A National Reason_

The Constitution of a country has as its specific object the
maintenance of the perfect equilibrium between authority and liberty.
"It is the charter of a people's liberties, the shield of the
individual against the possible tyranny of government, the effective
check upon the ambition of every government to extend the sphere of its
delegated powers.  Unlike the law, its primary purpose is to restrain
the Government, not the citizen. . . ."  (P. Blakely, S.J.) America,
Sept. 18, 1920.

The greatest liberty for the individual, combined with the greatest
good of the commonwealth, has always been the ideal aimed at by the
Fathers of a democratic country.  To tamper with the Constitution on
vital issues, to conceive it as an experiment, to ignore its
spirit,--that obvious intention of its framers--is always eventually
fatal to the peace and welfare of the nation.  No one lays hands with
impunity on that Ark of the Covenant.  The essential changes in the
Constitution of a country act as a time-fuse.  An explosion necessarily
follows, although it may take years and generations for a faulty
legislation to disclose its real consequences.  This is particularly
true in matters of education.  Laws of the educational departments may
change to become more efficient in their administration but should
never touch the fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution.

In Canada the protection of the minority rights is a principle embodied
in our Constitution, in the Imperial Statute of the British North
America.  Act.  Even where the letter of the Provincial Law has
established the "public school,"--as is the case in the Maritime
Provinces--the spirit of the law is generally observed, and by a
compromise and tacit agreement the rights of the minority are to a
great extent recognized.

In the West, Manitoba stands out in Canadian History as the battlefield
of educational rights.  Although the British North America Act,
1867,--that intangible charter of Canadian liberties--stipulates,
section 93, that in the carving out of new Provinces in the vast
domains of the North West Territories the existing educational rights
guaranteed to the minority should be respected, yet, the Manitoba
Legislative Assembly has broken away from the letter and spirit of the
Constitution and constituted a grievance which demands rectification.

The Federal Parliament partially recognized the principle of Separate
Schools in the formation of the Provinces of Saskatchewan and of
Alberta, by introducing, in section 17 of the Autonomy Bills of 1905,
the section 93 of the B.N.A. Act, and by reasserting the existing
rights granted by the N.W.T. School Ordinances of 1901.  We say
"partially," for it is not the right of collecting separate taxes and
teaching Religion during the last half hour of the school-day that
constitutes a really Catholic school.

The "Separate schools" in Saskatchewan and Alberta stand on the solid
granite of our Constitution.  The highest tribunals of the land and the
Empire have implicitly recognized the principle of the minority-schools
in many of their decisions.  Moreover, let us not forget it! the
separate school system in Canada is "_protestant_" in its origin.  It
was to protect the protestant minority of Lower Canada that this
system, Catholic in Ontario, Protestant in Quebec, was adopted on
September 18th, 1841.  In the West the minority school-law was also
enacted to protect the protestant minority of the Territories.  Our
Non-Catholic opponents should not forget this origin of our separate
schools.  What their fathers appreciated then for their children, we
appreciate now for ours.  The principle remains unchanged.

Some may be surprised at our contention to make an argument in favour
of separate schools out of the very point on which rests the
scaffolding of those who oppose them.  They claim that the minority
school principle is the greatest enemy of Canadian Unity.  What we
need, they say, is to standardize our schools, and bring all Canadian
children under one system.  No genuine "Canadianization" is possible
without this unity of education.  The advocates of these ideas are now
at work promoting through the country the "nationalization of schools."
The Conference of Winnipeg, 1919, was the first tangible result of this
movement.  A National Bureau of Education--a non-government
institution, at least for the time being; a survey of school text-books
throughout the Provinces, a study of matters affecting the status of
the teaching profession--such are the duties that this National Council
of Education has assumed at its first gathering.

This movement towards Federal control of schools involves the denial
and the eventual suppression of the minority-principle in our system of
Education.  This nationalization of Education, we claim, is erroneous
in its principle, anti-constitutional in its operation, and dangerous
in its consequences.  Uniformity in education, as a source of
efficiency, is one of the fallacies of our materialistic age.  Schools
to be successful have not to be submitted to the same laws of a
commercial or industrial combine.  Ethnical and moral values do not
follow the laws of the mart and the stock exchange.  If in our
extensive Dominion even a unity of tariff, readily acceptable to the
East and to the West, is Utopian, how much more so would be the unity
of the school system?  Education, to be effective, must take the colour
of the environments to meet the needs of the community.  The levelling
process would be most detrimental, for uniformity in education is the
seed of decay.

And it is on the plea of making better Canadians that the promoters of
"national schools" are drifting from the very basic principle of our
educational system, from the law and spirit of our Constitution.  Our
form of Government, as we all know, is dual.  Matters of education are
relevant to the Province.  The more the Province will abdicate its
claims, and submit to the growing influence of the Federal powers, the
greater will be the danger of losing the political equilibrium of
Confederation.  Unstable equilibrium, once disturbed, is hardly ever
re-established.  The centrifugal forces of the Province protect our
liberties against the possible excesses of the centripetal forces of
the Federal Government.  Any movement that tends to break the harmony
of these forces is, we claim, anti-Canadian.  The Premier of Quebec
speaking to the Deputy Ministers of Education and Superintendents of
Public Instruction, at an inter-provincial Conference sounded this note
of warning: "The absolute control by each Province of its educational
system is the keystone of our Confederation; and the whole structure of
Canada would crumble away if any attempt were made at suppressing that
which holds its several parts together." (Nov. 4, 1921.)  Quebec is
blamed for being the great obstacle to the realization of the dreams of
our nationalizers.  Quebec, we maintain, is the most sane Province of
the Dominion, and the greatest help to the maintenance of
Confederation.  This is now an admitted fact by every serious and broad
minded Canadian.  Its conservatism acts, we would say, as the governor
on the complicated machine of Canadian political life.  It regulates
its speed and keeps it within the limits of safety.  Moreover, we ask,
how could a system which would deny the principles and rights of over
forty per cent. of the population be rightly and justly named
"national"?  No one has the right to assume the monopoly of
"nationalism."

"The self-appointed or State-appointed nationalizer, we would say with
Father Millar, S.J., ignorant of our real history or its true meaning,
is fast becoming a menace to the sanity of our laws and to the supreme
wisdom of a traditional national policy." [2]

And what will be the consequences of this levelling uniformity that
crushes parental right and fuses the powers of Provinces into a Federal
unit?  The Prussian ideal is the answer.  We all know what that means
and where it leads.  Its principles are the solvents of what remains of
Christianity--unconscious to many, it is true--in the political life of
our country.  The armies that our boys fought on the fields of Flanders
were formed and trained in the national schools of Germany.


_V.--A British Reason_

The great misfortune of many who clamour against our separate schools
is their total ignorance of our history and of the spirit that the
liberty-loving Fathers of the Confederation have breathed into our
laws.  To them "national reasons" may not appeal.  This is very often
the case of the average Westerner.  The West is in its making and has
no past behind it.  This fact alone can explain how easy the Western
mind is open to influences opposed to the spirit of our Canadian
institutions.  It has no traditions, and traditions are the hidden
roots that plunge down into the soil of history, into the hearts of
past generations, and give to a people, its real national life.
Therefore, a "British reason," a reason founded on British traditions,
on the British way of doing things in the Colonies, may make a stronger
appeal to our Western mentality.

Freedom and fair play for every citizen within the Empire, the
recognition of racial and religious rights, have been the strength and
success of the British Government in its Colonial policy.  (We
underline "colonial policy" for, we cannot say the same of England's
policy with Ireland--)  We would quote here what a well known Western
public man wrote some years ago when, under the pen-name of "Daylight"
he discussed the "Separate School problem" in the columns of "The
Regina Leader," January 3rd, 1916.


"In conclusion there are one or two general remarks I should like to
make.  It has always appeared to me that there is among our
English-speaking people of Canada a section of the community that holds
extreme views on all matters pertaining to nationality and religion.
This section holds and advocates the idea, that there must be no
compromise in dealing with matters pertaining to race and religion.  In
a word, they would set about at once to "Prussianize" our complex
population.  They forget, or entirely ignore, the fact that this is not
the British plan.  If the British Empire is the glorious Empire it is
to-day is it not because of the fact that long ago the British
statesman and the British citizen have learned the lesson of tolerance?
To-day, Great Britain with its forty-five millions of people rules over
hundreds of millions of people of diverse nationalities and religious
faiths, and throughout the whole scheme of government and constitution
runs the idea of reasonable and just tolerance and compromise.  Were
this not so the British Empire would quickly fall to pieces.  Why then
should we not have more of this spirit in Canada, and particularly in
Western Canada?  Some people are mightily concerned about our
foreign-born population.  They imagine that the process of assimilation
can and should be accomplished in a day.  Nothing is further from the
truth.  The process is necessarily a slow one.  It is bound to take two
or three, and in some cases, more generations.  In the meantime we
should strive to make these people feel that they are welcome to our
broad open plains and to our citizenship.  As to the final outcome no
one need have any doubt."


The principle that has created the British Empire is the only principle
that will keep it on the map of the world.  This is history,
philosophy, and common sense.

And when we see England recognizing the Catholic elementary schools and
subsidizing to a certain extent our secondary schools, when Scotland
has just brought the Catholic schools of several cities into its
system, is it not painful, to say the least, to hear our
ultra-loyalists ever up in arms against our separate schools?  To them
we feel like saying, "Go back to England and Scotland, from whence you
or your forefathers came and learn from the Home Country the lesson of
tolerance, of sane political government."


_VI.--A Historical Reason_

In the discussion of many problems we are liable, particularly in the
West, to limit our vision to conditions as they present themselves to
the observer.  This is more noticeable in the educational field.  This
frame of mind may be traced to various causes.  But there is one cause
which, we believe, is more responsible than others.

Unconsciously our age is "_evolutionist_."  "The intellectual movement
of 'evolution,'" said Glenn Frank, "was not the private plaything of
biologists in sequestered laboratories, but a force that altered men's
conceptions in every field of affairs." ("Century," Sept., 1920.)  The
theory of evolution has such a grasp on the modern mind that its
concepts of government, of economics, of education are looked upon as
the last and improved effort of man in his eternal struggle to express
an unknown and always receding ideal.  This has accustomed the mind to
look upon the past but as a rudiment, an outline, a preparation of the
future.

Without entering into the discussion of the objective evidence of the
theory of evolution we may say that as far as education is concerned
its premises are false.  The human soul remains substantially the same
and the process of its education has not varied very much with
centuries.  Those therefore who look upon our modern Educational system
as the apex, the summing up of all past phases, are greatly mistaken.
"The lessons of past history," writes Dr. Walsh, "are extremely
precious not only because they show us where others made mistakes but
also because they show us the successes of the past.  The better we
know these, the deeper our admiration for them, the better the outlook
for ourselves and our accomplishment."

The State-school is an institution comparatively of very recent date
and has no right to be heralded as the final expression of an
educational system in a democracy.  The history of education shows a
lineage of men who can be more than favorably compared with the sons of
our common schools.  The mass of the people have indeed more
instruction but, at times, we doubt if they are better educated.
Results are the best judges of educational values.  History and
experience prove that success in education depends more on the sense of
responsibility in the parents and of duty in the children, than on
palatial school-houses and elaborate programme of studies.  This sense
of duty and the feeling of responsibility are not a necessary
consequence of state schools.  On the contrary they are more liable to
be found in independent institutions.  For, as we have seen, when the
State substitutes itself for the family, the first consequence is the
unchallenged yield of parental rights.

Those who would make an excursion into history and compare our modern
educational systems with those of the past will find illuminating
points of comparison and instructive conclusions.  We would advise them
to take Dr. Walsh, M.D., Ph.D., Litt.D., as guide.  His books:
"Education, how Old the New"--"The Thirteenth Century"--will prove most
interesting reading.

Already a reactionary policy is being enacted in several countries
where for years the State-School was the only one to share in the
public treasury.  In Holland, the Parliament of June, 1920, by a vote
of 72 against 3, passed a new school-law which recognizes and
subsidizes all separate primary, high and normal schools.  In Italy,
the Minister of Education, Benedetto Croce, in a speech on the
"reorganization of education," stated publicly that the neutral school
was theoretically absurd and practically impossible.  In Spain,[3] by a
Bill of May, 1919, the State universities have passed out of the hands
of the Government.  France, Portugal, Argentine Republic are fighting
for the same freedom.  In Poland's new charter of liberties, granted by
the Treaty of Versailles, the rights of the minority in school matters
are guaranteed.  Our Canadian representatives signed this document.  We
were granting then to the new Republic a sacred right which we still
refuse to our own at home, in the Province of Manitoba!


_VII.--A Religious Reason_

The creation of the state-school, necessarily undenominational in
character, has made the "separate school" an absolute necessity.  If
religion has any meaning in life this reason of our separation should
be most convincing.

In education one cannot separate the utilitarian side,--the fitting of
the child for the struggle of life,--from its main purpose,--the
development of moral character.  The moral aspect alone gives to human
life its true character, its real value.  As there is no morality
without religion, the system of education that would debar this
essential feature falls short of its full meaning.  With this principle
in view any fair-minded man will understand how true Christian parents
demand a school where their children will receive religious education.
They are in conscience bound to exact for their offspring such
education, and, where the State refuses them their own money to support
their "separate schools" they willingly penalize themselves to give
them this benefit.  The child's eternal welfare is not to be sacrificed
to a school system that has not even accomplished the purpose for which
it was established.  For, as we shall see, a neutral school is a
practical impossibility.

Those who fail to understand the pressing force of this viewpoint have
in our opinion lost the sense and sacredness of religion.  They are
astonished at the bitterness that characterizes at times the conflict.
Are not religious and racial issues so intimately united with the very
conception of life that they hold to the most intimate fibres of the
human heart?  For a Catholic, Religion is life itself in its most
sacred aspect.

But, our opponents will argue, in a country like Canada, where
"organized" religion--to speak their language--is so denominational,
religion in school is an impossibility.  Is it because other
denominations cannot agree as to their religious tenets that we, who
count over one-third of the total population and who stand united in
our faith, are to surrender what we consider most essential in
education and--lest we forget it--most protective to the best interests
of our Country?

What does the State give us to replace the "separate school"?  A
neutral, undenominational, irreligious school.  This neutrality we
claim, is erroneous in theory and impossible in practice.  The theory
of the neutral school is erroneous because it is against the teaching
of sound psychology and true pedagogy.

The soul of the child cannot be, as it were, divided into watertight
compartments so as to segregate religious influence from its daily
training.  As Cardinal O'Connell stated, "We Catholics believe that as
character is by far the most important product of education, the
training of the will, the moulding of the heart, the grounding of the
intellect in clear notions of right and wrong, obligation and duty,
should not be left to haphazard or squeezed as an afterthought into an
hour on Sunday.  The moral and spiritual growth of the child ought
normally to keep pace with his mental growth and the Church is
convinced that taking human nature as it is, the result cannot be
obtained effectively without including a judicious mixture of religious
training with the daily routine of the school."

In fact a neutral school is an impossibility.  We will simply ask our
readers a few questions and rely on their fairmindedness to formulate
the answers.  Can the teaching of history be neutral?  The Catholic
Church and the Reformation are historical facts: how are they to be
judged?  How are ethics to be treated, without reference to God, to
Jesus Christ, to an eternal sanction?  Can a teacher divest himself of
his mental attitude in the teaching of these subjects and answering the
questions of the pupils?

Were the teaching really neutral, the very atmosphere of the
school-room is what counts.  This atmosphere is indefinable and yet
everywhere felt.  It is made of trifles, but of trifles that count at
that receptive age of childhood.  As a subtle perfume it impregnates
the soul of the child with ideas and impressions which it will carry
through life.  Therefore the atmosphere of the class-room, we claim,
should be as near as possible, that of the home.  The parents have a
right to see that it should be so.  Is this possible in a neutral
school?  Its very negative character impregnates the class-rooms with
an irreligious feeling which the impressionable mind of the child
cannot but notice.  How is the child to grow up with the feeling of
Religion's importance in life if the ban is placed upon Religion the
moment he passes the threshold of the school-room?  "What we most
dread," said Bishop McQuaid, "is not the direct teaching of the
State-school, it is the indirect teaching which is most insidious and
most dangerous.  It is the moral atmosphere, the tone of thought
permeating these schools that give cause for alarm.  It is the
indifferentism with regard to all religious belief we most of all fear.
This is the dominant heresy that, imbibed in youth, can scarcely ever
be eradicated.  It is one that already has in our large towns and
cities decimated Protestant Churches."

Even the provision of optional religious instruction at the dying hour
of the class-day cannot redeem the neutral school.  In fact the Survey
of School conditions in Saskatchewan conducted by Dr. Foght, in 1918,
revealed there a state of things which in our mind is an eye-opener in
the matter under examination.  Out of over 4,000 schools not more than
212 reported as availing themselves of the law on religious
instruction.  We leave to the reader to draw the conclusion these
recent statistics suggest.

To conclude this already too lengthy argument, facts are vindicating in
every country the saneness of the Catholic view-point on religious
instruction and atmosphere in the school.  The alarming increase of
religious indifference, the rising tide of anarchy, the universal
feeling of unrest, have prompted the unequivocal admissions of leaders
of thought as to the moral failure of the neutral school.

Mr. William Jennings Bryan, in an address before the constitutional
convention of Nebraska, a few years ago, brought this striking
indictment against the State educational system of the United States.
"The greatest menace to the public school system of to-day is, in my
judgment, its Godlessness.  We have allowed the moral influence to be
crowded out.  When I say moral, I mean morality based upon religion.
We cannot build a system of morality on any other than a religious
basis.  We have gone too far in allowing religion to be eliminated from
our schools.  I would not have religion taught by public school
teachers, but all sects and creeds should have equal opportunity to
furnish at their own expense to students whose parents desire it, such
instruction not to interfere with the hours of school.  Our people will
be better citizens and stronger for their work if along with the
trained mind there is also an awakened moral sense."

In a recent report of the Interchurch Movement, based on a survey of
American Education, prevailing conditions that now threaten the safety
of State and Church are openly imputed to the neglect of religious
training of childhood and youth in the schools.  This deficiency in
religious education on the part of the Evangelical sects is called by
the authors of the report "Protestantism's weakest spot."  Emphatic
endorsement is given to the "denominational school" and full credit is
not denied to the emphasis placed upon religious teaching in schools by
the Catholic Church.

"It would be absolute madness," said Cardinal Bourne, at an Educational
meeting in Edinburgh, "on the part of any civil authority at the
present day to spurn and reject the educational assistance and
educational power the Catholic Church was willing and ready to place at
their disposal."

In our own country, the urgent necessity of introducing religion in our
public school is now for every serious-minded Canadian an agonizing
problem.  How many attempts have been made to solve it?  Was it not the
principal topic discussed at the Educational Conference of Winnipeg
(1919)?

The neutral school, we conclude, has been weighed and found wanting.
The hand-writing is on the wall of every country where the experiment
has been made and tells the same tale.  _Facts_ and _principles_ give
reason to our "Separate Schools."



_Why "Separate Schools?_"--Because it is our right and our duty to have
them.--This is our simple and straightforward answer to the ever
renascent objection of those who are not of our opinion.  That _right_
rests on the solid rock of Justice, of History and of Religion; that
_duty_ we owe to our children, to ourselves, to our Church, and to our
country.



[1] This chapter formed a series of articles in the North West Review
of Winnipeg.  The following editorial comment accompanied our
concluding article.

"This week we publish the last of the series of articles by Father
Daly, C.SS.R., dealing with the separate school question.

"We consider his contribution on this ever topical and historic problem
one of the best reasoned and for the average man the most concise and
useful yet published.  It might well be issued in pamphlet form and
kept for reference in every Catholic home in Western Canada, because
the subject is one likely to be controversial for an indefinite period.
Sometimes one finds Catholics who are not as well acquainted with the
fact as they should be that the question of Catholic education can
never be compromised.  A solid and reasoned knowledge of this fact is
in some respects as essential as if it were an article of faith,
especially in Western Canada, which, as Father Daly points out, is the
classic land of the school problem.

"Doubtless attempts will be made in the future to bring elementary
education through the pretext of Canadianization, under the "invisible
head" of this country.  Or as in the United States segregated attempts
may be made to abolish parochial schools altogether.

"Where there are so many probabilities and so much at stake it might be
well for the average Catholic to be in a position to give a good
account of himself by showing a thorough understanding of the question.

"If the present civilization succeeds, it will do so by adopting the
methods of some, if not all, of our big corporations of to-day, and
thus make of nations, huge Trust socialisms where the individual will
hunger no more for freedom because of his having never tasted it.  The
one great desideratum to this end is the absolute control of
education--an end that will never be reached so long as the Catholic
Church continues to save Christian civilization through its religious
schools.

"Would that our fellow citizens of other faiths knew the ruin that they
court by relinquishing to a material power control over the minds and
hearts of their children.

"In every country the public school is bringing young minds under the
spell of worldliness.  The result is selfishness, jingoism, narrow
nationalism--an unthinking, a gullible generation to become the easy
prey of exploiters and the docile slaves of commerce.

"No man who has drunk into his heart and mind in youth the truths of
religious education can readily become the willing dupe of a
materialistic state.

"Commerce to-day is the God of nations.  It makes wars, compels peace
and tramples upon morality and justice.  Surely then Catholics should
study in a particular way the only safeguard left them against such a
fate--the sound philosophy of a religious education."

[2] America, Aug. 21, 1920.

[3] Cfr. Article by Father Vaughan, S.J., on this subject--America,
Feb. 21, 1920.




CHAPTER IX.

A WINDOW IN THE WEST[1]

_A Crusade for Better Schools in Saskatchewan--Its Lessons: an
Invitation and a Warning._


"A Window in the West!"--This was the suggestive title given to a
course of pedagogical studies instituted in a Folk High-School of
Denmark.  The object of this course was to promote the study of these
English and American educational ideals which Denmark may assimilate
with profit.  They looked to the West for light!

May we be allowed also to open here, in this Educational
Conference. . . .  "A Window in the West."  Through that window will
come to you the bright vision of the educational activities of our
Western Provinces, and, with that vision, I hope, the sunny and breezy
atmosphere of new and progressive ideas.  I will limit my present
remarks to a brief sketch of what was known in Saskatchewan as the
"_Better School Movement_."  This educational movement has an
interesting history and carries with it a very profitable lesson.  As
the object of this Conference is to forward the cause of education in
this part of our great Dominion, we thought it would be both
interesting and instructive to hear that history and learn that lesson
that comes to us from beyond the Great Lakes.

The West, we know too well, has many things yet to learn from the East;
but good old Mother East should at times forget "what has been"--and
consider more "what is to be."  In many points her growing western
daughters can give her helpful suggestions.  Moreover this exchange of
ideas in an immense Dominion like ours is, we claim, absolutely
necessary to keep the mental equilibrium between East and West.  There
are let us not forget it, many other problems beside the tariff problem
which are widening the breach, deepening the chasm between these two
sections of our Country.  True patriotism demands co-operation, and not
antagonism, between these two main sectors of that immense firing line,
which is flung between the Atlantic and the Pacific.

1. _History_.--The history of the "Better School Movement" in
Saskatchewan is not very old, but, like the vegetation on the western
prairies had a rapid and healthy growth.  It crowded into a few years a
whole epoch of the educational life of the Province.  On June 22, 1915,
the Hon. W. Scott, then Premier and Minister of Education, made his
epochal speech which launched the idea of a reform movement.  The
object of this movement was the re-adjustment of the school system, of
its curriculum and administration, to conditions existing throughout
the Province.  The people of Saskatchewan were invited to constitute
themselves a grand committee of the whole on education, to study facts
and to suggest means.  This invitation of the keen-sighted Premier was
accepted by the people without any distinction of race, creed or
language.  The leader of the Opposition indorsed the idea and pledged
the support of his party.  This non-partisan movement crystallized
itself in the "Saskatchewan Public Education League" which was formed
at the general meeting of delegates from all over the Province, held in
Regina, in Sept., 1916.  The league became a forum for the expression
of public opinion.  The newspapers of the Province gave wide publicity
to the new movement and threw open their columns to a public
discussion.  Teachers' associations, inspectors' conventions, church
synods, grain growers' meetings, labour unions, medical councils,
trustees' conventions particularly, made school improvements a fruitful
topic at all their meetings of the year.  Educational problems and
reforms were in the air: never have we better understood the
educational value of a publicity campaign; never have we seen it
crowned with such a success.  The climax of this campaign was a public
holiday, June 30th, 1916; meetings were held in all the school
districts of the Province, speeches were made, resolutions passed.
Public opinion had been moulded and was ready for a "Survey" and
Legislation.

By order in Council, June 7th, 1917, Premier Martin, successor to Hon.
W. Scott, whom ill-health had forced to retire--made definite provision
for an educational Survey.  "This survey is in no sense of the word an
investigation; for investigations are necessarily based on assumption
of some sort of misfeasance or malfeasance.  It is instead a
sympathetic inquiry into the schools of the people as the schools
actually exist.  Suggestions for enlargement and re-direction are made
throughout."

These are the very terms of Dr. Foght's report to the Government.  This
specialist in rural school practice, of the Bureau of Education,
Washington, was engaged in this survey from August to November, 1917.
His report was dated Jan. 20, 1918.  At the session of that year it was
submitted to Parliament and served as the basis of new legislation.
Its reading will prove most interesting to friends of education, and
most suggestive in the outlining of new policies of administration and
in the remodelling of the curriculum.

II. _Lesson_.--This Saskatchewan Crusade for better schools carries
with it a pointed lesson.  In our humble estimation and from our
view-point this lesson is a call for action; at the same time it sounds
a warning.

1. _An Invitation_.--There is nothing, we believe, nothing more
inviting than the readiness of our Western Provinces in dealing with
problems.  Here we have a beautiful example of that boldness of western
youth, so confident in its resources, so optimistic in its views.

Like the West, let us diagnose our educational problems; a survey of
prevailing conditions will show facts and figures.  Let us see and
admit the truth; camouflage is a poor policy in matters of such
importance.

This diagnosis will naturally suggest remedies.  Although there are
certain standards in education, which are as stable as human nature
itself, nevertheless, we must not forget that the human mind is a
living thing--ever re-adjusting itself to environments that various
factors have created.  This readjustment of our methods in teaching and
of our policies in administration, we know, is a very delicate process.
But it has to be done and done rightly if education is not to be a
misnomer.

This re-adjustment will demand the co-operation of the educational
expert and the masses.  The expert has his ear to the ground, his hand
on the pulse to grasp the trend of human thought.  He walks ahead to
blaze the way.  To find or, at least, to train specialists to direct
the forward march is the easiest part of the problem.  The greatest
difficulty in all great movements is to overcome the profound and
widespread indifference of the masses.  Yet through this co-operation
of the people will come the only valuable and permanent reforms.
Without it our experts will court failure.

Two initial tasks impose themselves if we wish to enlist in this great
educational movement the sympathies of the people: 1. To arouse
interest in local communities.  2. To organize individual and group
action.

A wide publicity campaign (in the papers, by means of lectures,
distribution of literature, in season and out of season) is the only
means of arousing the people from their apathy.  It takes time to see
the ideas of leaders and experts filter down into the lower strata of
society.  Yet we should always have faith in the mastery of ideas, in
the ultimate triumph of truth and right.

The organization of units for a concerted action is a work of time and
patience.  Like the incoming tide it creeps in.  This will suppose, to
be efficient, a recognized leader and an established and well
thought-out plan.  This should be the definite result of this
conference.

2. _Warning_.--But all is not gold in the El Dorado of the West.  Many
schemes and laws have its lustre; but they have the brassy sound of the
neo-pagan state-monopoly ideal.  This thought of the supremacy of State
in matters of education permeates Dr. Foght's report from cover to
cover.  In general, legislation is looked upon in our new Provinces as
the universal panacea for all evils.  The West is the land of
experimental legislation.  In this we should not imitate our younger
sisters.  Let us beware of fads!  Let us never forget that legislation,
to be just and beneficial, should but help the individual and the
family in the forwarding of their true interest and in the protection
of their inalienable rights.

This extent of State Monopoly is noticeable in two of the most
important recommendations of Dr. Foght's report.  They are the
enlargement of school districts, so that the limits of the district
will coincide with those of the municipality, and the consolidation of
rural schools.  Reasons of better administration and great efficiency,
no doubt, militate in favour of this change.  Particularly
"Consolidation" is on a working basis in many Provinces.  But the great
danger we see in this change is the placing of primary schools further
away from the influence of the parents.  The school ceases, to a great
extent, to be "the extension of the home."  The control of the parents
is less direct.  The doors are wide open to State interference.

These are the lessons we may take from the "Better School Movement" in
Saskatchewan.  Let us accept the invitation and heed the warning.



One parting word.--Let the people of Nova Scotia be up and doing!  The
West is draining the East to its advantage.  Your sons and daughters
are doing the thinking for those new Provinces and creating another
Dominion beyond our Lakes.  If conditions are not changed, the
Provinces "down by the sea" will lose their influence and cease to play
their part around the family table of our vast Dominion.  "Light comes
from the East"--our Maritime people will proudly claim.  "Yes! . . .
and it travels westward!" . . . answers the Westerner.


[1] This chapter is the substance of a lecture given in Antigonish,
N.S., at the Educational Conference, Aug. 11, 1919.




CHAPTER X.

UNICUIQUE SUUM[1]

_Principle on which should be Based the Division of Company-Taxes
between Public and Separate Schools._


When a point of law is ever before the courts it is an evident sign
that the legislation governing that issue has been either defective in
its basic principle or deficient in its proper application.  Such has
been the case of the "Company-School-taxes" in the Provinces of
Saskatchewan and Alberta.  Every court in the land has had to deal with
this problem, and if legislation is not changed and placed upon a more
just and solid basis, it will ever be a source of trouble for the
community.

Before dealing with the merit of this school question, we beg to state
that the time for co-operation in educational matters has come.  The
day of wrangling and narrow conceptions has passed, we hope.  If there
is a sacred liberty ever protected by the British flag it is surely
that of education.--The recognition and protection of ethical and
religious ideals are the most potent factors of the British Empire.  He
is a true lover of British ideals who places himself upon that higher
level to judge the rights of minorities and the duties of majorities.
If our Province of Saskatchewan has not known the sterile struggles of
a sister Province it is because this principle has been respected and
protected by our legislation.  In suggesting a remedy to our laws
governing Company-school-taxes, I appeal to that broad and fair minded
spirit which seems to characterize our banner Province of the West.
The solution we propose would give more satisfaction to the interested
parties and relieve the problem of its acrimony.



In the Provinces of Saskatchewan and Alberta the separate schools are
an integral part of the public primary educational system.  They are
not parochial nor private schools, but public separate schools.  Their
existence is not a favour conceded to the Protestant or Catholic
minority, but rather, the acknowledgement of a natural and
constitutional right.  Therefore the separate schools come under the
common law.  With the purely public schools, our separate public
schools share equal obligations and equal rights.  The same official
inspection, the same qualifications for teachers, the same curriculum
of studies, the same school text-books are required in both cases by
the Department of Education.  Equal right to public money is recognized
in the indiscriminate distribution of Government-grants.  So both
schools stand side by side with equal duties and equal rights.  If this
point of law had been kept in view no painful issue would ever be
raised; co-operation, and not antagonism, would be the aim of the
community at large in the great and sublime work of education.  Hard
and bitter things have been said in the press, on the platform and even
in the pulpit: but they do not change a right.  Might itself cannot
stamp out RIGHT.



Public service is the principle of taxation.  In return for the benefit
which a business corporation derives from dealings with the public,
distributive justice demands that part of the profits made, return to
the community under the form of taxes.  This feature of a business
corporation makes it, I would say, _soulless_.  One goes into business
not to make a profession of faith, but to make money.  He deals with
every one indifferently.  The dollar of a Christian or of a heathen has
the same value as the dollar of a Jew.  Were a company to discriminate
with the public on lines of creed the public would be justified in
retaliating.

Public utility, in matters of Company-taxes, is the basic principle of
assessment; it should also be the reason of their equitable
distribution.  As the money of the public goes to Companies,
irrespective of creed, so also should the taxes of these Companies come
back to the community, irrespective of creed.  As Companies are
assessed in school matters for the _benefit of the children_ of the
community, the proceeds of the assessment should be therefore
divided--_not according to the faith of the shareholders of the
company, but according to the number of children in each school
district_.  And as the majority rules, the school district in the
majority should strike the rate of taxation for both districts.



The division of Company-taxes according to the faith of the
shareholders is _neither just, nor practical_.  It is not _just_ for
the reason we have brought forward.  The principle involved in the
present law is _just when the individual is concerned_, especially when
the individual is the father of a family.  As such, one has a right to
support the school which his conscience obliges him to support.  This
natural right, our present law recognizes.  _But in the case of a
company the principle of public utility and not the test of faith
should be invoked, we believe_.

This present law governing Company-taxes is not _practical_.  The onus
is on the Separate School-Board to enlist each year the sympathies of
the companies.  Before how many Boards of Directors is the matter
brought up?  The local manager is the one who deals with the problem,
and he often is a stranger to the laws of the Province, with no
sympathy for separate schools.  Facts, stubborn facts, are there to
prove our contention.  In no city of the Province of Saskatchewan is
the Separate School Board getting its part of Company-taxes.  This is
one of the reasons why our rate is often so high when compared with the
Public School rate, and why our Boards are crippled in their finances.



This simple reasoning should appeal to every fair-minded man.  This
change of legislation we advocate in the matter of Company-taxes, is
not a favour we beg--but the mere recognition of a principle of
distributive justice we ask.


NOTE. 1.  The argument as presented herein is still stronger when
applied to Companies of public utilities such as tramways, express
companies, etc., for their nature and profits depend absolutely on the
public.

NOTE. 2.  SCHOOL LAW OF QUEBEC PROVINCE IN THE MATTER.  No. 2892.

"When immovable property of such corporations and companies is within a
territory, placed under the administration of two corporations of
school commissioners of different religious beliefs, established in
virtue of Article 2590, the corporation which comprises the greatest
number of rate-payers entered on the valuation roll, shall be bound to
levy the taxes affecting such property and to divide the same
proportionately to the number of children from five to sixteen years of
age residing in each municipality."--62 V. c. 28, s. 399.


[1] This memoir was presented to the Premier of Saskatchewan at a time
when this problem was widely discussed in the Press.  As the
legislation, then enacted, did not bring a satisfactory solution we
thought that the argument as presented would be of service for a future
date.




CHAPTER XI.

DREAM OR REALITY[1]

_Higher Education in Western Canada--Duty of the Hour--University
Training Condition of Genuine Leadership--For Catholics Higher Education
means Higher Catholic Education--The Concerted Action of all Catholics in
Western Canada can make a Western Catholic University a Reality._


Never has the world manifested a keener and more general interest in
higher education.  The facilities which Governments offer to place within
the reach of the mass of the people; the benefits of university
education; the enormous sums left by wealthy individuals for the
endowment of chairs and the foundation of scholarships; the eagerness
with which these offers are grasped by men of all classes; the
extraordinary success of the Overseas University in the American Army,
which had a student body of 10,000--these are, without doubt, manifest
signs of public opinion on the matter of higher education.  The
world-struggle, we all feel, has shifted to another battlefield, and the
future in every realm of human activity rests on the mastery of ideas.
In that intellectual conflict, the primary school rooms are the trenches
on the first line of defence; the college and university lecture halls
stand out as the strategic heights from which the heavy artillery of
ideas smashes the way to victory.  Hold the college and university
heights to-day, and the hinterland of industry, commerce, science, art
and politics will be yours to-morrow.

Catholics throughout our Dominion begin to realize that higher education
is the price of leadership.  "Of the many points of contact between the
Church and the modern world, education is the point where Catholicism has
most to gain by energetic thought and action, and most to lose by an
atmosphere of indifference."  We are waking up from our deep lethargy and
beginning to understand that we shall not have our share in the shaping
of the destinies of our own Country until our leaders, particularly among
the laity, impose themselves upon the nation by their number and their
value.  The magnificent campaign of the "Antigonish Casket" in favour of
higher education and the exchange of views this point at issue brought
from various correspondents, the successful drive in favour of Loyola
College of Montreal, the growing influence of the Catholic student bodies
in the various universities, the creation of Laval, in Montreal, as a
distinct unit from Quebec; the tremendous success this newly born
organization met with in its drive for $5,000,000; all these facts
indicate concentration of forces in the direction of higher education.
The national Catholic conscience is awakened into action.  "One of the
most pressing needs of the Church at the present time, is to have a
well-connected body of university-trained Catholics."  This statement of
Father Plater, S.J., is true also for Canada and more particularly for
Western Canada.  And indeed, this pressing need of higher education has
come home of late to our western Catholics as is evidenced by the great
efforts made to establish colleges in the various Provinces.  As this
move is of the greatest importance for the welfare of the Church in that
promising part of our country, we thought to be of some service to the
Western Church in drawing the attention of Catholics to this important
issue and bringing to a focus certain indefinite, hazy views on the
subject.


_Higher Education--Duty of the Hour for Western Catholics._

"When a reflective man of middle life walks along the embowered paths of
Oxford and Cambridge or through their quadrangles whose walls have echoed
to the footsteps of so many brainy men of England, he realizes what these
institutions have been and still are to Great Britain and the Empire."
From the lecture halls of these seats of learning have gone, generation
after generation, the men who framed and directed the course of studies
of other universities, the legislators and statesmen that have shaped the
destinies of the British Empire.  "There is not a feature or a point in
the national character which has made England great among the nations of
the world, that is not strongly developed and plainly traceable in our
universities.  For eight hundred or a thousand years they have been
intimately associated with everything that has concerned the highest
interest of the country." (W. E.  Gladstone.)  This example of the power
of Oxford and Cambridge is so typical that one immediately grasps its
meaning and appreciates its full value.  On that immense background of
the Empire they stand out indeed in bold relief as the embodiment of
higher education, as the great portals that open on the highway of true
leadership.  Is not the affiliation, that subtle intellectual bond which
units our universities of Canada to those two great seats of learning, a
permanent and living proof of this fact?

A university is the vital centre of a nation's life.  Around it, by a
gradual process of elimination and a natural force of gravitation, centre
the master minds; from it, as from a fountain-head, flow with true
leadership in every branch of human society, progress, wealth and
prosperity.  On the force of this _centripetal_ and _centrifugal_
movement of a university depends its value in the community.  "The
increase in number and efficiency of universities," said Bishop Spalding,
"is the healthy proof of the vitality and energy of a nation."

In the educational system of a country the university stands out as the
apex, the culminating and crowning point of its intellectual life.  For,
as the college course develops the studious and acquisitive powers of the
mind, the university course has in view its creative and formative
powers.  "Glorious to most are the days of life in a great school," says
Morley, "but it is at college that aspiring talents enter into their own
inheritance."  "It is the function of education in the highest sense, to
teach man that there are latent in him possibilities beyond what he has
dreamed of, and to develop in him capacities of which without contact
with the highest learning, he had never become aware." (Haldane.)  We may
well call the university "the brains of a nation."  It equips the student
with standards and tests of objective truth. . . .  It makes him dig down
to the bed-rock on which truth in its various manifestations rests. . . .
Universities are indeed the nurseries of the higher life, the living
sources from which knowledge and culture flow in abundant streams.  They
do the thinking for the teeming masses who have neither the leisure nor
the opportunity to think for themselves and who live on that mental
atmosphere we call "public opinion."  From the heights of our
universities, ideas and principles gradually filter down into the lower
strata of the nation.  The novel, the Sunday supplement, the stage, the
cinema screen--these post-graduate courses of the working man--are
popularizing to-day the theories and ideals that were yesterday honoured
in our secular institutions of higher education.  It may take time,
perhaps centuries, for this process of intellectual filtration; but
ideas, like the stream, are bound to follow the incline of the water-shed.

If the change that takes place in the mind and conscience of the
individual is a slow and subtle process, what should we not expect when
there is question of a nation?  Yes, the process is slow but it is sure.
The permeation of evolutionism into every domain of human thought is a
recent and most striking illustration of it.  This fact stands out
conspicuously on the pages of history.  "Lord Acton's view of history,"
said Shane Leslie, "was that ideas, not men or events, made the
differences between one era and the next."  The mind is always the storm
centre of revolutions, the breeding ground of the most conflicting
theories.  The great storms that sweep over humanity always gather on the
high summits of religion and philosophy, blackening the mental horizon;
sooner or later, they break out on the lower plains of the economic
social and political world, spreading everywhere revolution and
destruction.  The blasphemous Proudhon gave utterance to a great truth
when he wrote: "It is surprising how at the bottom of every political
problem we always find some theology involved."  We lay stress upon this
aspect of universities, for, in our mind, from a catholic view-point, it
is of the greatest importance in the discussion of the present issue.

The university is not only the focus of the intellectual life of a
country; by its research work, by its applied science it becomes also the
very fountain head of all national progress and prosperity.  The natural
resources lie dormant, the soil--that perennial source of wealth, is
stagnant, the export-trade of manufactured goods and agricultural
products is at its lowest ebb, until touched by the magic wand of the
university expert.  It is he who discovers, develops and shows how to
make use of with profit, the hidden wealth of the land.  The research
bureaus instituted by the Government of Canada and the United States,
co-operating with the various universities, are now considered as the
most important factors of national prosperity.  The Reclamation Service
of the U.S. by irrigation, drainage and the pulling of stumps will
reclaim nearly 300 million acres for colonization.  To bring the economic
value of a university nearer home to us, who does not know the beneficial
influences of Saskatoon University on the agricultural pursuits of
Saskatchewan?  This relation of the university and the material
prosperity of a country is so marked that the Mosely Educational
Commission sent by England to the United States, most strongly emphasized
that living connection and necessary correlation between the universities
and the industrial and manufacturing prosperity of the United States.

A university is therefore not a mere luxury, but rather a necessary asset
in a nation's life.  "The development of the true spirit of the
University among a people is a good measure of the development of its
soul, and consequently of its civilization" (Haldane).  "No country," we
will conclude with "Catholic" in the Antigonish Casket, "ever attained to
any degree of political influence, nor have any people ever risen from a
lower to a higher level of intellectual and social culture, without the
light and inspiration that flow from a genuine university."  This vision
was before the eyes of Cecil Rhodes who founded scholarships throughout
the British Empire.  These scholarships glean every year in the wide
fields of the Empire the brightest minds and throw them as a beautiful
sheaf at the foot of the great English Alma Mater, Oxford.  Millions and
millions have been left for the same purpose to the American Universities.

The university may well then be called the Alma Mater--the nursing
mother, of the leaders of a nation.  From its halls "emerge those who
have that power of command which is born of penetrating insight.  Such a
power generally carries in its train the gift of organization, and
organization is one of the foundations of national strength." (Lord
Haldane.)  The belief that the self-made men were the real successful men
is a thing of the past.  A careful investigation has proved that ninety
per cent of the men who stood at the head of large financial, political,
philanthropic, economic, industrial and commercial institutions of the
world were graduates of universities.[2]  The self-made man as a leader
is the exception and has necessarily his limitations which he is the
first to feel and acknowledge.  Munsterberg in his book "The Americans"
has a page which is very much to the point.  "The most important factor
of the aristocratic differentiation of America is higher Education and
culture and this becomes more important every day.  The social importance
ascribed to a college graduate is all the time growing.  It was kept back
for a long time by unfortunate prejudices.  Because other than
intellectual forces had made the nation strong, and everywhere in the
foreground of public activity there were vigorous and influential men who
had not continued their education beyond the public grammar school, so
the masses instinctively believed that insight, real energy and
enterprise were better developed in the school of life than in the world
of books.  The college student was thought a weakling, in a way, who
might have fine theories, but who would never help to solve the great
national problems--a sort of academic "mug-wump," but not a leader.  The
banking house, factory, farm, the mine, law office and the political
position were thought better places for the young (American) man than the
college lecture halls. . . .  This has profoundly changed now, and
changes more, with every year. . . .  The change has taken place in
regard to what is expected of the college student; distrust has vanished
and people realize that the _intellectual discipline_ which he has had
until his twenty-second year in the artificial and ideal world is after
all the best training, less by its subject-matter than by its methods, is
the best possible preparation for practical activity. . . .  The leading
positions are almost entirely in the hands of men of academic training
and the mistrust of the theorizing college spirit has given place to a
situation in which university presidents and professors have much to say
on all practical questions of public life, and the college graduates are
the real supporters of every movement toward reform and civilization."
(Munsterberg--"The Americans" 600-602.)

The true _leaders_ in society are like the snow-capped heights of a
mountain range: they are the first that the new light of a breaking dawn,
of a coming period, is wont to strike with its rays, to be then reflected
on the silent and sleeping valleys.  The men who hold to-day the pen or
draughting pencil in the university are the men who will handle the
levers of the world's intricate machinery.  There they grapple with the
various problems of the scientifical, economic and political world and
their views, later on, will gradually influence the whole mental attitude
of the masses, who, in their daily life, are confronted with these same
problems.

This leadership of _thought_ and _action_ is no more the privilege of a
few; in our democratic country every one can aspire to it.  The days when
primary education was for the masses, secondary or college education for
the middle classes and university training for "the quality," have passed
away and gradually the benefits of higher education are being extended to
all.  The _equality of opportunity_, not that of wealth and position, is
_the test of true democracy_.  This condition has created the aristocracy
of brains and character before which the aristocracy of wealth, of blood
and lineage fade into insignificance.

The predominance of the "vocational feature" over the "cultural" in the
scope of our modern universities, the vast "extension work" [3] carried
on in the various fields, the multiplicity of "free scholarships" open to
the competition of the brainy and ambitious boy, are other proofs of this
democratic trait of our modern higher education.



Since higher education is the stepping stone to leadership, the question
most vital to Catholics in this particular and most momentous period of
our history is: "What share have we in the college and university life of
the country?"  "The progress of the Church in any country is attributable
to the _indwelling Spirit_ which guides the Church.--Next, to the piety,
zeal and education of its _priesthood_,--and lastly, though in no mean
degree, to the devotion, activity and education of the _laity_.  Where
these three features combine, then the Church is writing the brightest
pages of Her history." (Archbishop Glennon.)

I will not repeat here what "Catholic" in the Antigonish Casket, and
Henry Somerville in his pamphlet, "Higher education and Catholic
Leadership in Canada"--have been writing on for the past year or so.
With them we conclude that outside of the Province of Quebec, the
Catholics of the Dominion have not the influence they should wield.
Naturally there are many reasons to explain this fact.  But we will say
with the Editor of the North West Review, "facts cannot be ignored with
impunity, the sooner they are admitted and faced with courage the more
readily shall difficulties be overcome.  And the necessity for an
awakening to the demand for higher education is very real."

In the firing line of the world's gigantic struggle we shall never hold
the strategic points to which our number gives us a right in our Canadian
Democracy, unless our leaders are strong in number, and in power.
Catholic leadership will give us the occasion to present, explain and
promote "our solution" to various problems confronting the world.  During
this period of universal upheaval and momentous crisis, when all the
ingredients, we would say of the social and economic fabric are in a
state of flux,--like bronze in fusion,--Catholic leaders should be to the
front to supply the casts of Christian civilization.  If in the public
press, the legislative assemblies, the labor meetings, public gatherings,
where mind meets mind, ideal clashes with ideal, knowledge with
knowledge, where facts are being examined and weighed, where ideas are
thrown into the melting pot of public debate, if then and there, there is
no one to stand for Catholic views in the various matters under
discussion, can we be astonished that we are absolutely ignored, and our
views not considered?  "We believe that an attitude of merely destructive
criticism, of aloofness, scepticism, pessimism, is a deplorable mistake.
It is not by standing aloof from the movements of our day, but by going
fearlessly into them with the message of truth entrusted to our charge,
shall we best fulfil our high mission towards our fellow countrymen.  We
must seize these opportunities in the spirit of high confidence and
dauntless zeal which befits those who have the Truth, know they have the
Truth, and are assured that the Truth is great and shall prevail."
(Universe--June 13, 1919.)

Never has a greater opportunity challenged the Church and her leaders
than at this great turning of the tide in the history of the world.
Canada itself is on the threshold of the most eventful and decisive
period of her national life.  "The war has brought our country into the
broad stream of internationalism . . . and a new _national consciousness_
is being born and is sweeping over the land."  In the future, as in the
past, our Dominion will remain divided by race and creed.  But let us not
forget that the various religious and ethnical groups will have only the
influence that gives true leadership.  The value and the measure of
higher education among Catholics will therefore give the value and the
measure of their participation in the remodelling of their great country.

If such is the case of Catholics throughout Canada, what would we not say
of Catholics in our Western Provinces.  In this reconstruction of our
Dominion the prairie Provinces are without doubt to play a preponderant
part.  One has only to open his eyes to see the trend of our national
policies, and immediately grasp the growing importance of our Western
Provinces.  The West is gradually passing from the pioneer conditions and
becoming conscious of its importance.  With the beautiful qualities and
unlimited resources of youth, it has also its dangerous shortcomings.
Daring, venturous, over confident, the western mind is easily and
frequently hasty and radical in its conclusions.  Intoxicated with wealth
and success, inspired and aroused by the great possibilities of his new
home, the Westerner is ever tempted to experiment in legislation, make
extreme views prevail and believe the newest is always the best.  He will
boast of broadmindedness, of love of freedom and at the same time will,
under the deceiving tyranny of number, suppress the most sacred rights.
Nowhere we claim in our Dominion, is Catholic leadership and therefore
higher education, more needed at the present hour than in the West.  Our
Catholics there need indeed higher education, for, at this hour
particularly, the nation's business is our business; they cannot remain
an isolated factor in presence of the tremendous issues that stare the
world and our country in the face.  But if we wish to make our influence
as Catholics felt, let our leadership come from "_Higher Catholic
Education_" as from its fountain head.


_Higher Catholic Education for Catholics in Western Canada._

There is a decided distinction between higher education for Catholics and
higher Catholic education.  This leads us to place before the reader the
principles upon which rests the catholic ideal in matters of higher
education and to suggest means of its speedy realization in Western
Canada.  A friendly exchange of ideas on this most important and very
interesting topic will be profitable to all at this juncture, and help,
we hope, to clear up hazy notions and cloudy conceptions which some may
entertain on the subject.



In matters of Catholic education, the most weighty argument is that of
the authority of the Church.  Her views and practices, particularly on
questions of education, should be the views and practices of every good
Catholic.  In the New Canon-Law, in the Councils and Letters of the
Popes, is to be found the only authoritative direction in this momentous
problem.  The Church is most emphatic and most precise in its
pronouncements on the matter of higher education.  The Canon 1379,
paragraph 2, of the new Canon-Law, is very explicit on the subject.  "If
the public universities are not imbued with Catholic doctrine and
surrounded with a Catholic atmosphere, it is most desirable to found in
that country or region a Catholic University."  The Plenary Councils of
Baltimore and of Quebec (Tit, VI-C, VII) command in the most pressing
manner the Catholic youth to frequent only Catholic universities.  When
circumstances necessitate attendance at non-Catholic universities,
safeguards are exacted to minimize the danger.  These recent dispositions
of the Church's legislation reflect the stand the Church has always taken
on this ground of higher education.  Is She not "_Mater universitatum_?"
Modern civilization owes its universities to the Catholic Church, as the
very stones of Cambridge and Oxford still proclaim . . . _lapides
clamabunt_!  And in these days of religious indifference, after heroic
efforts and great sacrifices, in spite of the allurement of our wealthy
state and independent institutions, the Church counts in every country
seats of higher learning, where her children may receive the benefit of
university training without danger for their conscience or their faith.

This stand of the Church in primary, secondary and higher education is
the logical conclusion of her doctrine.  "The theory of life," said
Father Little, S.J., "and the theory of education go hand in hand."  As
the Church has a definite teaching on life, its value and its purpose,
She has necessarily fundamental principles upon which education must rest
if it wishes to be in harmony with Christian life and Catholic belief.
In her eyes education, in all its degrees, must be primarily and
profoundly religious.  "If indeed, the Catholic Faith which makes such
tremendous and such confident statements about God and His ways with men,
is true, then obviously it takes the central place in human knowledge,
and all other knowledge groups itself round and is coloured by Faith."
Therefore, the principle, "every Catholic boy and girl in a Catholic
college or university" should be to us as sacred as is "every Catholic
child in a Catholic school."  One is the consequence of the other; both
are the practical conclusions of our faith.  This close connection
between theories of education and the attitude towards problem of life is
evident in history.

The Pope, Benedict XV, in his recent letter to the American Hierarchy
(March, 1919), writes: "The future of the Church and State absolutely
depends on the condition and organization of the schools; there will be
no other Christians than those whom you will have formed by instruction
and education. . . .  We have followed with joy," he adds, "_the
marvellous progress of the Catholic University at Washington, progress so
closely united to the highest hopes of your churches_.  We have no doubt
that henceforth you will continue even more actively, to support an
institution of such great usefulness and promise as is the University."

The Most Reverend Dr. O'Dwyer, Bishop of Limerick, in 1904, vindicated
for the Irish people not the privilege, but the right to a Catholic
University.  "For us Catholics," he wrote, "the Gospel as taught by our
Holy Church, is our philosophy of life and we hold that any attempt to
educate a youth in what we call secularism is a retrogression to a lower
level than that of pre-Christian culture.  For this reason we have
withstood every attempt to force _secularism_ on this country and we
shall resist it to the last.  We have equally withstood _mixed
education_, which, false as it is in itself and pernicious, is in this
country a specious pretext for Protestant educational ascendancy."
(University education in Ireland.)

If such is the case with Catholic Ireland, what should we not conclude as
regards our Western Provinces?  Here, more than anywhere else in Canada,
does the Church need staunch, genuine, Catholic leadership.  In it the
future of Catholicity beyond the Great Lakes is involved.  Reason and
experience prove that the training which makes for genuine Catholic
influence is plainly out of question unless it be received in a college
and university whose atmosphere, teachings, aspirations and ideals are
thoroughly Catholic.  The recent foundations of a Catholic University in
Milan and in Nimeguen, Holland, justify this claim.



Conditions existing in our modern neutral universities vindicate our
stand and strengthen our position.  The tendency in these universities
is, without doubt, towards infidelity or to say the least, towards
diluted Christianity.--"The transformation from the old denominational
education to the new undenominational education was in point of
fact due to an antitheological--and even in some of its
manifestations--anti-religious movement.  If it included a sense of the
justice of equal treatment for all creeds and a sense of the liberty
necessary for science, it also included some of the anti-Christian spirit
of Continental liberalism.  The undenominational movement was the
practical expression of the liberal and scientific movement." (Life of
Newman--L 306.)

A few years ago there appeared in the "Cosmopolitan Review," under the
glaring title "Blasting at the Rock of Ages," an article which startled
the intellectual world.  It was a crude and biting exposure of the
intellectual license and unhealthy moral atmosphere of the great American
universities.  To follow the author of this powerful indictment in the
proof of his facts and statements would be beyond the scope of this
paper.  Only we would advise some of our near-sighted Catholics who
through that snobbishness which money often gives them, have a sort of
worship for non-Catholic universities, to read this indictment.  In
giving them a glance of the "inside of the cup" it may change their
opinion.

Dr. James Henry Leuba, professor of psychology at the Bryn Mawr College,
Pennsylvania, gave out to the public the answers he received from
sociologists, biologists, psychologists and teachers of universities and
other institutions in the United States, as regards their belief in the
existence of God.  More than fifty per cent.  admitted that they had no
belief whatever in the existence of God; forty per cent. denied the
immortality of the soul.  The great majority, said Dr. Leuba, were
university teachers and none could compare with them in influence over
the rising generation. (Cfr.  Archeological Report 1917--published by
Ontario Government.)

When subversive theories based on an absolute materialistic conception of
life, and from which God, Divine Providence, Christ, Christianity are
systematically excluded and ridiculed as myths of by-gone days; when, we
say, such theories are rampant in the halls of our modern universities,
should we be astonished to see outright infidelity, political socialism,
religious anarchy, stalk the length and breadth of the land?  "Impurity,
obscenity, moral corruption in many forms, with the ever consequent
cynicism and pessimism, forerunners of moral decadence, destruction of
the original, creative, shaping, joyous, confident energies of society,
come daily more boldly to the front of the stage and defy criticism or
mock at the archaic sanctions of yesterday.  One does not need to peruse
the great modern historians of Roman morals to foresee the results of
such an educational debauch, when allowed time enough and the working of
its own, unholy but intimate and inexorable logic." (Mgr. Shahan--at the
Catholic Educational Convention, U.S., 1919.)  Sow the wind, you will
reap the whirlwind.

Should not such atmosphere of infidelity or diluted Christianity in
non-Catholic universities be for Catholic students a source of danger to
the vigour and even to the integrity of their faith, to their constancy,
in the full and faithful observance of their practical religious duties?
Familiarity with error, at the age of youth principally, breeds contempt
of truth and jeopardizes faith.  The suppression of truth in its various
forms, the concealment of religious profession and observance,
necessarily lead to religious indifference.  How many sad examples could
we not give to back this statement?  This danger which Catholic youth
meets with in the very atmosphere of our neutral universities is still
greater when we consider the method of teaching now in honour in these
schools of higher learning.  The tutorial method, still in vogue at
Oxford, has given place to the _professorial_.  The systematic lecture
has replaced the exposition of texts.  The professor, with his frame of
mind, his views on facts and ideas, is the living book from which our
youth read their daily lesson.  His personality dominates the mind of the
pupil.  We all know what fascination the science, reputation and
eloquence of a professor have on the unarmed and impressionable minds of
youth.  The "_Magister dixit_" is very often the supreme law, the last
criterion of truth.  President Garfield's ideal of a college, "Mark
Hopkins on the other end of the log," recognizes the educative value of
the contact with a master-mind.

Authority and reason militate in favor of higher Catholic education for
Catholics in Western Canada, this is the logical conclusion of our
statements.



Yes, nice theories, some may say; but we are facing facts.  How are we to
contend with these well equipped, richly endowed, neutral institutions of
higher education?  Where shall we find the resources to pay efficient
teachers, to establish the various faculties that go to form a university
worthy of its name?  Have we not a state-university marvellously well
equipped and for which our Provinces are yearly spending fabulous sums?
Why not take advantage of our own money that goes in taxes for the
support of these institutions?

To argue along these lines is to concede to our enemies our position on
the Separate School question.  All these objections have been met with in
other countries and other provinces, and the answer to them was the
creation of Catholic colleges and universities.

The great fallacy of the age, and particularly in this part of the
country, is State Monopoly in educational matters.  This is looked upon
as the great triumph of modern democracy and the palladium of liberty.
The monopoly over the human mind by this monopoly of education is the
most dangerous of all state-monopolies.  It is the resurrection of the
pagan ideal, the magnification of the state to the detriment and
absorption of the individual and the family.  Germany has given us an
example of where "the standardization of thought and outlook" by the
State education leads to.  The Prussian ideal, in its last analysis, is
nothing else but the pagan ideal.

But no country in the British Empire has pushed the policy of
monopolisation of education so far as our Western Provinces.  Under the
specious plea of efficiency and absurd reason of uniformity, they will
not even grant charters to independent institutions of higher learning.
This policy surely does not reflect true statesmanship and makes British
liberty a misnomer on the lips of many of our ultra-loyal Westerners.  We
would ask our Western Governments to take lessons in this matter from
England.  When some few years ago the question of converting the
university colleges into Universities was before the English public there
was much talk of the danger of Lilliputian universities and of low
standards of teaching and examination.  But this question was brought to
trial by the State before a high tribunal and a firm decision was given
in favour of the principle.  A special committee of the Privy Council
conducted a semi-judicial enquiry and gave sentence on Febr., 1903.  The
result of this decision was that the colleges of Liverpool, Manchester,
Leeds, Sheffield, Birmingham, Bristol, Durham, blossomed out into
teaching universities.  This is the real British way of doing things.

The United States[4] have granted university charters to the various
Catholic institutions of higher learning which dot that land of Liberty
from coast to coast.  And let us not forget,--facts and figures will bear
us out,--the independent universities in the United States, in England
and in Belgium, only to mention some, have been in many Faculties more
efficient and more successful than the state institutions.  The
remarkable record of St. Louis University, a Jesuit institution, is
illustrative of this point.  A comparison of the respective medical and
dental records of this institution with perhaps two of the greatest
professional schools of the United States, John Hopkins and Harvard,
gives proof of higher efficiency to St. Louis University.  The official
bulletins of the Medical Dental Associations give the statistics.

The right of Catholics to their own schools--primary, secondary,
university, is a birthright we must always fight for.  It is the
elementary right of a civilized people to educate her sons as she sees
fit.  In the battle for this right the best strategy is to offer the
accomplished fact of a college and a university which by their
efficiency, their intellectual and moral value, impose themselves upon
the community and win their way to acceptance.  Let us blaze the trail
and to-morrow, it will be the great highway of Catholic education for the
coming generation in Western Canada.

But instead of this policy of "_isolation_" which in school matters is
the ordinary policy of the Church, some Catholics, in view of
circumstances, rather advocate that of "_permeation_."  The presence of
Catholics in State Universities will, they claim, create a better
atmosphere, abate or soften prejudice, beget a better feeling among the
future leaders of the community.  In England, it is true, Catholics are
allowed to attend Oxford and Cambridge; in Germany, they attend State
Universities.  The Catholics of Australia have since 1916 also a College
in conjunction with the Melbourne State University.  Student societies
have been formed, Catholic halls opened, courses of apologetics are given
to help the Catholic youth in the "steady daily pressure working against
them in a non-Catholic university," and to influence religious thought in
those centres of higher learning.

Has this "_modus vivendi_" brought about by various circumstances which
it would be too long to analyze here, produced the desired results?  In
Germany it has not created a Catholic atmosphere in one single
university.  Have not, on the contrary, the German universities been the
hot-beds of Modernism and many a young cleric has come from their halls
inoculated with this virus.

As for Oxford and Cambridge, we all know the controversy which divided
the Catholics for so many years.  As Catholics have been allowed to
follow the courses there for only a few decades, we are not yet, we
believe, in a position to judge of the influence of these universities on
the Catholic body of England as a whole.  Time only will tell.  But one
thing is certain, no comparison can be established between our state
universities and these colleges.  Although in the halls of Oxford,
Christianity "is often attuned to the outlook and temper of the age" as
the book "Foundations" (a statement of Christian belief in terms of
modern thought, by seven Oxford men) sadly reveals it, nevertheless,
there is not to be found in the English Colleges that atmosphere which
the absence of religion has created in our state universities.  The
presence of various denominational colleges on the grounds of our
Provincial Universities only gives them a tint of Christianity.  The
teaching of history and philosophy will tell the tale.  "It must be
remembered that an Oxford scheme was never Newman's ideal.  It was a
concession to necessities of the hour.  His ideal scheme, alike for
education of the young and for the necessary intellectual defence of
Christianity, had consistently been the erection of a large Catholic
University like Louvain.  This he had tried to set up in Ireland.  In
such an institution, _research and discussion of the questions of the day
would be combined_ as in the middle ages with a Catholic atmosphere, the
personal ascendancy of able _Christian professors_ and directly
_religious influence_ for the young men." (Life of Newman)--by Ward.

Were there question only of postgraduate work, of some special course in
agriculture, domestic science, there would be no difficulty, we believe,
to see Catholic students take advantage of the marvellous facilities our
state universities offer.  The matter, the short term of these courses or
the advanced age of the pupil would be in themselves sufficient
guarantee.  _But what we strongly object to is the Arts Course, and
particularly undergraduate work_, even were the contentious subjects,
such as philosophy and history, be given by Catholic teachers to Catholic
students separately.  The Arts Course, we must remember, is the real
dominating factor in higher education.  For we maintain with Cardinal
Newman that a University is a place of teaching universal knowledge and
that its object is primarily intellectual.  It has in view the diffusion
and extension of knowledge, rather than its advancement, which is
reserved to Academies.  It is the Arts Course of a University,
particularly its Philosophy, that gives this general knowledge and
enlargement of the mind.  Its influence is most telling in the various
Faculties where students specialize for their future career.  For
Philosophy plays such a large part in _human life, the movement of
opinions and the direction of minds_.  The Catholic student in those most
plastic years, in that critical period of receptivity, wherein ideas are
analyzed and synthesized for life time, cannot help but imbibe ideas and
doctrines opposed to his belief.  The elite alone, we believe, can resist
in the long run the influence of that indefinable quality called
atmosphere, and maintain among so many cross-currents, the right course.
The ordinary and inexperienced mind will be, if not contaminated, at
least weakened and this alone is disastrous in a leader.  Many changes,
many transformations, we know, take place in the mind of youth as it
emerges "from collegiate visions into the rough path of real life."  As
Morley wrote, "We know after the event, the tremendous changes of thought
. . . of conception of life, that coming years and new historic forces
were waiting to unfold before the undergraduate when he had once floated
out beyond the college bar." Yet, the solid teachings of Catholic
Philosophy will remain to him as the charter and compass when his ship
has taken to the high sea.  This is the principal reason why we vindicate
the right to our own higher education.  To push the argument further, we
would ask why should we be obliged to pay taxes to have doctrines opposed
to our conscience propounded from the professorial chairs of our State
University?  The granting of a Charter by the State is but the minimum of
our rights.


_Dream or Reality?_

A Catholic University for Western Canada!  Is this but the dream of a far
off future or can it be a reality within a few years?--There is the
problem which now faces the Catholic Church of our Western Provinces and
upon which, in our estimation, rests the influence the Church is to have
in the formation of the new and most promising part of our Dominion
beyond the Great Lakes.  A high conception of the duty of the present
hour and the whole-hearted co-operation of every Catholic unit in the
West, will without doubt bring its happy solution and make our dream a
reality.  To act on ideal principles with little or no attempt to
forecast accurately what is practicable would be to court failure.  We
are gradually passing the mile-stone of pioneer life in the West, and the
Church is slowly but surely being organized and entering into full
possession of her normal life.  The duties which Catholic solidarity
imposes upon us as regards the Church and the community at large are
growing apace with the status of the Church in these new Provinces.
Among these duties none, we believe, are more important than that we owe
to the cause of Catholic education.  Naturally, the burden of the
responsibility falls here upon parents whose bounden duty it is to see
that the school, college, university, be, as much as possible but the
extension of their Catholic home.  _The rising generation in the West has
a right to the benefits of a higher education; to this right corresponds
in the community a duty imposed upon its members by Catholic solidarity_.
For in the growing youth we see the Country and the Church, with whose
future welfare it is necessarily united.  A true Catholic must have his
vision of what the Church ought to be in his Country and must work to
make that vision come true.

Through a Catholic University, and through it only, will the Church give
its full _contribution to the national life of Western Canada_ by
creating as we said, Catholic leadership.  We have as Catholics, ideas to
give to the nation, to its up-building, and to its prosperity.  The sun
of Canadian liberty is shining for our doctrines as it does for other
ideals.  And, strange to say, the most subversive theories seem to take
the greatest and most frequent advantage of this freedom.  We have no
apology to make for our ideas.  They stand on their own merit and have
been vindicated by the acid-test of time.  To bring our message to the
country, to spread its beneficial influence is the mission of our
Catholic leaders.  Only a large number of truly educated Catholic men are
able to make their influence felt on the life and thought of a country.

This identification of a Catholic university with our Western Provinces
will be an asset to our public life and beneficial to the people at
large, notwithstanding their aloofness and unreasoned opposition to our
principles and methods.  The evils of the times are the direct result of
the secularization of education.  Catholic higher education is the only
antidote and remedy to this evil.  Its principles are a vigorous protest
against materialistic philosophy.  We believe in the mastery of ideas and
in the final victory of truth.

_The Church also for her own benefit needs true Catholic leaders_.
Leaders in a Catholic Community, who are not thoroughly Catholic in their
training, who have false notions, warped views, biassed conceptions of
vital questions, are most detrimental to the cause of Catholicity.
Distorted and confused ideas, in religious matters particularly, always
lead to a compromise.  After school days they fail to find their Catholic
faith correlated with the _problems_ and _experiences_ which never
troubled them before, and which now, lack of higher education will not
allow them to solve and to face.  Have we not indeed in Western Canada to
guard ourselves against latitudinarianism in our Catholic life?  Material
prosperity, success in business or in farming, associations with men and
women who have practically no belief whatever, erroneous conceptions of
broadmindedness in religious matters, absence of traditions, lack of
Catholic education, all these causes and many others have created
especially in our cities, where such a large floating population is to be
found, and in our country places where there is no resident priest, a
compromising Catholicism, apologetic Catholics.  How many Catholics in
the West are always ready to cringe in presence of those who are not of
our belief and to apologize for their faith.  To react against this
abiding danger we need all through the country well instructed and
thoroughly educated Catholic leaders who will be in our world of
agnosticism and irreligion, the protagonists and apologists of
Catholicism.  The fearless proclamation of the truth combined with a good
moral public life is in itself a tremendous power.  Indeed, we need in
all the avenues of life men whose university training will give them
influence in public life.  But let it never be forgotten those captains
of industry, those brilliant and successful professional men, those
progressive farmers--valuable as they all may be--must count more as
leaders of Catholic thought than as money-makers.  If not, they will be
found wanting when the Church needs them the most.  We emphasize this
point, for in the plea for higher education very often our attention
seems to be more on the successful business man than on the Catholic
thinker.

Love of Church and country will therefore inspire us with a high sense of
duty in relation to the establishment of a seat of higher education in
this promising part of our great Dominion.  And this duty, let us not
forget it, _is urgent_.  Every decade means a new generation that should
have passed from the halls of our university to the commanding heights of
the country's leadership.  Our hesitancy means a further postponement of
the triumph of the Catholic Cause.

This high conception of an urgent duty gives the vision.  From the
clearness, breadth and depth of that vision will spring the conquering
spirit of co-operation.  Co-operation to be efficient and persevering
demands a united plan of action and an authoritative leadership.

The Catholic population of Western Canada is yet very limited.  We cannot
afford to scatter our forces and multiply our institutions.  One
university for all Western Canada would be sufficient to meet the present
requirements.  The multiplication of inefficient universities is a
calamity for genuine higher education.  This has been the contention of
"Catholic" in a recent series of brilliant articles in the "Casket."  The
policy would therefore be for all to agree on one college as the
non-Catholics have done in the different Western Provinces.  This
naturally requires the sacrifice of parochialism and provincialism.  But
if the Methodists, Presbyterians and Baptists have each agreed on the
establishment of one educational centre for their students, surely the
Catholics can also sacrifice local interests to the welfare of the cause.
How many efforts our bigoted provincialism has neutralized in the past!

Authoritative leadership only can unite our efforts on this unity of plan
of action.  Nothing in this matter can be done without the direction and
support of the Hierarchy of the West.  The division among Bishops was,
according to Newman, one of the main causes that made the Dublin Catholic
University scheme a failure.  Naturally this problem of higher education
is one that overflows diocesan boundaries and remains common to all.
"Boundaries of jurisdiction, as wrote so advisedly, Archbishop McNeil, of
Toronto, are conveniences and means to an end." Beyond the
responsibilities of each separate diocese there are other
responsibilities which affect the Church of Canada as a whole.  Let one
man with vision, judgment, energy, and action, make the creation of the
Catholic University in the West the work and ambition of his life, let
him have the sincere approbation and efficient co-operation of all the
Hierarchy . . . that man, we claim, will rally the Catholic forces around
him and will give to the West and its rising generation the blessing so
much needed of Catholic university training.  Newman was fond of
repeating that it is only _individuals_ who do great things.

And what will, this Catholic university mean to Catholic life in Western
Canada?  Well established upon the highest academic level by its success
in the competitive field of learning, it will stand out as the embodiment
of Catholic intellectual life and the centre of Catholic activities.  It
will be the counter-ideal to the ideal of agnosticism and materialism so
fostered and so prevalent in our neutral universities.  Just as the
cathedrals are the expression of the Catholic faith in Christ's abiding
presence in the Sacrament of His love, so is a Catholic university the
embodiment and accomplishment of the Church's ideal in education.  By its
extension work, summer courses, circulating libraries, correspondence
courses, lectures, etc., the university would unite our activities,
eliminate waste of energy and direct our combined efforts.  Cardinal
Newman believed that a Catholic university was essential for thorough
health and efficiency in the Catholic body at large.  To realize all that
a Catholic university would mean one has only to know what Washington
stands for in the life of the Church in the United States.  In his
beautiful letter to the American Hierarchy, Benedict XV said of it: "The
University, we trust, will be the _attractive centre_ about which will
gather all who love the teachings of Catholicism."


_What is the Conclusion?_

We may summarize our argumentation in favour of our contention in the
following statements:

1.--THE INTERESTS OF CHURCH AND COUNTRY, PARTICULARLY IN THE WEST, DEMAND
CATHOLIC LEADERSHIP;

2.--NO GENUINE LEADERSHIP WITHOUT UNIVERSITY TRAINING;

3.--FOR CATHOLICS HIGHER EDUCATION MEANS HIGHER CATHOLIC EDUCATION.

Now, Patient reader, allow us to conclude these already too lengthy
pages, by this pointed question: "_Is a Catholic university for Western
Canada within the possibilities of the near future?_"

Our answer will be simple, direct, conclusive, and, we hope, convincing.
If all Catholics in the Western Provinces, under the direction and with
the continued support of the Hierarchy, unite in one sublime and
persistent effort, we have the utmost confidence in its immediate
realization.  Some Catholics, we know, will distrust its expediency,
despair of its success or even feel an obligation to oppose it.
Difficulties, most undoubtedly, we will have numerous and great.  With
time, patience, perseverance and self-sacrifice we will overcome them.
Nothing succeeds like success.  The establishment of a work of that kind
is the work of years and even of centuries.  There must be some day a
start, a foundation to build on.  The policy of nihilism leads nowhere.
The frequentation of our State universities would indefinitely postpone
all efforts for the Catholic ideal, and be a surrender of the whole
situation.  But let us not be carried away with the modern fallacy of
materialistic grandeur.  Spacious and beautiful buildings, nice grounds
and attractive surroundings are not to be despised when the finances are
good.  But all these things are secondary; they do not give the intrinsic
value to a university, they are not "the pulse of the machine."  The
great business of a university is to teach; the highest academic level
should be its worthy ambition.  The teachers are the real makers of a
seat of higher learning, they pitch high or low the standard of learning.

This great work will demand from every Catholic a continued effort of
loyal and generous support.  The Canon-law, the Councils, the
exhortations of the Pope insists on this support of Catholic
universities.  Particularly those who are blessed with the goods of this
world and to whom Providence has been generous, should remember that
"their wealth has a fiduciary character; a character that entails duties
towards the Catholic community at large, none less obligatory because
they are rooted in the virtue of _charity_, instead of the virtue of
_justice_."

But experience tells us that our Catholic institutions are founded and
supported more by the "widow's mite" than by the millionaires' donations.
The support will come from the Catholic communities of Western Canada; it
will indeed come with most gratifying results _if the appeal is lofty in
its motive and proposal, concerted and systematic in its action_.

We are not to go to the Catholics of the West with an appeal in one hand
and an apology in the other.  A straightforward, self-respecting
presentation of our cause will bring a no less straightforward and
self-respecting response.  To make this appeal an unqualified success
there must be also concerted action.  Intensive efforts alone bring
results.  This means the canvass of the West for this single purpose, at
a stated time.  But any canvass of this kind, to be effective, must be
prepared by an educational campaign.  Give the Catholics, we maintain,
the vision of their duty, sound the call . . . and they will respond.
For indifference, profound and widespread,--fruit of ignorance more than
of ill-will,--would be the greatest obstacle to overcome.  Arousing
interest will be the initial task.  In Australia, Archbishop Mannix
organized a campaign, in co-operation with his suffragan bishops, for the
purpose of the Catholic College of Melbourne and from June to December,
1916, half a million of dollars was collected.  The Catholics of Western
Canada are just as ready, we claim, to furnish such annual payment as
would be wanted: if only they are properly called upon.  But this proper
calling involves first a systematic and periodical recommendation of its
claims by the clergy and influential laymen.

System will avoid a conflict of claims for other great causes equally
worthy of our generous support.  The war has in this matter taught us at
home a great lesson.  There were appeals for the Patriotic Fund, the Red
Cross, the Belgium Relief, the French Aid, etc., etc.  They all came to
us in rotation.  No apology was made, every one felt in duty and honor
bound, and the money was always there with an extraordinary readiness.
Organization is the first element of success.



Who will be the promoters of this great work?  Naturally the Hierarchy of
the West will be its inspiring and moving spirit.  But, should not the
Knights of Columbus, that body-guard of Catholic laity, be called to the
honour of "seeing it through."  This great undertaking would be a most
appropriate background for all the activities of our valiant Knights in
Western Canada.

A society, Catholic in principle and membership, must, to last, and be an
asset to the Church, have a definite programme of action in harmony with
its aim and constitution.   If it keeps its energies pent up behind the
walls of the council-chambers and only finds them an outlet in social
functions and friendly gatherings, it will soon go to seed or die of dry
rot.  When on the contrary an organization, such as the Knights of
Columbus, throws the full weight of its energies in the forwarding of a
great cause, the possibilities of its influence are limitless.  The war
activities of the Knights and their splendid results for the Church and
the nation are a tangible proof of it.

Could there be a work more in harmony with the aims of the great Catholic
organization than that of higher education.  At the national convention
of 1912, held at Colorado Springs, the committee on Catholic Higher
Education ends its report by saying: "In the newer impetus that will come
to Catholic education as the result of better understanding (its
necessity and value), the Knights of Columbus must make themselves an
important factor.  We owe it to ourselves and to that special loyalty to
both Church and State which we pride to claim as the special note of the
order.  It is often asked what are the Knights of Columbus doing that
they should be so proud of their organization, and the best possible
answer would be for all of us to be able to point to benefits that were
conferred by Knights individually and in bodies upon our Catholic
education.  There can be no mistake about the benefit to be conferred on
Church and State by progress in Catholic education."

The active and persevering co-operation of the Knights in the forwarding
of the great cause of a Catholic University for Western Canada, would be
their contribution to the great period of reconstruction which the world
is now facing.



On one of those beautiful mellow autumn evenings, of which the Prairie
alone has the secret, the traveller, as his train steams into one of our
Western Cities, will behold a stately cupola tipped with a golden
cross.--"What is that new building, yonder on the outskirts of the city?"
will he inquire.  The answer will be: "_That is the Catholic University
of Western Canada_."



[1] This chapter appeared as a series of articles, in the North West
Review of Winnipeg,--under the signature of "Miles Christi."

[2] "Less than one per cent. of American men are college graduates Yet
this one per cent. of college graduates has furnished: 55% of our
Presidents, 36% of our Members of Congress, 47% of the Speakers of the
House, 54% of our Vice-Presidents, 62% of our Secretaries of State, 50%
of the Secretaries of the Treasury, 67% of the Attorney Generals, 69% of
the Justices of the Supreme Court."--Dr. Jones, of the University of
Missouri.

[3] Lord Haldane addressing the Co-operative Educational Association
(May, 1920) made this statement:  "The universities of England must be
made able, as national institutions, with a larger range of activity than
at present, to undertake extra-mural work on a scale so great that it
will be of general application throughout the land, and they must be put
in a position to be fitted to bring this about."

[4] Speaking of Publicly and privately supported institutions of learning
in the U.S., Dr. Cappen, assistant commissioner of the United States
Bureau of Education stated that there are 93 of the former in the U.S.
and 477 of the latter.  About 62 per cent. of the college students in the
country attend voluntarily supported colleges, and the private schools
have about 68 per cent. of the educational funds of the country at their
disposal.  This includes of course such very wealthy endowed institutions
as Harvard, Princeton, Yale, Cornell and Stanford.




PART III

SOCIAL PROBLEMS

"The political and economic struggles of society are in the last
analysis religious struggles; their sole solution, the teaching of
Jesus Christ."--(John Stuart Mill.)




CHAPTER XII.

BEYOND BERLIN[1]

_After-War Problems from a Catholic View-Point--Reconstruction, the
Duty of the Hour._


The heavy clouds of war and the bloody mist of battles are lifting;
once more the sun of peace bursts forth triumphant over a sad and weary
world.  The storm has wasted its fury.  The landscape is washed clear
and bright, the atmosphere is glowing and transparent; destruction and
ruins everywhere stand out in sharp and ghastly relief.  On the distant
horizon, beyond the Rhine, the dark clouds drag their tattered shreds;
the angry lightning still flashes and thunder yet rumbles yonder--on
German and Russian soil.

The war is over.  The muddy trench, the deadly shrapnel, the perfidious
gas, the roaring cannon, the forced marches on the slimy roads of
Flanders, the heroic dashes and agonizing retreats of struggling
armies, the lurking submarines, the treacherous, owlish zeppelins, the
long-protracted vigil on the deep--all these grim realities of four,
long, endless years have melted away in the blaze of a glorious
victory.  Now the German Armada rides at anchor, prisoner, in British
waters, the armies of the Allies bivouac on the banks of the Rhine, and
our Canadian boys, flushed with victory, come marching home.

The day of the German surrender, Clemenceau, Premier of France, made
this significant statement: "Great have been the problems of the war,
but greater will be the problems of peace."  Nations, indeed, now face
one of the most momentous periods of history.  The world has struck its
tents and is once more on the march.  Never, we believe, have such
tremendous responsibilities weighed upon a passing generation.  The
future will be greatly imperilled if at this critical juncture great
questions are fought out between ignorant desire for change and
ignorant opposition to change.  The handwriting is on the wall, and our
economic and social life, foreign to Christian morality, has been found
wanting.  Will a new and better social order rise from the ashes of
this world-conflagration?  There is the searching problem which presses
itself upon the mind of every thinking man.  "On every side," writes
Father Plater, S.J., "there is talk of reconstruction, economic,
political, social, educational.  Government departments are hard at
work gathering information, elaborating schemes.  Numerous organized
bodies, such as the Labor party, are putting forward their programmes.
Conferences and lectures on reconstruction are multiplied and
literature on the subject pours from the press."

"Great ideas," said Wilson, "at last have captured the hearts of the
common people and directed into positive channels and constructive
programmes the very energies which otherwise may have spent themselves
in the acts of retributive destruction."  Reconstruction!  This is now
the world's watch-word.  It sums up the various problems with which
nations will have to grapple in every realm of human activity.  It
speaks of conditions that are no more and suggests new outlines of the
social order.  Our present and pressing duty then is to weigh the
anchor, to swing out into the middle stream and take our course on the
permanent principles of Catholic Truth.  These principles stand on the
shores of History as the great revolving lights that sweep the high
seas in the darkness of night.

Canada, after having bravely and generously solved the problems of war,
is now also facing "the greater problems of peace."  This period of
reconstruction, more than that of the war, will test our national
fibre.  The strain will be greater for the conflict is being lifted to
a higher plane, that of ideas.  But nowhere in Canada will this vast
work of readjustment be more tangible than in our Great West.  The
youth of that part of the country, and the dominating factors of the
national problem will, we believe, make the West the classical land of
reconstruction.  A gradual evolution will bring our Eastern Provinces
to readjust themselves to the changing conditions of political and
economic life.  The West, on the contrary, has in such matters the
beautiful qualities, the unlimited resources of youth, but also its
dangerous shortcomings.  Daring, venturous, over-confident in
democracy, the Western mind is frequently most hasty and radical in its
conclusions.  It has not been matured by time, that great teacher of
patience and moderation; experience has not, as yet, tempered that
feverish and progressive youthfulness, so prone to speedy and often
drastic legislation.  The heat of fever is often mistaken for the glow
of health.  And as legislation is in the minds of the Western people
the panacea of all evils in society, will not the common tendency be to
carry on the work of reconstruction by parliament bills and
orders-in-council?  Is there not here a great danger?  "The danger of
premature commitment is much greater than that of more cautious policy,
proving a stumbling block in the way of future progress."

Moreover, the most vital factors of reconstruction in Canada will
affect more particularly the Prairie Provinces.  The back-to-the-land
movement, demobilization, settlement of returned soldiers on the farm,
intensive immigration policy, extensive agricultural production are
indeed Western problems.

The choice of the Hon. J. A. Calder of Saskatchewan, as chairman of the
Reconstruction Committee in the Federal Cabinet; the prominent part
given to him and to the Hon. Mr. Meighen of Manitoba, in the formation
and discussion of plans at the recent meeting of the Premiers of the
Provinces; these are in themselves striking illustrations of our
contention in the matter.

Although the West will, in the period of reconstruction command the
attention of the country at large, there are, nevertheless, problems,
particularly those affecting our social and economic life, which will
weigh heavily on our Eastern Provinces.  So reconstruction will be a
nation-wide work.


_The Duty of Catholics_

What is, therefore, the duty of Catholics, at the present hour?  Are we
to fold our arms and let others rebuild the very framework of society
according to plans which our faith, reason, and history disapprove of,
and very often condemn?  Our ideas in the matter may not prevail, but
how would we be justified in deploring the consequences of a
legislation which we did not even try, by our influence, to suppress or
modify?  To abstain as Catholics from this great work of reconstruction
is profoundly un-Catholic.  It is the act of a traitor to the Church
and country.  As Burke so gloriously said: he was aware that the age is
not all we wish, but he was sure that the only means to check its
degeneracy was heartily to concur in whatever is best in our time.

The Church depends upon her children to spread the beneficial influence
of her social doctrines.  "The great work of the Catholics, after the
war, will be," said Father McNabb, O.P., "to bring the vision of the
Bride of Christ, the Catholic Church, before the millions of our
countrymen."  "These countrymen of ours are blind and often bigoted,"
adds Henry Somerville.

There are Catholics who make this blindness and consequent bigotry an
excuse for their own narrowness and selfishness, for their neglect to
share in the nation's work, for their refusal to co-operate in
patriotic, civic and social undertakings as if they were none of our
business.  The nation's business is our business.  If we serve the
nation efficiently, we serve the Church.  We take then the best means
to open the eyes of our fellow-countrymen to the fact that Catholicism
is not uncivic.  If we make ourselves valued, anti-Catholic prejudice
will be dispelled.

Cardinal Bourne in his letter on "Social Reform" speaks very pointedly
of the duty of every Catholic in this matter.  His pronouncement and
that of the American Hierarchy are the most notable declarations from
Catholic sources on "Social Re-construction."  "It is admitted on all
hands," says the English Primate, "that a new order of things, new
social conditions between the different sections in which Society is
divided will arise as a consequence of the destruction of the formerly
existing conditions.

"The very foundations of political and social life, of our economic
system, of morals, of religion are being sharply scrutinized, and this,
not only by a few writers and speakers, but by a very large number of
people in every class of life, especially among the workers."

The nation's business is our business.  The true love of country
demands from Catholics at this critical stage of our history to throw
all their energies into the various social activities.  Society
throughout the world is shaken in its very foundations.  This universal
unrest in the political, social and economic spheres is a decided mark
of the birth-throes of a new social order.  Therefore, we will conclude
with Cardinal Gibbons; "The Church cannot remain an isolated factor in
the nation.  The Catholic Church possesses spiritual and moral
resources which are at the command of the nation in every crisis."

The reform or remodelling of the social fabric, if it is to be
effective and abiding, must ultimately rest on the definite and
unchanging principles of morality.  These principles constitute the
moral law, as physical principles are the basis of the physical law.
Ernest Fayle, in a very instructive article on "Reconstruction," in the
October number of the "_London Quarterly Review_," makes a statement
very pertinent to this matter; "The economic, political and social
factors in human life are so inextricably entangled that if we accept
quality of life and not mere power or wealth as the touchstone of
national success we dare not, even in the consideration of economic or
political questions, lose sight of the moral issues."

The Catholic Church has always been the teacher and guardian of that
natural moral law which stands as the foundation and buttress of the
social edifice.  Her plans of Reconstruction rest on the eternal
principles of equity which God has engraved on the human conscience and
which the teachings of Christ have sanctioned and perfected.  In the
light of Catholic doctrine moral laws are definite and unchanging, for
they are the deliberate expression of the necessary and fundamental
relations upon which rests human nature.  They are the living, free
expression of man's place in creation.  The most elaborate schemes and
powerful organizations are soulless without these basic principles of
morality and have but an ephemeral existence.

Is it not, therefore, a great act of patriotism to try to throw into
the scales of the nation's destinies the mighty weight of
indestructible and tried principles?  A growing respect is to be found
for the soundness, the wisdom and the justice of Catholic social
principles, even in circles where our beliefs have not yet found
acceptance.  True statesmen have always recognized the influence of the
Catholic Church's doctrine in social matters, although they may not
believe in the truth of her teachings.  They always looked upon her
principles of social life as the ballast that steadies the ship on
heaving seas.  To make the Church a spiritual ally, to recognize her
moral power and her far-reaching influence has always been considered
good diplomacy and clear-sighted statesmanship.


_Catholic's Patriotism in Public Life_

Reconstruction is the great work of the hour; co-operation is a duty
every Catholic owes to Church and country.  What definite and concrete
form of co-operation will that responsibility assume?  There is the
problem.  Our first duty, in the matter, lies, we believe, in a greater
participation in public life.  Too long have we stood aloof from
movements that aim at the social welfare of the community.  A false
timidity and an erroneous conception of our responsibilities have
estranged us, to a great extent, from the various activities of
national life.  This isolation has been most prejudicial to our
Catholic laity, for it has fostered in their ranks disinterestedness
and often apathy.  "With regard to the necessity of Catholics to obtain
positions on public bodies, Cardinal Bourne stated that very often
Catholics were urged to take part in public affairs, by becoming
elected to public bodies in order that they might safeguard Catholic
principles.  That was a great good--a very laudable object--but it was
not the highest object.  The great object was that out of the fulness
of their Faith they might give to their fellow-countrymen the
principles that flowed from that Faith, so that little by little there
might be built up in the consciousness of the nation that belief in and
use of those sound principles of the Catholic Faith which contained the
only solution of the difficulties with which they were faced."

"Too long have Catholics lived in isolation, allowing others to think
and act for them.  It is indeed, high time that they felt the pulse of
life that beats in the real statesman, as distinct from mere
politician.  Duty demands that Catholics add their power of intellect
and will to the similar power of other citizens anxious to help the
commonwealth.  We are not aliens in this land, not aliens by birth or
principle.  As to the latter, I may say with all truth, that no one has
given clearer expression to the basic principles of democracy than the
Catholic theologians, Suarez and Bellarmine." [2]

This attitude of aloofness, during the coming period of reconstruction
especially, would be profoundly un-Catholic.  Our active participation
in public life will give us occasion to dispel prejudice, to offset
subversive doctrines, to advocate in spite of failures and bigotry the
principles of Christian sociology.  We are firm believers in the
prevailing strength of ideas.  They are indestructible; they rule
sooner or later.  They may take time to crystalize into convictions,
but the force of mental gravitation must ultimately prevail.  And after
all, Reconstruction, as Dr. J. J. Walsh stated, is more a question of
remaking the map of man's mind than that of remodelling the map of
Europe.

The Catholics of England give us, in this matter as in many others, a
beautiful example to follow.  During the war they formed a "British
Catholic Information Society," having at its service "the Catholic War
News Office."  The result of their aggressive policy is the public
recognition of the value of the Catholic Church by the English people
in the national work of Reconstruction.  We would here refer the reader
to Father Plater's letter on "Catholics and Reconstruction" for further
details in this interesting matter.  Like our Catholic brothers of
England, let us also take our place boldly in the broad daylight of
public life.  We have ideas to give to the Nation, let us give them.
Canadian liberty, without doubt, exists for our doctrines as it does
for the subversive theories of State-Socialism.  We have no apology to
make for our ideas.  They stand on their own merits and have been
vindicated by the great acid test of time.  Yes, we possess the great
curative and creative forces for social Reconstruction; We have only to
call them into play.


_The Catholic Solution_

In season and out of season, in the press and on the platform, in
private gatherings and public meetings, through every medium of social
control, let the people hear the Catholic solution of the problems now
facing the nations of the world.  We have a message to deliver.  That
message, if it comes to the people shining like a steel blade, sounding
like the blare of a trumpet, if it wells up from a fiery heart and
drops from burning lips--that message will be heard.  In this period of
strain and suffering the public mind is keyed to its highest pitch,
ready to snap at any moment.  Strong feeling has generated in many
minds intellectual hysteria.  "In war time," says E. H. Griggs, "there
is a curious paradox of widening radicalism of thought, with constantly
decreasing freedom of action and expression.  When the discrepancy
becomes too great, you have the explosion,--a revolution."  Therefore
in this time of intellectual ferment, the continued affirmation of
truth, and the persistent statement of principles are in themselves a
highly valuable service, which we are bound to give to the world.  The
thought of the human mind, like rays of sun-light, focused on one
point, acquires the burning power of conviction.

Participation in public life develops conviction; conviction repeatedly
asserts itself; continued assertion creates opinion; and public opinion
is without doubt one of the most universal powers at work in the world.
In every sphere of life you can feel the constant pressure of this
tremendous influence.  It may well be named the "current" of public
opinion.  Draining to its profit the latent and loitering powers of the
individual thinker, silently, irresistibly it moves on; checked, it
becomes an angry whirlpool of confused and gyrating waters; harnessed
to the wheels of national life, it will transform its energies into
light, heat and power.

The creation and the spreading of Catholic opinion in social matters
should be in our mind, the ultimate goal of our activities, for it is
the greatest asset we can contribute to the vast work of
Reconstruction.  As Lord Morley said, "great economic and social forces
flow with tidal sweep over communities half conscious of that which is
befalling them.  Wise statesmen are those who foresee what time is
bringing and try to shape institutions and to mould men's thought and
purpose in accordance with the change that is silently surrounding
them."

Time, you readily understand, will not allow us to dwell upon the
various problems which Reconstruction will bring before the country.
Our aim, now, is rather to awaken the sense of responsibility, stir the
sleeping conscience into watchfulness, and give to our Catholic men and
women the stimulating thought of co-operation.  Our country is being
re-created in its political, social and economic life; to be a living
factor in that "re-creation" is the duty of the hour.

Before bringing these remarks of a rather general character to a close
allow us to mark for your attention the leading problems.  They will be
as landmarks planted to guide you on the way.  In the international
order, the problem of resetting nations on a new basis by a "just and
durable peace" now faces the world.  Racial and language problems
command our attention in the national order.  In the political world
ideas are to be readjusted as to the nature, powers and obligations of
the State.  Of late, the monopoly of the State has been asserting
itself so strongly that one is led to believe the old pagan principle
of the supremacy of the State will once more reign supreme.  When
nations have ceased to give to God what belongs to God, they give to
Caesar alone what belongs to Caesar and what belongs to God.

The social order will witness demobilization and immigration.  Who
cannot grasp the importance of these great problems with their various
and intricate issues?  The greatest transformations are, perhaps,
reserved for the economic order; capital and labor, efficient and
greater production of industry and agriculture, the living wage, and
uplifting of the workman's status, etc.  In the educational order the
battle will be greater, for there is a great tendency to centralize, to
federalize education, under the plea of "national schools."

The religious order will see tremendous efforts for union among the
various non-Catholic denominations; "social service" will be their
center of unity, the common field of action.

Various and important, as you see, are the problems that confront us in
the realms of human activity.  Now, bear in mind, the Catholic doctrine
has a solution for each problem and it is your duty to give it.
Knights of Columbus, as you helped the Church to solve the problems of
the war, so will you also help to solve the greater problems of peace.
If you wish to be the body-guard of the Church, your mission is to lend
your noble and generous efforts to your spiritual leaders in this great
work of reconstruction.  For, of this reconstructive period and its
great opportunities for militant and active Catholics, we may say what
Carlysle said of the period that followed the French Revolution; "Joy
was it, in that age, to be living--and to be young, was very heaven."
The task indeed is enormous, but the incentive most inspiring.

We are bound to meet with the fluctuations and uncertainties of the
human mind, particularly in such times of readjustment and intellectual
unrest.  Let us then never forget that since the coming of Christ and
the establishment of His Church on earth the principles of His teaching
are for all nations.  The sun of truth has its meridian in Rome, on the
rock of Peter.  There it stands at its zenith, in the permanent blaze
of a perennial mid-day; there it sets the time for the Catholic world
amid the ever-changing and conflicting problems of human history.
_Stat Crux dum volvitur orbis_.



[1] A speech delivered in the Assembly Hall of the Knights of Columbus,
St. John, N.B., December 22, 1918.  "The Catholic Mind" of New York
reproduced it in one of its issues.

[2] R. H. Tierney, S.J., Editor of America, at the Catholic Federation
meeting, Brooklyn, September 15, 1918.




CHAPTER XIII.

WHOM DO MEN SAY THAT THE SON OF MAN IS?  (MATH. XVI.-13.)--PUBLIC
OPINION AND THE CATHOLIC CHURCH

_What is Public Opinion--Its Power--How is it Formed--Public Opinion
and the Catholic Church--Our Duties to Public Opinion._


Numerous and strong are the influences at play in human life.  Acting
and reacting on the free will of man they are ever at work moulding his
character and shaping his destiny.  Like the waves of an incoming tide
they are beating the shores of our heart; their triumph is to carry
away our liberty on their receding waters.

Surrounding influences for good or for evil are indeed, to a great
extent, the determining factors of our moral life.  Day by day they
write our history and with it the history of the world; for, the life
of every man is but a line on the great page of his nation's history
and the history of a nation, but a chapter in that of humanity.

Of all the influences underlying human activities in the moral, social,
economic, and political world, one of the most universal and most
effective is beyond doubt, nowadays, _Public Opinion_.  We may well
name it the "_current_" of Public Opinion.  In every sphere of life one
can indeed feel the constant pressure of its tremendous power.  Like
the waters of a mill-race constantly and irresistibly the stream of
Public Opinion sweeps on.  It is very difficult to determine exactly
where lies its strength; it is nowhere and everywhere.  Unconscious of
its swollen powers it spends its energies for the welfare of the
community, or, unfortunately too often, loses itself in an angry
torrent of destruction.

You thwart its onward march: it will bury your barrier under its
laughing waters or . . . sweep it away.  You ride with it: it will
gladly carry you.  You check it: its troubled waves will rise angry
around you and engulf you.

Such is the "_current_" of Public Opinion.  To direct this great power,
to harness its tremendous forces, to convert them into light, heat, and
energy and set the wheels of moral, social, and political life running
with greater smoothness, rapidity, and strength, should be the noble
effort and the great task of every serious-minded man.

By no idle whim or sheer literary piquancy have we coupled _Public
Opinion and the Catholic Church_.  The inevitable relations that exist
between Public Opinion and the various predominating factors of a
nation should necessarily interest every true Canadian.  Among these
factors the Catholic Church stands pre-eminent.  Her beneficial
influences and her ready solutions to the various social and moral
problems that confront the world, cannot, even to the most prejudiced,
be passed unnoticed.  So no matter what our spiritual allegiance may
be, the relation of Public Opinion to the Catholic Church should be of
the greatest interest to any one who has at heart the common welfare.
In Western Canada particularly, where Public Opinion has such a sway,
this subject, we presume, must be of service both to those of the
Catholic Faith and to those of a different persuasion.



_What is Public Opinion--Its Power--How is it Formed?_

1. _What is Public Opinion_?

Ideas rule the world, but various are the effects ideas have on the
minds of men.  On some minds they exercise only a passing influence;
they are then what we call "_Impressions_"; variable as lights and
shadows over a summer lake they come and go.  Impressions are indeed
only on the surface of the mind, like foot-prints on the sand washed
away by the next tide.

When ideas take a stronger footing in our intelligence and are accepted
with a certain confidence, on their face-value or on the authority of
some leader, they become "_Opinions_."  Loosely entertained and readily
exchanged, opinions are the ordinary mental pabulum of the masses.

Few minds see their ideas crystallized into "_Convictions_."
Convictions are permanent, unchangeable ideas: based on facts and
supported by satisfactory evidence, they rest on the bed-rock of truth.
Few minds indeed, particularly on the larger and fundamental issues,
can claim the right to convictions.  For, convictions demand a breadth
of vision and grasp of detail which are given but to few souls.  These
minds, few in number, are the minds of leaders.  Their noble duty and
great responsibility is to _Awaken_, _Stimulate_, and _Organize_ the
thinking of the people.  Their thoughts, their ideas, are on the
unchartered sea of truth as the tossing buoy or lighted beacon from
which the unthinking masses take their course.  Rather than go to the
pains of thinking for themselves the crowds leave this task to a few
and content themselves with ready-made opinions, as these float by with
the tide of the hour.  Few make up their minds; they are made up for
them.

The common opinion which reflects the mind of the great majority,
embodies the prevailing idea, the universal sentiment, and directs the
common action is called. . . _Public Opinion_.


2. _Power of Public Opinion_.

You readily see, by its very nature, the tremendous power of Public
Opinion.  It is the "reason why," the basis of appreciation, the norm
of conduct of the great mass of the people.  As we stated before,
Public Opinion is like the stream that drains to its profit the
loitering energies of the individual mind, and makes them tributaries
that swell its volume and compress its course.  Who can analyze the
powers of this "_Organized Thinking_" of the people in a democracy?
Who can measure the force of these sweeping currents, of these tidal
waves of Public Opinion?

In fact, Public Opinion may be considered in our modern societies as
the greatest driving power.  For, Public Opinion is the vision of the
unthinking multitude, and vision is the first and foremost of
constructive or destructive forces.  It lights the way and invites
action accordingly.  Marvellous indeed is the sweep of the tide of
Public Opinion in various realms of human activities.  Its ebb and
flow--although frequently beyond analysis, are felt on every shore.

In the world of finance,--and this is the lowest in the scale of real
values,--is not that fragile but mighty factor we call credit based on
Public Opinion?  For, credit is but the general opinion of the
community on the possibilities of the industry or undertaking in which
its capital is involved, and on the honesty and ability of the
management.

What has weakened the moral fibre of our modern society so much that at
times one wonders if we are living in the Christian era?  If the home
is now so often desecrated by theories of free love and trial
marriages, if the cradles are empty, if the very sense of shame is a
thing of the past, if the most elementary principles of morality are
questioned, is it not because the public conscience is being warped,
chloroformed, deadened by a frenzied propaganda of a corrupted Public
Opinion?

Has not the politician and the legislator the ear to the wind, the eye
on the running tides and cross currents of thought, to know and sound
Public Opinion?  Like the skilful and watchful pilot, he counts with
the set of the tide and catches it at its crest.  He knows the exact
height of the rising tide that will float him and his cargo over the
bar . . . of a coming election--.  This tide of public feeling has
carried some to the high seas of success but left many stranded on the
desert shores.  Many public men indeed have set out on its angry waters
to brave its fury . . . and have never returned.  "In our times of
Democracy when the "competitive" principle has replaced the
"hereditary," not the kings, princes and nobles, but bankers,
merchants, railroad magnates, capitalists, politicians, editors,
educators, writers and artists occupy the high seats, hold the baton
and beat the time for the great social orchestra."  (Ross-Social
Psychology.)  "Power and influence," said Morley, "no longer reside in
the Crown but in the strong, subtle forces called Public Opinion: and
that Public Opinion is apt to involve fatal contentment with simple
answers to complex questions."

In the great international life of nations Public Opinion also holds
the reins.  This power manifests itself particularly at the great
turning points of History, such as we are now witnessing.  There is
always then resistance between conflicting forces; and resistance, we
know, strengthens the current.  What power was at work for the last
fifty years and marshalled, on that fatal August day of 1914, the
formidable army that swept over Belgium, France and Russia?  Public
Opinion created by the military caste in Germany!  What secret and
growing force made of the Allies' contemptible army of yesterday the
crushing victorious army of to-day?--The invincible power of Public
Opinion!--It leaped from the very depths of the wounded heart and
outraged conscience of nations, and created in a few months that
unconquerable army of inexhaustible reserves upon which the Allies
relied until their final triumph.  It fired the morale of our armies
and smashed the way to victory.  For those who could not go to the
battle-field, it kept the homefires burning and fringed with the silver
lining of radiant hope the dark clouds that hung over our horizon for
four long, dragging, weary years.


3. _How Public Opinion is Formed_.

You may ask how are the thoughts of the multitude so marshalled as to
make the unit of Public Opinion.  As we already remarked, the thinking
power of the ordinary man does not go _far_, _wide_, nor _deep_.  His
facility of absorbing ideas is far greater than his power of valuating
them.  He generally accepts as real value any thing that bears the
stamp of current opinion.  His belief in the value and weight of number
is without recall; his absolute trust in what Bryce calls "the fatalism
of multitude" is beyond appeal.  He lives and thrives on the
_surrounding mental atmosphere_.

How is this atmosphere created?  By the continued, persevering
repetition of the same ideas; by the vesting of these same ideas in the
attractive garb of self-interest, passion, fancy and vogue.  On this
process, we all know by experience, is based the ever youthful power of
_Advertisement_ . . . and of _Fashion_.

Advertisement!  Modern business is built to a great extent on the
mysterious allurement, the attractive invitation and innocent
camouflage of the advertisement that you find sparkling everywhere, on
the flashy poster, in the show-window, in the magazine, in the daily
paper.  Without willingness to admit our weakness, we fall victims to
this wizard that we despised yesterday and court to-day, and line up at
the counter . . . for a _Special Sale_, an _Astonishing Bargain_.  "We
are so thoroughly accustomed to the exploits of the advertiser that we
take them as a matter of course, rarely pausing to appreciate the art,
or at least, the artfulness with which we have been lured into the
acceptance of his ideas."

_Fashion_!  Who can analyze this power so great, so universal?  Who can
explain the psychology of this fact?  Every spring and fall of the year
Dame Fashion has an opening-ball--Paris plays the tune, New York wields
the baton, the ladies of the world . . . keep time . . . and the
gentlemen pay the piper.

We mention these facts of every day life to illustrate the permeating
and driving force of an idea, when constantly kept before the mind.
And what advertisement and fashion are in the commercial and social
life, _Propaganda_ and _Publicity_ are in the world of thought.  The
policy of propaganda is to enlist the active co-operation of every
vehicle of thought for the furtherance of an idea and to keep that idea
ever before the public.  One readily sees the tremendous
responsibilities, and understands the flagrant abuses of those called
to create and direct Public Opinion.  "The supremacy of ideas," it was
stated, "gives the greatest places of opportunity to those who awaken,
stimulate and organize the thinking of the people and especially the
thinking of a people in a democracy.  The teacher's desk, the
preacher's pulpit, the orator's platform, the writer and editor's
sanctum--these are the places of true leadership, the thrones of real
power."

This analysis of Public Opinion, of its power, of its formation will
now make us better understand its relations with the Catholic Church.


_Public Opinion and the Catholic Church_.

Nowadays the relation of Public Opinion to the Catholic Church is,
generally speaking, one of suspicion, frequently of silent contempt and
very often of open hostility.  This statement of fact may appear to
many too sweeping; its broadness may trouble the peaceful faith of
others.  Yet, history and every day experience prove the truth of our
assertion.  We go further and claim that for the Church this condition
will, and must exist.  The Church, like Christ, her Founder and Master,
is to be a "_Sign of Contradiction_."  Her very name "Catholic" is a
perennial witness to her sublime and admirable Catholicity, and thereby
an abiding proof of her Divinity.  A Church that modifies her tenets
and adjusts her moral standards to accommodate herself to the
conveniences and fancies of the world is not, and cannot be the Church
of Christ.  Now, as in the times of the Apostles, the Church "_Is a
Sect that is everywhere spoken against_"--"_If ye were of the world_?"
said the Saviour, "_the world would love his own; but ye are not of
this world, therefore the world hateth you_."  Yes, suspicion, contempt
and hostility are the hall-marks of historic Christianity, for they are
the realization of Christ's promises to His Church, the fulfilment of
His prophesies.  This fact for a Christian who has eyes to see, and
ears to hear, is particularly noticeable when periodically a tidal wave
of bigotry or open persecution strikes the Catholic Church, lashes
itself into fury, washes the Rock of Peter with ugly foam . . . and
dies away, ashamed of its own powerlessness and unfairness.

Viewing this relation of Public Opinion to the Catholic Church--not as
an evidence of that spiritual conflict, often unconscious but ever
real--but as a fact, a historic reality, some may ask the proof of our
rather bold statement.  Even those who are not of our Faith, and yet
always wish to be fair and broad in their dealings with the Catholic
Church, may question it.

The proof is very simple to give.  Public Opinion is against the
Catholic Church, because the powers that create and maintain Public
Opinion are against the Catholic Church.  Facts here speak for
themselves.

The Press--the Novel--the Periodical Literature--the Cinema--the
Stage--the Public School--the Academy and University Halls--the
Legislative Assemblies . . . are without doubt the high voltage-wires
that receive, carry and distribute the current of Public Opinion.  Or
rather, like the wireless stations they gather those invisible and
imponderable waves of thought and feeling that are ever flashing
through the intellectual and moral atmosphere of nations, and translate
their message to the masses.  Between these powers and Public Opinion
there is a continuous action and reaction.  They are at the same time
the _moulders_ and _mirrors_ of Public Opinion.  They are its
_masters_, but with the condition of being first its _servants_.

Of all these creative forces none is greater and more universal than
the _Press_.  If Public Opinion is the king and master of the modern
world, the Press is assuredly his faithful and most active Prime
Minister.  This chief executive has extended the kingdom of his master
to the very confines of the civilized world.  Nothing has contributed
more to the rule of Public Opinion than the Press.  With it ideas and
opinions run through the public mind as rapidly as the dispatches that
carry them.  "Mental touch is no longer bound up with physical
proximity.  With the telegraph to collect and transmit the expressions
and signs of the ruling mood, and the fast mail to hurry to the eager
clutch of waiting thousands the still damp sheets of the morning daily,
remote people are brought as it were into one another's presence."
(Ross-Social Psychology.)

The ordinary man now sees the world through his newspaper.  He absorbs
facts and principles with the shades and variations the daily paper
gives them.  Reports of events and announcements of policies are
colored to suit the aims and opinions of the editors and proprietors.
Windy platitudes--at least for those who know facts and have studied
principles--become gospel truth for the unthinking mass.  Public
Opinion is thus conscripted by an "irresponsible power."  This
irresponsibility of the Press is without doubt the greatest menace of
the day.  For, the opinions,--we mean to say--the propelling forces of
the silent millions are at its mercy. . . .  And these silent millions
make and unmake the world.

This great power of the Press is inimical to the Catholic Church.  By
press, you will readily understand, we do not mean any particular
paper, or a certain group of papers, but rather that formidable
ensemble of tremendous financial backing, of world-wide
information-services, of chains of papers that encircle the globe, of
these various agencies that tap the telegraphic wires of every country
and keep the cables hot.  The Hearst papers alone reach simultaneously
four or five million readers daily.  From New York to San Francisco one
man is leading the minds of these millions "to conclusions that he
wants them to arrive at"--What Hearst is for the United States, Lord
Northcliffe is for England.

This great press is against the Catholic Church.  The total suppression
of truths and of facts; the conspiracy of silence--often more dangerous
than an open attack; the coloring of news with shades of thought suited
to a definite purpose; the partial admission of truth and the maimed
relation of facts; the bold assertion of deliberate falsehoods; the
deceptive headlines--and the people live on headlines; the insinuating
title which is often in flagrant contradiction to the dispatch it
underlines:--these are a few of its various strategies of attack.  "The
Pope and the War," "Quebec and the War," "The Guelph Novitiate
Incident," are recent instances of what we refer to.

Some may object that the Catholics are of a rather susceptible nature
and always expect "privileges"--No, we only want the privileges of
truth, we mean fair play, equality, and justice.

What we say of the Press can also be said of periodical literature and
modern fiction.  "The very nature of periodical literature," says
Cardinal Newman, "broken into small wholes and demanded punctually to
an hour involves the habit of extempore philosophy . . . and that
philosophy, we know is not Christian philosophy.  The writers can give
no better guarantee for the philosophical truth of their principles
than their popularity at the moment and their happy conformity in
ethical character to the age which admires them."

Any one who has kept in touch with the stream of modern fiction is well
aware to what extent its waters are polluted and have contaminated the
mind and heart of our present generation.  When the world has been
slaking its literary thirst at sources such as H. G. Wells, Galsworthy,
Ibanez--only to mention a few--should we be astonished that public
opinion is drifting to paganism?  If theories of "Free Love" and
Divorce are rampant in our society, the responsibility to a great
extent lies with our modern novel.  The novels that are written and
read, indicate the mind and morals of a people.

What could we not write of the _Moving-Picture_ and the _Stage_?
Suffice it to state with Rev.  R. A. Knox--then an anglican minister,
and now a catholic priest: "When a nation has lost its hold of first
truths and its love for clear issues, which has had its morality sapped
by sentiment, thinks of Christian marriage in the light of the
problem-play . . . the moral fibre of that nation is gone."  For, the
vision of life and the interpretation of its pleasures and sorrows,
that come from the glare of the foot-lights, or the dimness of the
Movie-Screen, are surely not that given by the Catholic Church.  Over
the screen of the movies and the proscenium of the stage could we not
very often write what the author of the play "Enjoy Life," Max Hermann
Neisse, said lately to a Berlin sensation-seeking audience that was
underlying with frantic applause the unsavory remarks and filthy
inuendos of the closing act: "Pardon me, I did not write this act.--You
dictated it to me."

In pandering to the morbid curiosity and lustful passions of a
pleasure-mad world, the stage, the moving-picture, the novel, the
illustrated weekly are leading Public Opinion to depths before unknown.
The abyss calls to the abyss.  Ways of living always follow ways of
thinking.  Should we then be astonished that crime-wave after
crime-wave is sweeping the shores of every country.

Existing conditions in our universities, public academies and schools
are not of a nature to conciliate Public Opinion with the Catholic
Church.  We know perfectly well that in our seats of higher-learning
the Church is looked upon as an effete Institution, as something of the
past that has kept a certain air of respectability.  Her teachings and
her history are there viewed in the light of the "evolution theory."
Who has not read, a few years ago, that terrible indictment against the
antichristian education of the American Universities, as it appeared in
a celebrated article, under the title: "Blasting at the Rock of Ages?"

In our legislative assemblies, here and abroad, do we not find the
educational problem the burning problem for Church and State?  Over the
head of the child swords clash, for the child of to-day is the man of
to-morrow.  The stand the Catholic Church takes on the educational
problem--from which She never deviates--has always stirred Public
Opinion against her in political and social circles.  We have only to
mention "separate schools" to awaken the memories of a long and bitter
struggle.

The same inimical relations dominate the International Order.  Rome and
its world-wide moral influence have been deliberately ostracized in the
recent and unhappy attempt to form a League of Nations.

So the tide of Public Opinion sweeps upon tide.  Everywhere its heavy
waves break into a foamy froth on the Rock of Peter.  We conclude:
_Public Opinion is against the Catholic Church_.


_Our Duties to Public Opinion_.

The antagonism against the Catholic Church is an overt fact.  What are
the causes?  _A distorted vision_, born of misrepresentation of facts
and misrepresentation of doctrine and practice; the _blind prejudice_
against which our refutation of facts and explanation of principles are
of little avail: _these are the two main causes to which can be traced
this universal opposition_.  And indeed no one will tax us with
exaggeration were we to repeat here what Tertullian wrote in his
"Defence of the Church," a hundred years after St. John's death: "_They
think the Catholics to be the cause of every public calamity, of every
national ill_."  Have we not in our own country, organizations that
live and thrive only on enmity to the Church of Rome?  They cannot meet
without passing resolutions of condemnation of the Church, of the Pope,
of separate schools, etc.  We all know how often Public Opinion, in our
country, has been inflamed by prejudiced appeals to racial and
religious feelings.  Racial antagonism itself is only a cover for
anti-Catholic fanaticism.

Let us, by clear and sound thinking, by definite and bold expression
_enlighten Public Opinion_.  To-day Public Opinion is shifting as the
winds, swinging like a boat with the ebb and flow of the tide.  These
are days of loose thought, wild words, catchy phrases, especially in
social and religious matters.  Words and phrases are passed off as
ideas, and fragments of an idea as the whole idea.  Let ideas always be
clear-cut, with a sharp, definite relief.  Hazy notions are of no
constructive value, and always full of danger, particularly in times of
intellectual ferment, such as we are now going through.  They are on
the great sea of Truth as the smoke-screens, behind which lurk the
destroyers of error.

Cardinal Newman concludes one of his letters on "The Position of
Catholics"--which bears on the subject of Catholics making themselves
known: "Protestantism is fierce because it does not know you; ignorance
is its strength; error is its life; therefore bring yourselves before
it, press yourselves upon it, force yourselves into notice against its
will.  Oblige men to know you.  Politicians and philosophers would be
against you, but not the people, if they knew you."

_Create Public Opinion_ by _individual and concerted action_, that is
our next duty.  Truth spreads, not like the devastating torrent, but
like the tide.  From individual to individual as from pebble to pebble
it slowly creeps in and spreads the silent power of its rising waters.
"No one ever talks freely about anything without contributing
something, let it be ever so little, to the unseen forces which carry
the race on to its final destiny.  Even if he does not make a positive
impression he counteracts or modifies some other impression, or sets in
motion some train of ideas in some one else, which helps to change the
face of the world."  Godkin "Problems of Modern Democracy." 221-224.

By the continued repetition of truth and the persevering refutation of
falsehood we will help to create around us, in our limited sphere of
action, a sane Public Opinion.  But it is above all by the radiance of
our moral life that truth, particularly religious truth, will spread.
Religion, as we know, is of the moral order; its dogmas, precepts and
sacraments reach out into that domain.  Paul Bourget, the celebrated
French writer sums up one of his most striking novels in this phrase:
"_At Forty-three_" which he calls the noon hour of life--"_man must
live what he believes or he will eventually believe as he lives_."  To
live up to our principles is always the best proof of our belief in
them.

_Concerted action_ will extend the benefits of this individual action
to the creation of Public Opinion in the Community, in Society at
large.  As all great powers, Public Opinion is courted; this courtship
is "_Propaganda_."  Truth requires propaganda as life needs
transmission.  An efficient propaganda takes myriad forms but its
purpose is always the same, i.e., give to others our ideas and through
them organize the public mind.  Distribution of literature, lectures,
the press, the novel, the cinema, bureaus of information, active
participation in public life are vital factors of an efficiently
organized propaganda.  The recent Northcliffe propaganda, followed by
the Hearst propaganda are typical illustrations of how the public mind
of a Country was swayed from a pro-British to an Anti-English attitude.

_The Direction of Public Opinion_ is the ultimate triumph of
propaganda.  This is obtained when our principles pass into the warp
and woof of the social textures which are always in the making on the
great loom of our nation's life.  Ideas have their full value when they
are extended to social and political issues.  It is only then that they
influence a nation as such.  For our lives are knitted with the lives
of others, and their action and reaction upon them form our public
life.  "In the formation and guidance of the public opinion which
ultimately determines public action, Catholics bear responsibility and
must take their part."  (Cardinal Bourne, at the Catholic Congress of
England, 1920.)

As Catholics we have a contribution to make to the great upbuilding of
our Country.  There is in every problem an ethical side, an unchanging
and unchangeable principle, the bedrock on which it rests.   This
principle, the Catholic doctrine possesses; we know it, we are sure of
it.  Why not then have that aggressiveness of militant Catholics who
take advantage of every opportunity, without being obtrusive?  Are we
not too apologetic in our Public life?  We would not suggest in the
least to be discourteously aggressive, although at times we are tempted
to do so and seem justified in our retaliation.  But there is no reason
why we should apologize for our principles, for the solutions we have
to offer.  The sun of Canadian liberty shines also for us and for what
we stand; we have our place under the shade of the "Maple Leaf."

May we add a word for our non-Catholic friends.  They also have duties
towards Public Opinion in its relation with the Catholic Church.

_Receptiveness of mind_ is, in our estimation, the first and most
important duty of the non-Catholic.  Open-mindedness was named by
Confucius "mental hospitality."  It opens the door to truth by allowing
ourselves to be convinced by the strength of argument and the weight of
evidence.  This state of receptivity permits the mind to correct its
distorted vision, and to see facts and principles as they really are.
Freedom of mind enables those who possess it to see things in their
true proportions.

_Fair-mindedness_ will overcome prejudice, the great obstacle in
matters of Religion.  Prejudice is made of a coarse and impenetrable
fibre, of a close woven texture; it is the product of numerous and
various influences.  The ordinary causes of this pre-judgment or mental
torsion are an habitual intellectual outlook resulting from education
and surrounding influences, and a mental laziness which fails to
question its own attitude and to pursue principles to their logical
conclusions, and problems to their solution.  This explains how
reluctantly the mind, in religious matters particularly, will accept
views contrary to those with which it has been familiar since early
youth and which time and surroundings have but strengthened.  A
straight-forward appeal to _fairmindedness_ is alone able to break down
this barrier.

Duties are in proportion to the responsibilities they entail.  Public
Opinion, as we have seen, is a tremendous power but it is the power of
a high explosive which misdirected and ill-used will spread disaster.
Leadership is the spark that ignites the charge, is responsible for its
driving force.  In the days of real intellectual leadership the mastery
of ideas prevailed and Public Opinion was considered as the triumph of
an idea.  But in our days of so called democratic equality the centre
of gravity of this power has shifted from the leader to the multitude.
De Tocqueville in his book "Democracy in America" [1] has a remarkable
page, illustrating this point.  "The nearer the people," he writes,
"are drawn to a common level of an equal and similar condition the less
prone each man becomes to place implicit faith in a certain man or
certain classes of men.  But his readiness to believe the multitude
increases and opinion is more than ever the mistress of the world.  Not
only is common opinion the only guide which private judgment retains
among democratic people, but amongst such a people it possesses a power
infinitely beyond what it has elsewhere.  At periods of equality men
have no faith in one another by reason of their common resemblance; but
this very resemblance gives them almost unbounded confidence in the
judgment of the public; for it would not seem probable, as they are all
endowed with equal means of judging, but that the greater truth should
go with the greater number.  The public has therefore among a
democratic people a singular power which aristocratic nations cannot
conceive of; for it does not persuade to certain opinions, but it
impresses them and infuses them in the intellect by a sort of enormous
pressure of the minds of all upon the reason of each."

To this prestige of vast numbers Bryce has given a name.  "Out of the
mingled feelings that the multitude will prevail and that the
multitude, because it will prevail, must be right, there grows a
self-distrust, a despondency, a disposition to fall into line, to
acquiesce in the dominant opinion, to submit thought as well as action
to the encompassing powers of numbers."

"This tendency to acquiescence and submission, this sense of
insignificance of individual effort, this belief that the affairs of
men are swayed by large forces whose movements may be studied but
cannot be turned, I have ventured to call it "_The Fatalism of the
Multitude_."  It is often confounded with the tyranny of the majority,
but is at the bottom different though, of course, its existence makes
tyranny by the majority easier and more complete. . . .  In the
fatalism of the multitude there is neither _legal_ nor _moral_
compulsion; there is merely a loss of _resisting power_, a diminished
sense of personal responsibility of the duty to battle for one's own
opinion, such as has been bred in some people, by the belief of an over
mastering fate." [2]

One can readily grasp the dangers of Public Opinion at the mercy of
blatant agitators and unscrupulous leaders.  They have no idea to
promote, but only a feeling to exploit.  They flatter Public Opinion to
gain it.  They appear to consult it when in reality they are creating
and directing it.  They catch the restless and undirecting currents of
popular feeling when they are seeking an outlet and swing them slowly
at first but with a growing impetus in the channels of their own
interest or of the party they represent.  The people are deluded into
thinking that they are their own leaders and masters.  The feeling of
unrest that now prevails is due to this abuse of Public Opinion.  Like
children the leaders of nations have been playing with this wire of
high voltage.  Should we be surprised to see the world suffer deadly
shocks from whence it should receive light and power?

We are now at one of the most momentous periods of history.   Never
have clear thinking, earnest expression and concerted action been more
needed than now.  The world is ringing with wild words and dying from
loose thinking.  "The persistent statement of principles and the union
of all true conservative forces are absolutely necessary, if we wish to
bring the nation safe through this agonizing period and make the world
safe for democracy," as President Wilson said.

Therefore we claim that it is for the greatest benefit of the community
at large to have Public Opinion enlightened as to the value of the
Church as a reconstructive factor.

"_Great have been the Problems of War_!"  But, with Clemenceau, we also
are realizing--and some countries, with bitter deception and depressing
sorrow, "_That greater still are the Problems of Peace_."



[1] Vol. II., Chap. II.

[2] Bryce--"The American Commonwealth," Vol. II., Chap. 84.




CHAPTER XIV.

TRUTH SHALL MAKE YOU FREE[1]

(Jo. VIII, 32)

_Facts--Principles--Policy of the Catholic Truth Society--Its value for
the Church in Western Canada._


Truth and liberty, error and license are inseparable partners.  The
measure of truth gives the measure of true liberty, just as the degree of
error tells the degree of bondage.  This is a logical necessity, a
natural consequence.  The Master emphasized it when He said: "And you
shall know the Truth and the Truth shall make you free."  These pregnant
words of Christ are the charter of Christian civilisation and mark the
passing of expediency as the supreme rule of human liberty.

This explicit confidence in the abiding power of Truth and in its
necessary relation with our moral and religious life has prompted the
creation of the Catholic Truth Society and inspired its policy.  Never
was any Society more useful nor so well adapted to the conditions of
present times.

The world nowadays is fast drifting from its Christian moorings and
taking to the high seas of modern paganism.  The outlook on human life is
as in the days of Greece and Rome.  The old cry: _panem et
circeuses_!--is to be found on the lips of our multitudes and reflects
the aspirations of their life.  In the social realm, State-monopoly is
fast absorbing the individual and the family, and is heralded as the
supreme ideal of human society.  A speedy and complete return to
Christian principles will alone re-establish the world on its proper
axis.  Christian Truth shall again make the world free and save it from
the bondage of neo-paganism.  For, history and experience prove that
there is nothing more tyrannical than that bondage--let it be the bondage
of Czardom or Bolshevism--which comes to man under the cover and name of
liberty.  In the present universal unrest, so widely and so emphatically
voiced throughout the world, the mission of the Catholic Truth Society
appears as most providential.  The spreading of Catholic Truth will help
the world to reconquer its liberties and, with them, true civilization.

To state facts, discuss principles and advocate policies, in connection
with the Catholic Truth Society of Canada, particularly in the West, is
the object of this chapter.


_Facts._

The Catholic Truth Society was born in England; November 5th, 1884, was
its birthday; Mr. Britten,[2] its honored and devoted parent.  The
activities of the Anglican Church inspired this great Catholic layman to
counteract the influence of its propaganda.  Tract for tract, pamphlet
for pamphlet, lecture for lecture, advertisement for advertisement was
the plan of campaign of our new militant leader.  To marshal all the
tremendous forces of the "printed word" for the service and defence of
Mother Church was his noble ambition.  He had implicit faith in the
everlasting vitality which lies concealed in the divine seed of the Word
of God.  He knew that by spreading it broadcast, it would necessarily
fall on prepared and expectant soil, germinate and produce a hundred
fold.  With the approbation of the Hierarchy and the generous support of
a few intelligent associates, the Society issued devotional,
controversial, historical and dogmatic pamphlets.  Small in form, compact
in doctrine, living in expression, these messengers of Truth winged their
way through the world.  Little by little the Society's influence has
spread everywhere and proved beyond doubt to be a great factor of
Catholic apostolate in our time.

For twenty-one years (1888-1909) the annual meeting of the Catholic Truth
Society was the outstanding event of Catholic life in England.  It became
the field on which Catholic forces--clergy and laity--met yearly to
exchange ideas, formulate plans, co-ordinate purpose and concentrate
activity.  This gathering gave rise to the "National Catholic
Congress"--which now stands out as the annual review, the
"mass-manoeuvre," of the Church militant in England.  These meetings have
made of a handful of Catholics, many but neo-converts of yesterday, the
aggressive body we all admire, and from which we, in Canada, have many
things to learn.

The Editor of the "Universe" in his issue of Sept. 22, 1919, on the
occasion of the C.T.S. Conference in Nottingham, paid a beautiful tribute
to the Society.  "This summing up of its activities is in itself an
inspiration and incentive.  We are reminded by this Conference of the
debt and duty we owe to the society under whose auspices it meets.  The
debt is all-pervading.  How many Catholics in this country are there,
teachers or taught, who have not profited directly and personally by the
labour and enterprise, freely given, of the comparatively few who, since
that memorable day of its foundation, November 5, 1884, have maintained,
written for, and contributed to the expenses of the Catholic Truth
Society?  It has provided the apologist with an armoury and the teacher
with material; it has saved the scholarly many an hour of troublesome
research; it has given the unlearned instruction suited to their needs;
it has given the masses of our people the popular Catholic literature
they want; it has been a veritable sleuth-hound on the track of traducers
of the Church; it has explained and commended her cause to even greater
numbers outside her pale who were simply ill-informed; it has helped more
souls than anyone will ever be able to count, into the Fold.  Moreover,
it has been the fruitful parent of progeny (not always filially grateful)
which extends to-day to the uttermost parts of the earth.  And always it
has maintained a standard--which, in fact, it created amongst us--of
material high quality, of intellectual respectability and of religious
solidity, the more worthy of grateful appreciation because not everywhere
fully appreciated.  Nor can we forget that the Society is in a real sense
"the work of one man," though never has it been that very different
thing, a "one-man work."  No one layman (and very few ecclesiastics) has
done a larger definite and objective work for the Catholic Church in our
time than Mr. Britten."

Such a record should shame the faint-hearts among us who seem to think
that no corporate efforts are of any use in the world now rushing on to
its own destruction.  That it should shame those who take no interest at
all in the progress of their religion, would be too much to hope.

The mustard seed has become now a great tree; branches have been detached
from the main trunk and transplanted in the various parts of the world.
Ireland, Australia,[3] India,[4] America, Canada, each now has its own
Catholic Truth Society.

In 1887, six years after the foundation of the parent Society in England,
Canada had a first branch in Toronto.  Halifax,[5] Montreal, Winnipeg,
Regina, Saskatoon, Vancouver soon followed suit.  Silent and powerful as
the incoming tide, the Society in Canada is working its way into every
diocese and parish of the land.  The Society is now incorporated by act
of Federal Parliament, with Head-Office in Toronto, 67 Bond St.  Its
noble and just ambition is to weld into one great efficient organization
the various other branches that are in operation here and there
throughout the Dominion.  Organization means efficiency, strength and
success.

The time has come for the Catholic Truth Society in Canada, to create its
own literature, to issue its own pamphlets dealing with the needs and
problems of our own Country.  We have been importing from other countries
and have lived until now on their mental activity.  But this move demands
unity of purpose and concentration of effort.  Moreover, should not this
Dominion-wide organization serve marvellously to rally our dispersed and
disunited forces?  There is indeed a sad need of unity in our ranks
to-day.


_Principles._

The assured possession of truth and the pressing obligation for Catholics
to spread it: these are the two main principles upon which is founded and
exists the Catholic Truth Society.  As Catholics, we are absolutely sure
that we have the Truth; as Catholics worthy of the name, we feel in
conscience bound to give it to others.

The Catholic Church, like Christ, stands at the cross-roads of humanity
and cries out to the passing generations as they come tramping down the
avenues of time: "_Ego sum Veritas, Via et Vita_--I am the Truth, the
Way, the Life."  Her kingdom is that very same Kingdom of Truth of which
the Master spoke to Pilate when the latter had asked Him so insolently:
"What is Truth?"  Faith gives to everyone of Her children the right to
all the wealth of that Kingdom.

The self-assurance of the Catholic mind in matters of Religion is a noted
and universal fact which implies necessarily the tranquil possession of
Truth.  This certainly is not a blind adherence dictated by fear or
fatalism as some would lead the unwary to believe; but rather, as St.
Paul states, the reasonable subjugation of the mind . . . "_Rationabile
absequium_."  The universal unrest and chaotic condition of Christendom
outside of the Catholic Church are in sharp contrast with the unity and
tranquillity of the Catholic mind.  This is not the place to prove for
our own pleasure and benefit the security of our position.  Christian
Apologetics have vindicated it.

This security of the Catholic mind extends beyond the sacred domain of
Religion.  Catholic philosophy has been justly named the "scientific
justification of common sense."  Its principles do not rest on the
capricious fancies of the versatile human mind, as is the case with the
philosophy of the dreamer of Koenigsberg.  We only mention here Kant, for
his influence has in our days been tremendous and far reaching.  In
Catholic philosophy the mind indeed reflects the objective order of
things and from that order evolves universal laws.  This basic truth of
our mental attitude is still more evident when considered in the moral
order.  For, when God becomes but a "pure abstraction," and the moral law
solely dependent on the human will, one readily sees where such
philosophy may lead.  This "_ego-centric philosophy_" is responsible for
the frame of mind which gifted the world with German "Kultur."  Nietzche
taught Germany how to think, and Germany had set out to teach the world
the lessons she had received.  As some author remarked, Kant and Nietzche
are responsible for the firing of the Krupp guns.  Thus the war has shown
the fallacies of anti-Catholic philosophy.

From these serene heights of Philosophy, Catholic Truth flows into the
political, social and economic fields of human life.  Our principles on
Authority and Liberty, on Capital and Labor, on Family and State, on
Marriage and Education are as solid as the rock, and are recognized as
such, even by leaders who have a different religious persuasion.

Yes, religious, philosophical, social, political, economic truth we do
possess.  But of what use to the world, to the laborer, to the patriot,
to the inquirer, is this truth and the solutions to problems it offers,
if they are not known?  If we have the light we cannot hide it under the
bushel.  We must place it where it can be seen, where its beneficial rays
can light up the way for those who are "sitting in darkness, in the
shadow of death."

No Catholic is a Catholic for himself only.  Christian Charity imposes
upon us the duty to help our brother.  The spreading of Catholic Truth is
one of the great works of Mercy and is as binding as alms-giving for the
relief of temporal want.  The love of God and of our neighbour is the
foundation of this obligation.  This consciousness of Christian
solidarity whereby the rich come to the rescue of the poor, the learned
help the ignorant, is the driving force behind the Catholic Truth Society.

With the vision of the Truth and the conscientious impulse to spread it,
the Society is bound to grow in a genuine Catholic soil.  We say it
frankly, there is something wanting in a parish where the Catholic Truth
Society meets with no response, creates no interest.  The sense of real
Catholicism and the consciousness of the duties it implies are
conspicuous by their absence.  There, Christianity does not run deep
enough.  This also stands true where the Catholic Church Extension or
other organization of its kind, has no hold.  The same principle is at
stake; in both cases deficiency reveals a negative, rather than a
militant Christianity.


_Policy._

The world nowadays, like Pilate, asks the Church: "What is Truth?"  But
like Pilate also, proud of its power, its wealth, and success, it will
not wait for the answer.  Yet the Church's mission is to give to the
world that truth after which humanity thirsts.  Her mode of dispensation
will vary from age to age.  New times, new duties.  Her policy is often
suggested by the change of front in the line of the enemy.

As the "printed word" is now the great vehicle of propaganda, the great
message of Catholic Truth will be given more by print than by speech.
This new apostleship has opened the doors to Catholic lay activity.  The
Catholic Truth Society is one of its many forms and should, to be
faithful to its origin, remain a specifically Catholic laymen's movement.

The policy of the Catholic Truth Society is very broad and embraces a
great variety of activities which all tend to the propagation and defense
of Catholic Truth.

_Pamphlets_.--The printing and diffusion of pamphlets are characteristic
features of the Society.  These winged booklets have come to be most
fruitful transmitters of Catholic Truth.  Silent Messengers of truth,
they steal their way into homes and circles where the priest, and even at
times the catholic layman cannot penetrate.  Eloquent Preachers, their
voice is heard to the extremities of the earth.  Perpetual Missionaries,
they continue the work when the apostle has passed to another field.
They keep the light of faith burning bright in many a lonely
homesteader's cabin on the Prairies of our Great West.  How often have we
not seen farmers coming into the Regina Cathedral to fill their pockets
with pamphlets from the book-rack before they returned to their farms
often situated at thirty or forty miles from a Church!  Silent
Controversionalists, they give Catholic information and drive the
argument home without offence to the pride of the reader, for, the
personal element of the controversy is eliminated.  Their unobtrusiveness
is what the inquirer appreciates in matters of religious research
particularly.

The _Circulation of Catholic Papers_ and their _remailing_ to those who
live far from large centres and are out of touch with the Church are
other forms of the Apostolate of the Catholic Truth Society.  By these
means Catholic printed matter is capital, bearing compound interest and
more.

Free distribution of leaflets; the Mass register in the hotels and public
places; the information bureau; the bill-board; information about
Catholic Faith given by a Correspondence Guild; circulating libraries;
reading and study circles; reference library; the introduction of
Catholic literature into Public Libraries by creating the demand for
it, . . . these are some of the means through which the Society pursues
its policy.  To every wind, we may say, it sows the good seed of truth.

To fully understand the principles and forward with energy and
perseverance the policy of the Catholic Truth Society, demands an
enthusiastic love of the Church and an abiding confidence in the
conquering power of Truth and in its ultimate triumph.  Only a zealous
and aggressive Catholic can grasp this vision and walk in its light.  But
the example of the enemy's activities alone should be sufficient to give
us that zeal and aggressiveness.  The Dominion is flooded with the
literature of the Methodist Social Service, of the Bible Society, of the
Christian Science, of the Rationalistic Press Association.  Their
activities should act on our apathetic Catholics as the gust of wind that
scatters the ashes and fans the smouldering embers to a flame.

Generous are the hopes founded on the future of the Catholic Truth
Society of Canada.  With its far-flung line, from coast to coast, great
are the services it can render to the Church.  But there is no field with
greater possibilities for this apostolate of the "printed word" than our
Western Provinces.  There the pastors are yet few and the flock very
scattered.  The little pamphlet, the Catholic paper will keep the watch
around the lonely settler's faith until the living contact with the
Church's authority and sacraments be renewed.  And in the great battle
against religious indifference and profound materialism which are rapidly
spreading over our West, the Catholic Truth Society will make us realize
the saving power of Christianity. . . .  "_And you shall see Truth and
Truth shall make you free_."



[1] This Chapter was published in pamphlet form by the Catholic Truth
Society of Canada.

[2] Cardinal Vaughan and Lady Herbert are the real Founders of the C.T.S.
But Mr. Britten carried out the idea.--It was to be essentially a
lay-movement.

[3] Australian Catholic Truth Society.--At the annual meeting of the
Australian Catholic Truth Society the report stated that during the year
1919 152,309 pamphlets had been put into circulation, while the total
number published since the foundation of the Society was 1,837,947.  The
executive had decided to publish in future 36 penny pamphlets each year,
instead of 24, and trusted that their enterprise would be rewarded with a
substantial increase in the number of subscribers.

[4] The headquarters of the C.T.S. of India are in Trichinopoly.  They
have already their own publications.

[5] Although the Halifax branch of the C.T.S. does not form a unit of the
C.T.S. of Canada yet it is one of the most active branches in our Country.




CHAPTER XV.

A SUGGESTION[1]

_Importance of the Catholic Press--Requisites for its Success in the
West._


Nowadays the Press is assuredly the greatest factor of the public mind.
For, if public opinion is "King" and "Master" of the modern world, the
"Press" is his "Prime Minister."  Between these two great forces there
is a continuous action and reaction; the Press is at the same time the
moulder and mirror of public opinion.

We all know how the world has turned this mighty weapon against the
Catholic Church.  To create an anti-Catholic opinion, to surround the
Church--its authority, its practices--with an atmosphere of prejudice
and antagonism has always been the aim of the non-Catholic press.  Of
late this campaign has become so universal and so violent "that were
St. Paul to live among us, he would become a journalist," said
Archbishop Ireland.  Repeatedly the Pontiffs of Rome have urged the
faithful to contribute to the support of the Catholic Press.  "In vain
you will build churches," said Pius X, "give missions, found schools;
all your works, all your efforts will be destroyed if you are not able
to wield the defensive and offensive weapon of a loyal and sincere
Catholic Press."

The Catholics of Western Canada should have these words of the beloved
Pontiff continually before their minds.  There is no place in Canada
where this vital factor, the Catholic Press, is of such an absolute
necessity.  In our sparsely settled Provinces the Catholic paper is the
greatest help of the priest.  It prepares, keeps, and perfects his work
and very often is the only silent messenger of the Church's teachings
on the lonely prairie.  Isolation from all Catholic life, from its
teachings, its authority, its sacraments, has created through Western
Canada a tremendous leakage in the Church.  This leakage can be stopped
to a certain extent by the active service of a good Press.  The
Catholic paper, indeed, reacts as an antitoxin against the virus of
unbelief and indifferentism which a non-Catholic atmosphere is bound to
spread.  In its columns we find the answers to the misrepresentations
and slanders which bigotry is ever throwing at the Church.  But above
all it is through the medium of the Catholic paper that the lonely
Western settler enters into what we would call the larger life of the
Church.  We are too prone to think of and judge the Church by what we
see of Her in our own nearest surroundings.  We lose sight of Her
Catholicity and forget that greater life which is ever pulsating
throughout the world.  The reading of the Catholic paper breaks down
the narrow walls of parochialism, provincialism and nationalism, and
introduces its readers into the more serene and more spacious regions
of Catholic life.  This is, in our opinion, the greatest benefit one
can derive from the assiduous and intelligent reading of a good,
active, Catholic paper.

Australia and New Zealand have understood the imperative necessity, the
paramount importance of a Catholic Press.  "The Freeman's Journal,"
"The Southern Cross," "The Catholic Press," "The New Zealand Tablet,"
are widely circulated weekly papers that keep Catholic life so intense
in those distant colonies.  What the Catholics of Australia have done,
why can we not, in Western Canada, do likewise?

One cannot, indeed, over-estimate the value of a Catholic paper,
especially in a sparsely settled country where the Church has yet but
missions, where the visits of the priest and the teachings of the
Gospel are intermittent, where the Catholics are lost among people of
different faith and often of hostile feeling.  But, if we wish our
Catholic Press to fulfil its noble mission, it must be received as an
expected and welcomed friend, and not, as often is the case, as an
intruder, a sickly visitor who imposes himself more or less on our
faith and generous nature.

What then are the conditions of genuine success for a Catholic paper?
_Vigour in policy, extensiveness in circulation_: these are the two
essential conditions of success.  The Catholic paper in a community
must be a live-wire of high voltage, carrying light, heat, and power,
and not a mere telegraphic-cable repeating what others have already
said, or serving as a safety valve for the overflow of local gossip.
The news and issues of general interest should be so combined with
local topics as to awaken and keep the attention of the reader.

Circulation is also fundamental in journalism as well as in the human
system.  It carries life into the whole organism and is the warrant of
success.  The moment circulation becomes stagnant and loses hold of the
people, the paper is but a ghost.  Poor circulation is what gives to so
many Catholic papers such languid existence.

How can we create these conditions of success for the Catholic Press in
Western Canada, where its need is so deeply felt?  There is the crux of
the present situation.  Our scattered and comparatively small
population, even in our cities, the extreme difficulty of securing and
keeping managers and editors suited for this work, the indifference and
spirit of commercialism which characterize Western Canada: all these
factors tend to render precarious the life of a Catholic paper.  And
still the crying need is there; how are we to meet it?

This leads us to make a suggestion which would help to solve the
problem of the Catholic Press in the West.  The beautiful work of the
Catholic Press in France has prompted it.

The society of "La Bonne Presse" issues a weekly paper, "La Croix."
This paper has different issues for the different parts of France.  At
the central office, in Paris, exists a well organized "boiler-plate"
service for general Catholic news and opinions.  These "boiler-plates"
are shipped to all the sub-stations, where, during the week are
composed the pages of local news, editorials, advertisements, etc.
This is the most economical and most efficient modern method of
publishing several papers or different issues of the one paper.

Our circulation in Western Canada would not perhaps yet warrant such an
organization.  But working along the same lines, could we not have _one
paper_, with _different issues_ for the different Prairie Provinces?
This would necessitate a chief editor for the editorials of general
character, common to all--and a sub-editor in each Province who could
also act as manager in his section of the country.  To write editorials
adapted to the ever-changing needs of his Province, answer those who
attack the Church in our local papers, guide our Catholics in the
various issues which are discussed in the Province, and control the
correspondence for the different news centres, would be the duties of
this sub-editor.

One central printing plant would be sufficient.  Being a weekly paper,
the printing and mailing do not matter much, provided the plant were
not too far from the extreme points of circulation.  With the exception
of the composition of the specific pages of each issue, according to
Provinces, the general overhead expenses of printing and remailing
would be the same, and yet we would have a _local Catholic paper_.
This plan of unification would allow us, without heavy expenses, to
answer efficiently the local needs of each diocese and each Province.

We have the "Northwest Review."  It possesses a splendid equipment and
could easily duplicate its actual out-put.  Why could we not take that
paper, and have a Manitoba, a Saskatchewan, and an Alberta edition?
The plant is there, and why could not all Catholics take full advantage
of it, at a price with which no local or provincial Catholic paper
could compete, at least in the present circumstances.  It would require
"a subeditor-manager" in each Province to direct the provincial policy
of his specific edition and manage its circulation in every Catholic
community.  This plan would be workable until the time when success
would warrant in each Province a local printing plant, having at its
service a "boiler plate" supply from the main office.

The possibilities and opportunities for the Catholic Press have never
been greater than they are now.  Never and nowhere has its need been
more commanding than it is now in Western Canada.  In this period of
social reconstruction, efficient organization and combination of all
energies are necessary.  Organization implies leadership, and able
leadership needs the support of publicity to create sane opinions, to
spread and defend them.



[1] This Chapter was published as an article in the "North West
Review," Winnipeg, June 1st, 1918, under the following caption--"Timely
Suggestions on needs of Catholic Press in West--Constructive attempt to
solve problem which has engaged attention for many years."

The following editorial remarks accompanied its publication.  "We are
indebted to Rev. Father Daly, C.SS.R., of Regina, for a thoughtful
contribution on the needs of the Catholic Press in Western Canada.
This subject is by no means new.  Most people have had a fling at it
one time or another, and those have been most insistent as a rule who
have known least about it.  The article under consideration, however,
which may be found upon another page, besides pointing out the
difficulties which must be encountered and overcome, outlines a
constructive policy which should engage the earnest attention of the
Catholic public.  A scheme of development is there in broad outline and
it is with particular pleasure that we call our readers' attention to
it.  We would ask them to study it--particularly those who have had
some practical experience in newspaper work--and to give us the benefit
of their thought and experience.  A special invitation is extended to
our staff of faithful correspondents and contributors who have stuck to
their posts through fair weather and foul at considerable expense and
inconvenience to themselves.  They are in a position to realize in a
very special manner the difficulties of the situation and their
suggestions should prove invaluable.  If everyone interested would
expend a fraction of the energy wasted in destructive criticism in
working out a scheme of practical operation along constructive lines
much good would result therefrom.  Suggestions need not necessarily be
for publication.  Any communication marked "not for publication" shall
be, needless to state, regarded as private and confidential.  But let
all help.  An old newspaper maxim is to the effect that the printer's
devil has ideas that the editor or business manager would pay good
money for."




CHAPTER XVI.

THE NEW CANADIAN

_Immigration!--Are We ready for It?_


Demobilization is over.  Canada has settled down to the work of
"Reconstruction."  Already the eyes of every serious minded Canadian
scan the horizon, wondering if these transatlantic liners now bound for
our ports carry in their dark hulls hosts of new settlers.  Immigration
is the topic of the hour.  Confronted as we are by a fabulous national
debt, GREATER PRODUCTION is the only solution.  This intense and
extensive development of agriculture and industry necessarily involves
immigration.--Immigration is therefore an economic necessity.

War-wearied nations of Europe are just waking up to the realities of
conditions.  The dark cloud has lifted only to show everywhere silent
industries and desolate fields.  Thousands and hundreds of thousands
are turning their eyes to the "New World"--as to the "_Land of
Opportunity_."  They need Canada to break away from a gloomy past, just
as Canada needs them to build a bright and prosperous future.

Opinions may vary as to the time when immigration will be once more at
its height, but all seem to agree on the certainty of the fact.[1]
Probably the British Isles will open the march in the onward rush to
Canada; Continental Europe will follow in their wake.  Already the
various philanthropic and religious organizations are preparing to
welcome the new-comer to our Shores.

Misdirected and unsupervised immigration has been for the Church in the
past a great source of leakage.  Here and there noble and zealous
efforts have been made to prevent these losses; but they were local and
spasmodic.  It was only a few years previous to the outbreak of the war
that a Catholic Immigration Society for the Dominion was formed.  The
Reverend Abbe Casgrain was its Founder and Director.  Homes and
agencies were opened in every large city.  Let us hope that this
Dominion-wide organization will once more soon become a reality.  A
priest in full charge of its organization and responsible for its
efficiency is, we believe, the main condition of success.  And indeed
immigration is in Canada one of those problems that over-lap the
boundaries of dioceses and provinces and call for the co-operation and
co-ordination of all forces.  A leader, with the sanction and backing
of the Hierarchy, will be the binding link between the various helping
factors and will prevent immigration becoming "nobody's business" just
because "it is everybody's business."  This method of an organized and
responsible unity will alone straighten out our line of defence from
Halifax to Vancouver, and pinch out the various salients of enemy
forces that are always and everywhere at work.

But who will carry out this leader's policy, once thought out and
approved of?  As our Catholic Immigration Society is about to
reorganize its forces to meet new conditions, may we be allowed to
offer a suggestion?  The Knights of Columbus have just finished the
great work of their "Army Huts."  During the war and particularly
during the demobilization, they had trained secretaries, hotels,
recreation rooms, for the welfare of our soldiers.  This work has
placed them in the field of "Social Service" and given them a standing
in the community at large.  Now why could not that organization be
maintained and serve the purpose of Catholic Immigration?

The Knights of Columbus are indeed ready for the task.  Their chain of
huts from coast to coast link together our main centres; their trained
secretaries who have enlisted the sympathetic co-operation of devoted
ladies; the very nature of the Order, Dominion-wide in its organization
and spreading beyond the boundaries of any particular Province,
everything seems now to invite them to turn their efforts to the great
Cause of Immigration.  During the war they worked side-by-side with the
Red Triangle (Y.M.C.A.) and the Red Shield (S.A.).  As these
organizations are now intensely taking up what they call
"Canadianization" work in its various aspects, is it befitting, would
you think, for our Knights to drop out of the field?  Should they not,
on the contrary, prepare to "carry on"--as their brother Knights are
doing across the border?  The example they are giving there to the
Catholic laity is simply wonderful.  It is an object lesson that has
awakened the tremendous energies that lie dormant in the ranks of the
Catholic laymen and only want the spark of "leadership" to ignite them.
And indeed no work should appeal more to the Knights, for it places
them in their true sphere of action.  It opens up long vistas of
"Social religious work," by giving them the consciousness of the
religious solidarity and the feeling of their social and national
responsibilities.  With that vision, under that impulse, they walk from
their Council Chambers into the very life of the Church and of the
Nation.  They assume in all reality their office of a _Loyal
Body-guard_.  For, in this matter, our contention is that where the
Knights of Columbus' Order is not wedded to some definite programme of
action, in harmony with its aim and constitution, it ceases to be an
asset and will soon go to seed, or die of dry rot.



The following would be a summary of activities to be undertaken in
connection with Immigration work.  This is merely an outline that may
help in drawing up a more exhaustive plan of action.

1. _Permanent Secretaries_.--In our estimation, a permanent, trained
and well-paid secretary is the condition of genuine success.  The time
has passed to have to depend on voluntary and untrained service.  Times
have changed and methods also.  The permanency of a secretary gives to
our work stability and promise of intense life.  This has been the
secret of the success of other organizations that we could afford to
imitate.

Moreover this secretaryship can become the mother-cell of various
activities which eventually will branch off--_i.e._, Welfare Bureau,
Information Bureau, etc., etc.  This therefore should be our first
preoccupation, for on it depend the life and prosperity of our
Immigration Work.

2. _Ladies' Auxiliary_.--Local Women's organization can be called upon
to bring their sympathetic support to the carrying out of this work of
Catholic Immigration.  Generous and devoted women are always to be
found to whom this work will appeal.  Their natural sympathy and their
great faith make them always the "Real Workers."  The very same ladies
who helped so wonderfully in our patriotic work could continue to place
their kindness and devotedness at the Service of this great Catholic
Cause.  We only need, we are sure, to call on them, and organize their
various forces.  Why should not "The Catholic Women's League" have its
branch from coast to coast and take up everything of interest to the
Catholic Womanhood of Canada, and thereby, to the Church also?

This would have a great bearing on various issues and offer a great
medium for organized opinion and co-ordinated action.  Has not the time
come when our women forces have to organize and unite into one great
Canadian Catholic Body?

3. _Literature, Publicity_.--We are living in an age when literature
and publicity are the great vehicles of public opinion.  We need, to
carry on the work successfully, plenty of good literature and
efficient, sane publicity.  The hour has come to walk right out in the
open and nail our sign to the post at every cross-way.  Our Catholic
Immigrants are entitled to this service which will offset the
influences of dangerous agencies that meet them too often as they set
foot on our shores.

A new map of Western Canada with designations of Churches and Missions,
with resident or non-resident priests is needed.  The map published
before the war would have to be revised, for the growth of the Church
has been wonderful--in certain dioceses particularly.  Attractive
booklets giving useful information and warning the incoming immigrants
against the specific dangers he is liable to meet with; folders and
cards with addresses of the nearest Catholic churches and rectories,
with 'phone number of the Catholic Bureau, should be ready on hand.  A
list of the various offices of the Society and of other Catholic Social
Centres should also be now prepared.  This, we may remark, is very
important and demands careful study and experience.  A short snappy
leaflet very often goes further than a diluted booklet.  What others
have done or are doing in this line will be of great help.  Before the
war the Catholic Immigration Society of Canada had such literature.
The Catholic Truth Society of Canada could co-operate in this matter.

To reach the Catholic immigrant and emigrant is very often a problem of
_publicity_.  Posters on the docks, in the railroad stations and other
prominent places, cards, notices on the bulletin-boards of the steamers
and hotels, distribution of leaflets on boats and trains, copies of
current activities in the newspapers, advertising in our papers and
papers abroad, listing of the Catholic Bureau with other similar work
in the city, are some of the means to keep our work before the public.
Let us not be afraid to place our name where it can be seen.  We cannot
afford to hide our light under the bushel.  Let it burn bright, to
attract and guide our Catholic brother as he comes to our shores and
goes through our country.

4. _Co-operation_.--Co-operation of all our bureaus with our Catholic
Societies of Emigration of England, Ireland, etc., with Canadian
Government bureaus, Federal and Provincial and various other benevolent
organizations in Canada, as Traveller's Aid, etc., will be a marked and
appreciated aid to our work.  And when others will see us at "Our
Father's work," they will refer our own to us.  This is the ordinary
experience of all engaged in Social Service activities.

The Catholic Emigration Society of England has been recently formed and
is preparing for the exodus that will follow the inauguration of the
Government schemes for assisting ex-Service men.  This Society will
work on national lines with international co-operation.  The "Universe"
of Sept. 26, 1919, gives us an account of the first meeting.  The
movement is endorsed by the Hierarchy and representatives of Catholic
life in the British Isles, Canada, Australia and South-Africa.

5. _Finance_.--Naturally this work will demand funds.  Catholic Charity
will come to our rescue as this is certainly a work of preservation
which should appeal to any zealous Catholic.  And what others have been
able to do, why could we not find means to do?

But in this work the Canadian Government will give a helping hand.  The
authorities in Ottawa will be the first to appreciate what we will do
for our new Canadians.  In a recent memoir submitted to the Premiers of
our various Provinces the social welfare of the immigrants was one of
the topics to which particular attention was given.  We can see that
the Government will be ready to subsidize social work in Immigration,
provided there is no over-lapping.  There will be subsidies for our
work, if we are organized and ask for them.  When looking over the
amounts distributed to various Immigrations Societies, we see, for
instance, in 1913-1914 the Salvation Army receiving a subsidy of over
$22,000, while all the Catholic Immigration Societies received only
about $6,000.  We conclude that it is simply because we did not ask for
our "Pound of Flesh."



Should not, therefore, the work of Catholic Immigration with all its
wonderful possibilities for the welfare of Church and Country, appeal
to our Canadian Knights of Columbus?  Many and many a settler has been
lost to the Church--he, his children and future generations--because
perhaps no one was there to receive him on his arrival in his new
Country, to help him to settle where there was a church, a priest, and
a Catholic school.  No one needs more the help of his Catholic brother
than the immigrant, who has just broken away with a past made up of
customs, friendships, racial feelings, of all that is dear to man's
heart, and faces an enigmatic future.

The long procession which we have seen in the years of intense
immigration, winding its way through our cities and losing itself on
the plains of the West, is about to start again.  Shall we be there to
welcome and direct it?

_Knights of Columbus, what is your answer_?



[1] 200,000 are expected to come to Canada in 1921 from the British
Isles alone.  Hon. J. H. Calder, Minister of Immigration, made this
statement.




CHAPTER XVII.

UT SINT UNUM

_A Catholic Congress of the Western Provinces, the Ultimate Solution of
Their Problems--What is a Congress?--Its Utility--Its Necessity--A
Tentative Programme._


To know a problem, to probe its nature, and to analyze its various
factors frequently lead to an easy and happy solution.  But as Church
problems are mostly of a complex nature and cover a wide range, they
necessarily depend for their solution on the co-operation of the
various component units.  This explains why we would now appeal to the
Church of the West as a whole, for the solving of the problems dealt
with in this book.  Of their nature they out-distance the boundaries of
parish and diocese, for they affect the Church as a whole.  Without
wishing to disparage the value of parochial and diocesan activities, we
claim that the issues we have placed before our readers are not
confined within the imaginary lines of the parochial unit or the
boundaries of jurisdiction.  They will not be met with rightly and
successfully, if the Church as a unit does not agree on a uniform plan
of action.  For, to prevent a deplorable waste of potential powers, of
misdirected energies and of overlapping work, to forward the great
cause of the Church and realize its Catholic aspirations, to present a
united front to common dangers, the union and co-operation of all the
parishes and all the dioceses are an absolute necessity.

Never has the Church in Canada felt so keenly the necessity of this
union and co-operation.  An acute sense of uneasiness has spread, far
and broad, apathy and lethargy.  Instinctively eyes turn to the heights
from whence they have a right to expect direction and help.  The
necessity of some INTER-DIOCESAN ORGANIZATION, along the lines of the
National Catholic Welfare Council of the United States, is the
outspoken conviction of many and the unexpressed desire of all.  We are
weak in our divided strength.  The criticism of both clergy and laity
in this matter is widespread and very often justifiable.  We could
willingly endorse what Cardinal Newman wrote to a friend: "Instead of
aiming at being a world-wide power, we are shrinking into ourselves,
narrowing the lines of communion, trembling at freedom of thought, and
using the language of dismay and despair at the prospect before us,
instead of the high spirit of the warrior going out conquering and to
conquer."--(Life, by Ward II, p. 127.)

"_Ut sint unum!_"  "That they may be one!"  This is the supreme
solution of the weighty problems now facing the Church at this crucial
period of readjustment and reconstruction.  A general Congress would
crystallize, we believe, our desires for unity into a concrete fact.
It would help to group the various thoughts and workable schemes around
a definite plan and stimulate activities in view of its realization.
Some may find it rather presumptuous on our part to formulate such a
proposal.  Our sincerity and loyalty to the great Cause in view is our
only excuse.


_What is a Catholic Congress_?

A Catholic Congress--be it provincial, regional, national or simply
diocesan--is the meeting of Catholic clergy and laity under the
guidance of the Hierarchy, for the _study_ of various problems, the
_development and coordination of energies_, the _unification and
concentration_ of purpose.

The members of the Congress are delegates from the various parishes,
from social, mutual and diocesan organizations.  It is of absolute
necessity that the laity be well represented, for the Congress is the
great school of "social action," the great medium of educating the
Catholic body and developing the sense of Catholic social
responsibility.

The guidance of our Fathers in Christ, the Hierarchy, ensures to the
Congress its value, its authority--_Posuit Episcopos regere Ecclesiam
Dei_.

The object of the meeting is to give to Catholic life, by the perfect
organization and coordination of all its moral, social and religious
activities, its maximum of efficiency.  This necessitates the _study of
the problems of the day_ in their relation with Catholic principles.
Therefore the Congress is a readjustment of our vision to the
everchanging conditions of society; desuete methods are dropped and
methods more in harmony with the necessities of the times are examined,
approved of and adopted.  It affords an opportunity to discuss public
questions, to educate and crystallize public opinion on the Catholic
view-point of pending problems.  This readjustment is, in our
estimation, one of the greatest benefits of a Congress, for without it
there is waste of energies and danger of compromise on the part of the
most zealous.

The _development_ and _co-ordination of energies_ will be the natural
sequel of this general exchange of ideas, of this universal
consultation of the Catholic body.  When we shall have counted our
resources we shall then easily marshal existing forces, create new
battalions for the defence and peaceful promotion of Catholic doctrine,
liberties, and influence.

_To give unity of purpose_ to the various Catholic organizations, to
direct the loyal active co-operation of every unit towards the greatest
welfare of the Church, in one word, to create Catholic solidarity, is
the ultimate aim and supreme triumph of a Catholic Congress.

This congress therefore, stands for the mobilization of the Catholic
army for manoeuvres, and does not mean a mere pageant, a complacent
exhibition of our numbers, the platonic rehearsal of our past glories
and great achievements.  "We are here to do a work, and not to make a
show," should we say with Cardinal Manning.

The _Golden Rule_ that presides over, and directs this exchange of
thoughts, this study of problems, this marshalling of our forces, has
always been: _In necessariis unitas, in dubiis, libertas, in omnibus
charitas--Unity in essentials; liberty in non-essentials; charity in
all things_.  There is no reason whatever why a Congress should be ever
aggressive.  Destructive criticism leads nowhere.  But there is every
reason why a Congress should be perpetually active and "destructively
constructive."


_Should We have a Catholic Congress of the Western Provinces_?

The utility and necessity of a Catholic Congress will be an adequate
answer to this question--

_Utility of Catholic Congresses_.


Benedict XV in his letter to the American Hierarchy, March, 1919,
underlines very strongly the utility of these Catholic Meetings, "We
learn," says the Holy Father, "that you have unanimously resolved that
a yearly meeting of all the Bishops shall be held at an appointed place
in order to adapt means most suitable of promoting the interest and
welfare of the Catholic Church and that you appointed from among the
Bishops two commissions, one of which to deal with _social questions_,
while the other will study _educational problems_, and both will report
to their Episcopal brethren.  This is truly a worthy resolve and with
the utmost satisfaction We bestow upon it our approval."

"It is indeed wonderful how greatly the progress of Catholicism is
favored by those frequent assemblies of the Bishops, which our
Predecessors have more than once approved.  When the knowledge and the
experience of each are communicated to all the Bishops, it will be
easily seen what errors are secretly spreading and how they can be
extirpated; what threatens to weaken discipline among clergy and people
and how best the remedy can be applied; what movements if any, either
local or nation wide, are afoot for the control or judicious restraint
of which the wise direction of the Bishop may be most helpful."

"It is not enough however, to cast out evil; good work must at once
take its place and so these men are incited by mutual example.  Once
admitted that the _harvest depends upon the method and the means_, it
follows easily, that the assembled Bishops returning to their
respective dioceses, will rival one another in reproducing those works,
which they have seen elsewhere in operation to the distinct advantage
of the Faithful."

Great indeed are the advantages that accrue to the Church, in its
social influence particularly, from a Congress.  And indeed, since on
Catholic principles alone depend the solution of the social problem,
the welfare of Church and State alike requires that Catholics in every
condition of life should co-operate in the application of those
principles.  The influence of the Church in these matters depends not
only on her official teaching, but greatly on the social activities of
Her children.  These activities translate into tangible facts Her
doctrines on justice and charity, and thus spread the beneficial
influence of Her teachings.

The specific end of the Congress is to develop, co-ordinate, and direct
these social activities of Catholics and bring their influence to bear
upon the community at large.  _Instaurare omnia in Christo_ . . . is
the programme of such gatherings.

The Congress (1) establishes a Catholic platform and rallies our forces
around it, by creating a social solidarity, (2) enables our existing
institutions and societies to extend their activities by the
co-ordination of efforts; (3) facilitates the creation of new
organizations to meet specific needs.  "We cannot," writes Father
Plater, S.J., "stand aloof from secular movements, neither may we
wholly surrender ourselves to them.  We must by common study bring them
to the test of Catholic principles and we must by common action bend
them to the great issues of which the world is losing sight."

Moreover, once the Catholic laity has been lured into taking active
part in social work, once it feels that it is no more a dead unit but a
living factor, the Congress becomes a necessity, for it then serves as
the mental background that throws its work in relief and keeps the
fires of enthusiasm burning.


_Necessity of a Catholic Congress at the Present Time_.

The absolute _absence of unity and cohesion_ in our various social
activities; the momentous _period of reconstruction_ with its
far-reaching consequences in our national, political, social and
economic life; the _examples_ given to us by other _Catholic countries_
and by our own enemies; these three and potent reasons urge, in our
estimation, the calling of a Congress to get our bearings and to
discuss ways and means of action.

The deplorable lack of unity in the Church of Canada is obvious and can
be traced to many causes.  Racial and language conflicts particularly,
have divided our forces, absorbed our activities, narrowed our views
and made us forget the Catholic view-point of greater problems.  But
times and ideas are changing.  Never, we believe has the feeling of our
divisions and dissensions been so acute; never has the demand for
united action been so imperative as now.  The distressing times through
which the world is passing have forced upon us issues which will
require the united strength of Catholic forces.

United action, so much desired and so desperately needed, requires a
_uniform plan_ and an _authoritative leadership_.  A Congress will give
us these two elements of a much desired unity.

Too long, we believe, have Catholic social activities been directed
along purely parochial and diocesan lines.  The isolated action of
parishes, especially in our cities, is no longer able to grapple with
and solve our modern complex problems.  Parochialism is conducive to
the enjoyment of the Church's beneficial influences, but often leads us
to forget our responsibilities to the Church Universal.  "Parochialism
is the clog on the wheel of united Catholic Action in Canada."
(Canadian Freeman, Nov. 13, 1919.) And even on a broader field have we
not seen conflicting directions and abstinence of necessary
interference, precisely because the issues were seen in different
quarters from different angles.  So, a united plan of action which is
so absolutely necessary for efficient work cannot be obtained without
consultation and exchange of ideas.

This unity of plan will bring the Catholic consciousness to a focus.
It will create an intelligent interest in Catholic social work, and
lead to the gradual formation of various specific social organizations.
When luminous rays are brought to a focus their light and heat are most
intense.

The best concerted plans, the greatest enthusiasm to execute them, will
be of no avail without leadership.  For the secret of the success and
usefulness of an organization is to be found in the ability, character
and ideals of its leader.  Never perhaps in Canada, has the absence of
authoritative leadership, especially among the Catholic laity, been
felt so keenly as at the present trying period.  Let us hear an
authoritative writer on the matter:

"When the great buzz and stir of rebuilding comes and the interchange
and counterchange of ideas begin, the newly awakened folk will begin to
enquire what the Church has to say and to suggest on every ethical and
religious problem that comes up in the course of planning and
discussion.  But they will wish to know, not in the terms in which
great minds of the past have formulated Catholic teaching, but in the
speech and with the illustrations of contemporary life.  What we need
is Catholic intellectual leadership to interpret in a way they can
understand, the deep ethical truths of Catholic ethics, dogmas, which
are a guide to the reconstructive activities of all time.  Without
changing a jot of the unchangeable truth, new series of interpretations
can be given to Catholic dogma, morals, ethics, with explanations that
will catch the ear of the intelligent non-Catholic, give him in his own
idiom the solid gist of Catholic Doctrine and appeal to him with the
simple eloquence that Truth always has, when presented in the proper
way." (Father Garesche, S.J., America, Dec. 28.)  For, as the Editor of
the Universe said, commenting on the death of Sir Mark Sykes, "The
secret of ideal Catholic leadership lies in a passionate desire for the
Catholic good inseparable from the common good, combined with a
complete aloofness from any sectional interest."

Now, we may ask, what has given to Catholic France, Catholic Belgium,
Catholic England, these eminent leaders who in public and social life,
are by their fearless courage and ceaseless action, the very
personification of Catholicism?  It is without doubt their Catholic
Congresses.  There, the contact with the great problems of the day gave
them the vision of things before unseen, made them emerge from the
common mass, and marked them as leaders.  There, they learned to think
just, broad and deep.  The great Congresses of Catholic Germany brought
Windthorst to the foreground and made him the leader of the greatest
Catholic organization.  What the Congresses have done for Catholic
Germany, Belgium, France and England, they will also do for Canada.
They will give us true leaders, men of clear vision, of indomitable and
fearless will, of patient and persevering action.  For _mistaken
leadership is still a greater calamity than the absence of it_.  The
Plenary Council of Quebec urges the Catholics of Canada to meet in
Congress: "_Qui quidem in talium caetuum frequentia liberius poterunt
et validius sui nominis professionem sustinere, hostiles impetus
propulsare_."  In the mind of the great Pope Leo XIII, whose words are
here quoted, "a Congress is the most powerful offensive and defensive
weapon." Quebec Plenary Council--No. 441, d.



We may then conclude with a French writer: "_A Congress is a sacrament
of unity_."  It will visualize to the modern pagan for whom unity of
doctrine means nothing, the tremendous powers, the living influences
that flow from that same unity on the world.  And for the Catholics at
large it will now answer to a widespread, deep-seated longing for a
more effective national Catholic unity of action.

Yes, at all times, a Congress is a necessity for united action; but in
the troubled periods we now face, after the war, it becomes a factor of
supreme interest and of the most vital importance.



_Reconstruction_ is the world's watch-word as nations rise from the
ruins a long protracted and universal war has accumulated around them.

The period of reconstruction, more than that of the war, will test our
national fibre.  The problems we face are in extent, in character, in
complexity greater than at any other period of history.  The strain
will be greater, for the conflict is being lifted to a higher plane,
that of ideas.  And ideas are the supreme realities, the dynamic forces
that rule the world, the fulcrum that shifts the axis of the world's
civilization.

In these momentous times, the isolation of Catholics would be a
_calamity_; their participation, a _blessing_, for Church and country.
To stand aloof from the solution of the problems that stare us in the
face and insistently demand attention and solution, to confine our
efforts solely to parochial institutions and not enter into the broader
field of public life is for Catholics, at this hour, nothing short of a
calamity.  The consequences of this abstention will be to limit our
action to mere protestation and often useless defence, when our
principles are assailed and our positions in danger, when a leakage,
through the social activities of others, is but too manifest.  Let us
on the contrary, turn the energies we lose in mere defence to
constructive work, and our positions will be safer, and our principles
better appreciated.  "_Our liberties are best defended when Catholics
throw themselves into the stream of public life_."

And does not Catholic doctrine stand essentially for constructive
forces in the social, political and economic life of a country?  We
possess the foundation, the plans, the material of all true and lasting
social reconstruction.  The Gospel and the natural law form the
rock-bottom foundation; the definite and unchanging principles of
morality are its structural lines; justice is as the steel girders and
charity the fast-binding cement.

"At the present day," wrote Professor G. Toniolo, the eminent Catholic
Italian economist, "the great Encyclicals of Leo XIII, which, sustained
by the common light of the Evangelical teachings of Christian
philosophy and Revelation, have illuminated all the phases of social,
civil and political knowledge in harmonious, logical connections.  At
the present day we possess a unified complex of sociological teachings,
brought together in a system, which rests against the supernatural,
which measures up to the problems of our age, which, absorbing
everything, takes unto itself all that is true in modern science and is
proven by experience, and thus is prepared to oppose successfully a
positivistic, materialistic and anti-Christian sociology."

Yes, we possess the true solution of modern problems and . . . what are
we doing to give it to the world, to the community in which we live?
Why, the very fabric of social order is questioned, our working men are
absorbing everywhere the most subversive doctrines; the relations
between capital and labor are strained to a breaking-point; our
industrial system is controlled by economic theories divorced from
ethics, whereby the worker is a mere producer; the State-monopoly is
gradually spreading its influences as huge tentacles, around our most
sacred liberties; the equilibrium between liberty and authority--these
two poles of Christian civilization--is being displaced; . . . and what
are the activities of the Catholic body, as a whole, in Canada, to stem
the rising tide?  A sermon, now and then, on Socialism or on the rights
and duties of labour, will not solve the problems and extinguish the
volcano upon which we are peacefully living.  In our cities, the
housing problem, which involves to a great extent, the moral life of
the masses, is acute; the white slave traffic has established its
haunts and commercialized vice; the moving picture-show has become
everywhere the most popular educational factor: at its school the young
generation, eyes riveted on the flickering screen, is drinking in the
alluring lessons of free love, divorce and every anti-Christian
doctrine; our ports will soon see a new tide of immigration invade our
shores; the non-catholic denominations are crumbling away under the
very weight of their destructive and disintegrating principle of
private judgment; we are surrounded with pagans to whom the
supernatural religion of Christianity is but a name or a memory; from
our great West comes the urgent cry for help, for men and money; the
Church Extension, as the watchman in the night is crying out to our
uninterested Catholics--"the day is coming, the night is
coming"--meaning that the faint streak on the eastern horizon may be
the last rays of a dying day or the first blush of a new dawn; . . .
and what are we doing?  Here and there, a spasmodic effort, a generous
outburst of zeal--the work of some society, parish or diocese.  While,
what we need now is the combined effort of all the Catholics.  This
will only be obtained through a Congress.  What we need is _organized
opinion_.  The modern world is very sensitive to _organized
opinion_.--Let us get together!  We only need leaders to see our
opinion become "_articulate and authoritative_" and make its weight
felt in public life.  Never has a Congress been more necessary than
now.  Without it, Catholics will not take part in reconstruction, for a
Congress alone can unite us and give us the guarantee that our energies
will not be "frittered away by overlapping and friction."

There is a great moral tide now running in the world, said President
Wilson in his toast to the King of England . . . and that tide is the
great opportunity for Catholic social principles to take the high sea
of public life.  Let us therefore, like the skilful mariner, count with
this set of the tide and catch it at its crest.  "There is a tide in
the affairs of nations like that of men, which when taken at the flood
leads on to glory.  If we do not direct the ideas that are awork in the
seething mind of the world, they will spend their energies in
retributive destruction," wrote the Philosopher President of the United
States.

"The thrilling opportunities of the time, we will say with Father
Garesche, S.J., should stir us to the depths of our souls' capacity
with enthusiasm, energy and sacrifice. . . .  Our realization of the
needs and chances of the Church and the world, should stir us to the
utmost of personal effort."



_Exempla Trahunt_.--The great benefits that have ensued from a general
consultation or meeting of the _body Catholic in various countries_
form the best standing proof of their value.  In England the annual
conference of the Catholic Truth Society and other federated Societies,
is the leading event of Catholic life.  It has developed among the
English Catholic laity, a militant, virile Catholicism, most remarkable
for its aggressive policy and wonderful for its array of social
organizations, as one may readily learn from the "Hand-book of Catholic
Charitable and Social work" published by the C. T. Society of London.
Who does not know the wonderful results of the yearly Catholic
Congresses of Germany before the war?  We would refer the reader to the
wonderful book of Father Plater, S.J., "Catholic Social Work in
Germany."  To the same source may be traced the great social activities
of Catholics in France and Belgium.  In 1919 the Catholics of Holland
met at Utrecht, and in a national general convention, discussed the
Catholic view-point of burning questions--political, social and
spiritual.  The results of their united efforts are already tangible.
Legislation favourable to Catholic Schools has been enacted; a Catholic
University is being founded; the Catholic press is a power; sane social
legislation has been adopted.

An example that may strike home better, is one that comes from our
brethren in the United States.  Federation has already accomplished
wonders among our American Catholics and is welding into one great unit
the various societies of the Church in that immense country.  This
federation is only in its infancy and already its action has created a
mental attitude which makes united action, in various spheres, a
reality.  The annual meetings of the Catholic Education Association, of
the Catholic Hospitals, of Catholic Charities, of Catholic Press make
good our statement.  These gatherings have broadened the outlook and
sympathies of the American Catholics in general, and created the
vision, the sterling Catholicism, the fearless energy and the fervent
enthusiasm that characterize leaders.  Has not the general meeting of
the American Catholic Hierarchy opened a new era for the Church in the
United States?  Five Boards have been formed: Education, Social Work,
Press and Literature, Lay Societies, Home and Foreign Missions.
Through these channels the American Episcopacy will know the doings,
the needs and the possibilities of the Church as a whole, and be able
at any time, to throw, on a given point, on a new issue, the full
weight of united forces.

"The Welfare Council begins its second year of life and activity.  It
has already, in a remarkable and effective way, shown the wonderful
wealth of Catholic activity, and Catholic Service throughout the
country; it has unified our Catholic organizations, leaving to all
their autonomy; it has made Catholic faith a greater factor in American
life; and under its leaders it will, without doubt, be a further source
of strength, of help and co-operation to the entire Catholic body of
the Country.  It is the Catholic body expressing itself with one voice
and one heart in the work and in the interests common to us all as
Catholics."--The N.C.W.C. Bulletin, Oct., 1920.

_Fas est ab hoste doceri_. . . .  Powerful is the example of a brother,
but often, stronger and more pungent is the example that comes from an
enemy.  There are times indeed, when shame and honour are stronger than
love.  This brings us to speak of the tremendous activities of our
separated brethren.  Never have their efforts in view of organizing
their social service departments been so persistent and so manifest,
particularly in the mission field.  Doctrinal lines are being lowered
and various denominations absorbed gradually into a "Church-union"
scheme from coast to coast.  A "_social service programme_" is the only
binding element which is giving to them a fictitious unity.  Fabulous
sums are placed at the disposal of these bodies for home and foreign
mission work.  The Methodist Conference of Canada (1918--Hamilton) has
pledged itself to levy $8,000,000 in the next four years for mission
work.  In our own country, in our Western Provinces, the field
secretaries are most active among our Catholic foreigners.  On the
landing stage of our docks they are found to welcome the immigrants to
our shores.  And what could we not say of their "press activities!"

This movement for co-operation has, since the end of the war, taken
tremendous proportions.  Here is a fact which speaks volumes. . . .
"The fight between Protestants and Catholics," said a German Protestant
minister, "will forthwith subside in the domain of dogma, but it will
rise in the domain of social problems.  No doubt truth in the social
order will prevail as it has prevailed in the field of religious dogma.
But we have to change our strategy, study new tactics, and in our plan
of campaign turn from the defensive to the offensive."  Never should
the Catholics of Canada present a more united front.  To sneer and snap
our fingers at the energies and organizing powers of others is often
but a poor excuse for our own inertia.  It is certainly no argument.
_Fas est ab hoste doceri_.  The lesson has often a sting, but it is a
lesson. . . .  We need organization! . . .  The Congress is the great
medium of organization.  What are we going to do?  Changing a little
the wording of one of Cicero's famous sentences, in his orations
against Catiline, the arch-enemy of Rome, we shall say: "_The enemy is
at our doors! . . . and we are not even deliberating_!"



Before giving a suggestive programme for a Congress may we answer some
objections.

"The need for co-operation and co-ordination is indeed _admitted on all
hands_; it is its _feasibility_ that is doubted by so many good
Catholics.  It is admitted to be an ideal; the question that is raised
is whether the difficulties are not too great to be surmounted
otherwise than by a very slow and lengthy process of evolution.  That
such a gradual evolution would be in accordance with both nature and
history we should be the first to admit.  But, after all, there is such
a thing as retarding or assisting the process of evolution.  The
valuable maxim that 'things are what they are and their consequences
will be what they will be,' is after all but half the truth.  No
Catholic believes that we are carried helpless along a stream of
circumstances.  He believes that man is man, a free being whose free
action can within limits mould circumstance; and he believes that God
is God, the one free Being Who can and does overrule circumstance, and
Who, when and where He pleases, gives efficacy to the endeavour of His
free creatures to do the same." (Universe, Aug. 15th, 1919.)

Some may say that by coming together we shall awaken susceptibilities,
our motives will be suspected . . . and the final result will be more
prejudice, more bigotry. . . .

There is no reason why a Congress should be of an unfriendly
aggressiveness.  We have ideas to advocate, they stand on their own
merit.  They are in our belief, the only key of salvation; let us then
get together and bring them by organization and team work, into the
domain of realities.  Moreover, our enemies are not so very particular
in dealing with us and with our principles.  The best policy is to meet
in the open, as our Catholics are doing in England and stand on the
value of our doctrine and our works--"_Ex fructibus cognescetis illos_."

"What about the autonomy of parish and diocesan units?  Are they not
supreme?  Will not what we advocate interfere with these organizations?
Will it not destroy the work of our parochial societies, etc., etc.?"

"Organization which would attempt to meddle with local autonomy would
not only defeat its purpose, but would be chiselling its own epitaph."
. . .  The parish and diocesan units are and must ever remain supreme,
each in its own sphere.  We could never get a better working basis;
more genuine Christian charity and self sacrifice could not be met with
outside of our acting brotherhoods and charitable organizations. . . .
But, what we need more is _co-operation_ between these various units in
view of solving the complex social problems, especially in our cities.
This suppresses neglect and over-lapping, gives efficiency with the
least waste of energies.  "Blend organization and co-ordination with
the greatest amount of local autonomy and individual initiative": this
is the sole aim a Congress has in view.  There, and there alone, lies
the solution of our problems.




_Tentative Programme of Congress_.

I--_Preparation_.

The remote preparation for such a great and important undertaking,
would consist in what we would term "an educational campaign."  The
initial difficulty, the greatest obstacle would be to overcome the
general apathy, the want of interest, _vis inertiae_.  This could be
done by the Catholic press, lectures, sermons, etc.  It may take time
to wake up our people from their slumber, but the faith is there with
its latent energies, and we can count on them.  The forces are there;
they only need an occasion to call them into play.



The _immediate preparation_ would consist in the appointment of a
_small but strong organizing committee_.  Agitation without
organization is useless.  On the choice and activities of this
committee depends the entire success of the congress.

The various activities of this committee would be:

1. _Decide on Name_.--Congress, . . .  Conference, . . .  Catholic
Social Service Meeting, etc. . . .  This seems of no importance; but,
in fact, it often goes a long way in interesting the public and warding
off prejudice.

2. _Decide on
Place_.--Winnipeg--Regina--Edmonton--Calgary--Saskatoon--Vancouver.

3. _Decide on Delegates_.--Mode of selection,--clerical,--lay.  It is
very essential that a meeting of that kind should be thoroughly
_popular_ and _representative_.

4. _Decide on Speakers, Language_.--(One or several sections.)

5. _Decide on Programme_.--This is really the essential work of the
organizing committee.  In drawing the agenda, emphasis is to be laid
upon problems of immediate necessity:

_Defence_ and _construction_; defence against the enemies' activities;
_strong constructive policy_ with a wide scope for all energies: these
are the two poles on which revolve a good programme.

Racial--Language--Political issues are to be absolutely barred from the
programme.

6. _Decide on Committees_.--Their _number_ and _matters to be trusted
to them_.

7. _Sub-committees_ can be appointed for _publicity_, _information_,
_reception_ (ceremonies), _invitations_, _billeting_.

8. _Appointment_ of Permanent Secretary. . . .

N.B.--In a work of this nature it is the quiet, silent,
well-thought-out preparatory work that counts.  The distribution of the
work (papers--speakers--leaders) is the secret of genuine success.

Therefore, to make a Congress a success, we need:

1. _Clearly defined programme_.--(What do we want to do?)

2. Compact and efficient organization.--(How is it going to be done?)

3. _Competent and reliable leaders_.--(Who is going to do it?)

_Foresight_, _energy_, _decision_--should mark out the leaders;

_Foresight_ will give the _vision_.

_Energy_ will give the _will_.

_Decision_ will push to _action_.

II--_Suggestive Programme_.

1. Committee on "Education":

   1. _Our Primary Schools_.--Their legal status--their efficiency?
      Our teaching staff?  Bureau for Catholic teachers.

   2. _Higher Education_.--Catholic Colleges: their standing--Catholic
      University--Affiliation to State Universities?

   3. _Sunday School_.--Teaching of Catechism--in our separate
      schools--in sparsely settled countries?  Lay Cathechists?


2. Committee on "Catholic Missions."

   1. _Home Missions_.--Church Extension.--What co-operation are we
      giving?  Needs of the West: Men and money.

   2. _Foreign Missions_.--Propagation of Faith.--Holy Childhood.

   3. _What are we doing for non-Catholics_?

   4. _The Missions_ (parochial).

   5. _Priestly and religious vocations_.


3. Committee on "Press and Catholic Literature."

   1. _Catholic Newspapers_.--(Their policy.--Their circulation.)
      _Vigour in policy_ and _extensiveness in circulation_: two
      essential conditions for success.

   2. _Work and establishment of Catholic Truth Society_.

   3. _Catholic circulating libraries_ for cities, countries.  (Example
      of same, under care of Saskatchewan Government.)


4. Committee on "Public Morality."

   1. _Divorce--Race-suicide_.

   2. _Theatres--Moving pictures_.--(More severe censorship.)

   3. _Eugenics_?

   4. _Venereal diseases_?


5. Committee on "Social Action."

   1. _Immigration--Reception and direction_ of Catholic Immigrants at
      ports of St. John and Halifax and intermediate points.  Care of
      foreigners (leakage).

   2. _Colonization_?

   3. _Young Men's Association_--on Y.M.C.A. lines.  Young Girls'
      Association--on Y.W.C.A. lines--Girls' homes.


6. Committee on "Public Charities."

_Children's Aid--Orphanages--Free
Kindergartens--Day-nurseries--Juvenile Courts--Preventive and curative
work_.


7. Committee on "Labour Problem."

_Labour Unions--Living wage--Child labour--Care of girl-workers, etc_.

N.B.--The great point to elucidate in these matters is: _Must we, and
how far can we, co-operate with non-Catholic bodies_?  This is a very
important point, far reaching in its consequences.


8. Committee on "Resolutions."

"The resolutions are to embody the fruit of the collective experience
and deliberations of the Congress.  They will remain then as the
profession of Catholic conviction and go far to create public opinion
on the questions of the day." (Fr. Plater.)

And indeed, public discussion awakens new thoughts, gives various views
of a topic, suggests practical conclusions, expedient measures.  It is
the crystallizing process of all the activities of the Congress.


III--_After the Congress_.

The good results of a Congress are made permanent by the establishment
of:

1. _A permanent Committee of Clergy and laity_--who meet occasionally
to stimulate or check activities of the body at large.

2. _A Vigilance Committee_:

(a) _On legislation_.--To watch and initiate legislation--for different
Provinces.

(b) _On press_.

(c) _On social work_.

3. _Bureau_.--Clearing house--where "expert knowledge and effective
presentation" are to be found.  To this bureau should be attached a
priest who would specialize in social work.  He could be helped by an
efficient secretary.  His would be the energy that would carry to the
various organizations life and power.  The "Volksverein" in Catholic
Germany was a model in this line of work.



"_Praesentia tangens . . . futura prospiciens_" is a motto which
translates well the lofty ideal Catholics should have before their eyes
at this turning point of history.  Although we stand amid the ruins
accumulated during four long years of war and are confronted by
distressing after-war problems in every order of human activity, still
we raise our heads in hope and look beyond the crude realities of the
present to a brighter day breaking on the horizon of time, a day tinted
with the rising sun of Christian doctrine. . . .

_Instaurare omnia in Christo_ . . . to re-establish all things in
Christ, is the only reconstruction that will last.




CHAPTER XVIII.

ULTIMA VERBA

The Canadian West offers to one who has never gone beyond the Great
Lakes but a misty vision of boundless prairies that stretch over three
immense Provinces and lose themselves in the foothills of the
snow-capped Rockies.  Conflicting are the impressions that assail the
traveller's mind, various the feelings that crowd around his heart when
leaving behind him the East, he faces, for the first time, the "great
lone land" of the West.  From the immensities of the fertile prairie
comes to him an invigorating air of optimism which fires him with
enthusiasm and confidence in the possibilities of the country and gives
him the assurance of its future.  From the vast horizon that melts away
into the distant blue skies "he seems to hear the footsteps of Freedom
treading towards him."  This mysterious attractiveness of the boundless
desert that the plough has just turned into restful and fertile meadows
has at all times a peculiar fascination.  But it is at harvest season
that our glorious West it at its best.  Then under the deep blue
firmament, in the glorious sunlight and exhilarating atmosphere of the
rolling prairie one can hear, as it were, "the song of the land."  With
the hum of the binder, it comes to him froth the long rows of golden
sheaves, it rises from the fields where yet waves the ripening harvest.

Nature indeed is then most beautiful in the West.  But for the
Christian soul to whom Faith "is the evidence of things unseen and the
substances of things we hope for," the visible harvest leads to the
thought of that spiritual harvest to which the Master so often points
in the Gospel.  Under all the feverish activities which characterize
our Western communities lie deep in the consciences of men those unseen
realities, those spiritual values and eternal issues which constitute
the religious world.  In the mysterious furrows of the human heart is
ripening the harvest of eternity.

The Church of God ever stands as Christ by the mysterious well of
Jacob, at the intersection of the highways of History.  Now, as in the
days of the Saviour, winter has set in; a cold blast of indifference
and unbelief sweeps over the land.  Yet with the Master's vision and
boundless confidence, the Church, pointing to the Western plains,
repeats to us all the divine challenge.  "Do not you say there are yet
four months and then the harvest cometh?  Behold I say to you lift up
your eyes and see the countries for they are white already to the
harvest."  (Jo. iv, 35.)

Before parting with you, kind reader, may we make ours this pressing
invitation of the Master.  Yes, the immense West is "white already to
the harvest."  There stand as immense fields of ripening wheat, the
Catholic youth of Eastern Canada, the sturdy and thrifty Catholic
settlers of the British Isles and continental Europe.  There the rising
generation of Catholic children, like the tender green blades of the
future harvest, is springing into manhood.  Staring us in the face,
their eyes in our eyes, the children of foreign parentage wonder what
account we will make of their faith, what protection we will offer it.
They are the new Canadians, the nation of to-morrow.

To focus the Catholic mind of the nation on the great problems which
the West with its scattered population has forced upon our attention,
has been the object we have consistently pursued through the pages of
this book.  _For it is a fact of every day experience that problems are
only solved by those who know them, who understand their full meaning,
and grasp their vital importance_.

Our sole endeavour has been to point out the controlling forces, the
spiritual issues that lurk behind these problems.  In debatable matters
we always have tried to find that higher level which lies undisturbed
by the cross-currents of opinions.  Naturally there are conclusions we
draw or forms of action we propose which may not find favour with
everyone.  There are so many angles of vision from which moral problems
can be viewed.  But we will say with Cardinal Newman "nothing would be
done at all if a man waited until he could do it so well that no one
could find fault with it."  Were we, in our insistency on certain
topics and suggestions, accused of undue repetition, the importance of
the subject and our eager desire of immediate action would be our only
excuse and defence.

The Western spiritual harvest is indeed great and now ready for the
reapers.  Never in our mind has a period in the history of the Church
in Canada been more fraught with greater problems than the present one
which the sudden increase of the West has created.  The vastness of
their proportion and their far-reaching consequences involve to a great
extent the future of the Church in these new Provinces and,
consequently, in the Dominion at large.  Moreover this immense harvest
is now white and calls for the reapers.  To-morrow will be too late,
for, there comes a critical stage in the maturing harvest, when the
labours of past months and the most bright prospects melt away in an
hour.  If therefore action is not immediate, irreparable, we contend,
will be the loss to the Church in the West.  Only by a prompt and
united action will the stern and burning realities of the present be
converted into the bright visions that our Faith has a right to expect.

The harvesters are few.  But were the Church at this critical hour able
to count on all the spiritual forces that lie dormant in the souls of
her children in Canada, the history of the future in the West would be
different from that of the past.  As in times of emergency, the
conscription of Catholic forces is the supreme duty of the hour.  It is
the duty of our leaders to affect by a definite policy the
"indeterminate masses," just as it is the duty of each individual of
the masses to shoulder his share of responsibility by an active
co-operation.  _Without a definite workable policy of united action,
and the awakened consciousness of the Catholic masses at large,
throughout the Dominion, the Catholic problems in Western Canada will
not be solved_.

The Church in Canada, we maintain, stands at one of those critical
periods when the sweeping current of events give a decided bend to the
course of History.  The hour is serious, for never was the future so
greatly involved in the present as it is now.  All depends, to a very
large extent, on how, within the next decade or so, the Catholics will
consolidate their forces and extend their energies to meet the
religious issues of the West.  Were we to fail at this momentous
period, our inactivity and want of co-operation will be charged against
us, and in the eyes of the Church we shall be marked as felons and
traitors to her great cause.  The chapter of our times in the history
of the Church would then be fittingly headed with this accusing
caption: "_What should have been_!"  For, we are the makers of History;
we prepare its verdicts.

One last word before parting with you, gentle reader.  If you have
followed us through the various problems to which we have given our
attention in this book you will have remarked that there is one idea
which permeates, we would say, every page of it.  It is the key-note of
our work.  This idea is that of "_responsibility_," which a genuine and
active Catholicism necessarily implies.  This thought of Catholic
solidarity has inspired our humble effort; in it we place the hopes of
the future.  There lies in one word the burden of our message.

THE CHURCH OF THE WEST IS IN OUR HANDS--ITS FUTURE WILL BE WHAT WE
SHALL MAKE IT--THAT FUTURE, WHAT SHALL IT BE?--THE DIVINE MASTER, HIS
CHURCH, AND CATHOLIC POSTERITY, AWAIT OUR ANSWER.




APPENDIX

We thought it would be a benefit to our Canadian reader to republish
here three thought-compelling and illuminating articles that appeared,
the first in the "New York Times," the second in the "Century Magazine"
and the third in the "Detroit News."  As they deal with a similar
problem that confronts Canada also, they will corroborate views we have
expressed here and there in our book.  Let the reader substitute
"Canadianization" for "Americanization" and he will find that the
statements made can be well applied to existing conditions in our own
Country.


I. AMERICANIZATION

_By L. P. Edwards in N.Y. Times_.

The United States is suffering from one of its periodic attacks of Know
Nothingism.  It is seriously maintained in the public prints that our
recent Eastern European, and particularly our Russian, immigration
contains enormous numbers of murderers, thieves, counterfeiters,
dynamiters, arsonists and other criminals of the most atrocious
character.  It is alleged that the lives and property of all of us are
in imminent danger from these incredibly numerous blackguards, and that
the only salvation lies in what is called the Americanization of the
foreigner.

Now, it is known to every respectable sociologist in America that our
recent Eastern European immigrants, including the Russians, are just as
peaceable and law-abiding people as native Americans or native American
ancestry.  This is a fact about which there is not the slightest doubt
in the mind of any competently informed person.  It has been repeatedly
established by careful studies made by the United States Bureau of the
Census; by various State boards and by highly qualified private
foundations.

Furthermore, the most honest, thrifty, industrious, upright,
God-fearing and conservative portion of our foreign population is
precisely that portion which has clung most stubbornly to its native
ways of life and has been least influenced by American customs.  Our
immigrants upon changing their foreign languages, customs, beliefs and
ideals upon becoming "Americanized," deteriorate profoundly in moral
character; deteriorate to a degree that shows itself in the criminal
statistics.

It is very fortunate for the moral welfare of millions of our foreign
population that the present furore for "Americanization" is destined to
fail in its object.  Its failure is in its own nature.  The fundamental
social virtues, honesty, industry, thrift, truthfulness and the rest,
are the same for all societies on the same general level of
development.  They are not promoted by the custom of saluting any
particular flag nor advanced by the ability to read any particular
Constitution.

The very complete and profound change of character implied by the
phrase: "The Americanization of the Foreigner" can be wisely and safely
accomplished only if spread out over at least three generations, while
four or five would be better.  Every year less than three generations,
that the progress is hastened, means moral and spiritual breakdown for
thousands--means domestic tragedy and congested criminal calendars.
There is only one foreigner who is really a menace to American society.
He is the foreigner who is in rapid process of "Americanization."  The
danger point is the foreign-born child and the American-born child of
foreign parents.

The danger from these classes is real and serious, perhaps the most
serious presented in the whole range of immigration questions.  Here
again we have very reliable statistics which leave no room for
reasonable doubt.  America needs protection, needs it urgently, against
the foreigner of the second generation, particularly against the
youthful foreigner who goes through our Public school system.  The
father who stubbornly refuses to learn English or to adopt American
ways is commonly a man of admirable moral character.  The son, often
quite as American as young men of our old stock, is equally commonly a
youth of vicious and unprincipled character.

Public opinion in this matter is grievously at fault.  There is danger
to American institutions, and that danger is real, but it is just the
opposite of what is popularly feared.  The danger lies precisely in the
process of Americanization itself, particularly in the endeavor to
hasten that process.  If, as is commonly maintained, the present need
in America is peace and safety, security and conservatism, then the
Americanization of the foreigner should be slowed down in every way
possible.  No encouragement should at this time be offered to the
foreigner to abandon his native language or religion or to change his
ethical or cultural standards.

On the other hand, every possible assistance should be given to Roman
and Greek Catholic priests, Orthodox rabbis and other such leaders in
maintaining and strengthening the traditional loyalties of their
various groups.  Our Mohammedans--no negligible element in recent
immigration--should be encouraged to build mosques, to read the Koran
and to obey the various other requirements of their faith.  Our public
libraries should provide themselves more liberally with books in
foreign languages.  Foreign language lectures and speakers of all sorts
should be much encouraged.  By such means and only by such means can
the spirit of unrest and disquiet be stilled and the spirit of
conservatism and contentment with the status quo be developed among our
foreign population.

It is a most curious popular misconception that peace and quietness and
respect for law and order can be developed in the foreigner by suddenly
and violently disturbing his mental life.  Changing a man's language,
upsetting his moral and social conventions, altering his inherited
traditions of conduct, unsettling his ancestral faith--these are the
very best means possible for making him a disbeliever in all
established institutions, including those of the United States.  Yet
this is precisely what "Americanization" aims to do with the best
intentions.

Let us take a specific illustration.  It may perhaps be theoretically
desirable to bring our new immigrant to a realization of the crudity
and superstition of his Eastern Orthodox faith, and to be a lively
recognition of the superiority of American Protestantism.  Practically,
it can be seldom done and the reason is simple.  When a person has been
brought to realize the faults, imperfections, and limitations of a
traditional system of belief in religion, government or what not, he
inevitably applies his new critical attitude towards whatever system of
belief is offered to him as a substitute for the one he has been
encouraged to cast aside.

Most commonly the alternative system, being human, has serious faults,
imperfections and limitations of its own, which are easily enough
discoverable.  The net result of very much conscientious missionary
work in America is that the foreigner ceases to believe his traditional
faith, refuses allegiance to any American substitute and becomes an
infidel agnostic or atheist.  The same thing is just as common in the
realms of social, ethical and political faith as in that of religious
belief.

Respect for Government and law is not a natural instinct.  It is an
artificial attitude slowly built up in the individual by all sorts of
direct and indirect social pressure.  The breakdown of old habits of
thought in any one of the great departments of social activity very
rapidly affects the other phases of conduct.  The whole moral life of
the individual tends to become unsettled.  Nothing is held firmly
except the selfish determination to obtain material wealth.  Ideas and
ideals which stand in the way of this are cast aside.  The Americanized
foreigner possesses all the native Americans' ruthless greed without
possessing his social, ethical, religious, or political idealism.

No man can learn a language perfectly who learns it deliberately, and
social ideals are harder to learn than language.  They can never be
learned naturally and completely except when they are learned so
gradually and imperceptibly that the process is unrecognized and
largely unconscious.  This can never be possible in the case of the
foreign born, and is only very partially attainable in the case of the
children foreign born.  Its complete realization is possible only in
the case of children born and reared in an entirely American
environment.  That is to say it cannot be accomplished before the third
generation at the earliest, and often not then.


II. THE FAD OF AMERICANIZATION

_By Glenn Frank in the "Century Magazine," June, 1920_.

We are a nation of confirmed uplifters.  We are never happy except when
we are reforming something or saving somebody.  It doesn't matter
greatly whom we are saving or what we are reforming; the game is the
thing.  This uplift urge expresses itself in the "movement" mania, the
endemic home of which is United States.  The American cannot live by
bread alone; he must have committees, clubs, constitutions, by-laws,
platforms, and resolutions.  These things, the machinery of uplift are
his meat and wine.  The American society women takes to "social
service" and the American business man to "public work" as a bird takes
to the air or a hound to the trail.  It is in the blood.

Just now the most popular social sport is "Americanization."  It is in
many ways an ideal movement.  It fully satisfies the passion of the
comfortable classes for uplift, and is a Godsend to the candidate who
wants something to grow fervent about in lieu of a frank facing of
fundamental issues of politics and industry.  Above all,
Americanization work gives one the righteous feeling of a defender of
the faith.  The epidemic faddist character of much Americanization work
was pointedly stated in a recent article by Simon J. Lubin and
Christina Krysto in "The Survey."  They said:

"Every social organization, every religious society, every large
industry, every woman's club has been busy for months mapping out its
own particular program.  The study of Americanization has been used to
stimulate interest in organizations which were dying a natural death;
Americanization has been used as a pretext for sudden improvements in
industrial management when the attitude of labor has made sudden
improvements imperative; Americanization has been used to give
employment to social workers out of jobs."

This article further points out the inevitability of innumerable
perversions of Americanization in such an orgy of organization.  The
article says on this point:

"Every political party has its hangers-on who, consciously or
unconsciously, discredit the fine principles of that party by their
erroneous expounding of these.  Every new phase in industrial progress
has its profiteers--men who capitalize the advanced ideas of their
field for their own interest, regardless of the harm which they bring
to the whole by their methods.  Every scientific discovery has its
charlatans who mix enough of the truth with their lies to undermine the
whole truth when their lies become known.  Every religion has its false
messiahs, and many a man has been made an unbeliever because he has
followed these too easily and been disappointed too grievously."

It should be said that the profiteers, charlatans, and false messiahs
of Americanization are not, in the main, men and women of bad
intentions so much as they are men and women of half-ideas of
fractional and incomplete conceptions of Americanization.  The title of
false messiahs fits them better than either profiteers or charlatans,
for false messiahs are usually profoundly sincere, although profoundly
misguided.

No straight-thinking person disputes the need of a fundamentally sound
program of Americanization, a vast collective effort toward the
stimulation and spread of sane principles of national life among all
sorts and conditions of men and women who make up our population.  But
anything and everything that goes by the name of Americanization is not
necessarily an effective move in that direction.  There is slowly
growing up a body of incisive criticism dealing with the current
epidemic of Americanization work that is sweeping the country on the
wings of clever catch-words and generous emotions.  It may be of
interest and value to attempt an analysis and statement of the main
points of that body of criticism.  Here are a few plainly valid
criticisms.

First, it is psychologically bad to approach Americanization work
through a _super-organized and much-trumpeted movement, because such a
policy warns the foreigner in advance that a crowd of superior_ persons
have set out to improve him.  That is generally resented.  The fact is
that hardly a thing has been proposed as desirable in an
Americanization program that is not the duty or function of some
existing institution of our country, the church, the school, the
industry, the press.  Education, hygiene, and a decent inter-class
courtesy are necessary features of any sound Americanization program,
but they can be more effectively applied by calling them what they are
and promoting them in normal ways than by branding them Americanization
and cursing them with the blight of paternalistic uplift.

But it is probably useless to quarrel with a long established national
habit.  It is a habit of ours to create a new organization for every
new task.  Not only does that practice have the drawbacks just
mentioned, but it robs our established institutions of the habit of
doing creative work, leaves our established institutions as homes of
the routine and the regular.  There is a fundamental difference between
England and the United States in this matter.  In England the few men
who have caught an idea or envisioned a need, do not, as a regular
practice, create a new propagandist organization instanter, but in most
cases set quietly to work to get the machinery of established
institutions going on the task.  An increasing number of clear-minded
folk are becoming convinced that Americanization would proceed much
faster and more soundly through the increase efficiency of the existing
machinery of school and church and press and industry, without any
fanfare of trumpets, than through any propagandist "drive" for
uplifting the foreigner.

Second, it is a _fallacy_ to suppose that Americanization _is a process
needed by the foreigners only_.  Much Americanization work proceeds
upon the assumption that what is needed is to make the foreigner "like
us."  The fact is that Americanization is sorely needed by many of
"us," Americanization does not mean merely getting an immigrant ready
for his citizenship-papers.  It means the continuous fostering of the
American spirit of liberty, justice, and equality of opportunity in
every man and woman and institution and policy.  Americanization should
be looked upon as the inspiring goal of both native born and foreign
born, not as a missionary enterprise among the foreign born alone.  To
single out the foreign born as the exclusive objects of an
Americanization effort is organized tactlessness.  If, on the other
hand, the foreign born feel that they are being invited to join with
the native born in a vast collective effort to build a better nation in
which liberty, justice, and equality of opportunity shall increasingly
prevail, they will go out of their way to acquire the English language,
a knowledge of our institutions and ways, and all the instruments
necessary to the task of collaborating with us in the improvement of
the republic.

Third, serious danger lies in the _over-simplification of the_ problem
of Americanization by propagandist organizations.  We are in constant
danger from too simple analysis of problems and too simple as the
epigrams that grow up about it.  Panaceas usually touch only a part of
a problem.  It is interesting to watch various types of minds approach
the problems of Americanization in committee discussion.  Here are a
few simple solutions that the writer has heard from time to time:

Teach the foreigner to stick to the job and produce.  We need to teach
the foreigner that Americanism means patriotic production for the
relief of the world's present peace-time plight, just as it meant
patriotic production for the necessities of war-time.  A great drive
for industrial patriotism is the supreme need.

Teach the foreigner to respect our forms of government.  Make the
foreigner understand that we have settled the question of government
forms and that criticism is disloyalty.  We must discourage the
practice of biting the hand that feeds.

Teach the foreigner the English language.  There is no room in this
country for more than one language.  Alien intrigue could be killed if
we turned the United States into a country of one language.

Make every foreigner take out citizenship-papers within a specified
time or deport him.

Now, it is inevitable that when Americanization is made a popular
"drive" by a vast propagandist organization that the army of men and
women of one idea, apostles of simplicist solutions, will flock into
the ranks of the propagandists.  Even when the official program of the
organization is well rounded, the army of simple-solutionists will do
irreparable damage in their work as servants of the movement.

The problem cannot be dismissed by preaching to the foreigner that he
should stick to the job and produce.  The problem of maximum production
has a thousand ramifications that run throughout the whole industrial
problem.  The preaching of industrial patriotism is a waste of breath
unless it goes hand in hand with a far-reaching liberal program of
industrial justice and efficiency.  The industrial program is more
important than the industrial preaching.  Put the program into effect
and the preaching of loyalty to the job may be unnecessary.

Far from being Americanism, it is fundamentally anti-American to urge
an uncritical deification of any form of government.  Americanism
involves an invitation to continuous constructive criticism in behalf
of a bettering of our machinery of government.  It is no solution of
the foreign-born problem to preach loyalty to the _status quo_.  We
shall get further by saying to the foreigner, "We are engaged in a
great democratic experiment on this continent.  We have settled a few
principles in our minds.  We believe in popular rule through political
action, but as to details we are on a search for improvement.  We ask
you to learn our language and our institutions and then give us the
benefit of your best thought on ways and means for the improvement of
our machinery for democratic government.  The bars are down for the
frankest criticism from men and women who have the democratic patience
to trust their proposals to peaceful procedure."

Learning the English language is only a means to an end.  It is too
frequently made an end in itself.  There is no more virtue in talking
English than in talking Hottentot.  We shall not get far by the mere
exaltation of a language.  The only lasting results we shall achieve
will be through the making of participation in this national democratic
experiment of ours so attractive to the foreigner that he will burn
with the desire to master our tongue, that he may better play his part
and appreciate his privilege.  A man can plot the downfall of the
republic in English as easily as in an alien tongue.

Nor is there magic in the legal assumption of citizenship.  It is the
man behind the papers that counts.  If anything, we have made
citizenship too easy a privilege in the past.

Now, all this is said not to suggest that there is no room or need for
special consideration of the Americanization problem by groups of
public minded citizens.  It is not intended to suggest that
Americanization may not properly be made the subject of considerable
propaganda.  This comment has indulged in rather severe and unqualified
strictures upon the Americanization "drive" in the hope of capturing
attention for three manifest dangers that may prove the undoing of the
real Americanization work that cries aloud for administration.  These
three dangers are; first, the danger of making the Americanization
movement so plainly a conventional uplift movement that the foreigner
will resent what he might, with a more tactful approach, request;
second, the danger that, by thinking of Americanization as something
needed by the foreigner alone, we shall miss the opportunity of making
Americanization a vast national effort of self-education in the nature
and application of the principles of liberty justice, and equality of
opportunity that, theoretically at least, comprise the American idea;
and third, the danger that the propagandist's passion for simple
solutions will further postpone the day of a broad and well-balanced
program of national development.

We do not want "Americanism" to degenerate into a mere "protective
coloration" for politicians who want to hide their reaction and their
lack of ideas.


III. AMERICANIZATION WORK MUST PROCEED SLOWLY

_By Rev. D. P. Tighe, "Detroit News," Aug.  23, 1919_.

There are two methods of Americanizing the immigrant, says Fr. D. P.
Tighe in the August number of the Catholic Light.  One of them is
_revolutionary_, the other _evolutionary_.  To Americanize means to
take the immigrant and remake him.  Teaching him to write and speak the
language of the country is a mere detail of the process.  One cannot be
awake to the industrial and social needs of the country without
co-operating in every movement calculated to discourage the diversity
of language, and to give to the foreigner every facility for the quick
and easy mastery of English.  But Americanization is a different
proposition.  Trotzky, when he lived in East New York, could speak and
write English fluently, but he was not an American.  He had neither
understanding of, nor sympathy with American institutions; and, so,
instead of setting himself to remedy the abuses in our industrial and
political life as a good American citizen would remedy them he became
an anarchist and envisioned to himself a millennium of destruction that
involved the good as well as the evil.

"Americanization is more than a mere matter of language.  It involves
stripping the immigrant of much of what he has inherited from the
centuries.  He is the finished product of those centuries.  His speech,
his manner, his dress, his ideas along social and political and
industrial lines have been fashioned upon the distaff of time.  He
lands upon American soil and at once there is a strangeness in the
atmosphere that awes him, it is a new world in truth and the newness of
it repels him and drives him back upon himself.  The faintest link
between the new world and the old is a Godsend to him.  It gives him
courage, it robs him of that feeling of aloneness.  It tells him that
after all, maybe he is wanted.  In other words it creates an atmosphere
of sympathy and understanding.  Now any educator can tell you that this
very atmosphere of sympathy is of the very essence of the class room,
it's a condition of education, and Americanization is an education in
nationalism.

"And here is where the revolutionary idea of Americanization falls
down.  Are you going to prove to the immigrant in one lesson that he is
all wrong?  Are you going to undo with a single jerk what it has taken
centuries to do?  Are you going to take this man and by a sort of
patronizing coercion, yank him out himself and leave him, high and
dry--nowhere?  Or are you going to give him a reasonable time to learn
the things of the new world, time to be influenced by the new
environment?  It took centuries to make him just what he is.  Can't you
spare him one generation to shed the crust of those centuries?  Can't
you be satisfied with making him the solid groundwork of the
citizenship of his children?

"_Do we favor Americanization_?  By _revolution, no_; by _evolution,
yes_.  The lasting kind of Americanization comes, not through a quick
jerk, but through a long pull.  First make the immigrant feel at home.
Let him get his feet on the ground.  Let him get rid of his suspicions
and his distrust and his shyness by finding out the links that bind the
new order with the old, the things that make for the broader kind of
brotherhood.  Don't rush him; lay emphasis upon the things that are
common; from them he'll learn confidence, and confidence is a great big
step in the transforming of an European immigrant into an American
citizen."