CHAPTER XVI.

THE COLONY OF MARYLAND.

1634-1775.

     MARYLAND UNDER THE LAWS OF VIRGINIA UNTIL 1630.--FIRST
     LEGISLATION ON THE SLAVERY QUESTION IN 1637-38.--SLAVERY
     ESTABLISHED BY STATUTE IN 1663.--THE DISCUSSION OF
     SLAVERY.--AN ACT PASSED ENCOURAGING THE IMPORTATION OF
     NEGROES AND WHITE SERVANTS IN 1671.--AN ACT LAYING AN IMPOST
     ON NEGROES AND WHITE SERVANTS IMPORTED INTO THE
     COLONY.--DUTIES IMPOSED ON RUM AND WINE.--TREATMENT OF
     SLAVES AND PAPISTS.--CONVICTS IMPORTED INTO THE COLONY.--AN
     ATTEMPT TO JUSTIFY THE CONVICT-TRADE.--SPIRITED
     REPLIES.--THE LAWS OF 1723, 1729, 1752.--RIGHTS OF
     SLAVES.--NEGRO POPULATION IN 1728.--INCREASE OF SLAVERY IN
     1756.--NO EFFORTS MADE TO PREVENT THE EVILS OF SLAVERY.--THE
     REVOLUTION NEARING.--NEW LIFE FOR THE NEGROES.


Up to the 20th of June, 1630, the territory that at present
constitutes the State of Maryland was included within the limits of
the colony of Virginia. During that period the laws of Virginia
obtained throughout the entire territory.

In 1637[414] the first assembly of the colony of Maryland agreed upon
a number of bills, but they never became laws. The list is left, but
nothing more. The nearest and earliest attempt at legislation on the
slavery question to be found is a bill that was introduced "_for
punishment of ill servants_." During the earlier years of the
existence of slavery in Virginia, the term "servant" was applied to
Negroes as well as to white persons. The legal distinction between
slaves and servants was, "servants for a term of years,"--white
persons; and "servants for life,"--Negroes. In the first place, there
can be no doubt but what Negro slaves were a part of the population of
this colony from its organization;[415] and, in the second place, the
above-mentioned bill of 1637 for the "_punishment of ill servants_"
was intended, doubtless, to apply to Negro servants, or slaves. So
few were they in number, that they were seldom referred to as
"slaves." They were "servants;" and that appellation dropped out only
when the growth of slavery as an institution, and the necessity of
specific legal distinction, made the Negro the only person that was
suited to the condition of absolute property.

In 1638 there was a list of bills that reached a second reading, but
never passed. There was one bill "_for the liberties of the people_,"
that declared "all Christian inhabitants (slaves only excepted) to
have and enjoy all such rights, liberties, immunities, privileges and
free customs, within this province, as any natural born subject of
England hath or ought to have or enjoy in the realm of England, by
force or virtue of the common law or statute law of England, saving in
such cases as the same are or may be altered or changed by the laws
and ordinances of this province."[416] There is but one mention made
of "slaves" in the above Act, but in none of the other Acts of 1638.
There are certain features of the Act worthy of special consideration.
The reader should keep the facts before him, that by the laws of
England no Christian could be held in slavery; that in the Provincial
governments the laws were made to conform with those of the home
government; that, in specifying the rights of the colonists, the
Provincial assemblies limited the immunities and privileges conferred
by the Magna Charta upon British subjects, to Christians; that Negroes
were considered heathen, and, therefore, denied the blessings of the
Church and State; that even where Negro slaves were baptized, it was
held by the courts in the colonies, and was the law-opinion of the
solicitor-general of Great Britain, that they were not _ipso facto_
free;[417] and that, where Negroes were free, they had no rights in
the Church or State. So, while this law of 1638 did not say that
Negroes _should_ be slaves, in designating those who were to enjoy the
rights of freemen, it excludes the Negro, and thereby fixes his
condition as a slave by implication. If he were not named as a
freeman, it was the intention of the law-makers that he should remain
a bondman,--the exception to an established rule of law.[418]

In subsequent Acts reference was made to "servants," "fugitives,"
"runaways," etc.; but the first statute in this colony establishing
slavery was passed in 1663. It was "_An Act concerning negroes and
other slaves_." It enacts section one:--

     "All negroes or other slaves within the province, and all
     negroes and other slaves to be hereafter imported into the
     province, shall serve _durante vita_; and all children born
     of any negro or other slave, shall be slaves as their
     fathers were for the term of their lives."

Section two:--

     "And forasmuch as divers freeborn _English_ women, forgetful
     of their free condition, and to the disgrace of our nation,
     do intermarry with negro slaves, by which also divers suits
     may arise, touching the issue of such women, and a great
     damage doth befall the master of such negroes, for
     preservation whereof for deterring such free-born women from
     such shameful matches, _be it enacted_, &c.: That whatsoever
     free-born woman shall intermarry with any slave, from and
     after the last day of the present assembly, shall serve the
     master of such slave during the life of her husband; and
     that all the issue of such free-born women, so married,
     shall be slaves as their fathers were."

Section three:--

     "And be it further enacted, that all the issues of
     _English_, or other free-born women, that have already
     married negroes, shall serve the master of their parents,
     till they be thirty years of age and no longer."[419]

Section one is the most positive and sweeping statute we have ever
seen on slavery. It fixes the term of servitude for the longest time
man can claim,--the period of his earthly existence,--and dooms the
children to a service from which they were to find discharge only in
death. Section two was called into being on account of the
intermarriage of white women with slaves. Many of these women had been
indentured as servants to pay their passage to this country, some had
been sent as convicts, while still others had been apprenticed for a
term of years. Some of them, however, were very worthy persons. No
little confusion attended the fixing of the legal status of the issue
of such marriages; and it was to deter Englishwomen from such
alliances, and to determine the status of the children before the
courts, that this section was passed. Section three was clearly an _ex
post facto_ law: but the public sentiment of the colony was reflected
in it; and it stood, and was re-enacted in 1676.

Like Virginia, the colony of Maryland found the soil rich, and the
cultivation of tobacco a profitable enterprise. The country was new,
and the physical obstructions in the way of civilization numerous and
formidable. Of course all could not pursue the one path that led to
agriculture. Mechanic and trade folk were in great demand. Laborers
were scarce, and the few that could be obtained commanded high wages.
The Negro slave's labor could be made as cheap as his master's
conscience and heart were small. Cheaper labor became the cry on every
hand, and the Negro was the desire of nearly all white men in the
colony.[420] In 1671 the Legislature passed "_An Act encouraging the
importation of negroes and slaves into_" the colony, which was
followed by another and similar Act in 1692. Two motives inspired the
colony to build up the slave-trade; viz., to have more laborers, and
to get something for nothing. And, as soon as Maryland was known to be
a good market for slaves, the traffic increased with wonderful
rapidity. Slaves soon became the bone and sinew of the working-force
of the colony. They were used to till the fields, to fell the forests,
to assist mechanics, and to handle light crafts along the
water-courses. They were to be found in all homes of opulence and
refinement; and, unfortunately, their presence in such large numbers
did much to lower honorable labor in the estimation of the whites, and
to enervate women in the best white society. While the colonists
persuaded themselves that slavery was an institution indispensable to
the colony, its evil effects soon became apparent. It were impossible
to engage the colony in the slave-trade, and escape the bad results of
such an inhuman enterprise. It made men cruel and avaricious.

It was the motion of individuals to have legislative encouragement
tendered the venders of human flesh and blood; but the time came when
the government of the colony saw that an impost tax upon the slaves
imported into the colony would not impair the trade, while it would
aid the government very materially. In 1696 "_An Act laying an
imposition on negroes, slaves and while persons imported_" into the
colony was passed. It is plain from the reading of the caption of the
above bill, that it was intended to reach three classes of persons;
viz., Negro servants, Negro slaves, and white servants. The word
"imported" means such persons as could not pay their passage, and were
therefore indentured to the master of the vessel. When they arrived,
their time was hired out, if they were free, for a term of years, at
so much per year;[421] but if they were slaves the buyer had to pay
all claims against this species of property before he could acquire a
fee simple in the slave. Some historians have too frequently
misinterpreted the motive and aim of the colonial Legislatures in
imposing an impost tax upon Negroes and other servants imported into
their midst. The fact that the law applied to white persons does not
aid in an interpretation that would credit the makers of the act with
feelings of humanity. A people who could buy and sell wives did not
hesitate to see in the indentured white servants property that ought
to be taxed. Why not? These white servants represented so many dollars
invested, or so many years of labor in prospect! So all persons
imported into the colony of Maryland, "Negroes, slaves, and white
persons," were taxed as any other marketable article. A swift and
remorseless civilization against the stolid forces of nature made men
indiscriminate and cruel in their impulses to obtain. Public sentiment
had been formulated into law: the law contemplated "servants and
slaves" as chattel property; and the political economists of the
Province saw in this species of property rich gains for the
government. It was condition, circumstances, that made the servant or
slave; but at length it was nationality, color.

When, on the threshold of the eighteenth century, "white indentured"
servants were rapidly ceasing to exist under color or sanction of law,
religious bigotry and ecclesiastical intolerance joined hands with the
supporters of Negro slavery in a crusade[422] against the Irish
Catholics. In 1704 the Legislature passed "_An Act imposing three
pence per gallon on rum and wine, brandy and spirits, and twenty
shillings per poll for negroes, for raising a supply to defray the
public charge of this province, and twenty shillings, per poll, on
Irish servants, to prevent the importing too great a number of Irish
papist into this province_." Although this Act was intended to remain
on the statute-books only three years, its life was prolonged by a
supplemental Act, and it disgraced the colony for twenty-one years. As
in New York, so here, the government regarded the slave and Papist
with feelings of hatred and fear. The former was only suited to a
condition of perpetual bondage, the latter to be ostracized and driven
out from before the face of the exclusive Protestants of that period.
Both were cruelly treated; one on account of his face, the other on
account of his faith.

     "Unfortunately for the professors of the Catholic religion,
     by the force of circumstances which it is not necessary to
     detail, their religious persuasions became identified, in
     the public mind, with opposition to the principles of the
     revolution. Their political disfranchisement was the
     consequence. Charles Calvert, the deposed proprietary,
     shared the common fate of his Catholic brethren. Sustained
     and protected by the crown in the enjoyment of his mere
     private rights, the general jealousy of Catholic power
     denied him the government of the province."[423]

A knowledge of the antecedents of the master-class will aid the reader
to a more accurate conception of the character of the institution of
slavery in the colony of Maryland.

It is not very pleasing for the student of history at this time to
remember that the British colonies in North America received into
their early life the worst poison of European society,--the criminal
element. From the first the practice of transporting convicts into the
colonies obtained. And, during the reign of George I., statutes were
passed "authorizing transportation as a commutation punishment for
clergyable felonies." These convicts were transported by private
shippers, and then sold into the colony; and thus it became a gainful
enterprise. From 1700 until 1760 this nefarious and pestiferous
traffic greatly increased. At length it became, as already indicated,
the subject of a special impost tax. Three or four hundred convicts
were imported into the colony annually, and the people began to
complain.[424] In "The Maryland Gazette" of the 30th of July, 1767, a
writer attempted to show that the convict element was not to be
despised, but was rather a desirable addition to the Province. He
says,--

     "I suppose that for these last thirty years, communibus
     annis, there have been at least 600 convicts per year
     imported into this province: and these have probably gone
     into 400 families."

After answering some objections to their importation because of the
contagious diseases likely to be communicated by them, he further
remarks,--

     "This makes at least 400 to one, that they do no injury to
     the country in the way complained of: and the people's
     continuing to buy and receive them so constantly, shows
     plainly the general sense of the country about the matter;
     notwithstanding a few gentlemen seem so angry that convicts
     are imported here at all, and would, if they could, by
     spreading this terror, prevent the people's buying them. I
     confess I am one, says he, who think a young country cannot
     be settled, cultivated, and improved, without people of some
     sort: and that it is much better for the country to receive
     convicts than slaves. The wicked and bad amongst them, that
     come into this province, mostly run away to the northward;
     mix with their people, and pass for honest men: whilst those
     more innocent, and who came for very small offences, serve
     their times out here, behave well, and become useful
     people."

This attempt to justify the _convict trade_ elicited two able and
spirited replies over the signatures of "Philanthropos" and "C.D."
appearing in "Green's Gazette" of 20th of August, 1767, in which the
writer of the first article is handled "with the gloves off."

     "His remarks [says Philanthropos] remind me of the
     observation of a great philosopher, who alleges that there
     is a certain race of men of so selfish a cast, that they
     would even set a neighbour's house on fire, for the
     convenience of roasting an egg at the blaze. That these are
     not the reveries of fanciful speculatists, the author now
     under consideration is in a great measure a proof; for who,
     but a man swayed with the most sordid selfishness, would
     endeavor to disarm the people of all caution against such
     imminent danger, lest their just apprehensions should
     interfere with his little schemes of profit? And who but
     such a man would appear publicly as an advocate for the
     importation of felons, the scourings of jails, and the
     abandoned outcasts of the British nation, as a mode in any
     sort eligible for peopling a young country?"

In another part of his reply he remarks,--

     "In confining the indignation because of their importation
     to a few, and representing that the general sense of the
     people is in favor of this vile importation, he is guilty of
     the most shameful misrepresentation and the grossest
     calumny upon the whole province. What opinion must our
     mother country, and our sister colonies, entertain of our
     virtue, when they see it confidently asserted in the
     Maryland Gazette, that we are fond of peopling our country
     with the most abandoned profligates in the universe? Is this
     the way to purge ourselves from that false and bitter
     reproach, so commonly thrown upon us, _that we are the
     descendants of convicts?_ As far as it has lain in my way to
     be acquainted with the general sentiments of the people upon
     this subject, I solemnly declare, that the most discerning
     and judicious amongst them esteem it the greatest grievance
     imposed upon us by our mother country."

The writer felt that a young country could not be settled "without
people of some sort," and that it was better to secure "convicts than
slaves." Upon what grounds precisely this defender of buying convict
labor based his conclusion that he would rather have "convicts than
slaves" is not known. It could not have been that he believed the
convicts of England more industrious or skilful than Negro slaves? Or,
had he theoretical objections to slavery as a permanent institution?
Perhaps the writer had himself graduated from the criminal class! But
there were gentlemen who differed with him, and couched their
objections to the convict system of importation in very vigorous
English. On the 20th of August, 1767, two articles appeared in
"Greene's Gazette." Says one of these writers,--

     "For who, but a man swayed with the most sordid selfishness,
     would endeavor to disarm the people of all caution against
     such imminent danger, lest their just apprehensions should
     interfere with his little schemes of profit? And who but
     such a man would appear publicly as an advocate for the
     importation of felons, the scourings of jails, and the
     abandoned outcasts of the British nation, as a mode in any
     sort eligible for peopling a young country?"

There can be no doubt but that many of the convicts thus imported,
having served out their time, in a brief season became slave-drivers
and slave-owners. With hearts reduced to flinty hardness in the fires
of unrestrained passions, the convict element, as it became absorbed
in the great free white population of the Province,[425] created a
most positive sentiment in favor of a cruel code for the government of
the Negro slave. There were two motives that inspired the ex-convict
to cruelty to the Negro: to divert attention from himself, and to
persuade himself, in his doubting mind, that the Negro was inferior to
him by _nature_. It was, no doubt, a great undertaking; but the
findings of such a court must have been comforting to an anxious
conscience! The result can be judged. Maryland made a slave-code,
which, for cruelty and general inhumanity, has no equal in the
South.[426] The Maryland laws of 1715 contained, in chapter
forty-four, an act with one hundred and thirty-five sections relating
to Negro slaves. A most rigorous pass-system was established. By
section six, no Negro or other servant was allowed to leave the county
without a pass under the seal of the county in which their master
resided; for which pass the slave or other servant was compelled to
pay ten pounds of tobacco, or one shilling in money. If such persons
were apprehended, a justice of the peace could impose such fines and
inflict such punishment as were fixed by the law applying to runaways.
By the Act of 1723, chapter fifteen, under the caption of "_An Act to
prevent the tumultuous meeting and other irregularities of negroes and
other slaves_," the severity of the laws was increased tenfold.
According to section four, a Negro or other slave who had the temerity
to strike a white person, was to have his ears "_cropt on order of a
Justice_." Section six denies slaves the right of possession of
property: they could not own cattle. Section seven gave authority to
any white man to kill a Negro who resisted an attempt to arrest him;
and by a supplemental Act of 1751, chapter fourteen, the owner of a
slave thus killed was to be paid out of the public treasury. In 1729
an Act was passed providing, that upon the conviction of certain
crimes, Negroes and other slaves shall be not only hanged, but the
body should be quartered, and exposed to public view. When slaves grew
old and infirm in the service of their masters, and the latter were
inspired by a desire to compliment the faithfulness of their servants
by emancipation, the law came in and forbade manumission by the "last
will or testament," or the making free in any way of Negro slaves. It
was a temporary Act, passed in 1752, void of every element of
humanity; and yet it stood as the law of the colony for twenty long
years.

In 1748 the Negro population of Maryland was thirty-six thousand, and
still rapidly increasing.

     "By a 'very accurate census,' taken this year, this was
     found to be the number of white inhabitants in Maryland:--

       +---------+--------+-----------+-----------+---------+
       |         |  FREE. | SERVANTS. | CONVICTS. | TOTAL.  |
       +---------+--------+-----------+-----------+---------+
       |Men      | 24,058 |   3,576   |   1,507   |  29,141 |
       |Women    | 23,521 |   1,824   |     386   |  25,731 |
       |Boys     | 26,637 |   1,048   |      67   |  27,752 |
       |Girls    | 24,141 |     422   |      21   |  24,584 |
       |---------+--------+-----------+-----------+---------+
       |         | 98,357 |   6,870   |   1,981   | 107,208 |
       +---------+--------+-----------+-----------+---------+

     "By the same account the total number of mulattoes in
     Maryland amounted to 3,592; and the total number of Negroes,
     to 42,764. Pres. Stiles' MS. It was reckoned (say the
     authors of Univ. Hist.), that above 2,000 Negro slaves were
     annually imported into Maryland."[427]

In 1756 the blacks had increased to 46,225, and in 1761 to 49,675.
There was nothing in the laws to prohibit the instruction of Negroes,
and yet no one dared to brave public sentiment on that point. The
churches gave no attention or care to the slaves. During the first
half or three-quarters of a century there was an indiscriminate
mingling and marrying among the Negroes and white servants; and,
although this was forbidden by rigid statutes, it went on to a
considerable extent. The half-breed, or Mulatto, population
increased;[428] and so did the number of free Negroes. The contact of
these two elements--of slaves and convicts--was neither prudent nor
healthy. The Negroes suffered from the touch of the moral contagion of
this effete matter driven out of European society. Courted as rather
agreeable companions by the convicts at first, the Negro slaves were
at length treated worse by the ex-convicts than by the most
intelligent and opulent slave-dealers in all the Province. And with no
rights in the courts, incompetent to hold an office of any kind, the
free Negroes were in almost as disagreeable a situation as the slaves.

From the founding of the colony of Maryland in 1632 down to the
Revolutionary War, there is no record left us that any effort was ever
made to cure the most glaring evils of slavery. For the Negro this was
one long, starless night of oppression and outrage. No siren's voice
whispered to him of a distant future, propitious and gracious to
hearts almost insensible to a throb of joy, to minds unconscious of
the feeblest rays of light. Being _absolute_ property, it was the
right of the master to say how much food, or what quantity of
clothing, his slave should have. There were no rules by which a slave
could claim the privilege of ceasing from labor at the close of the
day. No, the master had the same right to work his slaves after
nightfall as to drive his horse morning, noon, and night. Poor
clothes, rough and scanty diet, wretched quarters, overworked,
neglected in body and mind, the Negroes of Maryland had a sore lot.

The Revolution was nearing. Public attention was largely occupied with
the Stamp Act and preparations for hostilities. The Negro was left to
toil on; and, while at this time there was no legislation sought for
slavery, there was nothing done that could be considered hostile to
the institution. The Negroes hailed the mutterings of the distant
thunders of revolution as the precursor of a new era to them. It did
furnish an opportunity for them in Maryland to prove themselves
patriots and brave soldiers. And how far their influence went to
mollify public sentiment concerning them, will be considered in its
appropriate place. Suffice it now to say, that cruel and hurtful,
unjust and immoral, as the institution of slavery was, it had not
robbed the Negro of a lofty conception of the fundamental principles
that inspired white men to resist the arrogance of England; nor did it
impair his enthusiasm in the cause that gave birth to a new republic
amid the shock of embattled arms.


FOOTNOTES:

[414] Dr. Abiel Holmes, in his American Annals, vol. ii. p. 5, says,
"Maryland now contained about thirty-six thousand persons, of white
men from sixteen years of age and upwards, and negroes male, and
female from sixteen to sixty." I infer from this statement that
slavery was in existence in Maryland in 1634; and I cannot find any
thing in history to lead me to doubt but that slavery was born with
the colony.

[415] Cabinet Cyclopædia, vol. i. p. 61.

[416] See Bacon's Laws, also Holmes's Annals, vol. i. p. 250.

[417] The following appeared in the Plantation Laws, printed in London
in 1705: "Where any negro or slave, being in servitude or bondage, is
or shall become Christian, and receive the sacrament of baptism, the
same shall not nor ought not to be deemed, adjudged or construed to be
a manumission or freeing of any such negro or slave, or his or her
issue, from their servitude or bondage, but that notwithstanding they
shall at all times hereafter be and remain in servitude and bondage as
they were before baptism, any opinion, matter or thing to the contrary
notwithstanding."

[418] McSherry's Hist. of Maryland, p. 86.

[419] Freedom and Bondage, vol. i. p. 249.

[420] McMahon's Hist. of Maryland, vol. i. p. 274.

[421] The following form was used for a long time in Maryland for
binding out a servant.

     This Indenture _made the ---- day of ---- in the ---- yeere
     of our Soveraigne Lord King_ Charles,_&c betweene ---- of
     the one party_, and ---- on the _other party_, Witnesseth,
     _that the said ---- doth hereby covenant promise, and grant,
     to and with the said ---- his Executors and Assignes, to
     serve him from the day of the date hereof, untill his first
     and next arrivall in_ Maryland: _and after for and during
     the tearme of ---- yeeres, in such service and imployment,
     as the said ---- or his assignee shall there imploy him,
     according to the custome of the Countrey in the like kind.
     In consideration whereof, the said ---- doth promise and
     grant, to and with the said ---- to pay for his passing, and
     to find him with Meat, Drinke, Apparell and Lodging, with
     other necessaries during the said terme; and at the end of
     the said terme, to give him one whole yeeres provision of
     Corne, and fifty acres of Land, according to the order of
     the countrey. In witnesse whereof, the said ---- hath
     hereunto put his hand and seate, the day and yeere above
     written_.

     Sealed and delivered in the presence of ----

                    --_Relation of the state of Maryland_, pp. 62, 63.


[422] Modern Traveller, vol. i. pp. 122, 123.

[423] McMahon's Maryland, vol. i. p. 278.

[424] 1st Pitkin's United States, p. 133.

[425] McMahone says of this convict element: "The pride of this age
revolts at the idea of going back to such as these, for the roots of a
genealogical tree; and they, whose delight it would be, to trace their
blood through many generations of stupid, sluggish, imbecile
ancestors, with no claim to merit but the name they carry down, will
even submit to be called '_novi homines_,' if a convict stand in the
line of ancestry."

[426] With perhaps the single exception of South Carolina, of which
the reader will learn more farther on.

[427] American Annals.

[428] Dr. Holmes says, "The total number of mulattoes in Maryland
amounted to 3,592," in 1755.




CHAPTER XVII.

THE COLONY OF DELAWARE.

1636-1775.

     THE TERRITORY OF DELAWARE SETTLED IN PART BY SWEDES AND
     DANES, ANTERIOR TO THE YEAR 1678.--THE DUKE OF YORK
     TRANSFERS THE TERRITORY OF DELAWARE TO WILLIAM PENN.--PENN
     GRANTS THE COLONY THE PRIVILEGE OF SEPARATE
     GOVERNMENT.--SLAVERY INTRODUCED ON THE DELAWARE AS EARLY AS
     1636.--COMPLAINT AGAINST PETER ALRICKS FOR USING OXEN AND
     NEGROES BELONGING TO THE COMPANY.--THE FIRST LEGISLATION ON
     THE SLAVERY QUESTION IN THE COLONY.--AN ENACTMENT OF A LAW
     FOR THE BETTER REGULATION OF SERVANTS.--AN ACT RESTRAINING
     MANUMISSION.


Anterior to the year 1638, the territory now occupied by the State of
Delaware was settled in part by Swedes and Danes. It has been recorded
of them that they early declared that it was "not lawful to buy and
keep slaves."[429] But the Dutch claimed the territory. When New
Netherlands was ceded to the Duke of York, Delaware was occupied by
his representatives. On the 24th of August, 1682, the Duke transferred
that territory to William Penn.[430] But in 1703 Penn surrendered the
old form of government, and gave the Delaware counties the privilege
of a separate administration under the _Charter of Privileges_.
Delaware inaugurated a legislature, but remained under the Council and
Governor of Pennsylvania. But slavery made its appearance on the
Delaware as early as 1636.[431]

     "At this early period there appears to have been slavery on
     the Delaware. As one Coinclisse was 'condemned, on the 3d of
     February, to serve the company with the blacks on South
     River for wounding a soldier at Fort Amsterdam. He was also
     to pay a fine to the fiscal, and damages to the wounded
     soldier.' On the 22d, a witness testifying in the case of
     Governor Van Twiller, (the governor of New Neitherlands
     before Kieft,) who was charged with neglect and
     mismanagement of the company's affairs, said that 'he had
     in his custody for Van Twiller, at Fort Hope and Nassau,
     twenty-four to thirty goats, and that _three negroes bought
     by the director_ in 1636, were since employed in his private
     service.' Thus it will be seen that slavery was introduced
     on the Delaware as early as 1636, though probably not in
     this State, as the Dutch at that time had no settlement
     here."[432]

And on the 15th of September, 1657, complaint was made that Peter
Alricks had "used the company's oxen and negroes;" thus showing that
there were quite a number of Negroes in the colony at the time
mentioned. In September, 1661, there was a meeting between Calvert,
D'Hinoyossa, Peter Alricks, and two Indian chiefs, to negotiate terms
of peace. At this meeting the Marylanders agreed to furnish the Dutch
annually three thousand hogsheads of tobacco, provided the Dutch would
"supply them with negroes and other commodities."[433] Negroes were
numerous, and an intercolonial traffic in slaves was established.

The first legislation on the slavery question in the colony of
Delaware was had in 1721. "_An Act for the trial of Negroes_" provided
that two justices and six freeholders should have full power to try
"negro and mulatto slaves" for heinous offences. In case slaves were
executed, the Assembly paid the owner two-thirds the value of such
slave. It forbade convocations of slaves, and made it a misdemeanor to
carry arms. During the same year an Act was passed punishing adultery
and fornication. In case of children of a white woman by a slave, the
county court bound them out until they were thirty-one years of age.
In 1739 the Legislature passed an Act for the better regulation of
servants and slaves, consisting of sixteen articles. It provided that
no indentured servant should be sold into another government without
the approval of at least one justice. Such servant could not be
assigned over except before a justice. If a person manumitted a slave,
good security was required: if he failed to do this, the manumission
was of no avail. If free Negroes did not care for their children, they
were liable to be bound out. In 1767 the Legislature passed another
Act restraining manumission. It recites:--

     "SECTION 2. _And be it enacted by the honorable John Penn,
     esq. with his Majesty's royal approbation, Lieutenant
     Governor and Commander in Chief of the counties of
     New-Castle, Kent and Sussex, upon Delaware, and province of
     Pennsylvania, under the honorable Thomas Penn and Richard
     Penn, esquires, true and absolute proprietaries of the said
     counties and province, by and with the advice and consent of
     the Representatives of the freemen of the said counties, in
     General Assembly met, and by the authority of the same_,
     That if any master or mistress shall, by will or otherwise,
     discharge or set free any Mulatto or Negro slave or slaves;
     he or she, or his or her executors or administrators, at the
     next respective County Court of Quarter Sessions, shall
     enter into a recognizance with sufficient sureties, to be
     taken in the name of the Treasurer of the said county for
     the time being, in the sum of Sixty Pounds for each slave so
     set free, to indemnify the county from any charge they or
     any of them may be unto the same, in case of such Negro or
     Mulattoe's being sick, or otherwise rendered incapable to
     support him or herself; and that until such recognizance be
     given, no such Negro or Mulatto shall be deemed free."[434]

The remainder of the slave code in this colony was like unto those of
the other colonies, and therefore need not be described. Negroes had
no rights, ecclesiastical or political. They had no property, nor
could they communicate a relation of any character. They had no
religious or secular training, and none of the blessings of home life.
Goaded to the performance of the most severe tasks, their only audible
reply was an occasional growl. It sent a feeling of terror through
their inhuman masters, and occasioned them many ugly dreams.


FOOTNOTES:

[429] Dr. Stevens in his History of Georgia, vol. i. p. 288, says, "In
the Swedish and German colony, which Gustavus Adolphus planted in
Delaware, and which in many points resembled the plans of the
Trustees, negro servitude was disallowed." But he gives no authority,
I regret.

[430] See Laws of Delaware, vol. i. Appendix, pp. 1-4.

[431] Albany Records, vol. ii, p. 10.

[432] Vincent's History of Delaware, p. 159.

[433] Ibid., p. 381.

[434] Laws of Delaware, vol. i. p. 436.




CHAPTER XVIII.

THE COLONY OF CONNECTICUT.

1646-1775.

     THE FOUNDING OF CONNECTICUT, 1631-36.--NO RELIABLE DATA
     GIVEN FOR THE INTRODUCTION OF SLAVES.--NEGROES WERE FIRST
     INTRODUCED SOME DURING THE EARLY YEARS OF THE
     COLONY.--"COMMITTEE FOR TRADE AND FOREIGN
     PLANTATIONS."--INTERROGATING THE GOVERNOR AS THE NUMBER OF
     NEGROES IN THE COLONY IN 1680.--THE LEGISLATURE (1690)
     PASSES A LAW PERTAINING TO THE PURCHASE AND TREATMENT OF
     SLAVES AND FREE PERSONS.--AN ACT PASSED BY THE GENERAL COURT
     IN 1711, REQUIRING PERSONS MANUMITTING SLAVES TO MAINTAIN
     THEM.--REGULATING THE SOCIAL CONDUCT OF SLAVES IN 1723.--THE
     PUNISHMENT OF NEGRO, INDIAN, AND MULATTO SLAVES, FOR THE USE
     OF PROFANE LANGUAGE, IN 1630.--LAWFULNESS OF INDIAN AND
     NEGRO SLAVERY RECOGNIZED BY CODE, SEPT. 5, 1646.--LIMITED
     RIGHTS OF FREE NEGROES IN THE COLONY.--NEGRO POPULATIONS IN
     1762.--ACT AGAINST IMPORTATION OF SLAVES, 1774.


Although the colony of Connecticut was founded between the years 1631
and 1636, there are to be found no reliable data by which to fix the
time of the introduction of slavery there.[435] Like the serpent's
entrance into the Garden of Eden, slavery entered into this colony
stealthily; and its power for evil was discovered only when it had
become a formidable social and political element. Vessels from the
West Coast of Africa, from the West Indies, and from Barbadoes, landed
Negroes for sale in Connecticut during the early years of its
settlement. And for many years slavery existed here, without sanction
of law, it is true, but perforce of custom. Negroes were bought as
laborers and domestics, and it was a long time before their number
called for special legislation. But, like a cancer, slavery grew until
there was not a single colony in North America that could boast of its
ability to check the dreadful curse. When the first slaves were
introduced into this colony, can never be known; but, that there were
Negro slaves from the beginning, we have the strongest historical
presumption. For nearly two decades there was no reference made to
slavery in the records of the colony.

In 1680 "the Committee for Trade and Foreign Plantations" addressed to
the governors of the North-American plantations or colonies a series
of questions. Among the twenty-seven questions put to Gov. Leete of
Connecticut, were two referring to Negroes. The questions were as
follows:--

     "17. What number of English, Scotch, Irish or Forreigners
     have (for these seaven yeares last past, or any other space
     of time) come yearly to plant and inhabit within your
     Corporation. And also, what Blacks and Slaves have been
     brought in within the said time, and att what rates?

     "18. What number of Whites, Blacks or Mulattos have been
     born and christened, for these seaven yeares last past, or
     any other space of time, for as many yeares as you are able
     to state on account of?"[436]

To these the governor replied as follows:--

     "17. _Answ_. For English, Scotts and Irish, there are so few
     come in that we cannot give a certain acco't. Som yeares
     come none; sometimes, a famaly or two, in a year. And for
     Blacks, there comes sometimes 3 or 4 in a year from
     Barbadoes; and they are sold usually at the rate of 22'li. a
     piece, sometimes more and sometimes less, according as men
     can agree with the master of vessells, or merchants that
     bring them hither.

     "18. _Answ_. We can give no acco't. of the perfect number of
     either born; but fewe blacks; and but two blacks christened,
     as we know of."[437]

It is evident that the number of slaves was not great at this time,
and that they were few and far between. The sullen and ofttimes
revengeful spirit of the Indians had its effect upon the few Negro
slaves in the colony. Sometimes they were badly treated by their
masters, and occasionally they would run away. The country was new,
the settlements scattered; and slavery as an institution, at this time
and in this colony, in its infancy. The spirit of insubordination
among the slave population seemed to call aloud for legislative
restriction. In October, 1690, the Legislature passed the following
bill:--

     "Whereas many persons of this Colony doe for their necessary
     use purchase negroe seruants, and often times the sayd
     seruants run away to the great wronge, damage and
     disapoyntment of their masters and owners, for prevention of
     which for [221] the future, as much as || may be, it is
     ordered by this Court that Whateuer negroe or negroes shall
     hereafter, at any time, be fownd wandring out of the towne
     bownds or place to which they doe belong, without a ticket
     or pass from the authority, or their masters or owners,
     shall be stopt and secured by any of the inhabitants, or
     such as shall meet with them, and brought before the next
     authority to be examined and returned to their owners, who
     shall sattisfy for the charge if any be; and all ferrymen
     within this Colony are hereby required not to suffer any
     negroe without such certificate, to pass over their ferry by
     assisting them therein, upon the penalty of twenty
     shillings, to be payd as a fine to the county treasury, and
     to be leuyed upon theire estates for non-payment in way of
     distresse by warrant from any one Assistant or Com'r. This
     order to be observed as to vagrant and susspected persons
     fownd wandring from town to town, hauveing no passes; such
     to be seized for examination and farther disspose by the
     authority; and if any negroes are free and for themselves,
     travelling without such ticket or certificate, they to bear
     the charge themselves of their takeing up."[438]

The general air of complaint that pervades the above bill leads to the
conclusion that it was required by an alarming state of affairs. The
pass-system was a copy from the laws of the older colonies where
slavery had long existed. By implication free Negroes had to secure
from the proper authorities a certificate of freedom; and the bill
required them to carry it, or pay the cost of arrest.

One of the most palpable evidences of the humanity of the Connecticut
government was the following act passed in May, 1702:--

     "Whereas it is observed that some persons in this Colonie
     having purchased Negro or Malatta Servants or Slaves, after
     they have spent the pricipall part of their time and
     strength in their masters service, doe sett them at liberty,
     and the said slaves not being able to provide necessaries
     for themselves may become a charge and burthen to the towns
     where they have served: for prevention whereof,

     "It is ordered and enacted by this Court and the authority
     thereof: That every person in this Colonie that now is or
     hereafter shall be owner of a negro or mulatta servant or
     slave, and after some time of his or her being taken into
     imployment in his or her service, shall sett such servant or
     slave at liberty to provide for him or herselfe, if
     afterwards such servant or slave shall come to want, every
     such servant shall be relieved at the onely cost and charge
     of the person in whose service he or she was last reteined
     or taken, and by whome sett at liberty, or at the onely cost
     and charge of his or her heirs, executors or administrators,
     any law, usage or custome to the contrary
     notwithstanding."[439]

Massachusetts had acted and did act very cowardly about this matter.
But Connecticut showed great wisdom and humanity in making a just and
equitable provision for such poor and decrepit slaves as might find
themselves turned out to charity after a long life of unrequited
toil. Slavery was in itself "the sum of all villanies,"--the blackest
curse that ever scourged the earth. To buy and sell human beings; to
tear from the famishing breast of the mother her speechless child; to
separate the husband from the wife of his heart; to wring riches from
the unpaid toil of human beings; to tear down the family altar, and
let lecherous beasts, who claim the name of "Christian," run over
defenceless womanhood as swine over God's altar!--is there any thing
worse, do you ask? Yes! To work a human being from youth to old age,
to appropriate the labor of that being exclusively, to rob it of the
blessings of this life, to poison every domestic charity, to fetter
the intellect by the power of fatal ignorance, to withhold the
privileges of the gospel of love; and then, when the hollow cough
comes under an inclement sky, when the shadows slant, when the hand
trembles, when the gait is shuffling, when the ear is deaf, the eye
dim, when desire faileth,--then to turn that human being out to die is
by far the profoundest crime man can be guilty of in his dealings with
mankind! And slavery had so hardened men's hearts, that the above act
was found to be necessary to teach the alphabet of human kindness. No
wonder human forbearance was strained to its greatest tension when
masters, thus liberating their slaves, assumed the lofty air of
humanitarians who had actually done a noble act in manumitting a
slave!

In 1708 the General Court was called upon to legislate against the
commercial communion that had gone on between the slaves and free
persons in an unrestricted manner for a long time. Slaves would often
steal articles of household furniture, wares, clothing, etc., and sell
them to white persons. And, in order to destroy the ready market this
wide-spread kleptomania found, an Act was passed making it a
misdemeanor for a free person to purchase any article from slaves. It
is rather an interesting law, and is quoted in full.

     "Whereas divers rude and evil minded persons for the sake of
     filthie lucre do frequently receive from Indians, malattoes
     and negro servants, money and goods stolen or obteined by
     other indirect and unlawful means, thereby incouraging such
     servants to steal from their masters and others: for redress
     whereof,

     [35] _Be it enacted by the Governour, Council and
     Representatives, in General Court assembled, and by the
     authoritie of the same_, That every free person whomsoever,
     which shall presume either openly or privately to buy or
     receive of or from any Indian, molato or negro servant or
     slave, any goods, money, merchandize, wares, or provisions,
     without order from the master or mistress of such servant
     or slave, every person so offending and being thereof
     convicted, shall be sentenced to restore all such money,
     goods, wares, merchandizes, or provisions, unto the partie
     injured, in specie, (if not altered,) and also forfeit to
     the partie double the value thereof over and above, or
     treble the value where the same are disposed of or made
     away. And if the person so offending be unable, or shall not
     make restitution as awarded, then to be openly whipt with so
     many stripes (not exceeding twentie,) as the court or
     justices that have cognizance of such offence shall order,
     or make satisfaction by service. And the Indian, negro, or
     molatto servant or slave, of or from whom such goods, money,
     wares, merchandizes or provisions shall be received or
     bought, if it appear to be stolen, or that shall steal any
     money, goods, or chattells, and be thereof convicted,
     although the buyer or receiver be not found, shall be
     punished by whipping not exceeding thirtie stripes, and the
     money, goods or chattels shall be restored to the partie
     injured, if it be found. And every assistant and justice of
     peace in the countie where such offence is committed, is
     hereby authorized to hear and determine all offences against
     this law, provided the damage exceed not the sum of fortie
     shillings."[440]

On the same day another act was passed, charging that as Mulatto and
Negro slaves had become numerous in parts of the colony, destined to
become insubordinate, abusive of white people, etc., and is as
follows:--

     "And whereas negro and molatto servants or slaves are become
     numerous in some parts of this Colonie, and are very apt to
     be turbulent, and often quarrelling with white people to the
     great disturbance of the peace:

     "_It is therefore ordered and enacted by the Governour,
     Council and Representatives, in General Court assembled, and
     by the authoritie of the same_, That if any negro or malatto
     servant or slave disturb the peace, or shall offer to strike
     any white person, and be thereof convicted, such negro or
     malatto servant or slave shall be punished by whipping, at
     the discretion of the court, assistant or justice of the
     peace that shall have cognizance thereof, not exceeding
     thirtie stripes for one offence."[441]

In 1711 the General Court of Connecticut Colony signally distinguished
itself by the passage of an act in harmony with that of 1702. It was
found that indentured servants as well as slaves had been made the
victims of the cruel policy of turning slaves and servants out into
the world without means of support after they had become helpless, or
had served out their time. This class of human beings had been cast
aside, like a squeezed lemon, to be trodden under the foot of men. The
humane and thoughtful men of the colony demanded a remedy at law, and
it came in the following admirable bill:--

     "An Act relating to Slaves, and such in particular as shall
     happen to become Servants for Time.

     "_It is ordered and enacted by the Governour, Council and
     Representatives, in General Court assembled, and by the
     authority of the same_, That all slaves set at liberty by
     their owners, and all negro, malatto, or Spanish Indians,
     who are servants to masters for time, in case they come to
     want, after they shall be so set at liberty, or the time of
     their said service be expired, shall be relieved by such
     owners or masters respectively, their heirs, executors, or
     administrators; and upon their, or either of their refusal
     so to do, the said slaves and servants shall be relieved by
     the selectmen of the towns to which they belong, and the
     said selectmen shall recover of the said owners or masters,
     their heirs, executors, or administrators, all the charge
     and cost they were at for such relief, in the usual manner
     as in the case of any other debts."[442]

In 1723 an Act was passed regulating the social conduct, and
restricting the personal rights, of slaves. The slaves were quite
numerous at this time, and hence the colonists deemed it proper to
secure repressive legislation. It is strange how anticipatory the
colonies were during the zenith of the slavery institution! They were
always expecting something of the slaves. No doubt they thought that
it would be but the normal action of goaded humanity if the slaves
should rise and cut their masters' throats. The colonists lived in
mortal dread of their slaves, and the character of the legislation was
but the thermometer of their fear. This Act was a slight indication of
the unrest of the people of this colony on the slavery question:--

     "[376] AN ACT TO PREVENT THE DISORDER OF NEGRO AND INDIAN
     SERVANTS AND SLAVES IN THE NIGHT SEASON.

     "_Be it enacted by the Governour, Council and
     Representatives, in General Court assembled, and by the
     authority of the same_, That from and after the publication
     of this act, if any negro or Indian servant or slave shall
     be found abroad from home in the night season, after nine of
     the clock, without special order from his or their master or
     mistress, it shall be lawful for any person or persons to
     apprehend and secure such negro or Indian servant or slave
     so offending, and him or them bring before the next
     assistant or justice of peace; which assistant or justice of
     peace shall have full power to pass sentence upon such negro
     or Indian servant or slave so offending, and order him or
     them to be publickly whipt on his or their naked body, not
     exceeding ten stripes, and pay cost of court, except his or
     their master or mistress shall redeem them by paying a fine
     not exceeding twenty shillings.

     "_And it is hereby enacted by the authority aforesaid_, That
     if any such negro or Indian servant or slave as abovesaid
     shall have entertainment in any house after nine of the
     clock as aforesaid, except to do any business they may be
     sent upon, the head of the family that entertaineth or
     tolerates them in his or their house, or any the
     dependencies thereof, and being convicted thereof before any
     one assistant or justice of the peace, who shall have power
     to hear and determine the same, shall forfeit the sum of
     twenty shillings, one-half to the complainer and the other
     half to the treasury of the town where the offence is
     committed; any law or usage to the contrary notwithstanding.
     And that it shall be the duty of the several grand-jurors
     and constables and tything-men, to make diligent enquiry
     into and present of all breaches of this act."[443]

The laws regulating slavery in the colony of Connecticut, up to this
time, had stood, and been faithfully enforced. There had been a few
infractions of the law, but the guilty had been punished. And in
addition to statutory regulation of slaves, the refractory ones were
often summoned to the bar of public opinion and dealt with summarily.
Individual owners of slaves felt themselves at liberty to use the
utmost discretion in dealing with this species of their property. So
on every hand the slave found himself scrutinized, suspicioned,
feared, hated, and hounded by the entire community of whites who were
by law a perpetual _posse comitatus_. The result of too great
vigilance and severe censorship was positive and alarming. It made the
slave desperate. It intoxicated him with a malice that would brook no
restraint. It is said that the use of vigorous adjectives and strong
English is a relief to one in moments of trial. But even this was
denied the oppressed slaves in Connecticut; for in May, 1730, a bill
was passed punishing them for using strong language.

     "AN ACT FOR THE PUNISHMENT OF NEGROES, INDIAN AND MULATTO
     SLAVES, FOR SPEAKING DEFAMATORY WORDS.

     "_Be it enacted by the Governour, Council and
     Representatives, in General Court assembled, and by the
     authority of the same_, That if any Negro, Indian or Molatto
     slave shall utter, publish and speak such words of any
     person that would by law be actionable if the same were
     uttered, published or spoken by any free person of any
     other, such Negro, Indian or Molatto slave, being thereof
     convicted before any one assistant or justice of the peace,
     (who are hereby impowred to hear and determine the same,)
     shall be punished by whipping, at the discretion of the
     assistant or justice before whom the tryal is, (respect
     being had to the circumstances of the case,) not exceeding
     forty stripes. And the said slave, so convict, shall be sold
     to defray all charges arising thereby, unless the same be by
     his or their master or mistress paid and answered, &c."[444]

The above act is the most remarkable document in this period of its
kind. And yet there are two noticeable features in it: viz., the
slave is to be proceeded against the same as if he were a free person;
and he was to be entitled to offer evidence, enter his plea, and
otherwise defend himself against the charge. This was more than was
allowed in any of the other colonies.

On the 9th of September, 1730, Gov. J. Talcott, in a letter to the
"Board of Trade," said that there were "about 700 Indian and Negro
slaves" in the colony. The most of these were Negro slaves. For on the
8th of July, 1715, a proclamation was issued by the governor against
the importation of Indians;[445] and on the 13th of October, 1715, a
bill was passed "_prohibiting the Importation or bringing into_" the
colony any Indian slaves. It was an exact copy of the Act of May,
1712, passed in the colony of Massachusetts.

The colony of Connecticut never established slavery by direct statute;
but in adopting a code which was ordered by the General Court of
Hartford to be "copied by the secretary into the book of public
records," it gave the institution legal sanction. This code was signed
on the 5th of September, 1646. It recognized the lawfulness of Indian
and Negro slavery. This was done under the confederacy of the "United
Colonies of New England."[446] For some reason the part of the code
recognizing slavery is omitted from the revised laws of 1715. In this
colony, as in Massachusetts, only members of the church, "and living
within the jurisdiction," could be admitted to the rights of freemen.
In 1715 an Act was passed requiring persons who desired to become
"freemen of this corporation," to secure a certificate from the
selectmen that they were "persons of quiet and peaceable behavior and
civil conversation, of the age of twenty-one years, and freeholders."
This provision excluded all free Negroes. It was impossible for one to
secure such a certificate. Public sentiment alone would have frowned
upon such an innovation upon the customs and manners of the Puritans.
On the 17th of May, 1660, the following Act was passed: "It is ordered
by this court, that neither Indian nor negar serv'ts shall be required
to traine, watch or ward in the Collo:"[447]

To determine the status of the Negro here, this Act was necessary. He
might be free, own his own labor; but if the law excluded him from the
periodical musters and trainings, from the church and civil duties,
his freedom was a mere _misnomer_. It is difficult to define the
rights of a free Negro in this colony. He was restricted in his
relations with the slaves, and in his intercourse with white people
was regarded with suspicion. If he had, in point of law, the right to
purchase property, the general prejudice that confronted him on every
hand made his warmest friends judiciously conservative. There were no
provisions made for his intellectual or spiritual growth. He was
regarded by both the religious and civil government, under which he
lived, as a heathen. Even his accidental conversion could not change
his condition, nor mollify the feelings of the white Christians (?)
about him. Like the wild animal, he was possessed with the barest
privilege of getting something to eat. Beyond this he had nothing.
Everywhere he turned, he felt the withering glance of a suspicious
people. Prejudice and prescriptive legislation cast their dark shadows
on his daily path; and the conscious superiority of the whites
consigned him to the severest drudgery for his daily bread. The
recollection of the past was distressing, the trials and burdens of
the present were almost unbearable, while the future was one shapeless
horror to him.

Perhaps the lowly and submissive acquiescence of the Negroes, bond and
free, had a salutary effect upon the public mind. There is something
awfully grand in an heroic endurance of undeserved pain. The white
Christians married, and were given in marriage; they sowed and
gathered rich harvests; they bought and built happy homes; beautiful
children were born unto them; they built magnificent churches, and
worshipped the true God: the present was joyous, and the future
peopled with sublime anticipation. The contrast of these two peoples
in their wide-apart conditions must have made men reflective. And
added to this came the loud thunders of the Revolution. Connecticut
had her orators, and they touched the public heart with the glowing
coals of patriotic resolve. They felt the insecurity of their own
liberties, and were now willing to pronounce in favor of the liberty
of the Negroes. The inconsistency of asking for freedom, praying for
freedom, fighting for freedom, and dying for freedom, when they
themselves held thousands of human beings in bondage the most cruel
the world ever knew, helped the cause of the slave. In 1762 the Negro
population of this colony was four thousand five hundred and
ninety.[448] Public sentiment was aroused on the slavery question;
and in October, 1774, the following prohibition was directed at
slavery:--

     "_Act against importation of slaves_--"No Indian, negro, or
     mulatto slave shall at any time hereafter be brought or
     imported into this State, by sea or land, from any place or
     places whatsoever, to be disposed of, left or sold, within
     this State."[449]

The above bill was brief, but pointed; and showed that Connecticut was
the only one of the New-England colonies that had the honesty and
courage to legislate against slavery. And the patriotism and
incomparable valor of the Negro soldiers of Connecticut, who proudly
followed the Continental flag through the fires of the Revolutionary
War, proved that they were worthy of the humane sentiment that
demanded the Act of 1774.


FOOTNOTES:

[435] In the Capital Laws of Connecticut, passed on the 1st of
December, 1642, the tenth law reads as follows. "10. If any man
stealeth a man or mankind, he shall be put to death. Ex. 21 16." But
this was the law in Massachusetts, and yet slavery existed there for
one hundred and forty-three (143) years.

[436] Conn. Col. Recs., 1678-89, p. 293.

[437] Ibid., p. 298.

[438] Conn Col Recs., 1689-1706, p. 40

[439] Ibid. 1689-1706, pp. 375, 376.

[440] Conn. Col. Recs., 1706-16, p. 52.

[441] Ibid., pp 51, 53.

[442] Conn. Col. Recs., 1706-16, p. 233.

[443] Conn. Col. Recs., 1717-25, pp. 390, 391.

[444] Ibid., 1726-35, p. 290.

[445] Conn. Col. Recs., 1706-16, pp. 515, 516.

[446] Hazard, State Papers, vol. ii. pp. 1-6.

[447] Conn. Col. Recs., vol. i. p. 349.

[448] Pres. Stiles's MSS.

[449] Freedom and Bondage, vol. i. pp. 272, 273.




CHAPTER XIX.

THE COLONY OF RHODE ISLAND.

1647-1775.

     COLONIAL GOVERNMENT IN RHODE ISLAND, MAY, 1647.--AN ACT
     PASSED TO ABOLISH SLAVERY IN 1652, BUT WAS NEVER
     ENFORCED.--AN ACT SPECIFYING WHAT TIMES INDIAN AND NEGRO
     SLAVES SHOULD NOT APPEAR IN THE STREETS.--AN IMPOST-TAX ON
     SLAVES (1708).--PENALTIES IMPOSED ON DISOBEDIENT
     SLAVES.--ANTI-SLAVERY SENTIMENT IN THE COLONIES RECEIVES
     LITTLE ENCOURAGEMENT.--CIRCULAR LETTER FROM THE BOARD OF
     TRADE TO THE GOVERNOR OF THE ENGLISH COLONIES RELATIVE TO
     NEGRO SLAVES.--GOVERNOR CRANSTON'S REPLY.--LIST OF
     MILITIA-MEN, INCLUDING WHITE AND BLACK SERVANTS.--ANOTHER
     LETTER FROM THE BOARD OF TRADE.--AN ACT PREVENTING
     CLANDESTINE IMPORTATIONS AND EXPORTATION OF PASSENGERS,
     NEGROES, OR INDIAN SLAVES.--MASTERS OF VESSELS REQUIRED TO
     REPORT THE NAMES AND NUMBER OF PASSENGERS TO THE
     GOVERNOR.--VIOLATION OF THE IMPOST-TAX LAW ON SLAVES
     PUNISHED BY SEVERE PENALTIES.--APPROPRIATION BY THE GENERAL
     ASSEMBLY, JULY 5, 1715, FROM THE FUND DERIVED FROM THE
     IMPOST-TAX, FOR THE PAVING OF THE STREETS OF NEWPORT.--AN
     ACT PASSED DISPOSING OF THE MONEY RAISED BY
     IMPOST-TAX.--IMPOST-LAW REPEALED, MAY, 1732.--AN ACT
     RELATING TO FREEING MULATTO AND NEGRO SLAVES PASSED
     1728.--AN ACT PASSED PREVENTING MASTERS OF VESSELS FROM
     CARRYING SLAVES OUT OF THE COLONY, JUNE 17, 1757.--EVE OF
     THE REVOLUTION.--AN ACT PROHIBITING IMPORTATION OF NEGROES
     INTO THE COLONY IN 1774.--THE POPULATION OF RHODE ISLAND IN
     1730 AND 1774.


Individual Negroes were held in bondage in Rhode Island from the time
of the formation of the colonial government there, in May, 1647, down
to the close of the eighteenth century. Like her sister colonies, she
early took the poison of the slave-traffic into her commercial life,
and found it a most difficult political task to rid herself of it. The
institution of slavery was never established by statute in this
colony; but it was so firmly rooted five years after the establishment
of the government, that it required the positive and explicit
prohibition of law to destroy it. On the 19th of May, 1652, the
General Court passed the following Act against slavery. It is the
earliest positive prohibition against slavery in the records of modern
nations.

     "Whereas, there is a common course practiced amongst English
     men to buy negers, to that end they may have them for
     service or slaves forever; for the preventinge of such
     practices among us, let it be ordered, that no blacke
     mankind or white being forced by covenant bond, or
     otherwise, to serve any man or his assighnes longer than ten
     yeares, or until they come to bee twentie-four yeares of
     age, if they bee taken in under fourteen, from the time of
     their cominge within the liberties of this Collonie. And at
     the end or terme of ten yeares to sett them free, as the
     manner is with the English servants. And that man that will
     not let them goe free, or shall sell them away elsewhere, to
     that end that they may bee enslaved to others for a long
     time, hee or they shall forfeit to the Collonie forty
     pounds."[450]

The above law was admirable, but there was lacking the public
sentiment to give it practical force in the colony. It was never
repealed, and yet slavery flourished under it for a century and a
half. Mr. Bancroft says, "The law was not enforced, but the principle
lived among the people."[451] No doubt the principle lived among the
people; but, practically, they did but little towards emancipating
their slaves until the Revolutionary War cloud broke over their homes.
There is more in the statement Mr. Bancroft makes than the casual
reader is likely to discern.

The men who founded Rhode Island, or Providence Plantation as it was
called early, were of the highest type of Christian gentlemen. They
held advanced ideas on civil government and religious liberty. They
realized, to the full, the enormity of the sinfulness of slavery; but
while they hesitated to strike down what many men pronounced a
necessary social evil, it grew to be an institution that governed more
than it could be governed. The institution was established. Slaves
were upon the farms, in the towns, and in the families, of those who
could afford to buy them. The population of the colony was small; and
to manumit the slaves in whom much money was invested, or to suddenly
cut off the supply from without, was more than the colonists felt able
to perform. The spirit was willing, but the flesh was weak.

For a half-century there was nothing done by the General Court to
check or suppress the slave-trade, though the Act of 1652 remained the
law of the colony. The trade was not extensive. No vessels from Africa
touched at Newport or Providence. The source of supply was Barbadoes;
and, occasionally, some came by land from other colonies. Little was
said for or against slavery during this period. It was a question
difficult to handle. The sentiment against it was almost unanimous. It
was an evil; but how to get rid of it, was the most important thing to
be considered. During this period of perplexity, there was an ominous
silence on slavery. The conservatism of the colonists produced the
opposite in the Negro population. They began to think and talk about
their "rights." The Act of 1652 had begun to bear fruit. At the
expiration of ten years' service, slaves began to demand their
freedom-papers. This set the entire Negro class in a state of
expectancy. Their eagerness for liberty was interpreted by the more
timid among the whites as the signal for disorder. A demand was made
for legislation that would curtail the personal liberties of the
Negroes in the evenings. It is well to produce the Act of Jan. 4,
1703, that the reader may see the similarity of the laws passed in the
New-England colonies against Negroes:--

     "An Act to restrict negroes and Indians for walking in
     unseasonable times in the night, and at other times not
     allowable.

     "Voted, Be it enacted by this Assembly and the authority
     thereof, and it is hereby enacted, If any negroes or
     Indians, either freemen, servants, or slaves, do walk in the
     streets of the town of Newport, of any other town in this
     Collony, after nine of the clock of the night, without a
     certificate from their masters, or some English person of
     said family with them, or some lawfull excuse for the same,
     that it shall be lawfull for any person to take them up and
     deliver them to a Constable, to be secured, or see them
     secured, till the next morning, and then to be brought
     before some Justice of the Peace in said town, to be dealt
     withall, according to the recited Act, which said Justice
     shall cause said person or persons so offending, to be
     whipped at the publick whipping post in said town, not
     exceeding fifteen stripes upon their naked backs, except
     their incorrigible behavior require more. And all free
     negroes and free Indians to be under the same penalty,
     without a lawful excuse for their so being found walking in
     the streets after such unseasonable time of night.

     "And be it further enacted, All and every house keeper,
     within said town or towns or Collony, that shall entertain
     men's servants, either negroes or Indians, without leave of
     their masters or to whom they do belong, after said set time
     of the night before mentioned, and being convicted of the
     same before any one Justice of the Peace, he or they shall
     pay for each his defect five shillings in money, to be for
     the use of the poor in the town where the person lives; and
     if refused to be paid down, to be taken by distraint by a
     warrant to any one Constable, in said town; any Act to the
     contrary notwithstanding."[452]

It is rather remarkable that this Act should prohibit free Negroes and
free Indians from walking the streets after nine o'clock. In this
particular this bill had no equal in any of the other colonies. This
act seemed to be aimed with remarkable precision at the Negroes as a
class, both bond and free. The influence of free Negroes upon the
slaves had not been in harmony with the condition of the latter; and
the above Act was intended as a reminder, in part, to free Negroes
and Indians. It went to show that there was but little meaning in the
word "free," when placed before a Negro's name. No such restriction
could have been placed upon the personal rights of a white colonist;
for, under the democratical government of the colony, a subject was
greater than the government. No law could stand that was inimical to
his rights as a freeman. But the free Negro had no remedy at law. He
was literally between two conditions, bondage and freedom.

Attention has been called to the fact, that the Act of 1652 was never
enforced. In April, 1708, an Act, laying an impost-tax upon slaves
imported into the colony, was passed which really gave legal sanction
to the slave-trade.[453] The following is the Act referred to:--

     "And it is further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that
     whereas, by an act of Assembly, in February last past,
     concerning the importing negroes, one article of said act,
     expressing that three pounds money shall be paid into the
     treasury for each negro imported into this colony; but upon
     exporting such negro in time limited in said act, said three
     pounds were to be drawn out of the treasury again by the
     importer:

     "It is hereby enacted, that said sum for the future, shall
     not be drawn out, but there continued for the use in said
     act expressed; any act to the contrary,
     notwithstanding."[454]

The Act referred to as having passed "in February last past," cannot
be found.[455] But, from the one quoted above, it is to be inferred
that two objects were aimed at, viz.: First, under the codes of
Massachusetts and Virginia, a drawback was allowed to an importer of a
Negro who exported him within a stated time: the Rhode-Island Act of
"February" had allowed importers this privilege. Second,
notwithstanding the loud-sounding Act of 1652, this colony was not
only willing to levy an impost-tax upon all slaves imported, but, in
her greed for "blood money," even denied the importer the mean
privilege, in exporting his slave, of drawing his rebate! The
consistency of Rhode Island must have been a jewel that the other
colonies did not covet.

The last section of the Act of 1703 was directed against "house
keepers," who were to be fined for entertaining Negro or Indian
slaves after nine o'clock. In 1708 another Act was passed,
supplemental to the one of 1703, and added stripes as a penalty for
non-payment of fines. Many white persons in the larger towns had grown
rather friendly towards the slaves; and, even where they did not speak
out in public against the enslavement of human beings, their hearts
led them to the performance of many little deeds of kindness. They
discovered many noble attributes in the Negro character, and were not
backward in expressing their admiration. When summoned before a
justice, and fined for entertaining Negroes after nine o'clock, they
paid the penalty with a willingness and alacrity that alarmed the
slave-holding caste. This was regarded as treason. Some could not pay
the fine, and, hence, went free. The new Act intended to remedy this.
It was as follows:--

     "An Act to prevent the entertainment of Negroes, &c.

     "Whereas, there is a law in this colony to suppress any
     persons from entertaining of negro slaves or Indian servants
     that are not their own, in their houses, or unlawfully
     letting them have strong drink, whereby they were damnified,
     such persons were to pay a fine of five shillings, and so by
     that means go unpunished, there being no provision made [of]
     what corporeal punishment they should have, if they have not
     wherewith to pay:

     "Therefore, it is now enacted, that any such delinquent that
     shall so offend, if he or she shall not have or procure the
     sum of ten shillings for each defect, to be paid down before
     the authority before whom he or she hath been legally
     convicted, he or she shall be by order of said authority,
     publicly whipped upon their naked back, not exceeding ten
     stripes; any act to the contrary, notwithstanding. "[456]

It is certain that what little anti-slavery sentiment there was in the
British colonies in North America during the first century of their
existence received no encouragement from Parliament. From the
beginning, the plantations in this new world in the West were regarded
as the hotbeds in which slavery would thrive, and bring forth abundant
fruit, to the great gain of the English government. All the
appointments made by the crown were expected to be in harmony with the
plans to be carried out in the colonies. From the settlement of
Jamestown down to the breaking out of the war, and the signing of the
Declaration of Independence, not a single one of the royal governors
ever suffered his sense of duty to the crowned heads to be warped by
local views on "the right of slavery." The Board of Trade was
untiring in its attention to the colonies. And no subject occupied
greater space in the correspondence of that colossal institution than
slavery. The following circular letter, addressed to the governors of
the colonies, is worthy of reproduction here, rather than in the
Appendix. It is a magnificent window, that lets the light in upon a
dark subject. It gives a very fair idea of the profound concern that
the home government had in foreign and domestic slavery.

     "CIRCULAR LETTER FROM THE BOARD OF TRADE TO THE GOVERNORS OF
     THE ENGLISH COLONIES, RELATIVE TO NEGRO SLAVES.

     "APRIL 17, 1708.

     "Sir: Some time since, the Queen was pleased to refer to us
     a petition relating to the trade of Africa, upon which we
     have heard what the Royal African Company, and the separate
     traders had to offer; and having otherwise informed
     ourselves, in the best manner we could, of the present state
     of that trade, we laid the same before Her Majesty. The
     consideration of that trade came afterwards into the house
     of commons, and a copy of our report was laid before the
     house; but the session being then too far spent to enter
     upon a matter of so great weight, and other business
     intervening, no progress was made therein. However, it being
     absolutely necessary that a trade so beneficial to the
     kingdom should be carried on to the greatest advantage,
     there is no doubt but the consideration thereof will come
     early before the Parliament at their next meeting; and as
     the well supplying of the plantations and colonies with
     sufficient numbers of negroes at reasonable prices, is in
     our opinion the chief point to be considered in regard to
     that trade, and as hitherto we have not been able to know
     how they have been supplied by the company, or by separate
     traders, otherwise than according to the respective accounts
     given by them, which for the most part are founded upon
     calculations made from their exports on one side and the
     other, and do differ so very much, that no certain judgment
     can be made upon those accounts.

     "Wherefore, that we may be able at the next meeting of the
     Parliament to lay before both houses when required, an exact
     and authentic state of that trade, particularly in regard to
     the several plantations and colonies: we do hereby desire
     and strictly require you, that upon the receipt hereof, you
     do inform yourself from the proper officers or otherwise, in
     the best manner you can, what number of negroes have been
     yearly imported directly from Africa into Jamaica, since the
     24th of June, 1698, to the 25th of December, 1707, and at
     what rate per head they have been sold each year, one with
     another, distinguishing the numbers that have been imported
     on account of the Royal African Company, and those which
     have been imported by separate traders; as likewise the
     rates at which such negroes have been sold by the company
     and by separate traders. We must recommend it to your care
     to be as exact and diligent therein as possibly you can, and
     with the first opportunity to transmit to us such accounts
     as aforesaid, that they may arrive here in due time, as also
     duplicates by the first conveyance.

     "And that we may be the better able to make a true judgment
     of the present settlement of that trade, we must further
     recommend it to you to confer with some of the principal
     planters and inhabitants within your government touching
     that matter, and to let us know how the negro trade was
     carried on, and the island of Jamaica supplied with negroes
     till the year 1698, when that trade was laid open by act of
     Parliament; how it has been carried on, and negroes supplied
     since that time, or in what manner they think the said trade
     may best be managed for the benefit of the plantations.

     "We further desire you will inform us what number of ships,
     if any, are employed from Jamaica to the coast of Africa in
     the negro trade, and how many separate traders are concerned
     therein.

     "Lastly, whatever accounts you shall from time to time send
     us touching these matters of the negro trade, we desire that
     the same may be distinct, and not intermixed with other
     matters; and that for the time to come, you do transmit to
     us the like half yearly accounts of negroes, by whom
     imported and at what rates sold; the first of such
     subsequent accounts, to begin from Christmas, 1707, to which
     time those now demanded, are to be given. So we bid you
     heartily farewell,

                    "Your very loving friends,
                                        "STAMFORD,
                                        HERBERT,
                                        PH. MEADOWS,
                                        I. PULTENEY,
                                        R. MONCKTON.

     "P.S. We expect the best account you can give us, with that
     expedition which the shortness of the time requires.

     "Memorandum. This letter, mutatis mutandis, was writ to the
     Governors of Barbadoes, the Leeward Islands, Bermuda, New
     York, New Jersey, Maryland, the President of the Council of
     Virginia, the Governor of New Hampshire and the
     Massachusetts Bay, the Deputy Governor of Pennsylvania, the
     Lords proprietors of Carolina, the Governors and Companies
     of Connecticut and Rhode Island."[457]

The good Queen of England was interested in the traffic in human
beings; and although the House of Commons was too busy to give
attention to "a matter of so great weight," the "Board of Trade" felt
that it was "absolutely necessary that a trade so beneficial to the
kingdom should be carried on to the greatest advantage." England never
gave out a more cruel document than the above circular letter. To read
it now, under the glaring light of the nineteenth century, will almost
cause the English-speaking people of the world to doubt even "the
truth of history." Slavery did not exist at sufferance. It was a crime
against the weak, ignorant, and degraded children of Africa,
systematically perpetrated by an organized Christian government,
backed by an army that grasped the farthest bounds of civilization,
and a navy that overshadowed the oceans.

The reply of the governor of Rhode Island was not as encouraging as
their lordships could have wished.

     GOVERNOR CRANSTON'S REPLY.

     "May it please your Lordships: In obedience to your
     Lordships' commands of the 15th of April last, to the trade
     of Africa.

     "We, having inspected into the books of Her Majesty's
     custom, and informed ourselves from the proper officers
     thereof, by strict inquiry, can lay before your Lordships no
     other account of that trade than the following, viz:

     "1. That from the 24th of June, 1698, to the 25th of
     December, 1707, we have not had any negroes imported into
     this colony from the coast of Africa, neither on the account
     of the Royal African Company, or by any of the separate
     traders.

     "2. That on the 30th day of May, 1696, arrived at this port
     from the coast of Africa, the brigantine Seaflower, Thomas
     Windsor, master, having on board her forty-seven negroes,
     fourteen of which he disposed of in this colony, for betwixt
     £30 and £35 per head; the rest he transported by land for
     Boston, where his owners lived.

     "3. That on the 10th of August, the 19th and 28th of
     October, in the year 1700, sailed from this port three
     vessels, directly for the coast of Africa; the two former
     were sloops, the one commanded by Nicho's Hillgroue, the
     other by Jacob Bill; the last a ship, commanded by Edwin
     Carter, who was part owner of the said three vessels, in
     company with Thomas Bruster, and John Bates, merchants, of
     Barbadoes, and separate traders from thence to the coast of
     Africa; the said three vessels arriving safe to Barbadoes
     from the coast of Africa, where they made the disposition of
     their negroes.

     "4. That we have never had any vessels from the coast of
     Africa to this colony, nor any trade there, the brigantine
     above mentioned, excepted.

     "5. That the whole and only supply of negroes to this
     colony, is from the island of Barbadoes; from whence is
     imported one year with another, betwixt twenty and thirty;
     and if those arrive well and sound, the general price is
     from £30 to £40 per head.

     "According to your Lordships' desire, we have advised with
     the chiefest of our planters, and find but small
     encouragement for that trade to this colony; since by the
     best computation we can make, there would not be disposed in
     this colony above twenty or thirty at the most, annually,
     the reasons of which are chiefly to be attributed to the
     general dislike our planters have for them, by reason of
     then turbulent and unruly tempers.

     "And that most of our planters that are able and willing to
     purchase any of them, are supplied by the offspring of those
     they have already, which increase daily; and that the
     inclination of our people in general, is to employ white
     servants before Negroes.

     "Thus we have given our Lordships a true and faithful
     account of what hath occurred, relating to the trade of
     Africa from this colony; and if, for the future, our trade
     should be extended to those parts, we shall not fail
     transmitting accounts thereof according to your Lordships'
     orders, and that at all times, be ready to show ourselves,

                    "Your Lordships' obedient servant,
                              "SAMUEL CRANSTON, _Governor_.

     "NEWPORT, ON RHODE ISLAND, December 5, 1708."[458]

So in nine years there had been no Negro slaves imported into the
colony; that in 1696 fourteen had been sold to the colonists for
between thirty pounds and thirty-five pounds apiece; that this was the
only time a vessel direct from the coast of Africa had touched in this
colony; that the supply of Negro slaves came from Barbadoes, and that
the colonists who would purchase slaves were supplied by the offspring
of those already in the plantation; and that the colonists preferred
white servants to black slaves. The best that can be said of Gov.
Cranston's letter is, it was very respectful in tone. The following
table was one of the enclosures of the letter. It is given in full on
account of its general interest:--

     "A list of the number of freemen and militia, with the
     servants, white and black, in the respective towns; as also
     the number of inhabitants in Her Majesty's colony of Rhode
     Island, &c., December the 5th, 1708.

     +-------------+-------+--------+---------+---------+-----------+
     |             |       |        |         |         |   TOTAL   |
     |   TOWNS.    |FREEMEN|MILITIA.| WHITE   | BLACK   | NUMBER OF |
     |             |       |        |SERVANTS.|SERVANTS.|INHABITANTS|
     +-------------+-------+--------+---------+---------+-----------+
     | Newport     |   190 |    358 |   20    |   220   |    2,203  |
     | Providence  |   241 |    283 |    6    |     7   |    1,446  |
     | Portsmouth  |    98 |    104 |    8    |    40   |      628  |
     | Warwick     |    80 |     95 |    4    |    10   |      480  |
     | Westerly    |    95 |    100 |    5    |    20   |      570  |
     | New Shoreham|    38 |     47 |   --    |     6   |      208  |
     | Kingstown   |   200 |    282 |   --    |    85   |    1,200  |
     | Jamestown   |    33 |     28 |    9    |    32   |      206  |
     | Greenwich   |    40 |     65 |    3    |     6   |      240  |
     +-------------+-------+--------+---------+---------+-----------+
     |   Total     | 1,015 |  1,362 |   56    |   426   |    7,181  |
     +-------------+-------+--------+---------+---------+-----------+

     "It is to be understood that all men within this colony,
     from the age of sixteen to the age of sixty years, are of
     the militia, so that all freemen above and under said ages
     are inclusive in the abovesaid number of the militia.

     "As to the increase or decrease of the inhabitants within
     five years last past, we are not capable to give an exact
     account, by reason there was no list ever taken before this
     (the militia excepted), which hath increased since the 14th
     of February, 1704-5 (at which time a list was returned to
     your Lordships), the number of 287.

                                        "SAMUEL CRANSTON, _Governor_.

     "NEWPORT, ON RHODE ISLAND, December the 5th, 1708."[459]

The Board of Trade replied to Gov. Cranston, under date of "Whitehall,
January 16th, 1709-10.," saying they should be glad to hear from him
"in regard to Negroes," etc.[460]

The letter of inquiry from the Board of Trade imparted to
slave-dealers an air of importance and respectability. The institution
was not near so bad as it had been thought to be; the royal family
were interested in its growth; it was a gainful enterprise; and, more
than all, as a matter touching the conscience, the Bible and universal
practice had sanctified the institution. To attempt to repeal the Act
of 1652 would have been an occasion unwisely furnished for
anti-slavery men to use to a good purpose. The bill was a dead letter,
and its enemies concluded to let it remain on the statute-book of the
colony.

The experiment of levying an impost-tax upon Negro slaves imported
into the colony had proved an enriching success. After 1709 the
slave-trade became rather brisk. As the population increased, public
improvements became necessary,--there were new public buildings in
demand, roads to be repaired, bridges to be built, and the poor and
afflicted to be provided for. To do all this, taxes had to be levied
upon the freeholders. A happy thought struck the leaders of the
government. If men _would_ import slaves, and the freemen of the
colony _would_ buy them, they should pay a tax as a penalty for their
sin.[461] And the people easily accommodated their views to the state
of the public treasury.

Attention has been called already to the impost Act of 1708. On the
27th of February, 1712, the General Assembly passed "_An Act for
preventing clandestine importations and exportations of passengers,
or negroes, or Indian slaves into or out of this colony_," etc. The
Act is quite lengthy. It required masters of vessels to report to the
governor the names and number of all passengers landed into the
colony, and not to carry away any person without a pass or permission
from the governor, upon pain of a fine of fifty pounds current money
of New England. Persons desiring to leave the colony had to give
public notice for ten days in the most public place in the colony; and
it specifies the duties of naval officers, and closes with the
following in reference to Negro slaves, calling attention to the
impost Act of 1708.--

     "It was then and there enacted, that for all negroes
     imported into this colony, there shall be £3 current money,
     of New England, paid into the general treasury of this
     colony for each negro, by the owner or importer of said
     negro; reference being had unto the said act will more fully
     appear.

     "But were laid under no obligation by the said act, to give
     an account to the Governor what negroes they did import,
     whereby the good intentions of said act were wholly
     frustrated and brought to no effect, and by the
     clandestinely hiding and conveying said negroes out of the
     town into the country, where they lie concealed:

     "For the prevention of which for the future, it is hereby
     enacted by the authority aforesaid, that from and after the
     publication of this act, all masters of vessels that shall
     come into the harbor of Newport, or into any port of this
     government, that hath imported any negroes or Indian slaves,
     shall, before he puts on shore in any port of this
     government, or in the town of Newport, any negroes or Indian
     slaves, or suffers any negroes or Indian slaves to be put on
     shore by any person whatsoever, from on board his said
     vessel, deliver unto the naval officer in the town of
     Newport, a fair manifest under his hand, which shall specify
     the full number of negroes and Indian slaves he hath
     imported in his said vessel, of what sex, with their names,
     the names of their owners, or of those they are consigned
     to; to the truth of which manifest so given in, the said
     master shall give his corporal oath, or solemn engagement
     unto the said naval officer, who is hereby empowered to
     administer the same unto him, which said manifest being duly
     sworn unto, the said naval officer shall make a fair entry
     thereof in a book, which shall be prepared for that use,
     whereunto the said mister shall set his hand....

     "And when the said master hath delivered his said manifest
     and sworn to it, as abovesaid, and before he hath landed on
     shore, or suffer to be landed, any negroes or Indian slaves
     as aforesaid, he, the said master, shall pay to the naval
     officer the sum of £3 current money, of New England, for
     each negro; and the sum of forty shillings of the like money
     for each Indian that shall be by him imported into this
     colony, or that shall be brought into this colony in the
     vessel whereof he is master.

     "But if he hath not ready money to pay down, as aforesaid,
     he shall then give unto the said naval officer a bill, as
     the law directs, to pay unto him the full sum above
     mentioned, for each and every negro and Indian imported as
     above said, which bill shall run payable in ten days from
     the entering the manifest as above said; and if at the end
     of the ten days, the said master shall refuse to pay the
     full contents of his bill, that then the said naval officer
     shall deliver the said bill unto the Governor, or in his
     absence, to the next officer of the peace, as aforesaid who
     shall immediately proceed with the said master in the manner
     above said, by committing of him to Her Majesty's jail,
     where he shall remain without bail or mainprize, until he
     hath paid unto the naval officer, for the use of this
     colony, double the sum specified in his said bill, and all
     charges that shall accrue thereby; which money shall be paid
     out by the said naval officer, as the General Assembly of
     this colony shall order the same.

     "And it is further enacted, that the naval officer who now
     is, and who ever shall be for the future put into said
     office, shall at his entering into the said office, take his
     engagement to the faithful performance of the above said
     acts. And for his encouragement, shall have such fees as are
     hereafter mentioned at the end of this act.

     "And for the more effectual putting in execution those acts,
     and that none may plead ignorance:

     "It is enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all masters
     of vessels trading to this government, shall give bond, with
     sufficient surety in the naval office, for the sum of £50,
     current money of New England."[462]

We have omitted a large portion of the bill, because of its length;
but have quoted sufficient to give an excellent idea of the marvellous
caution taken by the good Christians of Rhode Island to get every cent
due them on account of the slave trade, which their prohibition did
not prohibit. It was a carefully drawn bill for those days.

The diligence of the public officers in the seaport town of Newport
was richly rewarded. The slave-trade now had the sanction and
regulation of colonial law. The demand for Negro laborers was not
affected in the least, while traders did not turn aside on account of
three pounds per head tax upon every slave sold into Rhode Island. On
the 5th of July, 1715, the General Assembly appropriated a portion of
the fund derived from the impost-tax on imported Negroes to repairing
the streets; and then strengthened and amplified the original law on
impost-duties, etc. The following is the Act:--

     "This Assembly, taking into consideration that Newport is
     the metropolitan town in this colony, and that all the
     courts of judicature within this colony are held there; and
     also, that it is the chief market town in the government;
     and that it hath very miry streets, especially that leading
     from the ferry, or landing place, up to the colony house, so
     that the members of the courts are very much discommoded
     therewith, and is a great hindrance to the transporting of
     provisions, &c., in and out of the said towns, to the great
     loss of the inhabitants thereof:--

     "Therefore, be it enacted by this present Assembly, and by
     the authority thereof it is enacted, that the sum of £289
     17s. 3d., now lying in the naval officer's hand, (being
     duties paid to this colony for importing of slaves), shall
     be, and is hereby granted to the town of Newport, towards
     paving the streets of Newport, from the ferry place, up to
     the colony house, in said Newport; to be improved by their
     directors, such as they shall, at their quarter meetings
     appoint for the same.

     "And whereas, there was an act of Assembly, made at Newport
     in the year 1701-2, for the better preventing of fraud, and
     cozen, in paying the duties for importing of negro and
     Indian slaves into this colony, and the same being found in
     some clauses deficient, for the effecting of the full intent
     and purpose thereof:--

     "Therefore, it is hereby enacted by the authority aforesaid,
     that every master of ship, or vessel, merchant or other
     person or persons, importing or bringing into this colony
     any negro slave or slaves of what age soever, shall enter
     their number, names, and sex in the naval office; and the
     master shall insert the same in the manifest of his lading,
     and shall pay to the naval officer in Newport, £3 per head,
     for the use of this colony, for every negro, male or female,
     so imported, or brought in. And every such master, merchant,
     or other person, refusing or neglecting to pay the said duty
     within ten days after they are brought ashore in said
     colony, then the said naval officer, on knowledge thereof,
     shall enter an action and sue [for] the recovery of the
     same, against him or them, in an action of debt, in any of
     His Majesty's courts of record, within this colony.

     "And if any master of ship or vessel, merchant or others,
     shall refuse or neglect to make entry, as aforesaid, of all
     negroes imported in such ship or vessel, or be convicted of
     not entering the full number, such master, merchant, or
     other person, shall forfeit and pay the sum of £6, for every
     one that he shall refuse or neglect to make entry, of one
     moiety thereof to His Majesty, for and towards the support
     of the government of this colony; and the other moiety to
     him or them that shall inform or sue for the same; to be
     recovered by the naval officer in manner as above said.

     "And also, all persons that shall bring any negro or negroes
     into this colony, from any of His Majesty's provinces
     adjoining, shall in like manner enter the number, names and
     sex, of all such negroes, in the above said office, under
     the penalty of the like forfeiture, as above said, and to be
     recovered in like manner by the naval officer, and shall pay
     into the said office within the time above limited, the like
     sum of £3 per head; and for default of payment, the same to
     be recovered by the naval officer in like manner as
     aforesaid.

     "Provided always, that if any gentleman, who is not a
     resident in this colony, and shall pass through any part
     thereof, with a waiting man or men with him, and doth not
     reside in this colony six months, then such waiting men
     shall be free from the above said duty; the said gentleman
     giving his solemn engagement, that they are not for sale;
     any act or acts, clause or clauses of acts, to the contrary
     hereof, in any ways, notwithstanding.

     "Provided, that none of the clauses in the aforesaid act,
     shall extend to any masters or vessels, who import negroes
     into this colony, directly from the coast of Africa.

     "And it is further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that
     the money raised by the impost of negroes, as aforesaid,
     shall be disposed of as followeth, viz.:

     "The one moiety of the said impost money to be for the use
     of the town of Newport, to be disposed of by the said town
     towards paving the streets of said town, and for no other
     use whatsoever, for and during the full time of seven years
     from the publication of this act, and that £60 of said
     impost money be for, and towards the erecting of a
     substantial bridge over Potowomut river, at or near the
     house of Ezekiel Hunt, in East Greenwich, and to no other
     use whatsoever.

     "And that Major Thomas Frye and Capt. John Eldredge be the
     persons appointed to order and oversee the building of said
     bridge, and to render an account thereof, to the Assembly,
     and the said Major Frye and Capt. Eldredge to be paid for
     their trouble and pains, out of the remaining part of said
     impost money, and the remainder of said impost money to be
     disposed of as the Assembly shall from time to time see
     fit."[463]

And in October, 1717, the following order passed the assembly:--

     "It is ordered by this Assembly, that the naval officer pay
     out of the impost money on slaves, £100, to the overseer
     that oversees the paving of the streets of Newport, to be
     improved for paying the charges of paving said
     streets."[464]

The fund accruing from the impost-duty on slaves was regarded with
great favor everywhere, especially in Newport. It had cleaned her
streets and lightened the burdens of taxation which rested so
grievously upon the freeholders. There was no voice lifted against the
iniquitous traffic, and the conscience of the colony was at rest. In
June, 1729, the following Act was passed:--

     "An Act disposing of the money raised in this colony on
     importing negro slaves into this colony.

     "Forasmuch as there is an act of Assembly made in this
     colony the 27th day of February, A.D. 1711, laying a duty of
     £3 per head on all slaves imported into this colony, as is
     in said act is expressed; and several things of a public
     nature requiring a fund to be set apart for carrying them
     on:--

     "Be it therefore enacted by the General Assembly, and by the
     authority of the same it is enacted and declared, that
     henceforward all monies that shall be raised in this colony
     by the aforesaid account, on any slaves imported into this
     colony, shall be employed, the one moiety thereof for the
     use of the town of Newport, towards paving and amending the
     streets thereof, and the other moiety, for, and towards the
     support, repairing and mending the great bridges on the
     main, in the country roads, and for no other use whatsoever;
     any thing in the aforesaid act to the contrary, in anywise
     notwithstanding."[465]

It is wonderful how potential the influence of money is upon mankind.
The sentiments of the good people had been scattered to the winds; and
they had found a panacea for the violated convictions of the wrong of
slavery in the reduction of their taxes, new bridges, and cleansed
streets. Conscience had been bribed into acquiescence, and the
iniquity thrived. There were those who still endeavored to escape the
vigilance of the naval officers, and save the three pounds on each
slave. But the diligence and liberality of the authorities were not to
be outdone by the skulking stinginess of Negro-smugglers. On the 18th
of June, 1723, the General Assembly passed the following order:--

     "Voted, that Mr. Daniel Updike, the attorney general, be,
     and he hereby is ordered, appointed and empowered to gather
     in the money due to this colony, for the importation of
     negroes, and to prosecute, sue and implead such person or
     persons as shall refuse to pay the same; and that he be
     allowed five shillings per head, for every slave that shall
     be hereafter imported into this colony, out of the impost
     money; and that he be also allowed ten per cent. more for
     all such money as he shall recover of the outstanding debts;
     and in all respects to have the like power as was given to
     the naval officer by the former act."[466]

The above illustrates the spirit of the times. There was a mania for
this impost-tax upon stolen Negroes, and the law was to be enforced
against all who sought to evade its requirements. But the Assembly had
a delicate sense of equity, as well as an inexorable opinion of the
precise demands of the law in its letter and spirit. On the 19th of
June, 1716, the following was passed:--

     "It is ordered by this Assembly, that the duty of two
     sucking slaves imported into this colony by Col. James
     Vaughan, of Barbadoes, be remitted to the said James
     Vaughan."[467]

It was not below the dignity of the Legislature of the colony of Rhode
Island to pass a bill of relief for Col. Vaughan, and refund to him
the six pounds he had paid to land his two sucking Negro baby slaves!
In June, 1731, the naval officer, James Cranston, called the attention
of the Assembly to the case of one Mr. Royall,--who had imported
forty-five Negroes into the colony, and after a short time sold
sixteen of them into the Province of Massachusetts Bay, where there
was also an impost-tax,--and asked directions. The Assembly replied as
follows:--

     "Upon consideration whereof, it is voted and ordered, that
     the duty to this colony of the said sixteen negroes
     transported into the Massachusetts Bay, as aforesaid, be
     taken off and remitted; but that he collect the duty of the
     other twenty-nine."[468]

But the zeal of the colony in seeking the enforcement of the
impost-law created a strong influence against it from without; and by
order of the king the entire law was repealed in May, 1732.[469]


The cruel practice of manumitting aged and helpless slaves became so
general in this plantation, that the General Assembly passed a law
regulating it, in February, 1728. It was borrowed very largely from a
similar law in Massachusetts, and reads as follows:--

     "An Act relating to freeing mulatto and negro slaves.

     "Forasmuch, as great charge, trouble and inconveniences have
     arisen to the inhabitants of divers towns in this colony, by
     the manumitting and setting free mulatto and negro slaves;
     for remedying whereof, for the future,--

     "Be it enacted by the General Assembly of this colony, and
     by the authority of the same it is enacted, that no mulatto
     or negro slave, shall be hereafter manumitted, discharged or
     set free, or at liberty, until sufficient security be given
     to the town treasurer of the town or place where such person
     dwells, in a valuable sum of not less than £100, to secure
     and indemnify the town or place from all charge for, or
     about such mulatto or negro, to be manumitted and set at
     liberty, in case he or she by sickness, lameness or
     otherwise, be rendered incapable to support him or herself.

     "And no mulatto or negro hereafter manumitted, shall be
     deemed or accounted free, for whom security shall not be
     given as aforesaid, but shall be the proper charge of their
     respective masters or mistresses, in case they should stand
     in need of relief and support; notwithstanding any
     manumission or instrument of freedom to them made and given;
     and shall be liable at all times to be put forth to service
     by the justices of the peace, or wardens of the town."[470]

It is very remarkable that there were no lawyers to challenge the
legality of such laws as the above, which found their way into the
statute books of all the New-England colonies. There could he no
conditional emancipation. If a slave were set at liberty, why he was
free, and, if he afterwards became a pauper, was entitled to the same
care as a white freeman. But it is not difficult to see that the
status of a free Negro was difficult of definition. When the Negro
slave grew old and infirm, his master no longer cared for him, and the
public was protected against him by law. Death was his most beneficent
friend.

In October, 1743, a widow lady named Comfort Taylor, of Bristol
County, Massachusetts Bay, sued and obtained judgment against a Negro
named Cuff Borden for two hundred pounds, and cost of suit "for a
grievous trespass." Cuff was a slave. An ordinary execution would have
gone against his person: he would have been imprisoned, and nothing
more. In view of this condition of affairs, Mrs. Taylor petitioned the
General Assembly of Rhode Island, praying that authority be granted
the sheriff to sell Cuff, as other property, to satisfy the judgment.
The Assembly granted her prayer as follows:--

     "Upon consideration whereof, it is voted and resolved, that
     the sheriff of the said county of Newport, when he shall
     receive the execution against the said negro Cuff, be, and
     he is hereby fully empowered to sell said negro Cuff as
     other personal estate: and after the fine of £20 be paid
     into the general treasury, and all other charges deducted
     out of the price of said negro, the remainder to be
     appropriated in said satisfying said execution."[471]

This case goes to show that in Rhode Island Negro slaves were rated,
at law, as chattel property, and could be taken in execution to
satisfy debts as other personal property.

A great many slaves availed themselves of frequent opportunities of
going away in privateers and other vessels. With but little before
them in this life, they were even willing to risk being sold into
slavery at some other place, that they might experience a change. They
made excellent seamen, and were greatly desired by masters of vessels.
This went on for a long time. The loss to the colony was great; and
the General Assembly passed the subjoined bill as a check to the
stampede that had become quite general:--

     "AN ACT TO PREVENT THE COMMANDERS OF PRIVATEERS, OR MASTERS
     OF ANY OTHER VESSELS, FROM CARRYING SLAVES OUT OF THIS
     COLONY.

     "Whereas, it frequently happens that the commanders of
     privateers, and masters of other vessels, do carry off
     slaves that are the property of inhabitants of this colony,
     and that without the privity or consent of their masters or
     mistresses; and whereas, there is no law of this colony for
     remedying so great an evil,--

     "Be it therefore enacted by this General Assembly, and by
     the authority of the same, it is enacted, that from and
     after the publication of this act, if any commander of a
     private man of war, or master of a merchant ship or other
     vessel, shall knowingly carry away from, or out of this
     colony, a slave or slaves, the property of any inhabitant
     thereof, the commander of such privateer, or the master of
     the said merchant ship or vessel, shall pay, as a fine, the
     sum of £500, to be recovered by the general treasurer of
     this colony for the time being, by bill, plaint, or
     information in any court of record within this colony.

     "And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that
     the owner or owners of any slave or slaves that may be
     carried away, as aforesaid, shall have a right of action
     against the commander of the said privateer, or master of
     the said merchant ship or vessel, or against the owner or
     owners of the same, in which the said slave or slaves is, or
     are carried away, and by the said action or suit, recover of
     him or them, double damages.

     "And whereas, disputes may arise respecting the knowledge
     that the owner or owners, commanders or masters of the said
     private men of war, merchant ships or vessels may have of
     any slave or slaves being on board a privateer, or merchant
     ship or vessel,--

     "Be it therefore further enacted, and by the authority
     aforesaid, it is enacted, that when any owner or owners of
     any slave or slaves in this colony, shall suspect that a
     slave or slaves, to him, her or them belonging, is, or are,
     on board any private man of war, or merchant ship or vessel,
     the owner or owners of such slave or slaves may make
     application, either to the owner or owners, or to the
     commander or master of the said ship or vessel, before its
     sailing, and inform him or them thereof, which being done in
     the presence of one or more substantial witness or
     witnesses, the said information or application shall amount
     to, and be construed, deemed and taken to be a full proof of
     his or their knowledge thereof, provided, the said slave or
     slaves shall go in any such ship or vessel.

     "And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that
     if the owner or owners of any slave or slaves in this
     colony, or any other person or persons, legally authorized
     by the owner or owners of a slave or slaves, shall attempt
     to go on board any privateer, or a merchant ship or vessel,
     to search for his, her or their slave or slaves, and the
     commander or master of such ship or vessel, or other officer
     or officers on board the same, in the absence of the
     commander or master, shall refuse to permit such owner or
     owners of a slave or slaves, or other person or persons,
     authorized, as aforesaid, to go on board and search for the
     slave or slaves by him, her or them missed, or found absent,
     such refusal shall be deemed, construed, and taken to be
     full proof that the owner or owners, commander or master of
     the said privateer or other ship or vessel, hath, or have a
     real knowledge that such slave or slaves is, or are on
     board.

     "And this act shall be forthwith published, and therefrom
     have, and take force and effect, in and throughout this
     colony.

     "Accordingly the said act was published by the beat of drum,
     on the 17th day of June, 1757, a few minutes before noon, by

                                        "THO. WARD, Secretary."[472]

The education of the Negro slave in this colony was thought to be
inimical to the best interests of the master class. Ignorance was the
_sine qua non_ of slavery. The civil government and ecclesiastical
establishment ground him, body and spirit, as between "the upper and
nether millstones." But the Negro was a good listener, and was not
unconscious of what was going on around him. He was neither blind nor
deaf.

The fires of the Revolutionary struggle began to melt the frozen
feelings of the colonists towards the slaves. When they began to feel
the British lion clutching at the throat of their own liberties, the
bondage of the Negro stared them in the face. They knew the Negro's
power of endurance, his personal courage, his admirable promptitude in
the performance of difficult tasks, and his desperate spirit when
pressed too sharply. The thought of such an ally for the English army,
such an element in their rear, was louder in their souls than the roar
of the enemy's guns. The act of June, 1774, shows how deeply the
people felt on the subject.

     "AN ACT PROHIBITING THE IMPORTATION OF NEGROES INTO THIS
     COLONY.

     Whereas, the inhabitants of America are generally engaged in
     the preservation of their own rights and liberties, among
     which, that of personal freedom must be considered as the
     greatest; as those who are desirous of enjoying all the
     advantages of liberty themselves, should be willing to
     extend personal liberty to others;--

     "Therefore, be it enacted by this General Assembly, and by
     the authority thereof it is enacted, that for the future, no
     negro or mulatto slave shall be brought into this colony;
     and in case any slave shall hereafter be brought in, he or
     she shall be, and are hereby, rendered immediately free, so
     far as respects personal freedom, and the enjoyment of
     private property, in the same manner as the native Indians.

     "Provided, nevertheless, that this law shall not extend to
     servants of persons travelling through this colony, who are
     not inhabitants thereof, and who carry them out with them,
     when they leave the same.

     "Provided, also, that nothing in this act shall extend, or
     be deemed to extend, to any negro or mulatto slave,
     belonging to any inhabitant of either of the British
     colonies, islands or plantations, who shall come into this
     colony, with an intention to settle or reside, for a number
     of years, therein; but such negro or mulatto, so brought
     into this colony, by such person inclining to settle or
     reside therein, shall be, and remain, in the same situation,
     and subject in like manner to their master or mistress, as
     they were in the colony or plantation from whence they
     removed.

     "Provided, nevertheless, that if any person, so coming into
     this colony, to settle or reside, as aforesaid, shall
     afterwards remove out of the same, such person shall be
     obliged to carry all such negro or mulatto slaves, as also
     all such as shall be born from them, out of the colony with
     them. "Provided, also, that nothing in this act shall
     extend, or be deemed to extend, to any negro or mulatto
     slave brought from the coast of Africa, into the West
     Indies, on board any vessel belonging to this colony, and
     which negro or mulatto slave could not be disposed of in the
     West Indies, but shall be brought into this colony.

     "Provided, that the owner of such negro or mulatto slave
     give bond to the general treasurer of the said colony,
     within ten days after such arrival in the sum of £100,
     lawful money, for each and every such negro or mulatto slave
     so brought in, that such negro or mulatto slave shall be
     exported out of the colony, within one year from the date of
     such bond; if such negro or mulatto be alive, and in a
     condition to be removed.

     "Provided, also, that nothing in this act shall extend, or
     be deemed to extend, to any negro or mulatto slave that may
     be on board any vessel belonging to this colony, now at sea,
     in her present voyage."[473]

In 1730 the population of Rhode Island was, whites, 15,302; Indians,
985; Negroes, 1,648; total, 17,935. In 1749 there were 28,439 whites,
and 3,077 Negroes. Indians were not given this year. In 1756 the
whites numbered 35,939, the Negroes 4,697. In 1774 Rhode Island
contained 9,439 families, Newport had 9,209 inhabitants. The whites in
the entire colony numbered 54,435, the Negroes, 3,761, and the
Indians, 1,482.[474] It will be observed that the Negro population
fell off between the years 1749 and 1774. It is accounted for by the
fact mentioned before,--that many ran away on ships that came into the
Province.

The Negroes received better treatment at this time than at any other
period during the existence of the colony. There was a general
relaxation of the severe laws that had been so rigidly enforced. They
took great interest in public meetings, devoured with avidity every
scrap of news regarding the movements of the Tory forces, listened
with rapt attention to the patriotic conversations of their masters,
and when the storm-cloud of war broke were as eager to fight for the
independence of North America as their masters.


FOOTNOTES:

[450] R.I. Col. Recs., vol. i. p. 243.

[451] Bancroft, vol. i. 5th ed. p. 175.

[452] R.I. Col. Recs., vol. iii. pp. 492, 493.

[453] There is no law making the manufacturing of whiskey legal in the
United States; and yet the United-States government makes laws to
regulate the business, and collects a revenue from it. It exists by
and with the consent of the government, and, in a sense, is legal.

[454] R.I. Col. Recs., vol. iv. p. 34.

[455] I have searched diligently for the Act of February, among the
Rhode-Island Collections and Records, but have not found it. It was
evidently more comprehensive than the above Act.

[456] R.I. Col. Recs., vol iv. p. 50.

[457] R.I. Col. Recs, vol. iv. pp. 53, 54.

[458] R.I. Coll. Recs., vol. iv. pp. 54, 55.

[459] R.I. Col. Recs., vol iv. p. 59.

[460] J. Carter Brown's Manuscripts, vol. viii. Nos. 506, 512.

[461] It was a specious sort of reasoning. I learn that the bank over
on the corner is to be robbed to-night at twelve o'clock. Shall I go
and rob it at ten o'clock; because, if I do not do so, another person
will, two hours later?

[462] R.I. Col. Recs., vol. iv. pp. 133-135.

[463] R.I. Col. Recs., vol. iv. pp. 191-193.

[464] R.I. Col. Recs., vol. iv p. 225.

[465] R.I. Col. Recs., vol. iv. pp. 423, 424.

[466] Ibid., p. 330.

[467] Ibid., vol. iv. p. 209.

[468] R.I. Col. Recs., vol. iv. p. 454.

[469] Ibid., vol. iv. p. 471.

[470] Ibid., vol. iv. pp. 415, 416.

[471] R.I. Col. Recs., vol. v. pp. 72, 73.

[472] R.I. Col. Recs., vol vi. pp. 64, 65.

[473] R.I. Col. Recs., vol. vii. pp. 251, 252.

[474] American Annals, vol ii. pp. 107,155, 156, 184, and 265.




CHAPTER XX.

THE COLONY OF NEW JERSEY.

1664-1775.

     NEW JERSEY PASSES INTO THE HANDS OF THE ENGLISH.--POLITICAL
     POWERS CONVEYED TO BERKELEY AND CARTERET.--LEGISLATION ON
     THE SUBJECT OF SLAVERY DURING THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.--THE
     COLONY DIVIDED INTO EAST AND WEST JERSEY--SEPARATE
     GOVERNMENTS.--AN ACT CONCERNING SLAVERY BY THE LEGISLATURE
     OF EAST JERSEY.--GENERAL APPREHENSION RESPECTING THE RISING
     OF NEGRO AND INDIAN SLAVES.--EAST AND WEST JERSEY SURRENDER
     THEIR RIGHTS OF GOVERNMENT TO THE QUEEN.--AN ACT FOR
     REGULATING THE CONDUCT OF SLAVES.--IMPOST-TAX OF TEN POUNDS
     LEVIED UPON EACH NEGRO IMPORTED INTO THE COLONY.--THE
     GENERAL COURT PASSES A LAW RECREATING THE TRIAL OF
     SLAVES.--NEGROES RULED OUT OF THE MILITIA ESTABLISHMENT UPON
     CONDITION.--POPULATION OF THE JERSEYS IN 1738 AND 1745.


The colony of New Jersey passed into the control of the English in
1664; and the first grant of political powers, upon which the
government was erected, was conveyed by the Duke of York to Berkeley
and Carteret during the same year. In the "Proprietary Articles of
Concession," the words _servants, slaves, and Christian servants_
occur. It was the intention of the colonists to draw a distinction
between "_servants for a term of years_," and "_servants for life_,"
between white servants and black slaves, between Christians and
pagans.

When slavery was introduced into Jersey is not known.[475] There is no
doubt but that it made its appearance there almost as early as in New
Netherlands. The Dutch, the Quakers, and the English held slaves. But
the system was milder here than in any of the other colonies. The
Negroes were scattered among the families of the whites, and were
treated with great humanity. Legislation on the subject of slavery did
not begin until the middle of the eighteenth century, and it was not
severe. Before this time, say three-quarters of a century, a few Acts
had been passed calculated to protect the slave element from the sin
of intoxication. In 1675 an Act passed, imposing fines and punishments
upon any white person who should transport, harbor, or entertain
"apprentices, servants, or slaves." It was perfectly natural that the
Negroes should be of a nomadic disposition. They had no homes, no
wives, no children,--nothing to attach them to a locality. Those who
resided near the seacoast watched, with unflagging interest, the
coming and going of the mysterious white-winged vessels. They hung
upon the storied lips of every fugitive, and dreamed of lands afar
where they might find that liberty for which their souls thirsted as
the hart for the water-brook. Far from their native country, without
the blessings of the Church, or the warmth of substantial friendship,
they fell into a listless condition, a somnolence that led them to
stagger against some of the regulations of the Province. Their
wandering was not inspired by any subjective, inherent, generic evil:
it was but the tossing of a weary, distressed mind under the dreadful
influences of a hateful dream. And what little there is in the early
records of the colony of New Jersey is at once a compliment to the
humanity of the master, and the docility of the slave.

In 1676 the colony was divided into East and West Jersey, with
separate governments. The laws of East Jersey, promulgated in 1682,
contained laws prohibiting the entertaining of fugitive servants, or
trading with Negroes. The law respecting fugitive servants was
intended to destroy the hopes of runaways in the entertainment they so
frequently obtained at the hands of benevolent Quakers and other
enemies of "indenture" and slavery. The law-makers acted upon the
presumption, that as the Negro had no property, did not own himself,
he could not sell any article of his own. All slaves who attempted to
dispose of any article were regarded with suspicion. The law made it a
misdemeanor for a free person to purchase any thing from a slave, and
hence cut off a source of revenue to the more industrious slaves, who
by their frugality often prepared something for sale.

In 1694 "_an Act concerning slaves_" was passed by the Legislature of
East Jersey. It provided, among other things, for the trial of
"_negroes and other slaves, for felonies punishable with death, by a
jury of twelve persons before three justices of the peace; for theft,
before two justices; the punishment by whipping_." Here was the
grandest evidence of the high character of the white population in
East Jersey. In every other colony in North America the Negro was
denied the right of "trial by jury," so sacred to Englishmen. In
Virginia, Maryland, Massachusetts, Connecticut,--in all the
colonies,--the Negro went into court convicted, went out convicted,
and was executed, upon the frailest evidence imaginable. But here in
Jersey the only example of justice was shown toward the Negro in North
America. "Trial by jury" implied the right to be sworn, and give
competent testimony. A Negro slave, when on trial for his life, was
accorded the privilege of being tried by twelve honest white colonists
before _three_ justices of the peace. This was in striking contrast
with the conduct of the colony of New York, where Negroes were
arrested upon the incoherent accusations of dissolute whites and
terrified blacks. It gave the Negroes a new and an anomalous position
in the New World. It banished the cruel theory of Virginia, New York,
and Connecticut, that the Negro was a pagan, and therefore should not
be sworn in courts of justice, and threw open a wide door for his
entrance into a more hopeful state than he had, up to that time, dared
to anticipate. It allowed him to infer that his life was a little more
than that of the brute that perisheth; that he could not be dragged by
malice through the forms of a trial, without jury, witness, counsel,
or friend, to an ignominious death, that was to be regretted only by
his master, and his regrets to be solaced by the Legislature paying
"the price;" that the law regarded him as a man, whose life was too
dear to be committed to the disposition of irascible men, whose
prejudices could be mollified only in extreme cruelty or cold-blooded
murder. It had much to do toward elevating the character of the Negro
in New Jersey. It first fired his heart with the noble impulse of
gratitude, and then led him to _hope_. And how much that little word
means! It causes the soul to spread its white pinions to every
favoring breeze, and hasten on to a propitious future. And then the
fact that Negroes had rights acknowledged by the statutes, and
respectfully accorded them by the courts, had its due influence upon
the white colonists. The men, or class of men, who have rights not
challenged, command the respect of others. The fact clothes them with
dignity as with a garment. And then, by the inevitable logic of the
position of the courts of East Jersey, the colonists were led to the
conclusion that the Negroes among them had other rights. And, as it
has been said already, they received better treatment here than in any
other colony in the country.

In West Jersey happily the word "slave" was omitted from the laws.
Only servants and runaway servants were mentioned, and the selling of
rum to Negroes and Indians was strictly forbidden.

The fear of insurrection among Indians and Negroes was general
throughout all of the colonies. One a savage, and the other untutored,
they knew but two manifestations,--gratitude and revenge. It was
deemed a wise precaution to keep these unfortunate people as far
removed from the exciting influences of rum as possible. Chapter
twenty-three of a law passed in West Jersey in 1676, providing for
publicity in judicial proceedings, concludes as follows:--

     "That all and every person and persons inhabiting the said
     province, shall, as far as in us lies, be free from
     oppression and slavery."[476]

In 1702 the proprietors of East and West Jersey surrendered their
rights of government to the queen. The Province was immediately placed
with New York, and the government committed to the hands of Lord
Cornbury.[477] In 1704 "_An Act for regulating negroe, Indian and
mulatto slaves within the province of New Jersey_," was introduced,
but was tabled and disallowed. The Negroes had just cause for the
fears they entertained as to legislation directed at the few rights
they had enjoyed under the Jersey government. Their fellow-servants
over in New York had suffered under severe laws, and at that time had
no privilege in which they could rejoice. In 1713 the following law
was passed:--

     "_An act for regulating slaves._ (1 Nev. L., c. 10.) Sect.
     1. Against trading with slaves. 2. For arrest of slaves
     being without pass. 3. Negro belonging to another province,
     not having license, to be whipped and committed to jail. 4.
     Punishment of slaves for crimes to be by three or more
     justices of the peace, with five of the principal
     freeholders, without a grand jury; seven agreeing, shall
     give judgment. 5. Method in such causes more particularly
     described. Provides that 'the evidence of Indian, negro, or
     mulatto slaves shall be admitted and allowed on trials of
     such slaves, on all causes criminal.' 6. Owner may demand a
     jury. 7, 8. Compensation to owners for death of slave. 9. A
     slave for attempting to ravish any white woman, or presuming
     'to assault or strike any free man or woman professing
     Christianity,' any two justices have discretionary powers
     to inflict corporal punishment, not extending to life or
     limb. 10. Slaves, for stealing, to be whipped. 11. Penalties
     on justices, &c., neglecting duty. 12. Punishment for
     concealing, harboring, or entertaining slaves of others. 13.
     Provides that no Negro, Indian, or mulatto that shall
     thereafter be made free, shall hold any real estate in his
     own right, in fee simple or fee tail. 14. 'And whereas it is
     found by experience that free Negroes are an idle, slothful
     people, and prove very often a charge to the place where
     they are,' enacts that owners manumitting, shall give
     security, &c."[478]

Nearly all the humane features of the Jersey laws were supplanted by
severe prohibitions, requirements, and penalties. The trial by jury
was construed to mean that one Negro's testimony was good against
another Negro in a trial for a felony, allowing the owner of the slave
to demand a jury. Humane masters were denied the right to emancipate
their slaves, and the latter were prohibited from owning real property
in fee simple or fee tail. Having stripped the Negro of the few rights
he possessed, the General Court, during the same year, went on to
reduce him to absolute property, and levied an impost-tax of ten
pounds upon every Negro imported into the colony, to remain in force
for seven years.

In 1754 an Act provided, that in the borough of Elizabeth any white
servant or servants, slave or slaves, which shall "be brought before
the Mayor, &c., by their masters or other inhabitant of the Borough,
for any misdemeanor rude or disorderly behavior, may be committed to
the workhouse to hard labor and receive correction not exceeding
thirty lashes."[479] This Act was purely local in character, and
indiscriminate in its application to every class of servants. It was
nothing more than a police regulation, and as such was a wholesome
law.

In 1768 the General Court passed _An Act to regulate the trial of
slaves for murder and other crimes and to repeal so much of an act,
&c_. Sections one and two provided for the trial of slaves by the
ordinary higher criminal courts. Section three provided that the
expenses incurred in the execution of slaves should be levied upon all
the owners of able-bodied slaves in the county, by order of the
justices presiding at the trial. Section four repealed sections four,
five, six, and seven of the Act of 1713. This was significant. It
portended a better feeling toward the Negroes, and illumined the dark
horizon of slavery with the distant light of hope. A strong feeling
in favor of better treatment for Negro slaves made itself manifest at
this time. When the Quaker found the prejudice against himself
subsiding, he turned, like a good Samaritan, to pour the wine of human
sympathy into the lacerated feelings of the Negro. Private instruction
was given to them in many parts of Jersey. The gospel was expounded to
them in its beauty and simplicity, and produced its good fruit in
better lives.

The next year, 1769, a mercenary spirit inspired and secured the
passage of another Act levying a tax upon imported slaves, and
requiring persons manumitting slaves to give better securities. It
reads,--

     "Whereas duties on the importation of negroes in several of
     the neighboring colonies hath, on experience, been found
     beneficial in the introduction of sober industrious
     foreigners, to settle under his Majesty's allegiance, and
     the promoting a spirit of industry among the inhabitants in
     general, in order therefore to promote the same good designs
     in this government and that such as purchase slaves may
     contribute some equitable proportion of the public
     burdens."[480]

How an impost-tax upon imported slaves would be "beneficial in the
introduction of sober industrious foreigners," is not easily
perceived; and how it would promote "a spirit of industry among the
inhabitants in general," is a problem most difficult of solution. But
these were the lofty reasons that inspired the General Court to seek
to fill the coffers of the Province with money drawn from the
slave-lottery, where human beings were raffled off to the highest
bidders in the colony. The cautious language in which the Act was
couched indicated the sensitive state of the public conscience on
slavery at that time. They were afraid to tell the truth. They did not
dare to say to the people: We propose to repair the streets of your
towns, the public roads, and lighten the burden of taxation, by saying
to men-stealers, we will allow you to sell your cargoes of slaves into
this colony provided you share the spoils of your superlative crime!
No, they had to tell the people that the introduction of Negro slaves,
upon whom there was a tax, would entice sober and industrious white
people to come among them, and would quicken the entire Province with
a spirit of thrift never before witnessed!

In 1760 the Negro was ruled out of the militia establishment upon a
condition. The law provided against the enlistment of any "_young man
under the age of twenty-one years, or any slaves who are so for terms
of life, or apprentices_," without leave of their masters. This was
the mildest prohibition against the entrance of the slave into the
militia service in any of the colonies. There is nothing said about
the employment of the free Negroes in this service; and it is fair to
suppose, in view of the mild character of the laws, that they were not
excluded. In settlements where the German and Quaker elements
predominated, the Negro found that his "lines had fallen unto him in
pleasant places, and that he had a goodly heritage." In the coast
towns, and in the great centres of population, the white people were
of a poorer class. Many were adventurers, cruel and unscrupulous in
their methods. The speed with which the people sought to obtain a
competency wore the finer edges of their feeling to the coarse grain
of selfishness; and they not only drew themselves up into the
miserable rags of their own selfish aggrandizements as far as all
competitors were concerned, but regarded slavery with imperturbable
complacency.

In 1738 the population of the Jerseys was, whites, 43,388; blacks,
3,981. In 1745 the whites numbered 56,797, and the blacks,
4,606.[481]


FOOTNOTES:

[475] It is unfortunate that there is no good history of New Jersey.
The records of the Historical Society of that State are not
conveniently printed, nor valuable in colonial data.

[476] Freedom and Bondage, vol. i. p. 283.

[477] The following were the instructions his lordship received,
concerning the treatment of Negro slaves: "You shall endeavour to get
a law past for the restraining of any inhuman severity, which by ill
masters or overseers may be used towards their Christian servants and
their slaves, and that provision be made therein that the wilfull
killing of Indians and negroes may be punished with death, and that a
fit penalty be emposed for the maiming of them."--_Freedom and
Bondage_, vol. i. p. 280, note.

[478] Freedom and Bondage, vol. i. p. 284.

[479] Hurd, vol. i. p. 285.

[480] Hurd, vol. i. p 285.

[481] American Annals, vol. ii. pp. 127, 143.




CHAPTER XXI.

THE COLONY OF SOUTH CAROLINA.

1665-1775.

     THE CAROLINAS RECEIVE TWO DIFFERENT CHARTERS FROM THE CROWN
     OF GREAT BRITAIN.--ERA OF SLAVERY LEGISLATION.--LAW
     ESTABLISHING SLAVERY.--THE SLAVE POPULATION OF THIS PROVINCE
     REGARDED AS CHATTEL PROPERTY.--TRIAL OF SLAVES.--INCREASE OF
     SLAVE POPULATION.--THE INCREASE IN THE RICE TRADE.--SEVERE
     LAWS REGULATING THE PRIVATE AND PUBLIC CONDUCT OF
     SLAVE.--PUNISHMENT OF SLAVES FOR RUNNING AWAY.--THE LIFE OF
     SLAVES REGARDED AS OF LITTLE CONSEQUENCE BY THE VIOLENT
     MASTER CLASS.--AN ACT EMPOWERING TWO JUSTICES OF THE PEACE
     TO INVESTIGATE TREATMENT OF SLAVES.--AN ACT PROHIBITING THE
     OVERWORKING OF SLAVES.--SLAVE-MARKET AT
     CHARLESTON.--INSURRECTION.--A LAW AUTHORIZING THE CARRYING
     OF FIRE-ARMS AMONG THE WHITES.--THE ENLISTMENT OF SLAVES TO
     SERVE IN TIME OF ALARM.--NEGROES ADMITTED TO THE MILITIA
     SERVICE.--COMPENSATION TO MASTERS FOR THE LOSS OF SLAVES
     KILLED BY THE ENEMY OR WHO DESERT.--FEW SLAVES
     MANUMITTED.--FROM 1754-1776 LITTLE LEGISLATION ON THE
     SUBJECT OF SLAVERY.--THREATENING WAR BETWEEN ENGLAND AND HER
     PROVINCIAL DEPENDENCIES.--THE EFFECT UPON PUBLIC SENTIMENT.


The Carolinas received two different charters from the crown of Great
Britain. The first was witnessed by the king at Westminster, March 24,
1663; the second, June 30, 1665. The last charter was surrendered to
the king by seven of the eight proprietors on the 25th July, 1729. The
government became regal; and the Province was immediately divided into
North and South Carolina by an order of the British Council, and the
boundaries between the two governments fixed.

There were Negro slaves in the Carolinas from the earliest days of
their existence. The era of slavery legislation began about the year
1690. The first Act for the "_Better Ordering of Slaves_" was "read
three times and passed, and ratified in open Parliament, the seventh
day of February, Anno Domini, 1690." It bore the signatures of Seth
Sothell, G. Muschamp, John Beresford, and John Harris. It contained
fifteen articles of the severest character. On the 7th of June, 1712,
the first positive law establishing slavery passed, and was
signed.[482] The entire Act embraced thirty-five sections. Section
one is quoted in full because of the interest that centres in it in
connection with the problem of slavery legislation in the colonies.

     "1. _Be it therefore enacted_, by his Excellency, William,
     Lord Craven, Palatine, and the rest of the true and absolute
     Lords and Proprietors of this Province, by and with the
     advice and consent of the rest of the members of the General
     Assembly, now met at Charlestown, for the South-west part of
     this Province, and by the authority of the same, That all
     negroes, mulatoes, mustizoes or Indians, which at any time
     heretofore have been sold, or now are held or taken to be,
     or hereafter shall be bought and sold for slaves, are hereby
     declared slaves; and they, and their children, are hereby
     made and declared slaves, to all intents and purposes;
     excepting all such negroes, mulatoes, mustizoes or Indians,
     which heretofore have been, or hereafter shall be, for some
     particular merit, made and declared free, either by the
     Governor and council of this Province, pursuant to any Act
     or law of this Province, or by their respective owners or
     masters; and also, excepting all such negroes, mulatoes,
     mustizoes or Indians, as can prove they ought not to be sold
     for slaves. And in case any negro, mulatoe, mustizoe or
     Indian, doth lay claim to his or her freedom upon all or any
     of the said accounts, the same shall be finally heard and
     determined by the Governor and council of this
     Province."[483]

The above section was re-enacted into another law, containing
forty-three sections, passed on the 23d of February, 1722. Virginia
declared that children should follow the condition of their mothers,
but never passed a law in any respect like unto this most remarkable
Act. South Carolina has the unenviable reputation of being the only
colony in North America where by positive statute the Negro was doomed
to perpetual bondage.[484] On the 10th of May, 1740, an act regulating
slaves, containing fifty sections, recites:--

     "Whereas, in his Majesty's plantations in America, slavery
     his been introduced and allowed, and the people commonly
     called negroes, Indians, mulattoes and mustizoes, have been
     deemed absolute slaves, and the subjects of property in the
     hands of particular persons, the extent of whose power over
     such slaves ought to be settled and limited by positive
     laws, so that the slave may be kept in due subjection and
     obedience, and the owners and other persons having the care
     and government of slaves may be restrained from exercising
     too great rigour and cruelty over them, and that the public
     peace and order of this Province may be preserved: We pray
     your most sacred Majesty that it may be enacted."[485]

The first section of this Act was made more elaborate than any other
law previously passed. It bore all the marks of ripe scholarship and
profound law learning. The first section is produced here:--

     "1. _And be it enacted_, by the honorable William Bull,
     Esquire, Lieutenant Governor and Commander-in-chief, by and
     with the advice and consent of his Majesty's honorable
     Council, and the Commons House of Assembly of this Province,
     and by the authority of the same, That all negroes and
     Indians, (free Indians in amity with this government, and
     negroes, mulattoes and mustizoes, who are now free,
     excepted,) mulattoes or mustizoes who now are, or shall
     hereafter be, in this Province, and all their issue and
     offspring, born or to be born, shall be, and they are hereby
     declared to be, and remain forever hereafter, absolute
     slaves, and shall follow the condition of the mother, and
     shall be deemed, held, taken, reputed and adjudged in law,
     to be chattels personal, in the hands of their owners and
     possessors, and their executors, administrators and assigns,
     to all intents, constructions and purposes whatsoever;
     _provided always_, that if any negro, Indian, mulatto or
     mustizo, shall claim his or her freedom, it shall and may be
     lawful for such negro, Indian, mulatto or mustizo, or any
     person or persons whatsoever, on his or her behalf, to apply
     to the justices of his Majesty's court of common pleas, by
     petition or motion, either during the sitting of the said
     court, or before any of the justices of the same court, at
     any time in the vacation; and the said court, or any of the
     justices thereof, shall, and they are hereby fully impowered
     to, admit any person so applying to be guardian for any
     negro, Indian, mulatto or mustizo, claiming his, her or
     their freedom; and such guardians shall be enabled, entitled
     and capable in law, to bring an action of trespass in the
     nature of ravishment of ward, against any person who shall
     claim property in, or who shall be in possession of, any
     such negro, Indian, mulatto or mustizo; and the defendant
     shall and may plead the general issue on such action
     brought, and the special matter may and shall be given in
     evidence, and upon a general or special verdict found,
     judgment shall be given according to the very right of the
     cause, without having any regard to any defect in the
     proceedings, either in form or substance; and if judgment
     shall be given for the plaintiff, a special entry shall be
     made, declaring that the ward of the plaintiff is free, and
     the jury shall assess damages which the plaintiff's ward
     hath sustained, and the court shall give judgment, and award
     execution, against the defendant for such damage, with full
     costs of suit; but in case judgment shall be given for the
     defendant, the said court is hereby fully impowered to
     inflict such corporal punishment, not extending to life or
     limb, on the ward of the plaintiff, as they, in their
     discretion, shall think fit; _provided always_, that in any
     action or suit to be brought in pursuance of the direction
     of this Act, the burthen of the proof shall lay on the
     plaintiff, and it shall be always presumed that every negro,
     Indian, mulatto and mustizo, is a slave, unless the contrary
     can be made appear, the Indians in amity with this
     government excepted, in which case the burthen of the proof
     shall lye on the defendant; _provided also_, that nothing in
     this Act shall be construed to hinder or restrain any other
     court of law or equity in this Province, from determining
     the property of slaves, or their right of freedom, which
     now have cognizance or jurisdiction of the same, when the
     same shall happen to come in judgment before such courts, or
     any of them, always taking this Act for their direction
     therein."[486]

The entire slave population of this Province was regarded as _chattel
property, absolutely_. They could be seized in execution as in the
case of other property, but not, however, if there were other chattels
available. In case of "burglary, robbery, burning of houses, killing
or stealing of any meat or other cattle, or other petty injuries, as
maiming one of the other, stealing of fowls, provisions, or such like
trespass or injuries," a justice of the peace was to be informed. He
issued a warrant for the arrest of the offender or offenders, and
summoned all competent witnesses. After examination, if found guilty,
the offender or offenders were committed to jail. The justice then
notified the justice next to him to be associated with him in the
trial. He had the authority to fix the day and hour of the trial, to
summon witness, and "three discreet and sufficient freeholders." The
justices then swore the "freeholders," and, after they had tried the
case, had the authority to pronounce the sentence of death, "or such
other punishment" as they felt meet to fix. "The solemnity of a jury"
was never accorded to slaves. "Three freeholders" could dispose of
human life in such cases, and no one could hinder.[487] The confession
of the accused slave, and the testimony of another slave, were "held
for good and convincing evidence in all petty larcenies or trespasses
not exceeding forty shillings." In the case of a Negro on trial for
his life, "the oath of Christian evidence" was required, or the
"positive evidence of two Negroes or slaves," in order to convict.

The increase of slaves was almost phenomenal. The rice-trade had grown
to enormous proportions. The physical obstruction gave away rapidly
before the incessant and stupendous efforts of Negro laborers. The
colonists held out most flattering inducements to Englishmen to
emigrate into the Province. The home government applauded the zeal and
executive abilities of the local authorities. Attention was called to
the necessity of legislation for the government of the vast Negro
population in the colony. The code of South Carolina was without an
example among the civilized governments of modern times. It was
unlawful for any free person to inhabit or trade with Negroes.[488]
Slaves could not leave the plantation on which they were owned, except
in livery, or armed with a pass, signed by their master, containing
the name of the possessor. For a violation of this regulation they
were whipped on the naked back. No man was allowed to conduct a
"plantation, cow-pen or stock," that shall be six miles distant from
his usual place of abode, and wherein six Negroes were employed,
without one or more white persons were residing on the place.[489]
Negro slaves found on another plantation than the one to which they
belonged, "on the Lord's Day, fast days, or holy-days," even though
they could produce passes, were seized and whipped. If a slave were
found "keeping any horse, horses, or neat cattle," any white man, by
warrant, could seize the animals, and sell them through the
church-wardens; and the money arising from such sale was devoted to
the poor of the parish in which said presumptuous slaves resided. If
more than seven slaves were found travelling on the highway, except
accompanied by a white man, it was lawful for any white man to
apprehend each and every one of such slaves, and administer twenty
lashes upon their bare back. No slave was allowed to hire out his
time. Some owners of slaves were poor, and, their slaves being trusty
and industrious, permitted them to go out and get whatever work they
could, with the understanding that the master was to have the wages.
An Act was passed in 1735, forbidding such transactions, and fining
the persons who hired slaves who had no written certificate from their
masters setting forth the terms upon which the work was to be done. No
slave could hire a house or plantation. No amount of industry could
make him an exception to the general rule. If he toiled faithfully for
years, amassed a fortune for his master, earned quite a competence for
himself during the odd moments he caught from a busy life, and then,
with acknowledged character and business tact, he sought to hire a
plantation or buy a house, the law came in, and pronounced it a
misdemeanor, for which both purchaser and seller had to pay in fines,
stripes, and imprisonment. A slave could not keep in his own name, or
that of his master, any kind of a house of entertainment. He was even
prohibited by law from selling corn or rice in the Province. The
penalty was a fine of forty shillings, and the forfeiture of the
articles for sale. They could not keep a boat or canoe.

The cruelties of the code are without a parallel, as applied to the
correction of Negro slaves.

     "If any negro or Indian slave [says the act of Feb. 7, 1690]
     shall offer any violence, by stricking or the like, to any
     white person, he shall for the first offence be severely
     whipped by the constable, by order of any justice of peace;
     and for the second offence, by like order, shall be severely
     whipped, his or her nose slit, and face burnt in some place;
     and for the third offence, to be left to two justices and
     three sufficient freeholders, to inflict death, or any other
     punishment, according to their discretion."

As the penalties for the smallest breach of the slave-code grew more
severe, the slaves grew more restless and agitated. Sometimes under
great fear they would run away for a short time, in the hope that
their irate masters would relent. But this, instead of helping,
hindered and injured the cause of the slaves. Angered at the conduct
of their slaves, the master element, having their representatives on
the floor of the Assembly, secured the passage of the following brutal
law:--

     "That every slave of above sixteen years of age, that shall
     run away from his master, mistress or overseer, and shall so
     continue for the space of twenty days at one time, shall, by
     his master, mistress, overseer or head of the family's
     procurement, for the first offence, be publicly and severely
     whipped, not exceeding forty lashes; and in case the master,
     mistress, overseer, or head of the family, shall neglect to
     inflict such punishment of whipping, upon any negro or slave
     that shall so run away, for the space of ten days, upon
     complaint made thereof, within one month, by any person
     whatsoever, to any justice of the peace, the said justice of
     the peace shall, by his warrant directed to the constable,
     order the said negro or slave to be publicly and severely
     whipped, the charges of such whipping, not exceeding twenty
     shillings, to be borne by the person neglecting to have such
     runaway negro whipped, as before directed by this Act. And
     in case such negro or slave shall run away a second time,
     and shall so continue for the space of twenty days, he or
     she, so offending, shall be branded with the letter R, on
     the right cheek. And in case the master, mistress, overseer,
     or head of the family, shall neglect to inflict the
     punishment upon such slave running away the second time, the
     person so neglecting shall forfeit the sum of ten pounds,
     and upon any complaint made by any person, within one month,
     to any justice of the peace, of the neglect of so punishing
     any slave for running away the second time, such justice
     shall order the constable to inflict the same punishment
     upon such slave, or cause the same to be done, the charges
     thereof, not exceeding thirty shillings, to be borne by the
     person neglecting to have the punishment inflicted. And in
     case such negro or slave shall run away the third time, and
     shall so continue for the space of thirty days, he or she,
     so offending, for the third offence, shall be severely
     whipped, not exceeding forty lashes, and shall have one of
     his ears cut off; and in case the master, mistress, overseer
     or head of the family, shall neglect to inflict the
     punishment upon such slave running away the third time, the
     person so neglecting shall forfeit the sum of twenty pounds,
     and upon any complaint made by any person, within two
     months, to any justice of the peace, of the neglect of the
     so punishing any slave for running away the third time, the
     said justice shall order the constable to inflict the same
     punishment upon such slave, or cause the same to be done,
     the charges thereof, not exceeding forty shillings, to be
     borne by the person neglecting to have the punishment
     inflicted. And in case such male negro or slave shall run
     away the fourth time, and shall so continue for the space of
     thirty days, he, so offending, for the fourth offence, by
     order or procurement of the master, mistress, overseer or
     head of the family, shall be gelt; and in case the negro or
     slave that shall be gelt, shall die, by reason of his
     gelding, and without any neglect of the person that shall
     order the same, the owner of the negro or slave so dying,
     shall be paid for him, out of the public treasury. And if a
     female slave shall run away the fourth time, then she shall,
     by order of her master, mistress or overseer, be severely
     whipped, and be branded on the left cheek with the letter R,
     and her left ear cut off. And if the owner, if in this
     Province, or in case of his absence, if his agent, factor or
     attorney, that hath the charge of the negro or slave, by
     this Act required to be gelt, whipped, branded and the ear
     cut off, for the fourth time of running away, shall neglect
     to have the same done and executed, accordingly as the same
     is ordered by this Act, for the space of twenty days after
     such slave is in his or their custody, that then such owner
     shall lose his property to the said slave, to him or them
     that will sue for the same, by information, at any time
     within six months, in the court of common pleas in this
     Province. And every person who shall so recover a slave by
     information, for the reasons aforesaid, shall, within twenty
     days after such recovery, inflict such punishment upon such
     slave as his former owner or head of a family ought to have
     done, and for neglect of which he lost his property to the
     said slave, or for neglect thereof shall forfeit fifty
     pounds; and in case any negro slave so recovered by
     information, and gelt, shall die, in such case, the slave so
     dying shall not be paid for out of the public treasury. And
     in case any negro or slave shall run away the fifth time,
     and shall so continue by the space of thirty days at one
     time, such slave shall be tried before two justices of the
     peace and three freeholders, as before directed by this Act
     in case of murder, and being by them declared guilty of the
     offence, it shall be lawful for them to order the cord of
     one of the slave's legs to be cut off above the heel, or
     else to pronounce sentence of death upon the slave, at the
     discretion of the said justices; and any judgment given
     after the first offence, shall be sufficient conviction to
     bring the offenders within the penalty for the second
     offence; and after the second, within the penalty of the
     third; and so for the inflicting the rest of the
     punishments."[490]

If any slave attempted to run away from his or her master, and go out
of the Province, he or she could be tried before two justices and
three freeholders, and sentenced to suffer a most cruel death. If it
could be proved that any Negro, free or slave, had endeavored to
persuade or entice any other Negro to run off out of the Province,
upon conviction he was punished with forty lashes, and branded on the
forehead with a red hot iron, "that the mark thereof may remain." If a
white man met a slave, and demanded of him to show his ticket, and the
slave refused, the law empowered the white man "to beat, maim, or
assault; and if such Negro or slave" could not "be taken, to kill
him," if he would not "shew his ticket."

The cruel and barbarous code of the slave-power in South Carolina
produced, in course of time, a re-action in the opposite direction.
The large latitude that the law gave to white people in their dealings
with the hapless slaves made them careless and extravagant in the use
of their authority. It educated them into a brood of tyrants. They did
not care any more for the life of a Negro slave than for the crawling
worm in their path. Many white men who owned no slaves poured forth
their wrathful invectives and cruel blows upon the heads of innocent
Negroes with the slightest pretext. They pushed, jostled, crowded, and
kicked the Negro on every occasion. The young whites early took their
lessons in abusing God's poor and helpless children; while an overseer
was prized more for his brutal powers--to curse, beat, and
torture--than for any ability he chanced to possess for business
management. The press and pulpit had contemplated this state of
affairs until they, too, were the willing abettors in the most cruel
system of bondage that history has recorded. But no man wants his
horse driven to death, if it is a beast. No one cares to have every
man that passes kick his dog, even if it is not the best dog in the
community. It is _his_ dog, and that makes all the difference in the
world. The men who did the most cruel things to the slaves they found
in their daily path were, as a rule, without slaves or any other kind
of property. They used their authority unsparingly. Common-sense
taught the planters that better treatment of the slaves meant better
work, and increased profits for themselves. A small value was finally
placed upon a slave's life,--fifty pounds. Fifty pounds paid into the
public treasury by a man who, "of wantonness, or only of
bloody-mindedness, or cruel intention," had killed "a negro or other
slave of his own," was enough to appease the public mind, and atone
for a cold-blooded murder! If he killed another man's slave, the law
demanded that he pay fifty pounds current money into the public
treasury, and the full price of the slave to the owner, but was "not
to be liable to any other punishment or forfeiture for the same."[491]
The law just referred to, passed in 1712, was re-enacted in 1722. One
change was made in it: i.e., if a white servant, having no property,
killed a slave, three justices could bind him over to the master whose
slave he killed to serve him for five years. This law had a wholesome
effect upon irresponsible white men, who often presumed upon their
nationality, having neither brains, money, nor social standing, to
punish slaves.

In 1740, May 10, the following Act became a law, showing that there
had been a wonderful change in public sentiment rejecting the
treatment of slaves:--

     "XXXVII. And _whereas_, cruelty is not only highly
     unbecoming those who profess themselves christians but is
     odious in the eyes of all men who have any sense of virtue
     or humanity; therefore, to restrain and prevent barbarity
     being exercised towards slaves, _Be it enacted_ by the
     authority aforesaid, That if any person or persons
     whosoever, shall wilfully murder his own slave, or the slave
     of any other person every such person shall, upon conviction
     thereof, forfeit and pay the sum of seven hundred pounds
     current money, and shall be rendered, and is hereby declared
     altogether and forever incapable of holding, exercising,
     enjoying or receiving the profits of any office, place or
     employment, civil or military, within this Province: And in
     case any such person shall not be able to pay the penalty
     and forfeitures hereby inflicted and imposed, every such
     person shall be sent to any of the frontier garrisons of
     this Province, or committed to the work house in
     Charlestown, there to remain for the space of seven years,
     and to serve or to be kept at hard labor. And in case the
     slave murdered shall be the property of any other person
     than the offender, the pay usually allowed by the public to
     the soldiers of such garrison, or the profits of the labor
     of the offender, if committed to the work house in
     Charlestown shall be paid to the owner of the slave
     murdered. And if any person shall, on a sudden heat of
     passion, or by undue correction, kill his own slave, or the
     slave of any other person, he shall forfeit the sum of three
     hundred and fifty pounds, current money. And in case any
     person or persons shall wilfully cut out the tongue, put out
     the eye, castrate, or cruelly scald, burn, or deprive any
     slave of any limb or member, or shall inflict any other
     cruel punishment, other than by whipping or beating with a
     horse-whip, cow-skin, switch or small stick or by putting
     irons on, or confining or imprisoning such slave, every such
     person shall, for every such offence, forfeit the sum of one
     hundred pounds, current money."[492]

It may be said truthfully that the slaves in the colony of South
Carolina were accorded treatment as good as that bestowed upon
horses, in 1750. But their social condition was most deplorable. The
law positively forbid the instruction of slaves, and the penalty was
"one hundred pounds current money." For a few years Saturday afternoon
had been allowed them as a day of recreation, but as early as 1690 it
was forbidden by statute. In the same year an Act was passed declaring
that slaves should "have convenient clothes, once every year; and that
no slave" should "be free by becoming a christian,[493] but as to
payments of debts" were "deemed and taken as all other goods and
chattels." Their houses were searched every fortnight "for runaway
slaves" and "stolen goods." Druggists were not allowed to employ a
Negro to handle medicines, upon pain of forfeiting twenty pounds
current money for every such offence. Negroes were not allowed to
practise medicine, nor administer drugs of any kind, except by the
direction of some white person. Any gathering of Negroes could be
broken up at the discretion of a justice living in the district where
the meeting was in session.

Poor clothing and insufficient food bred wide-spread discontent among
the slaves, and attracted public attention.[494] Many masters
endeavored to get on as cheaply as possible in providing for their
slaves. In 1732 the Legislature passed an Act empowering two justices
of the peace to inquire as to the treatment of slaves on the several
plantations; and if any master neglected his slaves in food and
raiment, he was liable to a fine of not more than fifty shillings. In
May, 1740, an Act was passed requiring masters to see to it that their
slaves were not overworked. The time set for them to work, was "from
the 25th day of March to the 25th day of September," not "more than
fifteen hours in four-and-twenty;" and "from the 25th day of September
to the 25th day of March," not "more than fourteen hours in
four-and-twenty."

The history of the impost-tax on slaves imported into the Province of
South Carolina is the history of organized greed, ambition, and
extortion. Many were the gold sovereigns that were turned into the
official coffers at Charleston! With a magnificent harbor, and a
genial climate, no city in the South could rival it as a slave-market.
With an abundant supply from without, and a steady demand from within,
the officials at Charleston felt assured that high impost-duties could
not interfere with the slave-trade; while the city would be a great
gainer by the traffic, both mediately and immediately.

Sudden and destructive insurrections were the safety-valves to the
institution of slavery. A race long and cruelly enslaved may endure
the yoke patiently for a season: but like the sudden gathering of the
summer clouds, the pelting rain, the vivid, blinding lightning, the
deep, hoarse thundering, it will assert itself some day; and then it
is indeed a day of judgment to the task-masters! The Negroes in South
Carolina endured a most cruel treatment for a long time; and, when
"the day of their wrath" came, they scarcely knew it themselves, much
less the whites. Florida was in the possession of the Spaniards. Its
governor had sent out spies into Georgia and South Carolina, who held
out very flattering inducements to the Negroes to desert their masters
and go to Florida. Moreover, there was a Negro regiment in the Spanish
service, whose officers were from their own race. Many slaves had made
good their escape, and joined this regiment. It was allowed the same
uniform and pay as the Spanish soldiers had. The colony of South
Carolina was fearing an enemy from without, while behold their worst
enemy was at their doors! In 1740 some Negroes assembled themselves
together at a town called Stone, and made an attack upon two young
men, who were guarding a warehouse, and killed them. They seized the
arms and ammunition, effected an organization by electing one of their
number captain; and, with boisterous drums and flying banners, they
marched off "like a disciplined company." They entered the house of
one Mr. Godfrey, slew him, his wife, and child, and then fired his
dwelling. They next took up their march towards Jacksonburgh, and
plundered and burnt the houses of Sacheveral, Nash, Spry, and others.
They killed all the white people they found, and recruited their ranks
from the Negroes they met. Gov. Bull was "returning to Charleston from
the southward, met them, and, observing them armed, quickly rode out
of their way."[495] In a march of twelve miles, they had wrought a
work of great destruction. News reached Wiltown, and the militia were
called out. The Negro insurrectionists were intoxicated with their
triumph, and drunk from rum they had taken from the houses they had
plundered. They halted in an open field to sing and dance; and, during
their hilarity, Capt. Bee, at the head of the troops of the district,
fell upon them, and, having killed several, captured all who did not
make their escape in the woods.

The Province was thrown into intense excitement. The Legislature
called attention to the insurrection,[496] and declared legal some
very questionable and summary acts. In 1743 the people had not
recovered from the fright they received from the insurrection. On the
7th of May, 1743, an Act was passed requiring every white male
inhabitant, who resorted "to any church or any other public place of
divine worship, within" the Province to "carry with him a gun or a
pair of horse pistols, in good order and fit for service, with at
least six charges of gun-powder and ball," upon pain of paying "twenty
shillings."

As there was a law against teaching slaves to read and write, there
were no educated preachers. If a Negro desired to preach to his
fellow-slaves, he had to secure written permission from his master.
While Negroes were sometimes baptized into the communion of the
Church,--usually the Episcopal Church,--they were allowed only in the
gallery, or organ-loft, of white congregations, in small numbers. No
clergyman ventured to break unto this benighted people the bread of
life. They were abandoned to the superstitions and religious
fanaticisms incident to their condition.

In 1704 an Act was passed "_for raising and enlisting such slaves as
shalt be thought serviceable to this Province in time of Alarms_." It
required, within thirty days after the publication of the Act, that
the commanders of military organizations throughout the Province
should appoint "five freeholders," "sober and discreet men," who were
to make a complete list of all the able-bodied slaves in their
respective districts. Three of them were competent to decide upon the
qualifications of a slave. After the completion of the list, the
freeholders mentioned above notified the owners to appear before them
upon a certain day, and show cause why their slaves should not be
chosen for the service of the colony. The slaves were then enlisted,
and their masters charged with the duty of arming them "with a
serviceable lance, hatchet or gun, with sufficient amunition and
hatchets, according to the conveniency of the said owners, to appear
under the colours of the respective captains, in their several
divisions, throughout" the Province, for the performance of such
"public service" as required. If an owner refused to equip or permit
his slave to respond to alarms, he was fined five pounds for each
neglect, which was to be paid to the captain of the company to which
the slave belonged. If a slave were killed by the enemy "in the line
of duty," the owner of such slave was paid out of the public treasury
such sum of money as three freeholders, under oath, should award. The
Negroes did admirably; and four years later, on the 24th of April,
1708, the Legislature re-enacted the bill making them militia-men. The
last Act contained ten sections, and bears evidence of the pleasure
the whites took in the employment of Negroes as their defenders. If a
Negro were taken prisoner by the enemy, and effected his escape back
into the Province, he was emancipated. And if a Negro captured and
killed an enemy, he was emancipated, but if wounded himself, was set
free at the public expense. If he deserted to the enemy, his master
was paid for his loss.

Few slaves were manumitted. The law required that masters who
emancipated their slaves should make provisions for transporting them
out of the Province. If they were found in the Province twelve months
after they were set free, the manumission was considered void, except
approved by the Legislature.

From 1754 till 1776 there was little legislation on the subject of
slavery. The pressure from without made men conservative about
slavery, and radical on the question of the rights and liberties of
the colonies. The threatening war between England and her provincial
dependencies made men humane and patriotic; and during these years of
anxiety and excitement, the weary slaves breathed a better atmosphere,
and enjoyed the rare sensation of confidence and benevolence.


FOOTNOTES:

[482] An eminent lawyer, chief justice of the Supreme Court of the
State of ----, and a warm personal friend of mine, recently said to
me, during an afternoon stroll, that he never knew that slavery was
ever established by statute in any of the British colonies in North
America.

[483] Statutes of S.C., vol. vii. p. 352.

[484] Virginia made slavery statutory as did other colonies, but we
have no statute so explicit as the above. But slavery was slavery in
all the colonies, cruel and hurtful.

[485] Statutes of S.C., vol. vii. p. 397.

[486] Statutes of S.C., vol. vii. pp. 397, 398.

[487] Ibid., vol. vii. pp. 343, 344.

[488] This Act, passed on the 16th of March, 1696, was made
"perpetual" on the 12th of December, 1712. It remained throughout the
entire period. See Statutes of S.C., vol. ii, p. 598.

[489] Statutes of S.C., vol. vii. p. 363.

[490] Statutes of S.C., vol. vii. pp. 359, 360.

[491] Statutes of S.C., vol. vii. 363.

[492] Ibid., vol vii. pp. 410. 411.

[493] The following is the Act of the 7th of June, 1690. "XXXIV Since
charity, and the christian religion, which we profess, obliges us to
wish well to the souls of all men, and that religion may not be made a
pretence to alter any man's property and right, and that no person may
neglect to baptize their negroes or slaves, or suffer them to be
baptized, for fear that thereby they should be manumitted and set
free, Be it therefore enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it
shall be, and is hereby declared, lawful for any negro or Indian
slave, or any other slave or slaves whatsoever, to receive and profess
the christian faith, and be thereinto baptized; but that
notwithstanding such slave or slaves shall receive and profess the
Christian religion, and be baptized, he or they shall not thereby be
manumitted or set free, or his or their owner, master or mistress lose
his or their civil right, property, and authority over such slave or
slaves, but that the slave or slaves, with respect to his servitude
shall remain and continue in the same state and condition that he or
they was in before the making of this act."--_Statutes of S.C._, vol.
vii. pp 364, 365.

[494] In 1740 an Act was passed requiring masters to provide
"sufficient clothing" for their slaves.

[495] Hist. S.C. and Georgia, vol. ii. p. 73.

[496] Statutes of S.C., vol. vii. p. 416.




CHAPTER XXII.

THE COLONY OF NORTH CAROLINA.

1669-1775.

     THE GEOGRAPHICAL SITUATION OF NORTH CAROLINA FAVORABLE TO
     THE SLAVE TRADE.--THE LOCKE CONSTITUTION ADOPTED.--WILLIAM
     SAYLE COMMISSIONED GOVERNOR.--LEGISLATURE CAREER OF THE
     COLONY.--THE INTRODUCTION OF THE ESTABLISHED CHURCH OF
     ENGLAND INTO THE COLONY.--THE RIGHTS OF NEGROES CONTROLLED
     ABSOLUTELY BY THEIR MASTERS.--AN ACT RESPECTING
     CONSPIRACIES.--THE WRATH OF ILL-NATURED WHITES VISITED UPON
     THEIR SLAVES.--AN ACT AGAINST THE EMANCIPATION OF
     SLAVES.--LIMITED RIGHTS OF FREE NEGROES.


The geographical situation of North Carolina was favorable to the
slave-trade.

Through the genius of Shaftesbury, and the subtle cunning of John
Locke, Carolina received, and for a time adopted, the most remarkable
constitution ever submitted to any people in any age of the world. The
whole affair was an insult to humanity, and in its fundamental
elements bore the palpable evidences of the cruel conclusions of an
exclusive philosophy. "No elective franchise could be conferred upon a
freehold of less than fifty acres," while all executive power was
vested in the proprietors themselves. Seven courts were controlled by
forty-two counsellors, twenty-eight of whom held their places through
the gracious favor of the proprietary and "the nobility." Trial by
jury was concluded by the opinions of the majority.

     "The instinct of aristocracy dreads the moral power of a
     proprietary yeomanry; the perpetual degradation of the
     cultivators of the soil was enacted. The leet-men, or
     tenants, holding ten acres of land at a fixed rent, were not
     only destitute of political franchises, but were adscripts
     to the soil, 'under the jurisdiction of their lord, without
     appeal;' and it was added, 'all the children of leet-men
     shall be leet-men, and so to all generations.'"[497]

The men who formed the rank and file of the yeomanry of the colony of
North Carolina were ill prepared for a government launched upon the
immense scale of the Locke Constitution. The hopes and fears, the
feuds and debates, the vexatious and insoluble problems, of the
political science of government which had clouded the sky of the most
astute and ambitous statesmen of Europe, were dumped into this
remarkable instrument. The distance between the people and the
nobility was sought to be made illimitable, and the right to govern
was based upon permanent property conditions. Hereditary wealth was to
go arm in arm with political power.

The constitution was signed on the 21st of July, 1669, and William
Sayle was commissioned as governor. The legislative career of the
Province began in the fall of the same year; and history must record
that it was one of the most remarkable and startling North America
ever witnessed. The portions of the constitution which refer to the
institution of slavery are as follows:--

     "97th. But since the natives of that place, who will be
     concerned in our plantation, are utterly strangers to
     Christianity, whose idolatry, ignorance or mistake, gives us
     no right to expel or use them ill; and those who remove from
     other parts to plant there, will unavoidably be of different
     opinions, concerning matters of religion, the liberty
     whereof they will expect to have allowed them, and it will
     not be reasonable for us on this account to keep them out;
     that civil peace may be obtained amidst diversity of
     opinions, and our agreement and compact with all men, may be
     duly and faithfully observed; the violation whereof, upon
     what pretence soever, cannot be without great offence to
     Almighty God, and great scandal to the true religion which
     we profess; and also that Jews, Heathens and other
     dissenters from the purity of the Christian religion, may
     not be scared and kept at a distance from it, but by having
     an opportunity of acquainting themselves with the truth and
     reasonableness of its doctrines, and the peaceableness and
     inoffensiveness of its professors, may by good usage and
     persuasion, and all those convincing methods of gentleness
     and meekness, suitable to the rules and design of the
     gospel, be won over to embrace, and unfeignedly receive the
     truth; therefore any seven or more persons agreeing in any
     religion, shall constitute a church or profession, to which
     they shall give some name, to distinguish it from others....

     "101st. No person above seventeen years of age, shall have
     any benefit or protection of the law, or be capable of any
     place of profit or honor, who is not a member of some church
     or profession, having his name recorded in some one, and but
     one religious record, at once....

     "107th. Since charity obliges us to wish well to the souls
     of all men, and religion ought to alter nothing in any man's
     civil estate or right, it shall be lawful for slaves as well
     as others, to enter themselves and be of what church or
     profession any of them shall think best, and thereof be as
     fully members as any freemen. But yet no slave shall hereby
     be exempted from that civil dominion his master hath over
     him, but be in all things in the same state and condition he
     was in before....

     "110th. Every freeman of Carolina, shall have absolute
     power and authority over his negro slaves, of what opinion
     or religion soever."[498]

Though the Locke Constitution was adopted by the proprietaries, March
1, 1669, it may be doubted whether it ever had the force of law, as it
was never ratified by the local Legislature. Article one hundred and
ten, granting absolute power and authority to a master over his Negro
slave, is without a parallel in the legislation of the colonies. And
while the slave might enter the Christian Church, and his humanity
thereby be recognized, it was strangely inconsistent to place his life
at the disposal of brutal masters, who "neither feared God nor
regarded man."

The Negro slaves in North Carolina occupied the paradoxical position
of being eligible to membership in the Christian Church, and the
absolute property of their white brothers. In the second draught of
the constitution, signed in March, 1670, against the eloquent protest
of John Locke, the section on religion was amended so as, while
tolerating every religious creed, to declare "the Church Of England"
the only true Orthodox Church, and the national religion of the
Province. This, in the face of the fact that the great majority of all
the Christians who flocked to the New World were dissenters,
separatists, and nonconformists, can only be explained in the light of
the burning zeal of the Church of England to out-Herod Herod,--to
carry the Negroes into the communion of the State church for political
purposes. It was the most sordid motive that impelled the churchmen to
open the church to the slave. His membership did not change his
condition, nor secure him immunity from the barbarous treatment the
institution of slavery bestowed upon its helpless victims.

In the eyes of the law the Negro, being _absolute property_, had no
rights, except those temporarily delegated by the master; and he acted
in the relation of an agent. Negro slaves were not allowed "to raise
horses, cattle or hogs;" and if any stock were found in their
possession six months after the passage of the Act of 1741, they were
to be seized by the sheriff of the county, and sold by the
church-wardens of the parish. The profits arising from such sales
went, one half to the parish, the other half to the informer.[499] A
slave was not suffered to go off of the plantation where he was
appointed to live, without a pass signed by his master or the
overseer. There was an exception made in the case of Negroes wearing
liveries. Negro slaves were not allowed the use of fire-arms or other
weapons, except they were armed with a certificate from their master
granting the coveted permission. If they hunted with arms, not having
a certificate, any Christian could apprehend them, seize the weapons,
deliver the slave to the first justice of the peace; who was
authorized to administer, without ceremony, twenty lashes upon his or
her bare hack, and send him or her home. The master had to pay the
cost of arrest and punishment. The one exception to this law was, that
one Negro on each plantation or in each district could carry a gun to
shoot game for his master and protect stock, etc.; but his certificate
was to be in his possession all the time. If a Negro went from the
plantation on which he resided, to another plantation or place, he was
required by statute to travel in the most generally frequented road.
If caught in another road, not much travelled, except in the company
of a white man, it was lawful for the man who owned the land through
which he was passing to seize him, and administer not more than forty
lashes. If Negroes visited each other in the night season,--the only
time they could visit,--the ones who were found on another plantation
than their master's were punished with lashes on their naked back, not
exceeding forty; while the Negroes who had furnished the entertainment
received twenty lashes for their hospitality. In case any slave, who
had not been properly fed and clothed by his master, was convicted of
stealing cattle, hogs, or corn from another man, an action of trespass
could be maintained against the master in the general or county court,
and damages recovered.[500]

Here, as in the other colonies, the greatest enemy of the colonists
was an accusing conscience. The people started at every breath of
rumor, and always imagined their slaves conspiring to cut their
throats. There was nothing in the observed character of the slaves to
justify the wide-spread consternation that filled the public mind. Nor
was there any occasion to warrant the passage of the Act of 1741,
respecting conspiracies among slaves. It is a remarkable document, and
is produced here.

     "XLVII. _And be it further enacted by the authority
     aforesaid_, That if any number of negroes or other slaves,
     that is to say, three, or more, shall, at any time
     hereafter, consult, advise or conspire to rebel or make
     insurrection, or shall plot or conspire the murder of any
     person or persons whatsoever, every such consulting,
     plotting or conspiring, shall be adjudged and deemed felony;
     and the slave or slaves convicted thereof, in manner herein
     after directed, shall suffer death.

     "XLVIII. _And be it further enacted by the authority
     aforesaid_,'That every slave committing such offence, or any
     other crime or misdemeanor, shall forthwith be committed by
     any justice of the peace, to the common jail of the county
     within which the said offence shall be committed, there to
     be safely kept; and that the sheriff of such county, upon
     such commitment, shall forthwith certify the same to any
     Justice in the commission for the said court for the time
     being, resident in the county, who is thereupon required and
     directed to issue a summons for two or more Justices of the
     said court, and four freeholders, such as shall have slaves
     in the said county, which said three Justices and four
     freeholders, owners of slaves, are hereby impowered and
     required upon oath, to try all manner of crimes and
     offences, that shall be committed by any slave or slaves, at
     the court house of the county, and to take for evidence, the
     confession of the offender, the oath of one or more credible
     witnesses, or such testimony of negroes, mulattoes or
     Indians, bond or free, with pregnant circumstances, as to
     them shall seem convincing, without the solemnity of a jury;
     and the offender being then found guilty, to pass such
     judgment upon such offender, according to their discretion,
     as the nature of the crime or offence shall require; and on
     such judgment, to award execution.

     "XLIX. _Provided always, and be it enacted_, That it shall
     and may be lawful for each and every Justice, being in the
     commission of the peace for the county where any slave or
     slaves shall be tried, by virtue of this act, (who is owner
     of slaves) to sit upon such trial, and act as a member of
     such court though he or they be not summoned thereto;
     anything herein before contained to the contrary, in any
     wise, notwithstanding.

     "L. And to the end such negro, mulatto or Indian, bond or
     free, not being christians, as shall hereafter be produced
     as an evidence on the trial of any slave or slaves, for
     capital or other crimes, may be under the greater obligation
     to declare the truth; _Be it further enacted_, There where
     any such negro, mulatto or Indian, bond or free, shall, upon
     due proof made, or pregnant circumstances, appearing before
     any county court within this government, be found to have
     given a false testimony, every such offender shall, without
     further trial, be ordered, by the said court, to have one
     ear nailed to the pillory, and there stand for the space of
     one hour, and the said ear to be cut off, and thereafter the
     other ear nailed in like manner, and cut off, at the
     expiration of one other hour: and moreover, to order every
     such offender thirty-nine lashes, well laid on, on his or
     her bare back, at the common whipping post.

     "LI. _And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid_,
     That at every such trial of slaves committing capital or
     other offences, the first person in commission sitting on
     such trial, shall, before the examination of every negro,
     mulatto or Indian, not being a christian, charge such to
     declare the truth.

     "LII. _Provided always, and it is hereby intended_, That the
     master, owner or overseer of any slave, to be arraigned and
     tried by virtue of this act, may appear at the trial, and
     make what just defence he can for such slave or slave; so
     that such defence do not relate to any formality in the
     proceeding on the trial."[501]

The manner of conducting the trials of Negroes charged with felony or
misdemeanor was rather peculiar. Upon one or more white persons'
testimony, or the evidence of Negroes and Indians, bond or free, the
unfortunate defendant, "without the solemnity of a jury," before three
justices and four freeholders, could be hurried through a trial,
convicted, sentenced to die a dreadful death, and then be executed
without the officiating presence of a minister of the gospel.

The unprecedented discretion allowed to masters in the government led
to the most tragic results. Men were not only reckless of the lives of
their own slaves, but violent toward those belonging to others. If a
Negro showed the least independence in conversation with a white man,
he could be murdered in cold blood; and it was only a case of a
contumacious slave getting his dues. But men became so prodigal in the
exercise of this authority that the public became alarmed, and the
Legislature called a halt on the master-class. At first the
Legislature paid for the slaves who were destroyed by the consuming
wrath of ill-natured whites, but finally allowed an action to lie
against the persons who killed a slave. This had a tendency to reduce
the number of murdered slaves; but the fateful clause in the Locke
Constitution had educated a voracious appetite for blood, and the
extremest cruel treatment continued without abatement.

The free Negro population was very small in this colony. The following
act on manumission differs so widely from the law on this point in the
other colonies, that it is given as an illustration of the severe
character of the legislation of North Carolina against the
emancipation of Negroes.

     "LVI. _And be it further enacted by the authority
     aforesaid, _That no Negro or mulatto slaves shall be set
     free, upon any pretence whatsoever, except for meritorious
     services, to be adjudged and allowed of by the county court,
     and Licence thereupon first had and obtained: and that where
     any slave shall be set free by his or her master or owner,
     otherwise than is herein before directed, it shall and may
     be lawful for the church-wardens of the parish wherein such
     negro, mulatto or Indian, shall be found, at the expiration
     of six months, next alter his or her being set free, and
     they are hereby authorized and required, to take up and sell
     the said negro, mulatto or Indian, as a slave, at the next
     court to be held for the said county, at public vendue: and
     the monies arising by such sale, shall be applied to the use
     of the parish, by the vestry thereof: and if any negro,
     mulatto or Indian slave, set free otherwise than is herein
     directed, shall depart this province, within six months next
     after his or her freedom, and shall afterwards return into
     this government, it shall and may be lawful for the
     churchwardens of the parish where such negro or mulatto
     shall be found, at the expiration of one month, next after
     his or her return into this government to take up such negro
     or mulatto, and sell him or them, as slaves, at the next
     court to be held for the county, at public vendue; and the
     monies arising thereby, to be applied, by the vestry, to the
     use of the parish, as aforesaid."[502]

The free Negroes were badly treated. They were not allowed any
communion with the slaves. A free Negro man was not allowed to marry a
white woman, nor even a Negro slave woman without the consent of her
master. If he formed an alliance with a white woman, her offspring
were bound out, or sold by the church-wardens, until they obtained
their majority.[503] If the white woman were an indentured servant,
she was constrained to serve an additional year. If she were a free
woman, she was sold for two years by the church-wardens. Free Negroes
were greatly despised and shunned by both slaves and white people.

As a conspicuous proof of the glaring hypocrisy of the "nobility,"
who, in the constitution, threw open the door of the Church to the
Negro, it should be said, that, during the period from the founding of
the Province down to the colonial war, no attempt was ever made,
through the ecclesiastical establishment, to dissipate the dark clouds
of ignorance that enveloped the Negro's mind. They were left in a
state of ignorance and crime. The gravest social evils were winked at
by masters, whose lecherous examples were the occasion for the most
grievous offending of the slaves. The Mulattoes and other free Negroes
were taxed. They had no place in the militia, nor could they claim the
meanest rights of the humblest "leetman."


FOOTNOTES:

[497] Bancroft, vol. ii., 5th ed. p. 148.

[498] Statutes of S.C., vol. i. pp. 53-55.

[499] Public Acts of N.C., vol. i. p. 64.

[500] This is an instance of humanity in the North-Carolina code
worthy of special note. It stands as the only instance of justice
toward the over-worked and under-fed slaves of the colony.

[501] Public Acts of N.C., p.65.

[502] Public Acts of N.C., p. 66.

[503] The Act of 1741 says, "until 31 years of age."




CHAPTER XXIII.

THE COLONY OF NEW HAMPSHIRE.

1679-1775.

     THE PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENT OF MASSACHUSETTS EXERCISES
     AUTHORITY OVER THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE AT ITS
     ORGANIZATION.--SLAVERY EXISTED FROM THE BEGINNING.--THE
     GOVERNOR RELEASES A SLAVE FROM BONDAGE.--INSTRUCTION AGAINST
     IMPORTATION OF SLAVES.--SEVERAL ACTS REGULATING THE CONDUCT
     OF SERVANTS.--THE INDIFFERENT TREATMENT OF SLAVES.--THE
     IMPORTATION OF INDIAN SERVANTS FORBIDDEN.--AN ACT CHECKING
     THE SEVERE TREATMENT OF SERVANTS AND SLAVES.--SLAVES IN THE
     COLONY UNTIL THE COMMENCEMENT OF HOSTILITIES.


Anterior to the year 1679, the provincial government of Massachusetts
exercised authority over the territory that now comprises the State of
New Hampshire. It is not at all improbable, then, that slavery existed
in this colony from the beginning of its organic existence. As early
as 1683 it was set upon by the authorities as a wicked and hateful
institution. On the 14th of March, 1684, the governor of New Hampshire
assumed the responsibility of releasing a Negro slave from bondage.
The record of the fact is thus preserved:--

     "_The governor tould Mr. Jaffery's negro hee might goe from
     his master, hee would clere him under hande and sele, so the
     fello no more attends his master's consernes._"[504]

It may be inferred from the above, that the royal governor of the
Province felt the pressure of public sentiment on the question of
anti-slavery. While this colony copied its criminal code from
Massachusetts, its people seemed to be rather select, and, on the
question of human rights, far in advance of the people of
Massachusetts. The twelfth article was: "If any man stealeth mankind
he shall be put to death or otherwise grievously punished." The entire
code--the first one--was rejected in England as "fanatical and
absurd."[505] It was the desire of this new and feeble colony to
throw every obstacle in the way of any legal recognition of slavery.
The governors of all the colonies received instruction in regard to
the question of slavery, but the governor of New Hampshire had
received an order from the crown to have the tax on imported slaves
removed. The royal instructions, dated June 30, 1761, were as
follows:--

     "You are not to give your assent to, or pass any law
     imposing duties on negroes imported into New
     Hampshire."[506]

New Hampshire never passed any law establishing slavery, but in 1714
enacted several laws regulating the conduct of servants. One was _An
Act to prevent disorder in the night_:--

     "Whereas great disorders, insolencies, and burglaries are
     ofttimes raised and committed in the night time by Indian,
     negro and mulatto servants and slaves, to the disquiet and
     hurt of her Majesty's good subjects, for the prevention
     whereof _Be it_, &c.--that no Indian, negro or mulatto
     servant or slave may presume to be absent from the families
     where they respectively belong, or be found abroad in the
     night time after nine o'clock; unless it be upon errand for
     their respective masters."[507]

The instructions against the importation of slaves were in harmony
with the feelings of the great majority of the people. They felt that
slavery would be a hinderance rather than a help to them, and in the
selection of servants chose white ones. If the custom of holding men
in bondage had become a part of the institutions of Massachusetts,--so
like a cancer that it could not be removed without endangering the
political and commercial life of the colony,--the good people of New
Hampshire, acting in the light of experience, resolved, upon the
threshold of their provincial life, to oppose the introduction of
slaves into their midst. The first result was, that they learned quite
early that they could get on without slaves; and, second, the traders
in human flesh discovered that there was no demand for slaves in New
Hampshire. Even nature fought against the crime; and Negroes were
found to be poorly suited to the climate, and, of course, were an
expensive luxury in that colony.

But, nevertheless, there were slaves in New Hampshire. The majority of
them had gone in during the time the colony was a part of the
territory of Massachusetts. They had been purchased by men who
regarded them as indispensable to them. They had lived long in many
families; children had been born unto them, and in many instances they
were warmly attached to their owners. But all masters were not alike.
Some treated their servants and slaves cruelly. The neglect in some
cases was worse than stripes or over-work. Some were poorly clad and
scantily fed; and, thus exposed to the inclemency of the severe
climate, many were precipitated into premature graves. Even white and
Indian servants shared this harsh treatment. The Indians endured
greater hardships than the Negroes. They were more lofty in their
tone, more sensitive in their feelings, more revengeful in their
disposition. They were both hated and feared, and the public sentiment
against them was very pronounced. A law, passed in 1714, forbid their
importation into the colony under a heavy penalty.

In 1718 it was found necessary to pass a law to check the severe
treatment inflicted upon servants and slaves. _An Act for restraining
inhuman severities_ recited,--

     "Fort the prevention and restraining of inhuman severities
     which by evil masters or overseers, may be used towards
     their Christian servants, that from and after the
     publication hereof, if any man smite out the eye or tooth of
     his man servant or maid servant, or otherwise maim or
     disfigure them much, unless it be by mere casualty, he shall
     let him or her go free from his service, and shall allow
     such further recompense as the court of quarter sessions
     shall adjudge him. 2. That if any person or persons whatever
     in this province shall wilfully kill his Indian or negroe
     servant or servants he shall be punished with death."[508]

There were slaves in New Hampshire down to the breaking-out of the war
in the colonies, but they were only slaves in name. Few in number,
widely scattered, they felt themselves closely identified with the
interests of the colonists.


FOOTNOTES:

[504] Belknap's Hist. of N.H., vol. i. p. 333.

[505] Hildreth, vol. i. p. 501.

[506] Gordon's Hist. of Am. Rev., vol. v. Letter 2.

[507] Freedom and Bondage, vol. i. p. 266.

[508] Freedom and Bondage, vol. i. p. 267.




CHAPTER XXIV.

THE COLONY OF PENNSYLVANIA.

1681-1775.

     ORGANIZATION OF THE GOVERNMENT OF PENNSYLVANIA.--THE SWEDES
     AND DUTCH PLANT SETTLEMENTS ON THE WESTERN BANK OF THE
     DELAWARE RIVER.--THE GOVERNOR OF NEW YORK SEEKS TO EXERCISE
     JURISDICTION OVER THE TERRITORY OF PENNSYLVANIA.--THE FIRST
     LAWS AGREED UPON IN ENGLAND.--PROVISIONS OF THE
     LAW.--MEMORIAL AGAINST SLAVERY DRAUGHTED AND ADOPTED BY THE
     GERMANTOWN FRIENDS.--WILLIAM PENN PRESENTS A BILL FOR THE
     BITTER REGULATION OF SERVANTS.--AN ACT PREVENTING THE
     IMPORTATION OF NEGROES AND INDIANS.--RIGHTS OF NEGROES.--A
     DUTY LAID UPON NEGROES AND MULATTO SLAVES.--THE QUAKER THE
     FRIEND OF THE NEGRO.--ENGLAND BEINGS TO THREATEN HER
     DEPENDENCIES IN NORTH AMERICA.--THE PEOPLE OF PENNSYLVANIA
     REFLECT UPON THE PROBABLE OUTRAGES THEIR NEGROES MIGHT
     COMMIT.


Long before there was an organized government in Pennsylvania, the
Swedes and Dutch had planted settlements on the western bank of the
Delaware River. But the English crown claimed the soil; and the
governor of New York, under patent from the Duke of York, sought to
exercise jurisdiction over the territory. On the 11th of July, 1681,
"Conditions and Concessions were agreed upon by William Penn,
Proprietary," and the persons who were "adventurers and purchasers in
the same province." Provision was made for the punishment of persons
who should injure Indians, and that the planter injured by them should
"not be his own judge upon the Indian." All controversies arising
between the whites and the Indians were to be settled by a council of
twelve persons,--six white men and six Indians.

The first laws for the government of the colony were agreed upon in
England, and in 1682 went into effect. Provision was made for the
registering of all servants, their full names, amount of wages paid,
and the time when they received their remuneration. It was strictly
required that servants should not be kept beyond the time of their
indenture, should be kindly treated, and the customary outfit
furnished at the time of their freedom.

The baneful custom of enslaving Negroes had spread through every
settlement in North America, and was even "tolerated in Pennsylvania
under the specious pretence of the religious instruction of the
slave."[509] In 1688 Francis Daniel Pastorius draughted a memorial
against slavery, which was adopted by the Germantown Friends, and by
them sent up to the Monthly Meeting, and thence to the Yearly Meeting
at Philadelphia.[510] The original document was found by Nathan Kite
of Philadelphia in 1844.[511] It was a remarkable document, and the
first protest against slavery issued by any religious body in America.
Speaking of the slaves, Pastorius asks, "Have not these negroes as
much right to fight for their freedom as you have to keep them
slaves?" He believed the time would come,--

    "When, from the gallery to the farthest seat,
    Slave and slave-owner shall no longer meet,
    But all sit equal at the Master's feet."

He regarded the "buying, selling, and holding men in slavery, as
inconsistent with the Christian religion." When his memorial came
before the Yearly Meeting for action, it confessed itself "unprepared
to act," and voted it "not proper then to give a positive judgment in
the case." In 1696 the Yearly Meeting pronounced against the further
importation of slaves, and adopted measures looking toward their moral
improvement. George Keith, catching the holy inspiration of humanity,
with a considerable following, denounced the institution of slavery
"as contrary to the religion of Christ, the rights of man, and sound
reason and policy."[512]

While these efforts were, to a certain extent, abortive, yet,
nevertheless, the Society of the Friends made regulations for the
better treatment of the enslaved Negroes. The sentiment thus created
went far toward deterring the better class of citizens from purchasing
slaves. To his broad and lofty sentiments of humanity, the pious
William Penn sought to add the force of positive law. The published
views of George Fox, given at Barbadoes in 1671, in his "Gospel Family
Order, being a short discourse concerning the ordering of Families,
both of Whites, Blacks, and Indians," had a salutary effect upon the
mind of Penn. In 1700 he proposed to the Council "_the necessitie of
a law [among others] about ye marriages of negroes_." The bill was
referred to a joint committee of both houses, and they brought in a
bill "_for regulating Negroes in their Morals and Marriages_ &c." It
reached a second reading, and was lost.[513] Penn regarded the
teaching of Negroes the sanctity of the marriage relation as of the
greatest importance to the colony, and the surest means of promoting
pure morals. Upon what grounds it was rejected is not known. He
presented, at the same session of the Assembly, another bill, which
provided "_for the better regulation of servants in this province and
territories_." He desired the government of slaves to be prescribed
and regulated by law, rather than by the capricious whims of masters.
No servant was to be sold out of the Province without giving his
consent, nor could he be assigned over except before a justice of the
peace. It provided for a regular allowance to servants at the
expiration of their time, and required them to serve five days extra
for every day's absence from their master without the latter's assent.
A penalty was fixed for concealing runaway slaves, and a reward
offered for apprehending them. No free person was allowed to deal with
servants, and justices and sheriffs were to be punished for neglecting
their duties in the premises.

In case a Negro was guilty of murder, he was tried by two justices,
appointed by the governor, before six freeholders. The manner of
procedure was prescribed, and the nature of the sentence and
acquittal. Negroes were not allowed to carry a gun or other weapons.
Not more than four were allowed together, upon pain of a severe
flogging. An Act for raising revenue was passed, and a duty upon
imported slaves was levied, in 1710. In 1711-12, an Act was passed
"_to prevent the importation of negroes and Indians_" into the
Province. A general petition for the emancipation of slaves by law was
presented to the Legislature during this same year; but the wise
law-makers replied, that "it was neither just nor convenient to set
them at liberty." The bill passed on the 7th of June, 1712, but was
disapproved by Great Britain, and was accordingly repealed by an Act
of Queen Anne, Feb. 20, 1713. In 1714 and 1717, Acts were passed to
check the importation of slaves. But the English government, instead
of being touched by the philanthropic endeavors of the people of
Pennsylvania, was seeking, for purposes of commercial trade and gain,
to darken the continent with the victims of its avarice.

Negroes had no political rights in the Province. Free Negroes were
prohibited from entertaining Negro or Indian slaves, or trading with
them. Masters were required, when manumitting slaves, to furnish
security, as in the other colonies. Marriages between the races were
forbidden. Negroes were not allowed to be abroad after nine o'clock at
night.

In 1773 the Assembly passed "_An Act making perpetual the Act
entitled, An Act for laying a duty on negroes and mulatto slaves_,"
etc., and added ten pounds to the duty. The colonists did much to
check the vile and inhuman traffic; but, having once obtained a hold,
it did eat like a canker. It threw its dark shadow over personal and
collective interests, and poisoned the springs of human kindness in
many hearts. It was not alone hurtful to the slave: it transformed and
blackened character everywhere, and fascinated those who were anxious
for riches beyond the power of moral discernment. Here, however, as in
New Jersey, the Negro found the Quaker his practical friend; and his
upper and better life received the pruning advice, refining and
elevating influence, of a godly people. But intelligence in the slave
was an occasion of offending, and prepared him to realize his
deplorable situation. So to enlighten him was to excite in him a deep
desire for liberty, and, not unlikely, a feeling of revenge toward his
enslavers. So there was really danger in the method the guileless
Friends adopted to ameliorate the condition of the slaves.

When England began to breathe out threatenings against her
contumacious dependencies in North America, the people of Pennsylvania
began to reflect upon the probable outrages their Negroes would, in
all probability, commit. They inferred that the Negroes would be their
enemy because they were their slaves. This was the equitable findings
of a guilty conscience. They did not dare expect less than the
revengeful hate of the beings they had laid the yoke of bondage upon;
and verily they found themselves with "fears within, and fightings
without."


FOOTNOTES:

[509] Gordon's History of Penn., p. 114.

[510] Whittier's Penn. Pilgrim, p. viii.

[511] The memorial referred to was printed _in extenso_ in The Friend,
vol. xviii. No 16.

[512] Minutes of Yearly Meeting, Watson's MS. Coll. Bettle's notices
of N.S. Minutes, Penn. Hist. Soc.

[513] Colonial Rec., vol. i. pp. 598, 606. See also _Votes_ of
Assembly, vol. i. pp. 120-122.




CHAPTER XXV.

THE COLONY OF GEORGIA.

1732-1775.

     GEORGIA ONCE INCLUDED IN THE TERRITORY OF CAROLINA.--THE
     THIRTEENTH COLONY PLANTED IN NORTH AMERICA BY THE ENGLISH
     GOVERNMENT.--SLAVES RULED OUT ALTOGETHER BY THE
     TRUSTEES.--THE OPINION OF GEN. OGLETHORPE CONCERNING
     SLAVERY.--LONG AND BITTER DISCUSSION IN REGARD TO THE
     ADMISSION OF SLAVERY INTO THE COLONY.--SLAVERY
     INTRODUCED.--HISTORY OF SLAVERY IN GEORGIA.


Georgia was once included in the territory of Carolina, and extended
from the Savannah to the St. John's River. A corporate body, under the
title of "The Trustees for establishing the Colony of Georgia," was
created by charter, bearing date of June 9, 1732. The life of their
trust was for the space of twenty-one years. The rules by which the
trustees sought to manage the infant were rather novel; but as a
discussion of them would be irrelevant, mention can be made only of
that part which related to slavery. Georgia was the last colony--the
thirteenth--planted in North America by the English government.
Special interest centred in it for several reasons, that will be
explained farther on.

The trustees ruled out slavery altogether. Gen. John Oglethorpe, a
brilliant young English officer of gentle blood, the first governor of
the colony, was identified with "the Royal African Company, which
alone had the right of planting forts and trading on the coast of
Africa." He said that "slavery is against the gospel, as well as the
fundamental law of England. We refused, as trustees, to make a law
permitting such a horrid crime." Another of the trustees, in a sermon
preached on Sunday, Feb. 17, 1734, at St. George's Church, Hanover
Square, London, declared, "Slavery, the misfortune, if not the
dishonor, of other plantations, is absolutely proscribed. Let avarice
defend it as it will, there is an honest reluctance in humanity
against buying and selling, and regarding those of our own species as
our wealth and possessions." Beautiful sentiments! Eloquent testimony
against the crime of the ages! At first blush the student of history
is apt to praise the sublime motives of the "trustees," in placing a
restriction against the slave-trade. But the declaration of principles
quoted above is not borne out by the facts of history. On this point
Dr. Stevens, the historian of Georgia, observes, "Yet in the official
publications of that body [the trustees], its inhibition is based only
on political and prudential, and not on humane and liberal grounds,
and even Oglethorpe owned a plantation and negroes near Parachucla in
South Carolina, about forty miles above Savannah."[514] To this
reliable opinion is added:--

     "The introduction of slaves was prohibited to the colony of
     Georgia for some years, not from motives of humanity, but
     for the reason it was encouraged elsewhere, to wit: the
     interest of the mother country. It was a favorite idea with
     the 'mother country,' to make _Georgia_ a protecting blanket
     for the Carolinas, against the Spanish settlements south of
     her, and the principal Indian tribes to the west; to do
     this, a strong settlement of white men was sought to be
     built up, whose arms and interests would defend her northern
     plantations. The introduction of slaves was held to be
     unfavorable to this scheme, and hence its prohibition.
     During the time of the prohibition, Oglethorpe himself was a
     slave holder in Carolina."[515]

The reasons that led the trustees to prohibit slavery in the colony
are put thus tersely.--

     "1st. Its expense: which the poor emigrant would be entirely
     unable to sustain, either in the first cost of a negro, or
     his subsequent keeping. 2d. Because it would induce idleness
     and render labour degrading. 3d. Because the settlers, being
     freeholders of only fifty-acre lots, requiring but one or
     two extra hands for their cultivation, the German servants
     would be a third more profitable than the blacks. Upon the
     last original design I have mentioned, in planting this
     colony, they also based an argument against their admission,
     viz., that the cultivation of silk and wine, demanding skill
     and nicety, rather than strength and endurance of fatigue,
     the whites were better calculated for such labour than the
     negroes. These were the prominent arguments, drawn from the
     various considerations of internal and external policy,
     which influenced the Trustees in making this prohibition.
     Many of them, however, had but a temporary bearing, none
     stood the test of experience."[516]

It is clear, then, that the founders of the colony of Georgia were not
moved by the noblest impulses to prohibit slavery within their
jurisdiction. In the chapter on South Carolina, attention was called
to the influence of the Spanish troops in Florida on the recalcitrant
Negroes in the Carolinas, the Negro regiment with subalterns from
their own class, and the work of Spanish emissaries among the slaves.
The home government thought it wise to build up Georgia out of white
men, who could develop its resources, and bear arms in defence of
British possessions along an extensive border exposed to a pestiferous
foe. But the Board of Trade soon found this an impracticable scheme,
and the colonists themselves began to clamor "for the use of
negroes."[517] The first petition for the introduction and use of
Negro slaves was offered to the trustees in 1735. This prayer was
promptly and positively denied, and for fifteen years they refused to
grant all requests for the use of Negroes. They adhered to their
prohibition in letter and spirit. Whenever and wherever Negroes were
found in the colony, they were sold back into Carolina. In the month
of December, 1738, a petition, addressed to the trustees, including
nearly all the names of the foremost colonists, set forth the
distressing condition into which affairs had drifted under the
enforcement of the prohibition, and declared that "the use of negroes,
with proper limitations, which, if granted, would both occasion great
numbers of white people to come here, and also to render us capable to
subsist ourselves, by raising provisions upon our lands, until we
could make some produce fit for export, in some measure to balance our
importations." But instead of securing a favorable hearing, the
petition drew the fire of the friends of the prohibition against the
use of Negroes. On the 3d of January, 1739, a petition to the trustees
combating the arguments of the above-mentioned petition, and urging
them to remain firm, was issued at Darien. This was followed by
another one, issued from Ebenezer on the 13th of March, in favor of
the position occupied by the trustees. A great many Scotch and German
people had settled in the colony; and, familiar with the arts of
husbandry, they became the ardent supporters of the trustees. James
Habersham, the "_dear fellow-traveller_," of Whitefield, exclaimed,--

     "I once thought, it was unlawful to keep negro slaves, but I
     am now induced to think God may have a higher end in
     permitting them to be brought to this Christian country,
     than merely to support their masters. Many of the poor
     slaves in America have already been made freemen of the
     heavenly Jerusalem, and possibly a time may come when many
     thousands may embrace the gospel, and thereby be brought
     into the glorious liberty of the children of God. These, and
     other considerations, appear to plead strongly for a limited
     use of negroes; for, while we can buy provisions in Carolina
     cheaper than we can here, no one will be induced to plant
     much."

But the trustees stood firm against the subtle cunning of the
politicians, and the eloquent pleadings of avarice.

On the 7th October, 1741, a large meeting was held at Savannah, and a
petition drawn, in which the land-holders and settlers presented their
grievances to the English authorities in London. On the 26th of March,
1742, Mr. Thomas Stephens, armed with the memorial, as the agent of
the memorialists, sailed for London. While the document ostensibly set
forth their wish for a definition of "the tenure of the lands," really
the burden of the prayer was for "_Negroes_." He presented the
memorial to the king, and his Majesty referred it to a committee of
the "Lords of Council for Plantation Affairs." This committee
transferred a copy of the memorial to the trustees, with a request for
their answer. About this time Stephens presented a petition to
Parliament, in which he charged the trustees with direliction of duty,
improper use of the public funds, abuse of their authority, and
numerous other sins against the public welfare. It created a genuine
sensation. The House resolved to go into a "committee of the whole,"
to consider the petitions and the answer of the trustees. The answer
of the trustees was drawn by the able pen of the Earl of Egmont, and
by them warmly approved on the 3d of May, and three days later was
read to the House of Commons. A motion prevailed "that the petitions
do lie upon the table," for the perusal of the members, for the space
of one week. At the expiration of the time fixed, Stephens appeared,
and all the petitions of the people of Georgia to the trustees in
reference to "the tenure of lands," and for "the use of negroes," were
laid before the honorable body. In the committee of the whole the
affairs of the colony were thoroughly investigated; and, after a few
days session, Mr. Carew reported a set of resolutions, being the sense
of the committee after due deliberation upon the matters before
them:--

     "That the province of Georgia, in America, by reason of its
     situation, may be an useful barrier to the British provinces
     on the continent of America against the French and
     Spaniards, and Indian nations in their interests; that the
     ports and harbors within the said province may be a good
     security to the trade and navigation of this kingdom, that
     the said province, by reason of the fertility of the soil,
     the healthfulness of the climate, and the convenience of the
     rivers, is a proper place for establishing a settlement, and
     may contribute greatly to the increasing trade of this
     kingdom; that it is very necessary and advantageous to this
     nation that the colony of Georgia should be preserved and
     supported; that it will be an advantage to the colony of
     Georgia to permit the importation of rum into the said
     colony from any of the British colonies; that the petition
     of Thomas Stephens contains false, scandalous and malicious
     charges, tending to asperse the characters of the Trustees
     for Establishing the Colony of Georgia, in America."

When the resolution making the importation of rum lawful reached a
vote, it was amended by adding, "As also the use of negroes, who may
be employed there with advantage to the colony, under proper
regulations and restrictions." It was lost by a majority of nine
votes. A resolution prevailed calling Thomas Stephens to the bar of
the House, "to be reprimanded on his knees by Mr. Speaker," for his
offence against the trustees.

On the next day Stephens, upon his bended knees at the bar of the
House of Commons, before the assembled statesmen of Great Britain, was
publicly reprimanded by the speaker, and discharged after paying his
fees. Thus ended the attempt of the people of the colony of Georgia to
secure permission, over the heads of the trustees, to introduce slaves
into their service.

The dark tide of slavery influence was dashing against the borders of
the colony. The people were discouraged. Business was stagnated.
Internal dissatisfaction and factional strife wore hard upon the
spirit of a people trying to build up and develop a new country. Then
the predatory incursions of the Spaniards, and the threatening
attitude of the Indians, unnerved the entire Province. In this state
of affairs white servants grew insolent and insubordinate. Those whose
term of service expired refused to work. In this dilemma many persons
boldly put the rule of the trustees under foot, and hired Negroes from
the Carolinas. At length the trustees became aware of the clandestine
importation of Negroes into the colony, and thereupon gave the
magistrates a severe reproval. On the 2d of October, 1747, they
received the following reply:--

     "We are afraid, sir, from what you have wrote in relation to
     negroes, that he Honourable Trustees have been misinformed
     as to our conduct relating thereto; for we can with great
     assurance assert, that this Board has always acted an
     uniform part in discouraging the use of negroes in this
     colony, well knowing it to be disagreeable to the Trustees,
     as well as contrary to an act existing for the prohibition
     of them, and always give it in charge to those whom we had
     put in possession of lands, not to attempt the introduction
     or use of negroes. But notwithstanding our great caution,
     some people from Carolina, soon after settling lands on the
     Little Ogeechee, found means of bringing and employing a few
     negroes on the said lands, some time before it was
     discovered to us, upon which they thought it high time to
     withdraw them, for fear of being seized, and soon after
     withdrew themselves and families out of the colony, which
     appeals to us at present to be the resolution of divers
     others."[518]

It was charged that the law-officers knew of the presence of Negroes
in Georgia; that their standing and constant toast was, "_the
one thing needful_" (Negroes); and that they themselves had
surreptitiously aided in the procurement of Negroes for the colony.
The supporters of the colonists grew less powerful as the struggle
went forward. The most active grew taciturn and conservative. The
advocates of Negro labor became bolder, and more acrimonious in
debate; and at length the champions of exclusive white labor shrank
into silence, appalled at the desperation of then opponents. The Rev.
Martin Bolzius, one of the most active supporters of the trustees,
wrote those gentlemen on May 3, 1748:--

     "Things being now in such a melancholy state, I must humbly
     beseech your honors, not to regard any more our of our
     friend's petitions against negroes."

The Rev. George Whitefield and James Habersham used their utmost
influence upon the trustees to obtain a modification of the
prohibition against "the use of negroes." On the 6th of December,
1748, Rev. Whitefield, speaking of a plantation and Negroes he had
purchased, wrote the trustees:--

     "Upwards of five thousand pounds have been expended in that
     undertaking, and yet very little proficiency made in the
     cultivation of my tract of land, and that entirely owing to
     the necessity I lay under of making use of white hands. Had
     a negro been allowed, I should now have had a sufficiency to
     support a great many orphans, without expending above half
     the sum which has been laid out. An unwillingness to let so
     good a design drop, and having a rational conviction that it
     must necessarily, if some other method was not fixed upon to
     prevent it--these two considerations, honoured gentlemen,
     prevailed on me about two years ago, through the bounty of
     my good friends, to purchase a plantation in South Carolina,
     where negroes are allowed. Blessed be God, this plantation
     has succeeded; and though at present I have only eight
     working hands, yet in all probability there will be more
     raised in one year, and with a quarter the expense, than has
     been produced at Bethesda for several years last past. This
     confirms me in the opinion I have entertained for a long
     time, that _Georgia never can or will be a flourishing
     province without negroes are allowed_."[519]

The sentiment in favor of the importation of Negro slaves had become
well-nigh unanimous. The trustees began to waver. On the 10th of
January, 1749, another petition was presented to the trustees. It was
carefully drawn, and set forth the restrictions under which slaves
should be introduced. On the 16th of May following, it was read to the
trustees; and they resolved to have it "presented to His Majesty in
council." They also asked that the prohibition against the
introduction of Negroes, passed in "1735, be repealed." The Earl of
Shaftesbury, at the head of a special committee, draughted a bill
repealing the prohibition. On the 26th of October, 1749, a large and
influential committee of twenty-seven drew up and signed a petition
urging the immediate introduction of slavery, with certain
limitations. The paper was duly attested, and returned to the
trustees. The opposition to the introduction of slavery into the
colony of Georgia had been conquered; and, after a long and bitter
struggle, slavery was firmly and legally established in this the last
Province of the English in the Western world. The colonists were
jubilant.

The charter under which the trustees acted expired by limitation in
1752, and a new form of government was established under the Board of
Trade. The royal commission appointed a governor and council. One of
the first ordinances enacted by them was one whereby "all offences
committed by slaves were to be tried by a single justice, without a
jury, who was to award execution, and, in capital cases, to set a
value on the slave, to be paid out of the public treasury." At the
first session of the Assembly in 1755, a law was passed "_for the
regulation and government of slaves_." In 1765 an Act was passed
establishing a pass system, and the rest of the legislation in respect
to slaves was a copy of the laws of South Carolina.

The history of slavery in Georgia during this period is unparalleled
and incomparably interesting. It illustrates the power of the
institution, and shows that there was no Province sufficiently
independent of its influence so as to expel it from its jurisdiction.
Like the Angel of Death that passed through Egypt, there was no colony
that it did not smite with its dark and destroying pinions. The
dearest, the sublimest, interests of humanity were prostrated by its
defiling touch. It shut out the sunlight of human kindness; it paled
the fires of hope; it arrested the development of the branches of
men's better natures, and peopled their lower being with base and
consuming desires; it placed the "_Golden Rule_" under the unholy heel
of time-servers and self-seekers; it made the Church as secular as the
Change, and the latter as pious as the former: it was a gigantic
system, at war with the civilization of the Roundheads and Puritans,
and an intolerable burden to a people who desired to build a new
nation in this New World in the West.


FOOTNOTES:

[514] Stephens's Journal, vol. iii. p. 281.

[515] Freedom and Bondage, vol. i. p. 310, note.

[516] Stevens's Hist. of Georgia, vol. i. p. 289.

[517] Bancroft, vol. iii. 12th ed. p. 427.

[518] Stevens's Hist. of Georgia, vol. i. p. 307.

[519] Whitefield's Works, vol. ii. pp. 90, 105, 208.




Part III.


_THE NEGRO DURING THE REVOLUTION._




CHAPTER XXVI.

MILITARY EMPLOYMENT OF NEGROES.

1775-1780.

     "Many black soldiers were in the service during all stages
     of the war."--SPARKS.

     THE COLONIAL STATES IN 1715.--RATIFICATION OF THE
     NON-IMPORTATION ACT BY THE SOUTHERN COLONIES.--GEORGE
     WASHINGTON PRESENTS RESOLUTIONS AGAINST SLAVERY, IN A
     MEETING AT FAIRFAX COURT-HOUSE, VA.--LETTER WRITTEN BY
     BENJAMIN FRANKLIN TO DEAN WOODWARD, PERTAINING TO
     SLAVERY.--LETTER TO THE FREEMEN OF VIRGINIA FROM A
     COMMITTEE, CONCERNING THE SLAVES BROUGHT FROM
     JAMAICA.--SEVERE TREATMENT OF SLAVES IN THE COLONIES
     MODIFIED.--ADVERTISEMENT IN "THE BOSTON GAZETTE" OF THE
     RUNAWAY SLAVE CRISPUS ATTUCKS.--THE BOSTON MASSACRE.--ITS
     RESULTS.--CRISPUS ATTUCKS SHOWS HIS LOYALTY.--HIS SPIRITED
     LETTER TO THE TORY GOVERNOR OF THE PROVINCE.--SLAVES
     ADMITTED INTO THE ARMY.--THE CONDITION OF THE CONTINENTAL
     ARMY.--SPIRITED DEBATE IN THE CONTINENTAL CONGRESS, OVER THE
     DRAUGHT OF A LETTER TO GEN. WASHINGTON.--INSTRUCTIONS TO
     DISCHARGE ALL SLAVES AND FREE NEGROES IN HIS ARMY.--MINUTES
     OF THE MEETING HELD AT CAMBRIDGE.--LORD DUNMORE'S
     PROCLAMATION.--PREJUDICE THE SOUTHERN COLONIES.--NEGROES IN
     VIRGINIA FLOCK TO THE BRITISH ARMY.--CAUTION TO THE NEGROES
     PRINTED IN A WILLIAMSBURG PAPER.--THE VIRGINIA CONVENTION
     ANSWERS THE PROCLAMATION OF LORD DUNMORE.--GEN. GREENE, IN A
     LETTER TO GEN. WASHINGTON, CALLS ATTENTION TO THE RAISING OF
     A NEGRO REGIMENT ON STATEN ISLAND.--LETTER FROM A HESSIAN
     OFFICER.--CONNECTICUT LEGISLATURE ON THE SUBJECT OF
     EMPLOYMENT OF NEGROES AS SOLDIERS.--GEN. VARNUM'S LETTER TO
     GEN. WASHINGTON, SUGGESTING THE EMPLOYMENT OF NEGROES, SENT
     TO GOV. COOKE.--THE GOVERNOR REFERS VARNUM'S LETTER TO THE
     GENERAL ASSEMBLY.--MINORITY PROTEST AGAINST ENLISTING SLAVES
     TO SERVE IN THE ARMY.--MASSACHUSETTS TRIES TO SECURE LEGAL
     ENLISTMENTS OF NEGRO TROOPS.--LETTER OF THOMAS KENCH TO THE
     COUNCIL AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, BOSTON, MASS.--NEGROES
     SERVE IN WHITE ORGANIZATIONS UNTIL THE CLOSE OF THE AMERICAN
     REVOLUTION.--NEGRO SOLDIERS SERVE IN VIRGINIA.--MARYLAND
     EMPLOY NEGROES.--NEW YORK PASSES AN ACT PROVIDING FOR THE
     RAISING OF TWO COLORED REGIMENTS.--WAR IN THE MIDDLE AND
     SOUTHERN COLONIES.--HAMILTON'S LETTER TO JOHN JAY.--COL.
     LAURENS'S EFFORTS TO RAISE NEGRO TROOPS IN SOUTH
     CAROLINA.--PROCLAMATION OF SIR HENRY CLINTON INDUCING
     NEGROES TO DESERT THE REBEL ARMY.--LORD CORNWALLIS ISSUES A
     PROCLAMATION OFFERING PROTECTION TO ALL NEGROES SEEKING HIS
     COMMAND.--COL. LAURENS IS CALLED TO FRANCE ON IMPORTANT
     BUSINESS.--HIS PLAN FOR SECURING BLACK LEVIES FOR THE SOUTH
     UPON HIS RETURN.--HIS LETTERS TO GEN. WASHINGTON IN REGARD
     TO HIS FRUITLESS PLANS.--CAPT. DAVID HUMPHREYS RECRUITS A
     COMPANY OF COLORED INFANTRY IN CONNECTICUT.--RETURN OF
     NEGROES IN THE ARMY IN 1778.


The policy of arming the Negroes early claimed the anxious
consideration of the leaders of the colonial army during the American
Revolution. England had been crowding her American plantations with
slaves at a fearful rate; and, when hostilities actually began, it
was difficult to tell whether the American army or the ministerial
army would be able to secure the Negroes as allies. In 1715 the royal
governors of the colonies gave the Board of Trade the number of the
Negroes in their respective colonies. The slave population was as
follows:--

                            NEGROES. |                        NEGROES.
  New Hampshire                  150 |Maryland                   9,500
  Massachusetts                2,000 |Virginia                  23,000
  Rhode Island                   500 |North Carolina             3,700
  Connecticut                  1,500 |South Carolina            10,500
  New York                     4,000 |                          ------
  New Jersey                   1,500 |    Total                 58,850
  Pennsylvania and Delaware    2,500 |

Sixty years afterwards, when the Revolution had begun, the slave
population of the thirteen colonies was as follows:--

                            NEGROES. |                        NEGROES.
  Massachusetts                3,500 |Maryland                  80,000
  Rhode Island                 4,373 |Virginia                 165,000
  Connecticut                  5,000 |North Carolina            75,000
  New Hampshire                  629 |South Carolina           110,000
  New York                    15,000 |Georgia                   16,000
  New Jersey                   7,600 |                         -------
  Pennsylvania                10,000 |    Total                501,102
  Delaware                     9,000 |

Such a host of beings was not to be despised in a great military
struggle. Regarded as a neutral element that could be used simply to
feed an army, to perform fatigue duty, and build fortifications, the
Negro population was the object of fawning favors of the white
colonists. In the NON-IMPORTATION COVENANT, passed by the Continental
Congress at Philadelphia, on the 24th of October, 1774, the second
resolve indicated the feeling of the representatives of the people on
the question of the slave-trade:--

     "2. We will neither import nor purchase, any slave imported
     after the first day of December next; after which time, we
     will wholly discontinue the slave-trade, and will neither be
     concerned in it ourselves, nor will we hire our vessels, nor
     sell our commodities or manufactures to those who are
     concerned in it."[520]

It, with the entire covenant, received the signatures of all the
delegates from the twelve colonies.[521] The delegates from the
Southern colonies were greatly distressed concerning the probable
attitude of the slave element. They knew that if that ignorant mass of
humanity were inflamed by some act of strategy of the enemy, they
might sweep their homes and families from the face of the earth. The
cruelties of the slave-code, the harsh treatment of Negro slaves, the
lack of confidence in the whites everywhere manifested among the
blacks,--as so many horrid dreams, harassed the minds of slaveholders
by day and by night. They did not even possess the courage to ask the
slaves to remain silent and passive during the struggle between
England and themselves. The sentiment that adorned the speeches of
orators, and graced the writings of the colonists, during this period,
was "the equality of the rights of all men." And yet the slaves who
bore their chains under their eyes, who were denied the commonest
rights of humanity, who were rated as chattels and real property, were
living witnesses to the insincerity and inconsistency of this
declaration. But it is a remarkable fact, that all the Southern
colonies, in addition to the action of their delegates, ratified the
Non-Importation Covenant. The Maryland Convention on the 8th of
December, 1774; South Carolina Provincial Congress on the 11th
January, 1775; Virginia Convention on the 22d March, 1775; North
Carolina Provincial Congress on the 23d of August, 1775; Delaware
Assembly on the 25th of March, 1775 (refused by Gov. John Penn); and
Georgia,--passed the following resolves thereabouts:--

     "1. _Resolved_, That this Congress will adopt, and carry
     into execution, all and singular the measures and
     recommendations of the late Continental Congress.

     "4. _Resolved_, That we will neither import or [nor]
     purchase any slave imported from Africa or elsewhere after
     this date."

Meetings were numerous and spirited throughout the colonies, in which,
by resolutions, the people expressed their sentiments in reference to
the mother country. On the 18th of July, 1774, at a meeting held in
Fairfax Court-House, Virginia, a series of twenty-four resolutions
was presented by George Washington, chairman of the committee on
resolutions, three of which were directed against slavery.

     "17 _Resolved_. That it is the opinion of this meeting,
     that, during our present difficulties and distress, no
     slaves ought to be imported into any of the British colonies
     on this continent; and we take this opportunity of declaring
     our most earnest wishes to see an entire stop for ever put
     to such a wicked, cruel, and unnatural trade....

     "21. _Resolved_, That it is the opinion of this meeting,
     that this and the other associating colonies should break
     off all trade, intercourse, and dealings with that colony,
     province, or town, which shall decline, or refuse to agree
     to, the plan which shall be adopted by the General
     Congress....

     "24. _Resolved_, That George Washington and Charles
     Broadwater, lately elected our representatives to serve in
     the General Assembly, be appointed to attend the Convention
     at Williamsburg on the first day of August next, and present
     these resolves, as the sense of the people of this county
     upon the measures proper to be taken in the present alarming
     and dangerous situation of America."

Mr. Sparks comments upon the resolutions as follows:--

     "The draught, from which the resolves are printed, I find
     among Washington's papers, in the handwriting of George
     Mason, by whom they were probably drawn up; yet, as they
     were adopted by the Committee of which Washington was
     chairman, and reported by him as moderator of the meeting,
     they may be presumed to express his opinions, formed on a
     perfect knowledge of the subject, and after cool
     deliberation. This may indeed be inferred from his letter to
     Mr. Bryan Fairfax, in which he intimates a doubt only as to
     the article favoring the idea of a further petition to the
     king. He was opposed to such a step, believing enough had
     been done in this way already; but he yielded the point in
     tenderness to the more wavering resolution of his
     associates.

     "These resolves are framed with much care and ability, and
     exhibit the question then at issue, and the state of public
     feeling, in a manner so clear and forcible as to give them a
     special claim to a place in the present work, in addition to
     the circumstance of their being the matured views of
     Washington at the outset of the great Revolutionary struggle
     in which he was to act so conspicuous a part....

     "Such were the opinions of Washington, and his associates in
     Virginia, at the beginning of the Revolutionary contest. The
     seventeenth resolve merits attention, from the pointed
     manner in which it condemns the slave trade."[522]

Dr. Benjamin Franklin, in a letter to Dean Woodward, dated April 10,
1773, says,--

     "I have since had the satisfaction to learn that a
     disposition to abolish slavery prevails in North America,
     that many of the Pennsylvanians have set their slaves at
     liberty; and that even the Virginia Assembly have petitioned
     the king for permission to make a law for preventing the
     importation of more into that Colony. This request, however,
     will probably not be granted as their former laws of that
     kind have always been repealed, and as the interest of a few
     merchants here has more weight with Government than that of
     thousands at a distance."[523]

Virginia gave early and positive proof that she was in earnest on the
question of non-importation. One John Brown, a merchant of Norfolk,
broke the rules of the colony by purchasing imported slaves, and was
severely rebuked in the following article:--

     "'TO THE FREEMEN OF VIRGINIA:

     "'COMMITTEE CHAMBER, NORFOLK, March 6, 1775

     "'Trusting to your sure resentment against the enemies of
     your country, we, the committee, elected by ballot for the
     Borough of Norfolk, hold up for your just indignation Mr.
     John Brown, merchant of this place.

     "'On Thursday, the 2d of March, this committee were informed
     of the arrival of the brig Fanny, Capt. Watson, with a
     number of slaves for Mr. Brown: and, upon inquiry, it
     appeared they were shipped from Jamaica as his property, and
     on his account; that he had taken great pains to conceal
     their arrival from the knowledge of the committee; and that
     the shipper of the slaves, Mr. Brown's correspondent, and
     the captain of the vessel, were all fully apprised of the
     Continental prohibition against that article.

     "'From the whole of this transaction, therefore, we, the
     committee for Norfolk Borough, do give it as our unanimous
     opinion, that the said John Brown, has wilfully and
     perversely violated the Continental Association to which he
     had with his own hand subscribed obedience, and that,
     agreeable to the eleventh article, we are bound forthwith to
     publish the truth of the case, to the end that all such foes
     to the rights of British America may be publicly known and
     universally contemned as the enemies of American liberty,
     and that every person may henceforth break off all dealings
     with him.'"

And the first delegation from Virginia to Congress in August, 1774,
had instructions as follows, drawn by Thomas Jefferson:--

     "For the most trifling reasons, and sometimes for no
     conceivable reason at all, his Majesty has rejected laws of
     the most salutary tendency. _The abolition of domestic
     slavery is the great object of desire in those Colonies,
     where it was, unhappily, introduced in their infant state.
     But, previous to the enfranchisement of the slaves we have,
     it is necessary to exclude all further importations from
     Africa._ Yet our repeated attempts to effect this by
     prohibitions, and by imposing duties which might amount to a
     prohibition, have been hitherto defeated by his Majesty's
     negative; thus preferring the immediate advantages of a few
     British corsairs to the lasting interests of the American
     States, and to the rights of human nature, deeply wounded by
     this infamous practice."[524]

It is scarcely necessary to mention the fact, that there were several
very cogent passages in the first draught of the Declaration of
Independence that were finally omitted. The one most pertinent to this
history is here given:--

     "He has waged cruel war against human nature itself,
     violating its most sacred rights of life and liberty in the
     persons of a distant people who never offended him;
     captivating and carrying them into slavery in another
     hemisphere, or to incur miserable death in their
     transportation thither. This piratical warfare, the
     opprobrium of _Infidel_ powers, is the warfare of the
     _Christian_ king of Great Britain. Determined to keep open a
     market where _men_ should be bought and sold, he has
     prostituted his negative for suppressing every legislative
     attempt to prohibit or to restrain this execrable commerce.
     And, that this assemblage of horrors might want no fact of
     distinguished die, he is now exciting those very people to
     rise in arms among us, and to purchase that liberty of which
     he has deprived them, by murdering the people on whom he
     also obtruded them; thus paying off former crimes committed
     against the _liberties_ of one people with crimes which he
     urges them to commit against the _lives_ of another.[525]

The solicitude concerning the slavery question was not so great in the
Northern colonies. The slaves were not so numerous as in the Carolinas
and other Southern colonies. The severe treatment of slaves had been
greatly modified, the spirit of masters toward them more gentle and
conciliatory, and the public sentiment concerning them more humane.
Public discussion of the Negro question, however, was cautiously
avoided. The failure of attempted legislation friendly to the slaves
had discouraged their friends, while the critical situation of public
affairs made the supporters of slavery less aggressive. On the 25th of
October, 1774, an effort was made in the Provincial Congress of
Massachusetts to re-open the discussion, but it failed. The record of
the attempt is as follows:--

     "Mr. Wheeler brought into Congress a letter directed to
     Doct. Appleton, purporting the propriety, that while we are
     attempting to free ourselves from our present
     embarrassments, and preserve ourselves from slavery, that we
     also take into consideration the state and circumstances of
     the negro slaves in this province. The same was read, and it
     was moved that a committee be appointed to take the same
     into consideration. After some debate thereon, the question
     was put, whether the matter now subside, and it passed in
     the affirmative."[526]

Thus ended the attempt to call the attention of the people's
representatives to the inconsistency of their doctrine and practice on
the question of the equality of human rights. Further agitation of the
question, followed by the defeat of just measures in the interest of
the slaves, was deemed by many as dangerous to the colony. The
discussions were watched by the Negroes with a lively interest; and
failure led them to regard the colonists as their enemies, and greatly
embittered them. Then it was difficult to determine just what would be
wisest to do for the enslaved in this colony. The situation was
critical: a bold, clear-headed, loyal-hearted man was needed.

On Tuesday, Oct. 2, 1750, "The Boston Gazette, or Weekly Journal,"
contained the following advertisement:--

     "Ran-away from his master _William Brown_ of _Framingham_,
     on the 30th of _Sept_. last, a Molatto Fellow, about 27
     Years of Age, named _Crispas_, 5 Feet 2 Inches high, short
     curl'd Hair, his Knees nearer together than common; had on a
     light colour'd Bear-skin Coat, plain brown Fustian Jacket,
     or brown all-Wool one, new Buckskin Breeches, blue Yarn
     Stockings, and a checked woolen Shirt.

     "Whoever shall take up said Run-away, and convey him to his
     abovesaid Master, shall have _ten Pounds_, old Tenor Reward,
     and all necessary Charges paid. And all Masters of Vessels
     and others, are hereby cautioned against concealing or
     carrying off said Servant on Penalty of the Law. _Boston,
     October 2, 1750_."

During the month of November,--the 13th and 20th,--a similar
advertisement appeared in the same paper; showing that the "Molatto
Fellow" had not returned to his master.

Twenty years later "Crispas's" name once more appeared in the journals
of Boston. This time he was not advertised as a runaway slave, nor was
there reward offered for his apprehension. His soul and body were
beyond the cruel touch of master; the press had paused to announce his
apotheosis, and to write the name of the Negro patriot, soldier, and
martyr to the ripening cause of the American Revolution, in fadeless
letters of gold,--CRISPUS ATTUCKS!

On March 5, 1770, occurred the Boston Massacre; and, while it was not
the real commencement of the Revolutionary struggle, it was the bloody
drama that opened the most eventful and thrilling chapter in American
history. The colonists had endured, with obsequious humility, the
oppressive acts of Britain, the swaggering insolence of the
ministerial troops, and the sneers of her hired minions. The
aggressive and daring men had found themselves hampered by the
conservative views of a large class of colonists, who feared lest some
one should take a step not exactly according to the law. But while the
"wise and prudent" were deliberating upon a legal method of action,
there were those, who, "made of sterner stuff," reasoned right to the
conclusion, that they had rights as colonists that ought to be
respected. That there was cause for just indignation on the part of
the people towards the British soldiers, there is no doubt. But there
is reason to question the time and manner of the assault made by the
citizens. Doubtless they had "a zeal, but not according to knowledge."
There is no record to controvert the fact of the leadership of Crispus
Attucks. A manly-looking fellow, six feet two inches in height, he was
a commanding figure among the irate colonists. His enthusiasm for the
threatened interests of the Province, his loyalty to the teachings of
Otis, and his willingness to sacrifice for the cause of equal rights,
endowed him with a courage, which, if tempered with better judgment,
would have made him a military hero in his day. But consumed by the
sacred fires of patriotism, that lighted his path to glory, his career
of usefulness ended at the beginning. John Adams, as the counsel for
the soldiers, thought that the patriots Crispus Attucks led were a
"rabble of saucy boys, negroes, mulattoes, &c.," who could not
restrain their emotion. Attucks led the charge with the shout, "The
way to get rid of these soldiers is to attack the main-guard; strike
at the root: this is the nest." A shower of missiles was answered by
the discharge of the guns of Capt. Preston's company. The exposed and
commanding person of the intrepid Attucks went down before the
murderous fire. Samuel Gray and Jonas Caldwell were also killed, while
Patrick Carr and Samuel Maverick were mortally wounded.

The scene that followed beggared description. The people ran from
their homes and places of business into the streets, white with rage.
The bells rang out the alarm of danger. The bodies of Attucks and
Caldwell were carried into Faneuil Hall, where their strange faces
were viewed by the largest gathering of people ever before witnessed.
Maverick was buried from his mother's house in Union Street, and Gray
from his brother's residence in Royal Exchange Lane. But Attucks and
Caldwell, strangers in the city, without relatives, were buried from
Faneuil Hall, so justly called "_the Cradle of Liberty_." The four
hearses formed a junction in King Street; and from thence the
procession moved in columns six deep, with a long line of coaches
containing the first citizens of Boston. The obsequies were witnessed
by a very large and respectful concourse of people. The bodies were
deposited in one grave, over which a stone was placed bearing this
inscription:--

    "Long as in Freedom's cause the wise contend,
    Dear to your country shall your fame extend;
    While to the world the lettered stone shall tell
    Where Caldwell, Attucks, Gray and Maverick fell."

Who was Crispus Attucks? A Negro whose soul, galling under the
destroying influence of slavery, went forth a freeman, went forth not
only to fight for _his_ liberty, but to give his life as an offering
upon the altar of _American liberty_. He was not a madcap, as some
would have the world believe. He was not ignorant of the issues
between the American colonies and the English government, between the
freemen of the colony and the dictatorial governors. Where he was
during the twenty years from 1750 to 1770, is not known; but doubtless
in Boston, where he had heard the fiery eloquence of Otis, the
convincing arguments of Sewall, and the tender pleadings of Belknap.
He had learned to spell out the fundamental principles that should
govern well-regulated communities and states; and, having come to the
rapturous consciousness of his freedom in fee simple, the brightest
crown God places upon mortal man, he felt himself neighbor and friend.
His patriotism was not a mere spasm produced by sudden and exciting
circumstances. It was an education; and knowledge comes from
experience; and the experience of this black hero was not of a single
day. Some time before the memorable 5th of March, Crispus addressed
the following spirited letter to the Tory governor of the Province:--

     "TO THOMAS HUTCHINSON: _Sir_,--You will hear from us with
     astonishment. You ought to hear from us with horror. You are
     chargeable before God and man, with our blood. The soldiers
     were but passive instruments, mere machines; neither moral
     nor voluntary agents in our destruction, more than the
     leaden pellets with which we were wounded. You was a free
     agent. You acted, coolly, deliberately, with all that
     premeditated malice, not against us in particular, but
     against the people in general, which, in the sight of the
     law, is an ingredient in the composition of murder. You will
     hear further from us hereafter. Crispus Attucks."[527]

This was the declaration of war. It was fulfilled. The world has heard
from him; and, more, the English-speaking world will never forget the
noble daring and excusable rashness of Attucks in the holy cause of
liberty! Eighteen centuries before he was saluted by death and kissed
by immortality, another Negro bore the cross of Christ to Calvary for
him. And when the colonists were staggering wearily under their cross
of woe, a Negro came to the front, and bore that cross to the victory
of glorious martyrdom!

And the people did not agree with John Adams that Attucks led "a
motley rabble," but a band of patriots. Their evidence of the belief
they entertained was to be found in the annual commemoration of the
"5th of March," when orators, in measured sentences and impassioned
eloquence, praised the hero-dead. In March, 1775, Dr. Joseph Warren,
who a few months later, as Gen. Warren, made Bunker Hill the shrine of
New-England patriotism, was the orator. On the question of human
liberty, he said,--

     "That personal freedom is the natural right of every man,
     and that property, or an exclusive right to dispose of what
     he has honestly acquired by his own labor, necessarily
     arises therefrom, are truths which common sense has placed
     beyond the reach of contradiction. And no man, or body of
     men, can, without being guilty of flagrant injustice, claim
     a right to dispose of the persons or acquisitions of any
     other man, or body of men, unless it can be proved that such
     a right has arisen from some compact between the parties, in
     which it has been explicitly and freely granted."

These noble sentiments were sealed by his blood at Bunker Hill, on the
17th of June, 1775, and are the amulet that will protect his fame from
the corroding touch of centuries of time

The free Negroes of the Northern colonies responded to the call "_to
arms_" that rang from the placid waters of Massachusetts Bay to the
verdant hills of Berkshire, and from Lake Champlain to the upper
waters of the Hudson. Every Northern colony had its Negro troops, not
as separate organizations,--save the black regiment of Rhode
Island,--but scattered throughout all of the white organizations of
the army. At the first none but free Negroes were received into the
army; but before peace came Negroes were not only admitted, they were
purchased, and sent into the war, with an offer of freedom and fifty
dollars bounty at the close of their service. On the 29th of May,
1775, the "_Committee of Safety_" for the Province of Massachusetts
passed the following resolve against the enlistment of Negro slaves
as soldiers:--

     "Resolved, That it is the opinion of this committee, as the
     contest now between Great Britain and the colonies respects
     the liberties and privileges of the latter, which the
     colonies are determined to maintain, that the admission of
     any persons, as soldiers, into the army now raising, but
     only such as are freemen, will be inconsistent with the
     principles that are to be supported, and reflect dishonor on
     this colony, and that no slaves be admitted into this army
     upon any consideration whatever."[528]

On Tuesday, the 6th of June, 1775, "A resolve of the committee of
safety, relative to the [admission] of slaves into the army was read,
and ordered to lie on the table for further consideration."[529] But
this was but another evidence of the cold, conservative spirit of
Massachusetts on the question of other people's rights.

The Continental army was in bad shape. Its arms and clothing, its
discipline and efficiency, were at such a low state as to create the
gravest apprehensions and deepest solicitude. Gen. George Washington
took command of the army in and around Boston, on the 3d of July,
1775, and threw his energies into the work of organization. On the
10th of July he issued instructions to the recruiting-officers of
Massachusetts Bay, in which he forbade the enlistment of any "negro,"
or "any Person who is not an American born, unless such Person has a
Wife and Family and is a settled resident in this Country."[530] But,
nevertheless, it is a curious fact, as Mr. Bancroft says, "the roll of
the army at Cambridge had from its first formation borne the names of
men of color." "Free negroes stood in the ranks by the side of white
men. In the beginning of the war they had entered the provincial army;
the first general order which was issued by Ward, had required a
return, among other things, of the 'complexion' of the soldiers; and
black men like others were retained in the service after the troops
were adopted by the continent." There is no room to doubt. Negroes
were in the army from first to last, but were there in contravention
of law and positive prohibition.[531]

On the 29th of September, 1775, a spirited debate occurred in the
Continental Congress, over the draught of a letter to Gen. Washington,
reported by Lynch, Lee, and Adams. Mr. Rutledge of South Carolina
moved that the commander-in-chief be instructed to discharge all
slaves and free Negroes in his army. The Southern delegates supported
him earnestly, but his motion was defeated. Public attention was
called to the question, and at length the officers of the army debated
it. The following minute of a meeting held at Cambridge preserves and
reveals the sentiment of the general officers of the army on the
subject:--

     "At a council of war, held at head-quarters, October 8th,
     1775, present: His Excellency, General Washington;
     Major-Generals Ward, Lee, and Putnam Brigadier-Generals
     Thomas, Spencer, Heath, Sullivan, Greene, and Gates--the
     question was proposed:

     "'Whether it will be advisable to enlist any negroes in the
     new army? or whether there be a distinction between such as
     are slaves and those who are free?'

     "It was agreed unanimously to reject all slaves; and, by a
     great majority, to reject negroes altogether."

Ten days later, Oct. 18, 1775, a committee of conference met at
Cambridge, consisting of Dr. Franklin, Benjamin Harrison, and Thomas
Lynch, who conferred with Gen. Washington, the deputy-governors of
Connecticut and Rhode Island, and the Committee of the Council of
Massachusetts Bay. The object of the conference was the renovation and
improvement of the army. On the 23d of October, the employment of
Negroes as soldiers came before the conference for action, as
follows:--

     "Ought not negroes to be excluded from the new enlistment,
     especially such as are slaves? all were thought improper by
     the council of officers."

     "_Agreed_ that they be rejected altogether"

In his General Orders, issued from headquarters on the 12th of
November, 1775, Washington said,--

     "Neither negroes, boys unable to bear arms, nor old men
     unfit to endure the fatigues of the campaign, are to be
     enlisted."[532]

But the general repaired this mistake the following month. Lord
Dunmore had issued a proclamation declaring "all indented servants,
negroes, or others (appertaining to rebels) free." Fearing lest many
Negroes should join the ministerial army, in General Orders, 30th
December, Washington wrote:--

     "As the General is informed that numbers of free negroes are
     desirous of enlisting he gives leave to the recruiting
     officers to entertain them, and promises to lay the matter
     before the Congress, who, he doubts not, will approve of
     it."

Lord Dunmore's proclamation is here given:--

     "_By his Excellency the Right Honorable_ JOHN, _Earl of_
     DUNMORE, _his Majesty's Lieutenant and Governor-General of
     the Colony and Dominion of Virginia, and Vice-Admiral of the
     same_,--

     "A PROCLAMATION.

     "As I have ever entertained hopes that an accommodation
     might have taken place between _Great Britain_ and this
     Colony, without being compelled by my duty to this most
     disagreeable but now absolutely necessary step, rendered so
     by a body of armed men, unlawfully assembled, firing on his
     Majesty's tenders; and the formation of an army, and that
     army now on their march to attack his Majesty's troops, and
     destroy the well-disposed subject of this Colony: To defeat
     such treasonable purposes, and that all such traitors and
     their abettors may be brought to justice, and that the peace
     and good order of this Colony may be again restored, which
     the ordinary course of the civil law is unable to effect, I
     have thought fit to issue this my Proclamation; hereby
     declaring, that until the aforesaid good purposes can be
     obtained, I do, in virtue of the power and authority to me
     given by his Majesty, determine to execute martial law, and
     cause the same to be executed, throughout this Colony. And,
     to the end that peace and good order may the sooner be
     restored, I do require every person capable of bearing arms
     to resort to his Majesty's standard, or be looked upon as
     traitors to his Majesty's Crown and Government, and thereby
     become liable to the penalty the law inflicts upon such
     offences,--such as forfeiture of life, confiscation of
     lands, &c., &c. And I do hereby further declare all indented
     servants, negroes, or others (appertaining to Rebels,) free,
     that are able and willing to bear arms, they joining his
     Majesty's troops, as soon as may be, for the more speedily
     reducing this Colony to a proper sense of their duty to his
     Majesty's crown and dignity. I do further order and require
     all his Majesty's liege subjects to retain their quit-rents,
     or any other taxes due, or that may become due, in their own
     custody, till such time as peace may be again restored to
     this at present most unhappy country, or demanded of them,
     for their former salutary purposes, by officers properly
     authorized to receive the same.

     "Given under my hand, on board the Ship _William_, off
     _Norfolk_, the seventh day of November, in the sixteenth
     year of his Majesty's reign.

                                                   "DUNMORE.

                         "_God save the King!_"[533]

On account of this, on the 31st of December, Gen. Washington wrote the
President of Congress as follows:--

     "It has been represented to me, that the free negroes, who
     have served in this army, are very much dissatisfied at
     being discarded. As it is to be apprehended, that they may
     seek employ in the ministerial army, I have presumed to
     depart from the resolution respecting them, and have given
     license for their being enlisted. If this is disapproved of
     by Congress, I will put a stop to it."[534]

This letter was referred to a committee consisting of Messrs. Wythe,
Adams, and Wilson. On the 16th of January, 1776, they made the
following report:--

     "That the free negroes who have served faithfully in the
     army at Cambridge may be re-enlist--therein, but no
     others."[535]

This action on the part of Congress had reference to the army around
Boston, but it called forth loud and bitter criticism from the
officers of the army at the South. In a letter to John Adams, dated
Oct. 24, 1775, Gen. Thomas indicated that there was some feeling even
before the action of Congress was secured. He says,--

     "I am sorry to hear that any prejudices should take place in
     any Southern colony, with respect to the troops raised in
     this. I am certain the insinuations you mention are
     injurious, if we consider with what precipitation we were
     obliged to collect an army. In the regiments at Roxbury, the
     privates are equal to any that I served with in the last
     war; very few old men, and in the ranks very few boys. Our
     fifers are many of them boys. We have some negroes; but I
     look on them, in general, equally serviceable with other men
     for fatigue; and, in action, many of them have proved
     themselves brave.

     "I would avoid all reflection, or any thing that may tend to
     give umbrage; but there is in this army from the southward a
     number called riflemen, who are as indifferent men as I
     ever served with. These privates are mutinous, and often
     deserting to the enemy; unwilling for duty of any kind;
     exceedingly vicious; and, I think, the army here would be as
     well without as with them. But to do justice to their
     officers, they are, some of them, likely men."

The Dunmore proclamation was working great mischief in the Southern
colonies. The Southern colonists were largely engaged in planting,
and, as they were Tories, did not rush to arms with the celerity that
characterized the Northern colonists. At an early moment in the
struggle, the famous Rev. Dr. Hopkins of Rhode Island wrote the
following pertinent extract:--

     "God is so ordering it in his providence, that it seems
     absolutely necessary something should speedily be done with
     respect to the slaves among us, in order to our safety, and
     to prevent their turning against us in out present struggle,
     in order to get their liberty. Our oppressors have planned
     to gain the blacks, and induce them to take up arms against
     us, by promising them liberty on this condition; and this
     plan they are prosecuting to the utmost of their power, by
     which means they have persuaded numbers to join them. And
     should we attempt to restrain them by force and severity,
     keeping a strict guard over them, and punishing them
     severely who shall be detected in attempting to join our
     opposers, this will only be making bad worse, and serve to
     render our inconsistence, oppression, and cruelty more
     criminal, perspicuous, and shocking, and bring down the
     righteous vengeance of Heaven on our heads. The only way
     pointed out to prevent this threatening evil is to set the
     blacks at liberty ourselves by some public acts and laws,
     and then give them proper encouragement to labor, or take
     arms in the defence of the American cause, as they shall
     choose. This would at once be doing them some degree of
     justice, and defeating our enemies in the scheme that they
     are prosecuting."[536]

On Sunday, the 24th of September, 1775, John Adams recorded the
following conversation, that goes to show that Lord Dunmore's policy
was well matured:--

     "In the evening, Mr. Bullock and Mr. Houston, two gentlemen
     from Georgia, came into our room, and smoked and chatted the
     whole evening. Houston and Adams disputed the whole time in
     good humor. They are both dabs at disputation, I think.
     Houston, a lawyer by trade, is one of course, and Adams is
     not a whit less addicted to it than the lawyers. The
     question was, whether all America was not in a state of war,
     and whether we ought to confine ourselves to act upon the
     defensive only? He was for acting offensively, next spring
     or this fall, if the petition was rejected or neglected. If
     it was not answered, and favorably answered, he would be for
     acting against Britain and Britons, as, in open war, against
     French and Frenchmen; fit privateers, and take their ships
     anywhere. These gentlemen give a melancholy account of the
     State of Georgia and South Carolina. They say that if one
     thousand regular troops should land in Georgia, and their
     commander be provided with arms and clothes enough, and
     proclaim freedom to all the negroes who would join his camp,
     twenty thousand negroes would join it from the two Provinces
     in a fortnight. The negroes have a wonderful art of
     communicating intelligence among themselves; it will run
     several hundreds of miles in a week or fortnight. They say,
     their only security is this; that all the king's friends,
     and tools of government, have large plantations, and
     property in negroes; so that the slaves of the Tories would
     be lost, as well as those of the Whigs."[537]

The Negroes in Virginia sought the standards of the ministerial army,
and the greatest consternation prevailed among the planters. On the
27th of November, 1775, Edmund Pendleton wrote to Richard Lee that the
slaves were daily flocking to the British army.

     "The Governour, hearing of this, marched out with three
     hundred and fifty soldiers, Tories and slaves, to Kemp's
     Landing, and after setting up his standard, and issuing his
     proclamation, declaring all persons Rebels who took up arms
     for the country, and inviting all slaves, servants, and
     apprentices to come to him and receive arms, he proceeded to
     intercept Hutchings and his party, upon whom he came by
     surprise, but received, it seems, so warm a fire, that the
     ragamuffins gave way. They were, however, rallied on
     discovering that two companies of our militia gave way; and
     left Hutchings and Dr. Reid with a volunteer company, who
     maintained their ground bravely till they were overcome by
     numbers, and took shelter in a swamp. The slaves were sent
     in pursuit of them; and one of Col. Hutchings's own, with
     another, found him. On their approach, he discharged his
     pistol at his slave, but missed him; and was taken by them,
     after receiving a wound in his face with a sword. The number
     taken or killed, on either side, is not ascertained. It is
     said the Governour went to Dr. Reid's shop, and, after
     taking the medicines and dressings necessary for his wounded
     men, broke all the others to pieces. Letters mention that
     slaves flock to him in abundance; but I hope it is
     magnified."[538]

But the dark stream of Negroes that had set in toward the English
troops, where they were promised the privilege of bearing arms and
their freedom, could not easily be stayed. The proclamation of Dunmore
received the criticism of the press, and the Negroes were appealed to
and urged to stand by their "true friends." A Williamsburg paper,
printed on the 23d of November, 1775, contained the following
well-written plea:--

     "CAUTION TO THE NEGROES.

     "The second class of people for whose sake a few remarks
     upon this proclamation seem necessary is the Negroes. They
     have been flattered with their freedom, if they be able to
     bear arms, and will speedily join Lord Dunmore's troops. To
     none, then, is freedom promised, but to such as are able to
     do Lord Dunmore service. The aged, the infirm, the women and
     children, are still to remain the property of their
     masters,--of masters who will be provoked to severity,
     should part of their slaves desert them. Lord Dunmore's
     declaration, therefore, is a cruel declaration to the
     Negroes. He does not pretend to make it out of any
     tenderness to them, but solely upon his own account; and,
     should it meet with success, it leaves by far the greater
     number at the mercy of an enraged and injured people. But
     should there be any amongst the Negroes weak enough to
     believe that Lord Dunmore intends to do them a kindness, and
     wicked enough to provoke the fury of the Americans against
     their defenceless fathers and mothers, their wives, their
     women and children, let them only consider the difficulty of
     effecting their escape, and what they must expect to suffer
     if they fall into the hands of the Americans. Let them
     further consider what must be their fate should the English
     prove conquerors. If we can judge of the future from the
     past, it will not be much mended. Long have the Americans,
     moved by compassion and actuated by sound policy, endeavored
     to stop the progress of slavery. Our Assemblies have
     repeatedly passed acts, laying heavy duties upon imported
     Negroes; by which they meant altogether to prevent the
     horrid traffick. But their humane intentions have been as
     often frustrated by the cruelty and covetousness of a set of
     English merchants, who prevailed upon the King to repeal our
     kind and merciful acts, little, indeed, to the credit of his
     humanity. Can it, then, be supposed that the Negroes will be
     better used by the English, who have always encouraged and
     upheld this slavery, than by their present masters, who pity
     their condition; who wish, in general, to make it as easy
     and comfortable as possible; _and who would, were it in
     their power, or were they permitted, not only prevent any
     more Negroes from losing their freedom, but restore it to
     such as have already unhappily lost it?_ No: the ends of
     Lord Dunmore and his party being answered, they will either
     give up the offending Negroes to the rigor of the laws they
     have broken, or sell them in the West Indies, where every
     year they sell many thousands of their miserable brethren,
     to perish either by the inclemency of weather or the cruelty
     of barbarous masters. Be not then, ye Negroes, tempted by
     this proclamation to ruin yourselves. I have given you a
     faithful view of what you are to expect; and declare before
     God, in doing it, I have considered your welfare, as well as
     that of the country. Whether you will profit by my advice, I
     cannot tell; but this I know, that, whether we suffer or
     not, if _you_ desert us, _you_ most certainly will."[539]

But the Negroes had been demoralized, and it required an extraordinary
effort to quiet them. On the 13th of December, the Virginia Convention
put forth an answer to the proclamation of Lord Dunmore. On the 14th
of December a proclamation was issued "offering pardon to such slaves
as shall return to their duty within ten days after the publication
thereof." The following; was their declaration:--

     "_By the Representatives of the People of the Colony and
     Dominion of Virginia, assembled in General Convention_,

     "A DECLARATION.

     "Whereas Lord Dunmore, by his Proclamation dated on board
     the ship 'William,' off Norfolk, the seventh day of
     November, 1775, hath offered freedom to such able-bodied
     slaves as are willing to join him, and take up arms against
     the good people of this Colony, giving thereby encouragement
     to a general insurrection, which may induce a necessity of
     inflicting the severest punishments upon those unhappy
     people, already deluded by his base and insidious arts, and
     whereas, by an act of the General Assembly now in force in
     this Colony, it is enacted, that all negro or other slaves,
     conspiring to rebel or make insurrection, shall suffer
     death, and be excluded all benefit of clergy;--we think it
     proper to declare, that all slaves who have been or shall be
     seduced, by his Lordship's Proclamation, or other arts, to
     desert their masters' service, and take up arms against the
     inhabitants of this Colony, shall be liable to such
     punishment as shall hereafter be directed by the General
     Convention. And to the end that all such who have taken this
     unlawful and wicked step may return in safety to their duty,
     and escape the punishment due to their crimes, we hereby
     promise pardon to them, they surrendering themselves to
     Colonel William Woodford or any other commander of our
     troops, and not appearing in arms after the publication
     hereof. And we do further earnestly recommend it to all
     humane and benevolent persons in this Colony to explain and
     make known this our offer of mercy to those unfortunate
     people."[540]

Gen. Washington was not long in observing the effects of the Dunmore
proclamation. He began to fully realize the condition of affairs at
the South, and on Dec. 15 wrote Joseph Reed as follows:--

     "If the Virginians are wise, that arch-traitor to the rights
     of humanity, Lord Dunmore, should be instantly crushed, if
     it takes the force of the whole army to do it; otherwise,
     like a snow-ball in rolling, his army will get size, some
     through fear, some through promises, and some through
     inclination, joining his standard but that which renders the
     measure indispensably necessary is the negroes; for, if he
     gets formidable, numbers of them will be tempted to join who
     will be afraid to do it without."[541]

The slaves themselves were not incapable of perceiving the cunning of
Lord Dunmore. England had forced slavery upon the colonists against
their protest, had given instructions to the royal governors
concerning the increase of the traffic, and therefore could not be
more their friends than the colonists. The number that went over to
the enemy grew smaller all the while, and finally the British were
totally discouraged in this regard. Lord Dunmore was unwilling to
acknowledge the real cause of his failure to secure black recruits,
and so he charged it to the fever.

     "LORD DUNMORE TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE.


     [No. 1]        "SHIP 'DUNMORE,' IN ELIZABETH RIVER, VIRGINIA,
                                        30th March, 1776



     "Your Lordship will observe by my letter, No. 34, that I
     have been endeavouring to raise two regiments here--one of
     white people, the other of black. The former goes on very
     slowly, but the latter very well, and would have been in
     great forwardness, had not a fever crept in amongst them,
     which earned off a great many very fine fellows."

     [No. 3]        "SHIP 'DUNMORE,' IN GWIN'S ISLAND HARBOUR,
                                        VIRGINIA, June 26, 1776.

     "I am extremely sorry to inform your Lordship, that that
     fever, of which I informed you in my letter No. 1, has
     proved a very malignant one, and has carried off an
     incredible number of our people, especially the blacks. Had
     it not been for this horrid disorder, I am satisfied I
     should have had two thousand blacks, with whom I should have
     had no doubt of penetrating into the heart of this
     Colony."[542]

While the colonists felt, as Dr. Hopkins had written, that something
ought to be done toward securing the services of the Negroes, yet
their representatives were not disposed to legislate the Negro into
the army. He was there, and still a conservative policy was pursued
respecting him. Some bold officers took it upon themselves to receive
Negroes as soldiers. Gen. Greene, in a letter to Gen. Washington,
called attention to the raising of a Negro regiment on Staten Island.


     "CAMP ON LONG ISLAND,
     July 21, 1776, two o'clock.

     "SIR; Colonel Hand reports seven large ships are coming up
     from the Hook to the Narrows.

     "A negro belonging to one Strickler, at Gravesend was taken
     prisoner (as he says) last Sunday at Coney Island.
     Yesterday he made his escape, and was taken prisoner by the
     rifle-guard. He reports eight hundred negroes collected on
     Staten Island, this day to be formed into a regiment.

     "I am your Excellency's most obedient, humble servant,

                                        "N. GREENE.

     "_To his Excellency_ GEN. WASHINGTON, _Headquarters, New
     York_."[543]

To the evidence already produced as to the indiscriminate employment
of Negroes as soldiers in the American army, the observations of a
foreign officer are added. Under date of the 23d of October, 1777, a
Hessian officer wrote:[544]--

     "From here to Springfield, there are few habitations which
     have not a negro family dwelling in a small house near by.
     The negroes are here as fruitful as other cattle. The young
     ones are well foddered, especially while they are still
     calves. Slavery is, moreover, very gainful. The negro is to
     be considered just as the bond-servant of a peasant. The
     negress does all the coarse work of the house, and the
     little black young ones wait on the little white young ones.
     _The negro can take the field, instead of his master; and
     therefore no regiment is to be seen in which there are not
     negroes in abundance: and among them there, are able-bodied,
     strong, and brave fellows_. Here, too, there are many
     families of free negroes, who live in good houses, have
     property, and live just like the rest of the
     inhabitants."[545]

In the month of May, 1777, the Legislature of Connecticut sought to
secure some action on the subject of the employment of Negroes as
soldiers."

     "In May, 1777, the General Assembly of Connecticut appointed
     a Committee 'to take into consideration the state and
     condition of the negro and mulatto slaves in this State, and
     what may be done for their emancipation.' This Committee, in
     a report presented at the same session (signed by the
     chairman, the Hon. Matthew Griswold of Lyme), recommended--

     "'That the effective negro and mulatto slaves be allowed to
     enlist with the Continental battalions now raising in this
     State, under the following regulations and restrictions;
     viz., that all such negro and mulatto slaves as can procure,
     either by bounty, hire, or in any other way, such a sum to
     be paid to their masters as such negro or mulatto shall be
     judged to be reasonably worth by the selectmen of the town
     where such negro or mulatto belongs, shall be allowed to
     enlist into either of said battalions, and shall thereupon
     be, de facto, _free and emancipated_; and that the master of
     such negro or mulutto shall be exempted from the support and
     maintenance of such negro or mulatto, in case such negro or
     mulatto shall hereafter become unable to support and
     maintain himself.

     "'And that, in case any such negro or mulatto slave shall be
     disposed to enlist into either of said battalions during the
     [war], he shall be allowed so to do: and such negro or
     mulatto shall be appraised by the selectmen of the town to
     which he belongs, and his master shall be allowed to receive
     the bounty to which such slave may be entitled and also
     one-half of the annual wages of such slave during the time
     he shall continue in said service; provided, however, that
     said master shall not be allowed to receive such part of
     said wages after he shall have received so much as amounts,
     together with the bounty, to the sum at which he was
     appraised.'"

In the lower house the report was put over to the next session, but
when it reached the upper house it was rejected.

     "You will see by the Report of Committee, May, 1777, that
     General Varnum's plan for the enlistment of slaves had been
     anticipated in Connecticut; with this difference, that Rhode
     Island _adopted_ it, while Connecticut did _not._

     "The two States reached nearly the same _results_ by
     different methods. The unanimous declaration of the officers
     at Cambridge, in the winter of 1775, _against_ the
     enlistment of slaves,--confirmed by the Committee of
     Congress,--had some weight, I think, with the Connecticut
     Assembly, so far as the formal enactment of a law
     _authorized_ such enlistments was in question. At the same
     time, Washington's license to _continue_ the enlistment of
     negroes was regarded as a rule of action both by the
     selectmen in making up, and by the State Government in
     accepting, the quota of the towns. The process of
     draughting, in Connecticut, was briefly this: The
     able-bodied men, in each town, were divided into 'classes:'
     and each class was required to furnish one or more men, as
     the town's quota required, to answer a draught. Now, the
     Assembly, at the same session at which the proposition for
     enlisting slaves was rejected (May, 1777), passed an act
     providing that any _two_ men belonging to this State, 'who
     should procure an able-bodied soldier or recruit to enlist
     into either of the Continental battalions to be raised from
     this State,' should themselves be exempted from draught
     during the continuance of such enlistment. Of recruits or
     draughted men thus furnished, neither the selectmen nor
     commanding officers questioned the _color_ or the civil
     _status_: white and black, bond and free, if 'able-bodied,'
     went on the roll together, accepted as the representatives
     of their 'class,' or as substitutes for their employers. At
     the next session (October, 1777), an act was passed which
     gave more direct encouragement to the enlistment of slaves.
     By this existing law, the master who emancipated a slave was
     not released from the liability to provide for his support.
     This law was now so amended, as to authorize the selectmen
     of any town, on the application of the master,--after
     'inquiry into the age, abilities, circumstances, and
     character' of the servant or slave, and being satisfied
     'that it was likely to be consistent with his real
     advantage, and that it was probable that he would be able to
     support himself,'--to grant liberty for his emancipation,
     and to discharge the master 'from any charge or cost which
     may be occasioned by maintaining or supporting the servant
     or slave made free as aforesaid.' This enactment enabled the
     selectmen to offer an additional inducement to enlistment
     for making up the quota of the town. The slave (or servant
     for term of years) might receive his freedom; the master
     might secure exemption from draught, and a discharge from
     future liabilities, to which he must otherwise have been
     subjected. In point of fact, some hundreds of blacks--slaves
     and freemen--were enlisted, from time to time, in the
     regiments of the State troops and of the Connecticut line.
     _How_ many, it is impossible to tell: for, from first to
     last, the company or regimental rolls indicate _no
     distinctions_ of color. The _name_ is the only guide, and,
     in turning over the rolls of the Connecticut line, the
     frequent recurrence of names which were exclusively
     appropriated to negroes and slaves, shows how considerable
     was their proportion of the material of the Connecticut
     army; while such surnames as 'Liberty.' 'Freeman,'
     'Freedom,' &c, by scores, indicate with what anticipations,
     and under what inducements, they entered the service.

     As to the efficiency of the service they rendered, I can say
     nothing from the records, except what is to be gleaned from
     scattered files such as one of the petitions I send you. So
     far as my acquaintance extends, almost every family has its
     traditions of the good and faithful service of a black
     servant or slave, who was killed in battle, or served
     through the war, and came home to tell stories of hard
     fighting, and draw his pension. In my own native town,--not
     a large one,--I remember five such pensioners, three of
     whom, I believe, had been slaves, and, in fact, _were_
     slaves to the day of their death; for (and this explains the
     uniform action of the General Assembly on petitions for
     emancipation) neither the towns nor the State were inclined
     to exonerate the master, at a time when slavery was becoming
     unprofitable, from the obligation to provide for the old age
     of his slave."[546]

Gen. Varnum, a brave and intelligent officer from Rhode Island, early
urged the employment of Negro soldiers. He communicated his views to
Gen. Washington, and he referred the correspondence to the governor of
Rhode Island.

     GEN. WASHINGTON TO GOV. COOKE.

     HEADQUARTERS, 2d January, 1778

     SIR:--Enclosed you will receive a copy of a letter from
     General Varnum to me, upon the means which might be adopted
     for completing the Rhode Island troops to their full
     proportion in the Continental army. I have nothing to say in
     addition to what I wrote the 29th of the last month on this
     important subject, but to desire that you will give the
     officers employed in this business all the assistance in
     your power.

                    I am with great respect, sir,
                         Your most obedient servant,
                                   G. WASHINGTON.

     "To GOVERNOR COOKE."[547]

The letter of Gen. Varnum to Gen. Washington, in reference to the
employment of Negroes as soldiers, is as follows:--

     GEN. VARNUM TO GEN. WASHINGTON.

     "CAMP, January 2d, 1778.

     "SIR:--The two battalions from the State of Rhode Island
     being small, and there being a necessity of the state's
     furnishing an additional number to make up their proportion
     in the Continental army; the field officers have represented
     to me the propriety of making one temporary battalion from
     the two, so that one entire corps of officers may repair to
     Rhode Island, in order to receive and prepare the recruits
     for the field. It is imagined that a battalion of negroes
     can be easily raised there. Should that measure be adopted,
     or recruits obtained upon any other principle, the service
     will be advanced. The field officers who go upon this
     command, are Colonel Greene, Lieutenant Colonel Olney, and
     Major Ward; seven captains, twelve lieutenants, six ensigns,
     one paymaster, one surgeon and mates, one adjutant and one
     chaplain.

                    "I am your Excellency's most obedient servant,
                                                    "J.M. VARNUM.

     "TO HIS EXCELLENCY GENERAL WASHINGTON."[548]

Gov. Cooke wrote Gen. Washington as follows:--


     "STATE OF RHODE ISLAND, &c,
     "PROVIDENCE, January 19th, 1778.

     "SIR:--Since we had the honor of addressing Your Excellency
     by Mr. Thompson, we received your favor of the 2d of January
     current, enclosing a proposition of Gen. Varnum's for
     raising a battalion of negroes.

     "We in our letter of the 15th current, of which we send a
     duplicate, have fully represented our present circumstances,
     and the many difficulties we labor under, in respect to our
     filling up the Continental battalions. In addition thereto,
     will observe, that we have now in the state's service within
     the government, two battalions of infantry, and a regiment
     of artillery who are enlisted to serve until the 16th day of
     March next; and the General Assembly have ordered two
     battalions of infantry, and a regiment of artillery, to be
     raised, to serve until the 16th of March, 1779. So that we
     have raised and kept in the field, more than the proportion
     of men assigned us by Congress.

     "The General Assembly of this state are to convene
     themselves on the second Monday of February next, when your
     letters will be laid before them, and their determination
     respecting the same, will be immediately transmitted to Your
     Excellency.

                              "I have the honor to be, &c.,
                                        "NICHOLAS COOKE.

     "TO GEN. WASHINGTON."[549]

The governor laid the above letters before the General Assembly, at
their February session; and the following act was passed:--

     "Whereas, for the preservation of the rights and liberties
     of the United States, it is necessary that the whole powers
     of government should be exerted in recruiting the
     Continental battalions; and whereas, His Excellency Gen.
     Washington hath enclosed to this state a proposal made to
     him by Brigadier General Varnum, to enlist into the two
     battalions, raising by this state, such slaves as should be
     willing to enter into the service; and whereas, history
     affords us frequent precedents of the wisest, the freest,
     and bravest nations having liberated their slaves, and
     enlisted them as soldiers to fight in defence of their
     country; and also whereas, the enemy, with a great force,
     have taken possession of the capital, and of a greater part
     of this state; and this state is obliged to raise a very
     considerable number of troops for its own immediate defence,
     whereby it is in a manner rendered impossible for this state
     to furnish recruits for the said two battalions, without
     adopting the said measure so recommended.

     "It is voted and resolved, that every able-bodied negro,
     mulatto, or Indian man slave, in this state, may enlist into
     either of the said two battalions, to serve during the
     continuance of the present war with Great Britain.

     "That every slave, so enlisting, shall be entitled to, and
     receive, all the bounties, wages, and encouragements,
     allowed by the Continental Congress, to any soldier
     enlisting into their service.

     "It is further voted and resolved, that every slave, so
     enlisting, shall, upon his passing muster before Col.
     Christopher Greene, be immediately discharged from the
     service of his master or mistress, and be absolutely FREE,
     as though he had never been encumbered with any kind of
     servitude or slavery.

     "And in case such slave shall, by sickness or otherwise, be
     rendered unable to maintain himself, he shall not be
     chargeable to his master or mistress; but shall be supported
     at the expense of the state.

     "And whereas, slaves have been, by the laws, deemed the
     property of their owners, and therefore compensation ought
     to be made to the owners for the loss of their service,--

     "It is further voted and resolved, that there be allowed,
     and paid by this state, to the owner, for every such slave
     so enlisting, a sum according to his worth; at a price not
     exceeding £120 for the most valuable slave; and in
     proportion for a slave of less value.

     "Provided, the owner of said slave shall deliver up to the
     officer, who shall enlist him, the clothes of the said
     slave; or otherwise he shall not be entitled to said sum.

     "And for settling and ascertaining the value of such
     slaves,--

     "It is further voted and resolved, that a committee of five
     be appointed, to wit:

     "One from each county; any three of whom, to be a quorum, to
     examine the slaves who shall be so enlisted, after they
     shall have passed muster, and to set a price upon each slave
     according to his value, as aforesaid.

     "It is further voted and resolved, that upon any ablebodied
     negro, mulatto, or Indian slave, enlisting as aforesaid, the
     officer who shall so enlist him, after he shall have passed
     muster, as aforesaid, shall deliver a certificate thereof,
     to the master or mistress of said negro, mulatto, or Indian
     slave; which shall discharge him from the service of his
     said master or mistress, as aforesaid.

     "It is further voted and resolved, that the committee who
     shall estimate the value of any slave, as aforesaid, shall
     give a certificate of the sum at which he may be valued, to
     the owner of said slave; and the general treasurer of this
     state is hereby empowered and directed to give unto the said
     owner of the said slave, his promissory note, as treasurer,
     as aforesaid, for the sum of money at which he shall be
     valued, as aforesaid, payable on demand, with interest at
     the rate of six per cent. per annum; and that said notes,
     which shall be so given, shall be paid with the money which
     is due to this state, and is expected from Congress; the
     money which has been borrowed out of the general treasury,
     by this Assembly, being first re-placed."[550]

This measure met with some opposition, but it was too weak to effect
any thing. The best thing the minority could do was to enter a written
protest.

     "PROTEST AGAINST ENLISTING SLAVES TO SERVE IN THE ARMY.

     "We, the subscribers, beg leave to dissent from the vote of
     the lower house, ordering a regiment of negroes to be raised
     for the Continental service, for the following reasons,
     viz.:

     "1st. Because, in our opinion, there is not a sufficient
     number of negroes in the state, who would have an
     inclination to enlist, and would pass muster, to constitute
     a regiment; and raising several companies of blacks, would
     not answer the purposes intended; and therefore the attempt
     to constitute said regiment would prove abortive, and be a
     fruitless expense to the state.

     "2d. The raising such a regiment, upon the footing proposed,
     would suggest an idea and produce an opinion in the world,
     that the state had purchased a band of slaves to be employed
     in the defence of the rights and liberties of our country,
     which is wholly inconsistent with those principles of
     liberty and constitutional government, for which we are so
     ardently contending; and would be looked upon by the
     neighboring states in a contemptible point of view, and not
     equal to their troops; and they would therefore be unwilling
     that we should have credit for them, as for an equal number
     of white troops; and would also give occasion to our enemies
     to suspect that we are not able to procure our own people to
     oppose them in the field; and to retort upon us the same
     kind of ridicule we so liberally bestowed upon them, on
     account of Dunmore's regiment of blacks; or possibly might
     suggest to them the idea of employing black regiments
     against us.

     "3d. The expense of purchasing and enlisting said regiment,
     in the manner proposed, will vastly exceed the expenses of
     raising an equal number of white men; and at the same time
     will not have the like good effect.

     "4th. Great difficulties and uneasiness will arise in
     purchasing the negroes from their masters; and many of the
     masters will not be satisfied with any prices allowed.

                          "JOHN NORTHUP,       GEORGE PIERCE,
                          "JAMES BABCOK, JR.,  SYLVESTER GARDNER,
                          "OTHNIEL GORTON,     SAMUEL BABCOCK."[551]

Upon the passage of the Act, Gov. Cooke hastened to notify Gen.
Washington of the success of the project.

     "PROVIDENCE, February 23d, 1778.

     "SIR:--I have been favored with your Excellency's letter of
     the [3d instant,][552] enclosing a proposal made to you by
     General Varnum, for recruiting the two Continental
     battalions raised by this state.

     "I laid the letter before the General Assembly at their
     session, on the second Monday in this month; who,
     considering the pressing necessity of filling up the
     Continental army, and the peculiarly difficult circumstances
     of this state, which rendered it in a manner impossible to
     recruit our battalions in any other way, adopted the
     measure.

     "Liberty is given to every effective slave to enter the
     service during the war; and upon his passing muster, he is
     absolutely made free, and entitled to all the wages,
     bounties and encouragements given by Congress to any soldier
     enlisting into their service. The masters are allowed at the
     rate of £120, for the most valuable slave; and in proportion
     to those of less value.

     "The number of slaves in this state is not great; but it is
     generally thought that three hundred, and upwards, will be
     enlisted.

     "I am, with great respect, sir,

                    "Your Excellency's most obedient, humble servant,
                                        "NICHOLAS COOKE.

     "TO GEN. WASHINGTON."[553]

Where masters had slaves in the army, they were paid an annual
interest on the appraised value of the slaves, out of the public
treasury, until the end of the military service of such slaves.[554]
If owners presented certificates from the committee appointed to
appraise enlisted Negroes, they were paid in part or in full in
"Continental loan-office certificates."[555]

The reader will remember, that it has been already shown that Negroes,
both bond and free, were excluded from the militia of Massachusetts;
and, furthermore, that both the Committee of Safety and the Provincial
Congress had opposed the enlistment of Negroes. The first move in the
colony to secure legal enlistments and separate organizations of
Colored troops was a communication to the General Assembly of
Massachusetts, 3d of April, 1778.

     "_To the Honorable Council, and House of Representatives,
     Boston, or at Roxbury._

     "HONORED GENTLEMEN,--At the opening of this campaign, our
     forces should be all ready, well equipped with arms and
     ammunition, with clothing sufficient to stand them through
     the campaign, their wages to be paid monthly, so as not to
     give the soldiery so much reason of complaint as it is the
     general cry from the soldiery amongst whom I am connected.

     "We have accounts of large re-enforcements a-coming over
     this spring against us; and we are not so strong this
     spring, I think, as we were last. Great numbers have
     deserted; numbers have died, besides what is sick, and
     incapable of duty, or bearing arms in the field.

     "I think it is highly necessary that some new augmentation
     should be added to the army this summer,--all the
     re-enforcements that can possibly be obtained. For now is
     the time to exert ourselves or never; for, if the enemy can
     get no further hold this campaign than they now possess, we
     [have] no need to fear much from them hereafter.

     "A re-enforcement can quick be raised of two or three
     hundred men. Will your honors grant the liberty, and give me
     the command of the party? And what I refer to is negroes. We
     have divers of them in our service, mixed with white men.
     But I think it would be more proper to raise a body by
     themselves, than to have them intermixed with the white men;
     and their ambition would entirely be to outdo the white men
     in every measure that the fortune of war calls a soldier to
     endure. And I could rely with dependence upon them in the
     field of battle, or to any post that I was sent to defend
     with them; and they would think themselves happy could they
     gain their freedom by bearing a part of subduing the enemy
     that is invading our land, and clear a peaceful inheritance
     for their masters, and posterity yet to come, that they are
     now slaves to.

     "The method that I would point out to your Honors in raising
     a detachment of negroes;--that a company should consist of a
     hundred, including commissioned officers; and that the
     commissioned officers should be white, and consist of one
     captain, one captain-lieutenant, two second lieutenants; the
     orderly sergeant white; and that there should be three
     sergeants black, four corporals black, two drums and two
     fifes black, and eighty-four rank and file. These should
     engage to serve till the end of the war, and then be free
     men. And I doubt not, that no gentleman that is a friend to
     his country will disapprove of this plan, or be against his
     negroes enlisting into the service to maintain the cause of
     freedom, and suppress the worse than savage enemies of our
     land.

     "I beg your Honors to grant me the liberty of raising one
     company, if no more. It will be far better than to fill up
     our battalions with runaways and deserters from Gen.
     Burgoyne's army, who, after receiving clothing and the
     bounty, in general make it their business to desert from us.
     In the lieu thereof, if they are [of] a mind to serve in
     America, let them supply the families of those gentlemen
     where those negroes belong that should engage.

     "I rest, relying on your Honor's wisdom in this matter, as
     it will be a quick way of having a re-enforcement to join
     the grand army, or to act in any other place that occasion
     shall require; and I will give my faith and assurance that I
     will act upon honor and fidelity, should I take the command
     of such a party as I have been describing.

     "So I rest till your Honors shall call me; and am your very
     humble and obedient servant,

                                        "THOMAS KENCH,

     "In Col. Craft's Regiment of Artillery, now on Castle
     Island.

     "CASTLE ISLAND, April 3, 1778."

A few days later he addressed another letter to the same body.

     "_To the Honorable Council in Boston._

     "The letter I wrote before I heard of the disturbance with
     Col. Seares, Mr. Spear, and a number of other gentlemen,
     concerning the freedom of negroes, in Congress Street. It is
     a pity that riots should be committed on the occasion, as it
     is justifiable that negroes should have their freedom, and
     none amongst us be held as slaves, as freedom and liberty is
     the grand controversy that we are contending for; and I
     trust, under the smiles of Divine Providence, we shall
     obtain it, if all our minds can be united; and putting the
     negroes into the service will prevent much uneasiness, and
     give more satisfaction to those that are offended at the
     thoughts of their servants being free.

     "I will not enlarge, for fear I should give offence; but
     subscribe myself

                    "Your faithful servant,
                                        "THOMAS KENCH.

     "CASTLE ISLAND, April 7, 1778."[556]

On the 11th of April the first letter was referred to a joint
committee, with instructions "to consider the same, and report." On
the 17th of April, "a resolution of the General Assembly of Rhode
Island for enlisting Negroes in the public service" was referred to
the same committee. In the Militia Act of 1775, the exceptions were,
"Negroes, Indians, and mulattoes." By the act of May, 1776, providing
for the re-enforcement of the American army, it was declared that,
"Indians, negroes, and mulattoes, shall not be held to take up arms or
procure any person to do it in their room." By another act, passed
Nov. 14, 1776, looking toward the improvement of the army, "Negroes,
Indians, and mulattoes" were excluded. During the year 1776 an order
was issued for taking the census of all males above sixteen, but
excepted "Negroes, Indians, and mulattoes." But after some reverses to
the American army, Massachusetts passed a resolve on Jan. 6, 1777,
"for raising every seventh man to complete our quota," "without any
exceptions, save the people called Quakers." This was the nearest
Massachusetts ever got toward recognizing Negroes as soldiers. And on
the 5th of March, 1778, Benjamin Goddard, for the selectmen, Committee
of Safety, and militia officers of the town of Grafton, protested
against the enlistment of the Negroes in his town.

It is not remarkable, in view of such a history, that Massachusetts
should have hesitated to follow the advice of Thomas Kench. On the
28th of April, 1778, a law was draughted following closely the
Rhode-Island Act. But no separate organization was ordered; and,
hence, the Negroes served in white organizations till the close of the
American Revolution.

There is nothing in the records of Virginia to show that there was
ever any legal employment of Negroes as soldiers; but, from the
following, it is evident that free Negroes _did_ serve, and that there
was no prohibition against them, providing they showed their
certificates of freedom:--

     "And whereas several negro slaves have deserted from their
     masters, and under pretence of being free men have enlisted
     as soldiers: For prevention whereof, _Be it enacted_, that
     it shall not be lawful for any recruiting officer within
     this commonwealth to enlist any negro or mulatto into the
     service of this or either of the United States, until such
     negro or mulatto shall produce a certificate from some
     justice of the peace for the county wherein he resides that
     he is a free man."[557]

Maryland employed Negroes as soldiers, and sent them into regiments
with white soldiers. John Cadwalder of Annapolis, wrote Gen.
Washington on the 5th of June, 1781, in reference to Negro soldiers,
as follows:--

     "We have resolved to raise, immediately, seven hundred and
     fifty negroes, to be incorporated with the other troops; and
     a bill is now almost completed."[558]

The legislature of New York, on the 20th of March, 1781, passed the
following Act, providing for the raising of two regiments of blacks:--

     "SECT. 6.--And be it further enacted by the authority
     aforesaid, that any person who shall deliver one or more of
     his or her able-bodied male slaves to any warrant officer,
     as afore said, to serve in either of the said regiments or
     independent corps, and produce a certificate thereof,
     signed by any person authorized to muster and receive the
     men to be raised by virtue of this act, and produce such
     certificate to the Surveyor-General, shall, for every male
     slave so entered and mustered as aforesaid, be entitled to
     the location and grant of one right, in manner as in and by
     this act is directed; and shall be, and hereby is,
     discharged from any future maintenance of such slave, any
     law to the contrary notwithstanding: And such slave so
     entered as aforesaid, who shall serve for the term of three
     years or until regularly discharged, shall, immediately
     after such service or discharge, be, and is hereby declared
     to be, a free man of this State."[559]

The theatre of the war was now transferred from the Eastern to the
Middle and Southern colonies. Massachusetts alone had furnished, and
placed in the field, 67,907 men; while all the colonies south of
Pennsylvania, put together, had furnished but 50,493,--or 8,414 _less_
than the single colony of Massachusetts.[560] It was a difficult task
to get the whites to enlist at the South. Up to 1779, nearly all the
Negro soldiers had been confined to the New-England colonies. The
enemy soon found out that the Southern colonies were poorly protected,
and thither he moved. The Hon. Henry Laurens of South Carolina, an
intelligent and observing patriot, wrote Gen. Washington on the 16th
of March, 1779, concerning the situation at the South:--

     "Our affairs [he wrote] in the Southern department are more
     favorable than we had considered them a few days ago;
     nevertheless, the country is greatly distressed, and will be
     more so unless further reinforcements are sent to its
     relief. Had we arms for three thousand such black men as I
     could select in Carolina, I should have no doubt of success
     in driving the British out of Georgia, and subduing East
     Florida, before the end of July."[561]

Gen. Washington sent the following conservative reply:--

     "The policy of our arming slaves is in my opinion a moot
     point, unless the enemy set the example. For, should we
     begin to form battalions of them, I have not the smallest
     doubt, if the war is to be prosecuted, of their following us
     in it, and justifying the measure upon our own ground. The
     contest then must be, who can arm fastest. And where are our
     arms? Besides, I am not clear that a discrimination will not
     render slavery more irksome to those who remain in it. Most
     of the good and evil things in this life are judged of by
     comparison; and I fear a comparison in this case will be
     productive of much discontent in those, who are held in
     servitude. But, as this is a subject that has never employed
     much of my thoughts, these are no more than the first crude
     ideas that have struck me upon the occasion."[562]

The gifted and accomplished Alexander Hamilton, a member of
Washington's military family, was deeply interested in the plan
suggested by the Hon. Henry Laurens, whose son was on Washington's
staff. Col. John Laurens was the bearer of the following remarkable
letter from Hamilton to John Jay, President of Congress.

     "HEADQUARTERS, March 14, 1779.

     "To JOHN JAY.

     "DEAR SIR,--Col. Laurens who will have the honor of
     delivering you this letter, is on his way to South Carolina,
     on a project which I think, in the present situation of
     affairs there, is a very good one, and deserves every kind
     of support and encouragement. This is, to raise two, three,
     or four battalions of negroes, with the assistance of the
     government of the State, by contributions from the owners in
     proportion to the number they possess. If you should think
     proper to enter upon the subject with him, he will give you
     a detail of his plan. He wishes to have it recommended by
     Congress to the State: and, as an inducement, that they
     should engage to take those battalions into Continental pay.

     "It appears to me, that an expedient of this kind, in the
     present state of Southern affairs, is the most rational that
     can be adopted, and promises very important advantages.
     Indeed, I hardly see how a sufficient force can be collected
     in that quarter without it; and the enemy's operations there
     are growing infinitely more serious and formidable. I have
     not the least doubt that the negroes will make very
     excellent soldiers with proper management; and I will
     venture to pronounce, that they cannot be put into better
     hands than those of Mr. Laurens. He has all the zeal,
     intelligence, enterprise, and every other qualification,
     necessary to succeed in such an undertaking. It is a maxim
     with some great military judges, that, with sensible
     officers, soldiers can hardly be too stupid; and, on this
     principle, it is thought that the Russians would make the
     best troops in the world, it they were under other officers
     than their own. The King of Prussia is among the number who
     maintain this doctrine; and has a very emphatic saying on
     the occasion, which I do not exactly recollect. I mention
     this because I hear it frequently objected to the scheme of
     embodying negroes, that they are too stupid to make
     soldiers. This is so far from appearing to me a valid
     objection, that I think their want of cultivation (for their
     natural faculties are probably as good as ours), joined to
     that habit of subordination which they acquire from a life
     of servitude, will make them sooner become soldiers than our
     white inhabitants. Let officers be men of sense and
     sentiment; and the nearer the soldiers approach to machines,
     perhaps the better.

     "I foresee that this project will have to combat much
     opposition from prejudice and self-interest. The contempt we
     have been taught to entertain for the blacks makes us fancy
     many things that are founded neither in reason nor
     experience; and an unwillingness to part with property of so
     valuable a kind will furnish a thousand arguments to show
     the impracticability or pernicious tendency of a scheme
     which requires such a sacrifice. But it should be
     considered, that, if we do not make use of them in this way,
     the enemy probably will; and that the best way to
     counteract the temptations they will hold out will be to
     offer them ourselves. An essential part of the plan is to
     give them their freedom with their muskets. This will secure
     their fidelity, animate their courage, and, I believe, will
     have a good influence upon those who remain, by opening a
     door to their emancipation. This circumstance, I confess,
     has no small weight in inducing me to wish the success of
     the project, for the dictates of humanity, and true policy,
     equally interest me in favor of this unfortunate class of
     men.

                    "With the truest respect and esteem,
                         "I am, Sir, your most obedient servant,
                                        "ALEX. HAMILTON."[563]

The condition of the Southern States became a matter of Congressional
solicitude. The letter of Col. Hamilton was referred to a special
committee on the 29th of March, 1779. It was represented that South
Carolina especially was in great danger. The white population was
small; and, while there were some in the militia service, it was
thought necessary to keep as large a number of whites at home as
possible. The fear of insurrection, the desertion[564] of Negroes to
the enemy, and the exposed condition of her border, intensified the
anxiety of the people. The only remedy seemed to lie in the employment
of the more fiery spirits among the Negroes as the defenders of the
rights and interests of the colonists. Congress rather hesitated to
act,--it was thought that that body lacked the authority to order the
enlistment of Negroes in the States,--and therefore recommended to
"the states of South Carolina and Georgia, if they shall think the
same expedient, to take measures immediately for raising three
thousand able-bodied negroes." After some consideration the following
plan was recommended by the special committee, and adopted:--

     "IN CONGRESS, March 29, 1779.

     "The Committee, consisting of Mr. Burke, Mr. Laurens, Mr.
     Armstrong, Mr. Wilson, and Mr. Dyer, appointed to take into
     consideration the circumstances of the Southern States, and
     the ways and means for their safety and defence, report,--



     "That the State of South Carolina, as represented by the
     delegates of the said State and by Mr. Huger, who has come
     hither at the request of the Governor of the said State, on
     purpose to explain the particular circumstances thereof, is
     unable to make any effectual efforts with militia, by reason
     of the great proportion of citizens necessary to remain at
     home to prevent insurrections among the negroes, and to
     prevent the desertion of them to the enemy.

     "That the state of the country, and the great numbers of
     those people among them, expose the inhabitants to great
     danger from the endeavors of the enemy to excite them either
     to revolt or desert.

     "That it is suggested by the delegates of the said State and
     by Mr. Huger, that a force might be raised in the said State
     from among the negroes, which would not only be formidable
     to the enemy from their numbers, and the discipline of which
     they would very readily admit, but would also lessen the
     danger from revolts and desertions, by detaching the most
     vigorous and enterprising from among the negroes.

     "That, as this measure may involve inconveniences peculiarly
     affecting the States of South Carolina and Georgia, the
     Committee are of the opinion that the same should be
     submitted to the governing powers of the said States; and if
     the said powers shall judge it expedient to raise such a
     force, that the United States ought to defray the expense
     thereof: whereupon,

     "Resolved, That it be recommended to the States of South
     Carolina and Georgia, if they shall think the same
     expedient, to take measures immediately for raising three
     thousand able-bodied negroes.

     "That the said negroes be formed into separate corps, as
     battalions, according to the arrangements adopted for the
     main army, to be commanded by white commissioned and
     non-commissioned officers.

     "That the commissioned officers be appointed by the said
     States.

     "That the non-commissioned officers may, if the said States
     respectively shall think proper, be taken from among the
     non-commissioned officers and soldiers of the Continental
     battalions of the said States respectively.

     "That the Governors of the said States, together with the
     commanding officer of the Southern army, be empowered to
     incorporate the several Continental battalions of their
     States with each other respectively, agreeably to the
     arrangement of the army, as established by the resolutions
     of May 27, 1778; and to appoint such of the supernumerary
     officers to command the said negroes as shall choose to go
     into that service.

     "Resolved, That Congress will make provision for paying the
     proprietors of such negroes as shall be enlisted for the
     service of the United States during the war a full
     compensation for the property, at a rate not exceeding one
     thousand dollars for each active, able bodied negro man of
     standard size, not exceeding thirty-five years of age, who
     shall be so enlisted and pass muster.

     "That no pay or bounty be allowed to the said negroes, but
     that they be clothed and subsisted at the expense of the
     United States.

     "That every negro who shall well and faithfully serve as a
     soldier to the end of the present war, and shall then return
     his arms, be emancipated, and receive the sum of fifty
     dollars."[565]

Congress supplemented the foregoing measure by commissioning young
Col. Laurens to carry forward the important work suggested. The
gallant young officer was indeed worthy of the following
resolutions:--

     "Whereas John Laurens, Esq., who has heretofore acted as
     aide-de-camp to the Commander-in-chief, is desirous of
     repairing to South Carolina, with a design to assist in
     defence of the Southern States;--

     "_Resolved_, That a commission of lieutenant-colonel be
     granted to the said John Laurens, Esq."[566]

He repaired to South Carolina, and threw all his energies into his
noble mission. That the people did not co-operate with him, is
evidenced in the following extract from a letter he subsequently wrote
to Col. Hamilton:--

     "Ternant will relate to you how many violent struggles I
     have had between duty and inclination,--how much my heart
     was with you, while I appeared to be most actively employed
     here. But it appears to me, that I should be inexcusable in
     the light of a citizen, if I did not continue my utmost
     efforts for carrying the plan of the black levies into
     execution, while there remain the smallest hopes of
     success."[567]

The enemy was not slow in discovering the division of sentiment among
the colonists as to the policy of employing Negroes as soldiers. And
the suspicions of Gen. Washington, indicated to Henry Laurens, in a
letter already quoted, were not groundless. On the 30th of June, 1779,
Sir Henry Clinton issued a proclamation to the Negroes. It first
appeared in "The Royal Gazette" of New York, on the 3d of July, 1779.

     "By his Excellency Sir HENRY CLINTON, K.B. General and
     Commander-in-chief of all his Majesty's Forces within the
     Colonies laying on the Atlantic Ocean, from Nova Scotia to
     West-Florida, inclusive, &c., &c., &.

     "PROCLAMATION.

     "Whereas the enemy have adopted a practice of enrolling
     NEGROES among their Troops, I do hereby give notice That all
     NEGROES taken in arms, or upon any military Duty, shall be
     purchased for [_the public service at_] a stated Price; the
     money to be paid to the Captors.

     "But I do most strictly forbid any Person to sell or claim
     Right over any NEGROE, the property of a Rebel, who may take
     Refuge with any part of this Army: And I do promise to every
     NEGROE who shall desert the Rebel Standard, full security to
     follow within these Lines, any Occupation which he shall
     think proper.

     "Given under my Hand, at Head-Quarters, PHILLIPSBURGH, the
     30th day of June, 1779.

                                        "H. CLINTON.

     "By his Excellency's command,

                                        "JOHN SMITH, _Secretary_."

The proclamation had effect. Many Negroes, weary of the hesitancy of
the colonists respecting acceptance of their services, joined the
ministerial army. On the 14th of February, 1780, Col. Laurens wrote
Gen. Washington, from Charleston, S.C., as follows:--

     "Private accounts say that General Prevost is left to
     command at Savannah; that his troops consist of the Hessians
     and Loyalists that were there before, re-enforced by a corps
     of blacks and a detachment of savages. It is generally
     reported that Sir Henry Clinton commands the present
     expedition."[568]

Lord Cornwallis also issued a proclamation, offering protection to all
Negroes who should seek his command. But the treatment he gave them,
as narrated by Mr. Jefferson in a letter to Dr. Gordon, a few years
after the war, was extremely cruel, to say the least.

     "Lord Cornwallis destroyed all my growing crops of corn and
     tobacco; he burned all my barns, containing the same
     articles of the last year, having first taken what corn he
     wanted; he used, as was to be expected, all my stock of
     cattle, sheep, and hogs, for the sustenance of his army, and
     carried off all the horses capable of service; of those too
     young for service he cut the throats; and he burned all the
     fences on the plantation, so as to leave it an absolute
     waste. _He carried off also about thirty slaves. Had this
     been to give them freedom, he would have done right_; but it
     was to consign them to inevitable death from the small-pox
     and putrid fever, then raging in his camp. This I knew
     afterwards to be the fate of twenty-seven of them. I never
     had news of the remaining three, but presume they shared the
     same fate. When I say that Lord Cornwallis did all this, I
     do not mean that he carried about the torch in his own
     hands, but that it was all done under his eye; the situation
     of the house, in which he was, commanding a view of every
     part of the plantation, so that he must have seen every
     fire. I relate these things on my own knowledge, in a great
     degree, as I was on the ground soon after he left it. He
     treated the rest of the neighborhood somewhat in the same
     style, but not with that spirit of total extermination with
     which he seemed to rage over my possessions. Wherever he
     went, the dwelling-houses were plundered of every thing
     which could be carried off. Lord Cornwallis's character in
     England would forbid the belief that he shared in the
     plunder; but that his table was served with the plate thus
     pillaged from private houses, can be proved by many hundred
     eye-witnesses. From an estimate I made at that time, on the
     best information I could collect, I suppose _the State of
     Virginia lost, under Lord Cornwallis's hand, that year,
     about thirty thousand slaves; and that, of these,
     twenty-seven thousand died of the small-pox and camp-fever,
     and the rest were partly sent to the West Indies and
     exchanged for rum, sugar, coffee, and fruit; and partly sent
     to New York, from whence they went, at the peace, either to
     Nova Scotia or to England. From this last place, I believe,
     they have been lately sent to Africa._ History will never
     relate the horrors committed by the British Army in the
     Southern States of America."[569]

Col. Laurens was called from the South, and despatched to France on an
important mission in 1780. But the effort to raise Negro troops in the
South was not abandoned.

On the 13th of March, 1780, Gen. Lincoln, in a letter to Gov. Rutledge
of South Carolina, dated at Charleston, urged the importance of
raising a Negro regiment at once. He wrote,--

     "Give me leave to add once more, that I think the measure of
     raising a black corps a necessary one; that I have great
     reason to believe, if permission is given for it, that many
     men would soon be obtained. I have repeatedly urged this
     matter, not only because Congress have recommended it, and
     because it thereby becomes my duty to attempt to have it
     executed, but because my own mind suggests the utility and
     importance of the measure, as the safety of the town makes
     it necessary."

James Madison saw in the emancipation and arming of the Negroes the
only solution of the vexatious Southern problem. On the 20th of
November, 1780, he wrote Joseph Jones as follows:--

     "Yours of the 18th came yesterday. I am glad to find the
     Legislature persist in their resolution to recruit their
     line of the army for the war; though, without deciding on
     the expediency of the mode under their consideration, would
     it not be as well to liberate and make soldiers at once of
     the blacks themselves, as to make them instruments for
     enlisting white soldiers? It would certainly be more
     consonant with the principles of liberty, which ought never
     to be lost sight of in a contest for liberty: and, with
     white officers and a majority of white soldiers, no
     imaginable danger could be feared from themselves, as there
     certainly could be none from the effect of the example on
     those who should remain in bondage; experience having shown
     that a freedman immediately loses all attachment and
     sympathy with his former fellow-slaves."[570]

The struggle went on between Tory and Whig, between traitor and
patriot, between selfishness and the spirit of noble consecration to
the righteous cause of the Americans. Gen. Greene wrote from North
Carolina on the 28th of February, 1781, to Gen. Washington as
follows:--

     "The enemy have ordered two regiments of negroes to be
     immediately embodied, and are drafting a great proportion of
     the young men of that State [South Carolina], to serve
     during the war."[571]

Upon his return to America, Col. Laurens again espoused his favorite
and cherished plan of securing black levies for the South. But
surrounded and hindered by the enemies of the country he so dearly
loved, and for the honor and preservation of which he gladly gave his
young life, his plans were unsuccessful. In two letters to Gen.
Washington, a few months before he fell fighting for his country, he
gave an account of the trials that beset his path, which he felt led
to honorable duty. The first bore date of May 19, 1782.

     "The plan which brought me to this country was urged with
     all the zeal which the subject inspired, both in our Privy
     Council and Assembly; but the single voice of reason was
     drowned by the howlings of a triple-headed monster, in which
     prejudice, avarice, and pusillanimity were united. It was
     some degree of consolation to me, however, to perceive that
     truth and philosophy had gained some ground; the suffrages
     in favor of the measure being twice as numerous as on a
     former occasion. Some hopes have been lately given me from
     Georgia; but I fear, when the question is put, we shall be
     outvoted there with as much disparity as we have been in
     this country.

     "I earnestly desire to be where any active plans are likely
     to be executed, and to be near your Excellency on all
     occasions in which my services can be acceptable. The
     pursuit of an object which, I confess, is a favorite one
     with me, because I always regarded the interests of this
     country and those of the Union as intimately connected with
     it, has detached me more than once from your family; but
     those sentiments of veneration and attachment with which
     your Excellency has inspired me, keep me always near you,
     with the sincerest and most zealous wishes for a continuance
     of your happiness and glory."[572]

The second was dated June 12, 1782, and breathes a despondent air:--

     "The approaching session of the Georgia Legislature, and the
     encouragement given me by Governor Howley, who has a
     decisive influence in the counsels of that country, induce
     me to remain in this quarter for the purpose of taking new
     measures on the subject of our black levies. The arrival of
     Colonel Baylor, whose seniority entitles him to the command
     of the light troops, affords me ample leisure for pursuing
     the business in person; and I shall do it with all the
     tenacity of a man making a last effort on so interesting an
     occasion."[573]

Washington's reply showed that he, too, had lost faith in the
patriotism of the citizens of the South to a great degree. He wrote
his faithful friend:--

     "I must confess that I am not at all astonished at the
     failure of your plan. That spirit of freedom, which, at the
     commencement of this contest, would have gladly sacrificed
     every thing to the attainment of its object, has long since
     subsided, and every selfish passion has taken its place. It
     is not the public but private interest which influences the
     generality of mankind; nor can the Americans any longer
     boast an exception. Under these circumstances, it would
     rather have been surprising if you had succeeded; nor will
     you, I fear, have better success in Georgia."[574]

Although the effort of the Legislature of Connecticut to authorize the
enlistment of Negroes in 1777 had failed, many Negroes, as has been
shown, served in regiments from that State; and a Negro company was
organized. When white officers refused to serve in it, the gallant
David Humphreys volunteered his services, and became the captain.

     "In November, 1782, he was, by resolution of Congress,
     commissioned as a Lieutenant-Colonel, with order that his
     commission should bear date from the 23d of June, 1780, when
     he received his appointment as aide-de-camp to the
     Commander-in-chief. He had, when in active service, given
     the sanction of his name and influence in the establishment
     of a company of colored infantry, attached to Meigs',
     afterwards Butler's, regiment, in the Connecticut line. He
     continued to be the nominal captain of that company until
     the establishment of peace."[575]

The following was the roster of his company:--

                         "_Captain_,
                          DAVID HUMPHREYS.

                         _Privates_,

       Jack Arabus,     Brister Baker,    John Ball,
       John Cleveland,  Cæsar Bagdon,     John McLean,
       Phineas Strong,  Gamaliel Terry,   Jesse Vose,
       Ned Fields,      Lent Munson,      Daniel Bradley,
       Isaac Higgins,   Heman Rogers,     Sharp Camp,
       Lewis Martin,    Job Cæsar,        Jo Otis.
       Cæsar Chapman,   John Rogers,      James Dinah,
       Peter Mix,       Ned Freedom,      Solomon Sowtice,
       Philo Freeman,   Ezekiel Tupham,   Peter Freeman,
       Hector Williams, Tom Freeman,      Cato Wilbrow,
       Juba Freeman,    Congo Zado,       Cuff Freeman,
       Cato Robinson,   Peter Gibbs,      Juba Dyer,
       Prince George,   Prince Johnson,   Andrew Jack,
       Prince Crosbee,  Alex. Judd,       Peter Morando,
       Shubael Johnson, Pomp Liberty,     Peter Lion,
       Tim Cæsar,       Cuff Liberty,     Sampson Cuff,
       Jack Little,     Pomp Cyrus,       Dick Freedom,
       Bill Sowers,     Harry Williams,   Pomp McCuff."[576]
       Dick Violet,     Sharp Rogers,

But notwithstanding the persistent and bitter opposition to the
employment of slaves, from the earliest hours of the Revolutionary War
till its close, Negroes, bond and free, were in all branches of the
service. It is to be regretted that the exact number cannot be known.
Adjutant-Gen. Scammell made the following official return of Negro
soldiers in the main army, under Washington's immediate command, two
months after the battle of Monmouth; but the Rhode-Island regiment,
the Connecticut, New York, and New-Hampshire troops are not mentioned.
Incomplete as it is, it is nevertheless official, and therefore
correct as far as it goes.

     RETURN OF NEGROES IN THE ARMY, 24TH AUG., 1778.

  +--------------------+----------+------------+-----------+--------+
  |       BRIGADES.    | PRESENT. |SICK ABSENT.|ON COMMAND.| TOTAL. |
  +--------------------+----------+------------+-----------+--------+
  | North Carolina  .  |    42    |     10     |     6     |   58   |
  | Woodford    .   .  |    36    |      3     |     1     |   40   |
  | Muhlenburg  .   .  |    64    |     26     |     8     |   98   |
  | Smallwood   .   .  |    20    |      3     |     1     |   24   |
  | 2d Maryland .   .  |    43    |     15     |     2     |   60   |
  | Wayne   .   .   .  |     2    |     --     |    --     |    2   |
  | 2d Pennsylvania .  |   [33]   |     [1]    |    [1]    |  [35]  |
  | Clinton .   .   .  |    33    |      2     |     4     |   39   |
  | Parsons .   .   .  |   117    |     12     |    19     |  148   |
  | Huntington  .   .  |    56    |      2     |     4     |   62   |
  | Nixon   .   .   .  |    26    |     --     |     1     |   27   |
  | Patterson   .   .  |    64    |     13     |    12     |   89   |
  | Late Learned    .  |    34    |      4     |     8     |   46   |
  | Poor.   .   .   .  |    16    |      7     |     4     |   27   |
  +--------------------+----------+------------+-----------+--------+
  |       Total .   .  |   586    |     98     |    71     |  755   |
  +--------------------+----------+------------+-----------+--------+
                                ALEX. SCAMMELL, _Adj.-Gen._[577]

It is gratifying to record the fact, that the Negro was enrolled as a
soldier in the war of the American Revolution. What he did will be
recorded in the following chapter.


FOOTNOTES:

[520] Journal of the Continental Congress.

[521] The Hon. Peter Force, in an article to The National
Intelligencer, Jan. 16 and 18, 1855, says: "Southern colonies, jointly
with all the others, and separately each for itself, did agree to
prohibit the importation of slaves, voluntarily and in good faith."
Georgia was not represented in this Congress, and, therefore, could
not sign.

[522] Sparks's Washington, vol. ii. pp. 488-495.

[523] Sparks's Franklin, vol. viii, p. 42.

[524] Jefferson's Works, vol. i. p. 135.

[525] Ibid., pp. 23,24.

[526] Journals of the Provincial Congress of Mass., p. 29.

[527] Adams's Works, vol. ii. p. 322.

[528] Journals of the Provincial Congress of Mass., p. 553.

[529] Ibid., p. 302.

[530] The following is a copy of Gen. Gates's order to
recruiting-officers:--

     "You are not to enlist any deserter from the Ministerial
     Army, or any stroller, negro, or vagabond, or person
     suspected of being an enemy to the liberty of America, nor
     any under eighteen years of age.

     "As the cause is the best that can engage men of courage and
     principle to take up arms, so it is expected that none but
     such will be accepted by the recruiting officer. The pay,
     provision, &c., being so ample, it is not doubted but that
     the officers sent upon this service will, without delay,
     complete their respective corps, and march the men forthwith
     to camp.

     "You are not to enlist any person who is not an American
     born, unless such person has a wife and family, and is a
     settled resident in this country. The persons you enlist
     must be provided with good and complete arms."

     --MOORE'S _Diary of the American Revolution_, vol. i. p.
     110.

[531] The Provincial Congress of South Carolina, Nov 20, 1775, passed
the following resolve:--"On motion,_Resolved_, That the colonels of
the several regiments of militia throughout the Colony have leave to
enroll such a number of able male slaves, to be employed as pioneers
and laborers, as public exigencies may require; and that a daily pay
of seven shillings and sixpence be allowed for the service of each
such slave while actually employed."

--_American Archives_, 4th Series, vol. iv p. 6.

[532] Sparks's Washington, vol. iii. p. 155, note.

[533] Force's American Archives, 4th Series, vol. iii. p. 1,385.

[534] Spark's Washington, vol. iii. p. 218.

[535] Journals of Congress, vol ii. p. 26.

[536] Hopkins's Works, vol. ii. p. 584.

[537] Works of John Adams, vol. ii p. 428.

[538] Force's American Archives, 4th Series, vol. iv. p. 202.

[539] Force's American Archives, 4th Series, vol. iii. p. 1,387.

[540] Force's American Archives, 4th Series, vol. iv. pp. 84, 85.

[541] Life and Correspondence of Joseph Reed, vol. i. p. 135.

[542] Force's American Archives, 5th Series, vol. ii. pp 160, 162.

[543] Force's American Archives, 5th Series, vol. i p. 486.

[544] During a few months of study in New-York City, I came across the
above in the library of the N.Y. Hist. Soc.

[545] Schloezer's Briefwechsel, vol. iv. p. 365.

[546] An Historical Research (Livermore), pp. 114-116.

[547] R.I. Col. Recs., vol. viii. p. 640.

[548] R.I. Col. Recs., vol. viii. p. 641.

[549] Ibid., vol. viii. p. 524.

[550] R.I. Col. Recs., vol viii. pp. 358-360.

[551] R.I. Col. Recs., vol. viii. p. 361.

[552] This is evidently a mistake, as Washington's letter was dated
Jan. 2, as the reader will see.

[553] R.I. Col. Recs., vol. viii. p. 526.

[554] Ibid., p. 376.

[555] Ibid., p. 465.

[556] MSS. Archives of Mass., vol. cxcix. pp. 80, 84.

[557] Hening, vol. ix. 280.

[558] Sparks's Correspondence of the American Revolution, vol. iii. p.
331.

[559] Laws of the State of New York, chap. xxxiii. (March 20, 1781,
4th Session).

[560] The American Loyalist, p. 30, second edition.

[561] Sparks's Washington, vol. vi p. 204, note.

[562] Ibid., vol. vi. p. 204.

[563] Life of John Jay, by William Jay, vol. II. pp. 31, 32.

[564] Ramsay, the historian of South Carolina says, "It has been
computed by good judges, that, between 1775 and 1783, the State of
South Carolina lost twenty-five thousand negroes."

[565] Secret Journals of Congress, vol. i. pp. 107-110.

[566] Journals of Congress, vol. v. p. 123.

[567] Works of Hamilton, vol. i. pp. 114, 115.

[568] Sparks's Correspondence of the American Revolution, vol. ii. p.
402.

[569] Jefferson's Works, vol ii. p. 426.

[570] Madison Papers, p. 68.

[571] Sparks's Correspondence of the American Revolution, vol. iii. p.
246.

[572] Sparks's Correspondence of the American Revolution, vol. iii. p.
506.

[573] Ibid., p. 515.

[574] Sparks's Washington, vol. viii. pp. 322, 323.

[575] Biographical Sketch in "The National Portrait Gallery of
Distinguished Americans."

[576] Colored Patriots of the Revolution, p. 134.

[577] This return was discovered by the indefatigable Dr. George H.
Moore. It is the only document of the kind in existence.




CHAPTER XXVII.

NEGROES AS SOLDIERS.

1775-1783.

     THE NEGRO AS A SOLDIER.--BATTLE OF BUNKER HILL.--GALLANTRY
     OF NEGRO SOLDIERS.--PETER SALEM, THE INTREPID BLACK
     SOLDIER.--BUNKER-HILL MONUMENT.--THE NEGRO SALEM POOR
     DISTINGUISHES HIMSELF BY DEEDS OF DESPERATE VALOR.--CAPTURE
     OF GEN. LEE.--CAPTURE OF GEN. PRESCOTT.--BATTLE OF RHODE
     ISLAND.--COL. GREENE COMMANDS A NEGRO REGIMENT.--MURDER OF
     COL. GREENE IN 1781.--THE VALOR OF THE NEGRO SOLDIERS.


As soldiers the Negroes went far beyond the most liberal expectations
of their stanchest friends. Associated with white men, many of whom
were superior gentlemen, and nearly all of whom were brave and
enthusiastic, the Negro soldiers of the American army became worthy of
the cause they fought to sustain. Col. Alexander Hamilton had said,
"_their natural faculties are as good as ours_;" and the assertion was
supported by their splendid behavior on all the battle-fields of the
Revolution. Endowed by nature with a poetic element, faithful to
trusts, abiding in friendships, bound by the golden threads of
attachment to places and persons, enthusiastic in personal endeavor,
sentimental and chivalric, they made hardy and intrepid soldiers. The
daring, boisterous enthusiasm with which they sprang to arms disarmed
racial prejudice of its sting, and made friends of foes.

Their cheerfulness in camp, their celerity in the performance of
fatigue-duty, their patient endurance of heat and cold, hunger and
thirst, and their bold efficiency in battle, made them welcome
companions everywhere they went. The officers who frowned at their
presence in the army at first, early learned, from experience, that
they were the equals of any troops in the army for severe service in
camp, and excellent fighting in the field.

The battle of Bunker Hill was one of the earliest and most important
of the Revolution. Negro soldiers were in the action of the 17th of
June, 1775, and nobly did their duty. Speaking of this engagement,
Bancroft says,--

     "Nor should history forget to record that, as in the army at
     Cambridge, so also in this gallant band, the free negroes of
     the colony had their representatives."[578]

Two Negro soldiers especially distinguished themselves, and rendered
the cause of the colonists great service. Major Pitcairn was a gallant
officer of the British marines. He led the charge against the redoubt,
crying exultingly, "The day is ours!" His sudden appearance and his
commanding air at first startled the men immediately before him. They
neither answered nor fired, probably not being exactly certain what
was next to be done. At this critical moment, a Negro soldier stepped
forward, and, aiming his musket directly at the major's bosom, blew
him through.[579] Who was this intrepid black soldier, who at a
critical moment stepped to the front, and with certain aim brought
down the incarnate enemy of the colonists? What was his name, and
whence came he to battle? His name was Peter Salem, a private in Col
Nixon's regiment of the Continental Army.

     "He was born in Framingham [Massachusetts], and was held as
     a slave, probably until he joined the army: whereby, if not
     before, he became free. ... Peter served faithfully as a
     soldier, during the war."[580]

Perhaps Salem was then a slave: probably he thought of the chains and
stripes from whence he had come, of the liberty to be purchased in the
ordeals of war, and felt it his duty to show himself worthy of his
position as an American soldier. He proved that his shots were as
effective as those of a white soldier, and that he was not wanting in
any of the elements that go to make up the valiant soldier.
Significant indeed that a Negro was the first to open the hostilities
between Great Britain and the colonies,--the first to pour out his
blood as a precious libation on the altar of a people's rights; and
that here, at Bunker Hill, when the crimson and fiery tide of battle
seemed to be running hard against the small band of colonists, a Negro
soldier's steady musket brought down the haughty form of the
arch-rebel, and turned victory to the weak! England had loaded the
African with chains, and doomed him to perpetual bondage in the
North-American colonies; and when she came to forge political chains,
in the flames of fratricidal war, for an English-speaking people, the
Negro, whom she had grievously wronged, was first to meet her
soldiers, and welcome them to a hospitable grave.

Bunker-hill Monument has a charm for loyal Americans; and the Negro,
too, may gaze upon its enduring magnificence. It commemorates the
deeds, not of any particular soldier, but all who stood true to the
principles of equal rights and free government on that memorable "17th
of June."

     "No name adorns the shaft; but ages hence, though our
     alphabets may become as obscure as those which cover the
     monuments, of Nineveh and Babylon, its uninscribed surface
     (on which monarchs might be proud to engrave their titles)
     will perpetuate the memory of the 17th of June. It is the
     monument of the day, of the event, of the battle of Bunker
     Hill; of all the brave men who shared its perils,--alike of
     Prescott and Putnam and Warren, the chiefs of the day, and
     the colored man, Salem, who is reported to have shot the
     gallant Pitcairn, as he mounted the parapet. Cold as the
     clods on which it rests, still as the silent heavens to
     which it soars, it is yet vocal, eloquent, in their
     undivided praise."[581]

The other Negro soldier who won for himself rare fame and
distinguished consideration in the action at Bunker Hill was Salem
Poor. Delighted with his noble bearing, his superior officers could
not refrain from calling the attention of the civil authorities to the
facts that came under their personal observation. The petition that
set forth his worth as a brave soldier is still preserved in the
manuscript archives of Massachusetts:--

     "_To the Honorable General Court of the Massachusetts Bay_.

     "The subscribers beg leave to report to your Honorable House
     (which we do in justice to the character of so brave a man),
     that, under our own observation, we declare that a negro man
     called Salem Poor, of Col. Frye's regiment, Capt. Ames'
     company, in the late battle at Charlestown, behaved like an
     experienced officer, as well as an excellent soldier. To set
     forth particulars of his conduct would be tedious. We would
     only beg leave to say, in the person of this said negro
     centres a brave and gallant soldier. The reward due to so
     great and distinguished a character, we submit to the
     Congress.

               JONA. BREWER, Col.      | ELIPHALET BODWELL, Sgt.
               THOMAS NIXON, Lt.-Col.  | JOSIAH FOSTER, Lieut.
               WM. PRESCOTT, Col.      | EBENR. VARNUM, 2d Lieut.
               EPHm. COREY, Lieut.     | WM. HUDSON  BALLARD, Cpt.
               JOSEPH BAKER, Lieut.    | WILLIAM SMITH, Cap.
               JOSHUA ROW, Lieut.      | JOHN MORTON, Sergt.[?]
               JONAS RICHARDSON, Capt. | Lieut. RICHARD WELSH.

     "CAMBRIDGE, Dec. 5, 1775.

     "In Council, Dec. 21, 1775.--Read, and sent down.

                              "PEREZ MORTON, _Dep'y Sec'y._"[582]

How many other Negro soldiers behaved with cool and determined valor
at Bunker Hill, it is not possible to know. But many were there; they
did their duty as faithful men, and their achievements are the
heritage of the free of all colors under our one flag. Col. Trumbull,
an artist as well as a soldier, who was stationed at Roxbury,
witnessed the engagement from that elevation. Inspired by the scene,
when it was yet fresh in his mind, he painted the historic picture of
the battle in 1786. He represents several Negroes in good view, while
conspicuous in the foreground is the redoubtable Peter Salem. Some
subsequent artists--mere copyists--have sought to consign this black
hero to oblivion, but 'tis vain. Although the monument at Bunker Hill
"does not bear his name, the pencil of the artist has portrayed the
scene, the pen of the impartial historian has recorded his
achievement, and the voice of the eloquent orator has resounded his
valor."

Major Samuel Lawrence "at one time commanded a company whose rank and
file were all Negroes, of whose courage, military discipline, and
fidelity he always spoke with respect. On one occasion, being out
reconnoitring with this company, he got so far in advance of his
command, that he was surrounded, and on the point of being made
prisoner by the enemy. The men, soon discovering his peril, rushed to
his rescue, and fought with the most determined bravery till that
rescue was effectually secured. He never forgot this circumstance, and
ever after took especial pains to show kindness and hospitality to any
individual of the colored race who came near his dwelling."[583]

Gen. Lee, of the American army, was captured by Col. Harcourt of the
British army. It was regarded as a very distressing event; and
preparations were made to capture a British officer of the same rank,
so an exchange could be effected. Col. Barton of the Rhode-Island
militia, a brave and cautious officer, was charged with the capture of
Major-Gen. Prescott, commanding the royal army at Newport. On the
night of the 9th of July, 1777, Col. Barton, with forty men, in two
boats with muffled oars, evaded the enemy's boats, and, being taken
for the sentries at Prescott's head-quarters, effected that officer's
capture--a Negro taking him. The exploit was bold and successful.

     "They landed about five miles from Newport, and
     three-quarters of a mile from the house, which they
     approached cautiously, avoiding the main guard, which was
     at some distance. _The Colonel went foremost, with a stout,
     active negro close behind him, and another at a small
     distance; the rest followed so as to be near, but not seen_.

     "A single sentinel at the door saw and hailed the Colonel;
     he answered by exclaiming against, and inquiring for, rebel
     prisoners, but kept slowly advancing. The sentinel again
     challenged him, and required the countersign. He said he had
     not the countersign, but amused the sentry by talking about
     rebel prisoners, and still advancing till he came within
     reach of the bayonet, which, he presenting, the Colonel
     suddenly struck aside and seized him. He was immediately
     secured, and ordered to be silent, on pain of instant death.
     _Meanwhile, the rest of the men surrounding the house, the
     negro, with his head, at the second stroke forced a passage
     into it, and then into the landlord's apartment. The
     landlord at first refused to give the necessary
     intelligence; but, on the prospect of present death he
     pointed to the General's chamber, which being instantly
     opened by the negro's head, the Colonel calling the General
     by name, told him he was a prisoner_."[584]

Another account was published by a surgeon of the army, and is given
here:--

     "_Albany_, Aug. 3, 1777.--The pleasing information is
     received here that Lieut.-Col. Barton, of the Rhode-Island
     militia, planned a bold exploit for the purpose of
     surprising and taking Major-Gen. Prescott, the commanding
     officer of the royal army at Newport. Taking with him, in
     the night, about forty men, in two boats, with oars muffled,
     he had the address to elude the vigilance of the
     ships-of-war and guard-boats: and, having arrived
     undiscovered at the quarters of Gen. Prescott, they were
     taken for the sentinels; and the general was not alarmed
     till his captors were at the door of his lodging-chamber,
     which was fast closed. _A negro man, named Prince, instantly
     thrust his beetle head through the panel door; and seized
     his victim while in bed...._ This event is extremely
     honorable to the enterprising spirit of Col. Barton, and is
     considered as ample retaliation for the capture of Gen. Lee
     by Col. Harcourt. The event occasions great joy and
     exultation, as it puts in our possession an officer of equal
     rank with Gen. Lee, by which means an exchange may be
     obtained. Congress resolved that an elegant sword should be
     presented to Col. Barton for his brave exploit."[585]

Col. Barton evidently entertained great respect for the valor and
trustworthiness of the Negro soldier whom he made the chief actor in a
most hazardous undertaking. It was the post of honor; and the Negro
soldier Prince discharged the duty assigned him in a manner that was
entirely satisfactory to his superior officer, and crowned as one of
the most daring and brilliant _coups d'état_ of the American
Revolution.

The battle of Rhode Island, fought on the 29th of August, 1778, was
one of the severest of the Revolution. Newport was laid under siege by
the British. Their ships-of-war moved up the bay on the morning of the
action, and opened a galling fire upon the exposed right flank of the
American army; while the Hessian columns, stretching across a chain of
the "highland," attempted to turn Gen. Greene's flank, and storm the
advanced redoubt. The heavy cannonading that had continued since nine
in the morning was now accompanied by heavy skirmishing; and the
action began to be general all along the lines. The American army was
disposed in three lines of battle; the first extended in front of
their earthworks on Butt's Hill, the second in rear of the hill, and
the third as reserve a half-mile in the rear of the advance line. At
ten o'clock the battle was at white heat. The British vessels kept up
a fire that greatly annoyed the Americans, but imparted courage to the
Hessians and British infantry. At length the foot columns massed, and
swept down the slopes of Anthony's Hill with the impetuosity of a
whirlwind. But the American columns received them with the intrepidity
and coolness of veterans. The loss of the enemy was fearful.

     "Sixty were found dead in one spot. At another, thirty
     Hessians were buried in one grave. Major-Gen. Greene
     commanded on the right. Of the four brigades under his
     immediate command, Varnum's, Glover's, Cornell's and
     Greene's, all suffered severely, but Gen. Varnum's perhaps
     the most. A third time the enemy, with desperate courage and
     increased strength, attempted to assail the redoubt, and
     would have carried it but for the timely aid of two
     continental battalions despatched by Sullivan to support his
     almost exhausted troops. It was in repelling these furious
     onsets, that the newly raised black regiment, under Col.
     Greene, distinguished itself by deeds of desperate valor.
     Posted behind a thicket in the valley, they three times
     drove back the Hessians who charged repeatedly down the hill
     to dislodge them; and so determined were the enemy in these
     successive charges, that the day after the battle the
     Hessian colonel, upon whom this duty had devolved, applied
     to exchange his command and go to New York, because he dared
     not lead his regiment again to battle, lest his men should
     shoot him for having caused them so much loss."[586]

A few years later the Marquis de Chastellux, writing of this regiment,
said,--

     "The 5th [of January, 1781] I did not set out till eleven,
     although I had thirty miles' journey to Lebanon. At the
     passage to the ferry, I met with a detachment of the
     Rhode-Island regiment, the same corps we had with us all
     the last summer, but they have since been recruited and
     clothed. The greatest part of them are negroes or mulattoes;
     but they are strong, robust men, and those I have seen had a
     very good appearance.'"[587]

On the 14th of May, 1781, the gallant Col. Greene was surprised and
murdered at Point's Bridge, New York, but it was not effected until
his brave black soldiers had been cut to pieces in defending their
leader. It was one of the most touching and beautiful incidents of the
war, and illustrates the self-sacrificing devotion of Negro soldiers
to the cause of American liberty.

At a meeting of the Congregational and Presbyterian Anti-Slavery
Society, at Francestown, N.H., the Rev. Dr. Harris, himself a
Revolutionary soldier, spoke thus complimentarily of the Rhode-Island
Negro regiment:--

     "Yes, a regiment of _negroes_, fighting for _our_ liberty
     and independence,--not a white man among them but the
     officers,--stationed in this same dangerous and responsible
     position. Had they been unfaithful, or driven away before
     the enemy, all would have been lost. _Three times in
     succession_ were they attacked, with most desperate valor
     and fury, by well disciplined and veteran troops, and _three
     times_ did they successfully repel the assault, and thus
     preserve our army from capture. They fought through the war.
     They were brave, hardy troops. They helped to gain our
     liberty and independence."

From the opening to the closing scene of the Revolutionary War; from
the death of Pitcairn to the surrender of Cornwallis; on many fields
of strife and triumph, of splendid valor and republican glory; from
the hazy dawn of unequal and uncertain conflict, to the bright morn of
profound peace; through and out of the fires of a great war that gave
birth to a new, a grand republic,--the Negro soldier fought his way to
undimmed glory, and made for himself a magnificent record in the
annals of American history. Those annals have long since been
committed to the jealous care of the loyal citizens of the Republic
black men fought so heroically to snatch from the iron clutches of
Britain.


FOOTNOTES:

[578] Bancroft, vol. vii., 6th ed., p. 421.

[579] An Historical Research, p. 93.

[580] History of Leicester, p. 267.

[581] Orations and Speeches of Everett, vol. iii. p. 529.

[582] MS. Archives of Massachusetts, vol. clxxx, p. 241.

[583] Memoir of Samuel Lawrence, by Rev. S.K. Lothrop, D.D., pp. 8, 9.

[584] Frank Moore's Diary of the American Revolution, vol. i. p. 468.

[585] Thatcher's Military Journal, p. 87.

[586] Arnold's History of Rhode Island, vol. ii. pp. 427, 428.

[587] Chastellux' Travels, vol. i. p. 454; London, 1789.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

LEGAL STATUS OF THE NEGRO DURING THE REVOLUTION.

1775-1783.

     THE NEGRO WAS CHATTEL OR REAL PROPERTY.--HIS LEGAL STATUS
     DURING HIS NEW RELATION AS A SOLDIER.--RESOLUTION INTRODUCED
     IN THE MASSACHUSETTS HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES TO PREVENT THE
     SELLING OF TWO NEGROES CAPTURED UPON THE HIGH SEAS.--THE
     CONTINENTAL CONGRESS APPOINTS A COMMITTEE TO CONSIDER WHAT
     SHOULD BE DONE WITH NEGROES TAKEN IN VESSELS OF WAR IN THE
     SERVICE OF THE UNITED COLONIES.--CONFEDERATION OF THE NEW
     STATES.--SPIRITED DEBATE IN CONGRESS RESPECTING THE DISPOSAL
     OF RECAPTURES.--THE SPANISH SHIP "VICTORIA" CAPTURES AN
     ENGLISH VESSEL HAVING ON BOARD THIRTY FOUR NEGROES TAKEN
     FROM SOUTH CAROLINA--THE NEGROES RECAPTURED BY VESSELS
     BELONGING TO THE STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS.--THEY ARE DELIVERED
     TO THOMAS KNOX, AND CONVEYED TO CASTLE ISLAND.--COL. PAUL
     REVERE HAS CHARGE OF THE SLAVES ON CASTLE
     ISLAND.--MASSACHUSETTS PASSES A LAW PROVIDING FOR THE
     SECURITY, SUPPORT, AND EXCHANGE OF PRISONERS BROUGHT INTO
     THE STATE.--GEN. HANCOCK RECEIVES A LETTER FROM THE GOVERNOR
     OF SOUTH CAROLINA RESPECTING THE DETENTION OF NEGROES.--IN
     THE PROVINCIAL ARTICLES BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
     AND HIS BRITANNIC MAJESTY, NEGROES WERE RATED AS
     PROPERTY.--AND ALSO IN THE DEFINITE TREATY OF PEACE BETWEEN
     THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND HIS BRITANNIC MAJESTY.--AND
     ALSO IN THE TREATY OF PEACE OF 1814, BETWEEN HIS BRITANNIC
     MAJESTY AND THE UNITED STATES, NEGROES WERE DESIGNATED AS
     PROPERTY.--GEN. WASHINGTON'S LETTER TO BRIG. GEN. RUFUS
     PUTNAM IN REGARD TO A NEGRO IN HIS REGIMENT CLAIMED BY MR.
     HOBBY.--ENLISTMENT IN THE ARMY DID NOT ALWAYS WORK A
     PRACTICAL EMANCIPATION.


When the Revolutionary War began, the legal status of the Negro slave
was clearly defined in the courts of all the colonies. He was either
chattel or real property. The question naturally arose as to his legal
status during his new relation as a soldier. Could he be taken as
property, or as a prisoner of war? Was he booty, or was he entitled to
the usage of civilized warfare,--a freeman, and therefore to be
treated as such?

The Continental Congress, Nov. 25, 1775, passed a resolution
recommending the several colonial legislatures to establish courts
that should give jurisdiction to courts, already in existence, to
dispose of "cases of capture." In fact, and probably in law, Congress
exercised power in cases of appeal. Moreover, Congress had prescribed
a rule for the distribution of prizes. But, curiously enough,
Massachusetts, in 1776, passed an Act declaring, that, in case
captures were made by the forces of the colony, the local authorities
should have complete jurisdiction in their distribution; but, when
prizes or captives were taken upon colonial territory by the forces of
the United Colonies, the distributions should be made in accordance
with the laws of Congress. This was but a single illustration of the
divided sovereignty of a crude government. That there was need of a
uniform law upon this question, there could be no doubt, especially in
a war of the magnitude of the one that was then being waged.

On the 13th of September, 1776, a resolution was introduced into the
Massachusetts House of Representatives, "to prevent the sale of two
negro men lately brought into this state, as prisoners taken on the
high seas, and advertised to be sold at Salem, the 17th inst., by
public auction."[588] The resolve in full is here given:--

     "IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, SEPT. 13, 1776:

     "Whereas this House is credibly informed that two negro men
     lately brought into this State as prisoners taken on the
     High Seas are advertised to be sold at Salem, the 17th
     instant, by public auction,

     "_Resolved_, That the selling and enslaving the human
     species is a direct violation of the natural rights alike
     vested in all men by their Creator, and utterly inconsistent
     with the avowed principles on which this and the other
     United States have carried their struggle for liberty even
     to the last appeal, and therefore, that all persons
     connected with the said negroes be and they hereby are
     forbidden to sell them or in any manner to treat them
     otherways than is already ordered for the treatment of
     prisoners of war taken in the same vessell or others in the
     like employ and if any sale of the said negroes shall be
     made, it is hereby declared null and void.

     "Sent up for concurrence.

                              "SAM'L. FREEMAN, _Speaker_, P.T.

     "IN COUNCIL, Sept. 14, 1776. Read and concurred as taken
     into a new draught. Sent down for concurrence.

                              "JOHN AVERY, _Dpy. Secy._

     "IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, Sept. 14, 1776. Read and
     non-concurred, and the House adhere to their own vote. Sent
     up for concurrence.

                              "J. WARREN, _Speaker_.

     "IN COUNCIL, Sept. 16, 1776. Read and concurred as now taken
     into a new draft. Sent down for concurrence.

                              "JOHN AVERY, _Dpy. Secy._

     "IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, Sept. 16, 1779. Read and
     concurred.

                              "J. WARREN, _Speaker_.

     "Consented to.

                              "JER. POWELL,       JABEZ FISHER,
                              W. SEVER,           B. WHITE,
                              B. GREENLEAF,       MOSES GILL,
                              CALEB CUSHING,      DAN'L HOPKINS,
                              B. CHADBOURN,       BENJ. AUSTIN,
                              JOHN WHETCOMB,      WM. PHILLIPS,
                              ELDAD TAYLOR,       D. SEWALL,
                              S. HOLTEN,          DAN'L HOPKINS."


On the Journal of the House, p. 106, appears the following record,--

     "David Sewall, Esq., brought down the resolve which passed
     the House yesterday, forbidding the sale of two negroes,
     with the following vote of Council thereon, viz _In
     Council_, Sept. 14, 1776. Read and concurred, as taken into
     a new draught. Sent down for concurrence. Read and
     non-concurred, and the House adhere to their own vote. Sent
     up for concurrence."

The resolve, as it originally appeared, was dragged through a tedious
debate, non-concurred in by the House, recommitted, remodelled, and
sent back, when it finally passed.

     "LXXXIII. Resolve forbidding the sale of two Negroes brought
     in as Prisoners; Passed September 14, [16th,] 1776.

     "Whereas this Court is credibly informed that two Negro Men
     lately taken on the High Seas, on board the sloop
     _Hannibal_, and brought into this State as Prisoners, are
     advertized to be sold at _Salem_, the 17th instant, by
     public Auction:

     "_Resolved_, That all Persons concerned with the said
     Negroes be, and they are hereby forbidden to sell them, or
     in any manner to treat them otherwise than is already
     ordered for the Treatment of Prisoners taken in like manner;
     and if any Sale of the said Negroes shall be made it is
     hereby declared null and void, and that whenever it shall
     appear that any Negroes are taken on the High Seas and
     brought as Prisoners into this State, they shall not be
     allowed to be Sold, nor treated any otherwise than as
     Prisoners are ordered to be treated who are taken in like
     Manner."[589]

It looked like a new resolve. The pronounced and advanced sentiment in
favor of the equal rights of all created beings had been taken out,
and it appeared now as a war measure, warranted upon military policy.
This is the only chaplet that the most devout friends of
Massachusetts can weave out of her acts on the Negro problem during
the colonial period, to place upon her brow. It attracted wide-spread
and deserved attention.

During the following month, on the 14th of October, 1776, the
Continental Congress appointed a special committee, Messrs. Lee,
Wilson, and Hall, "to consider what is to be done with Negroes taken
by vessels of war, in the service of the United States." Here was a
profound legal problem presented for solution. According to ancient
custom and law, slaves came as the bloody logic of war. War between
nations was of necessity international; but while this truth had stood
through many centuries, the conversion of the Northern nations of
Europe into organized society greatly modified the old doctrine of
slavery. Coming under the enlightening influences of modern
international law, war captives could not be reduced to slavery.[590]
This doctrine was thoroughly understood, doubtless, in the
North-American colonies as in Europe. But the almost universal
doctrine of property in the Negro, and his status in the courts of the
colonies, gave the royal army great advantage in the appropriation of
Negro captives, under the plea that they were "property," and hence
legitimate "spoils of war;" while, on the part of the colonists, to
declare that captured Negroes were entitled to the treatment of
"prisoners of war," was to reverse a principle of law as old as their
government. It was, in fact, an abandonment of the claim of property
in the Negro. It was a recognition of his rights as a soldier, a
bestowal of the highest favors known in the treatment of captives of
war.[591] But there was another difficulty in the way. Slavery had
been recognized in the venerable memorials of the most remote nations.
This condition was coeval with the history of all nations, but nowhere
regarded as a relation of a local character. It grew up in social
compacts, in organized communities of men, and in great and powerful
states. It was recognized in private international law; and the
relation of master and slave was guarded in their local _habitat_, and
respected wherever found.[592] And this relation, this property in
man, did not cease because the slave sought another nation, for it
was recognized in all the commercial transactions of nations. Now,
upon this principle, the colonists were likely to claim their right to
property in slaves captured.

The confederation of the new States was effected on the 1st of March,
1781. Art. IX. gave the "United States in Congress assembled" the
exclusive authority of making laws to govern the disposal of all
captures made by land or water; to decide which were legal; how prizes
taken by the land or naval force of the government should be
appropriated, and the right to establish courts of competent
jurisdiction in such case, etc. The first legislation under this
article was an Act establishing a court of appeals on the 4th of June,
1781. It was discussed on the 25th of June, and again, on the 17th of
July, took up a great deal of time, but was recommitted. The committee
were instructed to prepare an ordinance regulating the proceedings of
the admiralty cases, in the several States, in instances of capture;
to codify all resolutions and laws upon the subject; and to request
the States to enact such provisions as would be in harmony with the
reserved rights of the Congress in such cases as were specified in the
Ninth Article. Accordingly, on the 21st of September, 1781, the
committee reported to Congress the results of their labor, in a bill
on the subject of captures. Upon the question of agreeing to the
following section, the yeas and nays were demanded by Mr. Mathews of
South Carolina:--

     "On the recapture by a citizen of any negro, mulatto,
     Indian, or other person from whom labor or service is
     lawfully claimed by _another citizen_, specific restitution
     shall be adjudged to the claimant, whether the original
     capture shall have been made on land or water, a reasonable
     salvage being paid by the claimant to the recaptor, not
     exceeding one-fourth part of the value of such labor or
     service, to be estimated according to the laws of the State
     _of which the claimant shall be a citizen_: but if the
     service of such negro, mulatto, Indian or other person,
     captured below high-water mark, shall not be legally claimed
     _by a citizen of these United States_, he shall be set at
     liberty."

The delegates from North Carolina, Delaware, New Jersey, and
Connecticut, refrained from voting; South Carolina voted in the
negative: but it was carried by twenty-eight yeas, against two nays.
After a spirited debate, continuing through several days, and having
received several amendments, it finally passed on Dec. 4, 1781, as
follows:--

     "On the recapture by a citizen of any negro, mulatto,
     Indian, or other person, from whom labor or service is
     lawfully claimed by _a State or a citizen of a State_,
     specific restitution shall be adjudged to the claimant,
     whether the original capture shall have been made on land or
     water, _and without regard to the time of possession by the
     enemy_, a reasonable salvage being paid by the claimant to
     the recaptor, not exceeding 1-4th of the value of such labor
     or service, to be estimated according to the laws of the
     State _under which the claim shall be made_.

     "But if the service of such negro, mulatto, Indian, or other
     person, captured below high water mark, shall not be legally
     claimed _within a year and a day from the sentence of the
     Court_, he shall be set at liberty."

It should be carefully observed that the above law refers only to
_recaptures_. It would be interesting to know the views the committee
entertained in reference to slaves captured by the ministerial army.
Nothing was said about this interesting feature of the case. Why
Congress did not claim proper treatment of the slaves captured by the
enemy while in the service of the United Colonies, is not known.
Doubtless its leaders saw where the logic of such a position would
lead them. The word "another" was left out of the original measure,
and was made to read, in the one that passed, "_a State or citizen_;"
as if it were feared that, by implication, a Negro would be recognized
as a _citizen_.

By the proclamation of Sir Henry Clinton, already mentioned in the
preceding chapter, Negroes were threatened with sale for "the public
service;" and Mr. Jefferson in his letter to Mr. Gordon (see preceding
chapter), says the enemy sold the Negroes captured in Virginia into
the West Indies. After the capture of Stony Point by Gen. Wayne,
concerning two Negroes who fell into his hands, he wrote to
Lieut.-Col. Meigs from New Windsor on the 25th of July, 1779, as
follows:--

     "The wish of the officers to free the three Negroes after a
     few Years Service meets my most hearty approbation but as
     the Chance of War or other Incidents may prevent the officer
     [owner] from Compling with the Intention of the Officers it
     will be proper for the purchaser or purchasers to sign a
     Condition in the Orderly Book.

     " ... I wou'd cheerfully join them in their Immediate
     Manumission--if a few days makes no material difference I
     could wish the sale put off until a Consultation may be had,
     & the opinion of the Officers taken on this Business."[593]

In June, 1779, a Spanish ship called "Victoria" sailed from
Charleston, S.C., for Cadiz. During the first part of her voyage she
was run down by a British privateer; but, instead of being captured,
she seized her assailant, and found on board thirty-four Negroes, whom
the English vessel had taken from plantations in South Carolina. The
Spaniards got the Negroes on board their ship, disabled the English
vessel, and then dismissed her. Within a few days she was taken by two
British letters-of-marque, and headed for New York. During her passage
thither she was re-captured by the "Hazard" and "Tyrannicide," armed
vessels in the service of Massachusetts, and taken into the port of
Boston. By direction of the Board of War she was ordered into the
charge of Capt. Johnson, and was unloaded on the 21st of June. The
Board of War reported to the Legislature that there were thirty-four
Negroes "taken on the high seas and brought into the state." On the
23d of June [1780] the Legislature ordered "that Gen. Lovell, Capt.
Adams, and Mr. Cranch, be a committee to consider what is proper to be
done with a number of negroes brought into port in the prize ship
called the[594] Lady Gage."[595] On the 24th of June, "the committee
appointed to take into consideration the state and circumstances of a
number of negroes lately brought into the port of Boston, reported a
resolve directing the Board of War to inform our delegates in Congress
of the state of facts relative to them, to put them into the barracks
on Castle Island, and cause them to be supplied and employed."[596]
The resolve passed without opposition.

     "CLXXX. _Resolve on the Representation of the Board of War
     respecting a number of negroes captured and brought into
     this State_. Passed June 24, 1779.

     "On the representation made to this Court by the Board of
     War respecting a number of negroes brought into the Port of
     Boston, on board the Prize Ship Victoria:

     "_Resolved_, that the Board of War be and they are hereby
     directed forthwith to write to our Delegates in Congress,
     informing them of the State of Facts relating to said
     Negroes, requesting them to give information thereof to the
     Delegates from the State of _South Carolina_, that so proper
     measures may be taken for the return of said Negroes,
     agreeable to their desire.

     "And it is further _Resolved_, that the Board of War be and
     they hereby are directed to put the said Negroes, in the
     mean time, into the barracks on Castle Island in the Harbor
     of Boston, and cause them to be supplied with such
     Provision and Clothing as shall be necessary for their
     comfortable support, putting them under the care and
     direction of some Prudent person or Persons, whose business
     it shall be to see that the able-bodied men may be usefully
     employed during their stay in carrying on the Fortifications
     on said Island, or elsewhere within the said Harbor; and
     that the Women be employed according to their ability in
     Cooking, Washing, etc. And that the said Board of War keep
     an exact Account of their Expenditures in supporting said
     Negroes."[597]

The Negroes were delivered to Thomas Knox on the 28th of June, and
were conveyed "to Castle Island pr. Order of Court." The Board of War
voted the "34 Negroes delivered" rations. Lieut.-Col. Paul Revere was
instructed to "issue to the Negroes at Castle Island--1 lb. of Beef, 1
lb. of Rice pr. day." The following letter is not without interest:--

     "WAR OFFICE, 28 June, 1779.

     "LT.-COL. REVERE,

     "Agreeable to a Resolve of Court we send to Castle Island
     and place under your care the following Negroes, viz.:

                    [19] Men,
                    [10] Women,
                    [5] Children,

     lately brought into this Port in the Spanish retaken Ship
     Victoria. The Men are to be employed on the Fortifications
     there or elsewhere in the Harbor, in the most useful manner,
     and the Women and Children, according to their ability, in
     Cooking, Washing, etc. They are to be allowed for their
     subsistence One lb. of Beef, and one lb. of Rice per day
     each, which Commissary Salisbury will furnish upon your
     order, and this to continue until our further orders.

                              "_By Order of the Board_."

In accordance with the order of the Legislature, made on the 24th of
June, the president of the Board of War, Samuel P. Savage, wrote a
letter to the Massachusetts delegates in Congress, dated "War Office
June 29th 1779," calling attention to the re-captured Negroes. The
letter closed with the following:--

     "Every necessary for the speedy discharge of these people,
     we have no doubt you will take, that as much expense as
     possible may be saved to those who call themselves their
     owners."

The writer was at pains to enumerate, in his letter, such slaves as he
was enabled to locate.

     "5 Men 4 Women 4 Boys 1 Girl belonging to Mr. Wm. Vryne.
     "9 Men 1 Woman belonging to Mr. Anthony Pawley.
     "1 Man belonging to Mr. Thomas Todd.
     "2 Men 3 Women belonging to Mr. Henry Lewis.
     "2 Men 2 Women belonging to Mr. William Pawley.

     "One of the negroes is an elderly sensible man, calls
     himself James, and says he is free, which we have no reason
     to doubt the truth of. He also says that he with the rest of
     the Negroes were taken from a place called Georgetown."[598]

Pending the action of the _lawful_ owners of these captives, the
council instructed the commandant of Castle Island, Col. Paul Revere,
to place out to service, in different towns, some of the Negroes, with
the understanding that they should be delivered up to the authorities
on their order. Some were delivered to gentlemen who desired them as
servants. But in the fall of 1779 quite a number were still on the
island, as may be seen by the following touching letter:--

     "BOSTON, Oct'r. 12. 1779. A Return of y'e Negroes at Castle
     Island, Viz.:

                   "NEGRO MEN.

     "1. ANTHONY.    6. BOBB.       11. JUNE.
      2. PARTRICK.   7. ANTHONEY.   12. RHODICK.
      3. PADDE.      8. ADAM.       13. JACK.
      4. ISAAC.      9. JACK.       14. FULLER.
      5. QUASH.      10. GYE.       15. LEWIS.

        "_The above men are stout fellows_.

                   "NEGRO BOYS.

                  "No. 1. SMART.
                       2. RICHARD.
                 "_Boys very small_.

     "NEGRO WOOMEN.              NEGRO GIRLS.
     "No. 1. KITTEY.              No. 1. LYSETT.
          2. LUCY.                    2. SALLY
          3. MILLEY.                  3. MERCY.
          4. LANDER.
     "_Pretty large_.            _Rather stout_.

     "_Gentlemen.

     "The Scituation of these Negroes is pitiable with respect to
     Cloathing.

                              "I am, Gen't.
                                   "Your very hum. Serv't.
                                        "John Hancock._"[599]

     "OCT. 12, 1779."

In the mean time some of the reputed owners of the Negroes at Castle
Island had come from Charleston, S.C., to secure their property. When
they arrived in Boston they secured the services of John Codman, Isaac
Smith, and William Smith, who on the 15th of November, 1779,
petitioned the Council for the "restitution" of slaves taken by a
British privateer, and retaken by two armed vessels of Massachusetts.
A committee was appointed to consider the petitions, and report what
action should be taken in the matter. Two days later another petition
was presented to the Council by one John Winthrop, "praying that
certain negroes, who were brought into this state by the Hazard and
Tyrannicide, may be delivered to him." It was referred to the
committee appointed on the 15th of November. On the 18th of November,
"Jabez Fisher, Esq., brought down a report of the Committee of both
Houses on the petition of Isaac Smith, being by way of resolve,
directing the Board of War to deliver so many of the negroes therein
mentioned, as are now alive. Passed in Council, and sent down for
concurrence." The order of the House is, "Read and concurred, as taken
into a new draught. Sent up for concurrence."

It is printed among the resolves of November, 1779.

     "XXXI. Resolve relinquishing this state's claim to a number
     of Negroes, passed November 18, 1779.

     "Whereas a number of negroes were re-captured and brought
     into this State by the armed vessels Hazard and Tyrannicide,
     and have since been supported at the expense of this State,
     and as the original owners of said Negroes now apply for
     them:

     "Therefore _Resolved_, That this Court hereby relinquish and
     give up any claim they may have upon the said owners for
     re-capturing said negroes: Provided they pay to the Board of
     War of this State the expence that has arisen for the
     support and clothing of the Negroes aforesaid."[600]

On the 12th of April, 1780, Massachusetts passed an Act providing more
effectually "for the security, support, and exchange of prisoners of
war brought into the State." It declares that

     "All Prisoners of War, whether captured by the Army or Navy
     of the United States, or armed Ships or Vessels of any of
     the United States, or by the Subjects, Troops, Ships, or
     Vessels of War of this State, and brought into the same, or
     cast on shore by shipwreck on the coast thereof ... all such
     prisoners, so brought in or cast on shore (including
     Indians, Negroes, and Molatoes) be treated in all respects
     as prisoners of war to the United States, any law or resolve
     or this Court to the contrary notwithstanding."[601]

The above Act was passed in compliance with a resolution of Congress,
Jan. 13, 1780; and it repealed an Act of 1777, that made no provisions
for the capture of Negroes.

On the 23d of January, 1784, Gov. Hancock sent a message to the
Legislature, transmitting correspondence received dining the
adjournment of the Legislature from Oct 28, 1783, to Jan. 21, 1784.
Calling the attention of the Legislature to this correspondence, he
referred to a letter from "His Excellency the Governor of South
Carolina, respecting the detention of some Negroes here, belonging to
the subjects of that state. I have communicated it to the Judges of
the Supreme Judicial Court--their observations upon it are with the
Papers. I have made no reply to the letter, judging it best to have
your decision upon it."[602] The same papers on the same day were read
in the Senate, and a joint committee of both houses was appointed. The
committee reported to both branches of the Legislature on the 23d of
March, 1784, and the report was adopted. A request was made of the
governor to furnish copies of the opinions of the judges, etc.

     "CLXXI. Order requesting the Governor to write to Governor
     _Guerard_ of _South Carolina_, inclosing the letter of the
     Judges of the Supreme Judicial Court, March, 23d, 1784.

     "_Ordered_, that his Excellency the Governor be requested to
     write to His Excellency _Benjamin Guerard_, Governor of
     _South Carolina_, inclosing for the information of Governor
     Guerard, the letter of the Judges of the Supreme Judicial
     Court of this Commonwealth, with the copy in the said letter
     referred to, upon the subject of Governor _Guerard's_
     letter, dated the sixth October, 1783."

The papers referred to seem to have been lost, but extracts are here
produced:--

     "GOVERNOR GUERARD TO GOVERNOR HANCOCK, 6th October, 1783.

     EXTRACT. "That such adoption is favoring rather of the
     Tyranny of Great Britain which occasioned her the loss of
     these States--that no act of British Tyranny could exceed
     the encouraging the negroes from the State owning them to
     desert their owners to be emancipated--that it seems
     arbitrary and domination--assuming for the Judicial
     Department of any one State, to prevent a restoration voted
     by the Legislature and ordained by Congress. That the
     liberation of our negroes disclosed a specimen of Puritanism
     I should not have expected from gentlemen of my Profession."

     MEMORANDUM. "He had demanded fugitives, carried off by the
     British, captured by the North, and not given up by the
     interference of the Judiciary.' Governor Hancock referred
     the subject to the Judges."

     "JUDGES CUSHING AND SARGENT TO GOVERNOR HANCOCK, Boston,

     Dec. 20, 1783.

     EXTRACT. "How this determination is an attack upon the
     spirit, freedom, dignity, independence, and sovereignty of
     South Carolina, we are unable to conceive. That this has any
     connection with, or relation to Puritanism, we believe is
     above y'r Excellency's comprehension as it is above ours. We
     should be sincerely sorry to do any thing inconsistent with
     the Union of the States, which is and must continue to be
     the basis of our Liberties and Independence; on the contrary
     we wish it may be strengthened, confirmed, and endure for
     ever."[603]

By the Treaty of Peace in 1783, Negroes were put in the same category
with horses and other articles of property.[604]

     "Negroes [says Mr. Hamilton], by the laws of the States, in
     which slavery is allowed, are personal property. They,
     therefore, on the principle of those laws, like horses,
     cattle and other movables, were liable to become booty--and
     belonged to the enemy, [captor] as soon as they came into
     his hands. Belonging to him, he was free either to apply
     them to his own use, or set them at liberty. If he did the
     latter, the grant was irrevocable, restitution was
     impossible. Nothing in the laws of nations or in those of
     Great Britain, will authorize the resumption of liberty,
     once granted to a human being."[605]

On the 6th of May, 1783, Gen. Washington wrote Sir Guy Carleton:--

     "In the course of our conversation on this point, I was
     surprised to hear you mention, that an embarkation had
     already taken place, in which a large number of negroes had
     been carried away. Whether this conduct is consonant to, or
     how far it may be deemed an infraction of the treaty, is not
     for me to decide. I cannot, however, conceal from you, that
     my private opinion is, that the measure is totally different
     from the letter and spirit of the treaty. But waiving the
     discussion of the point, and leaving its decision to our
     respective sovereigns; I find it my duty to signify my
     readiness, in conjunction with your Excellency, to enter
     into any agreement, or take any measures, which may be
     deemed expedient, to prevent the future carrying away of any
     negroes, or other property of the American
     inhabitants."[606]

In his reply, dated New York, May 12, 1783, Sir Guy Carleton says,--

     "I enclose a copy of an order, which I have given out to
     prevent the carrying away any negroes or other property of
     the American inhabitants."[607]

It is clear, that notwithstanding the Act of the Massachusetts
Legislature, and in the face of the law of Congress on the question of
recaptures, Gen. Washington, the Congress of the United Colonies, and
subsequently of the United States, regarded Negroes as _property_ from
the beginning to the end of the war. The following treaties furnish
abundant proof that Negroes were regarded as property during the war,
by the American government:--

     "PROVISIONAL ARTICLES BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
     AND HIS BRITANNIC MAJESTY.

     "Agreed upon by and between Richard Oswald, Esquire the
     Commissioner of His Britannic Majesty, for treating of Peace
     with the Commissioners of the United States of America, in
     behalf of his said Majesty, on one part, and John Adams,
     Benjamin Franklin, John Jay and Henry Laurens, four of the
     Commissioners of the said States, etc., etc., etc.

     "Article VII. * * * All prisoners on both sides shall be set
     at liberty, and His Britannic Majesty shall with all
     convenient speed, and without causing any destruction, or
     carrying away any '_negroes or other property_' of the
     American inhabitants, withdraw all his armies, garrisons and
     fleets from the said United States, and from every port,
     place and harbour within the same.* * *

     "Done at Paris, Nov 30, 1782.

                                        "RICHARD OSWALD, [L.S.]
                                        "JOHN ADAMS, [L.S.]
                                        "B. FRANKLIN, [L.S.]
                                        "JOHN JAY, [L.S.]
                                        "HENRY LAURENS, [L.S.]"[608]

     "DEFINITE TREATY OF PEACE, BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES OF
     AMERICA AND HIS BRITANNIC MAJESTY.

     "Article VII. * * * And His Britannic Majesty shall, with
     all convenient speed, and without causing any destruction,
     or carrying away any '_negroes or other property_' of the
     American inhabitants, withdraw all his armies, etc., etc.,
     etc.* * *

     "Done at Paris, Sept. 3, 1783.

                                        "D HARTLEY. [L.S.]
                                        "JOHN ADAMS, [L.S.]
                                        "B. FRANKLIN, [L.S.]
                                        "JOHN JAY, [L.S.]"[609]

     "TREATY OF PEACE AND AMITY, BETWEEN HIS BRITANNIC MAJESTY
     AND THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

     "[Ratified and confirmed by and with the advice and consent
     of the Senate, Feb. 11, 1815.]

     "Article I. * * * Shall be restored without delay, and
     without causing any destruction, or carrying away any of the
     artillery or other public property originally captured in
     the said forts or places, and which shall remain therein
     upon the exchange of the ratifications of this treaty, or
     any '_slaves or other private property_.' * * * *

     "Done, in triplicate, at Ghent, Dec. 24, 1814.

                                        "GAMBIER, [L.S.]
                                        "HENRY GOULBURN, [L.S.]
                                        "WILLIAM ADAMS, [L.S.]
                                        "JOHN OUINCY ADAMS, [L.S.]
                                        "J.A. BAYARD, [L.S.]
                                        "H. CLAY, [L.S.]
                                        "JONA. RUSSELL, [L.S.]
                                        "ALBERT GALLATIN. [L.S.]"[610]

It was not a difficult matter to retake Negroes captured by the enemy,
and then treat them as prisoners of war. But no officer in the
American army, no member of Congress, had the moral courage to
proclaim that property ceased in a man the moment he donned the
uniform of a Revolutionary soldier, and that all Negro soldiers
captured by the enemy should be treated as prisoners of war. So, all
through the war with Britain, the Negro soldier was liable to be
claimed as property; and every bayonet in the army was at the command
of the master to secure his property, even though it had been
temporarily converted into an heroic soldier who had defended the
country against its foes. The unprecedented spectacle was to be
witnessed, of a master hunting his slaves under the flag of the
nation. And at the close of hostilities many Negro soldiers were
called upon to go back into the service of their masters; while few
secured their freedom as a reward for their valor. The following
letter of Gen. Washington, addressed to Brig.-Gen. Rufus Putnam,
afterwards printed at Marietta, O., from his papers, indicates the
regard the Father of his Country had for the rights of the master,
though those rights were pushed into the camp of the army where many
brave Negroes were found; and it also illustrates the legal strength
of such a claim:--

     "HEAD QUARTERS, Feb. 2, 1783.

     "SIR,--Mr. Hobby having claimed as his property a negro man
     now serving in the Massachusetts Regiment, you will please
     to order a court of inquiry, consisting of five as
     respectable officers as can be found in your brigade, to
     examine the validity of the claim, the manner in which the
     person in question came into service, and the propriety of
     his being discharged or retained in service. Having inquired
     into the matter, with all the attending circumstances, they
     will report to you their opinion thereon; which you will
     report to me as soon as conveniently may be.

                              "I am, Sir, with great respect,
                                   "Your most obedient servant,
                                                  "G. WASHINGTON.

     "P.S.--All concerned should be notified to attend.

     "Brig.-Gen. PUTNAM."

Enlistment in the army did not work a practical emancipation of the
slave, as some have thought. Negroes were rated as chattel property by
both armies and both governments during the entire war. This is the
cold fact of history, and it is not pleasing to contemplate. The Negro
occupied the anomalous position of an American slave and an American
soldier. He was a soldier in the hour of danger, but a chattel in time
of peace.


FOOTNOTES:

[588] Felt says, in History of Salem, vol. ii. p. 278: "Sept. 17
[1776]. At this date two slaves, taken on board of a prize, were to
have been sold here; but the General Court forbid the sale, and
ordered such prisoners to be treated like all others."

[589] Resolves, p. 14. Quoted by Dr. Moore from the original
documents.

[590] Mr. Motley, "Rise of Dutch Republic," vol. i. p. 151, says that
in the sixteenth century, in wars between European states, the captor
had a property in his prisoner, which was assignable.

[591] Law of Fiefdom and Bondage, vol. i. p. 158.

[592] Mr. Hurd says, "In ascribing slavery to the law of nations it is
a very common error to use that term not in the sense of universal
jurisprudence--the Roman _jus gentium_-but in the modern sense of
public international law, and to give the custom of enslaving
prisoners of war, in illustration: as if the legal condition of other
slaves who had never been taken in war were not equally _jure gentium_
according to the Roman jurisprudence" See Mr. Webster's speech, 7th
March, 1830; Works, vol. v. p. 329.

[593] Dawson's Stony Point, pp. 111, 118.

[594] Dr. Moore thinks this the wrong name. The resolve proves it.

[595] House Journal, p. 60.

[596] Ibid, pp. 63, 64.

[597] Resolves, p. 51.

[598] Mass. Archives, vol. cli., pp. 202-294.

[599] The indefatigable Dr. George H. Moore copied the letter from the
original manuscript. The portions in Italics are in the handwriting of
Hancock. I have been placed under many obligations to my friend Dr.
Moore.

[600] Resolves, p. 131.

[601] Laws, 1780, chap. v. pp. 283, 284.

[602] Journal, vol. iv. pp. 308, 309.

[603] From Mr. Bancroft's MSS., America, 1783, vol. ii. Quoted by Dr.
Moore.

[604] Sparks's Washington, vol. viii. p. 428, note.

[605] Works of Hamilton, vol. vii. p. 191.

[606] Sparks's Washington, vol. viii. pp. 431,432.

[607] Sparks's Washington, vol. viii, Appendix, p. 544.

[608] U.S. Statutes at large, vol. viii, pp. 54, 57.

[609] Ibid., pp. 80, 83.

[610] U.S. Statutes at large, vol. viii. p. 218.




CHAPTER XXIX.

THE NEGRO INTELLECT.--BANNEKER THE ASTRONOMER.[611].--FULLER THE
MATHEMATICIAN.--DERHAM THE PHYSICIAN.

     STATUTORY PROHIBITION AGAINST THE EDUCATION OF
     NEGROES.--BENJAMIN BANNEKER, THE NEGRO ASTRONOMER AND
     PHILOSOPHER.--HIS ANTECEDENTS.--YOUNG BANNEKER AS A FARMER
     AND INVENTOR.--THE MILLS OF ELLICOTT & Co.--BANNEKER
     CULTIVATES HIS MECHANICAL GENIUS AND MATHEMATICAL
     TASTES.--BANNEKER'S FIRST CALCULATION OF AN ECLIPSE
     SUBMITTED FOR INSPECTION IN 1789.--HIS LETTER TO MR.
     ELLICOTT.--THE TESTIMONY OF A PERSONAL ACQUAINTANCE OF
     BANNEKER AS TO HIS UPRIGHT CHARACTER.--HIS HOME BECOMES A
     PLACE OF INTEREST TO VISITORS.--RECORD OF HIS BUSINESS
     TRANSACTIONS.--MRS MASON'S VISIT TO HIM.--SHE ADDRESSES HIM
     IN VERSE.--BANNEKER REPLIES BY LETTER TO HER.--PREPARES HIS
     FIRST ALMANAC FOR PUBLICATION IN 1792.--TITLE OF HIS
     ALMANAC.--BANNEKER'S LETTER TO THOMAS JEFFERSON.--THOMAS
     JEFFERSON'S REPLY.--BANNEKER INVITED TO ACCOMPANY THE
     COMMISSIONERS TO RUN THE LINES OF THE DISTRICT OF
     COLUMBIA.--BANNEKER'S HABITS OF STUDYING THE HEAVENLY
     BODIES.--MINUTE DESCRIPTION GIVEN TO HIS SISTERS IN
     REFERENCE TO THE DISPOSITION OF HIS PERSONAL PROPERTY AFTER
     DEATH..--HIS DEATH..--REGARDED AS THE MOST DISTINGUISHED
     NEGRO OF HIS TIME.--FULLER THE MATHEMATICIAN, OR "THE
     VIRGINIA CALCULATOR".--FULLER OF AFRICAN BIRTH, BUT STOLEN
     AND SOLD AS A SLAVE INTO VIRGINIA.--VISITED BY MEN OF
     LEARNING.--HE WAS PRONOUNCED TO BE A PRODIGY IN THE
     MANIPULATION OF FIGURES.--HIS DEATH.--DERHAM THE
     PHYSICIAN.--SCIENCE OF MEDICINE REGARDED AS THE MOST
     INTRICATE PURSUIT OF MAN.--DAILY LIFE OF JAMES DERHAM.--HIS
     KNOWLEDGE OF MEDICINES, HOW ACQUIRED.--HE BECOMES A
     PROMINENT PHYSICIAN IN NEW ORLEANS.--DR. RUSH GIVES AN
     ACCOUNT OF AN INTERVIEW WITH HIM.--WHAT THE NEGRO RACE
     PRODUCED BY THEIR GENIUS IN AMERICA.


From the moment slavery gained a foothold in North America until the
direful hour that witnessed its dissolution amid the shock of
embattled arms, learning was the forbidden fruit that no Negro dared
taste. Positive and explicit statutes everywhere, as fiery swords,
drove him away hungry from the tree of intellectual life; and all
persons were forbidden to pluck the fruit for him, upon pain of severe
penalties. Every yearning for intellectual food was answered by whips
and thumb-screws.

But, notwithstanding the state of almost instinctive ignorance in
which slavery held the Negro, there were those who occasionally
astounded the world with the brightness of their intellectual genius.
There were some Negroes whose minds ran the gauntlet of public
proscription on one side and repressive laws on the other, and safely
gained eminence in _astronomy, mathematics_, and _medicine_.

BANNEKER THE ASTRONOMER.

BENJAMIN BANNEKER, the Negro _astronomer_ and _philosopher_, was born
in Maryland, on the 9th of November, 1731. His maternal grandmother
was a white woman, a native of England, named _Molly Welsh_. She came
to Maryland in a shipload of white emigrants, who, according to the
custom of those days, were sold to pay their passage. She served her
master faithfully for seven years, when, being free, she purchased a
small farm, at a nominal price. Soon after she bought two Negro slaves
from a ship that had come into the Chesapeake Bay, and began life
anew. Both of these Negroes proved to be men of more than ordinary
fidelity, industry, and intelligence. One of them, it was said, was
the son of an African king. She gave him his freedom, and then married
him. His name was Banneker.[612] Four children were the fruit of this
union; but the chief interest centres in only one,--a girl, named
Mary. Following the example of her mother, she also married a native
of Africa: but both tradition and history preserve an unbroken silence
respecting his life, with the single exception that, embracing the
Christian religion, he was baptized "Robert Banneker;" and the record
of his death is thus preserved, in the family Bible: "_Robert Banneker
departed this life, July 'ye_ 10th 1759." Thus it is evident that he
took his wife's surname. Benjamin Banneker was the only child of
Robert and Mary Banneker.

Young Benjamin was a great favorite with his grandmother, who taught
him to read. She had a sincere love of the Sacred Scriptures, which
she did not neglect to inculcate into the youthful heart of her
grandson. In the neighborhood,--at that time an almost desolate
spot,--a school was conducted where the master admitted several
Colored children, with the whites, to the benefits of his
instructions. It was a "pay school," and thither young Banneker was
sent at a very tender age. His application to his studies was equalled
by none. When the other pupils were playing, he found great pleasure
in his books. How long he remained in school, is not known.

His father purchased a farm of one Richard Gist, and here he spent the
remnant of his days.

When young Banneker had obtained his majority, he gave attention to
the various interests of farm-life. He was industrious, intelligent in
his labors, scrupulously neat in the management of his grounds,
cultivated a valuable garden, was gentle in his treatment of
stock,--horses, cows, etc.,--and was indeed comfortably situated.
During those seasons of leisure which come to agriculturists, he
stored his mind with useful knowledge. Starting with the Bible, he
read history, biography, travels, romance, and such works on general
literature as he was able to borrow. His mind seemed to turn with
especial satisfaction to mathematics, and he acquainted himself with
the most difficult problems.

He had a taste also for mechanics. He conceived the idea of making a
timepiece, a clock, and about the year 1770 constructed one. With his
imperfect tools, and with no other model than a borrowed watch, it had
cost him long and patient labor to perfect it, to make the variation
necessary to cause it to strike the hours, and produce a concert of
correct action between the hour, the minute, and the second machinery.
He confessed that its regularity in pointing out the progress of time
had amply rewarded all his pains in its construction.[613]

In 1773 Ellicott & Co. built flour-mills in a valley near the banks of
the Patapsco River. Banneker watched the mills go up; and, when the
machinery was set in motion, looked on with interest, as he had a
splendid opportunity of observing new principles of mechanism. He made
many visits to the mills, and became acquainted with their
proprietors; and, till the day of his death, he found in the Ellicotts
kind and helpful friends.

After a short time the Ellicotts erected a store, where, a little
later, a post-office, was opened. To this point the farmers and
gentlemen, for miles around, used to congregate. Banneker often called
at the post-office, where, after overcoming his natural modesty and
diffidence, he was frequently called out in conversations covering a
variety of topics. His conversational powers, his inexhaustible fund
of information, and his broad learning (for those times and
considering his circumstances), made him the connoisseur of that
section. At times he related, in modest terms, the difficulties he was
constrained to encounter in order to acquire the knowledge of books he
had, and the unsatisfied longings he still had for further knowledge.
His fame as a mathematician was already established, and with the
increasing facilities of communication his accomplishments and
achievements were occupying the thought of many intelligent people.

     "By this time he had become very expert in the solution of
     difficult mathematical problems, which were then, more than
     in this century, the amusement of persons of leisure, and
     they were frequently sent to him from scholars residing in
     different parts of our country who wished to test his
     capacity. He is reported to have been successful in every
     case, and, sometimes, he returned with his answers,
     questions of his own composition conveyed in rhyme."

The following question was propounded to Mr. George Ellicott, and was
solved by Benjamin Hallowell of Alexandria.

    "A Cooper and Vintner sat down for a talk,
    Both being so groggy, that neither could walk,
    Says Cooper to Vintner, 'I'm the first of my trade,
    There's no kind of vessel, but what I have made,
    And of any shape, Sir,--just what you will,--
    And of any size, Sir,--from a ton to a gill!'
    'Then,' says the Vintner, 'you're the man for me,--
    Make me a vessel, if we can agree.
    The top and the bottom diameter define,
    To bear that proportion as fifteen to nine;
    Thirty-five inches are just what I crave,
    No more and no less, in the depth, will I have;
    Just thirty-nine gallons this vessel must hold,--
    Then I will reward you with silver or gold,--
    Give me your promise, my honest old friend?'
    'I'll make it to-morrow, that you may depend!'
    So the next day the Cooper his work to discharge,
    Soon made the new vessel, but made it too large:--
    He took out some staves, which made it too small,
    And then cursed the vessel, the Vintner and all.
    He beat on his breast, 'By the Powers!'--he swore,
    He never would work at his trade any more!
    Now my worthy friend, find out, if you can,
    The vessel's dimensions and comfort the man!

                                        "BENJAMIN BANNEKER."


The greater diameter of Banneker's tub must be 24.746 inches; the less
diameter, 14.8476 inches.

He was described by a gentleman who had often met him at Ellicott's
Mills as "of black complexion, medium stature, of uncommonly soft and
gentlemanly manners and of pleasing colloquial powers."

Fortunately Mr. George Ellicott was a gentleman of exquisite literary
taste and critical judgment. He discovered in Banneker the elements of
a cultivated gentleman and profound scholar. He threw open his library
to this remarkable Negro, loaded him with books and astronomical
instruments, and gave him the emphatic assurance of sympathy and
encouragement. He occasionally made Banneker a visit, when he would
urge upon him the importance of making astronomical calculations for
almanacs. Finally, in the spring of 1789, Banneker submitted to Mr.
Ellicott his first projection of an eclipse. It was found to contain a
slight error; and, having kindly pointed it out, Mr. Ellicott received
the following reply from Banneker:--

     LETTER OF BENJAMIN BANNEKER TO GEORGE ELLICOTT.

     "Sir,--I received your letter at the hand of Bell but found
     nothing strange to me In the Letter Concerning the number of
     Eclipses, the according to authors the Edge of the penumber
     only touches the Suns Limb in that Eclips, that I left out
     of the Number--which happens April 14th day, at 37 minutes
     past 7 o'clock in the morning, and is the first we shall
     have; but since you wrote to me, I drew in the Equations of
     the Node which will cause a small Solar Defet, but as I did
     not intend to publish, I was not so very peticular as I
     should have been, but was more intent upon the true method
     of projecting; a Solar Eclips--It is an easy matter for us
     when a Diagram is laid down before us, to draw one in
     resemblance of it, but it is a hard matter for young Tyroes
     in Astronomy, when only the Elements for the projection is
     laid down before him to draw his diagram with any degree of
     Certainty.

     "Says the Learned LEADBETTER, the projection, I shall here
     describe, is that mentioned by Mr. Flamsted. When the sun is
     in Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio or, Sagitary, the Axes
     of the Globe must lie to the right hand of the Axes of the
     Ecliptic, but when the sun is in Capricorn, Aquarius,
     Pisces, Aries, Taurus, or Gemini, then to the left.

     "Says the wise author FERGUSON, when the sun is in
     Capercorn, Aquarius, Pisces, Aries, Taurus, and Gemeni, the
     Northern half of the Earths Axes lies to the right hand of
     the Axes of the Ecliptic and to the left hand, whilst the
     Sun is on the other six signs.

     "Now Mr. Ellicott, two such learned gentlemen as the above
     mentioned, one in direct opposition to the other, stagnates
     young beginners, but I hope the stagnation will not be of
     long duration, for this I observe that Leadbetter counts the
     time on the path of Vertex 1, 2, 3 &c. from the right to the
     left hand or from the consequent to the antecedent,--But
     Ferguson on the path of Vertex counts the time 1, 2, 3 &c.
     from the left to the right hand, according to the order of
     numbers, so that that is regular, shall compensate for
     irregularity. Now sir if I can overcome this difficulty I
     doubt not being able to calculate a Common Almanac--Sir no
     more

                              "But remain your faithful friend,
                                        "B. BANNEKER.

     "Mr. GEORGE ELLICOTT, _Oct. 13th, 1789._"

His mother, an active, intelligent, slight-built Mulatto, with long
black hair, had exercised a tender but positive influence over him.
His character, so far as is known, was without blemish, with the
single exception of an occasional use of ardent spirits. He found
himself conforming too frequently to the universal habit of the times,
social drinking. Liquors and wines were upon the tables and sideboards
of the best families, and wherever Banneker went it confronted him. He
felt his weakness in this regard, and resolved to abstain from the use
of strong drink. Some time after returning from a visit to Washington,
in company with the commissioners who laid out the District of
Columbia, he related to his friends that during the entire absence
from home he had abstained from the use of liquors; adding, "I feared
to trust myself even with wine, lest it should steal away the little
sense I have." On a leaf of one of his almanacs, appears the following
in his own handwriting:--

     "Evil communications corrupt good manners, I hope to live to
     hear, that good communication corrects 'bad manners.'"

He had a just appreciation of his own strength. He hated vice of every
kind; and, while he did not connect himself to any church, he was
deeply attached to the _Society of Friends._ He was frequently seen in
their meeting-house. He usually occupied the rear bench, where he
would sit with uncovered head, leaning upon his staff, wrapt in
profound meditation. The following letter addressed to Mr. J. Saurin
Norris shows that his character was upright:--

     "In the year 1800, I commenced my engagements in the store
     of Ellicott's Mills, where my first acquaintance with
     Benjamin Banneker began. He often came to the store to
     purchase articles for his own use; and, after hearing him
     converse, I was always anxious to wait upon him. After
     making his purchases, he usually went to the part of the
     store where George Ellicott was in the habit of sitting to
     converse with him about the affairs of our Government and
     other matters. He was very precise in conversation and
     exhibited deep reflection. His deportment whenever I saw
     him, appeared to be perfectly upright and correct, and he
     seemed to be acquainted with every thing of importance that
     was passing in the country.

     "I recollect to have seen his Almanacs in my father's house,
     and believe they were the only ones used in the neighborhood
     at the time. He was a large man inclined to be fleshy, and
     was far advanced in years, when I first saw him, I remember
     being once at his house, but do not recollect any thing
     about the comforts of his establishment, nor of the old
     clock, about which you enquired. He was fond of, and well
     qualified, to work out abstruse questions in arithmetic. I
     remember, he brought to the store, one which he had composed
     himself, and presented to George Ellicott for solution. I
     had a copy which I have since lost; but the character and
     deportment of the man being so wholly different from any
     thing I had ever seen from one of his color, his question
     made so deep an impression on my mind I have ever since
     retained a perfect recollection of it, except two lines,
     which do not alter the sense. I remember that George
     Ellicott, was engaged in making out the answer, and cannot
     now say that he succeeded, but have no doubt he did. I have
     thus, briefly given you my recollections of Benjamin
     Banneker. I was young when he died, and doubtless many
     incidents respecting him, have, from the time which has
     since elapsed, passed from my recollection:

                              "CHARLES W. DORSEY, _of Elkridge_."

After the death of his mother, Banneker dwelt alone until the day of
his death, having never married, his manners were gentle and engaging,
his benevolence proverbial. His home became a place of great interest
to visitors, whom he always received cordially, and treated hospitably
all who called.

     "We found the venerable star-gazer," says the author of the
     Memoir of Susanna Mason, "under a wide spreading pear tree,
     leaden with delicious fruit; he came forward to meet us, and
     bade us welcome to his lowly dwelling. It was built of logs,
     one story in height, and was surrounded by an orchard. In
     one corner of the room, was suspended a clock of his own
     construction, _which_ was a true hearald of departing hours.
     He was careful in the little affairs of life as well as in
     the great matters. He kept record of all his business
     transactions, literary and domestic. The following extracts
     from his Account Book exhibit his love for detail.

     "'Sold on the 2nd of April, 1795, to Buttler, Edwards &
     Kiddy, the right of an Almanac, for the year 1796, for the
     sum of 80 dollars, equal to £30.

     "'On the 30th of April, 1795, lent John Ford five dollars.
     £1 17s. 6d.

     "'12th of December, 1797, bought a pound of candles at 1s.
     8d.

     "'Sold to John Collins 2 qts. of dried peaches 6d. "1 qt.
     mead 4d.

     "'On the 26th of March, came Joshua Sanks with 3 or 4
     bushels of turnips to feed the cows.

     "'13th of April, 1803, planted beans and sowed cabbage
     seed.'

     "He took down from a shelf a little book, wherein he
     registered the names of those, by whose visits he felt
     particularly honored, and recorded my mother's name upon the
     list; he then, diffidently, but very respectfully, requested
     her acceptance of one of his Almanacs in manuscript."

Within a few days after this visit Mrs. Mason addressed him in a
poetical letter, which found its way into the papers of the section,
and was generally read. The subjoined portions are sufficient to
exhibit the character of the effusion. The admonitory lines at the end
doubtless refer to his early addiction to strong drink.

     "_An Address to_ BENJAMIN BANNEKER, _an African Astronomer,
     who presented the Author with a Manuscript Almanac in_
     1796."

       "Transmitted on the wings of Fame,
       Thine _eclat_ sounding with thy name,
       Well pleased, I heard, ere 'twas my lot
       To see thee in thy humble cot.
       That genius smiled upon thy birth,
       And application called it forth;
       That times and tides thou could'st presage,
       And traverse the Celestial stage,
       Where shining globes their circles run,
       In swift rotation round the sun;
       Could'st tell how planets in their way,
       From order ne'er were known to stray.
       Sun, moon and stars, when they will rise,
       When sink below the upper skies,
       When an eclipse shall veil their light,
       And hide their splendor from our sight.
       .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .
       Some men whom private walks pursue,
       Whom fame ne'er ushered into view,
       May run their race, and few observe
       To right or left, if they should swerve,
       Their blemishes would not appear,
       Beyond their lives a single year.--
       But thou, a man exalted high,
       Conspicuous in the world's keen eye,
       On record now, thy name's enrolled,
       And future ages will be told,--
       There lived a man named BANNEKER,
       An African Astronomer!--
       Thou need'st to have a special care,
       Thy conduct with thy talent square,
       That no contaminating vice,
       Obscure thy lustre in our eyes."


During the following year Banneker sent the following letter to his
good friend Mrs. Mason:--

     "_August 26th, 1797_.

     "DEAR FEMALE FRIEND:--

     "I have thought of you every day since I saw you last, and
     of my promise in respect of composing some verses for your
     amusement, but I am very much indisposed, and have been
     ever since that time. I have a constant pain in my head, a
     palpitation in my flesh, and I may say I am attended with a
     complication of disorders, at this present writing, so that
     I cannot with any pleasure or delight, gratify your
     curiosity in that particular, at this present time, yet I
     say my will is good to oblige you, if I had it in my power,
     because you gave me good advice, and edifying language, in
     that piece of poetry which you was pleased to present unto
     me, and I can but love and thank you for the same; and if
     ever it should be in my power to be serviceable to you, in
     any measure, your reasonable requests, shall be armed with
     the obedience of,

                    "Your sincere friend and well-wisher,
                                             "BENJAMIN BANNEKER.

     "MRS. SUSANNA MASON.

     "N.B. The above is mean writing, done with trembling hands.
     B.B."

With the use of Mayer's Tables, Ferguson's Astronomy, and Leadbeater's
Lunar Tables, Banneker had made wonderful progress in his astronomical
investigations. He prepared his first almanac for publication in 1792.
Mr. James McHenry became deeply interested in him, and, convinced of
his talent in this direction, wrote a letter to the firm of Goddard &
Angell, publishers of almanacs, in Baltimore. They became the sole
publishers of Banneker's almanacs till the time of his death. In an
editorial note in the first almanac, they say,--

     "They feel gratified in the opportunity of presenting to the
     public, through their press, what must be considered as an
     extraordinary effort of genius; a complete and accurate
     Ephemeris for the year 1792, calculated by a sable
     descendant of Africa," etc.

And they further say,--

     "That they flatter themselves that a philanthropic public,
     in this enlightened era, will be induced to give their
     patronage and support to this work, not only on account of
     its intrinsic merits, (it having met the approbation of
     several of the most distinguished astronomers of America,
     particularly the celebrated Mr. Rittenhouse,) but from
     similar motives to those which induced the editors to give
     this calculation the preference,--the ardent desire of
     drawing modest merit from obscurity, and controverting the
     long-established illiberal prejudice against the blacks."

The title of his almanac is given below as a matter of historic
interest.

     "Benjamin Banneker's Pennsylvania, Delaware, Virginia, and
     Maryland Almanac and Ephemeris, for the year of our Lord
     1792, being Bissextile or leap year, and the sixteenth year
     of American Independence, which commenced July 4, 1776;
     containing the motions of the Sun and Moon, the true places
     and aspects of the Planets, the rising and setting of the
     Sun, and the rising, setting, and southing, place and age of
     the Moon, &c. The Lunations, Conjunctions, Eclipses,
     Judgment of the Weather, Festivals, and remarkable days."

He had evidently read Mr. Jefferson's Notes on Virginia; and touched
by the humane sentiment there exhibited, as well as saddened by the
doubt expressed respecting the intellect of the Negro, Banneker sent
him a copy of his first almanac, accompanied by a letter which pleaded
the cause of his race, and in itself, was a refutation of the charge
that the Negro had no intellectual outcome.

     "MARYLAND, BALTIMORE COUNTY, August 19, 1791.

     "SIR,

     "I am fully sensible of the greatness of the freedom I take
     with you on the present occasion; a liberty which seemed
     scarcely allowable, when I reflected on that distinguished
     and dignified station in which you stand, and the almost
     general prejudice which is so prevalent in the world against
     those of my complexion.

     "It is a truth too well attested, to need a proof here, that
     we are a race of beings, who have long laboured under the
     abuse and censure of the world; that we have long been
     looked upon with an eye of contempt; and considered rather
     as brutish than human, and scarcely capable of mental
     endowments.

     "I hope I may safely admit, in consequence of the report
     which has reached me, that you are a man far less inflexible
     in sentiments of this nature, than many others, that you are
     measurably friendly and well disposed towards us; and that
     you are willing to lend your aid and assistance for our
     relief from those many distresses, and numerous calamities,
     to which we are reduced.

     "If this is founded in truth, I apprehend you will embrace
     every opportunity to eradicate that train of absurd and
     false ideas and opinions, which so generally prevail with
     respect to us: and that your sentiments are concurrent with
     mine, which are, that one universal Father hath given being
     to us all; that He hath not only made us all of one flesh,
     but that He hath also, without partiality, afforded us all
     the same sensations, and endowed us all with the same
     faculties; and that however variable we may be in society or
     religion, however diversified in situation or in colour, we
     are all of the same family, and stand in the same relation
     to Him.

     "If these are sentiments of which you are fully persuaded,
     you cannot but acknowledge, that it is the indispensable
     duty of those, who maintain for themselves the rights of
     human nature, and who profess the obligations of
     Christianity, to extend their powers and influence to the
     relief of every part of the human race, from whatever burden
     or oppression they may unjustly labour under: and this, I
     apprehend, a full conviction of the truth and obligation of
     these principles should lead all to.

     "I have long been convinced, that if your love for
     yourselves, and for those inestimable laws which preserved
     to you the rights of human nature, was founded on sincerity
     you could not but be solicitous, that every individual, of
     whatever rank or distinction, might with you equally enjoy
     the blessings thereof; neither could you rest satisfied
     short of the most active effusion of your exertions, in
     order to their promotion from any state of degradation, to
     which the unjustifiable cruelty and barbarism of men may
     have reduced them.

     "I freely and cheerfully acknowledge, that I am of the
     African race, and in that colour which is natural to them,
     of the deepest dye; and it is under a sense of the most
     profound gratitude to the Supreme Ruler of the Universe,
     that I now confess to you, that I am not under that state of
     tyrannical thraldom, and inhuman captivity, to which too
     many of my brethren are doomed, but that I have abundantly
     tasted of the fruition of those blessings, which proceed
     from that free and unequalled liberty with which you are
     favoured; and which I hope you will willingly allow you have
     mercifully received, from the immediate hand of that Being
     from whom proceedeth every good and perfect gift.

     "Suffer me to recall to your mind that time, in which the
     arms of the British crown were exerted, with every powerful
     effort, in order to reduce you to a state of servitude: look
     back, I entreat you, on the variety of dangers to which you
     were exposed; reflect on that period in which every human
     aid appeared unavailable, and in which even hope and
     fortitude wore the aspect of inability to the conflict, and
     you cannot but be led to a serious and grateful sense of
     your miraculous and providential preservation; you cannot
     but acknowledge, that the present freedom and tranquility
     which you enjoy, you have mercifully received, and that it
     is the peculiar blessing of heaven.

     "This, Sir, was a time when you cleary saw into the
     injustice of a state of Slavery, and in which you had just
     apprehensions of the horrors of its condition. It was then
     that your abhorrence thereof was so excited, that you
     publicly held forth this true and invaluable doctrine, which
     is worthy to be recorded and remembered in all succeeding
     ages: 'We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men
     are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator
     with certain inalienable rights, and that among these are,
     life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.'

     "Here, was a time in which your tender feelings for
     yourselves had engaged you thus to declare; you were then
     impressed with proper ideas of the great violation of
     liberty, and the free possession of those blessings, to
     which you were entitled by nature; but, sir, how pitiable is
     it to reflect, that although you were so fully convinced of
     the benevolence of the Father of Mankind, and of his equal
     and impartial distribution of these rights and privileges
     which he hath conferred upon them, that you should at the
     same time counteract his mercies, in detaining by fraud and
     violence, so numerous a part of my brethren under groaning
     captivity and cruel oppression, that you should at the same
     time be found guilty of that most criminal act, which you
     professedly detested in others, with respect to yourselves.

     "Your knowledge of the situation of my brethren is too
     extensive to need a recital here; neither shall I presume to
     prescribe methods by which they may be relieved, otherwise
     than by recommending to you and all others, to wean
     yourselves from those narrow prejudices which you have
     imbibed with respect to them, and as Job proposed to his
     friends, 'put your soul in their soul's stead;' thus shall
     your hearts be enlarged with kindness and benevolence
     towards them; and thus shall you need neither the direction
     of myself or others in what manner to proceed herein.

     "And now, sir, although my sympathy and affection for my
     brethren hath caused my enlargement thus far, I ardently
     hope, that your candour and generosity will plead with you
     in my behalf, when I state that it was not originally my
     design; but having taken up my pen in order to present a
     copy of an almanac which I have calculated for the
     succeeding year, I was unexpectedly led thereto.

     "This calculation is the production of my arduous study, in
     my advanced stage of life: for having long had unbounded
     desires to become acquainted with the secrets of nature, I
     have had to gratify my curiosity herein through my own
     assiduous application to astronomical study, in which I need
     not recount to you the many difficulties and disadvantages
     which I have had to encounter.

     "And although I had almost declined to make my calculation
     for the ensuing year, in consequence of the time which I had
     allotted for it being taken up at the federal territory, by
     the request of Mr. Andrew Ellicott, yet I industriously
     applied myself thereto, and hope I have accomplished it with
     correctness and accuracy. I have taken the liberty to direct
     a copy to you, which I humbly request you will favourably
     receive; and although you may have the opportunity of
     perusing it after its publication, yet I desire to send it
     to you in manuscript previous thereto, that thereby you
     might not only have an earlier inspection, but that you
     might also view it in my own handwriting.

     "And now, sir, I shall conclude, and subscribe myself, with
     the most profound respect,

                    "Your most obedient humble servant,
                                        "BENJAMIN BANNEKER."


Mr. Jefferson, who was Secretary of State under President Washington,
sent the great Negro the following courteous reply:--

     "PHILADELPHIA, Aug. 30, 1791.

     "SIR,--I thank you sincerely for your letter of the 19th
     instant, and for the almanac it contained. Nobody wishes
     more than I do to see such proofs as you exhibit, that
     Nature has given to our black brethren talents equal to
     those of the other colors of men, and that the appearance of
     a want of them is owing only to the degraded condition of
     their existence, both in Africa and America. I can add, with
     truth, that no one wishes more ardently to see a good system
     commenced for raising the condition, both of their body and
     mind, to what it ought to be, as fast as the imbecility of
     their present existence, and other circumstances which
     cannot be neglected, will admit. I have taken the liberty of
     sending your almanac to Monsieur de Condorcet, Secretary of
     the Academy of Sciences, at Paris, and members of the
     Philanthropic Society, because I considered it a document to
     which your whole color had a right, for their justification
     against the doubts which have been entertained of them,

                    "I am, with great esteem, sir,
                                   "Your most obedient servant,
                                              "THO. JEFFERSON.

     "MR. BENJAMIN BANNEKER, near Ellicott's

     Lower Mills, Baltimore county."[614]

The only time Banneker was ever absent from his home any distance was
when "the Commissioners to run the lines of the District of
Columbia"--then known as the "Federal Territory"--invited him to
accompany them upon their mission. Mr. Norris says:--

     "Banneker's deportment throughout the whole of this
     engagement, secured their respect, and there is good
     authority for believing, that his endowments led the
     commissioners to overlook the color of his skin, to converse
     with him freely, and enjoy the clearness and originality of
     his remarks on various subjects. It is a fact, that they
     honored him with an invitation to a daily seat at their
     table; but this, with his usual modesty, he declined. They
     then ordered a side table laid for him, in the same
     apartment with themselves. On his return, he called to give
     an account of his engagements, at the house of one of his
     friends. He arrived on horseback, dressed in his usual
     costume;--full suit of drab cloth, surmounted by a broad
     brimmed beaver hat. He seemed to have been re-animated by
     the presence of the eminent men with whom he had mingled in
     the District, and gave a full account of their proceedings."

His habits of study were rather peculiar. At nightfall, wrapped in a
great cloak, he would lie prostrate upon the ground, where he spent
the night in contemplation of the heavenly bodies. At sunrise he would
retire to his dwelling, where he spent a portion of the day in repose.
But as he seemed to require less sleep than most people, he employed
the hours of the afternoons in the cultivation of his garden, trimming
of fruit-trees, or in observing the habits and flight of his bees.
When his service and attention were not required out-doors, he busied
himself with his books, papers, and mathematical instruments, at a
large oval table in his house. The situation of Banneker's dwelling
was one which would be admired by every lover of nature, and furnished
a fine field for the observation of celestial phenomena. It was about
half a mile from the Patapsco River, and commanded a prospect of the
near and distant hills upon its banks, which have been so justly
celebrated for their picturesque beauty. A never-failing spring issued
from beneath a large golden-willow tree in the midst of his
orchard.[615] The whole situation was charming, inspiring, and no
doubt helped him in the solution of difficult problems.

There is no reliable data to enlighten us as to the day of his death;
but it is the opinion of those who lived near him, and their
descendants, that he died in the fall of 1804. It was a bright,
beautiful day, and feeling unwell he walked out on the hills to enjoy
the sunlight and air. During his walk he came across a neighbor, to
whom he complained of being sick. They both returned to his house,
where, after lying down upon his couch, he became speechless, and died
peacefully. During a previous sickness he had charged his sisters,
Minta Black and Molly Morten, that, so soon as he was dead, all the
books, instruments, etc., which Mr. Ellicott had loaned him, should be
taken back to the benevolent lender; and, as a token of his gratitude,
all his manuscripts containing all his almanacs, his observations and
writings on various subjects, his letter to Thomas Jefferson, and that
gentleman's reply, etc., were given to Mr. Ellicott.[616] On the day
of his death, faithful to the instructions of their brother,
Banneker's sisters had all the articles moved to Mr. Ellicott's house;
and their arrival was the first sad news of the astronomer's death. To
the promptness of these girls in carrying out his orders is the
gratitude of the friends of science due for the preservation of the
results of Banneker's labors. During the performance of the last sad
rites at the grave, two days after his death, his house was discovered
to be on fire. It burnt so rapidly that it was impossible to save any
thing: so his clock and other personal property perished in the
flames. He had given to one of his sisters a feather-bed, upon which
he had slept for many years; and she, fortunately and thoughtfully,
removed it when he died, and prized it as the only memorial of her
distinguished brother. Some years after, she had occasion to open the
bed, when she discovered a purse of money--another illustration of his
careful habits and frugality.

Benjamin Banneker was known favorably on two continents, and at the
time of his death was the most intelligent and distinguished Negro in
the United States.


FULLER THE MATHEMATICIAN.

One of the standing arguments against the Negro was, that he lacked
the faculty of solving mathematical problems. This charge was made
without a disposition to allow him an opportunity to submit himself to
a proper test. It was equivalent to putting out a man's eyes, and then
asserting boldly that he cannot see; of manacling his ankles, and
charging him with the inability to run. But notwithstanding all the
prohibitions against instructing the Negro, and his far remove from
intellectual stimulants, the subject to whom attention is now called
had within his own untutored intellect the elements of a great
mathematician.

Thomas Fuller, familiarly known as the Virginia Calculator, was a
native of Africa. At the age of fourteen he was stolen, and sold into
slavery in Virginia, where he found himself the property of a planter
residing about four miles from Alexandria. He did not understand the
art of reading or writing, but by a marvellous faculty was able to
perform the most difficult calculations. Dr. Benjamin Rush of
Philadelphia, Penn., in a letter addressed to a gentleman residing in
Manchester, Eng., says that hearing of the phenomenal mathematical
powers of "Negro Tom," he, in company with other gentlemen passing
through Virginia, sent for him. One of the gentlemen asked him how
many seconds a man of seventy years, some odd months, weeks, and days,
had lived, he gave the exact number in a minute and a half. The
gentleman took a pen, and after some figuring told Tom he must be
mistaken, as the number was too great." 'Top, massa!" exclaimed Tom,
"you hab left out de leap-years!" And sure enough, on including the
leap-years in the calculation, the number given by Tom was correct.

     "He was visited by William Hartshorn and Samuel Coates,"
     says Mr. Needles, "of this city (Philadelphia), and gave
     correct answers to all their questions such as, How many
     seconds there are in a year and a half? In two minutes he
     answered 47,304,000. How many seconds in seventy years,
     seventeen days, twelve hours? In one minute and a half,
     2,110,500,800.[617]

That he was a prodigy, no one will question.[618] He was the wonder of
the age. The following appeared in several newspapers at the time of
his death:--

     "DIED,--Negro Tom, the famous African calculator, aged 80
     years. He was the property of Mrs. Elizabeth Cox, of
     Alexandria. Tom was a very black man. He was brought to this
     country at the age of fourteen, and was sold as a slave with
     many of his unfortunate countrymen. This man was a prodigy.
     Though he could neither read nor write, he had perfectly
     acquired the use of enumeration. He could give the number of
     months, days, weeks, hours, minutes, and seconds, for any
     period of time that a person chose to mention, allowing in
     his calculations for all the leap years that happened in the
     time. He would give the number of poles, yards, feet,
     inches, and barley-corns in a given distance--say, the
     diameter of the earth's orbit--and in every calculation he
     would produce the true answer in less time than ninety-nine
     out of a hundred men would take with their pens. And what
     was, perhaps, more extraordinary, though interrupted in the
     progress of his calculations, and engaged in discourse upon
     any other subject, his operations were not thereby in the
     least deranged; he would go on where he left off, and could
     give any and all of the stages through which the calculation
     had passed.

     "Thus died Negro Tom, this untaught arithmetician, this
     untutored scholar. Had his opportunities of improvement been
     equal to those of thousands of his fellow-men, neither the
     Royal Society of London, the Academy of Science at Paris,
     nor even a Newton himself need have been ashamed to
     acknowledge him a brother in science."[619]



DERHAM THE PHYSICIAN.

Through all time the science of medicine has been regarded as ranking
among the most intricate and delicate pursuits man could follow. Our
Saviour was called "the Great Physician," and St. Luke "the beloved
physician." No profession brings a man so near to humanity, and no
other class of men have a higher social standing than those who are
consecrated to the "art of healing." Such a position demands of a man
not only profound research in the field of medicine, but the rarest
intellectual and social gifts and accomplishments. For a Negro to gain
such a position in the nineteenth century would require merit of
unusual order. But in the eighteenth century, when slavery had cast
its long, dark shadows over the entire life of the nation, for a
Negro, born and reared a slave, to obtain fame in medicine second to
none on the continent, was an achievement that justly challenged the
admiration of the civilized world.

Dr. James Derham was born a slave in Philadelphia in 1762. His master
was a physician. James was taught to read and write, and early
rendered valuable assistance to his master in compounding medicines.
Endowed with more than average intelligence, he took a great liking to
the science of medicine, and absorbed all the information that came
within his observation. On the death of his master he was sold to the
surgeon of the Sixteenth British Regiment, at that time stationed in
Philadelphia. At the close of the war he was sold to Dr. Robert Dove
of New Orleans, a humane and intelligent man, who employed him as his
assistant in a large business. He grew in a knowledge of his
profession every day, was prompt and faithful in the discharge of the
trusts reposed in him, and thereby gained the confidence of his
master. Dr. Dove was so much pleased with him, that he offered him his
freedom upon very easy terms, requiring only two or three years'
service. At the end of the time designated, Dr. Derham entered into
the practice of medicine upon his own account. He acquired the
English, French, and Spanish languages so as to speak them fluently,
and built up a practice in a short time worth three thousand dollars a
year.[620] He married, and attached himself to the Episcopal Church,
in 1788, and at twenty-six years of age was regarded as one of the
most eminent physicians in New Orleans.

Dr. Rush of Philadelphia, in "The American Museum" for January, 1789,
gave an interesting account of this distinguished "Negro physician."
Says Dr. Rush,--

     "I have conversed with him upon most of the acute and
     epidemic diseases of the country where he lives. I expected
     to have suggested some new medicines to him, but he
     suggested many more to me. He is very modest and engaging in
     his manners. He speaks French fluently, and has some
     knowledge of the Spanish."[621]

Phillis Wheatley has been mentioned already. So, in the midst of
darkness and oppression, the Negro race in America, without the use of
the Christian church, schoolhouse, or printing-press, produced a
_poetess_, an _astronomer_, a _mathematician_, and a _physician_, who,
had they been white, would have received monuments and grateful
memorials at the hands of their countrymen. But even their color
cannot rob them of the immortality their genius earned.


FOOTNOTES:

[611] William Wells Brown, William C Nell, and all the Colored men
whose efforts I have seen, have made a number of very serious mistakes
respecting Banneker's parentage, age, accomplishments, etc. _He was of
mixed blood_. His mother's name was not Molly Morton, but one of his
sisters bore that name.

I have used the Memoirs of Banneker, prepared by J.H.B. Latrobe and J.
Saurin Norris, and other valuable material from the Maryland
Historical Society.

[612] In the most remote records the name was written _Banneky_.

[613] J. Saurin Norris's sketch.

[614] Jefferson's Works, vol. iii. p. 291.

[615] See Norris, paper on Banneker.

[616] All of Banneker's literary remains were published by J.H.B.
Latrobe in the Maryland Historical Society, and in the Maryland
Colonization Journal in 1845. The Memoir of Banneker was somewhat
marred by a too precipitous and zealous attempt to preach the doctrine
of colonization.

[617] Needles's Hist. Memoir of the Penn. Society for Promoting the
Abolition of Slavery, p 32.

[618] J.P. Brissot de Warville's Travels in the U.S., vol. i p. 243.

[619] Columbian Centinal of Boston, Dec. 29, 1790.

[620] Brissot de Warville's New Travels in the U.S., ed. 1794, vol. i.
p. 242.

[621] For an account of Fuller and Derham, see De la Littérature des
Nègres, ou Recherches sur leurs Facultés intellectuelles, leurs
Qualités morales et leur Littérature; suivies de Notices sur la Vie et
les Ouvrages des Nègres qui se sont distingués dans les Sciences, les
Lettres et les Arts. Par H. GRÉGOIRE, ancien Évêque de Blois, membre
du Sénat conservateur, de l'Institut national, de la Société royale
des Sciences de Göttingue, etc. Paris: MDCCCVIII.




CHAPTER XXX.

SLAVERY DURING THE REVOLUTION.

1775-1783.

     PROGRESS OF THE SLAVE-TRADE.--A GREAT WAR FOR THE
     EMANCIPATION OF THE COLONIES, FROM POLITICAL
     BONDAGE.--CONDITION OF THE SOUTHERN STATES DURING THE
     WAR.--THE VIRGINIA DECLARATION OF RIGHTS.--IMMEDIATE
     LEGISLATION AGAINST SLAVERY DEMANDED.--ADVERTISEMENT FROM
     "THE INDEPENDENT CHRONICLE."--PETITION OF MASSACHUSETTS
     STATES.--AN ACT PREVENTING THE PRACTICE OF HOLDING PERSONS
     IN SLAVERY.--ADVERTISEMENT FROM "THE CONTINENTAL
     JOURNAL."--A LAW PASSED IN VIRGINIA LIMITING THE RIGHTS OF
     SLAVES.--LAW DEMANDING ALL SLAVES WHO SERVED IN THE
     ARMY.--NEW YORK PROMISES HER NEGRO SOLDIERS FREEDOM.--A
     CONSCIENTIOUS MINORITY IN FAVOR OF THE ABOLITION OF THE
     SLAVE TRADE.--SLAVERY FLOURISHES DURING THE ENTIRE
     REVOLUTIONARY PERIOD.


The thunder of the guns of the Revolution did not drown the voice of
the auctioneer. The slave-trade went on. A great war for the
emancipation of the colonies from the political bondage into which the
British Parliament fain would precipitate them did not depreciate the
market value of human flesh. Those whose hearts were not enlisted in
the war skulked in the rear, and gloated over the blood-stained
shekels they wrung from the domestic slave-trade. While the precarious
condition of the Southern States during the war made legislation in
support of the institution of slavery impolitic, there were,
nevertheless, many severe laws in force during this entire period. In
the New England and Middle States there was heard an occasional voice
for the oppressed; but it was generally strangled at the earliest
moment of its being by that hell-born child, avarice. On the 21st of
September, 1776, William Gordon of Roxbury, Mass., wrote,--

     The Virginians begin their Declaration of Rights with
     saying,'that _all _ men are born equally free and
     independent, and have certain inherent natural rights, of
     which they cannot, by any compact, deprive themselves or
     their posterity; among which are the enjoyment of life and
     _liberty_.' The Congress declare that they 'hold these
     truths to be self-evident, that all men are created _equal_,
     that they are endowed by their Creator with certain
     _inalienable rights_, that among these are life, _liberty_
     and pursuit of happiness.' The Continent has rung with
     affirmations of the like import. If these, Gentlemen, are
     our genuine sentiments, and we are not provoking the Deity,
     by acting hypocritically to serve a turn, let us apply
     earnestly and heartily to the extirpation of slavery from
     among ourselves. Let the State allow of nothing beyond
     servitude for a stipulated number of years, and that only
     for seven or eight, when persons are of age, or till they
     are of age: and let the descendants of the Africans born
     among us, be viewed as free-born; and be wholly at their own
     disposal when one-and-twenty, the latter part of which age
     will compensate for the expense of infancy, education, and
     so on."

No one gave heed. Two months later, Nov. 14, there appeared in "The
Independent Chronicle" of Boston a plan for gradual emancipation; and
on the 28th of the same month, in the same paper there appeared a
communication demanding specific and immediate legislation against
slavery. But all seemed vain: there were few moral giants among the
friends of "liberty for all;" and the comparative silence of the press
and pulpit gave the advocates of human slavery an easy victory.

Boston, the home of Warren, and the city that witnessed the first holy
offering to liberty, busied herself through all the perilous years of
the war in buying and selling human beings. The following are but a
few of the many advertisements that appeared in the papers of the city
of Boston during the war:--[622]

From "The Independent Chronicle," Oct. 3, 1776:--

     "_To be_ SOLD A stout, hearty, likely NEGRO GIRL, fit for
     either Town or Country. Inquire of Mr. _Andrew Gillespie,
     Dorchester, Octo., 1., 1776._"

From the same, Oct. 10:--

     "A hearty NEGRO MAN, with a small sum of Money to be given
     away."

From the same, Nov. 28:--

     "To SELL--A Hearty likely NEGRO WENCH about 12 or 13 Years
     of Age, has had the Small Pox, can wash, iron, card, and
     spin, etc., for no other Fault but for want of Employ."

From the same, Feb. 27, 1777:--

     "WANTED a NEGRO GIRL between 12 and 20 Years of Age, for
     which a good Price will be given, if she can be
     recommended."

From "The Continental Journal," April 3, 1777:--

     "_To be_ SOLD, a likely Negro Man, twenty-two years old, has
     had the small-pox, can do any sort of business; sold for
     want of employment."

     _To be_ SOLD, a large, commodious Dwelling House, Barn, and
     Out-houses, with any quantity of land from 1 to 50 acres, as
     the Purchaser shall choose within 5 miles of Boston. Also a
     smart well-tempered NEGRO BOY of 14 years old, not to go out
     of this State and _sold for_ 15 _years only, if he continues
     to behave well_."

From "The Independent Chronicle," May 8, 1777:--

     "_To be_ SOLD, for want of employ, a likely strong NEGRO
     GIRL, about 18 years old, understands all sorts of household
     business, and can be well recommended."

The strange and trying vicissitudes through which the colonies had
passed exposed their hypocrisy, revealed the weakness of their
government, and forced them to another attempt at the extirpation of
slavery. The valorous conduct of the Negro soldiers in the army had
greatly encouraged their friends and emboldened their brethren, who
still suffered from the curse of slavery. The latter were not silent
when an opportunity presented to claim the rights they felt their due.
On the 18th of March, 1777, the following petition was addressed, by
the slaves in Boston, to the Legislature:--

     "PETITION OF MASSACHUSETTS SLAVES.

     "The petition of a great number of negroes, who are detained
     in a state of slavery in the very bowels of a free and
     Christian country, humbly showing,--

     "That your petitioners apprehend that they have, in common
     with all other men, a natural and inalienable right to that
     freedom, which the great Parent of the universe hath
     bestowed equally on all mankind, and which they have never
     forfeited by any compact or agreement whatever. But they
     were unjustly dragged by the cruel hand of power from their
     dearest friends, and some of them even torn from the
     embraces of their tender parents,--from a populous, pleasant
     and plentiful country, and in violation of the laws of
     nature and of nations, and in defiance of all the tender
     feelings of humanity, brought hither to be sold like beasts
     of burthen, and, like them, condemned to slavery for
     life--among a people possessing the mild religion of
     Jesus--a people not insensible of the sweets of national
     freedom, nor without a spirit to resent the unjust endeavors
     of others to reduce them to a state of bondage and
     subjection.

     "Your Honors need not to be informed that a life of slavery
     like that of your petitioners, deprived of every social
     privilege, of every thing requisite to render life even
     tolerable, is far worse than non-existence.

     "In imitation of the laudable example of the good people of
     these States, your petitioners have long and patiently
     waited the event of petition after petition, by them
     presented to the legislative body of this State, and cannot
     but with grief reflect that their success has been but too
     similar.

     "They cannot but express their astonishment that it has
     never been considered, that every principle from which
     America has acted, in the course of her unhappy difficulties
     with Great Britain, bears stronger than a thousand arguments
     in favor of your humble petitioners. They therefore humbly
     beseech Your Honors to give their petition its due weight
     and consideration, and cause an act of the legislature to be
     passed, whereby they may be restored to the enjoyment of
     that freedom, which is the natural right of all men, and
     their children (who were born in this land of liberty) may
     not be held as slaves after they arrive at the age of
     twenty-one years. So may the inhabitants of this State (no
     longer chargeable with the inconsistency of acting
     themselves the part which they condemn and oppose in others)
     be prospered in their glorious struggles for liberty, and
     have those blessings secured to them by Heaven, of which
     benevolent minds cannot wish to deprive their fellow men.

     "And your petitioners, as in duty bound, shall ever pray:--

                                        LANCASTER HILL,
                                        PETER BESS,
                                        BRISTER SLENFEN,
                                        PRINCE HALL,
                                        JACK PIERPONT, [his X mark.]
                                        NERO FUNELO, [his X mark.]
                                        NEWPORT SUMNER, [his X mark.]"

The following entry, bearing the same date, was made:--

     "A petition of Lancaster Hill, and a number of other Negroes
     praying the Court to take into consideration their state of
     bondage, and pass an act whereby they may be restored to the
     enjoyment of that freedom which is the natural right of all
     men. Read and committed to Judge Sargent, Mr. Dalton, Mr.
     Appleton, Col. Brooks, and Mr. Story."

There is no record of the action of the committee, if any were ever
had; but at the afternoon session of the Legislature, Monday, June 9,
1777, a bill was introduced to prevent "the Practice of holding
persons in Slavery." It was "read a first time, and ordered to be read
again on Friday next, at 10 o'clock A.M." Accordingly, on the 13th of
June, the bill was "read a second time, and after Debate thereon, it
was moved and seconded, That the same lie upon the Table, and that
Application be made to Congress on the subject thereof; and the
Question being put, it passed in the affirmative, and Mr. Speaker, Mr.
Wendell, and Col. Orne, were appointed a Committee to prepare a letter
to Congress accordingly, and report." The last action, as far as
indicated by the journal, was had on Saturday, June 14, when "the
Committee appointed to prepare a Letter to Congress, on the subject of
the Bill for preventing the Practice of holding Persons in Slavery,
reported." It was "Read and ordered to lie."[623] And so it did "lie,"
for that was the end of the matter.

Judge Sargent, who was chairman of the committee appointed on the 18th
of March, 1777, was doubtless the author of the following bill:--

     "STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS BAY. IN THE YEAR OF OUR LORD, 1777.

     "AN ACT for preventing the practice of holding persons in
     Slavery.

     "WHEREAS, the practice of holding Africans and the children
     born of them, or any other persons, in Slavery, is
     unjustifiable in a civil government, at a time when they are
     asserting their natural freedom; wherefore, for preventing
     such a practice for the future, and establishing to every
     person residing within the State the invaluable blessing of
     liberty.

     "_Be it Enacted_, by the Council and House of
     Representatives, in General Court assembled, and by the
     authority of the same,--That all persons, whether black or
     of other complexion, above 21 years of age, now held in
     Slavery, shall, from and after the ---- day of ---- next, be
     free from any subjection to any master or mistress, who have
     claimed their servitude by right of purchase, heirship, free
     gift, or otherwise, and they are hereby entitled to all the
     freedom, rights, privileges and immunities that do, or ought
     of right to belong to any of the subjects of this State, any
     usage or custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

     "_And be it Enacted_, by the authority aforesaid, that all
     written deeds, bargains, sales or conveyances, or contracts
     without writing, whatsoever, for conveying or transferring
     any property in any person, or to the service and labor of
     any person whatsoever, of more than twenty-one years of age,
     to a third person, except by order of some court of record
     for some crime, that has been, or hereafter shall be made,
     or by their own voluntary contract for a term not exceeding
     seven years, shall be and hereby are declared null and void.

     "And WHEREAS, divers persons now have in their service
     negroes, mulattoes or others who have been deemed their
     slaves or property, and who are now incapable of earning
     their living by reason of age or infirmities, and may be
     desirous of continuing in the service of their masters or
     mistresses,--_be it therefore Enacted_, by the authority
     aforesaid, that whatever negro or mulatto, who shall be
     desirous of continuing in the service of his master or
     mistress, and shall voluntarily declare the same before two
     justices of the County in which said master or mistress
     resides, shall have a right to continue in the service, and
     to a maintenance from their master or mistress, and if they
     are incapable of earning their living, shall be supported by
     the said master or mistress, or their heirs, during the
     lives of said servants, any thing in this act to the
     contrary notwithstanding.

     "_Provided_, nevertheless, that nothing in this act shall be
     understood to prevent any master of a vessel or other person
     from bringing into this State any persons, not Africans,
     from any other part of the world, except the United States
     of America, and selling their service for a term of time not
     exceeding five years, if twenty-one years of age, or, if
     under twenty-one, not exceeding the time when he or she so
     brought into the State shall be twenty-six years of age, to
     pay for and in consideration of the transportation and other
     charges said master of vessel or other person may have been
     at, agreeable to contracts made with the persons so
     transported, or their patents or guardians in their behalf,
     before they are brought from their own country."[624]

On the back of the bill the following indorsement was written by some
officer of the Legislature: "Ordered to lie till the second Wednesday
of the next Session of the General Court." This might have ended the
struggle for the extinction of slavery in Massachusetts, had not the
people at this time made an earnest demand for a State constitution.
As the character of the constitution was discussed, the question of
slavery divided public sentiment. If it were left out of the
constitution, then the claims of the master would forever lack the
force of law; if it were inserted as part of the constitution, it
would evidence the insincerity of the people in their talk about the
equality of the rights of man, etc. The Legislature--Convention of
1777-78--prepared, debated, and finally approved and submitted to the
people, a draught of a constitution for the State, on the 28th of
February, 1778. The framers of the constitution seemed to lack the
courage necessary to declare in favor of the freedom of the faithful
blacks who had rendered such efficient aid to the cause of the
colonists. The prevailing sentiment of the people demanded an article
in the constitution denying Negroes the right of citizens. It may be
fortunate for the fame of the Commonwealth that the record of the
debates on the article denying Negroes the right of suffrage has not
been preserved. The article is here given:--

     "V. Every male inhabitant of any town in this State, being
     _free_, and twenty-one years of age, _excepting Negroes,
     Indians and Mulattoes_, shall be intitled to vote for a
     Representative or Representatives, as the case may be," etc.

By this article three classes of inhabitants were excluded from the
rights, blessings, and duties of citizenship; and the institution of
slavery was recognized as existing by sanction of law. But the
constitution was rejected by the people, by an overwhelming majority;
not, however, on account of the fifth article, but because the
instrument was obnoxious to them on general principles.

The defeat of the constitution did not temper public sentiment on the
question of Negro slavery, for the very next year the domestic trade
seemed to receive a fresh impetus. The following advertisements
furnish abundant proof of the undiminished vigor of the enterprise.

From "The Continental Journal," Nov. 25, 1779:--

     "_To be_ SOLD A likely NEGRO GIRL, 16 years of Age, for no
     fault, but want of employ."

From the same, Dec. 16, 1779:--

     "_To be_ SOLD, A Strong likely NEGRO GIRL," etc.

From "The Independent Chronicle," March 9, 1780:--

     "_To be_ SOLD, for want of employment, an exceeding likely
     NEGRO GIRL, aged sixteen."

From the same, March 30 and April 6, 1780:--

     "_To be_ SOLD, very Cheap, for no other Reason than for want
     of Employ, an exceeding Active NEGRO BOY, aged fifteen.
     Also, a likely NEGRO GIRL, aged seventeen."

From "The Continental Journal," Aug. 17, 1780:--

     "_To be_ SOLD, a likely NEGRO BOY."

From the same, Aug. 24 and Sept. 7:--

     "_To be_ SOLD or LETT, for a term of years, a strong,
     hearty, likely NEGRO GIRL."

From the same, Oct. 19 and 26, and Nov. 2:--

     "_To be_ SOLD, a likely NEGRO BOY, about eighteen years of
     Age, fit for to serve a Gentleman, to tend horses or to work
     in the Country."

From the same, Oct. 26, 1780:--

     "_To be_ SOLD, a likely NEGRO BOY, about 13 years old, well
     calculated to wait on a Gentleman. Inquire of the Printer."

     "_To be_ SOLD, a likely young COW and CALF. Inquire of the
     Printer."

"Independent Chronicle," Dec. 14, 21, 28, 1780:--

     "A NEGRO CHILD, _soon expected, of a good breed_, may be
     owned by any Person inclining to take it, and Money with
     it."

"Continental Journal," Dec. 21, 1780, and Jan. 4, 1781:--

     "_To be_ SOLD, a hearty, strong NEGRO WENCH, about 29 years
     of age, fit for town or country."

From "The Continental Journal," March 1, 1781:--

     "_To be_ SOLD, an extraordinary likely NEGRO WENCH, 17 years
     old, she can be warranted to be strong, healthy and
     good-natured, _has no notion of Freedom_, has been always
     used to a Farmer's Kitchen and dairy, and is not known to
     have any failing, but being with Child, which is the only
     cause of her being sold."

It is evident, from the wording of the last advertisement quoted, that
the Negroes were sniffing the air of freedom that occasionally blew
from the victorious battle-fields, where many of their race had
distinguished themselves by the most intrepid valor. They began to get
"_notions of freedom_," and this depreciated their market value.

Dr. William Gordon, the steadfast, earnest, and intelligent friend of
the Negro, was deposed as chaplain of both branches of the Legislature
on account of his vehement protest against the adoption of the fifth
article of the constitution by that body. But his zeal was not thereby
abated. He continued to address able articles to the public, and
wrought a good work upon the public conscience.

In Virginia, notwithstanding Negroes were among the State's most
gallant defenders, a law was passed in October, 1776, "declaring
tenants of lands or slaves in taille to hold the same in fee simple."
Under the circumstances, after the war had begun, and after the
declaration by the State of national independence, it was a most
remarkable law.

     "That any person who now hath, or hereafter may have, any
     estate in fee taille, general or special, in any lands or
     slaves in possession, or in the use or trust of any lands or
     slaves in possession, or who now is or hereafter may be
     entitled to any such estate taille in reversion or
     remainder, after the determination of any estate for life or
     lives, or of any lesser estate, whether such estate taille
     hath been or shall be created by deeds, will, act of
     assembly, or by any other ways or means, shall from
     henceforth, or from the commencement of such estate taille,
     stand _ipso facto_ seized, possessed, or entitled of, in, or
     to such lands or slaves, or use in lands or slaves, so held
     or to be held as aforesaid, in possession, reversion, or
     remainder, in full and absolute fee simple, in like manner
     as if such deed, will, act of assembly, or other instrument,
     had conveyed the same to him in fee simple; any words,
     limitations, or conditions, in the said deed, will, act of
     assembly, or other instrument, to the contrary
     notwithstanding."[625]

But the valor of the Negro soldier had great influence upon the public
mind, and inspired the people in many of the States to demand public
recognition of deserving Negroes. It has been noted already, that in
South Carolina, if a Negro, having been captured by the enemy, made
good his escape back into the State, he was emancipated; and, if
wounded in the line of duty, was rewarded with his freedom. Rhode
Island purchased her Negroes for the army, and presented them with
fifty dollars bounty and a certificate of freedom at the close of the
war. Even Virginia, the mother of slavery, remembered, at the close of
the war, the brave Negroes who had fought in her regiments. In
October, 1783, the following Act was passed emancipating all slaves
who had served in the army with the permission of their masters. It is
to be regretted, however, that _all_ slaves who had served in the army
were not rewarded with their freedom.

     "I. WHEREAS it hath been represented to the present general
     assembly, that during the course of the war, many persons in
     this state had caused their slaves to enlist in certain
     regiments or corps raised within the same, having tendered
     such slaves to the officers appointed to recruit forces
     within the state, as substitutes for free persons, whose lot
     or duty it was to serve in such regiments or corps, at the
     same time representing to such recruiting officers that the
     slaves so enlisted by their direction and concurrence were
     freemen; and it appearing further to this assembly, that on
     the expiration of the term of enlistment of such slaves that
     the former owners have attempted again to force them to
     return to a state of servitude, contrary to the principles
     of justice, and to then own solemn promise.

     "II. And whereas it appears just and reasonable that all
     persons enlisted as aforesaid, who have faithfully served
     agreeable to the terms of their enlistment, and have thereby
     of course contributed towards the establishment of American
     liberty and independence, should enjoy the blessings of
     freedom as a reward for their toils and labours; _Be it
     therefore enacted_, That each and every slave who by the
     appointment and direction of his owner, hath enlisted in any
     regiment or corps raised within this state, either on
     continental or state establishment, and hath been received
     as a substitute for any free person whose duty or lot it was
     to serve in such regiment or corps, and hath served
     faithfully during the term of such enlistment, or hath been
     discharged from such service by some officer duly authorized
     to grant such discharge, shall from and after the passing of
     this act, be fully and compleatly emancipated, and shall be
     held and deemed free in as full and ample a manner as if
     each and every of them were specially named in this act; and
     the attorney-general for the commonwealth, is hereby
     required to commence an action, _in forma pauperis_, in
     behalf of any of the persons above described who shall after
     the passing of this act be detained in servitude by any
     person whatsoever; and if upon such prosecution it shall
     appeal that the pauper is entitled to his freedom in
     consequence of this act, a jury shall be empanelled to
     assess the damages for his detention."[626]

New York enlisted her Negro soldiers under a statutory promise of
freedom. They were required to serve three years, or until regularly
discharged. Several other States emancipated a few slaves who had
served faithfully in the army; and the recital of the noble deeds of
black soldiers was listened to with great interest, had an excellent
effect upon many white men after the war, and went far towards
mollifying public sentiment on the slavery question.

If Massachusetts were ever moved by the valor of her black soldiers to
take any action recognizing their services, the record has not been
found up to the present time. After commemorating the 5th of March for
a long time, as a day on which to inflame the public zeal for the
cause of freedom, her Legislature refused to mark the grave of the
first martyr of the Revolution, Crispus Attucks!

Slavery flourished during the entire Revolutionary period. It enjoyed
the silent acquiescence of the pulpit, the support of the public
journals, the sanction of the courts, and the endorsement of the
military establishment. In a free land (?), under the flag of the
government Negroes fought, bled, sacrificed, and died to establish,
slavery held undisputed sway. The colonial government, built by the
cruel and voracious avarice of Britain, crumbled under the
master-stroke of men who desired political and religious liberty more
than jewelled crowns; but the slave institution stood unharmed by the
shock of embattled arms. The colonists asked freedom for themselves
and children, but forged chains for Negroes and their children. And
while a few individual Negro slaves were made a present of themselves
at the close of the war, on account of their gallant service, hundreds
of thousands of their brethren were still retained in bondage


FOOTNOTES:

[622] See Slavery in Mass., p. 178.

[623] House Journal, pp. 19, 25.

[624] Mass. Archives; Revolutionary Resolves, vol. vii. p. 133.

[625] Hening, vol. ix. p. 226.

[626] Hening, vol. xi pp. 308, 309.




CHAPTER XXXI.

SLAVERY AS A POLITICAL AND LEGAL PROBLEM.

1775-1800.

     BRITISH COLONIES IN NORTH AMERICA DECLARE THEIR
     INDEPENDENCE.--A NEW GOVERNMENT ESTABLISHED.--SLAVERY THE
     BANE OF AMERICAS CIVILIZATION.--THE TORY PARTY ACCEPT THE
     DOCTRINE OF PROPERTY IN MAN.--THE DOCTRINE OF THE LOCAL
     CONSTITUTION IN THE SOUTH.--THE WAR PARTY THE DOMINANT
     POLITICAL ORGANIZATION IN THE NORTHERN STATES.--SLAVERY
     RECOGNIZED UNDER THE NEW GOVERNMENT.--ANTI SLAVERY AGITATION
     IN THE STATES.--ATTEMPTED LEGISLATION AGAINST
     SLAVERY.--ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION.--THEIR ADOPTION IN
     1778.--DISCUSSION CONCERNING THE DISPOSAL OF THE WESTERN
     TERRITORY.--MR. JEFFERSON'S RECOMMENDATION--AMENDMENT OF MR.
     SPAIGHT.--CONGRESS IN NEW YORK IN 1787.--DISCUSSION
     RESPECTING THE GOVERNMENT OF THE WESTERN
     TERRITORY.--CONVENTION AT PHILADELPHIA TO FRAME THE FEDERAL
     CONSTITUTION.--PROCEEDINGS OF THE CONVENTION.--THE SOUTHERN
     STATES STILL ADVOCATE SLAVERY.--SPEECHES ON THE SLAVERY
     QUESTION BY LEADING STATESMEN.--CONSTITUTION ADOPTED BY THE
     CONVENTION IN 1787.--FIRST SESSION OF CONGRESS UNDER THE
     FEDERAL CONSTITUTION HELD IN NEW YORK IN 1789.--THE
     INTRODUCTION OF A TARIFF BILL.--AN ATTEMPT TO AMEND IT BY
     INSERTING A CLAUSE LEVYING A TAX ON SLAVES BROUGHT BY
     WATER.--EXTINCTION OF SLAVERY IN MASSACHUSETTS.--A CHANGE IN
     THE PUBLIC OPINION OF THE MIDDLE AND EASTERN STATES ON THE
     SUBJECT OF SLAVERY.--DR. BENJAMIN FRANKLIN'S ADDRESS TO THE
     PUBLIC FOR PROMOTING THE ABOLITION OF SLAVERY.--MEMORIAL TO
     THE UNITED STATES CONGRESS.--CONGRESS IN 1790.--BITTER
     DISCUSSION ON THE RESTRICTION OF THE SLAVE TRADE.--SLAVE
     POPULATION.--VERMONT AND KENTUCKY ADMITTED INTO THE
     UNION.--A LAW PROVIDING FOR THE RETURN OF FUGITIVES FROM
     'LABOR AND SERVICE.--CONVENTION OF FRIENDS HELD IN
     PHILADELPHIA.--AN ACT AGAINST THE FOREIGN SLAVE
     TRADE.--MISSOURI TERRITORY.--CONSTITUTION OF GEORGIA
     REVISED.--NEW YORK PASSES A BILL FOR THE GRADUAL EXTINCTION
     OF SLAVERY.--CONSTITUTION OF KENTUCKY REVISED.--SLAVERY AS
     AN INSTITUTION FIRMLY ESTABLISHED.


The charge that the mother-country forced slavery upon the British
colonies in North America held good until the colonies threw off the
yoke, declared their independence, and built a new government, on the
4th of July, 1776. After the promulgation of the gospel of human
liberty, the United States of America could no longer point to England
as the "first man Adam" of the accursed sin of slavery. Henceforth the
American government, under the new dispensation of peace and the
equality of all men, was responsible for the continuance of slavery,
both as a political and legal problem

Slavery did not escheat to the English government upon the expiration
of its authority in North America. It became the dreadful inheritance
of the new government, and the eyesore of American civilization.
Instead of expelling it from the political institutions of the
country, it gradually became a factor of great power. Instead of
ruling it out of the courts, it was clothed with the ample garments of
judicial respectability.

The first article of the immortal Declaration of Independence was a
mighty shield of beautifully wrought truths, that the authors intended
should protect every human being on the American Continent.

     "_We hold these truths to be self-evident:--that all men are
     created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with
     certain inalienable rights; that among these are life,
     liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. That to secure these
     rights, governments are instituted among men, deriving their
     just powers from the consent of the governed; that whenever
     any form of government becomes destructive of these ends, it
     is the right of the people to alter or to abolish it, and to
     institute a new government, laying its foundation on such
     principles, and organizing its powers in such form, as to
     them shall seem most likely to effect their safety and
     happiness_."

It was to be expected, that, after such a declaration of principles,
the United States would have abolished slavery and the slave-trade
forever. While the magic words of the Declaration of Independence were
not the empty "palaver" of a few ambitious leaders, yet the practices
of the local and the national government belied the grand sentiments
of that instrument. From the earliest moment of the birth of the
United-States government, slavery began to receive political support
and encouragement. Though it was the cruel and depraved offspring of
the British government, it nevertheless was adopted by the _free
government_ of America. Political policy seemed to dictate the methods
of a political recognition of the institution. And the fact that the
slave-trade was prohibited by Congress at an early day, and by many of
the colonies also, did not affect the institution in a local sense.

The Tory party accepted the doctrine of property in man, without
hesitation or reservation. Their political fealty to the Crown, their
party exclusiveness, and their earnest desire to co-operate with the
Royal African Company in the establishment of the slave institution in
America, made them, as per necessity, the political guardians of
slavery. The institution once planted, property in man having been
acquired, it was found to be a difficult task to uproot it. Moreover,
the loss of the colonies to the British Crown did not imply death to
the Tory party. It doubtless suffered organically; but its individual
members did not forfeit their political convictions, nor suffer their
interest in the slave-trade to abate. The new States were ambitious to
acquire political power. The white population of the South was small
when compared with that of the North; but the slave population, added
to the former, swelled it to alarming proportions.

The local governments of the South had been organized upon the
fundamental principles of the Locke Constitution. The government was
lodged with the few, and their rights were built upon landed estates
and political titles and favors. Slaves in the Carolinas and Virginias
answered to the vassals and villeins of England. This aristocratic
element in Tory politics was in harmony, even in a republic, with the
later wish of the South to build a great political "government upon
Slavery as its chief corner-stone." Added to this was the desire to
abrogate the law of indenture of white servants, and thus to the odium
of slavery to loan the powerful influence of caste,--ranging the
Caucasian against the Ethiopian, the intelligent against the ignorant,
the strong against the weak.

New England had better ideas of popular government for and of the
people, but her practical position on slavery was no better than any
State in the South. The Whig party was the dominant political
organization throughout the Northern States; but the universality of
slavery made dealers in human flesh members of all parties.

The men who wrote the Declaration of Independence deprecated slavery,
as they were pronounced Whigs; but nevertheless many of them owned
slaves. They wished the evil exterminated, but confessed themselves
ignorant of a plan by which to carry their desire into effect. The
good desires of many of the people, born out of the early days of the
struggle for independent existence, perished in their very infancy;
and, as has been shown, all the States, and the Congress of the United
States, recognized slavery as existing under the new political
government.

But public sentiment changes in a country where the intellect is
unfettered. First, on the eve of the Revolutionary War, Congress and
nearly all the States pronounced against slavery; a few years later
they all recognized the sacredness of slave property; and still later
all sections of the United States seemed to have been agitated by
anti-slavery sentiments. In 1780 the Legislature of Pennsylvania
prohibited the further introduction of slaves, and gave freedom to the
children of all slaves born in the State. Delaware resolved "that no
person hereafter imported from Africa ought to be held in slavery
under any pretense whatever." In 1784 Connecticut and Rhode Island
modified their slave-code, and forbade further importations of slaves.
In 1778 Virginia passed a law prohibiting the importation of slaves,
and in 1782 repealed the law that confined the power of emancipating
to the Legislature, only on account of meritorious conduct. Private
emancipations became very numerous, and the sentiment in its favor
pronounced. But the restriction was re-enacted in about ten years. The
eloquence of Patrick Henry and the logic of Thomas Jefferson went far
to enlighten public sentiment; but the political influence of the
institution grew so rapidly that in 1785, but two years after the war,
Washington wrote LaFayette, "petitions for the abolition of slavery,
presented to the Virginia Legislature, could scarcely obtain a
hearing." Maryland, New York, and New Jersey prohibited the
slave-trade; but the institution held its place among the people until
1830. North Carolina attempted to prohibit in 1777, but-failed; but in
1786 declared the slave-trade "_of evil consequences and highly
impolitic_." South Carolina and Georgia refused to act, and the
slave-trade continued along their shores.

After the adoption of the Articles of Confederation in 1778, the
Continental Congress found itself charged with the responsibility of
deciding the conflicting claims of the various States to the vast
territory stretching westward from the Ohio River. The war over, the
payment of the public debt thus incurred demanded the consideration of
the people and of their representatives. Massachusetts, Connecticut,
New York, Virginia, North Carolina, and Georgia laid claim to
boundless tracts of lands outside of their State boundaries. But New
Hampshire, Rhode Island, New Jersey, Maryland, Delaware, and South
Carolina, making no such claims, and lacking the resources to pay
their share of the war debt, suggested that the other States should
cede all the territory outside of their State lines, to the United
States Government, to be used towards liquidating the entire debt. The
proposition was accepted by the States named; but not, however,
without some modification. Virginia reserved a large territory beyond
the Ohio with which to pay the bounties of her soldiers, while
Connecticut retained a portion of the Reserve since so famous in the
history of Ohio. The duty of framing an ordinance for the government
of the Western territory was referred to a select committee by
Congress, consisting of Mr. Jefferson of Virginia (chairman), Mr.
Chase of Maryland, and Mr. Howell of Rhode Island. The plan reported
by the committee contemplated the whole region included within our
boundaries west of the old thirteen States, and as far south as our
thirty-first degree north latitude. The plan proposed the ultimate
division of this territory into seventeen States; eight of which were
to be located below the parallel of the Falls of the Ohio (now
Louisville), and nine above it. But the most interesting rule reported
by Mr. Jefferson was the following, on the 19th of April, 1784:--

     "That after the year 1800, of the Christian era, there shall
     be neither slavery nor involuntary servitude in any part of
     the said _states_, otherwise than in punishment of crimes,
     whereof the part shall have been convicted to be personally
     guilty."

Mr. Spaight of North Carolina moved to amend the report by striking
out the above clause, which was seconded by Mr. Reed of South
Carolina. The question, upon a demand for the yeas and nays, was put:
"Shall the words moved to be stricken out stand?" The question was
lost, and the words were stricken out. The ordinance was further
amended, and finally adopted on the 23d of April

The last Continental Congress was held in the city of New York in
1787. The question of the government of the Western territory came up.
A committee was appointed on this subject, with Nathan Dane of
Massachusetts as chairman On the 11th of July the committee reported
"An Ordinance for the government of the Territory of the United
States, _Northwest of the Ohio_." It embodied many of the features of
Mr. Jefferson's bill, concluding with six unalterable articles of
perpetual compact, the last being the following: "There shall be
neither slavery nor involuntary servitude in the said territory,
otherwise than in punishment of crimes, whereof the parties shall be
duly convicted." When upon its passage, a stipulation was added for
the delivery of fugitives from "labor or service:"[627] and in this
shape the entire ordinance passed on the 13th of July, 1787.

Thus it is clear that under the Confederation slavery existed, a part
of the political government, as a legal fact. There was no effort made
by Congress to abolish it. Mr. Jefferson simply sought to arrest its
progress, and confine it to the original thirteen States.

On the 25th of May, 1787, the convention to frame the Federal
Constitution met at Philadelphia, although the day appointed was the
14th. George Washington was chosen president, a committee chosen to
report rules of proceeding, and a secretary appointed. The sessions
were held with closed doors, and all the proceedings were secret. It
contained the most eminent men in the United States,--generals of the
army, statesmen, lawyers, and men of broad scholarship. The question
of congressional apportionment was early before them, and there was
great diversity of opinion. But, as there was no census, therefore
there could be no just apportionment until an enumeration of the
people was taken. Until that was accomplished, the number of delegates
was fixed at sixty-five. Massachusetts was the only State in the Union
where slavery did not exist. The Northern States desired
representation according to the free inhabitants only; while all of
the Southern States, where the great mass of slaves was, wanted
representation according to the entire population, bond and free. Some
of the Northern delegates urged their view with great force and
eloquence. Mr. Patterson of New Jersey said he regarded slaves as mere
property. They were not represented in the States: why should they be
in the general government? They were not allowed to vote: why should
they be represented? He regarded it as an encouragement to the
slave-trade. Mr. Wilson of Pennsylvania said, "Are they admitted as
citizens? then, why not on an equality with citizens? Are they
admitted as property? then, why is not other property admitted into
the computation?" It was evident that neither extreme view could
carry: so the proposition carried to reckon three-fifths of the slaves
in estimating taxes, and to make taxation the basis of representation.
New Jersey and Delaware voted Nay; Massachusetts and South Carolina
were divided; and New York was not represented, her delegates having
failed to arrive.

It was apparent during the early stages of the debates, that a
constitution had to be made that would be acceptable to the Southern
delegates. A clause was inserted relieving the Southern States from
duties on exports, and upon the importation of slaves; and that no
navigation act should be passed except by a two-thirds vote. By
denying Congress the authority of giving preference to American over
foreign shipping, it was designed to secure cheap transportation for
Southern exports; but, as the shipping was largely owned in the
Eastern States, their delegates were zealous in their efforts to
prevent any restriction of the power of Congress to enact navigation
laws. It has been already shown that all the States, with the
exception of North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia, had
prohibited the importation of slaves. The prohibition of duties on the
importation of slaves was demanded by the delegates from South
Carolina and Georgia. They assured the Convention that without such a
provision they could never give their assent to the constitution. This
declaration dragooned some Northern delegates into a support of the
restriction, but provoked some very plain remarks concerning slavery.
Mr. Pinckney said, that, "If the Southern States were let alone, they
would probably of themselves stop importations. He would himself, as a
citizen of South Carolina, vote for it."

Mr. Sherman remarked that "the abolition of slavery seemed to be going
on in the United States, and that the good sense of the several states
would probably by degrees complete it;" and Mr. Ellsworth thought that
"slavery, in time, will not be a speck in our country." Mr. Madison
said "he thought it _wrong_ to admit in the Constitution the idea of
property in men."

Slavery, notwithstanding the high-sounding words just quoted, was
recognized in and by three separate clauses of the Constitution The
word "slave" was excluded, but the language does not admit of any
doubt.

     "Art. I. Sect. 2.... Representatives and direct taxes shall
     be apportioned among the several States which may be
     included within this Union, according to their respective
     numbers; which shall be determined by adding to the whole
     number of free persons, including those bound to service for
     a term of years, and excluding Indians not taxed,
     _three-fifths of all other persons.[628] ..._

     "Art I. Sect. 9. The migration or importation of such
     _persons_ as any of the States now existing shall think
     proper to admit, shall not be prohibited by the Congress
     prior to the year one thousand eight hundred and eight; but
     a tax or duty may be imposed on such importation, not
     exceeding ten dollars for each person....

     "Art. IV. Sect. 2.... No _person_ held to service or labor
     in one State, under the laws thereof, escaping into another,
     shall, in consequence of any law or regulation therein, be
     discharged from such service or labor, but shall be
     delivered up on claim of the party to whom such service or
     labor may be due."

The debate on the above was exciting and interesting, as the subject
of slavery was examined in all its bearings. Finally the Constitution
was submitted to Gouverneur Morris of Pennsylvania, to receive the
finishing touches of his facile pen. On the 8th of August, 1787,
during the debate, he delivered the following speech:--

     "He never would concur in upholding domestic slavery. It was
     a nefarious institution. It was the curse of Heaven on the
     States where it prevailed. Compare the free regions of the
     Middle States, where a rich and noble cultivation marks the
     prosperity and happiness of the people, with the misery and
     poverty which overspread the barren wastes of Virginia,
     Maryland, and the other States having slaves. Travel through
     the whole continent, and you behold the prospect continually
     varying with the appearance and disappearance of slavery.
     The moment you leave the Eastern States, and enter New York,
     the effects of the institution become visible. Passing
     through the Jerseys, and entering Pennsylvania, every
     criterion of superior improvement witnesses the change.
     Proceed southwardly, and every step you take through the
     great regions of slaves presents a desert, increasing with
     the increasing proportion of these wretched beings. Upon
     what principle it is that the slaves shall be computed in
     the representation? Are they men? Then make them citizens,
     and let them vote. Are they property? Why, then, is no other
     property included? The houses in this city (Philadelphia)
     are worth more than all the wretched slaves who cover the
     rice-swamps of South Carolina. The admission of slaves into
     the representation, when fairly explained, comes to
     this,--that the inhabitant of Georgia and South Carolina,
     who goes to the coast of Africa, and, in defiance of the
     most sacred laws of humanity, tears away his
     fellow-creatures from their dearest connections, and damns
     them to the most cruel bondage, shall have more votes in a
     government instituted for the protection of the rights of
     mankind than the citizen of Pennsylvania or New Jersey, who
     views with a laudable horror so nefarious a practice. He
     would add, that domestic slavery is the most prominent
     feature in the aristocratic countenance of the proposed
     Constitution. The vassalage of the poor has ever been the
     favorite offspring of aristocracy. And what is the proposed
     compensation to the Northern States for a sacrifice of every
     principle of right, of every impulse of humanity? They are
     to bind themselves to march their militia for the defence of
     the Southern States, for their defence against those very
     slaves of whom they complain. They must supply vessels and
     seamen in case of foreign attack. The Legislature will have
     indefinite power to tax them by excises and duties on
     imports, both of which will fall heavier on them than on the
     Southern inhabitants; for the bohea tea used by a Northern
     freeman will pay more tax than the whole consumption of the
     miserable slave, which consists of nothing more than his
     physical subsistence and the rag that covers his nakedness.
     On the other side, the Southern States are not to be
     restrained from importing fresh supplies of wretched
     Africans, at once to increase the danger of attack and the
     difficulty of defence: nay, they are to be encouraged to it
     by an assurance of having their votes in the National
     Government increased in proportion: and are, it the same
     time, to have their exports and their slaves exempt from all
     contributions for the public service. Let it not be said
     that direct taxation is to be proportioned to
     representation. It is idle to suppose that the General
     Government can stretch its hand directly into the pockets of
     the people scattered over so vast a country. They can only
     do it through the medium of exports, imports, and excises.
     For what, then, are all the sacrifices to be made? He would
     sooner submit himself to a tax for paying for all the
     negroes in the United States than saddle posterity with such
     a Constitution."[629]

Mr. Rufus King of Massachusetts in the same debate said,--

     "The admission of slaves was a most grating circumstance to
     his mind, and he believed would be so to a great part of the
     people of America. He had not made a strenuous opposition to
     it heretofore, because he had hoped that this concession
     would have produced a readiness, which had not been
     manifested, to strengthen the General Government, and to
     mark a full confidence in it. The report under consideration
     had, by the tenor of it, put an end to all those hopes. In
     two great points, the hands of the Legislature were
     absolutely tied. The importation of slaves could not be
     prohibited. Exports could not be taxed. Is this reasonable?
     What are the great objects of the general system? First,
     defence against foreign invasion; secondly, against internal
     sedition. Shall all the States, then, be bound to defend
     each, and shall each be at liberty to introduce a weakness
     which will render defence more difficult? Shall one part of
     the United States be bound to defend another part, and that
     other part be at liberty, not only to increase its own
     danger, but to withhold the compensation for the burden? If
     slaves are to be imported, shall not the exports produced by
     their labor supply a revenue, the better to enable the
     General Government to defend their masters? There was so
     much inequality and unreasonableness in all this, that the
     people of the Northern States could never be reconciled to
     it. No candid man could undertake to justify it to them. He
     had hoped that some accommodation would have taken place on
     this subject; that, at least, a time would have been limited
     for the importation of slaves. He never could agree to let
     them be imported without limitation, and then be represented
     in the National Legislature. Indeed, he could so little
     persuade himself of the rectitude of such a practice, that
     he was not sure he could assent to it under any
     circumstances. At all events, either slaves should not be
     represented, or exports should be taxable."

Mr. Roger Sherman of Connecticut,--

     "Regarded the slave-trade as iniquitous: but the point of
     representation having been settled after much difficulty and
     deliberation, he did not think himself bound to make
     opposition; especially as the present article, as amended,
     did not preclude any arrangement whatever on that point, in
     another place of the report."[630]

Mr. Luther Martin of Maryland, in the debate, Tuesday, Aug. 21,--

     "Proposed to vary Art. 7, Sect. 4, so as to allow a
     prohibition or tax on the importation of slaves. In the
     first place, as five slaves are to be counted as three free
     men in the apportionment of representatives, such a clause
     would leave an encouragement to this traffic. In the second
     place, slaves weakened one part of the Union, which the
     other parts were bound to protect: the privilege of
     importing them was therefore unreasonable. And, in the third
     place, it was inconsistent with the principles of the
     Revolution, and dishonorable to the American character, to
     have such a feature in the Constitution.

     "Mr. RUTLEDGE did not see how the importation of slaves
     could be encouraged by this section. He was not apprehensive
     of insurrections, and would readily exempt the other States
     from the obligation to protect the Southern against them.
     Religion and humanity had nothing to do with this question:
     interest alone is the governing principle with nations. The
     true question at present is, whether the Southern States
     shall or shall not be parties to the Union. If the Northern
     States consult their interest, they will not oppose the
     increase of slaves, which will increase the commodities of
     which they will become the carriers.

     "Mr. ELLSWORTH was for leaving the clause as it stands. Let
     every State import what it pleases. The morality or wisdom
     of slavery are considerations belonging to the States
     themselves. What enriches a part enriches the whole, and the
     States are the best judges of their particular interest. The
     old Confederation had not meddled with this point; and he
     did not see any greater necessity for bringing it within the
     policy of the new one.

     "Mr. PINCKNEY. South Carolina can never receive the plan if
     it prohibits the slave trade. In every proposed extension of
     the powers of Congress, that State has expressly and
     watchfully excepted that of meddling with the importation of
     Negroes, _If the States be all left at liberty on this
     subject, South Carolina may perhaps, by degrees, do of
     herself what is wished, as Virginia and Maryland have
     already done_.

     "Adjourned.

     "WEDNESDAY, Aug. 22.

     "_In Convention_.--Art. 7, Sect. 4, was resumed.

     "Mr. SHERMAN was for leaving the clause as it stands. He
     disapproved of the slave-trade; yet, as the States were now
     possessed of the right to import slaves, as the public good
     did not require it to be taken from them, and as it was
     expedient to have as few objections as possible to the
     proposed scheme of government, he thought it best to leave
     the matter as we find it. ... He urged on the Convention the
     necessity of despatching its business.

     "Col. MASON. This infernal traffic originated in the avarice
     of British merchants. The British Government constantly
     checked the attempts of Virginia to put a stop to it. The
     present question concerns, not the importing States alone,
     but the whole Union. The evil of having slaves was
     experienced during the late war. Had slaves been treated as
     they might have been by the enemy, they would have proved
     dangerous instruments in their hands. But their folly dealt
     by the slaves as it did by the Tories. He mentioned the
     dangerous insurrections of the slaves in Greece and Sicily,
     and the instructions given by Cromwell to the commissioners
     sent to Virginia,--to arm the servants and slaves, in case
     other means of obtaining its submission should fail.
     Maryland and Virginia, he said, had already prohibited the
     importation of slaves expressly. North Carolina had done the
     same in substance. All this would be in vain, if South
     Carolina and Georgia be at liberty to import. The Western
     people are already calling out for slaves for their new
     lands; and will fill that country with slaves, if they can
     be got through South Carolina and Georgia. Slavery
     discourages arts and manufactures. The poor despise labor
     when performed by slaves. They prevent the emigration of
     whites, who really enrich and strengthen a country. _They
     produce the most pernicious effect on manners. Every master
     of slaves is born a petty tyrant. They bring the judgment of
     heaven on a country. As nations cannot be rewarded or
     punished in the next world, they must be in this. By an
     inevitable chain of causes and effects, Providence punishes
     national sins by national calamities_. He lamented that some
     of our Eastern brethren had, from a lust of gain, embarked
     in this nefarious traffic. As to the States being in
     possession of the right to import, this was the case with
     many other rights, now to be properly given up. He held it
     essential, in every point of view, that the General
     Government should have power to prevent the increase of
     slavery.

     "Mr. ELLSWORTH, as he had never owned a slave, could not
     judge of the effects of slavery on character. He said,
     however, that, if it was to be considered in a moral light,
     we ought to go further, and free those already in the
     country. As slaves also multiply so fast in Virginia and
     Maryland, that it is cheaper to raise than import them,
     whilst in the sickly rice-swamps foreign supplies are
     necessary, if we go no further than is urged, we shall be
     unjust towards South Carolina and Georgia. Let us not
     intermeddle. As population increases, poor laborers will be
     so plenty as to render slaves useless. _Slavery, in time,
     will not be a speck in our county_. Provision is already
     made in Connecticut for abolishing it; and the abolition has
     already taken place in Massachusetts. As to the danger of
     insurrections from foreign influence, that will become a
     motive to kind treatment of the slaves.

     "Gen. PINCKNEY declared it to be his firm opinion, that if
     himself and all his colleagues were to sign the
     Constitution, and use their personal influence, it would be
     of no avail towards obtaining the assent of their
     constituents. South Carolina and Georgia cannot do without
     slaves. As to Virginia, she will gain more by stopping the
     importations. Her slaves will rise in value, and she has
     more than she wants. It would be unequal to require South
     Carolina and Georgia to confederate on such unequal terms.
     He said, the royal assent, before the Revolution, had never
     been refused to South Carolina as to Virginia. He contended,
     that the importation of slaves would be for the interest of
     the whole Union. The more slaves, the more produce to employ
     the carrying-trade: the more consumption also; and, the more
     of this, the more revenue for the common treasury. He
     admitted it to be reasonable, that slaves should be dutied
     like other imports; but should consider a rejection of the
     clause as an exclusion of South Carolina from the Union.

     "Mr. BALDWIN had conceived national objects alone to be
     before the Convention: not such as, like the present, were
     of a local nature. Georgia was decided on this point. That
     State has always hitherto supposed a General Government to
     be the pursuit of the Central States, who wished to have a
     vortex for every thing; that her distance would preclude
     her from equal advantage; and that she could not prudently
     purchase it by yielding national powers. From this it might
     be understood in what light she would view an attempt to
     abridge one of her favorite prerogatives. _If left to
     herself, she may probably put a stop to the evil_. As one
     ground for this conjecture, he took notice of the sect
     of ----, which, he said, was a respectable class of people,
     who carried their ethics beyond the mere _equality of
     men_,--extending their humanity to the claims of the whole
     animal creation.

     "Mr. WILSON observed, that, _if South Carolina and Georgia
     were themselves disposed to get rid of the importation of
     slaves in a short time, as had been suggested, they would
     never refuse to unite because the importation might be
     prohibited_. As the section now stands, all articles
     imported are to be taxed. Slaves alone are exempt. This is,
     in fact, a bounty on that article.

     "Mr. GERRY thought we had nothing to do with the conduct of
     the States as to slaves, but ought to be careful not to give
     any sanction to it.

     "Mr. DICKINSON considered it as inadmissible, on every
     principle of honor and safety, that the importation of
     slaves should be authorized to the States by the
     Constitution. The true question was, whether the national
     happiness would be promoted or impeded by the importation;
     and this question ought to be left to the National
     Government, not to the States particularly interested. If
     England and France permit slavery, slaves are, at the same
     time, excluded from both those kingdoms. Greece and Rome
     were made unhappy by their slaves. He could not believe that
     the Southern States would refuse to confederate on the
     account apprehended; especially as the power was not likely
     to be immediately exercised by the General Government.

     "Mr. WILLIAMSON stated the law of North Carolina on the
     subject; to wit, that it did not directly prohibit the
     importation of slaves. It imposed a duty of £5 on each slave
     imported from Africa, £10 on each from elsewhere, and £50 on
     each from a State licensing manumission. He thought the
     Southern States could not be members of the Union, if the
     clause should be rejected: and it was wrong to force any
     thing down not absolutely necessary, and which any State
     must disagree to.

     "Mr. KING thought the subject should be considered in a
     political light only. If two States will not agree to the
     Constitution, as stated on one side, he could affirm with
     equal belief, on the other, that great and equal opposition
     would be experienced from the other States. He remarked on
     the exemption of slaves from duty, whilst every other import
     was subjected to it, as an inequality that could not fail to
     strike the commercial sagacity of the Northern and Middle
     States.

     "Mr. LANGDON was strenuous for giving the power to the
     General Government. He could not, with a good conscience,
     leave it with the States, who could then go on with the
     traffic, without being restrained by the opinions here
     given, _that they will themselves cease to import slaves_.

     "Gen. PINCKNEY thought himself bound to declare candidly,
     that he did not think South Carolina would stop her
     importations of slaves in any short time; but only stop them
     occasionally, as she now does. He moved to commit the
     clause, that slaves might be made liable to an equal tax
     with other imports, which he thought right, and which would
     remove one difficulty that had been started.

     "Mr. RUTLEDGE. If the Convention thinks that North Carolina,
     South Carolina, and Georgia will ever agree to the plan,
     unless their right to import slaves be untouched, the
     expectation is vain. The people of those States will never
     be such fools as to give up so important an interest. He was
     strenuous against striking out the section, and seconded the
     motion of Gen. Pinckney for a commitment.

     "Mr. GOUVERNEUR MORRIS wished the whole subject to be
     committed, including the clauses relating to taxes on export
     and to a navigation act. These things may form a bargain
     among the Northern and Southern States.

     "Mr. BUTLER declared, that he never would agree to the power
     of taxing exports.

     "Mr. SHERMAN said it was better to let the Southern States
     import slaves than to part with them, if they made that a
     _sine qua non_. He was opposed to a tax on slaves imported,
     as making the matter worse, because it implied they were
     _property_. He acknowledged, that, if the power of
     prohibiting the importation should be given to the General
     Government, it would be exercised. He thought it would be
     its duty to exercise the power.

     'Mr. READ was for the commitment, provided the clause
     concerning taxes on exports should also be committed.

     "Mr. SHERMAN observed, that that clause had been agreed to,
     and therefore could not be committed.

     "Mr. RANDOLPH was for committing, in order that some middle
     ground might, if possible, be found. He could never agree to
     the clause as it stands. He would sooner risk the
     Constitution. He dwelt on the dilemma to which the
     Convention was exposed. By agreeing to the clause, it would
     revolt the Quakers, the Methodists, and many others in the
     States having no slaves. On the other hand, two States might
     be lost to the Union. Let us then, he said, try the chance
     of a commitment."[631]

Three days later (Saturday, Aug. 25) the debate on the subject was
resumed, and the report of the committee of eleven was taken up. It
was in the following words:--

     "Strike out so much of the fourth section as was referred to
     the Committee, and insert 'The migration or importation of
     such persons as the several States, now existing, think
     proper to admit, shall not be prohibited by the Legislature
     prior to the year 1800; but a tax or duty may be imposed on
     such migration or importation, at a rate not exceeding the
     average of the duties laid on imports.'



     "Gen. PINCKNEY moved to strike out the words 'the year
     eighteen hundred' as the year limiting the importation of
     slaves, and to insert the words 'the year eighteen hundred
     and eight.'

     "Mr. GORHAM seconded the motion.

     "Mr. MADISON. Twenty years will produce all the mischief
     that can be apprehended from the liberty to import slaves.
     So long a term will be more dishonorable to the American
     character than to say nothing about it in the Constitution.

     "On the motion, which passed in the affirmative,--

     "New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Connecticut, Maryland, North
     Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, ay,--7, New Jersey,
     Pennsylvania, Delaware, Virginia, no,--4.

     "Mr. GOUVERNOUR MORRIS was for making the clause read at
     once,--

     "'The importation of slaves into North Carolina, South
     Carolina, and Georgia, shall not be prohibited,' &c. This,
     he said, would be most fair, and would avoid the ambiguity
     by which, under the power with regard to naturalization, the
     liberty reserved to the States might be defeated. He wished
     it to be known, also, that this part of the Constitution was
     a compliance with those States. If the change of language,
     however, should be objected to by the members from those
     States, he should not urge it.

     "Col. MASON was not against using the term 'slaves,' but
     against naming North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia,
     lest it should give offence to the people of those States.

     "Mr. SHERMAN liked a description better than the terms
     proposed, which had been declined by the old Congress, and
     were not pleasing to some people.

     "Mr. CLYMER concurred with Mr. Sherman.

     "Mr. WILLIAMSON said, that, both in opinion and practice, he
     was against slavery; but thought it more in favor of
     humanity, from a view of all circumstances, to let in South
     Carolina and Georgia on those terms, than to exclude them
     from the Union.

     "Mr. GOUVERNEUR MORRIS withdrew his motion.

     "Mr. DICKINSON wished the clause to be confined to the
     States which had not themselves prohibited the importation
     of slaves; and, for that purpose, moved to amend the clause
     so as to read.--

     "'The importation of slaves into such of the States as shall
     permit the same shall not be prohibited by the Legislature
     of the United States until the year 1808;'--

     "which was disagreed to, _nem. con._

     "The first part of the Report was then agreed to, amended as
     follows:--

     "'The migration or importation of such persons as the
     several States now existing shall think proper to admit
     shall not be prohibited by the Legislature prior to the year
     1808.'

     "New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Connecticut, Maryland, North
     Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, ay,--7; New Jersey,
     Pennsylvania, Delaware, Virginia, no,--4."[632]



The above specimens of the speeches on the slavery question, during
the debate, are sufficient to furnish a fair idea of the personal
opinion of the great thinkers of that time on slavery. It is clear
that it was the wish of the great majority of the Northern delegates
to abolish the institution, in a domestic as well as in a foreign
sense; but they were not strong enough to resist the temptation to
compromise their profoundest convictions on a question as broad and
far-reaching as the Union that they were met to launch anew. Thus by
an understanding, or, as Gouverneur Morris called it, "a bargain,"
between the commercial representatives of the Northern States and the
delegates of South Carolina and Georgia, and in spite of the
opposition of Maryland and Virginia, the unrestricted power of
Congress to enact navigation-laws was conceded to the Northern
merchants; and to the Carolina rice-planters, as an equivalent, twenty
years' continuance of the African slave-trade. This was the third
great "compromise" of the Constitution. The other two were the
concession to the smaller States of an equal representation in the
Senate; and, to the slaveholders, the counting three-fifths of the
slaves in determining the ratio of representation. If this third
compromise differed from the other two by involving not merely a
political but a moral sacrifice, there was this partial compensation
about it, that it was not permanent like the others, but expired, by
limitation, at the end of twenty years.[633]

The Constitution was adopted by the Convention, and signed, on the
17th of September, 1787. It was then forwarded to Congress, then in
session in New-York City, with the recommendation that that body
submit it to the State conventions for ratification; which was
accordingly done. Delaware adopted it on the 7th of December, 1787;
Pennsylvania, Dec. 12; New Jersey, Dec. 18; Georgia, Jan. 2, 1788;
Connecticut, Jan. 9; Massachusetts, Feb. 7; Maryland, April 28; South
Carolina, May 23; New Hampshire, June 21 (and, being the ninth
ratifying, gave effect to the Constitution); Virginia ratified June
27; New York, July 26. North Carolina gave a conditional ratification
on the 7th of August, but Congress did not receive it until January,
1790; nor that of Rhode Island, until June of the same year.

At the conclusion of the deliberations of the convention that framed
the Constitution, it was voted that its journal be intrusted to the
custody of George Washington. He finally deposited it in the State
Department, and it was printed in 1818 by order of Congress.

The first session of Congress, under the new Constitution, was held
in the city of New York, in 1789. A quorum was obtained on the 6th of
April; and the first measure brought up for consideration was a
tariff-bill which Mr. Parker of Virginia sought to amend by inserting
a clause levying an impost-tax of ten dollars upon every slave brought
by water. "He was sorry the Constitution prevented Congress from
prohibiting the importation altogether. It was contrary to revolution
principles, and ought not to be permitted." Thus the question of
slavery made its appearance early at the first session of the first
Congress under the present Constitution. At that time Georgia was the
only State in the Union that seemed to retain a pecuniary interest in
the importation of slaves. Even South Carolina had passed an Act
prohibiting for one year the importation of slaves. In this, as on
several occasions before, she was actuated on account of the low
prices of produce,--too low to be remunerative. But, notwithstanding
this, Mr. Smith, the member from the Charleston district, grew quite
captious over the proposition of the gentleman from Virginia. He

     'Hoped that such an important and serious proposition would
     not be hastily adopted. It was rather a late moment for the
     first introduction of a subject so big with serious
     consequences. No one topic had been yet introduced so
     important to South Carolina and the welfare of the Union."

Mr. Sherman got the floor, and said he

     "Approved the object of the motion, but did not think it a
     fit subject to be embraced in this bill. He could not
     reconcile himself to the insertion of human beings, as a
     subject of impost, among goods, wares, and merchandise. He
     hoped the motion would be withdrawn for the present, and
     taken up afterwards as an independent subject."

Mr. Jackson of Georgia

     "Was not surprised, however others might be so, at the
     quarter whence this motion came. Virginia, as an old settled
     State, had her complement of slaves, and the natural
     increase being sufficient for her purpose, she was careless
     of recruiting her numbers by importation. But gentlemen
     ought to let their neighbors get supplied before they
     imposed such a burden. He knew this business was viewed in
     an odious light at the Eastward, because the people there
     were capable of doing their own work, and had no occasion
     for slaves. But gentlemen ought to have some feeling for
     others. Surely they do not mean to tax us for every comfort
     and enjoyment of life, and, at the same time, to take from
     us the means of procuring them! He was sure, from the
     unsuitableness of the motion to the business now before the
     house, and the want of time to consider it, the gentleman's
     candor would induce him to withdraw it. Should it ever be
     brought forward again, he hoped it would comprehend the
     white slaves as well as the black, imported from all the
     jails of Europe; wretches convicted of the most flagrant
     crimes, who were brought in and sold without any duty
     whatever. They ought to be taxed equally with Africans, and
     he had no doubt of the equal constitutionality and propriety
     of such a course."

Mr. Parker of Virginia obtained the floor again, and proceeded to
reply to the remarks offered upon his amendment by Sherman, Jackson,
and Smith. He declared,--

     "That, having introduced the motion on mature reflection, he
     did not like to withdraw it. The gentleman from Connecticut
     had said that human beings ought not to be enumerated with
     goods, wares, and merchandise. Yet he believed they were
     looked upon by African traders in that light. He hoped
     Congress would do all in their power to restore to human
     nature its inherent privileges; to wipe off, if possible,
     the stigma under which America labored; to do away with the
     inconsistence in our principles justly charged upon us; and
     to show, by our actions, the pure beneficence of the
     doctrine held out to the world in our Declaration of
     Independence."

Mr. Ames of Massachusetts

     "Detested slavery from his soul; but he had some doubts
     whether imposing a duty on their importation would not have
     an appearance of countenancing the practice."

Mr. Madison made an eloquent speech in support of Mr. Parker's
amendment. He said,--

     "The confounding men with merchandise might be easily
     avoided by altering the title of the bill; it was, in fact,
     the very object of the motion to prevent men, so far as the
     power of Congress extended, from being confounded with
     merchandise. The clause in the Constitution allowing a tax
     to be imposed, though the traffic could not be prohibited
     for twenty years, was inserted, he believed, for the very
     purpose of enabling Congress to give some testimony of the
     sense of America with respect to the African trade. By
     expressing a national disapprobation of that trade, it is to
     be hoped we may destroy it, and so save ourselves from
     reproaches, and our posterity from the imbecility ever
     attendant on a country filled with slaves. This was as much
     the interest of South Carolina and Georgia as of any other
     States. Every addition they received to their number of
     slaves tended to weakness, and rendered them less capable of
     self-defence. In case of hostilities with foreign nations,
     their slave population would be a means, not of repelling
     invasions, but of inviting attack. It was the duty of the
     general government to protect every part of the Union
     against danger, as well internal as external. Every thing,
     therefore, which tended to increase this danger, though it
     might be a local affair, yet, if it involved national
     expense or safety, became of concern to every part of the
     Union, and a proper subject for the consideration of those
     charged with the general administration of the government."

Mr. Bland approved the position taken by Mr. Madison, while Mr. Burke
of South Carolina charged the gentlemen with having wasted the time of
Congress upon a useless proposition. He contended, that, while slaves
were not mentioned in the Constitution, they would come under the
general five per cent _ad valorem_ duty on all unenumerated articles,
which would be equivalent to the proposition of the gentleman from
Virginia. Mr. Madison replied by saying, that no collector of customs
would presume to apply the terms "goods," "wares," and "merchandise"
to persons. Mr. Sherman followed him in the same strain, and denied
that persons were anywhere recognised as property in the Constitution.
Finally, at the suggestion of Mr. Madison, Mr. Parker consented to
withdraw his motion with the understanding that a separate bill should
be brought in. A committee was appointed to discharge that duty, but
the noble resolve found a quiet grave in the committee-room.

The failure of this first attempt, under the new Constitution, to
restrict slavery, did not lame the cause to any great extent. It was
rather accelerated. The manner and spirit of the debate on the subject
quickened public thought, animated the friends of the Negro, and
provoked many people to good works. Slavery had ceased to exist in
Massachusetts. Several suits, entered by slaves against their masters
for restraining their liberty, had been won. The case of Elizabeth
Freeman, better known as "Mum Bet," was regarded as the first-fruits
of the Massachusetts Declaration of Rights in the new Constitution of
1780. The Duke de la Rochefoucault Laincort gives the following
interesting account of the extinction of slavery in Massachusetts:--

     "In 1781, some negroes, prompted by private suggestion,
     maintained that they were not slaves: they found advocates,
     among whom was Mr. Sedgwick, now a member of the Senate of
     the United States; and the cause was carried before the
     Supreme Court. Their counsel pleaded, 1°. That no antecedent
     law had established slavery, and that the laws which seemed
     to suppose it were the offspring of error in the
     legislators, who had no authority to enact them;--2°, That
     such laws, even if they had existed, were annulled by the
     new Constitution. They gained the cause under both aspects:
     and the solution of this first question that was brought
     forward set the negroes entirely at liberty, and at the same
     time precluded their pretended owners from all claim to
     indemnification, since they were proved to have possessed
     and held them in slavery without any right. As there were
     only a few slaves in Massachusetts, the decision passed
     without opposition, and banished all further idea of
     slavery."[634]

Mr. Nell gives an account of the legal death of slavery in
Massachusetts, but unfortunately does not cite any authority. John
Quincey Adams, in reply to a question put by John C. Spencer, stated
that, "a note had been given for the price of a slave in 1787. This
note was sued, and the Court ruled that the maker had received no
consideration, as a man could not be sold. From that time forward,
slavery died in the Old Bay State." There were several suits
instituted by slaves against their reputed masters in 1781-82; but
there are strong evidences that slavery died a much slower death in
Massachusetts than many are willing to admit. James Sullivan wrote to
Dr. Belknap in 1795:--

     "In 1781, at the Court in Worcester County, an indictment
     was found against a white man named Jennison for assaulting,
     beating, and imprisoning Quock Walker, a black. He was tried
     at the Supreme Judicial Court in 1783. His defence was, that
     the black was his slave, and that the beating, etc., was the
     necessary restraint and correction of the master. This was
     answered by citing the aforesaid clause in the declaration
     of rights. The judges and jury were of opinion that he had
     no right to imprison or beat the negro. He was found guilty
     and fined 40 shillings. This decision put an end to the idea
     of slavery in Massachusetts."[635]

There are two things in the above that throw considerable uncertainty
about the subject as to the precise date of the end of slavery in the
Commonwealth. First, the suit referred to was tried in 1783, three
years after the adoption of the new Constitution. Second, the good
doctor does not say that the decision sealed the fate of slavery, but
only that it "was a mortal wound to slavery in Massachusetts."

From 1785-1790, there was a wonderful change in the public opinion of
the Middle and Eastern States on the subject of slavery. Most of them
had passed laws providing for gradual emancipation. The Friends of New
York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania began to organize a crusade against
domestic slavery. In the fall of 1789, while the Congressional debates
were still fresh in the minds of the people, the venerable Dr.
Benjamin Franklin, as president of the "Pennsylvania Society for
Promoting the Abolition of Slavery," etc., issued the following
letter:--

     "AN ADDRESS TO THE PUBLIC.

     _From the Pennsylvania Society for Promoting the Abolition
     of Slavery, and the Relief of Free Negroes unlawfully held
     in Bondage_.

     It is with peculiar satisfaction we assure, the friends of
     humanity, that, in prosecuting the design of our
     association, our endeavors have proved successful, far
     beyond our most sanguine expectations.

     "Encouraged by this success, and by the daily progress of
     that luminous and benign spirit of liberty which is
     diffusing itself throughout the world, and humbly hoping for
     the continuance of the divine blessing on our labors, we
     have ventured to make an important addition to our original
     plan; and do therefore earnestly solicit the support and
     assistance of all who can feel the tender emotions of
     sympathy and compassion, or relish the exalted pleasure of
     beneficence.

     "Slavery is such an atrocious debasement of human nature,
     that its very extirpation, if not performed with solicitous
     care, may sometimes open a source of serious evils.

     "The unhappy man, who has long been treated as a brute
     animal, too frequently sinks beneath the common standard of
     the human species. The galling chains that bind his body do
     also fetter his intellectual faculties, and impair the
     social affections of his heart. Accustomed to move like a
     mere machine, by the will of a master, reflection is
     suspended; he has not the power of choice; and reason and
     conscience have but little influence over his conduct,
     because he is chiefly governed by the passion of fear. He is
     poor and friendless; perhaps worn out by extreme labor, age,
     and disease.

     "Under such circumstances, freedom may often prove a
     misfortune to himself, and prejudicial to society.

     "Attention to emancipated black people, it is therefore to
     be hoped, will become a branch of our national police; but,
     as far as we contribute to promote this emancipation, so far
     that attention is evidently a serious duty incumbent on us,
     and which we mean to discharge to the best of our judgement
     and abilities.

     "To instruct, to advise, to qualify those who have been
     restored to freedom, for the exercise and enjoyment of civil
     liberty; to promote in them habits of industry; to furnish
     them with employments suited to their age, sex, talents, and
     other circumstances; and to procure their children an
     education calculated for their future situation in
     life,--these are the great outlines of the annexed plan
     which we have adopted, and which we conceive will
     essentially promote the public good, and the happiness of
     these our hitherto too much neglected fellow-creatures.

     "A plan so extensive cannot be carried into execution
     without considerable pecuniary resources, beyond the present
     ordinary funds of the Society. We hope much from the
     generosity of enlightened and benevolent freemen, and will
     gratefully receive any donations or subscriptions for this
     purpose which may be made to our Treasurer, James Starr, or
     to James Pemberton, Chairman of our Committee of
     Correspondence.

                    "Signed by order of the Society,
                                        "B. FRANKLIN, _President_.

     "Philadelphia, 9th of November, 1789."

And as his last public act, Franklin gave his signature to the
subjoined memorial to the United States Congress:--

     "The memorial respectfully showeth,--

     "That, from a regard for the happiness of mankind, an
     association was formed several years since in this State, by
     a number of her citizens, of various religious
     denominations, for promoting the abolition of slavery, and
     for the relief of those unlawfully held in bondage. A just
     and acute conception of the true principles of liberty, as
     it spread through the land, produced accessions to their
     numbers, many friends to their cause, and a legislative
     co-operation with their views, which, by the blessing of
     Divine Providence, have been successfully directed to the
     relieving from bondage a large number of their
     fellow-creatures of the African race. They have also the
     satisfaction to observe, that, in consequence of that spirit
     of philanthropy and genuine liberty which is generally
     diffusing its beneficial influence, similar institutions are
     forming at home and abroad.

     "That mankind are all formed by the same Almighty Being,
     alike objects of his care, and equally designed for the
     enjoyment of happiness, the Christian religion teaches us to
     believe, and the political creed of Americans fully
     coincides with the position. Your memorialists, particularly
     engaged in attending to the distresses arising from slavery,
     believe it their indispensable duty to present this subject
     to your notice. They have observed, with real satisfaction,
     that many important and salutary powers are vested in you
     for 'promoting the welfare and securing the blessings of
     liberty to the people of the United States'; and as they
     conceive that these blessings ought rightfully to be
     administered, without distinction of color, to all
     descriptions of people, so they indulge themselves in the
     pleasing expectation, that nothing which can be done for the
     relief of the unhappy objects of their care, will be either
     omitted or delayed.

     "From a persuasion that equal liberty was originally the
     portion, and is still the birth-right, of all men; and
     influenced by the strong ties of humanity, and the
     principles of their institution, your memorialists conceive
     themselves bound to use all justifiable endeavors to loosen
     the bands of slavery, and promote a general enjoyment of the
     blessings of freedom. Under these impressions, they
     earnestly entreat your serious attention to the subject of
     slavery; that you will be pleased to countenance the
     restoration of liberty to those unhappy men, who alone, in
     this land of freedom, are degraded into perpetual bondage,
     and who, amidst the general joy of surrounding freemen, are
     groaning in servile subjection; that you will devise means
     for removing this inconsistency from the character of the
     American people; that you will promote mercy and justice
     towards this distressed race; and that you will step to the
     very verge of the power vested in you for discouraging every
     species of traffic in the persons of our fellow-men.

                              "BENJ. FRANKLIN, _President_.

     "PHILADELPHIA, February 3, 1790."

The session of Congress held in 1790 was stormy. The slavery question
came back to haunt the members. On the 12th of February, the memorial
from the Pennsylvania society was read. It provoked fresh discussion,
and greatly angered many of the Southern members. As soon as its
reading was completed, the "Quaker Memorial," that had been read the
day previous, was called up; and Mr. Hartley moved its commitment. A
long and spirited debate ensued. It was charged that the memorial was
"a mischievous attempt, an improper interference, at the best, an act
of imprudence;" and that it "would sound an alarm and blow the trumpet
of sedition through the Southern States." Mr. Scott of Pennsylvania
replied by saying, "I cannot entertain a doubt that the memorial is
strictly agreeable to the Constitution. It respects a part of the duty
particularly assigned to us by that instrument." Mr. Sherman was in
favor of the commitment of the memorial, and gave his reasons _in
extenso_. Mr. Smith of South Carolina said, "Notwithstanding all the
calmness with which some gentlemen have viewed the subject, they will
find that the mere discussion of it will create alarm. We have been
told that, if so, we should have avoided discussion by saying nothing.
But it was not for that purpose we were sent here. We look upon this
measure as an attack upon property; it is, therefore, our duty to
oppose it by every means in our power. When we entered into a
political connection with the other States, this property was there.
It had been acquired under a former government conformably to the laws
and constitution, and every attempt to deprive us of it must be in the
nature of an _ex post facto_ law, and, as such, forbidden by our
political compact." Following the unwise and undignified example set
by the gentlemen who had preceded him on that side of the question, he
slurred the Quakers. "His constituents wanted no lessons in religion
and morality, and least of all from such teachers."

Madison, Gerry, Boudinot, and Page favored commitment. Upon the
question to commit, the yeas and nays being demanded, the reference
was made by a vote of forty-three to eleven. Of the latter, six were
from Georgia and South Carolina, two from Virginia, two from Maryland,
and one from New York. A special committee was announced, to whom the
memorial was referred, consisting of one member from each of the
following States: New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Connecticut, New York,
New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Virginia. At the end of a month, the
committee made the following report to Congress:--

     "1st. That the general government was expressly restrained,
     until the year 1808, from prohibiting the importation of any
     persons whom any of the existing states might till that time
     think proper to admit. 2d. That, by a fair construction of
     the constitution, congress was equally restrained from
     interfering to emancipate slaves within the states, such
     slaves having been born there, or having been imported
     within the period mentioned. 3d. That congress had no power
     to interfere in the internal regulation of particular states
     relative to the instruction of slaves in the principles of
     morality and religion, to their comfortable clothing,
     accommodation, and subsistence, to the regulation of
     marriages or the violation of marital rights, to the
     separation of children and parents, to a comfortable
     provision in cases of age or infirmity, or to the seizure,
     transportation, and sale of free negroes; but entertained
     the fullest confidence in the wisdom and humanity of the
     state legislature that, from time to time, they would revise
     their laws, and promote these and all other measures tending
     to the happiness of the slaves. The fourth asserted that
     congress had authority to levy a tax of ten dollars, should
     they see fit to exact it, upon every person imported under
     the special permission of any of the states. The fifth
     declared the authority of congress to interdict or to
     regulate the African slave-trade, so far as it might be
     carried on by citizens of the United States for the supply
     of foreign countries, and also to provide for the humane
     treatment of slaves while on their passage to any ports of
     the United States into which they might be admitted. The
     sixth asserted the right of congress to prohibit foreigners
     from fitting out vessels in the United States to be employed
     in the supply of foreign countries with slaves from Africa.
     The seventh expressed an intention on the part of congress
     to exercise their authority to its full extent to promote
     the humane objects aimed at in the Quaker's memorial."

Mr. Tucker took the floor against the report of the committee, and,
after a bitter speech upon the unconstitutionality of meddling with
the slavery question in any manner, moved a substitute for the whole,
in which he pronounced the recommendations of the committee "as
unconstitutional, and tending to injure some of the States of the
Union." Mr. Jackson seconded the motion in a rather intemperate
speech, which was replied to by Mr. Vining. The substitute of Mr.
Tucker was declared out of order. Mr. Benson moved to recommit in
hopes of getting rid of the subject, but the motion was overwhelmingly
voted down. The report was taken up article by article. The three
first resolutions (those relating to the authority of Congress over
slavery in the States) were adopted; while the second and third were
merged into one, stripped of its objectionable features. But on the
fourth the debate was carried to a high pitch. This one related to the
ten-dollar tax. Mr. Tucker moved to amend by striking out the fourth
resolution. Considerable discussion followed; and, upon the question
being put, it was carried by one vote. The fifth resolution,
affirming the power of Congress to regulate the slave-trade, drew the
fire of Jackson, Smith, and Tucker. Mr. Madison offered to modify it
somewhat. It was argued by the opponents of this resolution, that
Congress, under the plea of regulating the trade, might prohibit it
entirely. Mr. Vining of Delaware, somewhat out of patience with the
demands of the Southern members, told those gentlemen very plainly
that they ought to be satisfied with the changes already made to
gratify them; that they should show some respect to the committee;
that all the States from Virginia to New Hampshire had passed laws
prohibiting the slave-trade; and then delivered an eloquent defence of
the Quakers. The resolution, as modified by Mr. Madison, carried.

The sixth resolution, relating to the foreign slave-trade carried on
from ports of the United States, received considerable attention. Mr.
Scott made an elaborate speech upon it, in which he claimed, that, if
it were a question as to the power of Congress to regulate the foreign
slave-trade, he had no doubts as to the authority of that body. "I
desire," said that gentleman, "that the world should know, I desire
that those people in the gallery, about whom so much has been said,
should know, that there is at least one member on this floor who
believes that Congress have ample powers to do all they have asked
respecting the African slave-trade. Nor do I doubt that Congress will,
whenever necessity or policy dictates the measure, exercise those
powers." Mr. Jackson attempted to reply. He started out with a labored
argument showing the divine origin of slavery, quoting Scriptures;
showed that the Greeks and Romans had held slaves, etc. He was
followed and supported by Smith of South Carolina. Boudinot obtained
the floor, and, after defending the Quakers and praising Franklin,
declared that there was nothing unreasonable in the memorial; that it
simply requested them "to go to the utmost verge of the Constitution,"
and not beyond it. Further debate was had, when the sixth resolution
was adopted.

The seventh resolution, pledging Congress to exert their full powers
for the restriction of the slave-trade--and, as some understood it, to
discountenance slavery--was struck out. The committee then arose and
reported the resolutions to the house. The next day, the 23d March,
1790, after some preliminary business was disposed of, a motion was
made to take up the report of the committee. Ames, Madison, and others
thought the matter, having occupied so much of the time of the house,
should be left where it was; or rather, as Mr. Madison expressed it,
simply entered on the Journals as a matter of public record. After
some little discussion, this motion prevailed by a vote of twenty-nine
to twenty-five. The entry was accordingly made as follows:--

     "That the migration or importation of such persons as any of
     the states now existing shall think proper to admit, can not
     be prohibited by congress prior to the year 1808.

     "That congress have no right to interfere in the
     emancipation of slaves, or in the treatment of them, in any
     of the states, it remaining with the several states alone to
     provide any regulations therein which humanity and true
     policy require.

     "That congress have authority to restrain the citizens of
     the United States from carrying on the African slave-trade
     for the purpose of supplying foreigners with slaves, and of
     providing by proper regulations for the humane treatment,
     during their passage, of slaves imported by the said
     citizens into the said states admitting such importation.

     "That congress have also authority to prohibit foreigners
     from fitting out vessels in any port of the United States
     for transporting persons from Africa to any foreign port."

The census of 1790 gave the slave population of the States as
follows:--

          SLAVE POPULATION.--CENSUS OF 1790.

          Connecticut               2,759
          Delaware                  8,887
          Georgia                  29,264
          Kentucky                 11,830
          Maryland                103,036
          New Hampshire               158
          New Jersey               11,423
          New York                 21,324
          North Carolina          100,572
          Pennsylvania              3,737
          Rhode Island                952
          South Carolina          107,094
          Vermont                      17
          Virginia                293,427
          Territory south of Ohio   3,417

          Aggregate, 697,897.

Vermont was admitted into the Union on the 18th of February, 1791; and
the first article of the Bill of Rights declared that "no male person
born in this country, or brought from over sea, ought to be bound by
law to serve any person as a servant, slave, or apprentice after he
arrives at the age of twenty-one years, nor female, in like manner,
after she arrives at the age of twenty-one years, unless they are
bound by their own consent after they arrive at such age, or are bound
by law for the payment of debts, damages, fines, costs, or the like."
This provision was contained in the first Constitution of that State,
and, therefore, it was the first one to abolish and prohibit slavery
in North America.

On the 4th of February, 1791, Kentucky was admitted into the Union by
Act of Congress, though it had no Constitution. But the next year a
Constitution was framed. By it the Legislature was denied the right to
emancipate slaves without the consent of the owner, nor without paying
the full price of the slaves before emancipating them; nor could any
laws be passed prohibiting emigrants from other states from bringing
with them persons deemed slaves by the laws of any other states in the
Union, so long as such persons should be continued as slaves in
Kentucky. The Legislature had power to prohibit the bringing into the
state slaves for the purpose of sale. Masters were required to treat
their slaves with humanity, to properly feed and clothe them, and to
abstain from inflicting any punishment extending to life and limb.
Laws could be passed granting owners the right to emancipate their
slaves, but requiring security that the slaves thus emancipated should
not become a charge upon the county.

During the session of Congress in 1791, the Pennsylvania Society for
the Abolition of Slavery presented another memorial, calling upon
Congress to exercise the powers they had been declared to possess by
the report of the committee which had been spread upon the Journals of
the house. Thus emboldened, other anti-slavery societies, of Rhode
Island, Connecticut, New York, Virginia, and a few local societies of
Maryland, presented memorials praying for the suppression of slavery
in the United States. They were referred to a select committee; and,
as they made no report, New Hampshire and Massachusetts, the next
year, called the attention of Congress to the subject. On the 24th of
November, 1792, a Mr. Warner Mifflin, an anti-slavery Quaker from
Delaware, addressed a memorial to Congress on the general subject of
slavery, which was read and laid upon the table without debate. On the
26th of November, Mr. Stute of North Carolina offered some sharp
remarks upon the presumption of the Quaker, and moved that the
petition be returned to the petitioner, and that the clerk be
instructed to erase the entry from the Journal. This provoked a heated
discussion; but at length the petition was returned to the author,
and the motion to erase the record from the Journal was withdrawn by
the mover.

In 1793 a law was passed providing for the return of fugitives from
justice and from service, "In case of the escape out of any state or
territory of any person held to service or labor under the laws
thereof, the person to whom such labor was due, his agent, or
attorney, might seize the fugitive and carry him before any United
States judge, or before any magistrate of the city, town, or county in
which the arrest was made; and such judge or magistrate, on proof to
his satisfaction, either oral or by affidavit before any other
magistrate, that the person seized was really a fugitive, and did owe
labor as alleged, was to grant a certificate to that effect to the
claimant, this certificate to serve as sufficient warrant for the
removal of the fugitive to the state whence he had fled. Any person
obstructing in any way such seizure or removal, or harboring or
concealing any fugitive after notice, was liable to a penalty of $500,
to be recovered by the claimant."

In 1794 an anti-slavery convention was held in Philadelphia, in which
nearly all of the abolition societies of the country were represented.
A memorial, carefully avoiding constitutional objections, was drawn
and addressed to Congress to do whatever they could toward the
suppression of the slave-trade. This memorial, with several other
petitions, was referred to a special committee. In due time they
reported a bill, which passed without much opposition. It was the
first act of the government toward repressing the slave-trade, and was
as mild as a summer's day. On Wednesday, the 7th of January, 1795,
another meeting was held in Philadelphia, the second, to consider
anti-slavery measures. The Act of Congress was read.

     "_An Act to prohibit the carrying on the Slave-trade from
     the United States to any foreign place or country._

     "SECTION I. BE _it enacted by the Senate and House of
     Representatives of the United States of America, in Congress
     assembled_, That no citizen or citizens of the United
     States, or foreigner, or any other person coming into, or
     residing within the same, shall, for himself or any other
     person whatsoever, either as master, factor or owner, build,
     fit, equip, load or otherwise prepare any ship or vessel,
     within any port or place of the said United States, nor
     shall cause any ship or vessel to sail from any port or
     place within the same, for the purpose of carrying on any
     trade or traffic in slaves, to any foreign country; or for
     the purpose of procuring, from any foreign kingdom, place or
     country, the inhabitants of such kingdom, place or country,
     to be transported to any foreign country, port or place
     whatever, to be sold or disposed of, as slaves: And if any
     ship or vessel shall be so fitted out, as aforesaid, for the
     said purposes, or shall be caused to sail, so as aforesaid,
     every such ship or vessel, her tackle, furniture, apparel
     and other appurtenances, shall be forfeited to the United
     States; and shall be liable to be seized, prosecuted and
     condemned, in any of the circuit courts or district court
     for the district, where the said ship or vessel may be found
     and seized.

     "SECTION II. _And be it further enacted_, That all and every
     person, so building, fitting out, equipping, loading, or
     otherwise preparing, or sending away, any ship or vessel,
     knowing, or intending, that the same shall be employed in
     such trade or business, contrary to the true intent and
     meaning of this act, or any ways aiding or abetting therein,
     shall severally forfeit and pay the sum of two thousand
     dollars, one moiety thereof, to the use of the United
     States, and the other moiety thereof, to the use of him or
     her, who shall sue for and prosecute the same.

     "SECTION III. _And be it further enacted_, That the owner,
     master or factor of each and every foreign ship or vessel,
     clearing out for any of the coasts or kingdoms of Africa, or
     suspected to be intended for the slave-trade, and the
     suspicion being declared to the officer of the customs, by
     any citizen, on oath or affirmation, and such information
     being to the satisfaction of the said officer, shall first
     give bond with sufficient sureties, to the Treasurer of the
     United States, that none of the natives of Africa, or any
     other foreign country or place, shall be taken on board the
     said ship or vessel, to be transported, or sold as slaves,
     in any other foreign port or place whatever, within nine
     months thereafter.

     "SECTION IV. _And be it further enacted_, That if any
     citizen or citizens of the United States shall, contrary to
     the true intent and meaning of this act, take on board,
     receive or transport any such persons, as above described,
     in this act, for the purpose of selling them as slaves, as
     aforesaid, he or they shall forfeit and pay, for each and
     every person, so received on board, transported, or sold as
     aforesaid, the sum of two hundred dollars, to be recovered
     in any court of the United States proper to try the same;
     the one moiety thereof, to the use of the United States, and
     the other moiety to the use of such person or persons, who
     shall sue for and prosecute the same.

                    "FREDERICK AUGUSTUS MUHLENBERG,
                              _Speaker of the House of Representatives_.

                    "JOHN ADAMS,
                              _Vice-President of the United States, and
                                     President of the Senate_.

       "Approved--March the twenty-second, 1794.
            G'o: WASHINGTON, _President of the United States_."


In 1797 Congress again found themselves confronted by the dark problem
of slavery, that would not down at their bidding. The Yearly Meeting
of the Quakers of Philadelphia sent a memorial to Congress,
complaining that about one hundred and thirty-four Negroes, and others
whom they knew not of, having been lawfully emancipated, were
afterwards reduced to bondage by an _ex post facto_ law passed by
North Carolina, in 1777, for that cruel purpose. After considerable
debate, the memorial went to a committee, who subsequently reported
that the matter complained of was purely of judicial cognizance, and
that Congress had no authority in the premises.

During the same session a bill was introduced creating all that
portion of the late British Province of West Florida, within the
jurisdiction of the United States, into a government to be called the
Mississippi Territory. It was to be conducted in all respects like the
territory north-west of the Ohio, with the single exception that
slavery should not be prohibited. During the discussion of this
section of the bill, Mr. Thatcher of Massachusetts moved to amend by
striking out the exception as to slavery, so as to make it conform to
the ideas expressed by Mr. Jefferson a few years before in reference
to the Western Territory. But, after a warm debate, Mr. Thatcher's
motion was lost, having received only twelve votes. An amendment of
Mr. Harper of South Carolina, offered a few days later, prohibiting
the introduction of slaves into the new Mississippi Territory, from
without the limits of the United States, carried without opposition.

Georgia revised her Constitution in 1798, and prohibited the
importation of slaves "from Africa or any foreign place." Her
slave-code was greatly moderated. Any person maliciously killing or
dismembering a slave was to suffer the same punishment as if the act
had been committed upon a free white person, except in case of
insurrection, or "unless such death should happen by accident, in
giving such slave moderate correction." But, like Kentucky, the
Georgia constitution forbade the emancipation of slaves without the
consent of the individual owner; and encouraged emigrants to bring
slaves into the State.

In 1799, after three failures, the Legislature of New York passed a
bill for the gradual extinction of slavery. It provided that all
persons in slavery at the time of the passage of the bill should
remain in bondage for life, but all their children, born after the
fourth day of July next following, were to be free, but were required
to remain under the direction of the owner of their parents, males
until twenty-eight, and females until twenty-five. Exportation of
slaves was disallowed; and if the attempt were made, and the parties
apprehended, the slaves were to be free _instanter_. Persons moving
into the State were not allowed to bring slaves, except they had
owned them for a year previous to coming into the State.

In 1799 Kentucky revised her Constitution to meet the wants of a
growing State. An attempt was made to secure a provision providing for
gradual emancipation. It was supported by Henry Clay, who, as a young
lawyer and promising orator, began on that occasion a brilliant
political career that lasted for a half-century. But not even his
magic eloquence could secure the passage of the humane amendment, and
in regard to the question of slavery the Constitution received no
change.

As the shadows gathered about the expiring days of the eighteenth
century, it was clear to be seen that slavery, as an institution, had
rooted itself into the political and legal life of the American
Republic. An estate prolific of evil, fraught with danger to the new
government, abhorred and rejected at first, was at length adopted with
great political sagacity and deliberateness, and then guarded by the
solemn forms of constitutional law and legislative enactments.


FOOTNOTES:

[627] St. Clair Papers, vol. i. p. 120.

[628] The clause "three fifths of all other persons" refers to Negro
slaves. The Italics are our own. The Negro is referred to as _person_
all through the Constitution.

[629] Madison Papers, Elliot, vol. v. pp. 392, 393.

[630] Ibid., vol. v pp. 391, 392.

[631] Madison Papers, Elliot, vol. v. pp. 457-461.

[632] Madison Papers, Elliot, vol. v. pp. 477, 478.

[633] Examine Hildreth and the Secret Debates on the subject of the
"compromises."

[634] Travels, etc., vol. ii. p. 166.

[635] M.H.S. Coll., 5th Series, III., p. 403.




APPENDIX.

Part I.

_PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS_.

CHAPTER I.

THE UNITY OF MANKIND.


In Acts xvii. 26 the apostle says, "And God hath made of one blood all
nations of men to dwell on the face of the earth, and hath determined
the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation." In
Mark xvi. 15, 16, is recorded that remarkable command of our Saviour,
"GO YE INTO ALL THE WORLD, and preach the gospel TO EVERY CREATURE. He
that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth
not shall be damned." (See also Matt. xxviii. 18, 20.) Now there is a
very close connection between the statement here made by the apostle,
and the command here given by our Lord Jesus Christ; for it was in
obedience to this command that the apostle was at that time at Athens.
There, amid the proud and conceited philosophers of Greece, in the
centre of their resplendent capital, surrounded on every hand by their
noblest works of art and their proudest monuments of learning, the
apostle proclaims the equality of ALL MEN, their common origin, guilt,
and danger, and their universal obligations to receive and embrace the
gospel. The Athenians, like other ancient nations, and like them, too,
in opposition to their own mythology, regarded themselves as a
peculiar and distinct race, created upon the very soil which they
inhabited, and pre-eminently elevated above the barbarians of the
earth,--as they regarded the other races of men. Paul, however, as an
inspired and infallible teacher, authoritatively declares that "God
who made the world and all things therein," "hath made of one blood,"
and caused to descend from one original pair the whole species of men,
who are now by His providential direction so propagated as to inhabit
"all the face of the earth," having marked out in his eternal and
unerring counsel the determinate periods for their inhabiting, and the
boundaries of the regions they should inhabit.

The apostle in this passage refers very evidently to the record of the
early colonization and settling of the earth contained in the books of
Moses. Some Greek copies preserve only the word [Greek: enos], leaving
out [Greek: aimatos], a reading which the vulgar Latin follows. The
Arabic version, to explain both, has _ex homine_, or as De Dieu
renders it, _ex Adamo uno_, there being but the difference of one
letter in the Eastern languages between _dam_ and _adam_, the one
denoting blood, and the other man. But if we take this passage as our
more ordinary copies read it, [Greek: exenos aimatos], it is still
equally plain that the meaning is not that all mankind were made of
the same uniform matter, as the author of the work styled Pre-Adamites
weakly imagined, for on that ground, not only mankind, but the whole
world might be said to be _ex henos haimatos_, i.e., of the same
blood, since all things in the world were at first formed out of the
same matter. The word _[Greek: aima]_ therefore must be here rendered
in the same sense as that in which it occurs in the best Greek
authors--_the stock out of which men come_ Thus Homer says,--

"_[Greek: Ei eteon g emos esti kai aimtos êmeteroio]_".

In like manner those who are near relations, are called by Sophocles
_[Greek: oi pros aimatos]_. And hence the term _consanguinity_,
employed to denote nearness of relation. Virgil uses _sanguis_ in the
same sense.

"_Trojano a sanguine duci_."

So that the apostle's meaning is, that however men now are dispersed
in their habitations, and however much they differ in language and
customs from each other, yet they were all originally of the same
stock, and derived their succession from the first man whom God
created, that is, from Adam, from which name the Hebrew word for
blood--i.e.--_dam_--is a derivative.

Neither can it be conceived on what account Adam in the Scripture is
called "the first man," and said to be "made a living soul," and "of
the earth earthy," unless it is to denote that he was absolutely the
first of his kind, and was, therefore, designed to be the standard and
measure of all the races of men. And thus when our Saviour would trace
up all things to the beginning, he illustrates his doctrine by quoting
those words which were pronounced after Eve was formed. "But from the
beginning of the creation, God made them male and female, for this
cause shall a man leave father and mother and cleave unto his wife"
Now nothing can be more plain and incontrovertible than that those of
whom these words were spoken, were the first male and female which
were made in "the beginning of the creation." It is equally evident
that these words were spoken of Adam and Eve for "Adam said, This is
now bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh; therefore shall a man
leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife" If
the Scriptures then of the New Testament be true, it is most plain and
evident that all mankind are descended from Adam.[636]



THE CURSE OF CANAAN.

It is not necessary--nay, it is not admissible--to take the words of
Noah, as to Shem and Japheth, as _prophetic_ We shall presently see
that, as prophetic, they have failed. Let us not, in expounding
Scripture, introduce the _supernatural_ when the _natural_ is
adequate. Noah had now known the peculiarities of his sons long
enough, and well enough, to be able to make some probable conjecture
as to their future course, and then success or failure in life. It is
what parents do now a-days. They say of one son, He will succeed,--he
is so dutiful, so economical, so industrious. They say of another,
This one will make a good lawyer--he is so sharp in an argument. Of
another, they say, We will educate him for the ministry, for he has
suitable qualifications While of another they may be constrained to
predict that he will not succeed, because he is indolent, and selfish,
and sensual. Does it require special inspiration for a father, having
ordinary common sense, to discover the peculiar talents and
dispositions of his children, and to predict the probable future of
each of them? Some times they hit it sometimes they miss it. Shall it
not be conceded to Noah that he could make as probable a conjecture,
as to his sons, as your father made as to you, or as you think
yourselves competent to make for either of your sons? Noah made a
good hit. What he said as to the future of his sons, and of their
posterity, has turned out, in some respects, as he said it would, but
_not exactly_,--not so exactly as to authorize our calling his words
an inspired prophecy, as we shall presently show.

But, if we set out to establish or to justify slavery upon these words
of Noah, on the assumption GOD _spake_ by Noah as to the curse and
blessings here recorded, we have a right to expect to find the facts
of history to correspond. If the facts of history do not correspond
with these words of Noah, then God did not speak them by Noah as his
own. Let us face this matter. It is said, by those who interpret the
curse of Canaan as divine authority for slavery, that God _has hereby
ordained that the descendants of Ham shall be slaves_. The descendants
of Shem are not, of course, doomed to that curse. Now, upon the
supposition that these are the words of God, and not the denunciations
of an irritated father just awaking from his drunkenness, we ought not
to find any of _Canaan's descendants out of a condition of slavery,
nor any of the descendants of Shem in it_. If we do, then either these
are not God's words, or God's words have not come true.

But it is a fact that not all of Ham's entire descendants, nor even of
Canaan's descendants (on whom _alone_, and not _at all on Ham_, nor on
his three other sons, Noah's curse fell), are now, _nor ever have
been_, as a whole, in a state of bondage. The Canaanites were not
slaves, but free and powerful tribes, when the Hebrews entered their
territory. The Carthaginians, it is generally admitted, were descended
from Canaan. They certainly were free and powerful when, in frequent
wars, they contended, often with success, against the formidable
Romans. If the curse of Noah was intended for all the descendants of
Ham, it signally failed in the case of the first military hero
mentioned in the Bible, who was the founder of a world-renowned city
and empire. I refer to Nimrod, who was a son of Cush, the oldest son
of Ham. Of this Nimrod the record is, "He began to be a mighty one in
the earth: he was a mighty hunter before the Lord: and the beginning
of his Kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh, in the
land of Shinar. Out of that land went forth Asshur and builded
Nineveh, and the city Rehoboth, and Calah, and Resen, between Nineveh
and Calah; the same is a great city." This is Bible authority,
informing us that the grandson of Ham (Nimrod, the son of Cush) was a
mighty man--_the great man_ of the world, in his day--the founder of
the Babylonian empire, and the ancestor of the founder of the city of
Nineveh, one of the grandest cities of the ancient world. We are not
led to conclude, from these wonderful achievements by the posterity of
Cush (who was the progenitor of the Negroes), that this line of Ham's
descendants was so _weak in intellect_ as to be unable to set up and
maintain a government.[637]


FOOTNOTES

[636] The Unity of the Human Races, pp. 14-17.

[637] Curse of Canaan, pp. 5-7. By Rev. C.H. Edgar.




CHAPTER III.

NEGRO CIVILIZATION.

DR. WISEMAN has also shown that both Aristotle and Herodotus describe
the Egyptians--to whom Homer, Lycurgus, Solon, Pythagoras, and Plato
resorted for wisdom--as having the black skin, the crooked legs, the
distorted feet and the woolly hair of the Negro, from which we do not
wish, or feel it necessary to infer that the Egyptians were Negroes,
but _first_ that the ideas of degradation and _not-human_, associated
with the dark-colored African races of people _now_, were not attached
to them at an early period of their history; and _secondly_, that
while depicted as Negroes, the Egyptians were regarded by these
profound ancients--the one a naturalist and the other a historian--as
one of the branches of the human family, and as identified with a
nation of whose descent from Ham there is no question.[638] Egyptian
antiquity, not claiming priority of social existence for itself, often
pointed to the regions of Habesh, or high African Ethiopia, and
sometimes to the North, for the seat of the gods and demigods, because
both were the intermediate stations of the progenitor tribes.[639]

There is, therefore, every reason to believe that the primitive
Egyptians were conformed much more to the African than to the European
form and physiognomy, and therefore that there was a time when
learning, commerce, arts, manufactures, etc., were all associated with
a form and character of the human race now regarded as the evidence
only of degradation and barbarous ignorance.

But why question this fact when we can refer to the ancient and once
glorious kingdoms of Meroe, Nubia, and Ethiopia, and to the prowess
and skill of other ancient and interior African Nations? And among the
existing nations of interior Africa, there is seen a manifold
diversity as regards the blackest races. The characteristics of the
most truly Negro race are not found in _all_, nor to the same degree
in _many_.

Clapperton and other travellers among the Negro tribes of interior
Africa, attest the superiority of the pure Negroes above the mixed
races around them, in all moral characteristics, and describe also
large and populous kingdoms with numerous towns, well cultivated
fields, and various manufactures, such as weaving, dyeing, tanning,
working in iron and other metals, and in pottery.[640]

From the facts we have adduced it seems to follow, that one of the
earliest races of men of whose existence, civilization and
physiognomy, we have any remaining proofs, were dark or black colored.
"We must," says Prichard, "for the present look upon the black races
as the aborigines of Kelænonesia, or Oceanica,--that is as the
immemorial and primitive inhabitants. There is no reason to doubt that
they were spread over the Austral island long before the same or the
contiguous regions were approached by the Malayo-Polynesians. We
cannot say definitely how far back this will carry us, but as the
distant colonizations of the Polynesians probably happened before the
island of Java received arts and civilization from Hindustan, it must
be supposed to have preceded by some ages the Javan era of Batara
Guru, and therefore to have happened before the Christian era."

The Negro race is known to have existed 3,345 years, says Dr. Morton,
268 years later than the earliest notice of the white race, of which
we have distinct mention B.C. 2200. This makes the existence of a
Negro race certain about 842 years after the flood, according to the
Hebrew chronology, or 1650 years after the flood, according to the
Septuagint chronology, which may very possibly have been the original
Hebrew chronology. There is thus ample time given for the
multiplication and diffusion of man over the earth, and for the
formation--either by natural or supernatural causes, in combination
with the anomalous and altogether extraordinary condition of the
earth--of all the various races of men.

It is also apparent from the architecture, and other historical
evidences of their character, that dark or black races, with more or
less of the Negro physiognomy, were in the earliest period of their
known history cultivated and intelligent, having kingdoms, arts, and
manufactures. And Mr. Pickering assures us that there is no fact to
show that Negro slavery is not of modern origin. The degradation of
this race of men therefore, must be regarded as the result of external
causes, and not of natural, inherent and original incapacity.[641]


FOOTNOTES:

[638] See Dr. Wiseman's Lectures on the connection between Science and
Revealed Religion, Am. ed., pp. 95-98

[639] See Nat. Hist. Human Species p. 373.

[640] See British Encyclopædia, vol. ii. pp. 237, 238

[641] Tiedeman, on the Brain of the Negro, in the Phil. Trans., 1838,
p. 497




CHAPTER VI.

NEGRO TYPE.

It has often been said that, independently of the woolly hair and the
complexion of the Negroes, there are sufficient differences between
them and the rest of mankind to mark them as a very peculiar tribe.
This is true, and yet the principal differences are perhaps not so
constant as many persons imagine. In our West Indian colonies very
many Negroes, especially females, are seen, whose figures strike
Europeans as remarkably beautiful. This would not be the case if they
deviated much from the idea prevalent in Europe, or from the European
standard of beauty. Yet the slaves in the colonies, particularly in
those of England, were brought from the west coast of intertropical
Africa, where the peculiarities of figure, which in our eyes
constitute deformity in the Negro, are chiefly prevalent. The black
people imported into the French and to some of the Portuguese
colonies, from the eastern coast of the African continent, and from
Congo, are much better made. The most degraded and savage nations are
the ugliest. Among the most improved and the partially civilized, as
the Ashantees, and other interior States, the figure and the features
of the native people approach much more to the European. The ugliest
Negro tribes are confined to the equatorial countries; and on both
sides of the equator, as we advance towards the temperate zones, the
persons of the inhabitants are most handsome and well formed.

In a later period of this work I shall cite authors who have proved
that many races belonging to this department of mankind are noted for
the beauty of their features, and their fine stature and proportions.
Adanson has made this observation of the Negroes on the Senegal. He
thus describes the men. "Leur taille est pour l'ordinaire au-dessus de
la mediocre, bien prise et sans défaut. Ils sont forts, robustes, et
d'un tempérament propre à la fatigue. Ils ont les yeux noirs et bien
fendus, peu de barbe, les traits du visage assez agréables." They are
complete Negroes, for it is added that their complexion is of a fine
black, that their hair is black, frizzled, cottony, and of extreme
fineness. The women are said to be of nearly equal stature with the
men, and equally well made. "Leur visage est d'une douceur extrême.
Elles ont les yeux noirs, bien fendus, la bouche et les lèvres
petites, et les traits du visage bien proportionnés. Il s'en trouve
plusieurs d'une beauté parfaite." Mr. Rankin, a highly intelligent
traveller, who reports accurately and without prejudice the results of
his personal observation, has recently given a similar testimony in
regard to some of the numerous tribes of northern Negro-land, who
frequent the English colony of Sierra Leone. In the skull of the more
improved and civilized nations among the woolly-haired blacks of
Africa, there is comparatively slight deviation from the form which
may be looked upon as the common type of the human head. We are
assured, for example, by M. Golberry, that the Ioloffs, whose colour
is a deep transparent black, and who have woolly hair, are robust and
well made, and have regular features. Their countenances, he says, are
ingenuous, and inspire confidence: they are honest, hospitable,
generous, and faithful. The women are mild, very pretty, well made,
and of agreeable manners. On the other side of the equinoctial line,
the Congo Negroes, as Pigafetta declares, have not thick lips or ugly
features; except in colour they are very like the Portuguese. Kafirs
in South Africa frequently resemble Europeans, as many late travellers
have declared. It has been the opinion of many that the Kafirs ought
to be separated from the Negroes as a distinct branch of the human
family. This has been proved to be an error. In the conformation of
the skull, which is the leading character, the Kafirs associate
themselves with the great majority of woolly African nations.[642]


THE NEGROES.

The Negroes inhabit Africa from the southern margin of the Sahara as
far as the territory of the Hottentots and Bushmen, and from the
Atlantic to the Indian Ocean, although the extreme east of their
domain has been wrested from them by intrusive Hamites and Semites.
Most negroes have high and narrow skulls. According to Welcker the
average percentage of width begins at 68 and rises to 78. The
variations are so great that, among eighteen heads from Equatorial
Africa, Barnard Davis found no less than four brachyrephals. In the
majority dolichocephalism is combined with a prominence of the upper
jaw and an oblique position of the teeth, yet there are whole nations
which are purely mesognathous. It is to be regretted that in the
opinion of certain mistaken ethnologists, the negro was the ideal of
every thing barbarous and beast-like. They endeavoured to deny him any
capability of improvement, and even disputed his position as a man.
The negro was said to have an oval skull, a flat forehead, snout-like
jaws, swollen lips, a broad flat nose, short crimped hair, falsely
called wool, long arms, meagre thighs, calfless legs, highly elongated
heels, and flat feet. No single tribe, however, possesses all these
deformities. The colour of the skin passes through every gradation,
from ebony black, as in the Joloffers, to the light tint of the
mulattoes, as in the Wakilema, and Barth even describes
copper-coloured negroes in Marghi. As to the skull in many tribes, as
in the above mentioned Joloffers, the jaws are not prominent, and the
lips are not swollen. In some tribes the nose is pointed, straight, or
hooked; even "Grecian profiles" are spoken of, and travellers say with
surprise that they cannot perceive anything of the so-called negro
type among the negroes.

According to Paul Broca, the upper limbs of the negro are
comparatively much shorter than the lower, and therefore less ape-like
than in Europeans, and, although in the length of the femur the negro
may approximate to the proportions of the ape, he differs from them by
the shortness of the humerus more than is the case with Europeans.
Undoubtedly narrow and more or less high skulls are prevalent among
the negroes. But the only persistent character which can be adduced as
common to all is greater or less darkness of skin, that is to say,
yellow, copper-red, olive, or dark brown, passing into ebony black.
The colour is always browner than that of Southern Europe. The hair is
generally short, elliptic in section, often split longitudinally, and
much crimped. That of the negroes of South Africa, especially of the
Kaffirs and Betshuans, is matted into tufts, although not in the same
degree as that of the Hottentots. The hair is black, and in old age
white, but there are also negroes with red hair, red eye-brows, and
eye-lashes, and among the Monbuttoo, on the Uelle, Schweinfurth even
discovered negroes with ashy fair hair. Hair on the body and beards
exist, though not abundantly; whiskers are rare although not quite
unknown.

The negroes form but a single race, for the predominant as well as the
constant characters recur in Southern as well as in Central Africa,
and it was therefore a mistake to separate the Bantu negroes into a
peculiar race. But, according to language, the South Africans can well
be separated, as a great family, from the Soudan negroes.[643]


FOOTNOTES:

[642] Prichard's Physical History of Mankind, vol. i. pp. 247-249.




THE RELATION OF PHYSICAL CHARACTER TO CLIMATE.

We shall now find, on comparing these several departments with each
other, that marked differences of physical character, and particularly
of complexion, distinguished the human races which respectively
inhabit them, and that these differences are successive or by
gradations.

First, Among the people of level countries within the Mediterranean
region, including Spaniards, Italians, Greeks, Moors, and the
Mediterranean islanders, black hair with dark eyes is almost
universal, scarcely, one person in some hundreds presenting an
exception to this remark with this colour of the hair and eyes is
conjoined a complexion of brownish white, which the French call the
colour of brunettes. We must observe, that throughout all the zones
into which we have divided the European region, similar complexions to
this of the Mediterranean countries are occasionally seen The
qualities, indeed, of climate are not so diverse, but that even the
same plants are found sporadically, in the North of Europe as in the
Alps and Pyrenees. But if we make a comparison between the prevalent
colours of great numbers, we can easily trace a succession of shades
or of different hues.

Secondly, In the southernmost of the three zones, to the northward of
the Pyreno-Alpine line, namely, in the latitude of France, the
prevalent colour of the hair is a chestnut brown, to which the
complexion and the colour of the eyes bear a certain relation.

Thirdly, In the northern parts of Germany, England, in Denmark,
Finland and a great part of Russia, the xanthous variety, strongly
marked, is prevalent The Danes have always been known as a people of
florid complexion, blue eyes, and yellow hair The Hollanders were
termed by Silius Italicus, "Auricomi Batavi," the golden haired
Batavians, and Linnæus has defined the Finns as a tribe distinguished
by "capillis flavis prolixis."

Fourthly, In the northern division we find the Norwegians and Swedes
to be generally tall, white haired men, with light gray eyes
characters so frequent to the northward of the Baltic, that Linnæus
has specified them in a definition of the inhabitants of Swedish
Gothland. We have then to the northward of Mount Atlas, four well
marked varieties of human complexion succeeding each other, and in
exact accordance with the gradations of latitude and of climate from
south to north. The people are thus far nearly white in the colour of
their skin, but in the more southerly of the three regions above
defined, with a mixture of brown, or of the complexion of brunettes,
or such as we term swarthy or sallow persons.

Fifthly, In the next region, to the southward of Atlas, the native
inhabitants, are the "gentes sub fusci coloris" of Leo, and the
immigrant Arabs in the same country are, as we have seen by abundant
testimonies, of a similar high brown hue, but varying between that and
a perfect black.

Sixthly, With the tropic and the latitude of the Senegal, begins the
region of predominant and almost universal black, and this continues,
if we confine ourselves to the low and plain countries, through all
inter tropical Africa.

Seventhly, Beyond this is the country of copper coloured and red
people, who, in Kafirland, are the majority, while in inter-tropical
Africa there are but few such tribes, and those in countries of
mountainous elevation.

Lastly, Towards the Cape are the tawny Hottentots, scarcely darker
than the Mongoles, whom they resemble in many other particulars
besides colour.

It has long been well known, that as travellers ascend mountains, in
whatever region, they find the vegetation at every successive level
altering its character, and assuming a more northern aspect, thus
indicating that the state of the atmosphere, temperature and physical
agencies in general, assimilate as we approach alpine regions, to the
peculiarities locally connected with high latitudes. If therefore,
complexions and other bodily qualities belonging to races of men
depend upon climate and external conditions, we should expect to find
them varying in reference to elevation of surface, and if they should
be found actually to undergo such variations, this will be a strong
argument that these external characters do, in fact, depend upon local
conditions. Now, if we inquire respecting the physical characters of
the tribes inhabiting high tracts within either of the regions above
marked out, we shall find that they coincide with those which prevail
in the level or low parts of more northern tracts. The Swiss, in the
high mountains above the plains of Lombardy, have sandy or brown hair.
What a contrast presents itself to the traveller who descends into the
Milanese, where the peasants have black hair and eyes, with
strongly-marked Italian and almost Oriental features. In the higher
parts of the Biscayan country, instead of the swarthy complexion and
black hair of the Castilians, the natives have a fair complexion with
light-blue eyes and flaxen or auburn hair. And in Atlantica, while the
Berbers of the plains are of brown complexion with black hair, we have
seen that the Shuluh mountaineers are fair, and that the inhabitants
of the high tracts of Mons Aurasius are completely xanthous, having
red or yellow hair and blue eyes, which fancifully, and without the
shadow of any proof, they have been conjectured to have derived from
the Vandal troops of Genseric.

Even in the inter-tropical region, high elevations of surface, as they
produce a cooler climate, seem to occasion the appearance of light
complexions. In the high parts of Senegambia, which front the
Atlantic, and are cooled by winds from the Western Ocean, where, in
fact, the temperature is known to be moderate and even cool at times,
the light copper-coloured Frelahs are found surrounded on every side
by Negro nations inhabiting lower districts; and nearly in the same
parallel, but at the opposite side of Africa, are the high plains of
Enarea and Kaffa, where the inhabitants are said to be fairer than the
natives of southern Europe. The Galla and the Abyssinians themselves
are, in proportion to the elevation of the country inhabited by them,
fairer than the natives of low countries; and lest an exception should
be taken to a comparison of straight-haired races with woolly Negroes
or Shungalla, they bear the same comparison with the Danakil, Hazorta,
and the Bishari tribes, resembling them in their hair and features,
who inhabit the low tracts between the mountains of Tigre and the
shores of the Red Sea, and who are equally or nearly as black as
Negroes.

We may find occasion to observe that an equally decided relation
exists between local conditions and the existence of other characters
of human races in Africa. Those races who have the Negro character in
an exaggerated degree, and who may be said to approach to deformity in
person--the ugliest blacks with depressed foreheads, flat noses,
crooked legs--are in many instances inhabitants of low countries,
often of swampy tracts near the sea-coast, where many of them, as the
Papels, have scarcely any other means of subsistence than shell fish,
and the accidental gifts of the sea. In many places similar Negro
tribes occupy thick forests in the hollows beneath high chains of
mountains, the summits of which are inhabited by Abyssinian or
Ethiopian races. The high table-lands of Africa are chiefly, as far as
they are known, the abode or the wandering places of tribes of this
character, or of nations who, like the Kafirs, recede very
considerably from the Negro type. The Mandingos are, indeed, a Negro
race inhabiting a high region; but they have neither the depressed
forehead nor the projecting features considered as characteristic of
the Negro race.[644]


FOOTNOTES:

[643] Peschel, The Races of Man, pp. 462-464.




CHAPTER VII.

CITIES OF AFRICA.

_Carthage_. The foundation of this celebrated city is ascribed to
Elissa, a Tyrian princess, better known as Dido; it may therefore be
fixed at the year of the world 3158; when Joash was king of Judah; 98
years before the building of Rome, and 846 years before Christ. The
king of Tyre, father of the famous Jezebel, called in Scripture
Ethbaal, was her great grandfather. She married her near relation
Acerbas, also called Sicharbas, or Sichæus, an extremely rich prince,
Pygmalion, king of Tyre, was her brother. Pygmalion put Sichæus to
death in order that he might have an opportunity to seize his immense
treasures, but Dido eluded her brother's cruel avarice, by secretly
conveying away her deceased husband's possessions. With a large train
of followers she left her country, and after wandering some time,
landed on the coast of the Mediterranean, in Africa, and located her
settlement at the bottom of the gulf, on a peninsula, near the spot
where Tunis now stands. Many of the neighboring people, allured by the
prospect of gain, repaired thither to sell to those foreigners the
necessities of life, and soon became incorporated with them. The
people thus gathered from different places soon grew very numerous.
And the citizens of Utica, an African city about fifteen miles
distant, considering them as their countrymen, as descended from the
same common stock, advised them to build a city where they had
settled. The other natives of the country, from their natural esteem
and respect for strangers, likewise encouraged them to the same
object. Thus all things conspiring with Dido's views, she built her
city, which was appointed to pay in annual tribute to the Africans for
the ground it stood upon, and called it Carthage--a name that in the
Phoenician and Hebrew languages, [which have a great affinity,]
signifies the "New City." It is said that in digging the foundation, a
horse's head was found, which was thought to be a good omen, and a
presage of the future warlike genius of that people. Carthage had the
same language and national character as its parent state--Tyre. It
became at length, particularly at the period of the Punic War, one of
the most splendid cities in the world, and had under its dominion 300
cities bordering upon the Mediterranean. From the small beginning we
have described, Carthage increased till her population numbered
700,000, and the number of her temples and other public buildings was
immense. Her dominion was not long confined to Africa. Her ambitious
inhabitants extended their conquest into Europe, by invading Sardinia,
seizing a great part of Sicily, and subduing almost all of Spain.
Having sent powerful colonies everywhere, they enjoyed the empire of
the seas for more than six hundred years and formed a State which was
able to dispute pre-eminence with the greatest empire of the world, by
their wealth, their commerce, their numerous armies, their formidable
fleets, and above all by the courage and ability of their commanders,
and she extended her commerce over every part of the known world. A
colony of Phoenicians or Ethiopians, known in Scripture as Canaanites,
settled in Carthage. The Carthaginians settled in Spain and Portugal.
The first inhabitants of Spain were the Celts, a people of Gaul, after
them the Phoenicians possessed themselves of the most southern parts
of the country, and may well be supposed to have been the first
civilizers of this kingdom, and the founders of the most ancient
cities. After these, followed the Grecians, then the Carthaginians.

Portugal was anciently called Lusitania, and inhabited by tribes of
wandering people, till it became subject to the Carthaginians and
Phoenicians, who were dispossessed by the Romans 250 years before
Christ. (ROLLIN.)

The Carthaginians were masters of all the coast which lies on the
Mediterranean, and all the country as far as the river Iberus. Their
dominions, at the time when Hannibal the Great set out for Italy, all
the coast of Africa from the Aræ Phileanorum, by the great Syrtis, to
the pillars of Hercules was subject to the Carthaginians, who had
maintained three great wars against the Romans. But the Romans finally
prevailed by carrying the war into Africa, and the last Punic war
terminated with the overthrow of Carthage (NEPOS, _in Vita Annibalis_,
liv.)

The celebrated Cyrene was a very powerful city, situated on the
Mediterranean, towards the greater Syrtis, in Africa, and had been
built by Battus, the Lacedæmonian. (ROLLIN.)

_Cyrene_--(Acts xi. 20.) A province and city of Libya. There was
anciently a Phoenician colony called Cyrenaica, or "Libya, about
Cyrene." (Acts ii. 10.).

_Cyrene_--A country west of Egypt, and the birthplace of Callimachus
the poet, Eratosthenes the historian, and Simon who bore the Saviour's
cross. Many Jews from hence were at the Pentecost, and were converted
under Peter's sermon (Acts ii.). The region, now under the Turkish
power, and has become almost a desert. It is now called Cairoan. Some
of the Cyrenians were among the earliest Christians (Acts xi. 20); and
one of them, it is supposed, was a preacher at Antioch (Acts xiii. 1).
We find also, that among the most violent opposers of Christianity
were the Cyrenians, who had a synagogue at Jerusalem, as had those of
many other nations. It is said there were four hundred and eighty
synagogues in Jerusalem.

_Lybia_, or Libya (Acts ii. 10), was anciently among the Greeks, a
general name for Africa, but properly it embraced only so much of
Africa as lay west of Egypt, on the southern coast of the
Mediterranean. Profane geographers call it Libya Cyrenaica, because
Cyrene was its capitol. It was the country of the Lubims (2 Chron.
xii. 3), or Lehabims, of the Old Testament, from which it is supposed
to have derived its name.

The ancient city of Cyrene is now called Cyreune, Cairoan, or Cayran
and lies in the dominion of Tripoli. This district of the earth has
lately occasioned much interest among Italian and French geographers.
Great numbers of Jews resided here (Matt. xxvii. 32).

_Libya_, a part of Africa, bordering on Egypt, famous for its armed
chariots and horses (2 Chron. xvi. 8).

_Ophir_, the son of Joktan, gave name to a country in Africa, famous
for gold, which was renowned even in the time of Job (Job xxi. 24,
xxviii. 16); and from the time of David to the time of Jehoshaphat the
Hebrews traded with it, and Uzziah revived this trade when he made
himself master of Elath, a noted port on the Red Sea. In Solomon's
time, the Hebrew fleet took up three years in their voyage to Ophir,
and brought home gold, apes, peacocks, spices, ivory, ebony and
almug-trees (1 Kings ix. 28, x. 11, xxii. 48, 2 Chron. ix. 10).

_Tarshish_ (Isa. xxiii. 1), or Tharsish (1 Kings x. 22). It is
supposed that some place of this name existed on the eastern coast of
Africa or among the southern ports of Asia, with which the ships of
Hiram and Solomon traded in gold and silver, ivory, and apes and
peacocks (2 Chron. ix. 21). It is said that once in every three years
these ships completed a voyage, and brought home their merchandise.
Hence, it is inferred, the place with which they traded must have been
distant from Judea.

The vessels given by Hiram to Solomon, and those built by Jehoshaphat,
to go to Tarshish, were all launched at Eziongeber, it the northern
extremity of the eastern gulf of the Red Sea, now called the Gulf of
Ahaba (2 Chron xx. 36). The name of Tarshish was from one of the sons
of Javan (Gen. x. 4).

_Phut_ (Gen. x. 6), or Put (Nah. iii. 9), was the third son of Ham,
and his descendants, sometimes called Libyans, are supposed to be the
Mauritanians, or Moors of modern times. They served the Egyptians and
Tyrians as soldiers (Jer. xlvi. 9; Ezek. xxvii. 10, xxx. 5, xxxviii.
5).

_Pul_. A district in Africa, thought by Bochart to be an island in the
Nile, not far from Syene (Isa. lxvi. 19).

_Seba_ (Isa. xliii. 3) A peninsular district of African Ethiopia,
deriving its name from the eldest son of Cush (Gen. x. 7), who is
supposed to have been the progenitor of the Ethiopians. It is called
Seba by the Hebrews.


FOOTNOTES:

[644] Prichard. vol. ii pp. 334-338.


CITIES OF ETHIOPIA

_Ethiopian_ is a name derived from the "land of Ethiopia," the first
settled country before the flood. "The second river that went out of
Eden, to water the garden, or earth, was Gihon; the same that
encompasseth the whole land, or country, of _Ethiopia_" (Gen. ii. 13).
Here Adam and his posterity built their tents and tilled the ground
(Gen. iii. 23, 24).

The first city was Enoch, built before the flood in the land of Nod on
the east of Eden,--a country now called Arabia. Cain the son of Adam,
went out of Eden and dwelt in the land of Nod. We suppose, according
to an ancient custom he married his sister and she bare Enoch. And
Cain built a city and called the name of the city after the name of
his son, Enoch, (Gen. iv. 16, 17). We know there must have been more
than Cain and his son Enoch in the land of Nod to build a city but who
were they?... (MALCOM'S _Bible Dictionary_.)

The first great city described in ancient and sacred history was built
by the Cushites, or Ethiopians. They surrounded it with walls which,
according to Rollin, were eighty-seven feet in thickness, three
hundred and fifty feet in height and four hundred and eighty furlongs
in circumference. And even this stupendous work they shortly after
eclipsed by another, of which Diodorus says, "Never did any city come
up to the greatness and magnificence of this."

It is a fact well attested by history, that the Ethiopians once bore
sway, not only in all Africa, but over almost all Asia; and it is said
that even two continents, could not afford field enough for the
expansion of their energies.

"They found their way into Europe, and built a city on the western
coast of Spain, called by them Iberian Ethiopia." "And," says a
distinguished writer, "wherever they went, they were rewarded for
their _wisdom_."

THE TOWER OF BABEL--Nimrod, the son of Cush, an Ethiopian, attempted
to build the Tower of Babel (Gen. x. 8-10 xi. 4-9). One hundred and
two years after the flood, in the land of Shinar--an extensive and
fertile plain, lying between Mesopotamia on the west and Persia on the
east, and watered by the Euphrates,--mankind being all of one
language, one color, and one religion,--they agree to erect a tower of
prodigious extent and height. Their design was not to secure
themselves against a second deluge, or they would have built their
tower on a high mountain, but to get themselves a famous character,
and to prevent their dispersion by the erection of a monument which
should be visible from a great distance. No quarries being found in
that alluvial soil, they made bricks for stone, and used slime for
mortar. Their haughty and rebellious attempt displeased the Lord; and
after they had worked, it is said, twenty-two years, he confounded
their language. This effectually stopped the building, procured it the
name of _Babel_, or _Confusion_, and obliged some of the offspring of
Noah to disperse themselves and replenish the world. The tower of
Babel was in sight from the great city of Babylon. Nimrod was a hunter
and monarch of vast ambition. When he rose to be king of Babylon he
re-peopled Babel, which had been desolate since the confusion of
tongues, but did not dare to attempt the finishing of the tower. The
Scriptures inform us, he became "mighty upon earth;" but the extent of
his conquests is not known. (MALCOM'S _Bible Dictionary_.)

The private houses, in most of the ancient cities, were simple in
external appearance, but exhibited, in the interior, all the splendor
and elegance of refined luxury. The floors were of marble; alabaster
and gilding were displayed on every side. In every great house there
were several fountains, playing in magnificent basins. The smallest
house had three pipes,--one for the kitchen, another for the garden,
and a third for washing. The same magnificence was displayed in the
mosques, churches, and coffee houses. The environs presented, at all
seasons of the year, a pleasing verdure, and contained extensive
series of gardens and villas.

THE GREAT AND SPLENDID CITY OF BABYLON.--This city was founded by
Nimrod, about 2,247 years B.C., in the land of Shinar, or Chaldea, and
made the capital of his kingdom. It was probably an inconsiderable
place, until it was enlarged and embellished by Semiramis; it then
became the most magnificent city in the world, surpassing even Nineveh
in glory. The circumference of both these cities was the same, but the
walls which surrounded Babylon were twice as broad as the walls of
Nineveh, and having a hundred brass gates. The city of Babylon stood
on the river Euphrates, by which it was divided into two parts,
eastern and western; and these were connected by a cedar bridge of
wonderful construction, uniting the two divisions. Quays of beautiful
marble adorned the banks of the river; and on one bank stood the
magnificent Temple of Belus, and on the other the Queen's Palace.
These two edifices were connected by a passage under the bed of the
river. This city was at least forty-five miles in circumference; and
would, of course, include eight cities as large as London and its
appendages. It was laid out in six hundred and twenty five squares,
formed by the intersection of twenty-five streets at right angles The
walls, which were of brick, were three hundred and fifty feet high,
and eighty-seven feet broad. A trench surrounded the city, the sides
of which were lined with brick and waterproof cement. This city was
famous for its hanging gardens, constructed by one of its kings, to
please his queen. She was a Persian, and was desirous of seeing
meadows on mountains, as in her own country. She prevailed on him to
raise artificial gardens, adorned with meadows and trees. For this
purpose, vaulted arches were raised from the ground, one above
another, to an almost inconceivable height, and of a magnificence and
strength sufficient to support the vast weight of the whole garden
Babylon was a great commercial city, and traded to all parts of the
earth then known, in all kinds of merchandise, and she likewise traded
in slaves, and the souls of men. For her sins she has been blotted
from existence,--even her location is a matter of supposition. Great
was Babylon of old; in merchandise did she trade, and in souls. For
her sins she thus became blotted from the sight of men.




THE ETHIOPIAN KINGS OF EGYPT.

1. _Menes_ was the first king of Egypt. We have accounts of but one of
his successors--Timans, during the first period, a space of more than
two centuries.

2. _Shishak_ was king of Ethiopia, and doubtless of Egypt. After his
death

3. _Zerah_ the son of Judah became king of Ethiopia, and made himself
master of Egypt and Libya; and intending to add Judea to his dominions
made war upon Asa king of Judea. His army consisted of a million of
men, and three hundred chariots of war (2 Chron. xiv. 9).

4. _Sabachus_, an Ethiopian, king of Ethiopia, being encouraged by an
oracle, entered Egypt with a numerous army, and possessed himself of
the country. He reigned with great clemency and justice. It is
believed, that this Sabachus was the same with Solomon, whose aid was
implored by Hosea king of Israel, against Salmanaser king of Assyria.

5. _Sethon_ reigned fourteen years. He is the same with Sabachus, or
Savechus the son of Sabacan or Saul the Ethiopian who reigned so long
over Egypt.

6. _Tharaca_, an Ethiopian, joined Sethon, with an Ethiopian army to
relieve Jerusalem. After the death of Sethon, who had filled the
Egyptian throne fourteen years, Tharaca ascended the throne and
reigned eight years over Egypt.

7. _Sesach_ or Shishak was the king of Egypt to whom Jeroboam fled to
avoid death at the hands of king Solomon. Jeroboam was entertained
till the death of Solomon, when he returned to Judea and was made king
of Israel. (2 Chron. xi. and xii.)

This Sesach, in the fifth year of the reign of Rehoboam marched
against Jerusalem, because the Jews had transgressed against the Lord.
He came with twelve hundred chariots of war, and sixty thousand
horses. He had brought numberless multitudes of people, who were all
Libyans, Troglodytes, and Ethiopians. He seized upon all the strongest
cities of Judah, and advanced as far as Jerusalem. Then the king, and
the princes of Israel, having humbled themselves, and implored the
protection of the God of Israel, he told them, by his prophet
Shemaiah, that, because they humbled themselves, he would not utterly
destroy them, as they had deserved but that they should be the
servants of Sesach, in order _that they might know_ the difference of
_his service, and the service of the kingdoms of the country_. Sesach
retired from Jerusalem, after having plundered the treasures of the
house of the Lord, and of the king's house, he carried off every thing
with him, _and even also the three hundred shields of gold which
Salomon had made_.

The following are the kings of Egypt mentioned in Scripture by the
common appellation of Pharaoh:--

8. _Psammetichus_.--As this prince owed his preservation to the
Ionians and Carians, he settled them in Egypt, from which all
foreigners hitherto had been excluded; and, by assigning them
sufficient lands and fixed revenues, he made them forget their native
country. By his order, Egyptian children were put under their care to
learn the Greek tongue; and on this occasion, and by this means, the
Egyptians began to have a correspondence with the Greeks, and, from
that era, the Egyptian history, which till then had been intermixed
with pompous fables, by the artifice of the priests, begins, according
to Herodotus, to speak with greater truth and certainty.

As soon as Psammetichus was settled on the throne, he engaged in a war
against the king of Assyria, on account of the limits of the two
empires. This war was of long continuance. Ever since Syria had been
conquered by the Assyrians, Palestine, being the only country that
separated the two kingdoms, was the subject of continual discord; as
afterwards it was between the Ptolemies and the Seleucidæ. They were
perpetually contending for it, and it was alternately won by the
stronger. Psammetichus, seeing himself the peaceable possessor of all
Egypt, and having restored the ancient form of government, thought it
high time for him to look to his frontiers, and to secure them against
the Assyrian, his neighbour, whose power increased daily. For this
purpose he entered Palestine at the head of an army.

Perhaps we are to refer to the beginning of this war, an incident
related by Diodorus; that the Egyptians, provoked to see the Greeks
posted on the right wing by the king himself in preference to them,
quitted the service, being upwards of two hundred thousand men, and
retired into Ethiopia, where they met with an advantageous settlement

Be this as it will, Psammetichus entered Palestine, where his career
was stopped by Azotus, one of the principal cities of the country,
which gave him so much trouble, that he was forced to besiege it
twenty nine years before he could take it. This is the longest siege
mentioned in ancient history. Psammetichus died in the 24th year of
the reign of Josiah king of Judah; and was succeeded by his son Nechoa
or Necho--in Scriptures frequently called Pharaoh Necho.

9. _Nechao_ or _Pharaoh-Necho_ reigned sixteen years king of Egypt, (2
Chron. xxxv. 20,) whose expeditions are often mentioned in profane
history

The Babylonians and Medes having destroyed Nineveh, and with it the
empire of the Assyrians, were thereby become so formidable, that they
drew upon themselves the jealousy of all their neighbours. Nechao,
alarmed at the danger, advanced to the Euphrates, at the head of a
powerful army, in order to check their progress. Josiah, king of
Judah, so famous for his uncommon piety, observing that he took his
route through Judea, resolved to oppose his passage. With this view he
raised all the forces of his kingdom, and posted himself in the valley
of Megiddo (a city on this side of Jordan, belonging to the tribe of
Manasseh, and called Magdolus by Herodotus). Nechao informed him by a
herald, that his enterprise was not designed against him; that he had
other enemies in view, and that he had undertaken this war in the name
of God, who was with him; that for this reason he advised Josiah not
to concern himself with this war for fear it otherwise should turn to
his disadvantage. However, Josiah was not moved by these reasons; he
was sensible that the bare march of so powerful an army through Judea
would entirely ruin it. And besides, he feared that the victor, after
the defeat of the Babylonians, would fall upon him and dispossess him
of part of his dominions. He therefore marched to engage Nechao; and
was not only overthrown by him, but unfortunately received a wound of
which he died at Jerusalem, whither he had ordered himself to be
carried.

Nechao, animated by this victory, continued his march and advanced
towards the Euphrates. He defeated the Babylonians; took Carchemish, a
large city in that country; and securing to himself the possession of
it by a strong garrison, returned to his own kingdom after having been
absent three months.

Being informed in his march homeward, that Jehoaz had caused himself
to be proclaimed king at Jerusalem, without first asking his consent,
he commanded him to meet him at Riblah in Syria. The unhappy prince
was no sooner arrived there than he was put in chains by Nechao's
order, and sent prisoner to Egypt, where he died. From thence,
pursuing his march, he came to Jerusalem, where he gave the sceptre to
Eliakim (called by him Jehoiakim), another of Josiah's sons, in the
room of his brother; and imposed an annual tribute on the land, of a
hundred talents of silver, and one talent of gold. This being done, he
returned in triumph to Egypt.

Herodotus, mentioning this king's expedition, and the victory gained
by him at Magdolus, (as he calls it,) says that he afterwards took the
city Cadytis, which he represents as situated in the mountains of
Palestine, and equal in extent to Sardis, the capital at that time not
only of Lydia, but of all Asia Minor. This description can suit only
Jerusalem, which was situated in the manner above described, and was
then the only city in those parts that could be compared to Sardis. It
appears besides, from Scripture, that Nechao, after his victory, made
himself master of this capital of Judea; for he was there in person,
when he gave the crown to Jehoiakim. The very name Cadytis, which in
Hebrew, signifies the holy, points clearly to the city of Jerusalem,
as is proved by the learned dean Prideaux.

10. _Psammis_.--His reign was but of six years' duration, and history
has left us nothing memorable concerning him, except that he made an
expedition into Ethiopia.

11. _Apries_.--In Scripture he is called Pharaoh-Hophra; and,
succeeding his father Psammis, reigned twenty-five years.

During the first year of his reign, he was as happy as any of his
predecessors. He carried his arms into Cyprus; besieged the city of
Sidon by sea and land; took it, and made himself master of all
Phoenicia and Palestine.

So rapid a success elated his heart to a prodigious degree, and, as
Herodotus informs us, swelled him with so much pride and infatuation,
that he boasted it was not in the power of the gods themselves to
dethrone him; so great was the idea he had formed to himself of the
firm establishment of his own power. It was with a view to these
arrogant conceits, that Ezekiel put the vain and impious words
following into his mouth: _My river is mine own, and I have made it
for myself_. But the true God proved to him afterwards that he had a
master, and that he was a mere man; and he had threatened him long
before, by his prophets, with all the calamities he was resolved to
bring upon him, in order to punish him for his pride.

12. _Amasis_.--After the death of Apries, Amasis became peaceable
possessor of Egypt, and reigned over it forty years. He was, according
to Plato, a native of the city of Sais.

As he was but of mean extraction, he met with no respect, and was
contemned by his subjects in the beginning of his reign. He was not
insensible of this; but nevertheless thought it his interest to subdue
their tempers by an artful carriage, and to win their affection by
gentleness and reason. He had a golden cistern, in which himself, and
those persons who were admitted to his table, used to wash their feet,
he melted it down, and had it cast into a statue, and then exposed the
new god to public worship. The people hastened in crowds to pay their
adorations to the statue. The king, having assembled the people,
informed them of the vile uses to which this statue had once been put,
which nevertheless was now the object of their religious prostrations;
the application was easy, and had the desired success; the people
thenceforward paid the king all the respect that is due to majesty.

He always used to devote the whole morning to public affairs, in order
to receive petitions, give audience, pronounce sentences, and hold his
councils; the rest of the day was given to pleasure, and as Amasis, in
hours of diversion, was extremely gay, and seemed to carry his mirth
beyond due bounds, his courtiers took the liberty to represent to him
the unsuitableness of such a behaviour; when he answered that it was
impossible for the mind to be always serious and intent upon business,
as for a bow to continue always bent.

It was this king who obliged the inhabitants of every town to enter
their names in a book kept by the magistrates for that purpose, with
their profession and manner of living. Solon inserted this custom
among his laws.

He built many magnificent temples, especially at Sais the place of his
birth. Herodotus admired especially a chapel there, formed of one
single stone, and which was twenty-one cubits in front, fourteen in
depth, and eight in height; its dimensions within were not quite so
large; it had been brought from Elephantina, and two thousand men were
employed three years in conveying it along the Nile.

_Amasis_ had a great esteem for the Greeks. He granted them large
privileges; and permitted such of them as were desirous of settling in
Egypt to live in the city of Naucratis, so famous for its harbour.
When the rebuilding of the temple of Delphi, which had been burnt, was
debated on, and the expense was computed at three hundred talents,
Amasis furnished the Delphians with a very considerable sum towards
discharging their quota, which was the fourth part of the whole
charge.

He made an alliance with the Cyrenians, and married a wife from among
them. He is the only king of Egypt who conquered the island of Cyprus,
and made it tributary. Under his reign Pythagorus came into Egypt,
being recommended to that monarch by the famous Polycrates, tyrant of
Samos, who had contracted a friendship with Amasis, and will be
mentioned hereafter. Pythagoras, during his stay in Egypt, was
initiated in all the mysteries of the country, and instructed by the
priests in whatever was most abstruse and important in their religion.
It was here he imbibed his doctrine of the metempsychosis, or
transmigration of souls.

In the expedition in which Cyrus conquered so great a part of the
world, Egypt doubtless was subdued, like the rest of the provinces,
and Xenophon positively declares this in the beginning of his
Cyropædia, or institution of that prince. Probably, after that the
forty years of desolation, which had been foretold by the prophet,
were expired, Egypt beginning gradually to recover itself, Amasis
shook off the yoke, and recovered his liberty.

Accordingly we find, that one of the first cares of Cambyses, the son
of Cyrus, after he had ascended the throne, was to carry his arms into
Egypt. On his arrival there, Amasis was just dead, and succeeded by
his son Psammetus.

13. _Rameses Miamun_, according to Archbishop Usher, was the name of
this king, who is called Pharaoh in Scripture. He reigned sixty-six
years, and oppressed the Israelites in a most grievous manner. _He set
over them taskmasters, to afflict them with their burdens, and they
built for Pharaoh treasure cities, Pithon and Raamses. And the
Egyptians made the children of Israel serve with rigour, and they made
their lives bitter with hard bondage, in mortar and in brick, and in
all manner of service in the field; all their service wherein they
made them serve, was with rigour_. This king had two sons, Amenophis
and Busiris.

14. _Amenophis_, the eldest, succeeded him. He was the Pharaoh under
whose reign the Israelites departed out of Egypt, and who was drowned
in his passage through the Red Sea. Archbishop Usher says, that
Amenophis left two sons, one called Sesothis, or Seaostris, and the
other Armais. The Greeks call him Belus, and his two sons, Egyptus and
Danaus.

15. _Sesostris_ was not only one of the most powerful kings of Egypt,
but one of the greatest conquerors that antiquity boasts of. He was at
an advanced age sent by his father against the Arabians, in order
that, by fighting with them, he might acquire military knowledge. Here
the young prince learned to bear hunger and thirst, and subdued a
nation which till then had never been conquered. The youth educated
with him, attended him in all his campaigns.

Accustomed by this conquest to martial toils he was next sent by his
father to try his fortune westward. He invaded Libya, and subdued the
greatest part of that vast continent.

His army consisted of six hundred thousand foot, and twenty thousand
horse, besides twenty thousand armed chariots.

He invaded Ethiopia, and obliged the nations of it to furnish him
annually with a certain quantity of ebony, ivory, and gold.

He had fitted out a fleet of four hundred sail, and ordering it to
sail to the Red Sea, made himself master of the isles and cities lying
on the coast of that sea. After having spread desolation through the
world for nine years, he returned, laden with the spoils of the
vanquished nations. A hundred famous temples, raised as so many
monuments of gratitude to the tutelar gods of all the cities, were the
first, as well as the most illustrious testimonies of his victories.

16. _Pheron_ succeeded Sesostris in his kingdom, but not in his glory.
He probably reigned fifty years.

17. _Proteus_ was son of Memphis, and according to Herodotus, must
have succeeded the first--since Proteus lived at the time of the siege
of Troy, which, according to Usher, was taken An. Mun. 2820.

18. _Rhampsinitus_ who was richer than any of his predecessors, built
a treasury. Till the reign of this king, there had been some shadow at
least of justice and moderation in Egypt; but, in the two following
reigns, violence and cruelty usurped their place.

19, 20. Cheops and Cephrenus, reigned in all one hundred and six
years. Cheops reigned fifty years, and his brother Cephrenus fifty-six
years after him. They kept the temples closed during the whole time of
their long reign; and forbid the offerings of sacrifice under the
severest penalties. They oppressed their subjects.

21. _Mycerinus_ the son of Cheops, reigned but seven years. He opened
the temples; restored the sacrifices; and did all in his power to
comfort his subjects, and make them forget their past miseries.

22. _Asychis_ one of the kings of Egypt. He valued himself for having
surpassed all his predecessors, by building a pyramid of brick, more
magnificent, than any hitherto seen.

23. _Busiris_, built the famous city of Thebes, and made it the seat
of his empire. This prince is not to be confounded with Busirus, so
infamous for his cruelties.

24. _Osymandyas_, raised many magnificent edifices, in which were
exhibited sculptures and paintings of exquisite beauty.

25. _Uchoreus_, one of the successors of Osymandyas, built the city of
Memphis. This city was 150 furlongs, or more than seven leagues in
circumference, and stood at the point of the Delta, in that part where
the Nile divides itself into several branches or streams. A city so
advantageously situated, and so strongly fortified, became soon the
usual residence of the Egyptian kings.

26. _Thethmosis_ or _Amosis_, having expelled the Shepherd kings,
reigned in Lower Egypt.[645]


FOOTNOTES:

[645] Rollin, vol. i. pp. 129-147.




CHAPTER VIII.

AFRICAN LANGUAGES.

In the language of the Kafirs, for example, not only the cases but the
numbers and genders of nouns are formed entirely by prefixes,
analogous to articles. The prefixes vary according to number, gender
and case, while the nouns remain unaltered except by a merely euphonic
change of the initial letters. Thus, in Coptic, from _sheri_, a son,
comes the plural _neu-sheri_, the sons; from _sori_, accusation,
_hau-sori_, accusations. Analogous to this we have in the Kafir _ama_
marking the plural, as _amakosah_ the plural of _kosah_, _amahashe_
the plural of _ihashe_, _insana_ the plural of _usana_. The Kafir has
a great variety of similar prefixes; they are equally numerous in the
language of Kongo, in which, as in the Coptic and the Kafir, the
genders, numbers, and cases of nouns are almost solely distinguished
by similar prefixes.

"The Kafir language is distinguished by one peculiarity which
immediately strikes a student whose views of language have been formed
upon the examples afforded by the inflected languages of ancient and
modern Europe. With the exception of a change of termination in the
ablative case of the noun, and five changes of which the verb is
susceptible in its principal tenses, the whole business of declension,
conjugation, &c., is carried on by prefixes, and by the changes which
take place in the initial letters or syllables of words subjected to
grammatical government."[646]

Resources are not yet in existence for instituting a general
comparison of the languages of Africa. Many years will probably elapse
before it will be possible to produce such an analysis of these
languages, investigated in their grammatical structure, as it is
desirable to possess, or even to compare them by extensive collections
of well-arranged vocabularies, after the manner of Klaproth's Asia
Polyglotta. Sufficient data however are extant, and I trust that I
have adduced evidence to render it extremely probable that a principle
of analogy in structure prevails extensively among the native idioms
of Africa. They are probably allied, not in the manner or degree in
which Semitic or Indo-European idioms resemble each other, but by
strong analogies in their general principles of structure, which may
be compared to those discoverable between the individual members of
two other great classes of languages, by no means connected among
themselves by what is called family relation. I allude to the
monosyllabic and the polysynthetic languages, the former prevalent in
Eastern Asia, the latter throughout the vast regions of the New World.
If we have sufficient evidence for constituting such a class of
dialects under the title of African languages, we have likewise
reason--and it is equal in degree--for associating in this class the
language of the ancient Egyptians.[647]

That the written _Abyssinian_ language, which we call _Ethiopick_, is
a dialect of old _Chaldean_, and sister of _Arabick_ and _Hebrew_; we
know with certainty, not only from the great multitude of identical
words, but (which is a far stronger proof) from the similar
grammatical arrangement of the several idioms: we know at the same
time, that it is written like all the _Indian_ characters, from the
left hand to the right, and that the vowels are annexed, as in
Devanagari, to the consonants; with which they form a syllabick system
extremely clear and convenient, but disposed in a less artificial
order than the system of letters now exhibited in the _Sanscrit_
grammars; whence it may justly be inferred, that the order contrived
by PANINI or his disciples is comparatively modern; and I have no
doubt, from a cursory examination of many old inscriptions on pillars
and in caves, which have obligingly been sent to me from all parts of
India, that the _Nagari_ and _Ethiopean_ letters had at first a
similar form. It has long been my opinion, that the _Abyssinians_ of
the _Arabian_ stock, having no symbols of their own to represent
articulate sounds, borrowed those of the black pagans, whom the
_Greeks_ call _Troglodytes_, from their primeval habitations in
natural caverns, or in mountains excavated by their own labour: they
were probably the first inhabitants of _Africa_, where they became in
time the builders of magnificent cities, the founders of seminaries
for the advancement of science and philosophy, and the inventors (if
they were not rather the importers) of symbolical characters. I
believe on the whole, that the _Ethiops_ of _Meroe_ were the same
people with the first _Egyptians_, and consequently, as it might
easily be shown, with the original _Hindus_. To the ardent and
intrepid MR. BRUCE, whose travels are to my taste, uniformally
agreeable and satisfactory, though he thinks very differently from me
on the language and genius of the Arabs, we are indebted for more
important, and, I believe, more accurate information concerning the
nations established near the _Nile_, from its fountains to its mouths,
than all _Europe_ united could before have supplied; but, since he has
not been at the pains to compare the seven languages, of which he has
exhibited a specimen, and since I have not leisure to make the
comparison, I must be satisfied with observing, on his authority, that
the dialects of the _Gafots_ and the _Gallas_, the _Agows_ of both
races, and the _Falashas_, who must originally have used a _Chaldean_
idiom, were never preserved in writing, and the _Amharick_ only in
modern times: they must, therefore, have been for ages in fluctuation,
and can lead, perhaps, to no certain conclusion as to the origin of
the several tribes who anciently spoke them. It is very remarkable, as
MR. BRUCE and MR. BRYAN have proved, that the _Greeks_ gave the
appellation of _Indians_ both to the southern nations of _Africk_ and
to the people, among whom we now live; nor is it less observable,
that, according to EPHORUS, quoted by STRABO, they called all the
southern nations in the world _Ethiopians_, thus using _Indian_ and
_Ethiop_ as convertible terms: but we must leave the gymnosophists of
Ethiopia, who seemed to have professed the doctrines of BUDDHA, and
enter the great _Indian_ ocean, of which their _Asiatick_ and
_African_ brethren were probably the first navigators.[648]


FOOTNOTES:

[646] Kafir Grammar, p. 3.

[647] Prichard, vol. ii. pp. 216, 217.




SHERBRO MISSION-DISTRICT, WESTERN AFRICA.

Western Africa is one of the most difficult mission-fields in the
entire heathen world. The low condition of the people, civilly,
socially, and religiously, and the deadly climate to foreigners, make
it indeed a hard field to cultivate. I am fully prepared to indorse
what Rev. F. Fletcher, in charge of Wesleyan District, Gold Coast,
wrote a few months ago in the following language: "The Lord's work in
western Africa is as wonderful as it is deadly. In the last forty
years more than 120 missionaries have fallen victims to that climate;
but to-day the converts to Christianity number at least 30,000, many
of whom are true Christians. In this district we have 6,000 church
members, and though they are poor, last year they gave over 5,000
dollars for evangelistic and educational work.

"_Sherbro Mission_ now has four stations and chapels and over forty
appointments, 112 church members, 164 seekers of religion, 75 acres of
clear land, with carpenter, blacksmith, and tailor shops, in and upon
which, twenty five boys are taught to labor, and where eleven girls
are taught to do all ordinary house work and sewing, with its four day
and Sunday schools, 212 in the former and more than that number in the
latter, and with an influence for good that now reaches the whole
Sherbro tribe, embracing a country at least fifty miles square and
containing about 15,000 people. The seed sown is taking deep root
there, and the harvest is rapidly ripening, when thousands of souls
will be garnered for heaven. Surely we ought to thank God for past
success and resolve to do much more for that needy country in the
future.

"We now have Revs. Corner, Wilberforce, Evans, and their wives, all
excellent missionaries, from America; then Revs. Sawyer, Hero, Pratt,
and their wives, Mrs. Lucy Caulker, and other native laborers, all of
whom are doing us good service. With these six ordained ministers, and
twice that number of teachers and helpers, who are devoting all their
time to the mission, the work is going forward gloriously. Still,
there should be new stations opened and more laborers sent out
immediately."[649]


FOOTNOTES:

[648] Asiatic Researches, vol. iii. pp. 4, 5.

[649] Twenty fifth Annual Report, United Brethren, 1881.




Part II

_SLAVERY IN THE COLONIES._


CHAPTER XV.

CONDITION OF SLAVES IN MASSACHUSETTS.

The following memorandum in Judge Sewall's letter book was called
forth by Samuel Smith, murderer of his Negro slave at Sandwich. It
illustrates the deplorable condition of servants at that time in
Massachusetts, and shows Judge Sewall to have been a man of great
humanity.

     "The poorest Boys and Girls in this Province, such as are of
     the lowest Condition; whether they be English, or Indians,
     or Ethiopians: They have the same Right to Religion and
     Life, that the Richest Heirs have.

     "And they who go about to deprive them of this Right, they
     attempt the bombarding of HEAVEN, and the Shells they throw,
     will fall down upon their own heads.

     "Mr. Justice Davenport, Sir, upon your desire, I have sent
     you these _Quotations_, and my _own Sentiment_. I pray GOD,
     the Giver and Guardian of Life, to give his gracious
     Direction to you, and the other Justices, and take leave,
     who am your brother and most humble servant,

                                        "SAMUEL SEWALL.

     "BOSTON, July 20, 1719.

     "I inclosed also the _selling of Joseph_, and my Extract out
     of the _Athenian Oracle_.

     "To Addington Davenport, Esq., etc., going to Judge Sam'l
     Smith of Sandwitch, for killing his Negro."[650]

_Petition of Slaves in Boston_.

On the 23d of June, 1773, the following petition was presented to the
General Court of Massachusetts, which was read, and referred to the
next session:--

     PETITION OF SLAVES IN BOSTON.

     PROVINCE OF MASSACHUSETTS BAY.

     _To His Excellency, Thomas Hutchinson, Esq., Governor_--

     "To the Honorable, His Majesty's Council, and to the
     Honorable House of Representatives, in general court
     assembled at Boston, the 6th day of January, 1773:--The
     humble petition of many slaves living in the town of Boston,
     and other towns in the province, is this, namely:--

     That Your Excellency and Honors, and the Honorable the
     Representatives, would be pleased to take their unhappy
     state and condition under your wise and just consideration.

     We desire to bless God, who loves mankind, who sent his Son
     to die for their salvation, and who is no respecter of
     persons, that he hath lately put it into the hearts of
     multitudes, on both sides of the water, to bear our
     burthens, some of whom are men of great note and influence,
     who have pleaded our cause with arguments, which we hope
     will have their weight with this Honorable Court.

     We presume not to dictate to Your Excellency and Honors,
     being willing to rest our cause on your humanity and
     justice, yet would beg leave to say a word or two on the
     subject.

     Although some of the negroes are vicious, (who, doubtless,
     may be punished and restrained by the same laws which are in
     force against others of the King's subjects,) there are many
     others of a quite different character, and who, if made
     free, would soon be able, as well as willing, to bear a part
     in the public charges. Many of them, of good natural parts,
     are discreet, sober, honest and industrious; and may it not
     be said of many, that they are virtuous and religious,
     although their condition is in itself so unfriendly to
     religion, and every moral virtue, except _patience_? How
     many of that number have there been and now are, in this
     province, who had every day of their lives embittered with
     this most intolerable reflection, that, let their behavior
     be what it will, neither they nor their children, to all
     generations, shall ever be able to do or to possess and
     enjoy any thing--no, not even _life itself_--but in a manner
     as the _beasts_ that perish!

     We have no property! we have no wives! we have no children!
     we have no city! no country! But we have a Father in heaven,
     and we are determined, as far as his grace shall enable us,
     and as far as our degraded condition and contemptuous life
     will admit, to keep all his commandments; especially will we
     be obedient to our masters, so long as God, in his,
     sovereign providence, shall _suffer_ us to be holden in
     bondage.

     It would be impudent, if not presumptuous, in us to suggest
     to Your Excellency and Honors, any law or laws proper to be
     made in relation to our unhappy state, which although our
     greatest unhappiness, is not our _fault_; and this gives us
     great encouragement to pray and hope for such relief as is
     consistent with your wisdom, justice and goodness.

     We think ourselves very happy, that we may thus address the
     great and general court of this province, which great and
     good court is to us the best judge, under God, of what is
     wise, just and good.

     We humbly beg leave to add but this one thing more we pray
     for such relief only, which by no possibility can ever be
     productive of the least wrong or injury to our masters, but
     to us will be as life from the dead.[651]


FOOTNOTES:

[650] Slavery in Mass., pp 96, 97.

[651] Neil, pp. 39-41.




CHAPTER XIII.

THE COLONY OF NEW YORK.

1693, August 21st--All Indians, Negroes, and others not "listed in the
militia," are ordered to work on the fortification for repairing the
same, to be under the command of the captains of the wards they
inhabit. And £100 to be raised for the fortifications.

1722, February 20th.--A law passed by the common council of New York,
"restraining slaves, negroes, and Indians from gaming with moneys." If
found gaming with any sort of money, "copper pennies, copper
halfpence, or copper farthings," they shall be publickly whipped at
the publick whipping-post of this city, at the discretion of the
mayor, recorder, and aldermen, or any one of them, unless the owner
pay to the church wardens for the poor, 3s.

1731, November 18th--If more than three negro, mulatto, or Indian
slaves assemble on Sunday and play or make noise, (or at any other
time at any place from their master's service,) they are to be
publickly whipped fifteen lashes at the publick whipping-post.




NEW YORK.

Negro slavery, a favorite measure with England, was rapidly extending
its baneful influence in the colonies. The American Register, of 1769,
gives the number of negroes brought in slavery from the coast of
Africa, between Cape Blanco and the river Congo, by different nations
in one year, thus: Great Britain, 53,100; British Americans, 6,300;
France, 23,520; Holland, 11,300; Portugal, 1,700; Denmark, 1,200;
in all, 104,100, bought by barter for European and Indian
manufacturers,--£15 sterling being the average price given for each
negro. Thus we see that more than one half of the wretches who were
kidnapped, or torn by force from their homes by the agents of European
merchants (for such those who supply the market must be considered),
were sacrificed to the cupidity of the merchants of Great Britain; the
traffic encouraged by the government at the same time that the boast
is sounded through the world, that the moment a slave touches the
sacred soil, governed by those who encourage the slavemakers, and
inhabited by those who revel in the profits derived from murder, he is
free. Somerset, the negro, is liberated by the court of king's bench,
in 1772, and the world is filled with the fame of English justice and
humanity! James Grahame tells us that Somerset's case was not the
first in which the judges of Great Britain counteracted in one or two
cases the practical inhumanity of the government and the people: he
says, that in 1762, his grandfather, Thomas Grahame, judge of the
admiralty court of Glasgow, liberated a negro slave imported into
Scotland.

It was in vain that the colonists of America protested against the
practice of slave dealing. The governors appointed by England were
instructed to encourage it, and when the assemblies enacted laws to
prohibit the inhuman traffic, they were annulled by the vetoes of the
governors. With such encouragement, the reckless and avaricious among
the colonists engaged in the trade, and the slaves were purchased when
brought to the colonies by those who were blind to the evil, or
preferred present ease or profit to all future good. Paley, the
moralist, thought the American Revolution was designed by Providence,
to put an end to the slave trade, and to show that a nation
encouraging it was not fit to be intrusted with the government of
extensive colonies. But the planter of the Southern States have
discovered, since made free by that revolution, that slavery is no
evil; and better moralists than Paley, that the increase of slaves,
and their extension over new regions, is the duty of every good
democrat. The men who lived in 1773, to whom America owes her liberty,
did not think so.

Although resistance to the English policy of increasing the number of
negro slaves in America agitated many minds in the colonies,
opposition to the system of taxation was the principal source of
action; and this opposition now centered in a determination to baffle
the designs of Great Britain in respect to the duties on tea.
Seventeen millions of pounds of tea were now accumulated in the
warehouses of the East-India Company. The government was determined,
for reasons I have before given, to assist this mercantile company, as
well as the African merchants, at the expense of the colonists of
America. The East-India Company were now authorized to export their
tea free of all duty. Thus the venders being enabled to offer it
cheaper than hitherto to the colonists, it was expected that it would
find a welcome market. But the Americans saw the ultimate intent of
the whole scheme, and their disgust towards the mother country was
proportionably increased.




INDEX.


  Abbott, Granville S., verses by,  111.

  Adams, Abigail, views on slavery, 227.

  Adams, John, views on slavery, 203;
    letter to Jonathan Sewall on emancipation, 207.

  Adams, Samuel, urges the consideration of the memorial of
      Massachusetts Negroes,  234.

  Adgai, see Crowther.

  Africa, described, 14;
    Negro tribes, 24, 25;
    Negro kingdoms, 26, 28, 31;
    natives engage in the slave-trade, 27;
    laws, 30, 56, 57;
    religion, 30, 81-84, 89, 90;
    war between the different tribes, 35-39;
    war with England, 41-43;
    patriarchal government, 50, 54, 55;
    villages described, 51, 52;
    architecture, 51-53;
    women reign in, 55, 56;
    marriage, 57, 58;
    polygamy, 58;
    status of   the natives, 58, 59;
    warfare, 61, 62;
    agriculture,  62,  63;
    mechanic arts, 63-65;
    languages, 66-70, 90, 459;
    literature, 75-80;
    colony  founded   at Sierra Leone, 86, 87;
    and Liberia, 95, 97;
    first emigrants to, 97;
    republican government established, 100;
    first constitution abolishing slavery in Liberia, 103-105;
    weaker tribes chief source of slavery, 109, 120;
    early Christianity in, 111;
    earliest commerce for slaves between America and, 115;
    slaves from Angola, 134;
    shipload of slaves from Sierra Leone sold at Hispaniola, 138;
    number of Negroes stolen from annually, 237;
    slaves from, sold at Barbadoes, 259;
    cities of, described, 450;
    number of slaves brought from, 463.
    See Negroes.

  African Company, their charter abolished, 41:
    see Royal African Company.

  Akwasi Osai, king of Ashantee, invades Dahomey, 35;
    his defeat and death, 36.

  Alexander, James, volunteers to prosecute the Negroes in New York,
      151, 158, 166.

  Alricks, Peter, resident of New York 1657, 250.

  Amasis, king of Egypt, 457.

  Amenophis, king of Egypt, 458.

  America, introduction of Negro slaves, 116;
    colonies declare independence, 412;
    slavery in, 461;
    slaves imported to British America, 463.

  American Colonization Society locate a colony at Monrovia, 97.

  American Revolution, service of Negroes in the army of the, 324, 334,
      337, 342, 353, 362;
    slavery during the, 402.

  Ames, Edward B., remarks in favor of the government of Liberia, 99.

  Angola, Africa, slaves imported from, 134.

  Anne, queen of England, encourages the slave-trade, 140.

  Anti-slavery societies, memorials to Congress, 437;
    convention held at Philadelphia, 438.

  Apoko, Osai, king of Ashantee, 36.

  Appleton, Nathaniel, defends the doctrine of freedom for all, 204;
    author of "Consideration on Slavery," 218.

  Apries, king of Egypt, 456.

  Argall, Samuel, engaged in the slave-trade, 116, 117.

  Ashantee Empire, described, 34;
    wars of, 35, 37-39;
    revolt in, 36;
    troubles with England, 41, 42;
    massacre of women, 42;
    government, 44.

  Asia, idols with Negro features in, 17;
    traces of the race, 18.

  Asychis, king of Egypt, 458.

  Attucks, Crispus, advertised as a runaway slave, 330;
    figures in the Boston Massacre, 330;
    his death and funeral, 331;
    letter to Gov. Hutchinson, 332.

  Aviia, tribe in Africa, 51.

  Aviro, Alfonso de, discovers Benin in Africa, 26.


  Babel, the tower of, built by an Ethiopian, 453.

  Babylon, description of, 454.

  Bancroft, George, views on slavery, 206.

  Banneker, Benjamin, astronomer and philosopher, 386;
    farmer and inventor, 387;
    mathematician, 388;
    his first calculation of an eclipse, 389;
    letter to George Ellicott, 389;
    character of, 390;
    his business transactions, 391;
    verses addressed to, 392;
    letter to Mrs. Mason, 392;
    his first almanac, 393;
    letter to Thomas Jefferson, 394;
    accompanies commissioners to run the lines of District of Columbia,
      397;
    his habits of studying the heavenly bodies, 397;
    his death, 398.

  Baptist missionaries in Liberia, 101.

  Barbadoes, Negro slaves exchanged for Indians, 174;
    a slave-market for New-England traders,   181;
    Rhode   Island supplied with slaves from, 269.

  Barrère, Peter, treatise on the color of the skin, 19.

  Barton, Col. William, captures Gen. Prescott, 366.

  Bates, John, a slave-trader, 269.

  Belknap, Jeremy, remarks on the slave-trials in Massachusetts, 232.

  Benin, a   kingdom  in  Africa, supplies America with slaves, 26;
    discovered by the Portuguese and colonized, 26;
    the king contracts to Christianize his subjects for a white wife,
      27;
    the kingdom divided, and slave-trade suppressed, 28.

  Berkeley, Sir William, opposed to education and printing, 132.

  Bermuda Islands, slaves placed on Warwick's plantation, 118, 119;
    Pequod Indians exchanged for Negroes at, 173.

  Bernard, John, governor of the Bermudas, 118.

  Beverley, Robert, correction of his History of Virginia, 116.

  Bill, Jacob, a slave-trader, 269.

  Billing, Joseph, sued by his slave Amos Newport, 229.

  Blumenbach, Jean Frederic, opinion in regard to the color of the
      skin, 19.

  Blyden, Edward W., defines the term "Negro," 12;
    president of Liberia College, 102.

  Board of Trade, circular to the governors of the English colonies,
      relative to Negro slaves, 267;
    reply of Gov. Cranston of Rhode Island, 269.

  Bolzius, Henry, favors the introduction of slavery into Georgia, 321.

  Boombo, a Negro chief of Liberia, 106.

  Borden, Cuff, a Negro slave in Massachusetts, sued for trespass and
      ordered to be sold to satisfy judgment, 278.

  Boston, a slave-trader from, 181;
    Negro prohibited from employment in manufacturing hoops, 196;
    number of slaves in, 205;
    instructs the representatives to vote against the slave-trade, 221;
    Negroes charged with firing the town, 226;
    articles for the regulation of  Negroes passed, 226;
    massacre in, 1770, 330;
    Negroes on Castle Island, 376, 378.

  Bowditch, Thomas Edward, commissioner to treat with the Ashantees,
      39.

  Bradley, Richard, attorney-general of New York, prosecutes the
      Negroes, 166.

  Bradstreet, Ann, frees her slave, 207.

  Brazil, slaves sold to the Dutch, 136.

  Brewster, Capt. Edward, banished   by Capt. Argall, 117.

  Brewster, Thomas, a slave-trader, 269.

  Bristol County, Mass., a slave ordered to be sold, to satisfy
      judgment against him for trespass, 278.

  British army, Negroes in the, 87.

  Brown, John, reproved by Virginia committee of 1775 for purchasing
      slaves, 328.

  Brown, Joseph, effect of climate on man, 46.

  Bruce, James, discovers the ruins of the city of Meroe, 6.

  Bunker Hill, Negroes in the battle of, 363.

  Burgess, Ebenezer, missionary to Monrovia, 97.

  Burton, Mary, testifies in the Negro plot at New York, 1741, 147,
      148, 150, 158, 160, 162-164, 167, 168;
    recompensed by the government, 170.

  Busiris, king of Egypt, 458.

  Butler, Nathaniel, commissioner for Virginia Company, 118.


  Cade, Elizabeth, a witness in the Somersett case, 205.

  Calanee, image of Buddha at, 17.

  Caldwell, Jonas, killed at the Boston Massacre, 331.

  Campbell, Sir Neill, determines the war with Ashantees, 43.

  Canaan, the curse of, 444.

  Canada, expedition from New York against, 143.

  Candace, queen of the Ethiopians, 6.

  Carey, Lot, vice-agent of Liberia, 101.

  Carey, Peggy, implicated with Negro plot in New York, 1741, 147;
    trial, 152;
    found guilty, 152;
    her evidence, 153;
    sentenced to be hanged, 158.

  Carr, Patrick, wounded at the Boston Massacre, 331.

  Cartel, Edwin, a slave-trader, 269.

  Carthage, description of, 452.

  Castle Island, Boston, Negroes sent to the barracks at, 376;
    list of the same, 378.

  Cepharenus, king of Egypt, 458,

  Ceylon, image of Buddha at, 17.

  Chaillu, Paul B. Du, description of the Obongos, 46;
    of the villages of Mandji and Ishogo, 51, 52.

  Chambers, John, volunteers to prosecute the Negroes in New York, 151,
      158, 166.

  Charles V., grants a patent to import Negroes to America, 115.

  Charleston, S.C., slave-market  at, 299,
    Negroes from, recaptured, 376;
    list of, 378;
    claimed by owners, 379.

  Charlestown, Mass., Negro slaves executed at, in 1755, 226.

  Chastellux, Marquis de, describes the bravery of Col. Greene's Negro
      regiment at the battle of Rhode Island, 368.

  Cheops, king of Egypt, 458.

  Chibbu, Kudjoh, captured by the English, 42.

  Chisholm, Major J, services in Ashantee mentioned, 41, 42.

  Christy, David, describes the colony of Liberia, 107.

  Cintra, Piedro de, discoverer of Sierra Leone, 85.

  Clinton, Sir Henry, proclamation concerning fugitive Negroes, 1779,
      357.

  Codman, John, poisoned by his slave, 226.

  Coleman, Elihu, author of "Testimony against making Slaves of Men,"
      318.

  Coney Island, N.Y., slave captured at, 343.

  Congo Empire, Shinga queen of, 55.

  Congress, see United-States Congress.

  Connecticut, slavery in, 252-261;
    Negro slaves introduced, 252;
    number of Negroes in 1680, 253;
    purchase and treatment of slaves and free persons, 253;
    persons manumitting slaves, to maintain them, 254;
    commerce with slaves prohibited, 255;
    punishment of insubordinate slaves, 256;
    social conduct regulated, 257;
    punished for using profane language, 258;
    number of slaves in 1730, 259;
    Indian slaves prohibited, 250;
    Indian and Negro slavery legalized, 259;
    limited rights of free Negroes, 259;
    Negro population in 1762, 260;
    importation of slaves prohibited, 261;
    number of slaves in 1715, 325;
    enlistment of Negroes prohibited, 343;
    enlisted, 345;
    a Colored company recruited by David Humphreys, 361;
    slave population in 1790, 436.

  Continental army, condition of the, 334;
    Negroes in the, 337;
    Negro regiment raised for the, 342;
    number of men supplied to the, 353;
    return of Negroes in 1778, 362.

  Continental Congress, prohibits the importation of Negroes, 325;
    debate on the discharge of Negroes from the army, 335;
    action on the enlistment of Negroes, 355;
    resolution to establish courts to decide cases of captured slaves,
        370;
    action of the, relative to Negroes captured at sea, 373;
    discussion on the, Western territory, 415, 416;
    last meeting, 416.

  Cooke, Nicholas, governor of Rhode Island, letters to Washington on
      the enlistment of Negroes, 346, 349.

  Cornwallis, Lord, proclamation  offering protection to fugitive
      Negroes, 358.

  Cox, Melville B., missionary to Monrovia, 98.

  Cranston, Samuel, letter to the board of trade, relative to Negro
      slaves in Rhode Island, 269.

  Croker, John, testimony in the Negro plot at New York, 168.

  Crowther, Negro sold into slavery, 32;
    set at liberty by the English, 33;
    fitted for the ministry, returns to Africa as a missionary, 33.

  Cuffe, John, sketch of, 202.

  Cuffe, Paul, a distinguished Negro, 202.

  Cush, ancestor of the Negro race, 10;
    meaning of the term, 13.

  Cushing, Nathan, his opinion, 1783, relative to the South-Carolina
      Negroes, 381.

  Cuvier, Baron, varieties of the human form, 3.

  Cyrene, Africa, mentioned, 5;
    described, 452.


  Dahomey, a Negro kingdom of Africa, described, 28;
    women serve in the army, 29;
    laws, 30;
    invaded by King Akwasi, 35.

  Dalton, Richard, his slave reads Greek, 202.

  Davis, Hugh, a white servant, flogged in Virginia, for consorting
      with a Negro woman, 121.

  Deane, Thomas, mentioned, 196.

  Delaware, slavery in, 249-251;
    settled by Danes and Swedes, 249;
    slavery not allowed by the Swedes, 249;
    conveyed to William Penn, 249;
    granted a separate government, 249;
    slavery introduced, 249;
    first legislation on slavery, 250;
    law for the regulation of servants, 250;
    act restraining manumission of slaves, 250;
    number of slaves in 1715, 325;
    slave population in 1790, 436.

  Denmark, engaged in the slave-trade, 463.

  Denny, Thomas, representative of Leicester, Mass., instructed to vote
      against slavery, 225.

  Derham, James, a Negro physician of New Orleans, 400.

  Desbrosses, Elias, testimony in the Negro plot in New York, 1741, 165.

  "Desire," ship built for the slave-trade, 174.

  Dodge, Caleb, of Beverly, Mass., sued by his slave, 231.

  Dorsey, Charles W., character of Banneker, the Negro astronomer, 390.

  Duchet, Sir Lionel, engaged in the slave-trade, 138.

  Dummer, William, proclamation against Negroes of Boston, 226.

  Dunmore, Lord, proclamation in regard to fugitive Negroes, 336;
    condemned by the Virginia convention, 341;
    his failure to enlist Negroes, 342.

  Dupuis, M., appointed English consul to the court of Ashantee, 40.

  Dutch man-of-war lands the first Negroes in Virginia, 118;
    engage in the slave-trade, 124;
    import slaves to New Netherlands, 135;
    encourage the trade, 136;
    settlement on the Delaware, 312.


  Earl, John, his connection with the Negro plot at New York, 163.

  East Greenwich, R.I., bridge built at, by Negro impost-tax, 275.

  Egmont, Earl of, opposed to slavery in Georgia, 319.

  Egypt, first settlers of, 6, 10;
    Negro and Mulatto races in, 14;
    slavery in, 17;
    Negro civilization imitated by, 22;
    the Ethiopian kings of, 454.

  Elizabeth, Queen, of England, encourages the slave-trade, 138.

  Elizabeth, N.J., police regulations, 286.

  England, suppresses the slave-trade, 28, 31;
    sends agricultural implements, machinery, and missionaries to
      Africa, 32;
    conduct in the Ashantee war, 38, 41, 42;
    treaty with Ashantee, 42;
    founds a colony in Sierra Leone, 86;
    all slaves declared free on reaching British soil, 86;
    declares slave-trade piracy, 87;
    establishes a mission at Sierra Leone, 89;
    women sent to Virginia, 119;
    laws relating to slavery, 125;
    sanctions the slave-trade, 138-140, 463;
    courts decide in 1677 that a Negro slave is property, 190;
    slavery recognized in, 203;
    agrees to furnish Negroes to the West Indies, 236;
    treaty with United States, 382.

  Enoch, description of the city of, 453.

  Ethiopia, war with Cæsar, 6;
    natives same race as Egyptians, 6;
    meaning of, 13;
    cities of, described, 453;
    kings rule Egypt, 454.


  Fairfax, Va., meeting at, in 1774, pass resolutions against slavery,
      327.

  "Fanny," brig, arrives at Norfolk, Va., with slaves, 328.

  Federal Constitution, proceedings of convention to frame the, 417.

  Ferguson, Dr., describes character of the inhabitants of Sierra Leone,
      90-93.

  Folger, Elisha, captain of ship "Friendship," sued for recovery of a
      slave, 231.

  Forbes, Archibald, mentions Africans nine feet in height, 59.

  Fox, George, views concerning slaves, 313.

  France engaged in the slave-trade, 463.

  Franklin, Benjamin, letter to Dean Woodward on the abolition of
      slavery, 327;
    address to the public on the abolition of slavery, 431.

  Friends, see Quakers.

  Fuller, Thomas, a Negro mathematician, 399.


  Gage, Thomas, refuses to sign the bill to prevent the importation of
      Negroes into Massachusetts, 235, 237.

  Gates, Gen. Horatio, his order not to enlist Negroes, 334.

  George III. in 1751 repeals the act declaring slaves real estate, 125.

  Georgia, slavery in, 316-323;
    colony of, established, 316;
    slavery prohibited in, 316, 317;
    discussion in regard to the admission of slavery, 318-322;
    clandestine importation of Negroes, 320;
    slavery established, 322;
    history of slavery, 322;
    number of slaves in 1715, 325;
    importation of slaves prohibited, 440;
    slave population in 1790, 436.

  Germantown, Penn., memorial of Quakers against slavery in 1688, 313.

  Glasgow, Scotland, a slave liberated in 1762, 463.

  Goddard, Benjamin, protests against enlisting Negroes in Grafton,
      Mass., 352.

  Godfrey family of South Carolina, killed by a Negro mob, 299.

  Gordon, William, letter on the emancipation of slaves, 402;
    deposed as chaplain of the legislature of Massachusetts, 409.

  Grafton, Mass., protest in 1778 against the enlistment of Negroes,
      352.

  Grahame, Judge Thomas, liberates Negro slave in Glasgow, Scotland,
      463.

  Gray, Samuel, killed at the Boston Massacre, 331.

  Greece, Negro civilization imitated by, 22.

  Greene, Col. Christopher, commands a Negro regiment in 1778 at battle
    of Rhode Island, 368;
    his death, 369.

  Greene, Gen. Nathanael, letters to Washington on the raising of a
      Negro regiment, 342;
    on the enlistment of Negroes, the British army, 359;
    at battle of Rhode Island, 368.

  Greenleaf, Richard, sued by his slave, 204, 231.

  Guerard, Benjamin, governor of South Carolina, letter to Gov. Hancock
      relative to slaves recaptured from the British, 380.

  Guyot, Arnold H., opinion on the diversity of the human race, 20.


  Habersham, James, favors slavery in Georgia, 318, 321.

  Ham, the progenitor of the Negro race, 8;
    family of, 9, 11;
    founder of the Babylonian empire, 9.

  Hamilton, Alexander, letter to John Jay on the enlistment of Negroes,
      354;
    opinion in regard to slaves captured by the British, 381.

  Hamilton, Dr., his connection with the Negro plot at New York, 160.

  Hancock, John, letter on the condition of the South-Carolina Negroes
      recaptured from the British, 378.

  "Hannibal," sloop, Negroes captured from, 372.

  Harcourt, Col. William, captures Gen. Charles Lee, 366.

  Harper, ----, one of the founders of the colony at Cape Palmas,
      Liberia, 95.

  Harris, Rev. Samuel, describes bravery of Negro regiment at battle
      of Rhode Island, 369.

  Hawkins, Sir John, a slave-trader, 138.

  "Hazard," armed vessel, recaptures Negroes, 376.

  Hendrick, Cæsar, a slave, sues for his freedom, 204, 231.

  Hessian officer, letter on the employment of Negroes in the army, 343.

  Hillgroue, Nicholas, engaged in the slave-trade, 269.

  Hispaniola, slaves from Sierra Leone sold at, 138.

  Hobby, Mr., Negro in the army claimed by, 384.

  Hogg, Robert, a merchant of New York, robbed by Negroes, 145.

  Holbrook, Felix, petition of, for freedom, 133.

  Holland, growth of slavery in New Netherlands, 134;
    children of manumitted Negroes held as slaves to serve the
      government of, 135;
    slaves exchanged for tobacco, 136;
    engaged in the slave-trade, 463.

  Holt, Lord, his opinion that slavery was unknown to English law, 203.

  Hopkins, John H., views of slavery, 7, 8.

  Hopkins, Samuel, necessity of employing the Negroes in the American
      army, 338.

  Horsmanden, Daniel, one of the judges in the trial of the Negro plot
      at New York, 1741, 148.

  Hotham, Sir Charles, testimony in regard to the abolishment of slavery
      in Liberia, 105, 106.

  Hughson, John, his tavern at New York a resort for Negroes, 147;
    his connection with the Negro plot, 147;
    trial, 152, 157;
    sentenced to be hanged, 158;
    executed, 161.

  Hughson, Sarah, her connection with the New York Negro plot, 152;
    trial, 157;
    respited, 164;
    testimony, 165, 166, 168.

  Human race, the unity of, 443.

  Humphreys, David, recruits a company of colored infantry in
      Connecticut, 361.

  Hutchinson, a commissioner to treat with king of Ashantee, 39.

  Hutchinson, Gov. Thomas, refuses to sign bill to prevent the
      importation of slaves from Africa, 223.


  Indians, taxable, 122, 123;
    not treated as slaves, 123;
    declared slaves, 124, 125;
    denied the right to appear as witnesses, 129;
    act to baptize, 141;
    proclamation against the harboring, 141;
    alarmed on seeing a Negro, 173;
    exchanged for Negroes, 173;
    sent to Bermudas, 173;
    held in perpetual bondage, 178;
    marriage with Negroes, 180;
    introduction of, as slaves, prohibited in Massachusetts, 186;
    importation of, prohibited, 259, 311, 314;
    slavery of, legalized, 259.

  Ishogo villages in Africa described, 52.


  Jacksonburgh, S.C., Negro insurrection at, 299.

  Jamaica, slaves from, sold in Virginia, 328.

  James, Gov., commissioner to treat with king of Ashantee, 39.

  James City, Va., buildings destroyed, 126.

  Jameson, David, volunteers to prosecute the negroes in New York, 151.

  Japan, negro idols in, 17.

  Jefferson, Thomas, author of instructions to the Virginia delegation
      in Congress, 1774, on the abolition of slavery, 328;
    letters to Dr. Gordon relative to the treatment of Negroes in
      Cornwallis's army, 358;
    to Benjamin Banneker, 396;
    his recommendation in regard to slavery in the Western Territory,
      416.

  Jeffries, John P., declares there are no reliable data of the Negro
      race, 15.

  Johnson, David, accused of conspiracy in New York, 163.

  Jones, William, his genealogy of Noah, 11.

  Joseph, the selling of, a memorial by Samuel Sewall, 210;
    answered by John Saffin, 214.

  Josselyn, John, describes attempt to breed slaves in Massachusetts,
      174.


  Kane, William, accused of conspiracy in New York, 162;
    testimony of, in the Negro plot, 162-164, 168.

  Kench, Thomas, letters to the General Assembly of Massachusetts on
      the enlistment of Negroes, 350, 351.

  Kendall, Capt. Miles, deputy governor of Virginia, receives Negro
      slaves in exchange for supplies, 118;
    dispossessed of the same, returns to England to seek equity, 118;
    portion of the Negroes allotted to him, 118;
    none of which he receives, 119.

  Kentucky, admitted into the Union, 437;
    constitution revised, 441.

  Keyser, Elizur, emancipates his slave, 207.

  Knowls, John, confines James Sommersett on board his ship "Mary and
      Ann," 205.

  Knox, Thomas, South Carolina, recaptured slaves delivered to, 377.

  Kudjoh Osai, king of Ashantee, 36.

  Kwamina Osai, succeeds his father Kudjoh as king of Ashantee, 36.


  "Lady Gage," a prize-ship with Negroes, 376.

  Laing, Capt., his services in Ashantee, 42.

  Latrobe, J.H.B., one of the founders of the colony at Cape Palmas,
      Liberia, 95.

  Laurens, Henry, letter to Washington on arming of the Negroes of
      South Carolina, 353.

  Laurens, John, endeavors to raise Negro troops in South Carolina, 356;
    sails for France, 359;
    letters to Washington on his return, urging the enlistment of
      Negroes, 360.

  Lawrence, Major Samuel, commands a company of Negro soldiers, 366.

  Lechmere, Richard, sued by his slave, 230.

  Lee, Gen. Charles, captured by the British, 366.

  Leicester, Mass., representative of, instructed to vote against
      slavery, 225.

  Liberia, founded by Colored people from Maryland, 95;
    population, 95, 97, 102;
    refuge for Colored people, 96;
    native tribes, 97, 98;
    Christian mission founded, 98;
    government, 99;
    a republic, 100;
    school and college established, 100;
    churches, 101;
    trade, 103;
    first constitution, 103;
    slavery and slave-trade abolished, 104;
    treaty with England in regard to slavery, 104;
    testimony of officers of the Royal Navy in regard to the
      slave-trade at, 105;
    revolt in, subdued, 106, 107.

  Lincoln, Gen. Benjamin, letter to Gov. Rutledge of South Carolina,
      on the enlistment of Negroes, 359.

  Livingstone, David, describes African wars, 50, 51;
    status of the Africans, 58, 59;
    skilful in the mechanic arts, 63, 64.

  Locke, John, constitution prepared by, adopted in North Carolina, 302;
    local governments of the South organised on his plan, 414.

  Lodge, Abraham, volunteers to prosecute the Negroes in New York, 151.

  Lodge, Sir Thomas, a slave-trader, 138.

  Lowell, John, sues for the freedom of a slave in Newburyport, Mass.,
      231.

  Lybia, Africa, description of, 452.


  MacBrair, R.M., author of a Mandingo grammar, 70.

  McCarthy, Charles, appointed governor-general of Western Africa, 41;
    war with the Ashantees, 41;
    his defeat and death, 42.

  Madison, James, letter to Joseph Jones, on the arming of the Negroes,
      359.

  Mahoney, Lieut., his description of a Negro idol at Calanee, 17.

  Mandji, a village in Africa described, 51.

  Mankind, unity of, 1, 7, 108, 443;
    varieties of, 3.

  Mansfield, Lord, decision in the case of the Negro Sommersett, 85,
      205.

  Marlow, John, affidavit in the Sommersett case, 206.

  Maryland, appropriates money for the colony at Cape Palmas, 96;
    slaves purchased to evade tax, 128;
    slavery in, 238-248;
    under the laws of Virginia, 238;
    first legislation on slavery, 238;
    population of, 238;
    slavery established by statute, 240;
    Act passed encouraging the importation of Negroes and slaves, 241;
    impost on Negroes, slaves, and white persons imported into, 241;
    duties on rum and wine, 243;
    treatment of slaves and papists, 243;
    convicts imported into, 243;
    convict trade condemned, 244;
    defended, 244;
    slave-code, 246;
    rights of slaves, 246;
    law against manumission of slaves, 246;
    Negro population, 246, 247;
    white population, 247;
    increase of slavery, 247;
    number of slaves in 1715, 325;
    Negroes enlist in the army, 352;
    slave population in 1790, 436.

  Maryland Colonization Society, found colony of Negroes at Cape Palmas,
      Liberia, 95.

  Mason, George, author of the Virginia resolutions of 1774 against
      slavery, 327.

  Mason, Susanna, addresses a poetical letter to Benjamin Banneker, 392.

  Massachusetts, slavery in, 172-237;
    earliest mention of the Negro in, 173;
    Moore's history of slavery in, 173;
    Pequod War the cause of slavery, 173;
    slaves imported to, 174;
    ship "Desire" arrives with slaves, 174, 176;
    slavery established, 175;
    first statute establishing slavery, 177;
    made hereditary, 179;
    kidnapped Negroes, 180, 182;
    number of slaves, 183, 184;
    tax on slaves, 185;
    Negro population, 185;
    introduction of Indian slaves prohibited, 186;
    Negroes rated with cattle, 187, 188, 196;
    denied baptism, 189;
    Act in relation to marriage of Negro slaves, 191, 192;
    slave-marriage ceremony, 192;
    condition of free Negro, 194, 196;
    Act to abolish slavery, 204;
    slave awarded a verdict against his master, 204;
    emancipation of slaves, 205;
    legislation favoring the importation of white servants, and
      prohibiting the clandestine bringing-in of Negroes, 208;
    importation of Negroes not as profitable as white servants, 208,
      209;
    prohibitory legislation against slavery, 220;
    proclamation against Negroes, 226;
    slaves executed, 226;
    transported and exchanged for small Negroes, 226;
    slaves sue for freedom, 228-232;
    Negroes petition for freedom, 233;
    bill passed for the suppression of the slave-trade, 234, 235;
    vetoed by Gov. Gage, 235;
    number of slaves in, 325;
    emancipation of slaves, 329;
    enlistment of Negroes and emancipation of slaves prohibited, 329;
    enlistment of Negroes opposed, 334, 351;
    mode of enlisting Negroes, 352;
    Negroes serve with white troops, 352;
    number of men furnished to the army, 353;
    act relative to captured Negroes, 370;
    sale of captured Negroes prohibited, 371;
    armed vessels from, recapture Negroes, 376;
    act relative to prisoners of war, 379;
    slaves petition for freedom, 404;
    act against slavery, 405;
    extinction of slavery, 429;
    lawsuits brought by slaves, 430;
    condition of slaves, 461.

  Maverick, Samuel, attempts to breed slaves in Massachusetts, 174.

  Maverick, Samuel, mortally wounded at the Boston Massacre, 331.

  Mede, Joseph, his statement in regard to Ham corrected, 10.

  Medford, Mass., representative of, instructed to vote against
      slavery, 225.

  Melville, John, his sermon on Simon mentioned, 6.

  Menes, first king of Egypt, 454.

  Meroe, Egypt, capital of African Ethiopia and chief city of the
      Negroes, 6.

  Methodist Episcopal Church, establishes a mission in Liberia, 98, 100.

  Methodist Missionary Society appropriate money for the mission at
      Monrovia, 98.

  Mifflin, Warner, presents a memorial to Congress in 1792 for the
      abolition of slavery, 437.

  Mills, James, missionary to Monrovia, 97;
    death, 97.

  Missah Kwanta, son of the king of Ashantee, sent to England as a
      hostage, 43.

  Mississippi, slavery in Territory of, prohibited, 1797, 440.

  Monroe, James, town of Monrovia named in honor of, 97.

  Monrovia, Africa, founded, 97;
    population, 97;
    Christian mission established, 98, 99.

  Moore, George H., his history of slavery in Massachusetts commended,
      173;
    mentioned, 180, 183;
    remarks on the bill to prohibit the importation of slaves from
      Africa, 224.

  Morton, Samuel G., the sphinx a shrine of the Negro, 17.

  Murphy, Edward, accused of conspiracy in New York, 163.

  Murray, Joseph, volunteers to prosecute the Negroes in New York, 151,
      158, 166.

  Mycerinus, king of Egypt, 458.


  "Nautilus," ship arrives at Sierra Leone with colony of Negroes, 86.

  Nechao, king of Egypt, 455.

  Negro plot in New York City, 1741, 143-170.

  Negroes, members of the human family, 1, 5;
    descendants of Ham, 3, 8;
    represented in pictures of the crucifixion of Christ, 5;
    an Ethiopian eunuch becomes a Christian, 6;
    same race as Egyptian, 6;
    Cush an ancestor,  10;
    use of the term "Negro," 12, 13;
    antiquity of the race, 14-19;
    early military service, 15;
    figured in a Theban tomb, 15, 16;
    political and social condition, 16;
    the Sphinx a shrine of, 17;
    idols, 17, 18;
    origin of color and hair, 19-21;
    primitive civilization, 22;
    decline, 24;
    kingdoms, 26, 28, 31;
    engage in the slave trade, 27;
    women in the army, 29;
    laws, religion, 30;
    different tribes at war, 30-40;
    war with England, 41-43;
    the Negro type, 45-48;
    physical and mental character affected by climate, 46, 47, 385,
        448;
    longevity, 46;
    slaves the lower class, 47;
    habits, 48;
    susceptible to Christianity, 48;
    idiosyncrasies of the,  50;
    patriarchal government, 50, 54;
    villages, 51, 52;
    pursuits 51;
    architecture, 51, 53;
    women as rulers, 55,  56;
    priests, 55;
    laws, 56, 57;
    marriage, 57, 58;
    status, 58, 59;
    nine feet in height, 59;
    beauty of the, 60, 61;
    warfare, 61, 62;
    agriculture, 62, 63;
    mechanic arts, 63-65;
    languages,  66-70,  90;
    literature,  75-80;
    religion,   81-84, 89, 90;
    free, leave for England, 86;
    colony of, at Sierra Leone, 86;
    serve in the British army, 87;
    their  condition in America,  96;
    found colony at Liberia, 95;
    first importance of, 109;
    military  abilities, 110;
    early Christianity, 111;
    earliest importation to America, 115;
    in Virginia, 116, 118;
    number of, in Virginia, 119, 120;
    prohibition against, 121;
    tax on female, 122, 123;
    law of Virginia declares them slaves, 123, 124;
    repeal of the Act declaring them real estate, 125;
    duty on slaves in Virginia,  126-128;
    traffic encouraged in Virginia, 128;
    no political or military rights in Virginia, 128, 129;
    denied the right to appear as witnesses, 129;
    revolt of free, in Virginia, 130;
    pay taxes, 131;
    in the military service, 131;
    intermarriage of, prohibited, 131;
    denied education, 133;
    children of manumitted, made slaves, 135, 136;
    not allowed to hold real estate in New York, 142;
    earliest mention of, in Massachusetts, 173;
    held in perpetual bondage, 178;
    condition of free, in Massachusetts, 194, 196;
    importation of, not so profitable as white servants, 208;
    Act encouraging the importation of, into Maryland, 241;
    condition of free, in Maryland, 247;
    limited lights of free, 259, 308, 315;
    prohibited the use of the streets in Rhode Island, 264;
    military employment of, 324;
    excluded from the Continental Army, 335;
    allowed to re-enlist, 337;
    in Virginia join the British Army, 339;
    cautioned against joining the latter, 340;
    serve in the army with white troops in Massachusetts, 352;
    efforts to enlist in South Carolina, 351;
    company of, enlisted in Connecticut, 361;
    return of, in the army, 1778, 362;
    as soldiers, 1775-1783, 363;
    at the battle of Bunker Hill, 363;
    at battle of Rhode Island, 368;
    valor of, 369;
    sale of two captured, prohibited in Massachusetts,  371;
    disposal of recaptured, 374, 376;
    education of, prohibited, 385.

  Newburyport, Mass, a slave sues for freedom, 231

  New England Negroes leave for England, 86;
    engaged in the slave trade, 174, 180;
    see Massachusetts.

  New Hampshire, Massachusetts exercises authority over, 309;
    slavery in, 309-311;
    Negro slave emancipated, 309;
    instruction against importation of slaves, 309;
    conduct of servants regulated, 319;
    ill treatment of slaves, 311;
    importation of Indian servants prohibited, 311;
    ill treatment of servants and slaves prohibited, 311;
    duration of slaves in, 311;
    number of slaves in, 325;
    slave population in 1790, 436.

  New Jersey, slavery in, 282-288;
    Act in regard to slaves, 282;
    the colony divided, with separate governments, 283;
    entertaining of fugitive servants, or trading with Negroes,
      prohibited, 283;
    Negroes and other slaves allowed trial by a jury, 283;
    publicity in judicial proceedings, 285;
    rights of government of surrendered to the queen, 285;
    conduct of slaves regulated, 285;
    impost tax on imported Negroes, 286, 287;
    trials of slaves regulated, 286;
    security required
  for manumitted slaves, 287;
    slaves prohibited from joining the militia, 288;
    population, 1738-45, 288;
    number of slaves in, 325;
    slave population in 1790, 436.

  New Netherlands, see New York.

  Newport, Amos, a slave, sues for his freedom, 229.

  Newport, R.I., Negroes and Indians prohibited the use of the streets,
      264;
    Negro slaves arrive, 269;
    part of them sold, 269;
    vessels fitted out for the slave-trade, 269;
    streets repaired from the impost-tax on Negroes, 273, 275.

  New York, slavery in,  134-171;
    slaves imported from Brazil, 146;
    laws relative to slavery, 139;
    slaves the property of West-India Company, 139;
    supply of slaves, 140;
    Act for regulating slaves, 140;
    Act to baptize slaves, 141;
    expedition against Canada, 143;
    governor of, claims jurisdiction over Pennsylvania, 312;
    number of slaves in, 325;
    Act for raising Negro troops, 352;
    Negro soldiers promised freedom, 411;
    slave population in  1790, 436;
    bill for the gradual extinction of slavery, 440;
    laws in regard to slaves, 463.

  New York City, settled by the  Dutch, 134;
    growth of slavery under the Holland government, 134;
    children of manumitted Negroes made slaves, 135, 136;
    slaves imported from Brazil, 136;
    captured by the English, 138;
    laws on slavery, 139;
    identical with Massachusetts, 139;
    Gov. Dongan arrives, 139;
    General Assembly meet, 139;
    proclamation against the harboring of slaves, 141;
    slaves forbidden the streets after nightfall, 141;
    slave-market erected, 142;
    Negro riot, 143;
    Negro plot, 144-171;
    house of Robert Hogg robbed, 145;
    population,   145;
    fire at Fort George,  145;
    fires  in,  146;
    crew  of Spanish vessel adjudged slaves, 146;
    charged with firing houses, 146;
    house of John Hughson, resort for Negroes, 147;
    act  against entertaining   slaves, 148;
    council meet, request governor to offer reward for incendiaries, 149;
    Negroes deny all knowledge of the fires and plot, 149;
    Supreme Court convened, 149;
    trial of Negroes, 149;
    Negroes hanged, 154;
    fast observed in, 154;
    Negroes arrested, 155;
    chained to a stake, and burned, 157;
    proclamation granting freedom to conspirators who would confess, 159;
    Spanish Negroes sentenced to be hung, 161;
    Hughson executed, 161;
    Negroes hanged, 161, 169;
    thanksgiving, 169;
    Rev. John Ury executed, 169;
    arrests for conspiracy, 170;
    first session of Congress held at, in 1789, 426.

  Nicoll, Benjamin, volunteers to prosecute the Negroes in New York, 151.

  Nineveh, the city of, founded, 9-10.

  Noddle's Island, Mass., slaves on, 176.

  Non-Importation Act passed by Congress, 325.

  Norfolk, Va., arrival of slaves at, 328.

  North Carolina, slaves purchased in, to evade the tax, 128;
    slavery in, 302-308;
    situation of, favorable to the slave-trade, 302;
    the Locke Constitution adopted, 302;
    William Sayle commissioned governor, 303;
    Negro slaves eligible to membership in the church, 304;
    Church of England established in, 304;
    rights of Negroes controlled by their masters, 304;
    act respecting conspiracies, 305;
    form of trying Negroes, 307;
    ill treatment of Negroes, 307;
    emancipation of slaves prohibited, 307;
    limited rights of free Negroes, 308;
    number of slaves in, 325;
    slave population in 1790, 436.

  Nott, John C., antiquity of the Negro, 15;
    his social condition, 16.


  Oates, Titus, his connection with the Popish plot, 144.

  Obongos of Africa described, 46.

  Ockote, Osai, king of Ashantee, his war with the English, 43.

  Oglethorpe, John, first governor of Georgia, opposed to slavery, 316.

  Ophir, Africa, description of, 452.

  Opoko, Osai, king of Ashantee, 35.

  Osymandyas, king of Egypt, 458.

  Otis, James, speech in favor of freedom to the Negroes, 203.


  Parsons, Theophilus, his opinion on the existence of slavery in
      Massachusetts, 179, 180;
    decision in the case of Winchendon _vs._ Hatfield, 232.

  Pastorius, Francis Daniel, his memorial against slavery, 1688, 313.

  Payne, John, missionary bishop of Africa, 100.

  Pendleton, Edmund, letter to Richard Lee on the slaves of Virginia
      joining the British army, 339.

  Penn, William, Delaware conveyed to, 249;
    grants the privilege of separate government, 249;
    introduces bill for the regulation of servants, 314;
    opposed to slavery, 314.

  Pennsylvania, slavery in, 312-315;
    government organized, 312;
    Swedes and Dutch settlement, 312;
    governor of New York claims jurisdiction over, 312;
    first laws of, 312;
    memorial against slavery, 313;
    Penn presents bill for the better regulation of servants, 314;
    tax on imported slaves, 314;
    importation of Negroes and Indians prohibited, 314;
    petition for the freedom of slaves denied, 314;
    rights of the Negroes, 315;
    tax on Negroes and Mulatto slaves, 315;
    fears for the conduct of the slaves, 315;
    number of slaves in, 325;
    slave population in 1790, 436.

  Pennsylvania Society for promoting the abolition of  slavery,
      address of  the, 1789, 431.

  Pequod Indians captured in war exchanged for Negroes, 173;
    as slaves, 177.

  Peters, John, married to Phillis Wheatley, 200.

  Peters, Phillis, see Wheatley, Phillis.

  Pheron, king of Egypt, 458.

  Philadelphia, Federal Convention meet at, 417;
    Anti-slavery Convention held at, 438;
    see Pennsylvania.

  Phut, Africa, description of, 452.

  Pickering, Timothy, representative   of Salem, Mass., instructed to
      vote against the importation of slaves, 220.

  Pinny, J.B., missionary to Liberia, 100.

  Pitcairn, John, killed at Bunker Hill by a Negro soldier, 364.

  Plant, Matthias, missionary of the Propagation Society in Mass., 189.

  Po, Fernando, locates Portuguese colony in Africa, 26.

  Poor, Salem, a Negro soldier, his bravery at Bunker Hill, 365.

  Popish   plot   in   England concocted by Titus Gates, 144.

  Portugal, engages in the slave-trade, 26, 31, 463;
    locates colony at Benin, Africa, 26, 27.

  Prescott, Richard, captured by Lieut.-Col. Barton, 366.

  Presbyterian Board of Missions establish missions in Liberia, 100.

  Price, Arthur, arrested for theft in New York, 152;
    testimony in the Negro plot, 152,154.

  Prichard, John C., varieties of the human race, 4.

  Prince, a Negro, assists in the capture of Gen. Prescott, 367.

  Protestant Episcopal Church establishes first mission at Sierra Leone,
      89;
    in Liberia, 100.

  Proteus, king of Egypt, 458.

  Psammetichus, king of Egypt, 455.

  Psammis, king of Egypt, 456.

  Pul, Africa, description of, 452.


  Quakers, opposed to slavery, 218;
    memorial of, against slavery in Pennsylvania, 313;
    the friends of the Negroes, 315;
    memorial to Congress relative to slavery, 439.


  Rameses, Miamun, king of Egypt, 458.

  Raffles, T. Stanford, his researches on the Negro race, 19.

  Reade, W. Winwood, describes patriarchal government of Africa, 55;
    beauty of the Negro, 60, 61;
    people of Sierra Leone, 87.

  Revere, Paul, Negroes placed in his charge at Castle Island, Mass.,
      377.

  Rhampsinitus, king of Egypt, 458.

  Rhode Island, slavery in, 262-281;
    colonial government, 262;
    Act of 1652 to abolish slavery not enforced, 262;
    Negroes and Indians prohibited the use of the streets, 264;
    impost-tax on slaves, 265;
    entertainment of slaves prohibited, 266;
    Negro slaves sold in, 269;
    supply of Negroes from Barbadoes, 269;
    vessels fitted out for the slave-trade, 269;
    value of Negro slaves, 269;
    list of militia-men, including white and black servants, 270;
    clandestine importations and exportations of passengers, Negroes,
      or Indian slaves prohibited, 371;
    masters of vessels required to report the names and number of
      passengers, 272, 274;
    penalties for violating the impost-tax law on slaves, 272;
    portion of the impost-tax on imported Negroes appropriated to
      repair streets of Newport, 273;
    disposition of the money raised by impost-tax, 275;
    slaves imported into, 276;
    impost-tax repealed,  277;
    manumission of aged and helpless slaves regulated,  277;
    Negro slaves rated as chattel property, 278;
    masters of vessels prohibited from carrying slaves out of, 278;
    importation of Negroes prohibited, 280;
    population from 1730-1774, 281;
    number of slaves in, 325;
    act emancipating slaves on joining  the army, 347;
    protest against the enlistment of slaves, 348;
    Negro troops engaged in the battle of, 368;
    slave population in 1790, 436.

  Ricketts, Capt., services in the Ashantee war, 42.

  Roberts, J.J., president of Liberia, proclamation regarding
      passports, 106.

  Rockwell, Charles, describes Liberia, 96.

  Roman Catholics denied the right to appear as witnesses in Virginia,
      129;
    treatment of, in Maryland, 243;
    denounced by Oates, 144;
    suspected in New York, 160, 162, 164, 167.

  Rome, Negro civilization imitated by, 22.

  Rommes, John, charged with burglary at New  York, 148;
    accused of being in the Negro plot, 153.

  Royal African Company, charter abolished, 41;
    ordered to send  supply of slaves to New York, 140;
    has sole right to trade on the coast of Africa, 316.

  Royall, Jacob, imports Negro slaves into Rhode Island, 276.

  Ruffin, Robert, a slave of, declared free for revealing plot of free
      Negroes in Virginia, 130.

  Rush, Benjamin, his opinion of James Derham the Negro physician, 401.

  Ryase, Andrew, accused of conspiracy in New York, 163.


  Sabachus, king of Ethiopia, 454.

  Saffin, John, reply to Judge Sewall's tract, "The Selling of Joseph,"
      214.

  St. George's Bay Company organized, 86;
    succeeded by the Sierra Leone Company, 86.

  Salem, Mass, representative of, instructed to vote against the
        importation of slaves, 220, 224;
    Negro conspiracy, 227;
    slaves sent to, 209, 376;
    petition of slaves in, 462;
    Negroes captured at sea advertised for sale, 372.

  Salem, Peter, a Negro soldier, his bravery at Bunker Hill, 364.

  Salisbury, Samuel Webster, author of an address on slavery, 1769,
      218.

  Saltonstall, Richard, petitions the General Court of Massachusetts
      against stealing Negroes for slaves, 181.

  Sandwich, Mass, representative of, instructed to vote against
      slavery, 225.

  Sargent, Nathaniel P., opinion, 1783, relative to South-Carolina
      Negroes, 381.

  Savage, Samuel P., letter, 1763, in regard to South Carolina Negroes,
      377.

  Sayle, William, commissioned governor of North Carolina, 302.

  Schultz, John, testimony in the Negro plot at New York, 1741, 463.

  Scotland, a Negro slave liberated in 1762, 403.

  Scott, Bishop, letter on the government of Liberia, 99.

  "Seaflower," ship, arrives at Newport, R.I., from Africa, with slaves,
      269.

  Seba, Africa, description of, 452.

  Sesach, king of Egypt, 454.

  Sesostris, king of Egypt, 458.

  Sethon, king of Egypt, 454.

  Sewall, Jonathan, letter to John Adams on the emancipation of slaves,
      207.

  Sewall, Joseph, sermon on the fires in Boston, 1723, 226.

  Sewall, Samuel, protests against rating Negroes with cattle, 187;
    his hatred of slavery, 210;
    publishes his tract "The Selling of Joseph," 210;
    father of the anti-slavery movement in Massachusetts, 217;
    letter to Addington Davenport on the murder of Smith's slave, 1719,
     461.

  Shaftesbury, Earl of, in favor of introducing slavery into Georgia,
      322.

  Sharp, Granville, one of the founders of Sierra Leone colony, 86.

  Sherbro, mission district, Western Africa, described, 460.

  Shinga, queen of Congo, 55

  Shishak, king of Ethiopia, 454.

  Shodeke, king of Yoruba, Africa, 31.

  Siam, negro idols in, 17.

  Sicana, chief of the Kaffir tribe, a Christian and a poet, 80.

  Sierra Leone, sends colony to Yoruba, Africa, 32;
    discovered, 85;
    Negro colony founded, 86,67;
    attacked by French squadron, 87;
    England takes possession of, 87;
    population, 88, 90;
    trade, 88;
    Christian missions at, 89,90;
    languages of colony, 90;
    character of the inhabitants described by Gov. Ferguson, 90-93;
    slaves from, sold at Hispaniola, 138.

  Sierra Leone Company, organized, 86,
    objects of, 87.

  Simon, a negro, bears the cross of Jesus, 5.

  Slavery, Hopkins's Bible views of, 7, 8;
    in  Egypt, 17,
    in Africa, 25-27,
    Lord Manfield's decision in the Sommersett case, 85;
    colonization, the solution of, 97;
    abolished in Liberia,  104,  105;
    weaker tribes of Africa, chief source of, 109;
    introduced in Virginia, 115, 116, 118;
    made legal in Virginia, 123, 124;
    growth of, in Virginia, 133;
    growth in New York, 134;
    sanctioned by the English, 138;
    New York laws, 139;
    made legal in New York, 140;
    in Massachusetts,  172-237;
    established,  175,  179;
    first statute establishing, in United States, 177;
    sanctioned by the church and courts, 178;
    made hereditary in Massachusetts,   179;
    growth of, in Massachusetts, 183;
    recognized in England, 203;
    act to abolish in Massachusetts, 204;
    prohibitory legislation against, 220-225;
    first legislation in Maryland, 235;
    established by statute,  240;
    increased in  Maryland, 247;
    introduced in Delaware, 249;
    first legislation on, 250;
    Indian and Negro, legalized in Connecticut, 259;
    in New Jersey, 282;
    established in South Carolina, 289;
    perpetual, 290, 291;
    in New  Hampshire 309;
    memorial against, in Pennsylvania, 313;
    prohibited in Georgia, 316;
    Gov. Oglethorpe's opinion on, 316;
    discussion on the admission of, in Georgia, 318-322;
    established in Georgia, 322;
    Washington prevents resolutions against, 327;
    legislation against, demanded, 403;
    act against, in Massachusetts, 405;
    progress of, during the Revolution, 411;
    as a political and legal problem, 412;
    recognized under the new government of United States, 414;
    attempted legislation against,  415;
    advocated by  the Southern States, 418;
    speeches delivered in the convention at Philadelphia on, 420;
    in the Federal Congress, 427;
    extinction  of, in Massachusetts,   429;
    Franklin's address for the abolition of, 431;
    memorials  to Congress for the abolition of, 432, 437;
    bill for the gradual extinction  of, in  New York, 440;
    firmly established, 441.

  Slaves, social condition of white and black, 16;
    the lower class of negroes, 47;
    Lord Mansfield's decision in the Sommersett case, 85, 86;
    declared free on reaching British soil, 86;
    introduced in America, 115;
    first introduced in Virginia, 116, 118;
    on Somer Islands, 118;
    number of, in Virginia, 119, 120, 132, 133;
    prohibition against, 121;
    special tax on female, 122, 123;
    sold for tobacco, 122;
    laws of Virginia in regard to, 123-125;
    act repealed declaring them real estate, 125;
    duty on, 126, 127;
    purchased in Maryland and Carolina to evade the tax, 128;
    tax on sales of, in Virginia, 128;
    reduced, 128;
    repealed, 128;
    revived, 128;
    traffic in, encouraged in Virginia, 128;
    no political or military rights, 128, 129;
    laws in Virginia, 129,  130;
    value  fixed  on, when executed, 129;
    laws of  Virginia in regard to freedom of, 130;
    presented to clergymen, 131;
    prohibition against instructing, 132;
    denied education, 132;
    introduced in New York, 134;
    West India Company trade in, 135;
    manumitted in New York, 135;
    children of the latter held as, 135;
    imported from Brazil to New York, 136;
    exchanged for tobacco, 136;
    intermarry in New York, 137;
    New York to have constant supply, 140;
    Act to regulate, 140, 141;
    Act to baptizse, 140;
    against the harboring of, 141, 148;
    forbidden the streets in New York, 141;
    Negro riot, 143;
    Negro plot, 144-171;
    executed, 154, 161;
    burned, 157;
    Negroes exchanged for Indians, 173;
    Indians sent to Bermudas, 173;
    imported from Barbadoes to Massachusetts, 174;
  ship "Desire" arrives with, 174, 176;
    attempt to breed, in Massachusetts, 174;
    sold in Massachusetts, 175;
    issue of  female, the  property of their master, 180;
    marriage of, 180, 191, 192;
    sold at Barbadoes and West Indies, 181;
    number in Massachusetts, 183, 184;
    tax on, 185;
    rated as cattle, 187, 188, 196;
    denied baptism, 189;
    marriage-ceremony, 192;
    verdict awarded  to  a slave in Massachusetts, 204;
    number in Boston, 205;
    emancipated, 206;
    executed in Massachusetts, 226;
    transported and exchanged for small negroes, 226;
    sue for freedom in Massachusetts, 228-232;
    emancipated   by England,  231;
    slave-code of Maryland, 246;
    laws against manumission of, 246, 250;
    introduced in Connecticut, 252;
    purchase and treatment of, 253;
    persons manumitting to maintain them, 254;
    commerce with, prohibited,  255;
    importation of, prohibited, 259, 261;
    impost-tax on, in Rhode Island, 265;
    entertainment of, prohibited, 266;
    letter of the board of trade relative to, 267;
    Rhode Island supplied with, from  Barbadoes,  269;
    slaves sold in Rhode Island, 269;
    value of, 269;
    clandestine importation and exportation of, prohibited, 271;
    Act relative to freeing Mulatto and Negro, in Rhode Island, 277;
    rated as chattel property, 278;
    masters of vessels prohibited from carrying Negro out of Rhode
      Island, 280;
    importation  of, prohibited,  280;
    allowed trial by jury, in New Jersey, 283;
    impost-tax  on, 286, 287;
    prohibited from joining militia, 288;
    regarded as chattel property in South Carolina, 292;
    branded, 294;
    life  of, regarded as of little consequence, 296;
    education of, prohibited, 298, 300;
    overworking of, prohibited, 298;
    insurrection, 299;
    enlistment of, 300;
    masters compensated for the loss of, 301;
    rights of, controlled by the master in North Carolina, 304;
    emancipation of, prohibited, 307;
    New Hampshire opposed to the importation of, 309;
    ill treatment of, prohibited, 311;
    duration of, in New Hampshire, 311;
    tax on, imported into Pennsylvania, 314, 315;
    petition for freedom of, denied, 314;
    number of slaves in the colonies 1715 and 1775, 325;
    arrival of, at Virginia, from Jamaica, 328;
    severe treatment of, modified, 329;
    the Boston Massacre, 330;
    in the Continental army, 333, 335;
    excluded from the army, 335;
    allowed to re-enlist, 337;
    Lord Dunmore's proclamation  freeing,   336;
    join  the British army, 339;
    prohibited from enlisting in Connecticut, 343;
    Rhode Island emancipates, on joining the army, 347;
    protest against the same, 348;
    masters of enlisted, recompensed,   349;
    serve in the army with white troops, 352;
    Act to enlist, in New York, 352;
    efforts to enlist, in South Carolina, 357;
    treatment of, by Cornwallis, 358;
    exchanged for merchandise, 358;
    disposal of recaptured, 374, 376, 379;
    recaptured, sent to Boston, 376;
    list of recaptured, 377;
    held as personal property, 381, 384;
    education of, prohibited, 385;
    sale of, advertised, 403, 408;
    in Massachusetts petition for freedom, 404;
    rights of, limited in Virginia, 409;
    who served in the army emancipated, 410;
    promised their freedom in New York, 411;
    impost-tax on, introduced in Federal Congress, 427;
    lawsuits instituted by, in Massachusetts, 430;
    number of, in United States, 1790, 436;
    law for the return of fugitive, 438;
    introduction of, prohibited into the Mississippi Territory, 440;
    importation of, prohibited in Georgia, 440;
    condition of, in Massachusetts, 461;
    petition of, in Boston, 462;
    Massachusetts   laws   in regard to, 463.

  Slave-trade, commenced at Benin, Africa, 26;
    natives of Africa engage in, 27;
    suppressed by England, 28, 31;
    at Yoruba, Africa, 31;
    declared piracy by England, 87;
    abolished in Liberia, 104, 105;
    earliest commerce for slaves between Africa and America, 115;
    introduced first in Virginia, 116, 118;
    Dutch engage in the, 124, 135;
    tax on the subjects of Great Britain in the, 127;
    encouraged in Virginia, 128;
    with Angola, Africa, 134;
    encouraged by the Dutch, 135;
    sanctioned by the English, 138;
    encouraged by Queen Elizabeth, 138;
    growth in New York, 140;
    slave-market erected in New York, 142;
    Indians exchanged for Negroes, 173;
    in New England, 174;
    ship "Desire" built for the, 174;
  arrives with cargo of slaves, 174, 176;
    on the coast of Guinea, 180;
    increased in Massachusetts, 184;
    abolished by England, 231;
    bill for the suppression of, in Massachusetts, 235;
    sanctioned in Rhode Island, 265, 273;
    vessels fitted out for the, 269;
    slave-market at Charleston, S.C., 299;
    the situation of South Carolina favorable to the, 302;
    progress during the Revolution, 402;
    discussion in Congress on the restriction of the, 434;
    act against the foreign, 438.

  Slew, Jenny, a slave, sues for her freedom, 228.

  Smeatham, Dr., one of the founders of the Sierra Leone colony, 86.

  Smith, Hamilton, antiquity of the Negro race, 18.

  Smith, Samuel, murders his Negro slave, 461.

  Smith, William, volunteers to prosecute the Negroes in New York, 151,
      158, 166.

  Sommersett, James, a Negro slave, brought to England and abandoned by
      his master, 85, 205;
    discharged, 206.

  Sorubiero, Margaret, connected with the New-York Negro plot, 1741,
      147, 152, 153.

  South Carolina, slaves purchased in, to evade the tax, 128;
    slavery in, 289-301;
    receives two charters from Great Britain, 289;
    Negro slaves in, 289;
    slavery legislation, 289;
    slavery established, 289;
    perpetual bondage of the Negro, 290, 291;
    slaves regarded as chattel property, 292;
    trial of slaves, 292;
    increase of slave population, 292;
    growth of the rice-trade, 292;
    trade with Negroes prohibited, 293;
    conduct of slaves regulated, 293;
    punishment of slaves, 294;
    branded, 294;
    life of slaves regarded as of little consequence, 296;
    fine for killing slaves, 296;
    education of slaves prohibited, 298, 300;
    permitted to be baptized, 298;
    inquiry into the treatment of slaves,  298;
    overworking of slaves prohibited, 298;
    hours of labor, 298;
    slave-market at Charleston, 299;
    Negro insurrection, 299;
    whites authorized to carry fire-arms, 300;
    enlistment of slaves, 300;
    Negroes admitted to the militia service, 300;
    masters compensated for the loss of slaves, 301;
    few slaves manumitted, 301;
    little legislation on slavery from 1754-1776, 301;
    effect of the threatened war with England, 301;
    number of slaves in 1715 and 1775, 325;
    efforts to raise Negro troops, 355;
    Negroes desert from, 355;
    recapture of Negroes from the British, 376;
    slave population, 1790, 436.

  Spain engaged in the slave-trade, 31;
    her colonies in the West Indies to be furnished with Negroes, 237.

  Stanley, Henry M., description of a journey through Africa, 72.

  Staten Island, N.Y., a Negro regiment to be raised there, 342.

  Stephens, Thomas, favors the introduction of slavery in Georgia, 319;
    reprimanded, 320.

  Stewart, Charles, owner of the Negro slave James Sommersett, 205.

  Stone, S.C., a Negro insurrection at, 299.

  Swain, John, suit to recover a slave, 231.

  Swan, James, advocate of liberty for all, 204.

  Swedes, settle on the Delaware River, 312.


  Tacudons, king of Dahomey, 28.

  Tarshish, Africa, description of, 452.

  Taylor, Comfort, sues a slave for trespass, 278.

  Teage, Collin, missionary to Liberia, 101.

  Tembandumba, queen of the Jagas, 56.

  Tharaca, king of Egypt, 454.

  Thethmosis, king of Egypt, 459.

  Thomas, John, letter to John Adams, 1775, on the employment of
      Negroes in the army, 337.

  Thompson, Capt, of ship "Nautilus," arrives at Sierra Leone with
      Negroes, 86.

  Timans, second king of Egypt, 454.

  Tutu Osai, king of Ashantee, 34.

  "Treasurer," ship, sails to West Indies for Negroes, 116;
    arrives at Virginia, 117.

  "Tyrannicide," armed vessel, re-captures Negroes, 376.


  Uchoreus, king of Egypt, 459.

  Undi, African chief, 50.

  United States, condition of the Colored population before the war of
      1861, 96;
    first statute establishing slavery in, 177;
    slave population, 1715 and 1775, 325;
    confederation of the, 374;
    treaty with England, 382;
  the Tory party in favor of slavery, 413;
    the Whigs the dominant party in the Northern States, 414;
    slavery recognized under the new government of the, 414;
    anti-slavery agitation in, 414;
    plan for the disposal of the Western Territory, 416;
    proceedings of Federal Convention, 417;
    slave population in 1790, 436.

  United-States Congress, action on the disposal of recaptured Negroes,
      374;
    first session at New York, 1789, 426;
    proceedings, 427;
    memorials to, for the abolition of slavery, 432, 437;
    discussion in, on the restriction of the slave-trade, 433;
    prohibits the introduction of slaves into the Mississippi Territory,
      440.

  Upton, Samuel and William, emancipate their father's slave, 207.

  Ury, John, his connection with the New-York Negro plot, 1741, 160,
      162, 163, 166;
    executed, 169.

  Utrecht, the treaty of, to provide Negroes for the Spanish West
      Indies, 236.


  Van Twiller, Wouter, charged with neglect of public affairs in
      New Netherlands, 249;
    owner of Negro slaves, 250.

  Varick, Cæsar, charged with burglary at New York, 148.

  Varnum, Gen. J.M., letter to Washington on the enlistment of Negroes,
      346.

  Vaughan, Col. James, Legislature of Rhode Island refund tax on two
      child slaves imported by, 276.

  Vermont, slave population, 1790;
    admitted into the Union, 436.

  "Victoria," ship, captures British privateer with Negroes, 376.

  Virginia, slavery in, 115-133;
    slaves first introduced, 116;
    number of, 119;
    forced on the colony, 119;
    the first to purchase slaves, 119;
    women purchased in England and sent to, 119;
    number of slaves, 119, 120, 132, 133;
    population, 120;
    Assembly pass prohibition against Negroes, 121;
    slavery legalized, 123;
    Indians declared slaves, 124, 125;
    Assembly protest against the repeal of the Act declaring Negroes
        real estate, 125, 126;
    impose duty on slaves and servants imported, 126, 127;
    tax on slaves sold, 128;
    reduced, 128, repealed, 128;
    revived, 128;
    prohibit Catholics, Indians, and Negro slaves to appear as
        witnesses, 129;
    pass act to value slave when executed, 129;
    threatened revolt of the free Negroes, 130;
    Act in regard to the freedom of slaves, 130;
    number of slaves in 1715 and 1775, 325;
    arrival of slaves in 1775, 328;
    purchaser of the same reproved, 328;
    instructions to delegation to Congress relative to the abolition
        of slavery, 328;
    Lord Dunmore's proclamation freeing slaves, 336;
    Negroes join the British army, 339, 352;
    declaration of convention against Dunmore's proclamation, 341;
    number of slaves in Cornwallis's army, 358;
    rights of slaves limited, 409;
    slaves who served in the army emancipated, 410;
    slave population, 1790, 436.


  Walklin, Thomas, testimony in the Sommersett case, 205.

  Warren, Joseph, oration on human liberty, 333.

  Warwick, Earl of, slaves on his plantation at the Bermudas, 116, 118.

  Washburn, Emory, views on the slavery laws of Massachusetts, 179.

  Washington, George, acknowledges verses written by Phillis Wheatley,
      200, 201;
    presents Virginia resolutions of 1774 against slavery, 327;
    takes command of the army, 334;
    forbids the enlistment of Negroes, 334;
    instructed to discharge all Negroes and slaves in the army, 335;
    order of, against Negro enlistments, 336;
    letter to Congress on admitting Negroes to the army, 337;
    letter to Joseph Reed on Lord Dunmore's proclamation, 341;
    letter to Gov. Cooke, 345;
    letter to Henry Laurens, on the arming of the Negroes, 353;
    letter to John Laurens on the failure to enlist Negroes in the
        South, 360;
    letter to Sir Guy Carleton relative to Negroes, 381;
    to Gen. Putnam in regard to a Negro in the army claimed by his
        owner, 384;
    president of the Federal Convention, 417.

  Watson, Capt., arrives at Norfolk, Va., with slaves, 328.

  Wayne, Anthony, letter to Lieut.-Col. Meigs relative to Negroes
    captured by him, 375.

  Wesleyan Methodists establish mission at Sierra Leone, 90.

  West India Company, trade in slaves, 135;
    children of manumitted Negroes held as slaves by the, 135;
    cost of the government of New Netherland to the, 136;
    encourage commerce in slaves, 137;
    slaves in New York the property of the, 139.

  West Indies, Negroes captured and made slaves, 117, 118;
    slaves sold at, 181;
    England furnishes Negroes to the, 237.

  Western Territory, plan for the disposal of the, 416;
    slave population, 1790, 436.

  Wheatley, Phillis, an African poetess, 197;
    visits England, 198;
    publishes her poems, 199;
    marries John Peters, 200;
    death of, 200;
    poem to Washington, 200;
    Washington's letter of acknowledgment, 201.

  Whipple, John, sued by Jenny Slew, a slave, 228.

  Whitefield, Rev. George, his plantation and Negroes in Georgia, 321.

  Williams, George W., orations on "The Footsteps of the Nation,"
      "Early Christianity in Africa," 111;
    first colored graduate from Newton Seminary, 111;
    ordination poem by Rev. Dr. Abbott, 111.

  Wilson, D.A., principal of school at Liberia, 100.

  Wilson, Jacob, on African languages, 67.

  Wilkinson, Gardiner, discovers a Theban tomb with Negro scenes, 15;
    condition of white and black slaves, 16.

  Willson, Capt. John, charged with exciting slaves, 226.

  Windsor, Thomas, master of ship "Seaflower," arrives at Newport,
      R.I., with slaves from Africa, 269.

  Winter, Sir William, a slave-trader, 138.

  Worcester, Mass, representative instructed to vote against slavery,
      220.


  York, Duke of, conveys Delaware to William Penn, 249.

  Yoruba, Africa, Negro kingdom, 31;
    slave trade stopped, 31.


  Zerah, king of Ethiopia, 454.