CONTRIBUTIONS FROM
  THE MUSEUM OF HISTORY AND TECHNOLOGY:

  PAPER 35




  THE BORGHESI ASTRONOMICAL CLOCK IN THE MUSEUM OF HISTORY AND TECHNOLOGY

  by

  _Silvio A. Bedini_


                             DEVELOPMENT OF ASTRONOMICAL CLOCKS     32

                                              DESIGNER BORGHESI     33

                                            CLOCKMAKER BERTOLLA     34

                                           FIRST BORGHESI CLOCK     38

                                          SECOND BORGHESI CLOCK     41

                              BORGHESIAN THEORY OF THE UNIVERSE     54

                                                     LAST YEARS     57

                      THE CLOCKS OF BARTOLOMEO ANTONIO BERTOLLA     59

                                                       APPENDIX     71

                                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY     76


[Illustration: Figure 1.--THE DIAL PLATE of the Borghesi clock, showing
the horary and astronomical indications which are automatically
presented.]


  _Silvio A. Bedini_


  _The Borghesi Astronomical Clock_
  _In the Museum of History and Technology_


     _The history of the 18th-century Borghesi astronomical clock is
     described here from contemporary source material. The evolution
     of its design by Father Francesco Borghesi and the building of
     the complex mechanism devised by the clockmaker, Bartolomeo
     Antonio Bertolla, is a story of the vision of one man turned
     into reality by another. The result of their collaboration is
     the unique, astronomical timepiece now in the Museum of History
     and Technology._

     THE AUTHOR: _Silvio A. Bedini is curator of mechanical and
     civil engineering in the Smithsonian Institution's Museum of
     History and Technology._


     "... All this work I had performed eagerly, so that, while in
     my room, I might contemplate leisurely, both during the day and
     in the night, the true face of the heavens and of the seas
     unobscured by clouds, even though I had no astronomical
     equipment."[1]

With these words, Father Francesco Borghesi (1723-1802) of Mechel
described the reasons which inspired him to invent a unique astronomical
clock which is now in the horological collection of the Museum of
History and Technology.

This complicated mechanism, which performs a multitude of functions, was
designed by Father Francesco Borghesi, a secular priest in Venezia
Tridentina. It was constructed in 1764 under his direction by a
provincial clockmaker named Bartolomeo Antonio Bertolla (1702-1789) of
Mocenigo di Rumo. It was the second of two complicated astronomical
clocks which Father Borghesi designed and which Bertolla constructed.
According to contemporary sources, this clock was presented to the
Empress Maria Theresa of Austria soon after its completion.

Its history is rather hazy, except for the fact that in 1780 this second
Borghesi timepiece was still in the Imperial Palace in Vienna. The clock
was again noted in 1927 when it was sold at a public auction in New
York.[2] Subsequently, it was acquired for the Smithsonian Institution.




Development of Astronomical Clocks


The history of the great theoretical and mechanical achievement which
the Borghesi clock represents has been most adequately covered
elsewhere.[3] Consideration of the development of equation and
astronomical clocks is required here only for the purpose of relating
the Borghesi timepiece with the other significant developments in this
branch of horology.

The invention of the anchor escapement in about 1670, and the consequent
greater accuracy in time-telling, led to increased preoccupation with
precision. Daily differences in time as recorded by sundials and clocks
became more noticeable. Finally, in the second half of the 17th century,
some attempt was made to construct mechanical clocks combined with
sundials as well as astronomical clocks.

With the improvement of precision time-telling, it became necessary to
reconcile the actual difference between true and mean time. Although a
great variety of time-equation tables were produced, there was a
considerable margin for error in their use. This led to the construction
of mechanical clocks in which the equation of time was automatically
accomplished. A few were produced late in the 17th and early 18th
century at considerable cost and, consequently, with little popularity.
Equation sundials were also developed which were elaborately ingenious,
but they were not completely practical. Inevitably, they were supplanted
by the mechanical equation clock.

Probably the first documented mention of an equation clock is in the
diary of John Evelyn who recorded that in 1666 he visited the Royal
Society where he witnessed a curious clock, which showed the equation of
time, being presented by a certain Mercator. More data on the subject
appeared in the first two decades of the 18th century, when Henry Sully,
Joseph Williamson, Daniel Quare, and Thomas Tompion--who were among the
foremost English clockmakers of all time--produced elaborate examples of
these timepieces. Another significant maker was Dowe Williamson, who
became Court Clockmaker to Emperor Charles VI of Austria. In London,
Joseph Williamson produced some of the finest astronomical timepieces of
this type that have been known. The interest in the subject next shifted
to France where many fine examples were produced during the first half
of the 18th century.

Just after the middle of the 18th century, the subject of astronomical
clocks suddenly became a major horological preoccupation in another
region, namely, Austria, where the work in this field was apparently
done exclusively by members of the clergy. The earliest was Father
Philipp Matthaeus Hahn (1739-1790) of Wuerttemberg.[4] Father Hahn
considered the equation of time as only one part of a plan to represent
astronomical occurrences by means of clockwork. In addition to
planetaria and similar mechanisms, Father Hahn produced two
extraordinary astronomical, tall-case clocks, both of which survive in
public museums.



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The author wishes to acknowledge the valuable assistance received from
the following: DR. AMOS AVERY, Amherst, Massachusetts; MR. EDWIN A.
BATTISON, curator of light machinery and horology, U.S. National Museum;
DOTT. RICHARD BLAAS, Oesterreiches Staatsarchiv, Vienna; DOTT. ADOLFO
CETTO, librarian, Biblioteca Comunale di Trento, who made copies of
Borghesi's two volumes available; SIGNOR MARIO DI MARIO, editor of _La
Clessidra_, Rome, who permitted several of the illustrations in Sig.
Luigi Pippa's article to be used herein; MR. WALTER A. GILBERT, Norwich,
Connecticut; DR. HEINRICH LINARDI, Uhrenmuseum der Stadt Wien, Vienna;
SIGNOR LUIGI PIPPA, Milan, Italy; CAV. ING. GUIDO UCELLI DI NEMI,
Presidente, and DOTT. FEDERICO MORELLI and CAV. ORAZIO CURTI of the
Museo Nazionale della Scienza e della Tecnica, Milan, for their
cooperation on the descriptions and illustrations of the restored
clockshop of Bartolomeo Antonio Bertolla; and DR. EDWARD WATERS,
Division of Music, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.

The translation from Francesco Borghesi's Latin texts, which made this
study possible, were made by: REV. NEIL HERLIHY, S.J., REV. FRANCIS J.
HEYDEN, S.J., and REV. STEPHEN X. WINTERS, S.J., Georgetown University,
Washington, D.C.; and REV. DANIEL HUNTER, O.P., and REV. ROBERT STENGER,
O.P., Dominican House of Studies, Washington, D.C.



[Illustration: Figure 2.--PORTRAIT OF FATHER FRANCESCO BORGHESI,
inventor and designer of the astronomical clock in the Museum of History
and Technology.]

Another of the clerical clockmakers was Father Aurelianus a San Daniele
(1728-1782), an Augustine monk in the monastery of the Imperial Court at
Vienna.[5] His four complicated astronomical clocks, which exist in
museums at present, are comparable to those produced by Father Hahn. The
third cleric was Brother David a San Cajetano (1736-1796) in the same
Augustine order to which Father Aurelianus belonged. He achieved note as
the author of various publications, including _Neue Raedergebaeude_[6]
[New Construction of Wheels] relating to planet-wheels, or gear-trains
containing epicyclic elements. He constructed a clock based on an
elaborate astronomical design which was substantially different from the
others. The fourth of the ecclesiasts who designed astronomical clocks
in this period was Father Klein of Prague, who produced a complicated
astronomical timepiece in about 1738.

The fact that such important and outstanding examples of astronomical
clocks were produced exclusively by ecclesiasts in Austria during the
second half of the 18th century is especially significant. It is
particularly so when a fifth cleric is added to the group, also an
Austrian subject although Italian by heritage, in the person of Father
Francesco Borghesi.

Although only Father Borghesi's second astronomical clock is now known,
it is apparent that this example in the Museum of History and Technology
represents an experiment in astronomical time-telling comparable to any
of the timepieces produced by Father Hahn, Father Aurelianus, Brother
David a San Cajetano or Father Klein.

This combination of five clerical clockmakers who lived in the same
region during the same period of time is sufficiently unusual. However,
the fact that each of them apparently worked without association with
any of the others leads to the conjecture that a common factor must have
led them to their individual preoccupation with astronomical horology.
What the link may have been is not apparent from the surviving records
of the lives and works of these clerics. Certainly it was not an
interest in astronomy or clockmaking per se, because other than the
astronomical clocks, none of these horological inventors--with the
possible exception of Father Hahn--worked in any other aspect of the
fields of astronomy or horology. However, after a comprehensive study of
Father Borghesi's writings, there is little doubt of the religious basis
of his own inspiration.




Designer Borghesi


Father Borghesi's story takes place in the picturesque mountainous
region of what was then known as Venezia Tridentina (since 1947,
Trentino-Alto Adige) in northern Italy, along the Tyrolean border of
Austria. Because of its strategic position as the passage between
Innsbruck and Verona, the possession of the Tridentina was contested
again and again in the European wars, but during Father Borghesi's
lifetime, the Tridentina was under Austrian domination.

[Illustration: Figure 3.--PANORAMA of the village of Mechel in the
valley of the Non, birthplace of Father Borghesi.]

Deep within this mountainous district is the romantic valley of the Non,
or Anauni, with its great forests and ancient castles. Most maps do not
mark it, and the tourist guides ignore it.[7] One of the chief
communities is Cles, with its historic Renaissance buildings. The major
city of the region is Trent on the Adige River, with its surviving Roman
relics and Romanesque and Renaissance architecture.

The little villages scattered throughout the valley of the Non played no
part in history, but such names as Mechel and Mocenigo di Rumo reflect
the interchange of sovereignty. It was in the little village of Mechel
that Francesco Borghesi was born in 1723.[8] Local records are meager
and inadequate, and many of the details of Borghesi's life must be
assumed. Inasmuch as the village was in a rural, agricultural district,
Borghesi may have come from a family of farmers, vintners, or village
tradesmen. Borghesi sought an education by entering the priesthood and
was ordained a secular priest in Salzburg. He was first assigned as
curate to the village parish of Rumo in the valley of the Non, a short
distance from his birthplace.[9] Later, he was transferred to his native
Mechel. He was inherently a man of simple tastes and of great piety. He
tended to the needs of his mountain villagers and attended the births,
weddings and deaths of his parishioners. It was during his assignment in
this tiny community that Father Borghesi met and became friendly with
the clockmaker, Bartolomeo Antonio Bertolla of nearby Mocenigo di Rumo.




Clockmaker Bertolla


Bartolomeo Antonio Bertolla was born in Mocenigo di Rumo, a short
distance from Mechel, in 1702.[10] Nothing is known of his boyhood,
other than the fact that he was mechanically inclined. At the age of 17
he was apprenticed to become a clockmaker with the master, Johann Georg
Butzjaeger of Neulengbach, a small village on the edge of the great
Vienna woods.[11] This region was then part of the domain of the
Archduke of Austria, of which Sankt Poelten was the capital.

[Illustration: Figure 4.--PORTRAIT OF BARTOLOMEO ANTONIO BERTOLLA,
clockmaker, of Mocenigo di Rumo. The canvas in oils is owned by
descendants. In the upper left-hand corner is an inscription, now hardly
legible, indicating that the portrait may have been painted after
Bertolla's death on January 15, 1789. Translated, it states: "Bartolomeo
Antonio Bertola [sic] Celebrated Mechanician and Inventor of various
Instruments. Repairer of the clocks of Venice, Verona, Trent, and other
localities. Maker of the Work which combines the Copernican and
Ptolemaic Systems devised by Father Francesco Borghesi of Mechel,
Laureate Mathematician, and humbly offered to Her Imperial Majesty Maria
Theresa. Died in piety in his home at Rumo on 15 January 1789 at the age
of 86." (_Courtesy of Sig. Luigi Pippa of Milan._)]

[Illustration: Figure 5.--THE VILLAGE OF MOCENIGO DI RUMO in the valley
of the Non. Arrow points to Bertolla's home and workshop at far left.]

[Illustration: Figure 6.--CERTIFICATE OF APPRENTICESHIP awarded to
Bartolomeo Antonio Bertolla upon completion of his 3-year apprenticeship
at Neulengbach, dated December 27, 1722.]

Bertolla began his apprenticeship with Butzjaeger under the auspices of
the Corporation of Blacksmiths of Sankt Poelten in 1719. His training was
supervised by two master locksmiths, Johann Christian Winz and Peter
Wisshofer, who were members of the Corporation, and were assigned to
serve as patrons for the apprentice. It was their obligation to make
certain that he received good care and adequate instruction from his
master. While he worked in Butzjaeger's shop, Bertolla lived with the
master's family in their home.

Bertolla's 3 years at Neulengbach passed quickly as he sought to absorb
all that his master could teach him. Butzjaeger was considered to be a
good craftsman in the region, yet today there is not even a mention of
his name in the lists of clockmakers. He specialized in the production
and repair of "great clocks" which included tall-case, domestic
timepieces, and tower clocks. Butzjaeger treated his apprentice well, and
in return Bertolla rewarded him by being diligent and honest. His
subsequent work is sufficient indication that he developed into an
extremely skilled craftsman, and he became the equal of any clockmaker
of his time.

The 3 years of apprenticeship were completed and on December 27, 1722,
Bertolla received a certificate from the Corporation of Blacksmiths
which assured whomever it might concern of Bertolla's skill, diligence
and honesty, and permitted him to open his own shop as a clockmaker
under the auspices of the Corporation. This document, which has been
preserved by Bertolla's descendants, is an interesting record of the
organization of the trade guilds in the 18th century, and, for that
reason, has been translated from the original German:

     We, the Superiors and other masters of the honorable
     corporation of municipal blacksmiths, armorers, and of smiths,
     in the Imperial City of St. Poelten in Austria by the river
     Enns, DECLARE BY THESE PRESENTS put in force by this document
     to anyone who waits to hear.... That the honorable and able
     BARTOLOMEO ANTONIO BERTOLLA of Rumo in Lentzberg, the Tyrol, on
     the 27th day of the month of December of the year 1719 was
     consigned as apprentice for three years, in the presence of two
     sponsoring masters for the purpose, the honorable Johann
     Christian Winz and Peter Wisshofer, both of them master
     locksmiths representing the entire honorable Corporation and
     others of open shop--to the honorable JOHANN GEORG BUTZJAeGER,
     incorporated with us, citizen and master clockmaker for large
     clocks in the merchant-village of Neulengbach in Wienerwald, as
     his master of the art, would have therefore perfectly and
     rightfully worked and learned, and

     that afterwards, on the day and year noted at the bottom, he
     will be newly declared free and independent before us,
     representative of an entire and honorable Corporation and with
     open shop, of his above-mentioned master and of the two
     sponsoring masters mentioned,

     and since he eagerly requested a truthful certificate of
     apprenticeship for his honest service as an apprentice and for
     his good behavior, and we having great pleasure as well as the
     duty of favoring the truth and well knowing that the aforesaid
     BARTOLOMEO ANTONIO BERTOLLA has learned honestly the art of
     clockmaking for great clocks from his aforesaid master, and
     that he has always behaved with honesty, obedience,
     faithfulness and diligence both towards his master and towards
     us to our complete satisfaction and, therefore, we cannot in
     any manner refuse his request, rather we wish to grant it with
     a clear conscience.

     WE THEREFORE ADDRESS TO EVERYONE and to anyone in whatever
     state and rank, but particularly to those interested in our
     branch of this art, our respectful and courteous entreaty and
     request to consider BARTOLOMEO ANTONIO BERTOLLA well
     recommended for his honest apprenticeship and his good
     behavior, and to desire to favor him in every way, in such a
     manner that will assure our gratitude whenever an occasion
     presents itself.

     For this purpose, we issue, as we have declared we wish to
     issue to you, BARTOLOMEO ANTONIO BERTOLLA, this certificate of
     apprenticeship, attaching to it the seal of our Corporation.

     Executed in the city of St. Poelten on 27 December 1722.[12]

His apprenticeship over, Bertolla returned to his native region where he
soon established a reputation for himself as one of the most skillful
clockmakers in the Tridentina and produced timepieces of fine quality in
some quantity. No records have survived concerning his personal life,
but it is believed that he married probably soon after his return. He
had no children of his own. To expand his business, he eventually took
into his shop two nephews, the sons of a brother and a sister, as
apprentices.

Bertolla's work brought him a sufficient number of clients, and he
produced elaborate clocks for his more wealthy patrons.

In 1752, it is recorded that he repaired the great clock in the
campanile of the Church of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary in Cles,
the regional capital of the valley of the Non. The clock dated probably
from the 16th century, and it seems likely that Bertolla replaced the
original two-wheel train with a three-wheel movement, and that he added
the present anchor escapement.[13]

It is not possible to determine when Father Borghesi first made
Bertolla's acquaintance, but it may be assumed that they had become
friends in the late 1750's.

After he had come to know Bertolla, Father Borghesi apparently spent
many hours in the clockmaker's shop. He was fascinated by mechanics in
any form, and the complications of clockwork particularly intrigued him.
Bertolla was patient with the young priest, explaining the tools he had
and their uses, the clocks he produced or repaired, and the principles
which were involved. Father Borghesi listened willingly and as his
understanding of timepieces grew, his curiosity increased.

In spite of himself, the priest could not be satisfied with the ordinary
aspects of his friend's work and wanted to learn more. From a casual
pastime, the study of time became an obsession with him. There was but
one recourse: he went back to studying once again. This time it was not
theology, however, but the sciences. Every moment he could spare went
into the perusal of books on mathematics, astronomy, and associated
subjects. He progressed rapidly, driven by his overpowering interest and
aided by his quick intellect.

Little by little, Borghesi managed to acquire the basic texts that
explained this new world to him, probably borrowing them from old
seminary friends. As each new book came into his hands, he devoured it
in his desire to master its contents. He discussed each new principle or
precept that he learned with Bertolla. Together, they attempted to apply
his new learning to the calculations necessary for a timepiece which
would demonstrate the astronomical theories in visual form. Borghesi
taught himself slowly, step by step, and the result was a profound
understanding of astronomical science. He conceived the project of
constructing a great astronomical clock which he felt could be
accomplished by combining Bertolla's mechanical skills with his own
recent mastery of astronomy and mathematics.




First Borghesi Clock


It is not difficult to visualize the two men, the priest and the
clockmaker, as they sat together night after night working out their
plans. Father Borghesi would painstakingly outline the astronomical
principles he wished to have the clock exhibit and the mathematical
principles which would be involved to operate them. Bertolla
concentrated on them and tried to transcribe the principles into
functional mechanical terms, visualizing each operation in terms of
wheels and gears. Little by little the two men coordinated the numerous
elements and welded them into an operating entity. They adjourned either
to the stark simplicity of the rectory or, probably more often, to
Bertolla's little home workshop, the priest standing over his friend
while the latter worked at his bench in the dark paneled interior
illuminated only by the several lamps on the work benches.

This first clock which the two men combined to create is a monument to
the great scientific knowledge of the self-taught priest and the
technical ability of the clockmaker--a unity combining astronomical
science, mechanics, and artistry. The story of the project is told in a
little book, _Novissima Ac Perpetua Astronomica..._, which Borghesi
later published. Explaining the incentive which inspired him, and the
premises from which he began his work, he wrote:

     From the foundation of astronomical science long ago,
     innumerable [and] repeated observations of both ancient and
     modern astronomers, emerged at last from their hiding places.
     Made light of by the jests of so many outstanding intellects,
     they have so successfully brought to light the paths of the
     stars and their motions, which are more complicated to us than
     the Gordian knots. Now it is possible for even an amateur in
     astronomy, sufficiently instructed, to predict for any given
     time not only the mean position of the planets, but also their
     true longitude and latitude, and even the true time of their
     conjunctions, and their ecliptic oppositions, with all the
     attendant circumstances. Yet, until now, no hypothesis has been
     devised which would force an automaton to show to us, before
     our very eyes, the eclipses of the planets in their true and
     certain times.

     For though there have been men seeking with all their might to
     bind by laws their artificial heavens, by I know not how many
     and how great calculations, and to systematize the complexities
     of the rotations of celestial bodies; nevertheless, all of
     them, as if by common agreement, considered themselves to have
     made great contributions to mechanico-theoretical astronomy.
     However, they have only attained, even though closely, the mean
     locations of the secondary mobiles, and those by a certain
     rather crude calculation. Some attained by more, some by less,
     but all by some degree of wandering from the truth, either worn
     out by the intricacies of the motions, or deceived and
     deceiving by the errors of their calculations. This fact those
     well know, who, setting about to collect information of this
     kind, even those publicized not long ago, with true
     astronomical calculation, have been bored to death while
     digging out by the most elementary and superficial arithmetical
     torture, the worst of fallacies spontaneously erupting from
     thence.

     It would seem that true calculations alone can be desired in
     mechanico-astronomics. Long study had not only convinced me
     that an automaton was within the realm of possibility, but that
     there were many mechanical systems by which it could be
     achieved. I girded myself for a new project and developed it
     theoretically from the ground up, but under such unhappy
     auspices that not only did all hope fail that anyone would ever
     appear who might have seemed willing to set his hand to the
     work, but that the new discovery itself was scoffed at by many
     as altogether a nightmarish delirium of an unbridled
     imagination.

The first months of the project must have seemed like an inspired dream
to the two men, and then must have followed a period of hopeless
depression. Bertolla undoubtedly felt many times that the clock was an
aspiration far beyond their combined abilities and means, but the priest
would not be thwarted in his ambition and refused to abandon the
project. He felt that it was a work that they were destined to produce.
Many times, he wrote, he chided and begged and shamed his erstwhile
partner into resuming the project where it had been last abandoned.
Little by little, the first clock began to take form. As each new
difficulty was encountered, the two men would go back over the notes and
sketches to trace the problem to its source. Often a new part of the
mechanism would nullify another which had thus far operated
successfully, and a complete rearrangement would be required.

[Illustration: Figure 7.--TITLE PAGE of Father Borghesi's first book.
The translation in its entirety is: "The Most Recent, Perpetual,
Astronomical Calendar Clock: Theoretical--Practical: by means of which
besides the hours, the minutes and seconds; the current year, the month;
the day of the month and the day of the week; the dominical letter,
epact, and thence, the day of all the feastdays, both fixed and movable;
the solar cycle; the golden number; the Roman indiction; the dominant
planet of any year and its sign; the phases of the moon and its mean
age: and all the motions of the sun and the moon as to longitude,
latitude, eccentricity, etc., are immediately seen, so accurately that
[not only] the true new full moons and the true quadrature, etc., of the
sun and moon appear, but also, all solar and lunar eclipses--both
visible and invisible; as in heaven, so on the clock, they are
conspicuously celebrated in their true times, and those of the past and
those of the future, with their circumstances of time and duration,
magnitude, etc., can be quickly determined. All this was devised and
brought to light by the author, Francesco Borghesi of Anauni, a secular
priest of Trent, A.A.L.L. & Doctor of Philosophy. (Trent: From the
printshop of Giovanni Battista Monauni, With Permission of Superiors.)"
(_Title page reproduced by permission of the Biblioteca della Citta di
Trento._)]

Again and again, Bertolla threw up his hands in despair and begged
Father Borghesi to abandon the enterprise. He protested that he was not
capable of producing such a complicated mechanism; he had neither the
tools nor the skill. The priest wished to produce a clock such as the
world had never seen before, such as the greatest scientists and
clockmakers of all time had never been able to make. But Bertolla felt
that he was only a provincial craftsman who could not hope to surpass
them all with only his simple tools and training.

In his book on the first clock, _Novissima Ac Perpetua Astronomica..._,
Father Borghesi wrote that when he had finally come within a few weeks
of the embryo stage in the development of his clock, he was faced with
the problem of bolstering the sagging enthusiasm of Bertolla. The
clockmaker's original enthusiasm had shown promise of great results, but
as the days passed and the problems of the multiplex and generally
unfamiliar apparatus to be forged for the workings of the automaton
became more complex, his ardor decreased. Finally, Bertolla became so
discouraged by the scoffers and frustrated by the fact that the work was
insufficiently organized that Father Borghesi wrote that "it almost
became a harder task for me to bolster up by daily opportunity and
importunity the failing patience of the artisan, frightened away from
the work already begun, than it was for me to extract from the inner
recesses of mathematics and astronomy, without light and without a
guide, the whole fabric of the machine itself!"

In spite of Bertolla's protests, Father Borghesi prevailed, reviving his
friend's interest once more until the two were deep in the project
again. Months passed as they worked together on the mechanism and it
seemed as if they lived for no other purpose. Inevitably, Bertolla's
health began to suffer, undermined as it was by the constant nervous
tension, and he eventually became ill from mental strain. He was forced
to spend some time in bed, and for many weeks the subject of the clock
was not discussed. Bertolla's other work, by which he made his living,
suffered and it was several months before he was able to return to his
little shop.

One year passed into another and the work progressed slowly. The first
clock, which easily should have been finished in less than a year, was
not completed until after three full years had passed. However, when the
priest and the clockmaker put the finishing touches to their great
clock, the result surpassed the greatest possible expectations, for it
was truly a masterpiece. Not only did it illustrate the ecliptic
phenomena of the moon, the sun and earth occurring in their proper time,
as well as many other things, but it showed these operations as they
succeeded in proper order, taking place through the centuries.

With mutual feelings of great pride, the two friends surveyed the result
of their three years of endeavor. Bertolla realized that he had reached
a point of maximum achievement in his work. He probably felt that now he
could relax again, that his sleep would no longer be troubled by
confused nightmares of wheels and gears that did not mesh together. Time
was to prove otherwise.


PUBLISHED DESCRIPTION OF THE FIRST CLOCK

Father Borghesi soon came to the conclusion that it would be desirable
to have a written description to explain the mechanism of the clock and
its many indicators. He thereupon wrote out the story of how the clock
was made, the reasons for embarking on the enterprise, the difficulties
he had encountered, and the success which had crowned his and Bertolla's
mutual labors. Finally, he described the operation of the clock's
mechanism and the functions of its array of indicators.

The little book was written in Latin and only a few copies were printed,
presumably at the priest's own expense, on a handpress by Giovanni
Battista Monauni, printer to the Bishop in Trent. The little volume was
stated by contemporary writers to have been published in 1763, although
no date appears on the title page. The title translated is, in part,
_The Most Recent, Perpetual Astronomical Calendar Clock,
Theoretical--Practical...._ The work begins with an introduction for the
reader in which Father Borghesi stated that:

     ... the little work, which, as far as I was concerned could
     easily have been finished in a year, was only completed after
     about three years. Fortunately, however, it was so far beyond
     the expectations of most, that not only am I able to foretell
     with certainty all the lunar ecliptic phenomena and the solar,
     or rather terrestrial, phenomena, carefully worked out in their
     true periods, among many other matters exhibited by the
     machine; but also, within a few hours, I can exhibit by
     altogether tangible evidence to the skeptics and the doubting
     those very same phenomena, occurring within the space of many
     years, or even centuries, and succeeding one another in proper
     order, with their many attendant circumstances. I was not much
     concerned about the other eclipses, such as those of Mercury,
     Venus, and the other stars wandering through the zodiac, or
     about the other solar eclipses from the transit of Mercury or
     Venus, since they are altogether undiscernible to the naked
     eye, and very few compilers of ephemerides wish them to be
     noted, probably for the same reason.

     Do not, however, expect, star-loving reader, that here anything
     at all that you may wish can be drawn forth as from its source,
     for to demand this would be almost the same as to seek to drain
     as from a cup all the vast knowledge of the many arithmetical
     sciences from the narrow confines of one book. You will
     understand how impossible that is when, through prolonged
     labor, you have grown somewhat more mature in this kind of
     learning.

     Wherefore, rather fully, and out of consideration for you, I
     have decided, setting aside these prolixities, with completely
     synoptic brevity and with all possible clarity to expound for
     you simply the proportion of the movements, the description of
     the machine, and its usage. As a result, when you have
     progressed a little in theoretical mechanics, you will not only
     be able to reduce all these things to their astronomical
     principles, but you may find the way more smoothly laid out for
     you even for perfecting the machine itself. And, thus, you may
     be more effectively encouraged to a successful conclusion. Let
     it be so now for you through the following 10 chapters!

After these rather hopeful assurances, Father Borghesi proceeded to
provide a detailed description of the clock dial and functions in the 10
short chapters which he had promised, under a separate section entitled
"Synopsis Totius Operis Mechanici," which is translated in its entirety
in the appendix.

As Father Borghesi prepared his little volume about his first clock, and
described its unusual features and outlined its functions, which were
primarily to place in evidence the celestial constellations, it occurred
to him that it would now be easier after the experience he had acquired
with his first timepiece, to construct another clock, which would
present the motions of the two astronomical systems, the Ptolemaic and
the Copernican. In this first book, he promised the reader that he would
undertake the second project. It is fortunate that Father Borghesi
undertook this project for the second clock is the only example of his
work that is known to exist today. Extensive research has not shown what
happened to the first clock, although several sources state that both
timepieces were presented to Empress Maria Theresa sometime between 1764
and 1780.




Second Borghesi Clock


Father Borghesi lost no time in initiating the project of the second
clock. The first and most important step was to inform Bertolla and
enlist his assistance. Bertolla was adamant: he had had enough of
complicated astronomical movements. He was delighted by the prospect of
returning to his former simple life, producing simple, domestic,
elementary movements for his country clients. Father Borghesi begged and
cajoled. The second clock would be a much simpler one to construct, he
persisted. After all, they had gained invaluable experience from the
production of the first clock. Furthermore, he had already completed its
design.

Bertolla apparently wavered in his resolve and, unwillingly and against
his better judgment, he allowed the priest's inducements to prevail.
Once again, the two friends yielded their leisure hours to a study of
the priest's books and drawings as Father Borghesi enthusiastically
elaborated his design for the timepiece, and Bertolla attempted to
transcribe astronomical indications into terms of wheel counts. The
second clock was, as Borghesi had promised, much easier of execution.
Within a year, it was completed and functioned with complete success.

[Illustration: Figure 8.--THE BORGHESI CLOCK in the Museum of History
and Technology, constructed in 1764 by Bartolomeo Antonio Bertolla of
Mocenigo di Rumo from the designs of Father Francesco Borghesi of Rumo
and Mechel.]

[Illustration: Figure 9.--ANOTHER VIEW of the Borghesi clock.]

This is the clock now in the Museum of History and Technology. It is
housed in a tall case of dark-red mahogany veneered on oak, with
restrained carving featuring ribands and foliate motifs. Gilt-brass
decorations flank the face of the hood, which is surmounted by three
gilt-brass finials in the form of orbs. A wide door in the waist may be
opened to attend the weights. The case is 7 feet 8 inches high, 20-1/2
inches wide at the waist, and 14 inches in depth.

The dial is of gilt brass, measuring 21 inches high and 15 inches in
width, with a number of supplementary silvered dials visible through its
openings. Instead of hands, the dial utilizes three concentric rings
moving around a central disc, the indications of which are read at two
bisecting gilt lines inscribed in the glass face. Twelve separate
functions are performed by the chapter ring assembly alone, and there
are 14 openings on the dial. It is estimated that the clock performs 30
separate functions, including striking and chiming. Of the multiple
chapter rings, the outermost is 1-1/8 inches wide, the center ring is
3/8 inch wide, and the innermost ring measures 1-1/4 inches in width.


THE DIAL-PLATE ENGRAVINGS

The gilt dial is incised throughout with figures and inscriptions in
engraving of the very finest quality, as is evidenced in the
illustrations. The frontispiece is surmounted at its center by the
crowned double eagle of the House of Hapsburg, indicating the identity
of the sovereign in whose reign it was made, Emperor Francis I or the
Empress Maria Theresa of Austria. Below the eagle at either side are
flying cherubs supporting ribands with inscriptions. Centered at the
bottom of the frontispiece immediately above the chapter rings is the
moving silvered orb representing the sun. Surrounding it is a tableau of
the Holy Trinity, with the Virgin Mary being crowned by Christ holding a
cross at the left and God with a sword in hand at the right, and a dove
representing the Holy Spirit hovering over the Virgin's head. Father S.
X. Winters, S.J., considers it reminiscent of the triptych "The
Coronation of the Virgin" by Fra Lippo Lippi.

[Illustration: Figure 10.--DIAGRAM OF the dial plate.]

[Illustration: Figure 11.--DIAL PLATE of the Borghesi clock.]

KEY TO DIAGRAM OF THE DIAL PLATE

A Dominating planet, represented by its symbol and its house;

B Dominical letter (Lit. Dom.);

C Epacts (Cyc. EpEC);

D Roman indiction (Ind. Rom.), part of the reckoning of the Julian
period;

E Solar cycle, (Cyc. Sol.), part of the reckoning for the Julian period;

F Golden number (Num. Aur.), part of the reckoning for the Julian
period;

G, H, I, J The era, or the current year; part of the six windows of the
Iris, or rainbow;

K Shuttered winding hole, for winding up the weights; part of the six
windows of the Iris;

L The era, or the month of the current year; part of the Iris, or six
windows of the rainbow;

M The sun in its epicycle;

N The 12 signs of the sun's anomaly;

O, P The first chapter ring representing the equatorial globe of the
week, revolving from left to right;

Q The coming day indicated through the window;

R The second chapter ring; including the synodic-periodic measure of
the tides, the days of the median lunar-synodic age, the signs and
degrees of the signs for mean distance of the moon from the sun;

S Epicycle of the moon with signs of its anomaly;

T Head of the dragon (Cap. Draconis);

U Tail of the dragon (Cauda Draconis), for measuring eclipses of the
earth and of the moon;

V Third chapter ring, with degrees of lunar latitude and some fixed
stars;

W Fourth chapter ring, showing firmament of fixed stars, signs of the
zodiac and degrees of the signs, the months of the year, and days of the
months, revolving left to right for the course of a mean astronomical
year;

X Adjustment marked _Claudit_ (it closes) and _Aperit_ (it opens) for
disengaging dial work for the purpose of making astronomical experiments
and computations;

Y Adjustment marked _Concitat_ (it accelerates) and _Retardit_ (it
retards) for fast and slow adjustments of the movement.

In the upper spandrels of the dial are two more cherubs bearing ribands
with inscriptions. In the lower left corner is a magnificent engraving
of Atlas upholding the globe of the world, inscribed with the zodiac,
over his head. The lower right corner features the figures of two
noblemen apparently examining and discussing an orb upon a table, the
significance of which is not clear.

[Illustration: Figure 12.--EMPRESS MARIA THERESA, to whom Father
Borghesi is stated to have presented his two astronomical clocks. The
coin bearing her portrait is in the Museum of History and Technology.]


THE INSCRIPTIONS

Beginning with the uppermost part of the frontispiece, there are nine
inscriptions in Latin on the dial plate. The topmost is _Franciscvs I
sit plan. Dominator aeternvs._ The phrase has reference to Francis I,
who was Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire, from 1745-1765, and husband of
Empress Maria Theresa of Austria. The phrase may be translated as "May
Francis I be the eternal ruler by favor of the planets" or more simply
"Long Live Francis I, Emperor."[14] Although the dial plate of the
Borghesi clock is inscribed with his name, the records indicate that
the clock was presented to Maria Theresa. Francis I may have already
died before the presentation was made.

[Illustration: Figure 13.--PORTRAIT OF FRANCIS I, Emperor of the Holy
Roman Empire, to whom Father Borghesi's astronomical clock in the Museum
of History and Technology appears to have been inscribed.]

From the left to right over the tableau of the Holy Trinity is the
phrase "Lavs sacrosanctae Triadi Vni Deo, et Deiparae" (Praise [be] to
the most Holy Trinity, to the one God, and to the Mother of God).

Within the upper left and right spandrels is inscribed:

     Isthaec, Signum grande apparvit in Coelo * sancta Dei genitrix
     amicta sole * Illibato pede Lvnae et serpentis nigra premens
     Cornva * bis senis pvlcherrime Coronata syderibvs * Tempe
     indesinenter clavsa, scatvrigo signata * Cedrvs in Libano,
     Cypresvs in Monte Sion * Mater pvrae Dilectionis sanctaeqve
     spei * Chara patris aeterni proles, Verbi Mater, sponsaqve
     procedentis *, gratiae et gloriae circvmdata varietate.

This inscription is a eulogy to the Virgin Mary assembled from the texts
of Holy Scripture. In addition, each _lemma_, contained within
asterisks, carries out the chronogram 1764, the year the clock was
completed. Each _lemma_ is translated and identified from the
Douay-Rheims version of the Bible:

     This woman: a great sign appeared in Heaven (Apocalypse 12:1) *
     The Holy Mother of God clothed with the sun (Apocalypse 12:1) *
     And with unharmed foot crushing the black horns of the moon
     (Apocalypse 12:1) and the serpent (Genesis 3:15) * Most
     beautifully crowned with twice-six (Apocalypse 12:1) * A garden
     [_Tempe_[15]] enclosed, sealed with a fountain [spring of
     water] (Song of Songs 4:12) * Like a cedar in Lebanon, and a
     cypress tree on Mount Zion; (Ecclesiasticus 24:17) * Mother of
     pure love and of holy hope: Beloved daughter of the Eternal
     Father, Mother of the Word, Spouse of the Holy Spirit:
     (Ecclesiasticus 24:24) * Surrounded with a diversity of grace
     and glory (Psalms 44:10).

[Illustration: Figure 14.--THE BOTTOM RIGHT CORNER of the dial plate,
showing two noblemen contemplating an orb, with the inscription "Diligit
Avdaces Trepidos Fortvna Repellet." (Fortune favors the daring and
rejects the timid.)]

At the lower left corner below the figure of Atlas upholding the world
is the phrase, _Assidvo proni donant di cvncta labori_. (The favorable
gods willingly grant all things to the assiduous laborer.) The same
phrase is quoted by Father Borghesi in the text of his second volume.
The last inscription appears at the lower right corner under the figures
of the two noblemen, _Diligit avdaces trepidos fortvna repellet_.
(Fortune favors the daring and rejects the timid.) The last two
inscriptions are in dactylic hexameter. They appear to be original
compositions inasmuch as no classical prototypes have been identified.

[Illustration: Figure 15.--THE BOTTOM LEFT CORNER of the dial plate,
showing the engraving of Atlas, with the inscription "Assidvo proni
donant di cvncta labori." (The favorable gods willingly grant all things
to the assiduous laborer.)]


CENTER DIAL INSCRIPTIONS

[Illustration: Figure 16.--DETAIL OF FRONTISPIECE of the Borghesi clock,
showing the apertures for calendar indicators and the details of the
engraving.]

In addition to the inscriptions previously noted on the outer dial
plate, there are three major inscriptions in the central dial. The
outermost states _Circulus horarius Soli_, _Lunae_, _Fixis_, _Nodis_,
_Aestuique marino communis_ (the hour circle, common to the sun, the
moon, the fixed stars, the nodes and to the sea tide). This inscription
is divided into four parts by the insertion of four divisions for the
day into canonical hours: [_Horae_] _Nocturnae_ (night hours);
_Matutinae_ (morning hours); _Diurnae_ (daytime hours) and _Vespertinae_
(evening hours).

The next section of the central dial is inscribed
_Intumescite--Detumescite_ (rise and fall of the tides) repeated at
intervals of approximately every six hours. Within the next section is
the following inscription, inscribed continuously around the ring:

     Lege fluunt, refluunt, dormitant hac maris undae: Ad Phoebi et
     Phoebes concordia iussa moventur Aequora; discordi iussu
     suspensa quiescunt.

Translated, this is:

     By this law the sea waves ebb and flow and lie dormant: When
     Phoebus and Diana agree in their commands, the waters are
     moved; when they disagree, the waters lie silent.[16]

Within the central boss of the dial plate, the name of the maker is
inscribed:

     Bvrghesio Doctore, et Bertolla Limatore Annaniensibvs*

Translated, this is:

     [By] Doctor Borghesi and Bertolla, mechanician citizens of
     Anauni.


INDICATORS IN THE FRONTISPIECE

There are 12 windows in the frontispiece, through each of which appears
an indication relating to time. Beginning at the top of the frontispiece
of the dial, the first opening occurs on the breast of the imperial
eagle. This indicates the dominating planet, represented by its symbol,
and its house.

The opening in the eagle's left claw, labeled "Lit. Dom." is the
dominical letter. The first seven days in the month of January are each
assigned one of the letters _a_ through _g_ in order of appearance. The
letter which coincides with the first Sunday within this period is
called the dominical letter, and it serves for the following year. In
leap year, two letters are required, one to February 29th and the letter
next proceeding for the remainder of the year. This letter is used in
connection with establishing the date of Easter Sunday. The date of
Easter regulates the dates of the other movable feasts.

The eagle's right claw is labeled "Cyc. EpEC" and represents the epact,
or the age of the moon on January 1st. It serves to find the moon's age
by indicating the number of days to be added to each lunar year in order
to complete a solar year. Twelve lunar months are nearly 11 days short
of the solar year, so that the new moons in one year fall 11 days
earlier than they did the preceding year. However, 30 days are deducted
as an intercalary month since the moon has made a revolution in that
time, and the remainder, 3, would be the epact.

Below the imperial eagle two winged cherubs support a riband with three
indictions of the Julian period. This period of 7980 years is the
product derived from multiplying together the sums of 28, which
represents the cycle of the sun; 19, representing the cycle of the moon;
and 15, which represents the Roman indiction. The Julian period is
reckoned to have begun from 4713 B.C. so that the period will be
completed in A.D. 3267. The first of the three openings is marked "Ind.
Rom." or "Roman indiction," which was an edict by the Emperor
Constantine in A.D. 312, providing for the assessment of a property tax
at the beginning of each 15-year cycle. It continues to be used in
ecclesiastical contracts. The second opening, which occurs immediately
below the eagle, is marked "Cyc. Sol." (cycle of the sun). This cycle
takes a period of 28 years, after which the days of the week once again
fall upon the same days of the month as they did during the first year
of the former cycle. There is no relationship with the course of the sun
itself, but was invented for the purpose of determining the dominical
letter which designates the days of the month on which the Sundays occur
during each year of the cycle. Since cycles of the sun date from 9 years
before the Christian era, it is necessary to add the digit 9 to the
digits of the current year and then divide the result by 28. The
quotient is the number of cycles which has passed, and the remainder
will be the year of the cycle answering to the current year. The third
opening on the riband is labeled "Num. Aur." (golden number). Meton, an
astronomer of Athens, discovered in 432 B.C. that after a period of 19
years the new and the full moons returned on the same days of the month
as they had before, and this is called the cycle of the moon. The Greeks
were so impressed with this calculation that they had it inscribed in
letters of gold upon stone, hence the golden number. The First Council
of Nicaea in A.D. 325 determined that Meton's cycle was to be used to
regulate the movable feasts of the Church.

Immediately above the chapter rings is an opening through which the orb
of the sun is visible.


THE CHAPTER-RING ASSEMBLY

In a separate chapter in his second volume, entitled "Descriptio
Authomatis Summa totius Operis Mechanici" (Description of the
Automaton--Summary of the Complete Mechanism), Father Borghesi provided
a description of the functions of the various indicators, prefixing it
with the short poem shown in figure 18. He then continues:

     In the middle of the frontispiece, as at the center of the
     universe, the terraqueous globe of the week revolves, with a
     daily motion turning from right to left, bringing with it from
     the round window the coming day and at the circumference the
     circle of hours common to the sun, to the moon, to the fixed
     stars, to the head and tail of the dragon, and to the raging
     sea.

     The second circle revolves the synodic-periodic measure of the
     raging sea, the days of the median lunar-synodic age, the signs
     and individual degrees of the signs of the distance of the moon
     from the middle of the sun within the time of 29 terrestrial
     revolutions, hours 12.44.3.13. This circle revolves likewise
     from right to left around the center of the earth. In this
     second circle, another little orb revolves, bringing with it
     the epicycle of the moon, in which the little circle of the
     moon (whose illuminated middle always faces towards the sun),
     running from left to right through the signs of the anomaly;
     within 13 revolutions of the earth, hours 18.39.16. It descends
     from apogee to perigee and in just as many others it returns
     from perigee to apogee, to be carried down thus to true, back
     and front from the longitude and distance from the sun and from
     the middle of the earth.

     The third circle (on which I have tried to indicate
     astronomically-geometrically in their places, the degrees of
     lunar latitude both in the south and in the north, and some
     fixed stars, those, namely, which can be separated by us from
     the moon which goes between) from left to right turns around
     the center of the earth, stretching out the head and tail of
     the dragon, on the inside above the second circle for noting
     and measuring the sun (but I should rather say the earth), and
     the eclipses of the moon, within 346 revolutions of the earth,
     hours 14.52.23.

     The fourth circle, in which the heaven of the fixed stars,
     reduced to the correct ascent of our times, the signs of the
     zodiac and the individual degrees of the signs, the months of
     the year and the single days of the month can be seen, likewise
     makes its journey around the earth from left to right in 365
     terrestrial revolutions, hours 5.48.56.; that is, within a
     median astronomical year. Above this annual orb, the sun, in
     its small epicycle, gliding through the 12 signs of the
     anomaly, within the space of 182 terrestrial revolutions, hours
     15.6.58., from left to right, falls from apogee to perigee;
     and, within the same time, rises from perigee to apogee, and
     brings with it, the index, namely its central radius, inhering
     to the axis of the equatorial orb and cutting the four greatest
     circles from the center.

     When the sun has been moved around, Iris shows from six windows
     the era, that is, the current year. Two winged youths take
     their place next to Iris, carrying the Julian period: namely,
     the Roman indiction, the cycle of the sun and the golden
     number, on a leaf of paper held between them. The imperial
     eagle stands out on top (as if added to the frontispiece)
     carrying on its breast the dominating planet and in its talons
     the ecclesiastical calends (that is, the dominical letter and
     the epact).


ATTACHMENTS FOR ADJUSTMENT

Two attachments, in the form of small superimposed dials are situated at
the base of the dial plate, at either side and immediately below the
fourth chapter ring. In his second volume, Father Borghesi stated that
they "are not moved from inside the clock, but the one at the right
[inscribed _concitat_ and _retardat_] serves for loosening
[accelerating] and tightening [retarding] time; that is, the reins of
the perpendicular."

In other words, the purpose of this attachment is for adjusting the
pendulum to make the clock operate fast or slow. The second attachment,
which appears at the left, and which is inscribed "Claudit" (close) and
"Aperit" (open) serves the purpose of "... preparing the mechanism in a
moment, as swiftly as you wish, for sustaining the astronomical
experiments of which you will hear later; when these things have been
done, it restores the mechanism to its natural motion at the same
speed."

This adjustment relates to the final section of Father Borghesi's second
book, entitled "Chronologo-Astronomicus Usus Authomatis"
(Chronological-Astronomical Use of the Automaton), which is translated
from the Latin in its entirety:

     With one glance at this automaton, you can quickly answer these
     questions: What hour the sun shows, the moon, any fixed star,
     the head and tail of the dragon. Is the sea swelling with
     periodic heat [at high tide?] or is it deflated [low tide], or
     quiescent? How many days is it from mean new moon or full moon?
     By how many signs and degrees is the moon distant from the sun,
     and from its nodes? What sign of the zodiac does the sun
     occupy, the moon, the head and tail of the dragon? Is the sun
     or the moon, in apogee or perigee, ascending or descending?
     What is the apparent speed of the sun and of the moon? What is
     the apparent magnitude of the solar and lunar diameter, and of
     the horizontal parallax of the umbra and penumbra of the earth?
     What is the latitude of the moon? Is it north or south? Does
     the moon hide [occult eclipse] any of the fixed stars from the
     earth dwellers, and which of these does it obscure? Is there a
     true new or full moon? Is the sun in eclipse anywhere on earth?
     What is the magnitude, and the duration of this eclipse, with
     respect to the whole earth? Can it be seen in the north or in
     the south? Is the moon in eclipse? Total or partial? Of what
     magnitude, etc.? What limb of the moon is obscured? How many
     years have passed from a given epoch? Is this year a leap year,
     or a common year--first, second, or third after leap year? What
     is the current month of the year, and what day of the month and
     of the week? Which of the planets is dominant? What days of the
     year do the various feasts fall on, and the movable feasts
     during the ecclesiastical year? And many other similar
     questions, which I pass over here for the sake of brevity.

     Besides, this device can be so arranged for any time
     whatsoever, past or future, and for the longitude of any
     region, and can be so manipulated by hand, that within the
     space of a very short time there can be provided in their
     proper order, the various orbits of the luminous bodies, their
     alternating eclipses, as many as have taken place through the
     course of many years, or even from the beginning of the world;
     or those that will be seen as long as the world itself shall
     last, with all their attendant circumstances (year, month, day,
     duration, magnitude, etc.). All these can be seen with great
     satisfaction of curiosity and of learning, and hence with great
     pleasure to the soul. In the meanwhile, the little bells
     continually play, at their proper, respective times. So that,
     all exaggeration aside, a thousand years pass, in the sight of
     this clock, as one day!

     I am aware of your complaints, O star-loving reader--that my
     description is too meager and too succinct. Lay the blame for
     this on those cares, hateful both to me and to you, more
     pressing, which forbid me and deprive you of a methodical
     explanation of the work.


THE CLOCK MOVEMENT

Father Borghesi specified that the entire mechanism was equal in weight
to a seventh part of a _Centenarii Germanici_, a Germanic hundredweight.
This is probably the Austrian centner which is equivalent to 123.4615
pounds. Therefore, the clock mechanism weighs approximately 17.6 pounds.

The clock operated for a hundred days and more at a single winding,
according to Father Borghesi, and by means of a pendulum with a leaden
bob weighing 60 Viennese pounds, attached at a height of 5 feet. Father
Borghesi stated the weight of the pendulum to be 60 _librarum
Viennensium_, but the Viennese libra does not appear among the weights
of the Austrian Empire. However, using the average libra, an ancient
Roman unit of weight equal to 0.7221 pound, it may be assumed that the
driving weight should be approximately 45 pounds.

Father Borghesi, however, does not venture to provide any description
whatsoever of the movement of his second clock in his book. He gave the
following reasons:

     But beyond this, I entirely omit [a description of] the further
     apparatus of the very many wheels, etc., inside the clock which
     carry on its functions, lest I become too verbose for some
     persons. To explain more thoroughly the internal labyrinth of
     the entire mechanism, from which the movement of the circles or
     heavens, etc., are derived, would seem to entangle in too many
     complicated perplexities.... Therefore, that I might not delay
     longer, and perhaps to no purpose, I have thought it better to
     leave the whole work to the proportionate calculus of the
     arithmeticians and the technical skill of mechanics. If they
     have any desire to construct a similar mechanism, they will
     follow the aforesaid motions of the heavens, etc., not only by
     one means alone but by many, more swiftly through thoughtful
     study than by any amount of instruction.

     For whoever is well versed in the theory of calculus and sets
     to work at any given project, will discover any desired motion
     by a thousand and more ways, by one or another gearing of
     wheels; which an industrious mechanic will carry out in
     actuality and without too much difficulty. Nor is there any
     reason for anyone to be discouraged, so long as he is not
     disgusted by the amount of labor for there is nothing truer
     than the old saying "The favorable gods grant everything to the
     assiduous laborer."

     Nay, further, even this little work itself can be improved on
     and surpassed by new inventions. Otherwise that other old
     adage, almost as old as the world, would prove false, "What you
     have found already done, you can easily repeat, nor is it
     difficult to add to what has already been invented." Relying on
     this principle, I have already conceived some new things to be
     added to the present little work.

[Illustration: Figure 17.--MOVEMENT OF BORGHESI CLOCK viewed from the
right side, with details of chiming mechanism.]


THE BELLS

There is a discrepancy between Father Borghesi's written description in
his second book of the number of bells and those which currently exist
in the clock. At the present time, there are two sets of bells attached
to the upper part of the movement. While Father Borghesi indicated that
there were two sets of bells in the clock, he described the first set by
stating that:

     ... there are three bells inside the clock: The largest, when
     struck by a little hammer at each mean new moon, signifies the
     new moon. The smallest indicates in the same way the full moon
     at the time of the mean full moon, by automatic sound. When on
     the equatorial earth, the sun appears anywhere in eclipse, two
     bells (the largest and the medium) sounding together
     automatically, announce that eclipse at the time of the mean
     new moon. (I think it is evident that eclipses of the sun occur
     at new moons and eclipses of the moon at full moon.)

     When the moon is eclipsed, the smallest and the medium bells,
     simultaneously and automatically, announce the event to the ear
     at the time of the mean full moon. Besides, at the proper time
     and automatically, the largest of these bells announces the
     current solar hour and the smallest bell strikes the quarter
     hours.

In the clock today, the first set consists of a smaller bell fixed
within a larger one. It is presumably these bells that indicate the
eclipses and also strike the hours and quarter hours. A pull cord
attached to the striking mechanism repeats the current hour and quarter
hours at will. The second set consists of nine meshed bells struck with
individual hammers operated by means of a pinned cylinder as in a music
box. On the hour, the chimes play one of two melodies, which may be
changed at will. While not identified, these appear to be Tyrolean folk
melodies. The largest of this set of bells is dissimilar to the other
chimes, and may be the third bell described by Father Borghesi to
signify the new moon.


CHRONOGRAMS

One of the most curious aspects of the second clock produced by Father
Borghesi and Bertolla, as well as of the second published volume, is the
presence of chronograms which occur repeatedly on the clock dial and
throughout the _Novissimum Theorico-Practicum Astronomicum Authoma_ from
the title page to the end of the book. Interestingly enough, Father
Borghesi did not utilize this device even once in his first little book.

[Illustration: Figure 18.--A CHRONOGRAM in the text of Father Borghesi's
second volume, indicating the year 1764. The poem is translated as: "In
the Mount of 'Anauni,' the inscrutable heavens are led, You learn from
these all the labors of the sun and the moon. Here you are shown and
hear the conjunction of the moon: And a bell brings to the ears by its
sound, all eclipses."]

Webster defines a chronogram as an inscription, sentence, or phrase in
which certain letters express a date or epoch. The method used by Father
Borghesi for forming chronograms was a simple one. He used combinations
of uppercase and lowercase letters in two sizes in the inscriptions on
the clock dial and in his writings. At first this curious combination in
the inscriptions on the dial plate was a source of considerable
speculation. The extremely fine quality of the engraving and artistry
was such that these combinations could only be deliberate in nature and
not the accidental whims or accidents of the engraver. Accordingly, they
must be chronographic in intention. Such proved to be the case.

Borghesi used the larger size of uppercase letters to form the
chronogram, and each chronogram was complete within a phrase or line. He
accomplished this by using for this purpose those letters of the
alphabet which form the Roman numerals. The uppercase letters found
within words are copied off in the order in which they appear in the
inscription or phrase. These are then converted into their numerical
equivalents, and totaled. Taking the uppermost inscription on the clock
dial as the first example:

    FranCIsCVs I sIt pLan. DoMInator aeternVs

The letters which are intended to form the chronogram are:

     C  I  C  V I I  L  D    M  I V

    100 1 100 5 1 1 50 500 1000 1 5

These figures added together total 1764.

The second inscription on the clock dial which forms a chronogram is

    LaVs saCrosanCtae TrIaDI VnI Deo, et DeIparae

     L V  C   C  I  D  I V I  D   D  I

    50 5 100 100 1 500 1 5 1 500 500 1 = 1764.

The third inscription required a little more planning, because of its
greater length. Accordingly, Father Borghesi divided it into nine parts,
each of which is separated from the other by means of asterisks. Each of
the nine parts of the inscription formed a chronogram which, in every
instance, totals to the date 1764, the year in which the second clock
was completed. The same procedure was followed with the inscriptions in
the lower left and the lower right corners of the dial as well as with
the maker's inscription within the central disk. This inscription is

    BVrghesIo DoCtore, et BertoLLa LIMatore AnnanIensIbVs

    V I  D   C   L  L  L I  M   I I V

    5 1 500 100 50 50 50 1 1000 1 1 5 = 1764.

The inscriptions within the chapter ring are not utilized for
chronograms, however. It is apparent that Father Borghesi was required
to make a most careful selection of the texts for his inscriptions in
order that none of the phrases included any additional letters which
formed Roman numerals than would total to the date he desired to
indicate, namely, 1764. Where it was necessary, he employed an asterisk
to separate parts of texts so that each would produce the same total.
Any letter that did not form a Roman numeral, even if capitalized or
used in a larger size, did not interfere with the formation of the
chronograms.

In spite of his ingenuity in designing a text which would include only
such of the letters representing the Roman numerals which would provide
the chronograms for 1764, Father Borghesi experienced some difficulties,
particularly in place names. He accordingly changed them in order to
avoid the inclusion of letters that would have disturbed his totals.
Examples are MEGGL instead of MECHL, which had an extra C, and RVNNO
instead of RVMO, which had an extra M.


PUBLISHED DESCRIPTION OF THE SECOND CLOCK

When the clock had been completed and proved to work successfully,
Borghesi once more reduced a description of the clock and its function
to published form in a second little volume published by Monauni. This
second work was also in Latin, the title of which is translated as _The
Most Recent Theoretical-Practical Astronomical Clock According to the
Equally Most Recent System of the World_. As with his first book, Father
Borghesi devoted a number of pages to a preface addressed to the reader,
which is translated from the Latin:

     This mechanical instrument was far from being ready for public
     notice. A great deal of time and work remained to produce a
     machine of this new system from the very foundations; then, by
     a most accurate calculation to bring the motions of many wheels
     up-to-date with the most recent astronomical observations; and,
     finally, to fashion it with the craftsman's file, often enough
     with a weary hand. All this work I had performed eagerly, so
     that, while in my room, I might contemplate leisurely, both day
     and night, the true face of the heavens and the seas unobscured
     by clouds, even though I had no astronomical equipment. But,
     then I remembered that, in my book on the first clock, I had
     promised a description of a new (at least, as far as is known
     to me) clock. Moreover, friends with astronomical interest, who
     took part in the oft-repeated astronomical experiments
     concerning this clock, persuaded me that the intellectual world
     would enjoy having a greater knowledge and a description of
     this work. However, it was not only the promises nor the
     desires of many which moved me to write this work, but I also
     thought it was necessary to set forth, before the description
     of the clock, an exposition of the astronomical system
     according to which this clock was constructed, so that the
     complete work would be evident to all. I was concerned about
     making this timepiece more acceptable and more understandable
     to those people who are far distant and unable to see it, so
     that this present exposition would obtain credulity among all.
     I could find no better method than to set forth for the reader
     the theory of the universe which I figured out after many
     sleepless nights.

     In testing this theory day after day, it not only appeared to
     be complete, and true, but each day it appeared more
     conformable to reality; it captured my mind in such a way that
     I finally adhered to it. I desired, while I lived, to erect
     this work as a monument to the theory. To do this, I digressed
     a bit from the true-to-life pattern to the mechanical order so
     that I could transfer all the movements of the heavens, etc.
     (which I enjoyed thinking about more), to the plane surface of
     the clock's face. In this way, the ecliptical spectacles of the
     stars, etc., would appear at their proper times clearly before
     the eyes of the viewer. I could also avoid many difficulties
     which otherwise, perhaps, even the hands of the most skillful
     craftsmen could never solve.

[Illustration: Figure 19.--MOVEMENT OF THE BORGHESI CLOCK, viewed from
the rear, showing rear of dial plate.]

[Illustration: Figure 20.--TITLE PAGE of Father Borghesi's second
book. The translation in its entirety is: "The Most Recent
Theoretical-Practical Astronomical Clock According to the Equally Most
Recent System of the World. Author: Francesco Borghesi of Mechel of
Anauni * Priest of Trent, Doctor of Philosophy * (The System of the
Clock) Ingeniously connected to new theoretical laws published 1764: and
the constructor, Bartholomeo Antonio Bertolla of Rumo, similarly from
Anauni * who skillfully produced this work * in this same current year
of Our Lord * which is the year 5713 [sic] since God created this earth.
(Trent: From the Printshop of Giovanni Battista Monauni, With Permission
of the Superiors.)" (_Title page reproduced by courtesy of the
Biblioteca della Citta di Trento._)]

     You ought to know, therefore, that as a result of my nightly
     meditations, I have rejected, after much consideration, all the
     explanations of the universe thus far published. All other
     theories of the make-up of the universe, however admirable, and
     however many there are, turn the sun and earth around in an
     ecliptic in an annual movement. Thus, Philolaus was the first
     to move the earth from the center of the universe and move it
     through the void; afterwards, Aristarchus of Samos and then
     Copernicus moved the earth with the moon. The Egyptians, as
     well as Pythagoras, Ptolemy, Tycho, Riciolus, Longomontanus,
     etc., thought that the sun moved through the degrees of the
     ecliptic each year. But I attributed this movement to neither
     earth nor sun for the movement of both is only apparent. I did
     not vainly surmise the annual equilibrium in all astronomical
     observations to be from the daily movement of the same axis
     moved at the poles of the heavens. Nor, in like manner, is
     there a better way to satisfy physical experiments. To you,
     then, most cultured reader: If you, perhaps, can make any use
     or draw pleasure from this most faithful description of my new
     theory and the mechanical instrument, refer it first to God on
     High from whom is everything that is best, and then to those
     avidly awaiting this little work. Lastly, if you find any
     statement less fitting; in your humanity, do not disdain to
     excuse it.




Borghesian Theory of the Universe


In Father Borghesi's second volume, there is a separate chapter entitled
"An Exposition of the Latest Theory of the Universe." This follows the
introduction to the reader, and in it Father Borghesi proposed:

     That you might rightly conceive my new system of the world and
     mechanically, as it were, construct it, imagine for yourself,
     beneath that most happy seat of the Blessed and above all other
     heavens, a kind of spherical convexity, everywhere equidistant
     from the center of the earth, and endowed with absolutely no
     motion.

     On the inside, at two points diametrically opposite each other,
     this convexity has two most sturdy poles (to speak
     mechanically), projecting towards the center (which you call
     the poles of the heavens), and the largest immobile semicircle,
     in some manner is drawn from the center of one pole to the
     center of the other. This semicircle in the middle, namely at a
     point equidistant from each pole, is thought to be secured by
     some sign, for example, by that "o," for arranging more
     perceptibly the seat of the sun (as will be shown later). This
     much must be conceived first.

     You must understand that imposed on these poles is the first
     mobile [Primum Mobile], everywhere convex, and divided, into 12
     equal parts [Dodecatemoria], by the 6 greatest circles,
     intersecting each other at the centers of the poles. Then it is
     divided by another equally great circle, everywhere equidistant
     from the poles, into two hemispheres. One hemisphere of 12
     parts, proceeding in order from west [setting] to east [rising]
     should be assigned the respective signs of the zodiac; that is,
     one to Aries, the next to Taurus, and so on, etc. The circle
     which cuts those 12 parts transversely in the middle, you call
     the ecliptic. Then, these capital spaces of the Primum Mobile
     are subdivided by degrees, minutes, etc., both in longitude and
     in latitude, so that this heaven represents a kind of great
     spherical net, extended to capture the longitude and latitude
     of the stars, and Mobile on the aforementioned poles. Note,
     however (and this is almost the leading point of the system),
     in that circle of longitude which divides the sign of Gemini
     from Cancer and Arcitenens [Sagittarius] from Capricorn, you
     must conceive two points, directly opposite each other and
     removed about twenty-three and a half degrees from the poles:
     Boreal [the northern] between Gemini and Cancer; Austral [the
     southern] between Sagittarius and Capricorn. These two points
     by some power (imagine it is magnetic power), equal between
     them, hold the terraqueous orb suspended in the middle, by
     acting on the axis of the same orb (imagine it is iron) in such
     a way that the earth is continually drawn to those two points
     as to two opposite centers. It is never nearer to one, for as
     it is about to move towards one, the opposite power is
     constantly drawing it back. Thus, both those points and the
     axis of the earth are always held in one common line, wherever
     those points happen to be carried by the rotation of this
     heaven.

     Again, it is necessary for you to conceive in this heaven,
     first, two great circles, bisecting each other at right angles
     in the centers of these two magnets. One of these circles,
     passing through the first point of Aries and Libra in the
     ecliptic, is called equinoctial colure: the other circle,
     passing consequently between the first point of Cancer and
     Capricorn, is called solstitial colure. Beneath these are
     likewise imagined many other great circles, in the centers of
     the magnets dividing crosswise in the shape of an "X." But if,
     receding from these magnets, you describe circles (parallel to
     each other and ever greater and greater, up to the greatest
     circle which you will perceive is called the equator),
     equidistant from each magnet and obliquely splitting the
     ecliptic in the equinoctial colure, you can then behold a
     great, new, woven net in this heaven of the Primum Mobile. This
     net most beautifully expands to extract the straight ascent and
     descent of the stars, etc., from the vast ocean of the heavens,
     catching the straight ascent in the greatest circles and, in
     other unequal circles, parallel to each other and obliquely
     cutting across, most safely catching the descent.

     Immediately below the Primum Mobile place the heaven of the
     fixed stars (and, that the idea might be clearer), revolving
     separately on the same poles on which the Primum Mobile
     revolves. Through this heaven, the filaments of the little
     nets, etc., seem to the eyes of you on earth as if they shine.
     In this heaven, you should conceive in their fixed places, the
     fixed stars, a proportionate, inviolable distance from each
     other, and, indeed, if you will, the heavenly images, etc.,
     depicted, and all carried along at the same time with their
     heaven by one motion.

     Conceive a straight line running from the center of the earth
     to that sign "o" noted in the semicircle of the supreme
     immobile heaven. On this line, greatly below the heaven of the
     fixed stars, place the center of the solar epicycle, holding an
     area in common with the ecliptic and subject to absolutely no
     motions, but at such a distance from the center of the earth
     that the semidiameter of the earth has little, if any,
     proportion with the distance of the solar epicycle from the
     earth. Around the sun, moving continually in this epicycle (its
     immobile palace) through the degrees of the anomaly, you can
     revolve, with motions proportionate to the system, the five
     planets: Mercury and Venus (the nearest barons of the sun),
     then Mars, Jupiter and, most remote, Saturn, with its
     respective satellites, etc., eccentrically surrounding the
     earth itself and the moon in their immense ambit and wandering
     by their proper motions through the zodiac.

     Nevertheless, not far from the earth you should imagine
     fabricated, as from most refined crystal, the heaven of the
     moon everywhere equidistant from the center of the earth and
     revolving separately on the same poles (prolonged even to this
     place) on which the Primum Mobile and the heaven of the fixed
     stars revolve. In the middle of this, that is, in some point
     equally removed from the poles, you place the center of the
     lunar epicycle, movable also by the common rotation of the
     lunar heaven. I refrain from the other movements of the moon in
     latitude, etc., as also those of the five planets, etc., which
     the theory in no way excludes, lest by a variety of congested
     motions explained too abundantly, either you might be confused
     about the fundamental concept of the system or, while adorning
     the theory and trying to embellish the least things more
     widely, you might reject also the things which are capital.

     Here you already have the whole machine, but still inert and to
     be animated for the first time by motions accommodated to the
     system. Nevertheless, before I assign motion to the individual
     parts of the world, so that the thing might later appear more
     clearly to you, I arrange all things thus: first, as if by
     hand, I turn the Primum Mobile until the Boreal magnetic point
     comes to the level or the area of the semicircle described in
     the supreme immobile convexity; then I turn the heaven of the
     fixed stars until, for example, the heel of Castor (a star of
     the third magnitude), almost in the ecliptic and indeed in our
     time not far distant from the solstitial colure, likewise falls
     nearly at the level of the aforesaid semicircle. Later, I turn
     the lunar heaven until I bring the center of the lunar epicycle
     to the same level. Then, I turn the earth until some
     predetermined city, for example, Trent, situated in the
     northern zone with a latitude of about forty-six degrees, is
     brought to the oft-mentioned level.

     From things arranged in this way and from what has gone before,
     it is evident (with the motions of the luminaries in epicycles
     left out, however, lest you be distracted by the explanation)
     that at Trent, just as in the whole northern hemisphere, it is
     the summer solstice; and, conversely, in the southern
     hemisphere, it is the winter solstice. The reason is because
     the northern magnetic point together with the northern half of
     the earthly axis is at its highest point towards the sun,
     immovably residing in a line sent through the level of the
     highest semicircle; and, conversely, the southern magnetic
     point with the corresponding half of the axis is most removed
     from the same. It further follows, that noonday and the new
     moon coincide, and the heel of Castor almost reaches the
     summit, etc.

     Now, beginning from this hypothetical situation of the whole
     world as from the root of the motions, I move all things in
     their circles so that the earth turns on its axis with a
     revolving motion from west to east in each 24 hours of median
     time. The lunar heaven completes one circle around its poles
     likewise from west to east in the time of 29 terrestrial
     revolutions, hours 12.44.3.13.1. The sphere of the fixed stars
     on the same poles revolves once from east to west within 365
     revolutions of the earth, hours 6.9.29.1. The Primum Mobile on
     the poles (common to the heaven of the fixed stars and the
     heaven of the moon), is moved once in the same way from east to
     west, a little faster, however, than the heaven of the fixed
     stars, yet within 365 revolutions of the earth, hours 5.48.56;
     that is, within a median astronomical year.

     Now, behold for yourself a new world supported on new poles and
     provided with new motions and laws. Now you, reader and lover
     of the stars, turn it, and revolve it as long as it pleases
     you, and compare it astronomically and physically with the
     Copernican or the Tychonian systems or with whatever one
     pleases you more, and judge which one seems more consonant with
     nature when all things are examined. But if you aren't able to
     reconcile this theory with some astronomical observations or
     physical experiments and think it should be eliminated from
     the group of theories, see that I might know this while life is
     still my companion, so that I might think with you, if this is
     possible. Also, so that, in gratitude for the detected or
     perhaps hidden error, I might speak or write, and you won't
     have to shout in vain in bold ridicule and with no applause
     after the fleeing shades of the dead and the mute ashes. But,
     if you object that the daily motion of the revolving earth and
     the annual motion of its whirling axis do not sufficiently
     agree with certain texts of Sacred Scripture, and if those
     things which the Copernicans and the Longomontanists say do not
     convince you, then reject my whole system as an old wives'
     tale.



GLOSSARY

ANOMOLIA or anomaly, is the angular distance of a planet from its
perihelion (that point of the orbit of a planet which is nearest to the
sun) as seen from the sun.

AEQUINOCTIUM or the equinox, is the time in which days and nights are
equal in the space of hours. There are two equinoxes: the spring
equinox--c. 8 calends of April in the sign of Aries; and the fall
equinox--c. 10 calends of October in the sign of Libra.

AERAS is derived from _aera_, _aerae_, which originally meant a given
number, usually used in regard to money. The word was later extended to
mean a number used in any calculation, and finally it came to mean a
certain time from which subsequent times were counted, e.g., _Anno
Domini_, after the Birth of Christ.

COLURI or the Colures, which are two circles in the heavenly sphere,
passing through the poles of the world and cutting each other at right
angles: the one passes through the equinoctial points of Aries and Libra
and is called _Colurus Aequinoctiorum_ or equinoctial colure; the other
touches the _solstitialia_ of Cancer and Capricorn and is called
_Colurus Solstitiorum_ or solstitial colure. They are called _Colurus_,
which is translated as "mutilated tails," for the part which emerges in
the Antarctic is not visible and is quasitruncated.

ECLIPTICA or the ecliptic, is an imaginary line in the heavens in which
the sun was supposed to have performed its annual course.

EPICYCLUS or epicycle, is a small orb which, being fixed in the deferent
of a planet, is carried along with its motion and yet, with its own
peculiar motion, carries the body of the planet fastened to it round
about its proper center.

IRIS or the rainbow. In mythology, Iris was the daughter of Thaumatis
and Electra, messenger of Juno of the goddesses and Jove of the gods.

SOLSTITIUM or the solstice, is that time when the sun seems to stand
still for a short time: when the sign of Cancer enters the month of June
(equivalent to the summer solstice, when the sun begins to recede from
us); and when the sign of Capricorn enters the month of December
(equivalent to the winter solstice, when the sun begins to accede to
us).






Last Years


There is a break in the story of Borghesi and Bertolla for the next five
years. The second clock may have been the last project on which the
priest and the clockmaker worked together, for very good reasons. The
two clocks must have represented a considerable financial investment in
materials and in time, and neither of the men was in sufficiently
affluent circumstances to undertake the luxury of such a hobby without
some form of recompense. The publication of the two little volumes must
have also been done at Father Borghesi's expense. The income of the
parish priest in a small mountain village could not have been equal to
the relatively great costs of the projects that had been completed. It
seems probable that the priest attempted to sell his clocks to a wealthy
patron, perhaps the Baron of Cles, or he may have attempted to obtain
some form of recompense for the continuation of his research. However,
no records can be found of such patronage if it existed. If Borghesi had
received financial assistance while the projects were in progress, he
would certainly have made adequate mention of the patron's name and
assistance in one or the other of the two volumes which he
published.[17]

The next record relating to Borghesi which has been found is the
description of a letter written by an anonymous mathematician late in
1768 or early in 1769. It was 28 pages in length, written in Latin, in
the form of a reply to the writer's brother, on the subject of the clock
invented by Borghesi. It consisted primarily of a criticism launched
against Borghesi's first little volume published in 1763.

The anonymous letter is without date, place, or signature. This writer
claimed that Father Borghesi had made many errors in his book,
presumably in the description of the clock's functions, and in the basic
theories upon which the priest had predicated his research. No complete
copy of the letter's text has been found for study, although it is
described at length in Tovazzi's _Biblioteca Tirolese_. Tovazzi noted
that four copies of the letter existed at that time, and that he
personally had filed one in the Biblioteca di Cles in Trent. However,
every attempt to locate a copy at the present time has been
unsuccessful.

If the anonymous letter was brought to the attention of Father Borghesi,
it must have introduced a disturbing note into his life and cost the
priest many unhappy moments. He was not, however, dissuaded from his
preoccupation with horology. Several years later, in 1773, Father
Borghesi was working on yet another astronomical clock, this time
presumably without the assistance of Bertolla. This third clock was
reported by Tovazzi to have been "of minimum expense but of maximum
ingenuity."

No subsequent information relating to it has come to light, and there is
no record that it was actually completed.

Again there is a period of silence in the life of Father Borghesi which
no amount of research has yet been able to pierce. Whatever the
circumstances may have been, it is reported by several of the sources
noted that both the first and the second clock did, in fact, become the
property of the Empress Maria Theresa in Vienna. The presentation was
made sometime during the period between the completion of the second
clock in 1764 and the year 1780. There is some discrepancy in the
contemporary accounts as to whether Father Borghesi presented one or two
clocks to the Empress, but all the sources with but one exception record
that both clocks were acquired by the Empress.

It is doubtful that Father Borghesi had originally intended to give his
clocks to the Empress at the time that they were made, for he would most
certainly have made some mention of such an intention in the two little
volumes which he published about them. If he saw the letter published by
the anonymous mathematician in late 1768 or 1769, it is possible that he
decided to make the presentation in expiation of his sense of guilt for
the amount of his time which the creation of the timepieces had
consumed. On the other hand, it is just as possible that Father Borghesi
may have forwarded copies of his two little volumes to the Imperial
Court at Vienna, and that the Empress expressed a desire to acquire the
clocks.

Father Tovazzi states that in 1780 "the clock invented by him [Borghesi]
was preserved in Vienna, Austria, at the Imperial Court from which the
inventor was receiving an annual pension of 400 florins." No records in
the Palace archives relating to the clock have yet been found, nor
records of payment of an annuity to Father Borghesi. However, a more
exhaustive investigation of the Furniture Depository of the Imperial
Court may bring forth related records. It was the implication in Father
Tovazzi's account that the second clock had been presented to the
Empress prior to the publication of the anonymous, critical letter in
1768 or 1769. He believed that it was envy of Father Borghesi's
ingenuity, fame and financial benefit that had caused the anonymous
mathematician to publish his letter, for Tovazzi asked "Who would have
encountered opposition to such a marvel? Envy is not yet dead, and has
always reigned."

This last-mentioned theory about the presentation may be the most likely
one. Some evidence may be found in the second clock itself which bears
out this assumption. The multiple chapter ring, with its many
inscriptions, is engraved and silvered in a relatively crude manner,
presumably by Bertolla himself. The main dial plate, however, which is
of gilt brass, is engraved with the utmost skill by one of the great
masters of the art. The inscription below the Imperial Hapsburg eagle
relates to Francis I, Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire. It is entirely
possible that although Father Borghesi originally had no intention of
giving the clock to the Emperor or the Empress at the time that it was
made, he later changed his mind. Accordingly, he may have commissioned a
master engraver, possibly in Trent or in Vienna itself, to produce a
dial plate which would be of such a quality as to be worthy of the
Emperor himself. If so, this was done shortly after the clock was
completed, for the Emperor died in August of the following year. Perhaps
by the time that the clock was ready, the Emperor had already died, and
Father Borghesi gave the clock instead to Maria Theresa without revising
the inscription.

The acceptance of the clocks by the Empress, and the annuity which was
his reward, would have constituted considerable honor even for one of
the foremost clockmakers of the Empire, but for a humble parish priest
in a little village, such notable Imperial recognition was overwhelming.
Possibly as a result of it, a change was noted in Father Borghesi in the
next few years. His conscience began to bother him, and he began to
question whether he had done right in spending so much of his time and
thought on his horological research. He became more and more confused in
his own mind. Had he spent too much time in mechanical studies to the
neglect of his ecclesiastical duties? If this had been the case, he had
committed the most grievous sin.

Exaggerated though these thoughts may appear, they were undoubtedly of
the most critical importance to the middle-aged priest. His mental
turbulence and confusion increased daily, and it soon became apparent to
others around him. By June 1779, he was completely in the grip of his
obsession, and his parishioners began to whisper amongst themselves that
their pastor was being tortured by the devil. They were unable to help
him, and he became more and more preoccupied with his problem. The years
passed slowly as the pastor became more vague and more tortured by his
conscience.[18]

There probably was continued contact between Father Borghesi and
Bertolla for at least some time after the development of his illness.
Bertolla had retired from active work, but continued to pursue his
interests in his clockshop as much as his health and advanced years
permitted. A clock which he made at the age of 80 survives and is
described and illustrated in the following section on "The Clocks of
Bartolomeo Antonio Bertolla." Finally, on January 15, 1789, Bertolla
passed away and Father Borghesi was left alone, deprived of the
companionship he had enjoyed with the older man for the past two or
three decades. One of Bertolla's nephews continued to work in the master
clockmaker's workshop, but there did not appear to be any association
between the younger man and Father Borghesi.

At last, in 1794, Father Borghesi lost his sanity completely, and he was
forced to relinquish his pastoral duties to a curate. For the remaining
eight years of his life, he continued to live in the rectory of the
little parish church in Mechel where most of his life had been spent,
his needs undoubtedly attended by the parishioners he could no longer
serve. During this period, until his death at the age of 79 on June 12,
1802, Father Borghesi lived on, oblivious of those around him.
Seemingly, he retired to another world; perhaps to that universe which
he had tried to reproduce in his second clock.




The Clocks of Bartolomeo Antonio Bertolla


The ingenuity displayed in the Borghesi clock by its constructor,
Bartolomeo Antonio Bertolla, requires a consideration of the other
examples of his work that have survived. The most important of his
clocks are probably the one in the Episcopal Palace at Trent and another
made for the Baron of Cles.

The one which survives in the Episcopal Palace to the present time, is
extremely tall and is housed in an elaborately decorated narrow case of
black or ebonized wood approximately 9 to 10 feet in height. The upper
part of the case is decorated with elaborately carved and gilt rococo
motifs. The movement operates for one year at a winding, indicates and
strikes the hours, and shows the lunar phases. It has an alarm, and will
repeat the strike at will, indicating the number of the past hour and
the quarters. The gilt brass dial is decorated with silver-foliated
scrollwork in relief at the corners, inside the chapter ring, and within
the broken arch. Featured above the chapter ring is the coat of arms,
executed in silver, of the patron for whom the clock was made,
Cristoforo Sizzo di Noris. Di Noris was Bishop of Trent for 13 years,
from 1763 to 1776.

The clock which Bertolla made for the Baron of Cles is a tall, narrow,
case clock of ebony or ebonized pearwood which is approximately 9-1/2
feet in height. The decoration of the case is considerably more
conservative than the one made for Di Noris, but the black wood is
decorated with silver trim and carved designs in the wood itself. The
dial is decorated with silver scrollwork and spandrels within and around
a raised chapter ring. The clock operates for one month at each winding,
has an alarm, indicates and strikes the hours, and will repeat the
quarters. This handsome timepiece is still in the possession of the
descendants of the Baron of Cles.

[Illustration: Figure 21.--TALL-CASE CLOCK BY BERTOLLA in the Episcopal
Palace in Trent, made for Bishop Cristoforo Sizzo di Noris. A striking
and repeating clock with lunar phases. (_Courtesy of Museo Nazionale
della Scienza e della Tecnica, Milan._)]

[Illustration: Figure 22.--INTERIOR OF BERTOLLA'S WORKSHOP, showing
detail of ceiling. (_Courtesy Museo Nazionale della Scienza e della
Tecnica, Milan._)]

[Illustration: Figure 23.--INTERIOR OF BERTOLLA'S WORKSHOP, showing the
main workbench and the collection of clockmakers' tools. (_Courtesy of
Museo Nazionale della Scienza e della Tecnica, Milan._)]

[Illustration: Figure 24.--FUSEE CUTTER used by Bertolla. Now in the
collection of the Museo Nazionale della Scienza e della Tecnica,
Milan.]

[Illustration: Figure 25.--INTERIOR OF BERTOLLA'S WORKSHOP, showing
details of paneling and floor case with Bertolla manuscripts. (_Courtesy
of Museo Nazionale della Scienza e della Tecnica, Milan._)]

According to Pippa,[19] certain characteristics become apparent in a
study of the surviving clocks by Bertolla. The tall-case clocks are
narrow and range in height from 7-3/4 feet to 10-1/2 feet. The cases had
this excessive height in order to obtain the greatest fall for the month
and year movements which Bertolla constructed. For the weight assembly,
he substituted a drum wound with a key at the point of the driving wheel
in place of the customary pulley. The addition of an intermediate wheel
augmented the drop of the weight.

Bertolla's movements were solidly constructed from well-hammered brass
and iron. He favored the recoil anchor escapement in his clocks and the
Graham dead-beat anchor escapement with a seconds' pendulum. The
escapement was not always placed in the traditional location in the
upper center between the plates. Bertolla occasionally displaced the
pendulum to one side, to the lower part of the movement or placed it
entirely between two other small plates.[20]

He utilized every type of striking work, including the music-box
cylinder common in the clocks of the Black Forest and the rack and
snail. Bertolla most frequently employed the hour strike and _grand
sonnerie_. He often used a single hammer on two bells of different sound
with the rack and snail. An example of this type is the clock he
produced at the age of 80. To achieve the necessary axis of rotation for
the hammer, which is perpendicular to the plate when it strikes the
hours, it moves to an oblique position and displaces one of the two long
pins in an elongated opening.

Bertolla's dial plates were generally well executed, with a raised or
separate chapter ring applied to a brass or copper plate, such as a
copper-plate _repousse_ and gilt with baroque motifs, or upon a smooth
brass plate with spandrels of _repousse_ work usually of silver, in
relief and attached. The engraving of the chapter rings was excellent.
The hands were well executed in steel or perforated bronze, and
occasionally of _repousse_ copper; gilt was applied to the hands made of
forged steel.

[Illustration: Figure 26.--DIAL PLATE of a brass lantern clock made by
Bertolla, found in his workshop after his death. (_Courtesy of Museo
Nazionale della Scienza e della Tecnica, Milan._)]

In the course of time, Bertolla's home workshop passed from one
generation to another within the family. Inevitably, it underwent many
modifications until the only original part of the building that remained
intact from Bertolla's time was his clockshop.

[Illustration: Figure 27.--MOVEMENT of a brass lantern clock made by
Bertolla. (_Courtesy of Museo Nazionale della Scienza e della Tecnica,
Milan._)]

Within the last few years, the workshop room was acquired complete with
contents from Bertolla's descendants, and installed in the Museo
Nazionale della Scienza e della Tecnica in Milan as an exhibit of a
typical 18th-century clockmaker's shop. The original workshop was
dismantled in Mocenigo di Rumo and completely rebuilt in the museum,
including the walls, ceiling and floor. The paneling and woodwork of the
walls and ceiling, which have been preserved intact, are hand-cut fir,
with columns, trim and moldings carved by hand. A small painting is
featured in the center of the coffered ceiling. The original shop
benches and chests of drawers are set around the reconstructed shop and
Bertolla's tools and equipment laid out as they had been originally.
Other clockmaker's tools and equipment in the museum's collection are
also displayed. Approximately 40 percent of the tools are the original
items from Bertolla's shop. Parts of clocks and works in progress are
on view on the benches as they were in Bertolla's time.[21] Also
preserved in the museum are sketches found in Bertolla's manuscripts,
some of which are reproduced on the following pages.

[Illustration: Figure 28.--DETAIL OF WALL of Bertolla's workshop, with
regulatory clock made by his nephew, Alessandro Bertolla of Venice. Note
wheel layouts, etc., scribed in the paneling. (_Courtesy of Museo
Nazionale della Scienza e della Tecnica, Milan._)]

[Illustration: Figure 29.--TABLE CLOCK BY BERTOLLA in the collection of
Doctor Vittorio dal Lago of Bergamo. The dial indicates the days of the
week and of the month, the names of the months and lunar phases. The
clock strikes the hours and quarters and repeats. (_Courtesy of Sig.
Luigi Pippa of Milan._)]

The shop contains two completed clocks made by Bertolla. One is a
weight-driven lantern clock typical of the 18th century, Italian style
with brass dial, plates and posts, anchor escapement, and striking
work. The dial is engraved in the usual style of Bertolla's baroque
design, and the hands are of pierced bronze. Another clock associated
with Bertolla and found in the shop, was made by his nephew, Alessandro
Bertolla, who worked in Venice after his apprenticeship with his uncle
had been completed. This clock is a regulator with a seconds' pendulum
and sweep hand on an enameled dial. The original case has not survived.

[Illustration: Figure 30.--LAYOUT OF THE WHEELWORK of a clock made by
Bertolla for His Excellency Paulo Dona, inscribed "Design No. 1."
(_Courtesy of Museo Nazionale della Scienza e della Tecnica, Milan._)]

[Illustration: Figure 31.--PENDULUM ARRANGEMENT SKETCH for an
unidentified clock found in Bertolla's workshop. (_Courtesy of Museo
Nazionale della Scienza e della Tecnica, Milan._)]

[Illustration: Figure 32.--STRIKING CLOCK SKETCH found in Bertolla's
manuscripts. (_Courtesy of Museo Nazionale della Scienza e della
Tecnica, Milan._)]

[Illustration: Figure 33.--FIFTEEN-DAY STRIKING CLOCK SKETCH, inscribed
"Design No. 3," found in Bertolla's workshop. (_Courtesy of Museo
Nazionale della Scienza e della Tecnica, Milan._)]

[Illustration: Figure 34.--DIAL PLATE of a brass lantern clock made by
Bertolla at the age of 80. (_Courtesy of Museo Nazionale della Scienza e
della Tecnica, Milan._)]

[Illustration: Figure 35.--MOVEMENT of brass lantern clock produced by
Bertolla at the age of 80, showing details of movement and double bell.
(_Courtesy of Museo Nazionale della Scienza e della Tecnica, Milan._)]

One of the most interesting of Bertolla's clocks, and probably the last
one which he produced, was found in his workshop. This timepiece
indicates the hours, minutes and quarters by means of a single hand or
index. The weight-driven clock strikes the hours and quarters on two
bells with a single hammer. The chapter ring, which is soldered to the
dial plate, is marked for the minutes on the outer rim and for the four
quarters inside it. Over the center of it, is a semicircular opening in
the dial plate through which is visible a revolving disk attached behind
the dial plate. This disk is marked with the hours and revolves from
right to left, the current hour being indicated by a projection from the
minute ring. The brass dial plate is engraved with simple floral
designs in the corners and around the broken arch. There is no
comparison between this crude and simple decoration and the extremely
fine quality of the engraving on the dial plate of the Borghesi clock,
for instance. In the center of the dial plate is engraved the following:

     "Questo orologio l'ideai e lo feci nella mia avanzata eta
     d'anni 80. Bart^{o} Ant^{o} Bertolla"

     (I designed and made this clock at my advanced age of 80 years.
     Bartolomeo Antonio Bertolla.)





FOOTNOTES


   [1]  BORGHESI, _Novissimum Theorico-Practicum Astronomicum Authoma
        Juxta Pariter Novissimum Mundi Systema..._, pp. 8-9.

   [2]  WENHAM, "Tall Case Clocks," p. 33.

   [3]  VON BERTELE, "The Development of Equation Clocks," parts 1
        through 5.

   [4]  ENGELMANN, _Philipp Matthaeus Hahn_; VISCHER, _Beschreibung
        mechanischer Kunstwerke..._.

   [5]  LLOYD, _Some Outstanding Clocks Over Seven Hundred Years,
        1250-1950_, pp. 116, 118, 120.

   [6]  SAN CAJETANO, _Praktische Anleitung fuer Kuenstler..._.

   [7]  FRANCH, _La Valle di Non_.

   [8]  BONOMI, _Naturalisti, Medici e Tecnici Trentini_, p. 16

   [9]  AMBROSI, _Scrittori ed Artisti Trentini_, pp. 132, 525.

  [10]  Ibid.

  [11]  PIPPA, "Antonio Bartolomeo Bertolla," pp. 22-23.

  [12]  Ibid., p. 22.

  [13]  Ibid., p. 23.

  [14]  The abbreviation in the inscription "pLan" is difficult to
        interpret. According to Father F. X. Winters, S.J., it may
        represent "sit planetis" or "sit planetarum." The use of an
        abbreviation was necessary to prevent the addition of another
        letter I or M, which would have disturbed the formation of the
        chronogram desired. Literally, "sit planetis" means "May he be
        eternal ruler _by_ [or _through_] favor of the planets," while
        "sit planetarum" is to be translated "May he be eternal ruler
        _of_ the planets." Father Winters considered both versions
        somewhat overexaggerated and proposed that the best translation
        might be "Long Live Francis I, Emperor."

  [15]  The word "Tempe" refers to the Vale of Tempe, in Thessaly,
        through which the Peneus River flows. It is between Mounts
        Olympus and Ossa, and is situated between the town of Larissa
        and the sea. In mythology, it is told that these mounts were
        originally joined and Hercules separated them to allow the river
        to pass between them. The word "Tempe" is also used to mean any
        pleasant place. Thus, the inscription "Tempe indesinenter
        clausa, Scaturigo signata" is literally translated "Tempe always
        closed, A fount of water sealed up" or, freely translated, as "A
        garden enclosed, a fountain sealed up."

  [16]  "Phoebi" or Phoebus, called Apollo, the sun god; Phoebes or
        Diana, the moon goddess, sister of Apollo.

  [17]  PIPPA, op. cit. (footnote 11), pp. 23-25.

  [18]  PERINI, _Statistica del Trentino, Biblioteca Communale del
        Trentino_, vol. 2, p. 57 (cons. 6, carta 9); TOVAZZI,
        _Biblioteca Tirolese_, pp. 406-407.

  [19]  PIPPA, op. cit. (footnote 11), pp. 24-25.

  [20]  PIAMONTE, _La Nauna Descritta al Viaggiattore_.

  [21]  ESPOSTI, "La Sala 'Innocente Binda' al Museo della Scienza e
        della Tecnica di Milano," pp. 18-21.




Appendix

SYNOPSIS OF THE COMPLETE MECHANICAL WORKS OF THE FIRST CLOCK

     [Translated from the section entitled "Synopsis Totius Operis
     Mechanici" in Francesco Borghesi's first book _Novissima Ac
     Perpetua Astronomica Ephemeris Authomatica
     Theorico-Practica..._.]


I

Of three movable indices, the farthest from the center of the dial is
fitted with an index on either side and marked with four segments of a
circle. Immediately below are five numbers, divided into the days of
setting the measure of the mean-synodic age of the moon, and into signs,
degrees of the signs, and of the distance of the moon from the sun.
These, in each revolution, revolve once around the solar disk
superimposed on the mean synodic-lunar disk, and also around the lunar
disk. The upper indices, meanwhile, in the two external greatest orbits,
measure the time continuously, in the accustomed manner of the
Germans--the middle index measuring by hours and the uppermost by the
first minutes [of hours].


II

Inside these three circles, perpendicular above their center, is a small
index of the seconds of minutes. At each first minute of time, being the
fastest of all, it describes the smallest orbit. Next to this are two
other slightly larger circles divided into 30 degrees, one [rotating?]
from the right, the other from the left. These two indices are arranged
in such a fashion that the one rotating from the observer's left
completes its period 12 times during one, mean, solar-astronomical year.
The one [rotating] from the right likewise completes its cycle 12 times
during the period of one mean-synodic moon. In between these, there is
placed another small sphere, divided into 40 arbitrary parts, whose dial
does not move automatically, but is moved by hand for speeding up or
slowing down the course of the time, or of the perpendicular.


III

Diagonally from the sides of the center of the three larger indices, six
other indices revolve: three on the left from one center, and three on
the right from another. The uppermost of the three which are on the
right of the observer [and which are] decorated with a small disk of the
sun, runs its cycle once during a mean solar-astronomical year. The
second measures the distance of the sun from its apogee. The third
revolves 12 times, with each lunar revolution from one node to the same
[repeated] node. Under the point of the uppermost index, first lie the
months of the year which are inscribed, and the days of each month, but
having only 28 days assigned to February; then the signs of the zodiac,
and their several degrees. The circle corresponding to the middle index,
extending through the first semicircle from apogee to the lower perigee
and returning through the second semicircle to the upper locations of
apogee, shows the true equation or eccentricity of the sun, joined with
the little equation of the moon in syzygy. [These equations are]
measured by geometric-astronomic proportion for each distance of the
sun from its apogee or perigee in degrees, and in sufficiently small
parts of degrees, with the title added above in their proper places,
whether an addition is to be made to the mean location of the sun or a
subtraction from the same, so that the true longitude of the sun may be
calculated. Three circles are assigned to the lowest index, of which 30
degrees of distance of the moon from its nodes comprise the larger. The
middle circle is based on the hypothesis of the mean invariable
diameters (that is, of the sun, the moon, and the terrestrial shadow),
and is divided into hours and quarters of duration. The last circle is
divided by the trigonometric laws into the inches of magnitude of lunar
eclipses. Lying between these circles, there is another eccentric circle
(black with a spot) exhibiting the shadow of the earth, in which the
little moon sinks itself, carried by the lowest index. In any ecliptic
full moons, the patent number of inches of immersion somehow affects the
minds of the cultured, but also the scheme of maximum obscuration
affects the eyes of the illiterate themselves.


IV

Of the three indices which revolve from the left, the uppermost
completes its cycle within 12 hours, just as the hour index. The middle
one with two pointers on diametrically opposite sides, carries the marks
of conjunction and opposition of the luminous bodies, with a movement
equal to the course of the sun from lunar apogee or perigee. The lowest
index, fitted with a single pointer, indicates the motion of the moon
from its apogee or perigee. Under these three indices, there is situated
a common circle, divided into 12 parts, each of which are further
divided into 30 parts through its outer circumference. I have said a
common circle, for, with respect to the first index, the division
represents 12 hours, and the double subdivision representing the double
set of minutes of the hours serves for an excitator for anytime at all,
at will. For as often as the little index reaches the twelfth hour,
first being moved by hand wherever you prefer, a little hammer strikes
the little bell many times. But if you observe the second or the third
index, the first division provides the signs, and the subdivision of the
signs gives the individual degrees of the distance of the sun from the
lunar apogee, or of the moon from its apogee, respectively. To this is
added two other interior circles from the same center: to the larger is
inserted the equation of the center of the moon in its conjunctions and
oppositions; and on the smaller the equation of the same moon in its
quarters, astronomically-geometrically proportioned to the distance of
the moon from its apogee or perigee. In the first case, the equation is
to be subtracted from the mean longitude of the moon, descending from
apogee to perigee; in the second case, to be added to the mean longitude
of the moon ascending from perigee to apogee; and, in the third
semicircle of the index, as the rubric directs, common to both
equations, added around the center.


V

Perpendicularly under the center of the machine, two other indices are
carried about one and the same center. The one nearer to the
observer--bearing in one of two points diametrically opposite the small
disk of the sun, in the other the disk of the moon--runs a course equal
to the motion of the sun from the head or the tail of the dragon
(_Draco_). The other, of simple construction, marked with a small moon,
signifies in like manner the motion of the moon from the head or the
tail of the dragon.

Immediately below, there is a larger circle, common [referring] to both
these indices, which is divided into 12 parts. Each of these parts in
turn, in the outer periphery, is subdivided further into 30 parts, which
are the 12 signs of the zodiac and the individual degrees of the signs
of distance of the sun and the moon from the head of the dragon.

In the second circle is read the latitude of the moon, measured by
degrees, etc., on a trigonometric scale, by signs and degrees of
distance of the moon from its nodes, that is, from the head or tail of
the dragon. When the second index is descending from the head of the
dragon to the tail, the latitude will be to the north of the solar path;
that is, the ecliptic. On the other hand, it will be south of the
ecliptic when the same index is returning upward from the tail to the
head of the dragon as advised by the title inscribed on the third
circle.

Finally, on the fourth and last circle are seen more prime minutes of
the circle for reducing the orbit of the moon to the ecliptic. That the
true longitude of the moon may be obtained more accurately, these must
be subtracted from the longitude of the moon already calculated in the
first and third quadrant of the circle of the second index. On the other
hand, they are to be added to the same in the second and fourth
quadrant, as is noted in their respective places, according to the
theory of right ascensions.

Here, then, [you have] as finally completed, delineation of the great
index which was partially described before in this book.

From two points of that index which perpendicularly correspond to the
center of these circles, a pair of compasses, by an unvaried aperture up
to the circumference of the first larger circle, has marked off four
segments of a circle. The two larger segments, equal among themselves,
in one aperture refer to the sun, and the two smaller in the other,
likewise equal, refer to the moon. The one pointer is for determining
the solar eclipses; the other, for lunar. Both segments of each
division, like little wings of the index, stretch to the extent of the
degree of distance of the moon from its nodes, and to which that
determined latitude corresponds. On one side, that latitude precisely
equals the radii of the earth, the sun, and the moon, as the termini of
solar eclipses; and, on the other side, precisely equals the radii of
the earth's shadow and of the moon, as the confines of lunar eclipses.
The apexes of the last index, diametrically limited [opposite], indicate
the age of the moon, and its mean distance from the sun; one pointer,
upon which the sun sits, measuring the mean days and degrees from the
full moon; the other, on which the moon sits, measuring the mean days
and degrees from the new moon.


VI

Besides the larger and smaller indices already mentioned, all [of which]
revolve within the periphery of the three largest circles, six dials in
this clock also revolve within the same circles which are to be seen
through six openings of the frontispiece. The first of these, intended
to indicate the phases of the moon by an unusual method (completely
black, and decorated with the characters of the principal aspects of the
moon) continually revolves interiorly around the center of the machine
and at the new moon, it completely removes from sight the face of the
moon through the round window. It continually recedes through the first
half of the circle until, at the time of the full moon, it restores the
moon, looking out with a full star. Soon again, too slow to be
observed, it returns through the other half of the circle, so that in
the next conjunction, the whole face of the moon may have a covering of
darkness, once again to be removed.

The other dials are moved by spontaneous advances at stated times. The
first of these shows, through a square opening, the day of the month;
the second, through another opening, shows the current day of the week
with the characters of the seven planets which, according to ancient
superstition, preside over each day of the week (now, by a truer form of
religion divided by the Church into ferias, etc.); that is, the sun, the
moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn, to which I have added
the numbers of the ferias. These two little dials are advanced daily, by
a sudden movement at midnight. The remaining three are changed
automatically only once a year on the first of January.

The first of these dials contains five little cells, opening from a
common window: in the first cell, at the edge of the dial, is found the
dominical letter; in the second, the cycle of the sun; in the third, the
character; in the fourth, the sign; and, in the fifth, the house of the
planet dominating the year. The second dial shows the epacts, with the
golden number. The third, and last of all, shows the Roman cycle.

Finally, as indicated by the epact and the dominical letter in an
immovable table added outside, are the feastdays and other movable
events of the year; that is, Easter, the four seasons, the Rogation
Days, etc.


VII

But lest the various movements of the indices and the various beginnings
of the divisions tend to cause some fatigue, the precaution has been
taken, that all the indices by common law are moved from the top towards
the right of the observer, and from thence all the arithmetic divisions
of the circles take their beginning. And lest the multitude of different
figures should deceive the eye, the larger divisions of the circles have
been marked by Roman numbers, that is, by capital letters of the
alphabet; others, in other places, by differently colored numbers. Thus,
the movements of the indices, the distribution of the circles and the
multitude of numbers not only do not disturb the eyes and the mind, but
rather marvelously delight them.


VIII

After having completed briefly the description of the dial and the
indices and their motions, I have not without reason delayed in
satisfying the desires of many who wish to learn at least the method by
which, from this mechanism, may be calculated the true times of new and
full moons, and their ecliptics. In order to make these matters clearer,
it is necessary that they be explained here at greater length.

With the indices, then, adjusted astronomically-geographically to the
longitude of any given region, and to the mean time whether past,
present or future, and assuming the clock to be in normal operation (as
at present it has been for a whole year and more), then the moon will be
in conjunction with the sun in the heavens. When the equations on the
mechanism are examined, the sun and moon shall be found to be in the
same degree of longitude, and in the same part of a degree. There will
also be an ecliptic new moon that is in conjunction with a solar
eclipse, or rather with a terrestrial eclipse. This will occur if, at
that time, both apexes of the first index, located below the center of
the clock, are hidden by the two segments of the circle extending from
the center of the mechanism through the lowest index.

And the eclipse will be greater and greater and, consequently, visible
in more regions of the earth, the more deeply the two pointers,
indicating the distance of the sun from its apogee, are hidden in the
center of the segments.

But whether the eclipse takes place in the head or in the tail of the
dragon, or whether it is north or south, is indicated by the small disk
of the sun attached to one of the two pointers hidden by the segments of
the circle. If, at that time, the little disk shall be found in the head
of the dragon inscribed on the plane of the dial, then the sun has been
snatched from the earth and ingloriously entombed, as it were, in the
huge jaw of the dragon. Then, ... the heavens themselves will lend aid
to the woeful pomp of the senseless funeral in full darkness by suddenly
lighting the unhappy lamps of the fixed stars. However, if the little
disk occupies the tail of the dragon on the mechanism, then the sun in
the heavens also, as if freed from the toils of the immense dragon's
tail, will emerge without difficulty.

The center of the eclipse will traverse the hemisphere of the earth
north of the solar path, always nearer to the pole of the ecliptic, in
proportion to the inclination of the disk to the north. On the other
hand, if the little disk inclines to the left semicircle, then the
people south of the solar path will enjoy the spectacle of the total
central eclipse.

But if the little disk remains neutral (inclining neither way) and
remains halfway between the two sections of the circle, then the
greatest solar eclipse will take place at the equator and those who live
near the poles of the ecliptic will not enjoy a trace of that eclipse.
This is because the half of the equatorial diameter enormously
outmeasures even the greatest apparent semidiameters of the sun and of
the moon, even taking as a norm the smallest horizontal parallax of the
moon.

What has been said about the true new moon is to be understood also,
proportionately, about the true full moon. For when, with respect to the
equations of the centers, the moon shall be distant on the mechanism by
a full semicircle from the sun (also in the heavens it will be truly in
opposition to the sun) there will be a true full moon. Likewise, the
moon in the heavens will be in eclipse if, at the time of opposition,
the pointers of the little index (which we mentioned before) situated
below the center of the clock are so far away from the belly of the
dragon that they are forced to lie under the two smaller segments of the
circle which, in all full moons, are always to be moved from the index
of the synodic moon to the region of that little index. As a matter of
fact, the closer the little pointers approach to the middle of the
segments, the more obscured it will be.

You will know, furthermore, that the eclipse of the moon occurs in the
head of the dragon if the disk of the little moon, attached to the other
point of the little index, is raised to the head of the dragon;
conversely, when the little disk of the moon inclines to the tail, the
eclipse is taking place in the tail of the dragon.

And, accordingly, when you observe the little moon of the index inclined
to one or other section of the circle, so also in the heavens, the
eclipse of the moon is only partial and the northern or the southern
part of the moon is illuminated.

The current time will indicate whether the lunar eclipse is visible or
not. As the new moon ecliptic falls during the day, the eclipse will not
be visible, since the earth denies a sight of the moon which is below
the horizon. But, conversely, if there are no clouds, the eclipse will
be visible anywhere, if the luminous bodies are ecliptically in
opposition at night.

Since lunar eclipses appear to all people as being of the same magnitude
and duration, and begin and dissipate at the same absolute moment of
time, I decided to reveal another facet of this spectacle on the right
side of the center of the clock (see chapter III above). There, at the
time of the true ecliptic full moon, as the pointer of the third little
index shows, you can ascertain the hours, etc., of duration, and the
inches of greatest obscuration. The little moon attached to the index is
a model of the actual eclipsed moon.


IX

Thus, with the aid of this machine, solar and lunar eclipses of the past
can be recalled and future ones can be foreseen. Indeed, if the index of
prime minutes is speeded up by hand, whose wheel imparts motion to the
other indices and shields, then, the dials and openings will foretell
the year, month, day, hour, etc., of any future eclipse. I foresaw that
the times would thus be evolved too slowly, and that the clock wheels
would be considerably worn by repeated experiments (if, for instance, by
the rotation of the index of prime minutes, to whose period only a
single hour corresponds, the future new and full moon ecliptics were
being investigated). Therefore, I took care that the wheel which
immediately communicates motion to the index of the synodic moon should
be so fitted internally to the mechanism that by the reversal of any
external index, the wheel would be removed from its proper position;
whenever desired, it could be quickly and most accurately restored to
its proper place.

In this way, since the close meshing of the wheels is released, you can
extend the experiment for many years, even for many centuries. You have
only to guide with your hand the index of the synodic moon on the
circles, always intently observing whether, in the passage which this
index makes over the little index, both pointers of the little index are
hidden by the segments of the circle. Having observed this, look at the
index moved by hand, for if this has carried the solar disk halfway
between the two larger segments of the circle to the region of the
hidden little index, then you will know that eclipse will be a solar
eclipse. On the other hand, you will know that it will be a lunar
eclipse, if the index (moved by hand) has carried the moon, situated
between the two smaller segments of the circle, to the same region
(i.e., the hidden part of the circle). The solar disk and the lunar disk
alternately will reveal to you the circumstances of both eclipses. The
current year will be given by the Julian period, reducible to any
desired epoch, and, contained in the solar cycle, the golden number and
the Roman cycle. The month of the year and also the day of the month
will be indicated by the pointer of the little index, first on the right
side of the clock. And what I have said of future eclipses should be
equally understood of past eclipses, so long as the index, which can be
moved either way at will, is moved in reverse.

Finally, though 55 wheels were employed to carry so many dials, all are
driven by one source of power not exceeding the third part of a Germanic
hundred-weight which, suspended at the geometric height of five feet
(about the ordinary stature of a man), keeps the whole machine in
operation for a hundred days and more.

Although the machine repeats hours and quarter hours at will and,
consequently, the number of wheels and the rest of the apparatus
necessary for these functions is thereby increased, it has not grown to
an unwieldy size, however much one might erroneously imagine it to be.
It does not exceed the bulk of ordinary clocks hanging from a wall;
indeed, it scarcely equals these.

The entire machine, ready for operation, does not weigh more than 156
ounces, although it is made of steel or brass throughout and further
weighted with two bells and a rather large brass dial-plate.

Of course, there are many more things to be said, especially about the
mechanical structure of the wheels, but fearing to tire my kind reader
unduly by exceeding the bounds of a summary, I am forced to put an end,
though unwillingly, to this sufficiently shortened explanation of the
work. I have hope of giving satisfaction to many more when I shall have
communicated to the learned world another and completely new automatic
work, grander than this present one. It is already theoretically
completed in all its calculations, but still to be worked out
mechanically from the very beginning, if but God, thrice Best and
Greatest, bless the undertaking and mercifully grant life and health--to
whom be in, and from, and through all things, all honor and glory in
eternity and beyond.




BIBLIOGRAPHY


The following works have been used in compiling the material for this
paper. They are frequently referred to in the text in shortened form.

     AMBROSI, FRANCESCO. _Scrittori ed artisti Trentini._ Trent:
     Giovanni Zippel, 1883.

     BONOMI, L. _Naturalisti, medici e tecnici Trentini._ Trent:
     privately printed, 1930.

     BORGHESI, FRANCESCO. _Novissima ac Perpetua Astronomica
     Ephemeris Authomatica Theorico-Practica._ Trent: Giovanni
     Battista Monauni, 1763(?).

     ---- _Novissimum Theorico-Practicum Astronomicum Authoma Juxta
     Pariter Novissimum Mundi Systema._ Trent: Giovanni Battista
     Monauni, 1764.

     ENGELMANN, MAX. Philipp Matthaeus Hahn. Berlin: Verlag Fischer,
     1923.

     ESPOSTI, ALFREDO DEGLI. La sala 'Innocente Binda' al Museo
     della Scienza e della Tecnica di Milano. _La Clessidra_ (July
     1960), anno 16, no. 7, pp. 18-21.

     FRANCH, LEONE. _La Valle di Non._ Trent, 1953.

     LLOYD, H. ALAN. _Some outstanding clocks over seven hundred
     years, 1250-1950._ London: Leonard Hill, 1958.

     MOSNA, EZIO. _Trento._ Trent, 1914.

     PERINI, AGOSTINO (compilatore). _Statistica del Trentino,
     Biblioteca Communale del Trentino._ Vol. 2, p. 57 (cons. 6,
     carta 9).

     PIAMONTE, GUISEPPE. _La nauna descritta al viaggiattore._
     Milan, 1829.

     PIPPA, LUIGI. Antonio Bartolomeo Bertolla. _La Clessidra_
     (January 1961), anno 17, no. 1, pp. 22-25.

     SAN CAJETANO, DAVID A. _Praktische Anleitung fuer Kuenstler, alle
     astronomische Perioden durch brauchbare bisher noch nie
     gesehene ganz neue Raederwerke mit Leichtigkeit vom Himmel
     unabweichlich genau auszufuehren, sammt Erweiterung der Theorie
     des neuen Raedergebaeudes._ Vienna: privately printed, 1793.

     TOVAZZI, GIANGRISOSTOMO. _Biblioteca Tirolese._ Vol. 2, art.
     329, MS. 168, pp. 406-407. Trent, 1780.

     VISCHER, GEORGE F. _Beschreibung mechanischer Kunstwerke,
     welche unter der Direktion und Anweisung M. Philipp Matth.
     Hahn, Pfarrers in Kornwestheim..._. Stuttgart: Mezler, 1774.

     VON BERTELE, HANS. The development of equation clocks. _La
     Suisse Horologere_ (1959-1961), parts 1 through 5.

     WENHAM, EDWARD. Tall case clocks. _The Antiquarian Magazine_
     (May 1927), vol. 8, no. 4, p. 33. [The Borghesi clock is
     illustrated only from a photograph of the Anderson Art
     Galleries in New York, and mislabeled "Astronomical Clock made
     in Jena, 1656, in elaborate mahogany case."]







  CONTRIBUTIONS FROM
  THE MUSEUM OF HISTORY AND TECHNOLOGY:

  PAPER 36




  THE ENGINEERING CONTRIBUTIONS OF WENDEL BOLLMAN

  _Robert M. Vogel_


                                                   EARLY CAREER     80

                                              THE BOLLMAN TRUSS     85

                                         W. BOLLMAN AND COMPANY     91

                                 FINAL USE OF THE BOLLMAN TRUSS     95

                                            KNOWN BOLLMAN WORKS     99

                                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY    104




_Robert M. Vogel_


THE ENGINEERING CONTRIBUTIONS OF WENDEL BOLLMAN


[Illustration: Figure 1.--WENDEL BOLLMAN, C.E. (1814-1884). (_Photo
courtesy of Dr. Stuart Christhilf._)]


     _The development of structural engineering has always been as
     dependent upon the availability of materials as upon the
     expansion of theoretical concepts. Perhaps the greatest single
     step in the history of civil engineering was the introduction
     of iron as a primary structural material in the 19th century;
     it quickly released the bridge and the building from the
     confines of a technology based upon the limited strength of
     masonry and wood._

     _Wendel Bollman, self-taught Baltimore civil engineer, was the
     first to evolve a system of bridging in iron to be consistently
     used on an American railroad, becoming one of the pioneers who
     ushered in the modern period of structural engineering._

     THE AUTHOR: _Robert M. Vogel is curator of civil engineering in
     the Smithsonian Institution's Museum of History and
     Technology._


Wendel Bollman's name survives today solely in association with the
Bollman truss, and even in this respect is known only to a few older
civil and railroad engineers. The Bollman system of trussing, along with
those of Whipple and Fink, may be said to have introduced the great age
of the metal bridge, and thus, directly, the modern period of civil
engineering.

Bollman's bridge truss, of which the first example was built in 1850,
has the very significant distinction of being the first bridging system
in the world employing iron in all of its principal structural members
that was used consistently on a railroad.

The importance of the transition from wood to iron as a structural and
bridge building material is generally recognized, but it may be well to
mention certain aspects of this change.

The tradition of masonry bridge construction never attained the great
strength in this country which it held in Europe, despite a number of
notable exceptions. There were several reasons for this. From the very
beginning of colonization, capital was scarce, a condition that
prevailed until well into the 19th century and which prohibited the use
of masonry because of the extremely high costs of labor and transport.
An even more important economic consideration was the rapidity with
which it was necessary to extend the construction of railways during
their pioneer years. Unlike the early English and European railways,
which invariably traversed areas of dense population and industrial
activity, and were thus assured of a significant financial return almost
from the moment that the first rail was down, the Baltimore and Ohio
and its contemporaries were launched upon an entirely different
commercial prospect. Their principal business consisted not so much in
along-the-line transactions as in haulage between principal terminals
separated by great and largely desolate expanses. This meant that income
was severely limited until the line was virtually complete from end to
end, and it meant that commencement of return upon the initial
investment was entirely dependent upon the speed of survey, graduation,
tunneling, and bridging.

[Illustration: Figure 2.--MODEL OF B. H. LATROBE'S TRUSS, built in 1838,
over the Patapsco River at Elysville (now Daniels), Maryland. (_Photo
courtesy of Baltimore and Ohio Railroad._)]

The need for speed, the general attenuation of capital, and the simple
fact that all the early railroads traversed thickly forested areas
rendered wood the most logical material for bridge and other
construction, both temporary and permanent.

The use of wood as a bridge material did not, of course, originate with
the railroads, or, for that matter, in this country. The heavily wooded
European countries--Switzerland in particular--had a strong tradition of
bridge construction in timber from the Renaissance on, and naturally a
certain amount of this technique found its way to the New World with the
colonials and immigrants.

America's highway system was meager until about the time the railroad
age itself was beginning. However, by 1812 there were, along the eastern
seaboard, a number of fine timber bridges of truly remarkable structural
sophistication and workmanship.

It was just previous to the advent of the railroads that the erection of
highway bridges in this country began to pass from an art to a science.
And an art it had been in the hands of the group of skilled but
unschooled master carpenters and masons who built largely from an
intuitive sense of proportion, stress, and the general "fitness of
things." It passed into an exact science under the guidance of a small
number of men trained at first in the scientific and technical schools
of Europe, and, after about 1820, in the few institutions then
established in America that offered technical instruction.

The increasing number of trained engineers at first affected highway
bridge construction not so much in the materials used but in the way
they were assembled. In a bridge designed by a self-taught constructor,
the cheapness of wood made it entirely feasible to proportion the
members by enlarging them to the point where there could be no question
as to their structural adequacy. The trained engineer, on the other
hand, could design from the standpoint of determining the entire load
and then proportioning each element according to the increment of stress
upon it and to the unit capacity of the material.

By the time railroads had started expanding to the West there had been
sufficient experience with the half dozen practical timber truss systems
by then evolved, that there was little difficulty in translating them
into bridges capable of supporting the initial light rail traffic.

In spite of its inherent shortcomings, wood was so adaptable that it met
almost perfectly the needs of the railroads during the early decades of
their intense expansion, and, in fact, still finds limited use in the
Northwest.




Early Career


Wendel Bollman was born in Baltimore of German parents in 1814. His
father was a baker, who in the same year had aided in the city's defense
against the British. Wendel's education, until about the age of 11, was
more or less conventionally gained in public and private schools in
Baltimore. He then entered into informal apprenticeship, first to an
apothecary in Sheperdstown, Virginia (now West Virginia), and then to
one in Harpers Ferry. In 1826 or 1827 he became ill and returned to
Baltimore for cure. From that time on his education was entirely
self-acquired.

[Illustration: Figure 3.--TRUSSED BEAM.]

It is of interest, in light of his later career, to note that on the
Fourth of July 1828, he marched with other boys in a procession that was
part of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad's cornerstone-laying ceremony.
Shortly afterward, he apprenticed himself to a carpenter for a brief
time, but when the work slacked off he obtained work with the B. & O.
The right-of-way had been graded for about five miles by that time, but
no rail was down. The boy was at first given manual work, but soon
advanced to rodman and rapidly rose as he gained facility with the
surveying apparatus. In the fall of 1829 he participated in laying the
first track. As his mother was anxious that he continue his education in
carpentry, he left the railroad in the spring of 1830 to again enter
apprenticeship. He finished, became a journeyman, helped build a
planter's mansion in Natchez, and returned to Baltimore in 1837 to
commence his own carpentry business. The next year, while building a
house in Harpers Ferry, he was asked to rejoin the B. & O. to rebuild
parts of its large timber bridge over the Potomac there, which had
fallen victim to various defects after about a year's use.

[Illustration: Figure 4.--SIMPLE BEAM of 50-foot span with three
independent trussing systems. Bollman's use of this method of support
led to the development of his bridge truss. This drawing is of a
temporary span used after the timber bridge at Harpers Ferry was
destroyed during the Civil War. (In Baltimore and Ohio Collection,
Museum of History and Technology.)]

Shortly after the Harpers Ferry bridge reconstruction, Bollman was made
foreman of bridges. It is apparent that, on the basis of his practical
ability, enhanced by the theoretical knowledge gained by intense
self-study, he eventually came to assist Chief Engineer Benjamin H.
Latrobe in bridge design. He later took this work over entirely as
Latrobe's attentions and talents were demanded in the location and
extension of the line between Cumberland and Wheeling.

[Illustration: Figure 5.--BOLLMAN'S ORIGINAL PATENT DRAWING, 1851. (In
National Archives, Washington, D.C.)]

The B. & O. did not reach its logical destination, Ohio (actually
Wheeling, West Virginia, on the east bank of the Ohio River) until 1853.
In the years following Bollman's return to the railroad, the design of
bridges was an occupation of the engineering staff second in importance
only to the location of the line itself. During this time Bollman
continued to rise and assume greater responsibilities, being appointed
master of road by Latrobe in 1848. In this position he was responsible
for all railroad property that did not move, principally the
right-of-way and its structures, including, of course, bridges.

The recognition of Bollman's abilities was in the well-established
tradition of the B. & O., long known as America's first "school of
engineering," having sponsored many early experiments in motive power,
trackwork, and other fundamental elements of railroad engineering. It
furnished the means of expression for such men as Knight, Wright,
Whistler, Latrobe, and Winans.

[Illustration: Figure 6.--PLAN OF HARPERS FERRY BRIDGE as built by
Latrobe. The second Winchester track was later removed.]

Of these pioneer civil and mechanical engineers, some were formally
trained but most were self-taught. Bollman's career on the B. & O. is of
particular interest not only because he was perhaps the most successful
of the latter class but because he was probably also the last. He may be
said to be a true representative of the transitional period between
intuitive and exact engineering. Actually, his designing was a composite
of the two methods. While making consistent use of mathematical
analysis, he was at the same time more or less dependent upon empirical
methods. For years, B. & O. employees told stories of his sessions in
the tin shop of the railroad's main repair facility at Mount Clair in
Baltimore, where he built models of bridges from scraps of metal and
then tested them to destruction to locate weaknesses. It seems most
likely, however, that the empirical studies were used solely as checks
against the mathematical.

[Illustration: Figure 7.--RECENT MODEL of Bollman's Winchester span.
Only two of the three lines of trussing are shown. The model is based on
Bollman's published description and drawings of the structure. (USNM
318171; Smithsonian photo 46941.)]

In the period when Bollman began designing--about 1840--there were fewer
than ten men in the country designing bridges by scientifically correct
analytical methods, Whipple and Roebling the most notable of this group.
By 1884, the year of Bollman's death, the age of intuitive design had
been dead for a decade or longer.

[Illustration: Figure 8.--THE BALTIMORE AND OHIO RAILROAD'S Potomac
River crossing at Harpers Ferry, about 1860. Bollman's iron "Winchester
span" of 1851 is seen at the right end of Latrobe's timber structure of
1836, which forms the body of the bridge. (_Photo courtesy of Harpers
Ferry National Historical Park._)]

The B. & O. was in every way a truly pioneer enterprise. It was the
first practical railroad in America; the first to use an American
locomotive; the first to cross the Alleghenies. The spirit of innovation
had been encouraged by the railroad's directors from the outset. It
could hardly have been otherwise in light of the project's elemental
daring.

The first few major bridges beyond the line's starting point on Pratt
Street, in Baltimore, were of rather elaborate masonry, but this may be
explained by the projectors' consciousness of the railroad's
significance and their desire for permanence. However, the
aforementioned economic factors shortly made obvious the necessity of
departure from this system, and wood was thereafter employed for most
long spans on the line as far as Harpers Ferry and beyond. Only the most
minor culverts and short spans, and those only in locations near
suitable quarries, were built of stone.

In addition to the economic considerations which prompted the company to
revert to timber for the major bridges, there were several situations in
which masonry construction was unsuitable for practical reasons. If
stone arches were used in locations where the grade of the line was a
relatively short distance above the surface of the stream to be crossed,
a number of short arches would have been necessary to avoid a very flat
single arch. In arch construction, the smaller the segment of a circle
represented by the arch (that is, the flatter the arch), the greater the
stress in the arch ring and the resulting horizontal thrust on the
abutments.

[Illustration: Figure 9.--BOLLMAN SKEW BRIDGE at Elysville (now
Daniels), Maryland, built in 1853-1854. (_Photo courtesy of Maryland
Historical Society._)]

The piers for the numerous arches necessary to permit an optimum amount
of rise relative to the span would have presented a dangerous
restriction to stream flow in time of flood. By the use of timber
trusses such crossings could be made in one or two spans with, at the
most, one pier in the stream, thus avoiding the problem.

The principal timber bridges as far west as Cumberland were of Latrobe's
design. These were good, solid structures of composite construction, in
which a certain amount of cast iron was used in joints and wrought iron
for certain tension members. They were, however, more empirical than
efficient and, for the most part, not only grossly overdesigned but of
decidedly difficult fabrication and construction.

What is interesting about the Latrobian timber trusses, however, is the
effect they appear to have had upon Bollman's subsequent work in the
design of his own truss. This effect is evidenced by the marked analogy
between the primary structural elements of the two types. The Latrobe
truss at Elysville (fig. 2) was only partially a truss, inasmuch as the
greater part of the load was not carried from panel to panel, finally to
appear at the abutments as a pure vertical reaction, but was carried
from each panel (except the four at the center) directly to the bearing
points at the piers by heavy diagonal struts, after the fashion of the
famous 18th-century Swiss trusses of the Grubenmanns. It was a
legitimate structural device, and the simplest means of extending the
capacity of a spanning system. However, it was defective in that the
struts applied considerable horizontal thrust to the abutments,
requiring heavier masonry than would otherwise have been necessary.

It is quite likely that Latrobe did not have absolute confidence in the
various pure truss systems already patented by Town, Long, and others,
and preferred for such strategic service a structure in which the panel
members acted more or less independently of one another. It will be seen
that, similarly, the individual panel loads in Bollman's truss were
carried to the ends of the frame by members acting independently of one
another.




The Bollman Truss


There had never been any question about the many serious inadequacies of
wood as a bridge material. Decay and fire risk, always present, were the
principal ones, involving continuous expenditure for replacement of
defective members and for fire watches. It was, in fact, understood by
the management and engineering staff of the B. & O. that their timber
bridge superstructures, though considered the finest in the country,
were more or less expedient and were eventually to be replaced. In this
regard it is not surprising that Latrobe, a man of considerable
foresight, had, at an early date, given serious thought to the possible
application of iron here.

[Illustration: Figure 10.--POTOMAC RIVER CROSSING of the Baltimore and
Ohio at North Branch, Maryland, built in 1856. There are three Bollman
deck trusses. (_Photo courtesy of Baltimore and Ohio Railroad._)]

[Illustration: Figure 11.--THE FINK TRUSS. (_Smithsonian photo
41436._)]

[Illustration: WENDEL BOLLMAN'S

Patent Iron Suspension Railroad Bridge.

The undersigned would inform the officers of Railroads and others, that
he is prepared to furnish Drawings and Estimates for Bridges, Roofs,
etc., on the plan of Bollman's Patent.

The performance of these bridges, some of which have been in use for six
years, has given entire satisfaction. Their simplicity of construction
renders repairs easy and cheap, and by a peculiar connection of the Main
and Panel Rods at the bottom of the Posts, all danger from the effects
of expansion, which has heretofore been the chief objection to Iron
Bridges, is entirely removed.

    J. H. TEGMEYER,
    Baltimore, Md.

Figure 12.--ADVERTISEMENT in the _Railroad Advocate_, August 1855.]

The world's first major iron bridge, the famed cast-iron arch at
Coalbrookdale, England, had been constructed in 1779. Its erection was
followed by rather sporadic interest in this use of the material. The
first significant use of iron in this country was in a series of small
trussed highway arches erected by Squire Whipple over the Erie Canal in
the early 1840's, over 60 years later. In these, as in most of the
earlier iron structures, an arch of cast iron was the primary support.
The thrust of the arches was counteracted by open wrought-iron links
with other wrought- and cast-iron members contributing to the truss
action.

The Whipple bridges promoted a certain amount of interest in the
material. In the B. & O.'s annual report for the fiscal year 1849
appears the first record of Latrobe's interest in this important matter.
In the president's message is found the following, rather offhand,
statement:

     $6,183.19 have been expended toward the renewal of the Stone
     Bridges on the Washington Branch, carried off by the flood of
     Oct. 7th, 1847. Preparations are made and contracts entered
     into, for the reconstruction of the large Bridges at Little
     Patuxent and at Bladensburg which will be executed in a few
     months.... It is proposed to erect a superstructure of Iron
     upon stone abutments, at each place--with increased span, for
     greater security against future floods.

It is interesting to note that it was indeed Bollman trusses to which
the president of the railroad had referred. How much earlier than this
date Bollman had evolved his peculiar trussing system is not clear. The
certain influence of Latrobe's radiating strut system of trussing has
been mentioned. As likely an influence was another basic technique
commonly used to increase the capacity of a simple timber beam--that of
trussing--i.e., placing beneath the beam a rod of iron that was anchored
at the ends of the beam and held a certain distance below it at the
center by a vertical strut or post. This combination thus became a truss
in that the timber portion was no longer subject to a bending stress but
to a simple one of compression, the rod absorbing the tensile stress of
the combination. The effect was to deepen the beam, increasing the
distance between its extreme fibers and--by thus reducing the bending
moment--reducing the stress in them (see fig. 3).

[Illustration: Figure 13.--THE FOUR BOLLMAN SPANS at Harpers Ferry that
survived the Civil War. The spans were completed in 1862-1863. (_Photo
courtesy of Baltimore and Ohio Railroad._)]

It apparently occurred to Bollman that by extending the number of rods
in a longitudinal direction, this effect could be practically amplified
to such an extent as to be capable of spanning considerable distances.
He almost certainly did not at first contemplate an all-iron system, but
rather a composite one such as described. It is entirely likely that
such trussed beams, with multiple systems of tension rods, were used by
Bollman as bridging in temporary trestlework along the line as early as
1845 (see fig. 4).

It is impossible to say whether Bollman himself, or Latrobe, was struck
with the logic of further elaborating upon the system and,
simultaneously, translating the timber compression member into one of
cast iron. Cast iron would naturally have been selected for a member
that resisted a compressive stress, as it was considerably cheaper than
wrought iron. But more important, at that time wrought iron was not
available in shapes of sufficient sectional area to resist the
appreciable buckling stresses induced in long compression members. The
cost of building up members to sufficient size from the very limited
selection of small shapes then rolled would have been prohibitive.

The trussing rods, subjected to tension, were of wrought iron inasmuch
as the sectional area had only to be sufficient to resist the primary
axial stress.

The first all-iron Bollman truss was constructed over the Little
Patuxent River at Savage Factory, near Laurel, Maryland, in 1850. In the
chief engineer's report for the year 1850, Latrobe was able to state
that the truss had been completed and was giving "much satisfaction."
He went on at some length to praise the "valuable mechanical features"
embodied therein, and expressed great confidence that iron would become
as important a material in the field of civil engineering as it was in
mechanical engineering.

[Illustration: Figure 14.--THE HARPERS FERRY BRIDGE as completed after
the Civil War. It was used by the Baltimore and Ohio until 1894, and as
a highway bridge until 1936. (Photo 690, Baltimore and Ohio Collection,
Museum of History and Technology.)]

The cost of this first major Bollman bridge was $23,825.00. Its span was
76 feet. Latrobe's confidence was well placed. The Savage span and
another at Bladensburg may be considered successful pilot models, for,
in spite of a certain undercurrent of mistrust of iron bridges within
the engineering profession--due mainly to a number of failures of
improperly designed spans--Latrobe felt there was sufficient
justification for the unqualified adoption of iron in all subsequent
major bridge structures on the B. & O.

Almost immediately following completion of the Savage Bridge, Bollman
undertook the design of replacements for the large Patapsco River span
at Elysville (now Daniels), Maryland, and the so-called Winchester span
of the B. & O.'s largest and most important bridge, that over the
Potomac at Harpers Ferry. Harpers Ferry bridge, a timber structure, had
been designed by Latrobe and built in 1836-1837 by the noted bridge
constructor Lewis Wernwag. It was peculiar in having a turnout, near the
Virginia shore, whereby a subsidiary road branched off to Winchester
(see fig. 6). Only the single span on this line, situated between the
midriver switch and the shore, was slated for replacement, as the other
seven spans of the bridge had been virtually reconstructed in the decade
or so of their history and were in sound condition at the time.

The Winchester span (fig. 8), which was the first Bollman truss to
embody sufficient refinement of detail to be considered a prototype, was
completed in 1851. Bollman was extremely proud of the work, with perfect
justification it may be said. The 124-foot span was fabricated in the
railroad's extensive Mount Clair shops. It was subdivided into eight
panels by seven struts and seven pairs of truss rods. An interesting
difference between this span and Bollman's succeeding bridges was his
use of granite rather than cast iron for the towers. The span consisted
of three parallel lines of trussing to accommodate a common road in
addition to the single-track Winchester line.

The distinctive feature of the Bollman system was the previously
mentioned series of diagonal truss links in combination with a cast-iron
compression chord, which Bollman called the "stretcher." The spacing
between the chord and the junction of each pair of links was maintained
by a vertical post or strut, also cast.

[Illustration: Figure 15.--NORTH STREET (now Guilford Avenue) bridge,
Baltimore. In this transitional composite structure cast iron was used
only in the relatively short sections of the upper chord. For the long
unsupported compression members of the web system, standard wrought-iron
angles and channels were built up into a large section. The decorative
cast-iron end posts were non-structural. (Photo in the L. N. Edwards
Collection, Museum of History and Technology.)]

Much of the appeal of this design lay unquestionably in the sense of
security derived from the fact that each of the systems acted
independently to carry its load to the abutments. The lower chords,
actually nonfunctional in the primary structure, were included merely to
preserve the proper longitudinal spacing between the lower ends of the
struts. A certain lack of rigidity was inherent in the system due to
that very discontinuity which characterized its action; however, this
was compensated for by a pair of light diagonal stay rods crossing each
panel. These rods served the additional function of distributing
concentrated loads to adjacent struts much in the manner of the bridging
between floor joists in a building.

In the Winchester span the floor system was of timber for reasons of
economy. This was a very minor weakness inasmuch as any stick could be
quickly replaced, and without disturbing the function of the structure.
Bollman received a patent for his truss in January 1852, and in the same
year published a booklet describing his system in general and the
Harpers Ferry span in particular. Here, he first calls it a "suspension
and trussed bridge," which is indeed an accurate designation for a
system which is not strictly a truss because it has no active lower
chord. (The analogy to a suspension bridge is quite clear, each pair of
primary rods being comparable to a suspension cable.) Thereafter,
Bollman's invention was generally termed a suspension truss.


INFLUENCE OF THE TRUSS

Bollman's 1852 publication was widely disseminated here and abroad and
studied with respectful interest by the engineering profession. Its
drawings of the structure were copied in a number of leading technical
journals in England and Germany. Although there is no record that the
type was ever reproduced in Europe, there can be little doubt that this
successful structural use of iron by the most eminent railroad in the
United States and its endorsement by an engineer of Latrobe's status
gave great impetus to the general adoption of the material. This
influence was certainly equal to that of Stephenson's tubular iron
bridge of 1850 over the Menai Strait, or Roebling's iron-wire suspension
bridge of 1855 over Niagara gorge. The Bollman design had perhaps even
greater influence, as the B. & O. immediately launched the system with
great energy and in great numbers to replace its timber spans; on the
other hand, Roebling's structure was never duplicated in railroad
service, and Stephenson's only once.

[Illustration: Figure 16.--_Left:_ CONJECTURAL SECTION of Bollman's
segmental wrought-iron column, about 1860, and section of the standard
Phoenix column; _right:_ Phoenix column as used in truss-bridge
compression members.]


EVALUATION OF THE TRUSS

By the late 1850's iron was well established as a bridge material
throughout the world. Once the previous fears of iron had been stilled
and the attention of engineers was directed to the interpretation of
existing and new spanning methods into metal, the Bollman truss began to
suffer somewhat from the comparison. Although its components were simple
to fabricate and its analysis and design were straightforward, it was
less economical of material than the more conventional panel trusses
such as the Pratt and Whipple types. Additionally, there was the
requisite amount of secondary metal in lower chords and braces necessary
for stability and rigidity.

A factor difficult to assess is Bollman's handling of his patent, which
was renewed in 1866. There is sufficient evidence to conclude that he
considered the patent valuable because it was based upon a sound design.
Therefore, he probably established a high license fee which, with the
truss's other shortcomings, was sufficient to discourage its use by
other railroads. As patron, the B. & O. had naturally had full rights to
its use.

An additional defect, acknowledged even by Bollman, arose because of the
unequal length of the links in each group except the center one. This
caused an unevenness in the thermal expansion and contraction of the
framework, with the result that the bridges were difficult to keep in
adjustment. This had the practical effect of virtually limiting the
system to intermediate span lengths, up to about 150 feet. For longer
spans the B. & O. employed the truss of another of Latrobe's assistants,
German-born and technically trained Albert Fink.

The Fink truss was evolved contemporaneously with Bollman's and was
structurally quite similar, being a suspension truss with no lower
chord. The principal difference was the symmetry of Fink's plan, which
was achieved by carrying the individual panel loads from the panel
points to increasingly longer panel units before having them appear at
the end bearings. This eliminated the weakness of unequal strains. The
design was basically a more rational one, and it came to be widely used
in spans of up to 250 feet, generally as a deck-type truss (see fig.
11).




W. Bollman and Company


Bollman resigned from the Baltimore and Ohio in 1858 to form, with John
H. Tegmeyer and John Clark, two of his former B. & O. assistants, a
bridge-building firm in Baltimore known as W. Bollman and Company. This
was apparently the first organization in the United States to design,
fabricate, and erect iron bridges and structures, pioneering in what 25
years later had become an immense industry. The firm had its foundation
at least as early as 1855 when advertisements to supply designs and
estimates for Bollman bridges appeared over Tegmeyer's name in several
railroad journals (see fig. 12).

Bollman's separation from the B. & O. was not a complete one. The
railroad continued its program of replacing timber bridges with Bollman
trusses, and contracted with W. Bollman and Company for design and a
certain amount of fabrication. There is some likelihood that eventually
fabrication was entirely discontinued at Mount Clair, and all parts
subsequently purchased from Bollman.

The firm prospered, erecting a number of major railroad bridges in
Mexico, Cuba, and Chile. Operations ceased from 1861 to 1863 because of
difficult wartime conditions in the border city of Baltimore. Following
this, Bollman reentered business as sole proprietor of the Patapsco
Bridge and Iron Works.

[Illustration: QUINCY BAY BRIDGE

Figure 17.--CHICAGO, BURLINGTON AND QUINCY RAILROAD BRIDGE over Quincy
Bay (branch of the Mississippi River) at Quincy, Illinois. The pivot
draw-span was formed of two Bollman deck trusses supported at their
outer ends by hog chains. The bridge was built in 1867-1868 by the
Detroit Bridge and Iron Co., Bollman licensee. (Clarke, _Account of the
Iron Railway Bridge ... at Quincy, Illinois_.)]

The most noteworthy of Bollman's works in this period was a series of
spans at Harpers Ferry. The B. & O.'s timber bridge had been destroyed
by Confederate forces in June 1861, and the crossing was thereafter made
upon temporary trestlework. This was a constant source of trouble, with
continuing interruptions of the connection from high water, washouts,
and military actions. The annoyance and expense of this became so great
that the company decided to risk an iron bridge at the crossing. In July
and August 1862, two sections of Bollman truss, spans no. 4 and no. 5
were completed. As this occurred during the time when W. Bollman and
Company was inoperative, the work was produced at Mount Clair to
Bollman's design and, undoubtedly, erected under his supervision. Five
weeks later, on September 24, these and Bollman's famous Winchester span
of 1851 were blown up by the Confederates, and the line's business was
again placed at the mercy of trestling.

The spirit of the B. & O. administration indeed seems to have been
unshakable when, in the face of such heartbreaking setbacks, it
determined to again bridge the river with iron, even at the height of
the hostilities. In November, span no. 5 was erected, and by April 1863
nos. 3, 4, and 6 also. These were the four straight spans in midriver
between the "wide" (or "branch," or "wye") span and the span on the
Maryland shore over the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal (see fig. 13).
Although the wood floor system of these spans was burned for strategic
reasons by U.S. troops later in 1863, they survived the war.

In 1868 the remaining trestlework was replaced with Bollman trusses.
This magnificent structure served the railroad until 1894 when the
right-of-way was realigned at Harpers Ferry. However, the half used by
the common road remained in use until carried away by the disastrous
flood in 1936. The piers may still be seen.

During the prewar years, Bollman evolved a structural development of
most profound importance, which is usually associated with the Phoenix
Iron Works and its founder, Samuel J. Reeves. In the erection of a high
trestlework viaduct for the Havana Railroad, Bollman apparently became
concerned with the tensile weakness of cast iron when applied in long,
unsupported columns. Although a column is normally subjected to
compressive stresses, when the slenderness ratio--that is, the length
divided by the radius of gyration of the cross section--becomes great, a
secondary bending stress may be produced. If this stress becomes great
enough, the value of the tensile stress in one side of the column may
actually exceed the principal compressive stress, and a net effect of
tension result.

[Illustration: Figure 18.--OHIO RIVER CROSSING of the Baltimore and Ohio
at Benwood, West Virginia, completed in 1870. Bollman deck trusses were
used in the approaches on both sides. (Photo 693, Baltimore and Ohio
Collection, Museum of History and Technology.)]

[Illustration: Figure 19.--PATAPSCO RIVER crossing of the Baltimore and
Ohio between Thistle and Ilchester, Maryland. (Photo 695, Baltimore and
Ohio Collection, Museum of History and Technology.)]

As already mentioned, the few available rolled-iron shapes were of
relatively small area and quite unsuitable for use as columns unless
combined and built up in complex fabrications. The normal practice at
the time was to use cast compression members in iron bridges and
structures, with their sectional area so proportioned to the length that
a state of tension could not exist. In the case of long members, this
naturally meant that an excessive amount of material was used.

[Illustration: Figure 20.--TWO VIEWS OF BOLLMAN-BUILT "water-pipe truss"
that carries Lombard Street over Jones Falls in Baltimore. Built in
1877.]

Bollman was conscious of the problem from his experience with the
stretchers and struts of his truss, and he must have been aware of the
great advantage which would be obtained by a practical method of forming
such members in wrought iron, the tensile resistance of which is
equivalent to the compressive. He eventually developed the forerunner of
what came to be known as the Phoenix form by having special segmental
wrought-iron shapes rolled by Morris, Tasker and Company of
Philadelphia, these shapes being combined into a circular section with
outstanding flanges for riveting together. The circular section is
theoretically the most efficient to bear compressive loading. A column
of any required diameter could be produced by simply increasing the
number of segments, the individual size of which never exceeded
contemporary rolling mill capacity (see fig. 16).

The design exhibits the inspired combination of functional perfection
and simplicity that seems to characterize most great inventions.

[Illustration: Figure 21.--THE HARPERS FERRY BRIDGE toward the end of
its career, carrying a common road over the Potomac. The westernmost
line of trussing and span no. 1 had been removed long before. View
through the Winchester span looking toward Maryland in 1933. (_Photo
courtesy of Harpers Ferry National Historical Park._)]

It may have been because he had no facilities for rolling that Bollman
communicated his idea to Reeves, although this seems illogical. At any
rate, Reeves and his associates patented the system extensively, and the
Phoenix column was eventually employed to the virtual exclusion of
cast-iron and other types of wrought-iron columns. By the end of the
19th century it began to pass from use, as mills became capable of
producing larger sections with properties relatively favorable to column
use and more adaptable to connection with other members.




Final Use of the Bollman Truss


The Bollman truss found occasional use elsewhere than on the B. & O.
lines, but generally only when erected on contract by Patapsco Bridge
and Iron Works. However, the fact that Bollman could profitably erect
this bridge in the severely competitive 1870's indicates that the harsh
criticism of the system by authorities of such stature as Whipple was
not necessarily justified. Bollman's advertisements, in fact, refer to
the favorable recommendations of other such renowned engineers as
Herman Haupt and M. C. Meigs.

[Illustration: Figure 22.--BOLLMAN DECK TRUSSES in the North River
Bridge built in 1873 at Mount Crawford, Virginia, on the Valley Railroad
of Virginia (B. & O.). Each end span is 98 ft. 6 in.; the river span is
148 ft. 9 in. (Photo 756, Baltimore and Ohio Collection, Museum of
History and Technology.)]

An interesting application of the system was in a drawbridge, formed of
two Bollman deck spans, over an arm of the Mississippi at Quincy,
Illinois (see fig. 17). The first iron bridge in Mexico was erected by
Bollman over the Medellin River about 1864. Another work of this period,
which attracted considerable attention, was a pair of bridges that
Bollman erected over North Carolina's Cape Fear River in 1867-1868.
These bridges were notable for their foundation on cast-iron cylinders,
sunk pneumatically. This was one of the first instances of the use of
the process in America, and the depth of 80 feet below the water surface
reached by one cylinder was considered remarkable for years afterward.

In the last active decade or so of his career, Bollman produced hundreds
of minor bridges and other structures. In 1873 he supplied the castings
for the splendid iron dome of Baltimore's City Hall and erected the
ingenious water-main truss which carries Lombard Street over Jones Falls
in that city. In this structure the top and bottom chords of the central
line of trussing are cast-iron water mains, bifurcated at the abutments,
and joined by cast- and wrought-iron web members (see fig. 20).

In the mid 1870's Bollman saw his truss pass into obsolescence. This was
due primarily to the generally increasing distrust of cast iron for
major structural members due to its brittleness, but advances in
structural theory, availability of a greater variety of rolled
structural shapes, and the increasing loading patterns of the period all
contributed.

[Illustration: Figure 23.--THE ONLY SURVIVING BOLLMAN TRUSS BRIDGE, at
Savage, Maryland. The bridge was built elsewhere in 1852 and was moved
to this now-abandoned Baltimore and Ohio industrial siding in about
1888.]

Although no Bollman trusses were built by Bollman or the B. & O. after
1875, those in use were only removed as required by heavier motive
power. The Harpers Ferry span, as noted, remained in full main-line
service until 1894. Bollman trusses on feeder lines were continued in
use until much later; a number of them on the Valley Railroad of
Virginia (see fig. 22) were not removed until 1923. However, only on the
most isolated spurs was the Bollman truss permitted to reach really ripe
age. The sole known remaining example (fig. 23) stands on such a
branch--ironically, at Savage, over the Little Patuxent, the site of the
first Bollman span. This is not the 1850 bridge, but one built in 1852
and moved to the present site 30 years later. The fate of the first span
is not known.

[Illustration: Figure 24.--HOT-WATER AND CHOCOLATE PITCHERS of the
10-piece, silver tea service presented to Bollman by his fellow
employees when he resigned from the Baltimore and Ohio in 1858. A
railroad motif was used throughout, each piece being circled at top and
bottom by a track, complete with rail of accurate section and ties.
Spouts are in simulation of hexagonal sheet-iron chimneys, with seams
riveted, and the handles are in the form of a surveyor's telescope. On
the various pieces are engraved the designs of the more important B. &
O. bridges. Throughout is a wonderful profusion of bits and objects of
railroadiana in low relief, high relief, and fully modeled. In Board of
Directors Room, Baltimore and Ohio Railroad Company, Baltimore, Md.
(_Photo courtesy of Baltimore and Ohio Railroad._)]




Known Bollman Works


(All B. & O. works listed were designed by Bollman and built by the
railroad, unless otherwise indicated.)

  Dates of   Location             Type     No. spans  Remarks
  service                                  / length
                                           of each

  1850-?     Savage, Md., Little  Bollman    1/76'    First Bollman truss
             Patuxent River       through             erected; granite towers;
                                  truss               cost, $23,825. B. & O. RR.

  1851-?     Bladensburg, Md.,    Bollman    1/?      Second Bollman truss
             Anacostia River      through             erected; granite towers;
                                  truss               cost, $19,430. B. & O. RR.

  1851-1862  Harpers Ferry, Va.,  Bollman    1/124'   Winchester span; first
             Potomac River        through             major Bollman truss; three
                                  truss               lines of truss; granite
                                                      towers; blown up by
                                                      Confederate Army on
                                                      September 24, 1862.
                                                      B. & O. RR.

  1851-?     Baltimore, Md.,      Trestle    --       Wood trestle bents with
             Carey Street                             wrought-iron diagonals.
                                                      First use of iron
                                                      structural members in
                                                      trestlework. Total length
                                                      76 feet. B. & O. RR.

  1852-      Savage, Md., Little  Bollman    2/+-80'   Still standing. Moved to
             Patuxent River       through             Savage in 1888; original
                                  truss               location unknown. This and
                                                      succeeding Bollman trusses
                                                      use iron towers. B. & O.
                                                      RR.

  1852 (or   Marriottsville,      Bollman    1/50'    One of first Bollman
  1853)-?    Md., Patapsco River  truss               trusses with iron towers.
                                                      B. & O. RR.

  1853-?     Zanesville, Ohio,    Bollman    4/124'   Double track, Central Ohio
             Muskingum River      truss      (or      RR. Designed by Bollman;
                                             5/160')  built by Douglas, Smith &
                                                      Co., Zanesville.

  1854-      Elysville (now       Bollman    3/97'9"  Upper bridge, skew. Cost,
  1870(?)    Daniels),  Md.,      through             $24,477.59. B. & O. RR.
             Patapsco River       truss

  1854-1862  Monocacy, Md.,       Bollman    3/119'   Blown up September 8,
             Monocacy River       truss               1862; rebuilt in 1864.
                                                      Cost, $22,722.59.
                                                      B. & O. RR.

  1854-?     Eastern Ohio         Bollman    1/40'    C. O. RR. Section 76
                                  truss(?)            adjacent to 300-ft.
                                                      tunnel.

  1855-?     Bridgeville, Ohio,   Bollman    1/71'    C. O. RR.
             Salt Creek           deck truss

  Pre-1855-? Buffalo, N.Y.        --         --       Unidentified. Mentioned by
                                                      George Vose in Railroad
                                                      Advocate (June 9, 1855).

  1856-?     Elysville, Md.,      Bollman   3/111'    Lower Bridge. B. & O. RR.
             about 1-1/4 miles    through
             east of 1854         truss
             bridge, Patapsco
             River

  Pre-1856-? Marriottsville,      Bollman   1/48'9"   Referred to as "Tunnel
             Md.                  truss(?)            Bridge" in B. & O. RR.
                                                      annual report, 1856.

  1856-?     Near Ijamsville,     "Iron     3/23'9"   Possibly trussed beams;
             Md., Bush Creek      girders"            mentioned in B. & O. RR.
                                                      annual report, 1856.

  1856-?     Near Ijamsville,     "Iron     2/23'9"   As above.
             Md., Bush Creek      girders"

  1856-      North Branch, Md.,   Bollman   3/142'    Partially destroyed in
  c.1862     Potomac River        deck truss          Civil War. B. & O. RR.

  1860-1906  Chile, Angostura     Bollman   4/115'    Chilean Railways.
             River                truss(?)            Designed and built by
                                                      Bollman. Replaced by
                                                      bridge built by French
                                                      firm of Schneider,
                                                      Cruesot & Co.

  1860-1910  Chile, Paine River   Bollman   1/?       As above.
                                  truss(?)

  Post-      Ilchester, Md.,      Bollman   1/?       B. & O. RR.
  1860-?     Patapsco River       through
                                  truss

  Pre-1861-? Cuba                 Bridges   --        All bridges on Havana
                                  and                 RR., including iron
                                  station             station house and bridge
                                  house               at Guines. Designed and
                                                      built by Bollman.

  Pre-1861-? Cuba                 Bridges   --        All bridges on Cienfuegos
                                                      RR., Cardenas RR., and
                                                      Havana & Matanzas RR.
                                                      Designed and built by
                                                      Bollman.

  Pre-1861-? Cuba                 Trestle   --        Trestle with wrought-iron
                                                      columns (the first such
                                                      ever constructed). Havana
                                                      RR. Designed and built by
                                                      Bollman.

  1862-1862  Harpers Ferry, Va.,  Bollman   2/160'    Span no. 3 (July 24) and
             Potomac River        through             span no. 4 (August 21).
                                  truss               Blown up September 24,
                                                      1862. B. & O. RR.

  1862-1936  Harpers Ferry, Va.,  Bollman   1/160'    Span no. 5 (November).
             Potomac River        through             B. & O. RR.
                                  truss

  1863-1936  Harpers Ferry, Va.,  Bollman   3/160'    Spans nos. 3, 4, and 5.
             Potomac River        through             Constructed previous to
                                  truss               April 1863. B. & O. RR.

  1863-?     Berwyn, Md., Paint   Bollman   ?         Iron bridge mentioned in
             Branch               truss(?)            B. & O. RR. annual report,
                                                      1863.

  1863(4?)-? Clinton, Iowa,       Pivot     1/360'    Built by Detroit Bridge
             Mississippi River    draw                & Iron Works. It was the
                                                      longest in the world at
                                                      time of completion.
                                                      Designed by Bollman.

  1864-?     Laurel, Md.,         Bollman   ?         Replaced stone arch that
             Patuxent River       truss               had been washed out. B. &
                                                      O. RR.

  c. 1864-?  Near Veracruz,       Bollman   1/115'    Veracruz & Jucaro RR.
             Mexico, Medellin     through             First iron bridge in
             River                truss               Mexico. Designed and
                                                      built by Bollman.

  1864-?     Near Point of        Bollman   1/80'(?)  Iron bridge mentioned in
             Rocks, Md., Back     truss(?)            B. & O. RR. annual
             Creek                                    report, 1864. The span
                                                      length given is that of
                                                      previous stone arch.

  1864-?     Bladensburg, Md.,    Bollman   1/?       Span for second track, to
             Anacostia River      truss               match 1851 span. B. & O.
                                                      RR.

  1868-?     Cape Fear, N.C.,     Bollman   2/146'6"  Wilmington Railway Bridge
             Northeast Branch,    truss(?)  1/164'    Co. This bridge was
             Cape Fear River                pivot     connected to that over
                                            draw/150' the Northwest Branch by
                                                      2-1/2 miles of timber
                                                      trestling. Designed and
                                                      built by Bollman.

  1868-?     Cape Fear, N.C.,     Bollman   1/217'(?) See above.
             Northwest Branch,    truss(?)  pivot
             Cape Fear River                draw/150'

  1868-?     Quincy, Ill.,        Bollman   4/85'     Chicago, Burlington &
             Quincy  Bay (in      deck      pivot     Quincy RR. The pivot draw
             Mississippi River)   truss     draw/190' was formed of two 85-ft.
                                                      simple Bollman deck spans
                                                      whose outer ends hung from
                                                      hog chains. Designed by
                                                      Bollman; built by Detroit
                                                      Bridge & Iron Works.

  1869-      Baltimore, Md.,      Warren     2/100'   North Avenue Bridge.
  c.1892     over Jones Falls,    truss      2/55'6"  Composite double
             B. & O. RR., and                         intersection truss;
             Northern Central                         timber top chord and
             RR.                                      posts, wrought-iron lower
                                                      chord and ties. In 55-ft.
                                                      spans, both chords
                                                      timber. Cost, $73,588.
                                                      Built by Bollman.

  c.1869-    Harpers Ferry, Va.,  Bollman    4/?      Canal span (no. 8), Wide
  1936       Potomac River        through             span  (no. 2), Winchester
                                  truss               span, and West End span.
                                                      Destroyed by flood in
                                                      1936. B. & O. RR.

  1870-      Baltimore, Md.,    Iron         1/108'   Charles Street Bridge.
  c.1895     Jones Falls        "Isometrical          Three lines of trussing.
                                truss"                Cost, $20,297. Built by
                                (probably             Bollman.
                                Pratt type)

  1870-      Bellaire, Ohio-      Bollman    9/107'-  In approaches; 2 spans on
  1893 &     Benwood W. Va.,      deck       125'     Ohio side; 7 on West
  1900       Ohio River           truss               Virginia side. B. & O. RR.

  1870-      Belpre, Ohio-        Bollman    16/?     In approaches; 7 spans on
  c.1895     Parkersburg, W.      deck                Ohio side; 9 on West
             Va., Ohio River      truss               Virginia side. B. & O. RR.

  1870-?     Elysville, Md.,      Bollman    4/?      Skew; replacement of
             Patapsco River       through             Upper Bridge(?). B. & O.
                                  truss               RR.

  1871-      Baltimore, Md.,      Timber     ?        Decker Street (now
  c.1895     Jones Falls          and iron            Maryland Avenue) Bridge.
                                  truss               Cost, $24,975. Built by
                                                      Bollman.

  1871-      Baltimore, Md.,      Warren     1/100'   North Avenue Bridge.
  c.1892     over Northern        truss               Composite double
             Central RR. at                           intersection truss;
             Jones Falls                              cast-iron top chord and
                                                      posts; wrought-iron
                                                      bottom chord and ties.
                                                      West span. Built by
                                                      Bollman.

  1873-1923  Cave Station, Va.,   Bollman    1/98'7"  Valley Railroad of
             Middle River         deck       1/63'5"  Virginia (B. & O.) Bridge
                                  truss               no. 120. The main span
                                                      was a Whipple deck truss.
                                                      Replaced with plate
                                                      girders. Designed by
                                                      Bollman.

  1873-1923  Mount Crawford,      Bollman    2/98'6"  Valley Railroad of
             Va., North River     deck       1/148'9" Virginia (B. & O.) Bridge
                                  truss               no. 117. Designed by
                                                      Bollman.

  1873-1923  Verona, Va., North   Bollman    3/98'7"  Valley Railroad of
             River                deck                Virginia (B. & O.) Bridge
                                  truss               no. 129. The main span
                                                      was a 147-ft. Whipple
                                                      deck truss. Designed by
                                                      Bollman.

  1873-?     Wadesville, Va.,     Bollman    1/147'8" Span length given is that
             Opequon Creek        through             of previous wood span
                                  truss               that burned in 1862. B.
                                                      & O. RR.

  c. 1873-   Baltimore, Md.       Iron roof  ?        First Presbyterian
                                  trusses             Church. Built by Bollman;
                                                      possibly designed by him.

  1873-      Baltimore, Md.       Cast-iron           City Hall. Cost, $12,840.
                                  stairs              Designed by George A.
                                                      Frederick, architect;
                                                      built by Bollman.

  1873-      Baltimore, Md.       Cast-iron           Dome of the City Hall.
                                  framework           Cost, $70,525. Designed
                                                      by George A. Frederick;
                                                      built by Bollman.

  1875-      Baltimore, Md.,      Iron truss 1/?      Fayette Street Bridge.
  c.1913     Jones Falls                              Cost, $9,396. Built by
                                                      Bollman.

  1876-      Baltimore, Md.,      "Single-   1/?      Canton Avenue (now Fleet
  c.1913     Jones Falls          beam iron           Street) Bridge. Cost,
                                  bridge"             $8,904. Built by Bollman.
                                  (truss?)

  1876-      Baltimore, Md.,      "Single-   1/?      Eastern Avenue Bridge.
  c.1913     Jones Falls          beam iron           Cost, $12,382. Built by
                                  bridge"             Bollman.
                                  (truss?)

  1877-      Baltimore, Md.,      Pratt and  1/88'6"  Lombard Street Bridge.
             Jones Falls          bowstring           Three lines of truss;
                                  truss               two outer trusses,
                                                      composite cast- and
                                                      wrought-iron polygonal
                                                      Pratt type; center
                                                      composite bowstring with
                                                      Pratt-system web. Both
                                                      chords are cast-iron
                                                      water mains, bifurcated
                                                      at the end bearings;
                                                      cast-iron posts and
                                                      wrought-iron ties. In
                                                      service. Cost, $7,632.
                                                      Designed by Jas. Curran,
                                                      Baltimore water
                                                      department; built by
                                                      Bollman.

  1877-      Baltimore, Md.,      Iron truss  1/?     Bath Street Bridge. Cost,
  c.1913     Jones Falls                              $4,172. Built by Bollman.

  1879-?     Baltimore, Md.       Drawbridge  1/?     Over entrance to City
                                                      Dock. Cost, $13,182.
                                                      Built by Bollman.

  1879-      Baltimore, Md.,      Warren     2/173'9" North Street (now
  c.1930     over Jones Falls     truss               Guilford Avenue) Bridge.
             and railroad                             Composite trusses;
             tracks                                   cast-iron top chord and
                                                      end posts; wrought-iron
                                                      bottom chord and web
                                                      members. Cost, $38,772.45.
                                                      Built by Bollman;
                                                      designed by Latrobe.

  1881-1960  Baltimore, Md.,      Wrought-   1/?      Union Avenue Bridge.
             (Woodberry),         iron Pratt          Built by Bollman;
             Jones Falls          truss               possibly designed by him.

  ?-?        Harpers Ferry, Va.,  Bollman    1/148'   Arsenal Branch, B. & O.
             Arsenal Canal        through             RR. Skew type. Span
                                  truss               length is that of
                                                      previous timber span.

  ?-?        Baltimore, Md.,      Bollman    2/?      B. & O. RR.
             Gwynns Falls         through
                                  truss




BIBLIOGRAPHY


_A history and description of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad by a
citizen of Baltimore._ Baltimore, 1853.

Baltimore and Ohio Railroad Company. _A list of the officers and
employees of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad for November, 1857._
Baltimore, 1857.

----. _Third annual report of the president and directors to the
stockholders of the Baltimore and Ohio Rail Road Company._ Baltimore:
1829. (Also the fourth through 38th annual reports. Baltimore,
1830-1864.)

----. _Baltimore and Ohio exhibits at the Century of Progress._ Chicago,
1934.

_Biographical cyclopedia of representative men of Maryland and the
District of Columbia._ Baltimore, 1879.

BOLLMAN, WENDEL. _Iron suspension and trussed bridge as constructed for
the Baltimore and Ohio Rail Road Co. at Harper's Ferry, and on the
Washington branch of this road._ Baltimore, 1852.

----. Letter to John W. Garrett dated June 17, 1862. In files of
Division of Mechanical and Civil Engineering, United States National
Museum, Washington, D.C.

----. _Report of Mr. Bollman in relation to Central Ohio Rail Road._
Baltimore, 1854.

BRYANT, WILLIAM C. _Picturesque America._ New York, 1874.

CLARKE, THOMAS CURTIS. _An account of the iron railway bridge across the
Mississippi River at Quincy, Illinois._ New York, 1869.

COLBURN, ZERAH. American iron bridges. _Minutes of the proceedings of
the Institution of Mechanical Engineers_ (1863), vol. 22, pp. 540-573.

CONDIT, CARL. _American building art:--The nineteenth century._ New
York: Oxford Press, 1960.

GRAY, GEORGE E. Notes on early practice in bridge building.
_Transactions of the American Society of Civil Engineers_ (1897), vol.
37, pp. 2-16.

GREINER, JOHN E. The American railroad viaduct--Its origin and
evolution. _Transactions of the American Society of Civil Engineers_
(1891), vol. 25, pp. 349-372.

LANG, PHILIP GEORGE. Bollman trusses on Valley of Virginia Branch will
soon be memories. _Baltimore and Ohio Magazine_ (October 1923), pp.
18-19.

----. The old Baltimore and Ohio bridge crossing the Potomac River at
Harpers Ferry, West [sic] Virginia. _Engineering News-Record_ (September
17, 1931), p. 446.

MALEZIEUX, EMILE. _Travaux publics des Etats-Unis d'Amerique en 1870._
Paris, 1873.

MCDOWELL, W. H. Unpublished engineer's report to the president and
directors of Wilmington Railway Bridge Company, Wilmington, North
Carolina, dated March 12, 1868. Typewritten copy in files of Division of
Mechanical and Civil Engineering, U.S. National Museum, Washington, D.C.

SMITH, CHARLES SHALER. _Comparative analysis of the Fink, Murphy,
Bollman and triangular trusses._ Baltimore, 1865.

SMITH, WILLIAM P. _The book of the great railway celebrations of 1857._
Baltimore, 1858.

TYRRELL, HENRY G. _History of bridge engineering._ Chicago, 1911.

WHIPPLE, SQUIRE. _Bridge building._ Albany, New York, 1869.









  CONTRIBUTIONS FROM
  THE MUSEUM OF HISTORY AND TECHNOLOGY:

  PAPER 37




  SCREW-THREAD CUTTING BY THE MASTER-SCREW METHOD SINCE 1480


  _Edwin A. Battison_




_Edwin A. Battison_

SCREW-THREAD CUTTING BY THE MASTER-SCREW METHOD SINCE 1480

    _Among the earliest known examples of screw-thread cutting machines
    are the screw-cutting lathe of 1483, known only in pictures and
    drawings, and an instrument of the traverse-spindle variety for
    threading metal, now in the Smithsonian Institution, dating from the
    late 17th or early 18th century. The author shows clearly their
    evolution from something quite specialized to the present-day tool.
    He has traced the patents for these instruments through the early
    1930's and from this research we see the part played by such devices
    in the development of the machine-tool industry._

    THE AUTHOR: _Edwin A. Battison is associate curator of mechanical
    and civil engineering in the Smithsonian Institution's Museum of
    History and Technology._


Directness and simplicity characterize pioneer machine tools because
they were intended to accomplish some quite specialized task and the
need for versatility was not apparent. History does not reveal the
earliest forms of any primitive machines nor does it reveal much about
the various early stages in evolution toward more complex types. At best
we have discovered and dated certain developments as existing in
particular areas. Whether these forms were new at the time they were
first found or how widely dispersed such forms may have been is unknown.
Surviving evidence is in the form of pictures or drawings, such as the
little-known screw-cutting lathe of 1483 (fig. 1) shown in _Das
mittelalterliche Hausbuch_.

This lathe shows that its builder had a keen perception of the necessary
elements, reduced to bare essentials, required to accomplish the object.
Present are the coordinate slides often credited to Henry Maudslay. His
slides are not, of course, associated with the spindle; neither is there
any natural law which compels them to guide the tool exactly parallel
with the axis of revolution. In this sense the screw-cutting lathe in
the _Hausbuch_ is superior because it is in harmony with natural law and
can generate a true cylinder, whereas Maudslay's lathe can only transfer
to the work whatever accuracy is built into it.

In principle this machine shown in the _Hausbuch_ is very advanced as we
see when we follow the design through to the present time. The artist,
whose drawings give us our only knowledge of the machine, himself was
obviously not very familiar with the details of its function. Reference
to figure 1 shows that the threads on the lead screw and on the work,
wind in opposite directions. This must be an error in delineation since
the two are closely coupled together without any intervening mechanism
so that the only possible result on the work must be a thread winding in
the same direction as on the original screw. The work also is shown
threaded for its entire length; this cannot be accomplished with any one
location of the cross-slide. We are left with the question of whether
this slide was used in two locations or whether the artist, possibly
working from notes or an earlier rough sketch, failed to show an
unthreaded portion on one end or the other of the work.

[Illustration: Figure 1.--EARLIEST REPRESENTATION FOUND OF A
MASTER-SCREW TYPE of thread-cutting machine. From the inconsistencies,
such as right- and left-hand threads on master and work, it appears that
the artist had scant insight into actual function. From plate 62 of _Das
mittelalterliche Hausbuch, nach dem Originale im Besitze des Fuersten von
Waldburg-Wolfegg-Waldsee, im Auftrage des Deutschen Vereins fuer
Kunstwissenschaft, herausgegeben von Helmuth Th. Bossert und Willy F.
Storck_ (Leipzig: E. A. Seemann, 1912).]

Of at least equal importance with the lead screw and work and their
relationship to each other is the tool-support with its screw-adjusted
cross-slide (fig. 2). Just how this was attached to the frame of the
machine so that it placed the tool at a suitable radius is again a
questionable point. The very well-developed cutting tool is sharpened to
a thin, keen edge totally unsuited for cutting metal but ideal for use
on a softer, fibrous substance: undoubtedly wood, in this instance.
Unfortunately, the angle at which the artist chose to show us this
cutter is not a view from which it is possible to judge whether or not
the tool has been made to conform to the helix angle of the thread to be
cut. This cross-slide, in conjunction with the traversing work spindle,
gives us a machine having two coordinate slides yielding the same effect
as the slide rest usually attributed to Henry Maudslay at the end of the
18th century. Actually, an illustration of coordinate slides independent
of the spindle had been published as early as 1569 by Besson[1] and
knowledge of them widely disseminated by his popular work on mechanics.
These slides are shown as part of a screw-cutting machine with a
questionably adequate connection, by means of cords, between the master
screw and the work.

It was the author's pleasure recently to obtain for the Smithsonian
Institution and identify a small, nicely made, brass instrument which
had been in two collections in this country and one collection in
Germany as an unidentified locksmith's tool (fig. 3). This proved to be
an instrument of the traverse-spindle variety for threading metal.
Fortunately, all essential details were present including a cutter (A in
figure 4); this instrument was identified by the signature "Manuel
Wetschgi, Augspurg." The Wetschgis were a well-known family of gunsmiths
and mechanics in Augsburg through several generations. Two bore the
given name Emanuel: the earlier was born in 1678 and died in 1728. He
was quite celebrated in his field of rifle making and became chief of
artillery to the Landgrave of Hesse-Kassel shortly before his death in
his 51st year. Little is known of the later Emanuel Wetschgi except that
he was at Augsburg in 1740. Tentative attribution of the instrument has
been made to the earlier Emanuel, chiefly on the basis of his recognized
position as an outstanding craftsman.

[Illustration: Figure 2.--CROSS-SLIDE for the thread-cutting lathe of
_Das mittelalterliche Hausbuch_, shown in figure 1. It is remarkable not
only for its early date, but also for its high state of development with
a crossfeed screw which had not become universally accepted 300 years
later. The cutter, shown out of its socket, is obviously sharpened for
use on wood.]

In several respects this little machine differs from its predecessor of
the _Hausbuch_, as might be expected when allowance is made for the
generations of craftsmen who undoubtedly worked with such tools over the
roughly 200 years of time separating them. Another factor to consider
when comparing these two machines is that one was used on metal, the
other probably only on wood. Therefore, it is not surprising to find on
the later machine an outboard or "tailstock" support for the work. The
spindle of this support has to travel in unison with the work-driving
spindle so that it is not an unexpected discovery to find that it is
spring-loaded. Figure 5 shows how this spring may be adjusted to
accommodate various lengths of work by moving the attachment screw to
various holes in both the spring and in the frame. Also visible in the
same illustration is a rectangular projection at the other end of the
spring which engages a mating hole in the "tailstock" spindle to prevent
its rotation.

[Illustration: Figure 3.--SMALL THREAD-CUTTING LATHE which was made to
be held in a vise during use. It was found as shown here, with only the
operating crank missing. The overall length is approximately 12 inches,
depending on the adjustment of parts. (Smithsonian photo 46525B.)]

Figure 6 shows the traversing spindle and nut removed from the machine.
Provision has been made for doing this so easily that there is every
reason to believe that, originally, there were various different spindle
and nut units which could be interchangeably used in the machine.
Additional evidence tending to support this concept exists in the
cutting tool (fig. 4), which must have been intended for serious work as
it has been carefully fitted in its unsymmetrical socket. The cutting
blade of this tool, which works with a scraping rather than a true
cutting action, is too wide to form a properly proportioned thread when
used with the existing lead screw. This may well indicate that the tool
was made for use with a lead of coarser pitch, now lost.

[Illustration: Figure 4.--THE WORKING AREA of figure 3, showing the tool
and signature. (Smithsonian photo 46525A.)]

Perhaps the most startling feature of this machine when compared with
the machine of the _Hausbuch_, is the absence of a cross-slide for
adjusting the tool. Possibly this can be explained by the blunt scraping
edge on the tool. In actual use, recently, to cut a sample screw, using
a tool similar to the one found in the machine (fig. 7), it was found
advantageous to be free of a cross-slide and thus be able to feed the
tool into the work by feel rather than by rule, as would be done with a
slide rest. In this way, it was possible to thread steel without
tearing, as the cutting pressure could readily be felt and the tool
could release itself from too heavy a cut. Size on several screws could
be repeated by setting the tool to produce the desired diameter when its
supporting arm came to rest against the frame of the machine. The screws
used in the machine itself were apparently made in just such a way. They
were not cut with a die as the thread blends very gradually into the
body of the screw without the characteristic marks left by the cutting
edges of a die. Threads cut with a single-point tool controlled by a
cross-slide usually end even more abruptly than those cut by a die,
while it would be quite simple with a machine of the nature we are
considering to bring the thread to a gentle tapering end as seen in
figure 8 (another view of the screw A in fig. 3) by gradually releasing
the pressure necessary to keep the tool cutting as the end of the
thread was approached.

[Illustration: Figure 5.--SPRING FOR KEEPING THE FOLLOWER SPINDLE
against the work, showing the method and range of adjustment. Note the
rectangular projection to engage a mating socket in the spindle, to
prevent spindle rotation. (Smithsonian photo 46525.)]

[Illustration: Figure 6.--WORK SPINDLE AND ITS NUT removed from the
machine to illustrate how easily another spindle and nut of different
pitch could be substituted. (Smithsonian photo 46525C.)]

That machines of this general type having the lead screw on the axis of
the work were competitive with other methods and other types of machines
over a long period of time may be seen from figures 9 and 10. The
machine, left front in figure 9 and in more intimate detail in figure
10, can be seen to differ little from that shown in _Das
mittelalterliche Hausbuch_ of 1483. The double work-support is, of
course, a great improvement, while the tool-support is regressive since
it lacks a feed screw.

The development of engineering theory, coupled with the rising needs of
industry, particularly with the advent of the Industrial Revolution,
brought about accelerated development of screw-cutting lathes through
the combination of screw-cutting machines with simple lathes as seen in
figure 9 and in detail in figure 11. One important advance shown here
is driving the machine by means of a cord or band so that any means of
rotary power could be applied, not just hand or foot power. Of greater
interest and technical importance to this study is the provision, seen
to better advantage in figure 11, for readily changing from one master
lead screw to another. This had already been achieved in the Manuel
Wetschgi machine, as far as versatility is concerned, although not in
quite such a convenient way.

[Illustration: Figure 7.--THREAD OF MODERN FORM recently cut, using the
old screw and nut but with a new tool. The material threaded is
carbon-steel drill rod. (Smithsonian photo 49276A.)]

Figure 12, the headstock of another and more advanced lathe than shown
in figures 9 and 11 but of the same type, shows "keys" (D), each of
which is a partial nut of different pitch to engage with a thread of
mating pitch. The dotted lines in figure 13 show the engaged and
disengaged positions of one of these keys, and figure 14 shows the
spindle with the various leads, C. At D is a grooved collar to be
engaged by the narrow key shown in operating position at the left in
figure 12 for the purpose of controlling the endwise movement of the
spindle when used for ordinary turning instead of thread-cutting. In
return for greater convenience and freedom from the expense of the many
separate spindles, as typified by the Wetschgi machine, a sacrifice has
been made in the length of the thread which can be cut without
interruption.

[Illustration: Figure 8.--BINDING SCREW seen at A in figure 3, showing
the long smooth fadeout of the thread below the shoulder. (Smithsonian
photo 49276.)]

[Illustration: Figure 9.--MAKING SCREWS IN FRANCE in the third quarter
of the 18th century. From _L'Encyclopedie, ou dictionnaire raisonne des
sciences, des arts et des metiers ... receuil de planches sur les
sciences, les arts liberaux, et les arts mechaniques, avec leur
explication_ (Paris: 1762-1772), vol. 9, plate 1.]

[Illustration: Figure 10.--DETAILS OF THE MACHINE in the left foreground
of figure 9, showing the crude tool-support without screw adjustment.
From _L'Encyclopedie_, vol. 9, plate 2.]

This reduction in the length that could conveniently be threaded was no
great drawback on many classes of work. This can be realized from figure
16 which shows a traverse-spindle lathe headstock typical of the
mid-19th century. During the years intervening between the machines of
figures 12 and 16, the general design was greatly improved by removing
the lead screws from the center of the spindle. This made possible a
shorter, much stiffer spindle and supported both ends of the spindle in
one frame or headstock rather than in separate pieces attached to the
bed. The screws were now mounted outside of the spindle-bearings, one at
a time, while the mating nuts were cut partially into the circumference
of a disk which could be turned to bring any particular nut into working
position as required. With this arrangement, a wide variety of leads
either right or left hand could be provided and additional leads could
be fitted at any future time. Screw-cutting lathes of this design were
popular for a very long time with instrument makers and opticians who
had little need to cut screws of great length.

[Illustration: Figure 11.--DETAILS OF THE THREADING LATHE seen in the
right foreground of figure 9 showing the method of drive and support for
the work. From _L'Encyclopedie_, vol. 9, plate 1.]

The demands of expanding industry for greater versatility in the
production of engineering elements late in the 18th century set the
stage for the evolution of more complex machines tending to place the
threaded spindle lathes in eclipse. Maudslay's lathe of 1797-1800 (fig.
15) appeared at this time when industry was receptive to rapid
innovation. Unfortunately, the gearing which once existed to connect the
headstock spindle with the lead screw has long been lost. At this time
it is quite difficult to say with certainty whether the original gear
set offered a variety of ratios, as was true of slightly later Maudslay
lathes, or a fixed ratio. The plausibility of the fixed ratio theory is
supported by the very convenient means, seen in figure 15, for removing
the lead screw in preparation for substitution of one of another pitch.
All that is required is to back off its supporting center at the
tailstock end and withdraw the screw from its split nut[2] and from the
driving clutch near the headstock. This split nut also would have to be
changed to one of a pitch corresponding to that of the screw. While more
expensive than a solid nut, it neatly circumvents the need (and saves
the time involved) to reverse the screw in order to get the tool back to
the point of beginning preliminary to taking another cut. David
Wilkinson's lathe of 1798 (fig. 17) which was developed in Rhode Island
at the same time shows the same method of mounting and driving the
master screw. At least in the United States, this method of changing the
lead screw instead of using change gears remained popular for many
years. Examples of this changeable screw feature are to be found in the
lathes constructed for the pump factory of W. & B. Douglas Company,
Middletown, Connecticut,[3] in the 1830's. Middletown, at that time one
of the leading metal-working centers in one of the chief industrial
States, had been for many years the site of the Simeon North arms
factory which rivaled Whitney's. In this atmosphere, it is reasonable to
expect that machinery constructed by local mechanics, as was the custom
in those days, would reflect the most accepted refinements in machine
design.

[Illustration: Figure 12.--WELL-DEVELOPED EXAMPLE of lathe headstock
having several leads on the spindle and provision for mounting the work
or a work-holding chuck on the spindle. Adapted from _L'Encyclopedie_,
vol. 10, plate 13.]

[Illustration: Figure 13.--END VIEW OF THE HEADSTOCK seen in figure 12,
showing the keys or half nuts which engage the threaded spindle, in
engaged and disengaged positions. From _L'Encyclopedie_, vol. 10, plate
13.]

[Illustration: Figure 14.--SPINDLE OF FIGURES 12 AND 13, showing the
several leads and the many-sided seat for the driving pulley. Note the
scale of feet. From _L'Encyclopedie_, vol. 10, plate 16.]

Roughly twenty years later, Joseph Nason of New York patented[4] the
commercially very important "Fox" brassworker's lathe (fig. 18). While
this does have a ratio in the pair of gears connecting the work spindle
and master screw, it is clear from the patent that various pitches are
to be obtained by changing screws, not by changing gears. The patent
sums it up as follows:

     A nut upon the end of the stud ... is unscrewed when the guide
     screw is to be removed or changed. The two wheels ... should have
     in their number of teeth a common multiple. They are seldom or
     never removed and their diameters are made dissimilar only for the
     purpose of giving to the guide screw a slower rate of motion than
     that of the mandrel whereby it may be made of coarser pitch than
     that of the screw to be cut and its wear materially lessened.

The introduction of gearing between the spindle and the lead screw, for
whatever purpose, could not help but introduce variable factors caused
by inaccuracies in the gears themselves and in their mounting. These
were of little consequence for common work, particularly when coupled to
a screw which, itself, was of questionable accuracy. The increasing
refinements demanded in scientific instruments and in machine tools
themselves after they had reached a relatively stable form dictated that
attention be dedicated to improved accuracy of the threaded components.

[Illustration: Figure 15.--MAUDSLAY'S WELL-KNOWN screw-cutting lathe of
1797-1800, showing the method of mounting and driving changeable master
screws. (_Photo courtesy of The Science Museum, London._)]

[Illustration: Figure 16.--HEADSTOCK OF A GERMAN INSTRUMENT-MAKER'S
LATHE, typical of the mid-19th century, showing the traverse spindle,
interchangeable lead screws, and semicircumferential nut containing
several leads. The nut may be brought into engagement by the lever at
top rear of the headstock. This releases the end thrust control on the
spindle simultaneously with engagement of the nut. (Smithsonian photo
49839.)]

[Illustration: Figure 17.--DAVID WILKINSON'S SCREW-CUTTING LATHE,
patented in the United States in 1798. Note the ready facility with
which the lead screw may be exchanged for another and the same means of
supporting and driving as in figure 15. (U.S. National Archives photo.)]

An attack on this problem, which interestingly reverts to the
fundamental principle of motion derived from a master screw without the
intervention of other mechanism (fig. 19), is covered by a patent[5]
issued to Charles Vander Woerd, one-time superintendent of the Waltham
Watch Company. The problem is well stated in the patent:

     This invention relates to the manufacture of leading screws to be
     used for purposes requiring the highest attainable degree of
     correctness in the cutting of the screw-threads of said screw ...
     as, for example, in machines for ruling lines in glass plates to
     produce refraction [sic] gratings for the resolution of the lines
     of the solar spectrum, such machines being required to rule many
     thousands of lines on an inch of space by a marking device which is
     reciprocated over the glass plate and is fed by the action of a
     leading screw after the formation of each line. Great difficulty
     has been experienced in constructing a leading screw for this and
     other purposes, in which the thread is so nearly correct as to
     produce no perceptible variation in the microscopic spaces between
     the ruled lines or gratings.... Various causes prevent the
     formation of a thread on the rod or blank, which is absolutely
     uniform and accurate from end to end of the rod. Among other causes
     are the variations of temperature from time to time, the
     imperfections of the operating leading screw, the springing of the
     leading screw and of the rod that is being threaded, and other
     unavoidable causes, all of which, although apparently trivial and
     producing only slight variations in the thread at different parts
     of the rod or blank, are of sufficient moment to be seriously
     considered when a screw of absolute accuracy is desired.

[Illustration: Figure 18.--NASON'S LATHE, patented in 1854, showing a
master lead screw driven at less than work speed so that the master
could be of a coarser and more durable pitch than the work. U.S. patent
10383.]

It is interesting to note in figure 19 that Vander Woerd's machine, to
avoid the problems outlined in his patent, has returned to a starkly
simple design. We are not told, however, how he originated this master
screw which is used to produce the accurately threaded work pieces.
Later generations, in the search for ever-greater accuracy, also
returned to the fundamental simplicity of a master screw as we shall see
when we consider the refinements in mechanism necessary to the extended
development of the automobile and the airplane.

[Illustration: Figure 19.--VANDER WOERD'S PATENT, seen here, covered the
combination of a master screw, toolslide and work in a rigid frame to be
supported and driven by outside means of no required precision. U.S.
patent 293930 dated February 1884.]

As the power and speed of automobiles and aircraft increased, critical
parts became more highly stressed. Gears and threaded parts were
particularly troublesome details of the mechanism because of the
stresses concentrated in them, and, in the case of gears, because of the
internal and external stresses originating in minute deviations from the
ideal of tooth form and spacing. The problems were not entirely new but
had hitherto been solved by increasing the size of the parts, an avenue
of limited utility to designers in these fields where total weight as
well as the effects of mass and inertia are so important. By making
these parts of heat-treated steel, the strength could be made suitable
while the size and mass of the parts were kept within bounds. The
necessary processes of heat-treating were not always applicable to
finished parts as they sometimes destroyed both finish and accuracy.
Grinding, which was well developed for the simple plane, cylindrical,
and conical surfaces so widely used in mechanisms, had to be extended to
threads and gears so that they could be finished after heat-treating.
Sometimes the gear teeth themselves were ground; for other applications
it was sufficient to improve the accuracy of the gear cutters.

[Illustration: Figure 20.--A HOB-GRINDING MACHINE patented in 1932 and
incorporating the master-screw principle. Carl G. Olson's U.S. patent
1874592.]

Attempts to produce gear hobs free of the imperfections and distortions
introduced by heat treatment led to another return to the use of the
master lead screw. Figure 20 illustrates a machine having this feature
which was patented in 1932 by Carl G. Olson.[6] In speaking of the
spindle-driving mechanism disclosed in earlier patents, the patent goes
on to say:

     This driving mechanism includes an integral spindle 20, one
     extremity thereof being designed for supporting a hob 22 and the
     other extremity thereof being formed so as to present a lead screw
     24. The spindle 20 is mounted between a bearing 26 and a bearing
     28, the latter bearing providing a nut in which the lead screw 24
     rotates.... From the description thus far given it will be apparent
     that the rotation of the lead screw 24 within the bearing or nut 28
     will cause the hob to be moved axially, the lead of the screw 24
     being equal to the lead of the thread in the hob.

Claim 8 which concludes the descriptive portion of the patent states in
part:

     In a hob grinding machine of the class described, a rotary work
     supporting spindle, means for effecting longitudinal movement of
     the spindle, a tool holder for supporting a grinding wheel in
     operative position with respect to the work supported by the
     spindle during the rotary and longitudinal movement thereof, ...

Even before this patent was applied for, another patent was pending for
the purpose of modifying the pitch of the lead screw without the use of
change gears in spite of the wide acceptance of such gear mechanisms for
over a hundred years.

[Illustration: Figure 21.--A HOB-GRINDING MACHINE OF 1933, showing use
of the master screw with a modifier but without change gears. Carl G.
Olson's U.S. patent 1901926.]

[Illustration: Figure 22.--A SINE-BAR DEVICE to modify the effective
lead of a master lead screw without introducing a complex mechanism
which would be both difficult to make and to operate within the required
close limits. Carl G. Olson's (1933) U.S. patent 1901926.]

Figure 21 shows a plan view[7] of the machine, and figure 22 a detailed
view of the sine-bar mechanism actuated by the master screw, 6, to
modify the effective pitch of the lead screw in accordance with the
realities of practice as stated in the preamble of the patent:

     This invention relates to material working machines, and
     particularly to machines such as hob grinders and the like, wherein
     the work is reciprocated through the agency of a lead screw.

     In the manufacture of hobs it is common practice to employ the same
     machine for grinding hobs of varied diameters, and in order to
     employ such a machine in this manner the pitch of the lead screw,
     thereof, which actuates the work carrier, must conform to the axial
     pitch of the hob to be ground. This will be readily apparent when
     it is understood that the helix angles of hobs vary in accordance
     with their diameters and, consequently, the difference between the
     normal pitch and the axial pitch correspondingly varies. While the
     requirement for the normal pitch may be the same for hobs of
     different diameters, it is necessary to change the axial pitch in
     accordance with a change in the hob diameter, and this axial pitch
     of the hob is equal to the pitch of the lead screw which actuates
     the work carrier in grinding machines heretofore used. Hence, in
     order to adapt such machines to cover a wide range of leads, it is
     necessary to provide a large number of interchangeable lead screws
     and obviously this represents a large investment, and the
     interchanging of these screws requires the expenditure of
     considerable time in setting up the machine for each job.

Thread-grinding machines were being designed concurrent with the
development of hob-grinding machines. Many were entirely concerned with
features peculiar to the problems of wheel-dressing and to automatic
characteristics. An invention to embody the use of a master screw and
concerned with the precision grinding of worm threads, for use in
gearing, was patented by Frederick A. Ward in this era.[8] That part of
the invention pertaining to the use of a master screw, "a rotary work
holder mounted on said carriage and provided with a driving spindle, an
exchangeable master screw and stationary nut detachably secured to said
spindle and head,..." is shown in figure 23.

[Illustration: Figure 23.--DETAILS OF A WORK SPINDLE WITH WORK, showing
the use of a master lead screw to control the pitch of a precision worm
thread being ground. From the 1933 U.S. patent 1899654, of F. A. Ward's
worm-grinding machine.]

Machines embodying the principle of the master lead screw are found in
constant use by industry at the present time for specialized
application. Whenever technological changes again reopen the topic of
thread-cutting to a new degree of accuracy or call for a reevaluation of
popular methods for any other reason, we may expect to see another
resurgence of the master-screw method, for no other design eliminates so
many variables or rests on such firm and fundamental natural principles
as the machine of _Das mittelalterliche Hausbuch_ of 1483, the earliest
such machine now known.





FOOTNOTES


   [1]  JACQUES BESSON, _Des instruments mathematiques, et mechaniques,
        servants a l'intelligence de plusiers choses difficiles, &
        necessaires a toutes republiques_, 1st ed. (Orleans, 1569).
        [Also available in later editions in French, German, and
        Spanish.]

   [2]  J. FOSTER PETREE, introduction, _Henry Maudslay, 1771-1831, and
        Maudslay Sons and Field, Ltd._ (London: The Maudslay Society,
        1949).

   [3]  _American Machinist_ (September 28, 1916), vol. 45, no. 13,
        pp. 529-531.

   [4]  U.S. patent 10383 issued to Joseph Nason of New York, January 3,
        1854.

   [5]  U.S. patent 293930 issued to Charles Vander Woerd of Waltham,
        Massachusetts, February 19, 1884.

   [6]  U.S. patent 1874592, filed June 8, 1929, issued to C. G. Olson of
        Chicago, Illinois, August 30, 1932, and assigned to the Illinois
        Tool Works, also of Chicago.

   [7]  U.S. patent 1901926, filed February 16, 1928, issued to C. G.
        Olson of Chicago, Illinois, March 21, 1933, and assigned to the
        Illinois Tool Works, also of Chicago.

   [8]  U.S. patent 1899654, filed August 31, 1931, issued to F. A. Ward
        of Detroit, Michigan, February 28, 1933, and assigned to the
        Gear Grinding Company of Detroit, Michigan.





Typographical Corrections

  Page 107: "... servants a l'intelligence de plusieurs choses difficiles,
            & necessaires ..." (had "a," "plusiers," "necessaires")






  CONTRIBUTIONS FROM
  THE MUSEUM OF HISTORY AND TECHNOLOGY:

  PAPER 38




  THE EARLIEST ELECTROMAGNETIC INSTRUMENTS

  _Robert A. Chipman_


                          ELECTROSTATIC INSTRUMENTS BEFORE 1800    123

       INSTRUMENTING VOLTAIC OR GALVANIC ELECTRICITY, 1800-1820    124

                          ELECTRICAL INSTRUMENTATION, 1800-1820    125

                                            OERSTED'S DISCOVERY    126

                  BEGINNINGS OF ELECTROMAGNETIC INSTRUMENTATION    126

                                        CHRONOLOGY AND PRIORITY    127

                           ORIGINAL ELECTROMAGNETIC MULTIPLIERS    129

                                                    CONCLUSIONS    135

                                                ACKNOWLEDGMENTS    136




_Robert A. Chipman_


THE EARLIEST ELECTROMAGNETIC INSTRUMENTS


[Illustration: Figure 1.--MODELS OF VARIOUS ELECTROMAGNETIC INSTRUMENTS
created by Schweigger, Poggendorf and Cumming in 1821, made for an
exhibit in the Museum of History and Technology, Smithsonian
Institution. (Smithsonian photo 49493.)]


    _The history of the early stages of electromagnetic instrumentation
    is traced here through the men who devised the theories and
    constructed the instruments._

    _Despite the many uses made of voltaic cells after Volta's
    announcement of his "pile" invention in 1800, two decades passed
    before Oersted discovered the magnetic effects of a voltaic circuit.
    As a result of this and within a five-month period, three men,
    apparently independently, announced the invention of the "first"
    electromagnetic instrument. This article details the merits of their
    claims to priority._

    THE AUTHOR: _Robert A. Chipman is chairman of the Department of
    Electrical Engineering at the University of Toledo in Toledo, Ohio,
    and consultant to the Smithsonian Institution._




Electrostatic Instruments before 1800


It is the fundamental premise of instrument-science that a device for
detecting or measuring a physical quantity can be based on any
phenomenon associated with that physical quantity. Although the
instrumentation of electrostatics in the 18th century, for example,
relied mainly on the phenomena of attraction and repulsion and the
ubiquitous sparks and other luminosities of frictional electricity, even
the physiological sensation of electric shock was exploited
semiquantitatively by Henry Cavendish in his well-known anticipation of
Ohm's researches. Likewise, Volta in 1800[1] described at length how the
application of his pile to suitably placed electrodes on the eyelids, on
the tongue, or in the ear, caused stimulation of the senses of sight,
taste and hearing; on the other hand, he reported that electrodes in the
nose merely produced a "more or less painful" pricking feeling, with no
impression of smell. The discharges from the Leyden jars of some of the
bigger frictional machines, such as van Marum's at Leyden, were found by
1785 to magnetize pieces of iron and to melt long pieces of metal
wire.[2]

The useful instruments that emerged from all of this experience were
various deflecting "electrometers" and "electroscopes" (the words were
not carefully distinguished in use), including the important goldleaf
electroscope ascribed to Abraham Bennet in 1787.[3]

In 1786, Galvani first observed the twitching of the legs of a dissected
frog produced by discharges of a nearby electrostatic machine, thereby
revealing still another "effect" of electricity. He then discovered that
certain arrangements of metals in contact with the frog nerves produced
the same twitching, implying something electrical in the frog-metal
situation as a whole. Although Galvani and his nephew Aldini drew from
these experiments erroneous conclusions involving "animal electricity,"
which were disputed by Volta in his metal-contact theory, it is
significant from the instrumentation point of view that the frog's legs
were unquestionably by far the most sensitive detector of metal-contact
electrical effects available at the time. Without their intervention the
development of this entire subject-area, including the creation of
chemical cells, might have been delayed many years. Volta himself
realized that the crucial test between his theory and that of Galvani
required confirming the existence of metal-contact electricity by some
electrical but nonphysiological detector. He performed this test
successfully with an electroscope, using the "condensing" technique he
had invented more than a decade earlier.




Instrumenting Voltaic or Galvanic Electricity, 1800-1820


In his famous letter of March 20, 1800, written in French from Como,
Italy, to the president of the Royal Society in London, Volta made the
first public announcement of both his "pile" (the first English
translator used the word "column"), and his "crown of cups" (the same
translator used "chain of cups" for Volta's "couronne de tasses"). The
former consisted of a vertical pile of circular disks, in which the
sequence copper-zinc-pasteboard, was repeated 10 or 20 or even as many
as 60 times, the pasteboard being moistened with salt water. The "crown
of cups" could be most conveniently made with drinking glasses, said
Volta, with separated inch-square plates of copper and zinc in salt
water in each glass, the copper sheet in one glass being joined by some
intermediate conductor and soldered joints to the zinc in the next
glass.

Volta considered the "crown of cups" and the "pile" to be essentially
identical, and as evidences of the electrical nature of the latter,
said:

    ... if it contains about 20 of these stories or couples of metal, it
    will be capable not only of emitting signs of electricity by
    Cavallo's electrometer, assisted by a condenser, beyond 10 deg. or 15 deg.,
    and of charging this condenser by mere contact so as to make it emit
    a spark, etc., but of giving to the fingers with which its
    extremities (the bottom and top of the column) have been touched
    several small shocks, more or less frequent, according as the
    touching has been repeated. Each of these shocks has a perfect
    resemblance to that slight shock experienced from a Leyden flask
    weakly charged, or a battery still more weakly charged, or a torpedo
    in an exceedingly languishing state, which imitates still better the
    effects of my apparatus by the series of repeated shocks which it
    can continually communicate.[4]

The "effects" provided by Volta's pile and crown-of-cups are therefore
electroscope deflection, sparks, and shocks. Later in the letter, he
describes the stimulation of sight, taste, and hearing as noted earlier,
but nowhere does he mention chemical phenomena of any kind, or the
heating of a wire joining the terminals of either device. Hence, except
for the additional physiological responses, he adds nothing to the
catalog of observations on which instruments might be based. His
familiarity with the moods of the torpedo (electric eel) seems to be
intimate.

The reading of Volta's letter to the Royal Society on June 26, 1800, its
publication in the Society's _Philosophical Transactions_ (in French)
immediately thereafter, and its publication in English in the
_Philosophical Magazine_ for September 1800,[5] gave scientists
throughout Europe an easily constructed and continuously operating
electric generator with which innumerable new physical, chemical, and
physiological experiments could be made. Editor-engineer William
Nicholson read Volta's letter before its publication and, by the end of
April, he and surgeon Anthony Carlisle had built a voltaic pile.
Applying a drop of water to improve the "connection" of a wire lying on
a metal plate, they happened to notice gas bubbles forming on the wire,
and pursued the observation to the point of identifying the electrical
decomposition of water into hydrogen and oxygen.

Within two or three years innumerable electrochemical reactions had been
described, some of which, one might think, could have served as
operating principles for electrical instruments. Although the phenomena
of gas formation and metal deposition were in fact widely used as crude
indicators of the polarity and relative strength of voltaic piles and
chemical cells during the period 1800-1820 (and the gas bubbles were
made the basis of a telegraph receiver by S. T. Soemmering), the
quantitative laws of electrolysis were not worked out by Faraday until
after 1830, and not until 1834 was he satisfied that the electrolytic
decomposition of water was sufficiently well understood to be made the
basis for a useful measuring instrument. Describing his
water-electrolysis device in that year, he wrote:

    The instrument offers the only _actual measurer_ [italics his] of
    voltaic electricity which we at present possess. For without being
    at all affected by variations in time or intensity, or alterations
    in the current itself, of any kind, or from any cause, or even of
    intermissions of actions, it takes note with accuracy of the
    quantity of electricity which has passed through it, and reveals
    that quantity by inspection; I have therefore named it a
    VOLTAELECTROMETER.[6]

In passing, Faraday commented that the efforts by Gay-Lussac and Thenard
to use chemical decomposition as a "measure of the electricity of the
voltaic pile" in 1811 had been premature because the "principles and
precautions" involved were not then known. He also noted that the
details of _metal deposition_ in electrolysis were still not
sufficiently understood to permit its use in an instrument.[7]

The heating of the wires in electric circuits must have been observed so
early and so often with both electrostatic and voltaic apparatus, that
no one has bothered to claim or trace priorities for this "effect." The
production of incandescence, however, and the even more dramatic
combustion or "explosion" of metal-foil strips and fine wires has a good
deal of recorded history. Among the first to burn leaf metal with a
voltaic pile was J. B. Tromsdorff of Erfurt who noted in 1801 the
distinctly different colors of the flames produced by the various common
metals. In the succeeding few years, Humphry Davy at the Royal
Institution frequently, in his public lectures, showed wires glowing
from electric current.

Early electrical instrumentation based on the heating effect took an
unusual form. Shortly after 1800, W. H. Wollaston, an English M.D.,
learned a method for producing malleable platinum. He kept the process
secret, and for several years enjoyed an extremely profitable monopoly
in the sale of platinum crucibles, wire, and other objects. About 1810,
he invented a technique for producing platinum wire as fine as a few
millionths of an inch in diameter, that has since been known as
"Wollaston wire." For several years preceding 1820, no other instrument
could compare the "strengths" of two voltaic cells better than the test
of the respective maximum lengths of this wire that they could heat to
fusion. One can sympathize with Cumming's comment in 1821 about "the
difficulty in soldering wires that are barely visible."[8]




Electrical Instrumentation, 1800-1820


The 20 years following the announcement of the voltaic-pile invention
were years of intense experimental activity with this device. Many new
chemical elements were discovered, beginnings were made on the
electrochemical series of the elements, the electric arc and
incandescent platinum wires suggested the possibilities of electric
lighting, and various electrochemical observations gave promise of other
practical applications such as metal-refining, electroplating, and
quantity production of certain gases. Investigators were keenly aware
that all of the available means for measuring and comparing the
_electrical_ aspects of their experiments (however vaguely these
"electrical aspects" may have been conceived), were slow, awkward,
imprecise, and unreliable.

The atmosphere was such that prominent scientists everywhere were ready
to pounce immediately on any reported discovery of a new electrical
"effect," to explore its potentialities for instrumental purposes. Into
this receptive environment came H. C. Oersted's announcement of the
magnetic effects of a voltaic circuit, on July 21, 1820.[9]

[Illustration: Figure 2.--"GALVANOMETER" WAS THE NAME given by Bischof
to this goldleaf electrostatic instrument in 1802, 18 years before
Ampere coupled the word with the use of Oersted's electromagnetic
experiment as an indicating device.]




Oersted's Discovery


Many writers have expressed surprise that with all the use made of
voltaic cells after 1800, including the enormous cells that produced
the electric arc and vaporized wires, no one for 20 years happened to
see a deflection of any of the inevitable nearby compass needles, which
were a basic component of the scientific apparatus kept by any
experimenter at this time. Yet so it happened. The surprise is still
greater when one realizes that many of the contemporary natural
philosophers were firmly persuaded, even in the absence of positive
evidence, that there _must_ be a connection between electricity and
magnetism. Oersted himself held this latter opinion, and had been
seeking electromagnetic relationships more or less deliberately for
several years before he made his decisive observations.

His familiarity with the subject was such that he fully appreciated the
immense importance of his discovery. This accounts for his employing a
rather uncommon method of publication. Instead of submitting a letter to
a scientific society or a report to the editor of a journal, he had
privately printed a four-page pamphlet describing his results. This, he
forwarded simultaneously to the learned societies and outstanding
scientists all over Europe. Written in Latin, the paper was published in
various journals in English, French, German, Italian and Danish during
the next few weeks.[10]

In summary, he reported that a compass needle experienced deviations
when placed near a wire connecting the terminals of a voltaic battery.
He described fully how the direction and magnitude of the needle
deflections varied with the relative position of the wire, and the
polarity of the battery, and stated "From the preceding facts, we may
likewise collect that this conflict performs circles...." Oersted's
comment that the voltaic apparatus used should "be strong enough to heat
a metallic wire red hot" does not excuse the 20-year delay of the
discovery.




Beginnings of Electromagnetic Instrumentation


The mere locating of a compass needle above or below a suitably oriented
portion of a voltaic circuit created an electrical instrument, the
moment Oersted's "effect" became known, and it was to this basic
juxtaposition that Ampere quickly gave the name of galvanometer.[11] It
cannot be said that the scientists of the day agreed that this
instrument detected or measured "electric current," however. Volta
himself had referred to the "current" in his original circuits, and
Ampere used the word freely and confidently in his electrodynamic
researches of 1820-1822, but Oersted did not use it first and many of
the German physicists who followed up his work avoided it for several
years. As late as 1832, Faraday could make only the rather noncommittal
statement: "By current I mean anything progressive, whether it be a
fluid of electricity or vibrations or generally progressive forces."[12]

Nevertheless, whatever the words or concepts they used, experimenters
agreed that Oersted's apparatus provided a method of monitoring the
"strength" of a voltaic circuit and a means of comparing, for example,
one voltaic battery or circuit with another.

It was perfectly clear, from Oersted's pamphlet, that if a compass
needle was deflected clockwise when the wire of a particular voltaic
circuit lay above it in the magnetic meridian, the same needle would
_also_ be deflected clockwise if the wire was turned end-for-end and
placed _below_ the compass needle, without changing the rest of the
circuit. Anyone perceiving this fact might deduce, as a matter of logic,
that if the wire of the circuit was first passed above the needle, in
the magnetic meridian, then folded and returned in a parallel path below
the needle, the deflecting effect on the needle would be repeated, and a
more sensitive indicator would result, assuming that any additional wire
introduced has not affected the "circuit" excessively.

Since 1821, historical accounts of the origins of electromagnetism seem
to have limited their credit assignments for the conception and
observation of this electromagnetic "doubling" effect (or "multiplying"
effect, if the folding is repeated) to three persons. Almost without
exception, however, these accounts have given no specific information as
to precisely what each of these three accomplished, what physical form
their respective creations took, what experiments they performed, and
what functional understanding they apparently had of the situation. The
usual statement is simply that a compass needle was placed in a coil of
wire.[13] The main purpose of the present review is to recount some of
these details.

The following are the three candidates whose names are variously
associated with the "invention" of the first constructed electromagnetic
instrument, or "multiplier," or primitive galvanometer.

JOHANN SALOMO CHRISTOPH SCHWEIGGER (1779-1857) in 1820 had already been
editor for several years of the _Journal fuer Chemie und Physik_, and was
professor of chemistry at the University of Halle.

JOHANN CHRISTIAN POGGENDORF (1796-1877) in 1820 had only recently
entered the University of Berlin as a student following several years as
an apothecary's apprentice and a brief period as an apothecary. Four
years later, he succeeded Gilbert as editor of the influential _Annalen
der Physik_, a position he held for more than 50 years.

JAMES CUMMING (1771-1861) in 1820 was professor of chemistry at
Cambridge University.




Chronology and Priority


The earliest established date in the "multiplier" record is September
16, 1820, when Schweigger read his first paper to the Natural Philosophy
Society of Halle. There seems to be no reason to doubt that this report
justifies the frequently used label "Schweigger's multiplier."

In an exuberant support of Schweigger's position, Speter[14] with no
mention of Cumming and no hint of "invention" details, shows that
Poggendorf in 1821 admitted Schweigger's priority, but suffered some
lapse of memory 40 years later when writing sections of his biographical
dictionary, leaving a distinct suggestion that the invention was his.
Further confusion for later generations resulted from some ambiguous
entries in the _Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie_ of 1888. The name
"multiplier" seems not to have originated with Schweigger himself.
Speter credits it to Meineke as "working" editor of Schweigger's
_Journal_, but Seebeck seems to have used it much earlier.[15]

Conceding priority of conception to Schweigger (Cumming has not been a
real competitor on this point) does not alter the fact that all three
seem to have reached their results independently of one another, that
the first work of each on this subject was published within a period of
five months, that there were significant differences in their
conceptions of the uses and the optimum design of their devices and that
between them they provided an adequate foundation for the subsequent
development of the galvanometer to become the primary
electrical-measuring instrument.

In the matter of publication, Schweigger, as editor of what was
popularly called Schweigger's _Journal_, had an obvious advantage, and
presented his experiments beginnings on page 1 of the first volume of
his _Journal_ for 1821, published January 1 of that year.[16] Oersted's
paper had appeared two volumes previously. He began by referring to
Oersted's discovery as "the most interesting to be presented in a
thousand years of the history of magnetism." He was, in fact, so
impressed with the epochal nature of Oersted's achievement that he
commemorated it by giving his _Journal_ a second title so that "volume
one" of the new title could begin in the year after Oersted's
publication.

Poggendorf, as a relatively junior student, had no such easy access to
publicity, but he had a staunch admirer in one of his professors, Paul
Erman at the University of Berlin. Erman added a seven-page postscript
on Poggendorf's invention to his book _Outline of the Physical Aspects
of the Electro-chemical Magnetism Discovered by Professor Oersted_,
published before April 1821,[17] with an introductory paragraph:

    Herr Poggendorf, who is one of the most excellent ornaments of the
    lecture room and laboratory of the University here, carried out a
    very coherent and well-conceived investigation of electro-chemical
    magnetism, leading step-by-step to a method of amplifying this
    activity-phenomenon by means of itself.

The postscript begins by referring to the "condenser [_Kondensator_]
just brought to my attention by Herr Poggendorf" and explains that he
cannot release his treatise "without preliminary announcement of this
subject of the highest importance." (It can be inferred from the text
that the name "condenser" was chosen because of the device's enhancing
of magnetic measurements analogously to the enhancing of electric
measurements by Volta's electrostatic "condenser.")

Immediately on reading the book, Schweigger published extracts, mainly
of the postscript, with indignant comments on Erman's remissness (or
worse) in having failed to mention Schweigger's prior work.[18]

However, Erman was not alone in his unawareness, if it was that, of
Schweigger's discovery.

Rival editor Gilbert of the _Annalen der Physik_ reviewed Erman at much
greater length than Schweigger, reprinting most of the postscript with
evident enthusiasm, and stating in his preamble that the invention is
attributed to "a young physicist studying here in Berlin, Herr
Poggendorf."[19] Only in a footnote is the reader directed to another
footnote in the next article in the volume, where Gilbert finally states
that he "cannot leave unmentioned the fact that this amplifying
apparatus seems to be due to Herr Professor Schweigger." He then quotes
rather fully from Schweigger's first two papers.[16] Oersted in 1823
explained the situation thus: "The work of M. Poggendorf, having been
mentioned in a book on electromagnetism by the celebrated M. Erman
published very shortly after its discovery, became known to many
scientists before that of M. Schweigger. This is the reason for the same
apparatus carrying different names."[20]

The same confusion is well illustrated by the paper to which Gilbert
attached his confessional footnote mentioned above. Written by Professor
Raschig of Dresden, on April 3, 1821, the paper is entitled "Experiments
with the Electro-magnetic Multiplier," but the device, throughout the
paper, is repeatedly referred to in the phrase "Poggendorf's condenser,
or rather multiplier," an awkward combination that suggests editorial
intervention.[21]

The work of James Cumming at Cambridge is described in two papers which
he read to the Cambridge Philosophical Society in 1821, which were then
duly published in the _Transactions_ of that Society. The first, "On the
Connexion of Galvanism and Magnetism," was read April 2, 1821,[22] and
the second, "On the Application of Magnetism as a Measure of
Electricity," was read a few weeks later on May 21st.[23]

Though he quotes some unrelated 18th-century experiments by Ritter in
Germany, an 1807 publication of Oersted's, and electromagnetic
experiments with solenoids performed by Arago and Ampere in late 1820,
Cumming makes no mention of Schweigger or Poggendorf, and never uses the
word "multiplier." It, therefore, seems probable that his work was done
without knowledge of the German publications or inventions.




Original Electromagnetic Multipliers


Of the three sets of instruments made, respectively, by Schweigger,
Poggendorf and Cumming, those of Schweigger are the most elementary, and
the least realistic from a practical point of view. He makes little
effort to investigate the effect of any design parameters, but presents
some odd conductor configurations that involve unimportant variations of
the basic principle. The following extracts from his first three
papers[13] contain the major references to his conception, construction,
and use of his multiplier.


PAPER READ IN HALLE, SEPTEMBER 16, 1820

    That a powerful voltaic pile is required for these experiments (of
    Oersted) I have confirmed in my physics lectures, using an electric
    pile that was so strong it would easily produce potassium metal the
    second and third day after it was built. However, I soon saw that
    the electromagnetic effect was related, not to the pile, but to the
    simple circuit, and I was thereby led to perform the experiment with
    much greater sensitivity. To amplify these electromagnetic phenomena
    of the simple circuit it seemed to me necessary to adopt a different
    arrangement from that initiated by Volta, in order that the
    electrical phenomena of his simple circuit might be raised to a
    higher degree.

    Since a reversal of the effect occurs according to whether the
    connecting-wire lies over or under the needle, and likewise
    according to whether the wire leads from the positive or negative
    pole, thence I say it is an easy inference that a doubling of the
    effect is attainable, which is verified in practice.

    I present to the Society the simple "doubling apparatus"
    [_Verdoppelungs-Apparat_], where the compass is placed between two
    wires passing around it. A multiplication of the effect is easily
    obtained when the wire is not just once but many times wound around.
    A single turn suffices, however, to demonstrate Oersted's
    experiments, using small strips of zinc and copper dipped in
    ammonium-chloride solution.

Amid innumerable, rambling theorizations (such as, that "hydrogenation
affects magnetism as oxidation affects galvanism," or "sulphur,
phosphorous and carbon are especially significant in magnetism, since
iron in combination with any of these inflammable materials becomes a
magnet-material"), Schweigger announces that he looked for the reactive
force of the needle on the connecting wire in the simple Oersted
experiment, and that he used his "amplifying apparatus" to look for
magnetic effects from an electrostatic machine, but without success in
both cases. He suggests that he will continue with many more
electromagnetic experiments because "with the use of the
doubling-apparatus, the needle, instead of needing for excitation a cell
capable of generating sparks, approaches more closely the sensitivity of
a twitching nerve." However, "additional special experiments are
required to find to what limits the amplification can be increased by
the method I have created in the construction of this
doubling-apparatus, using multiple turns of wire."

[Illustration: Figure 3.--THIS WIRE "BOW-PATTERN" was the first
illustration Schweigger gave of his "doubling apparatus," though he had
presented a verbal description of a single-coil arrangement somewhat
earlier. The purpose of the bow pattern was to show that compass needles
at the centers of the two loops deflected in opposite directions. (From
_Journal fuer Chemie und Physik_.)]


PAPER READ IN HALLE, NOVEMBER 4, 1820

[The first half of this paper describes successful observations of the
reaction-force of a magnetic needle on the connecting wire of a voltaic
circuit, achieved by pivoting the connecting wire in the form of brass
needles above and below the compass needle. Though the multiplier
configuration of needle and wire is in fact present here, Schweigger
does not mention it, evidently regarding this as a separate project. He
continues.]

    In my lecture of September 16th, I showed that Oersted's results
    depend, not on the voltaic cell, but only on the connecting circuit.
    The principle I have used for amplification of the effects, for the
    construction of an electromagnetic battery as it were, was the
    winding of wire around the compass, and I now present to the Society
    a bow-pattern of multiple-wound, wax-insulated wire, Figure 3.
    [There were no illustrations with Schweigger's first paper.] While
    a single wire, using the weak electric circuit here, deflects the
    magnetic needle only 30 deg. or 40 deg., if the compass is placed in one of
    the openings of this pattern, the needle is deflected 90 deg. to the
    east, or in the other opening 90 deg. to the west, using the same weak
    electric circuit....

The "bow-pattern" device has novelty interest only, adding nothing to
the elucidation of the multiplier phenomenon. The same is true of
Schweigger's next proposal, shown in figure 4. "... I will now add
another apparatus, which is just an extension of the previous one,
whereby the needle can take up any angle from 0 deg. to 180 deg.." A short
length of circular glass tubing, of inside diameter large enough to
contain a compass needle, stands with its axis vertical and has single
or multiple loops of wire wound on it in vertical diametral planes. In
the illustration, successive plane coils are inclined at 30 deg. to one
another. "... the electric current flows through the whole wire, and the
needle moves under all of these currents, and coming always into another
loop can take any desired angle."

With much further theorizing about "the correlation of magnetism with
the cohesion of bodies," Schweigger states again his evaluation of his
discovery: "Oersted succeeded in electromagnetic research by using a
spark-producing cell, which could make a wire glow. My amplifying
electromagnetic device needs only a weak circuit of copper, zinc, and
ammonium chloride solution."[24]

[Illustration: Figure 4.--SCHWEIGGER MADE THIS peculiar construction of
wire coils, wound endwise on a short vertical section of glass tubing
with a compass needle inside, merely to startle his Halle audience with
the fact that the compass needle could rest in any of several stable
positions. (From _Journal fuer Chemie und Physik_.)]

[Illustration: Figure 5.--SCHWEIGGER'S SUGGESTION of one possible design
for an amplifying electromagnetic indicator. The components are wooden
rods and insulated wire. Position b referred to in the text is at the
bottom of the diagram between the letters a and c. (From _Journal fuer
Chemie und Physik_.)]


"FURTHER WORDS ABOUT THE NEW MAGNETIC PHENOMENA"

[This was presumably written between November 4, 1820, and the January
1, 1821, publication date of his _Journal_.]

    These wonderful new electrical effects[25] are most easily rendered
    perceptible with the help of the previously described wire loops. To
    focus attention on just one of the windings of Figure 3, we sketch a
    new drawing, Figure 5.... Since it is of major importance that these
    loops be made of silk-covered wire lying evenly on one another, it
    is convenient to wind the loops on two small slotted sticks of wood,
    although it is also possible to hold the wires together with wax or
    shellac, or to tie them together in an orderly manner with silk
    thread....

    In Figure 5, Aa and Cc represent little slotted rods of wood on
    which the silk-covered wire is wound. Only three windings are shown
    in the figure, but I generally adopt three times that many. Now t is
    connected with the copper and d with the zinc, and the compass B set
    between the rods Aa and Cc with the coil perpendicular to the
    magnetic meridian and the terminals d, t at the east.

    The instant Z and K are dipped in the ammonium chloride solution,
    the needle turns around and stays with the north pole point
    south....

    If now the compass is taken out of the coil and put in position b,
    all effects are reversed, and are considerably weaker, for obvious
    reasons....

    It is of the same significance whether we bring the compass from B
    to b in Figure 5, or from mesh 1 to mesh 2 in Figure 3, only that in
    the latter case, because the compass is enclosed by the two sides, a
    stronger effect results....

    If now the coil is rotated ... so that the face previously north now
    faces south, then on connecting the electric circuit there is
    absolutely no trace of effect on the needle, assuming that the
    terminal wires are not reversed....

    It seems unnecessary to note that our magnetic coil can be placed in
    the direction of the magnetic meridian or at any arbitrary angle
    with it....

Following several pages of further talk about the relation of "cohesion
to magnetism" and about "unipolar and bipolar conductors," the only
additional item of interest is the observation that discharges of a
Leyden jar (_Kleistichen Flasche_) strong enough to burn strips of leaf
gold and to magnetize an iron rod in a coil, produced no compass-needle
deflections, even with the help of the "amplifying apparatus."

Schweigger, therefore, described the basic multiplier idea clearly
enough in his first paper, but offered no sketch of the simplest
construction until the third paper. In the second paper, meanwhile, he
had illustrated two peculiar designs involving the principle in less
elementary ways.

His indifference to whether the wire loops lie _in_ the magnetic
meridian (fig. 3) or perpendicular to it (fig. 5) or "at any other
arbitrary angle to it," reveals a poor appreciation of the
measuring-instrument potentialities. His conception seems to be
primarily that of a detector.

Poggendorf's invention, as first reported by Erman and presented to a
wider audience by Gilbert[26] was described as consisting of typically
40 to 50 turns of 1/10-line diameter, silk-covered copper wire tied
tightly together, with the whole pressed laterally to form an elliptical
opening in which a pivoted compass needle could move freely while
maintaining clearance of about 2 lines from the wire at all points.[27]

"This magnetic condenser can be a great boon to electro-chemistry," said
Erman, for "it avoids all the difficulties of electric condensers." He
noted that, using the condenser, Poggendorf had already established the
electric series for a great number of bodies, discovered various
anomalies about conductivities, and found a way of detecting dissymmetry
of the poles of a compass needle. On the other hand, even with the
condenser, no magnetic effects have so far been obtainable from a strong
tourmaline, or from a 12,000-pair, Zamboni dry cell.

Poggendorf's own account of his work finally appeared as a very long
article in the journal known as "Oken's Isis."[28] The editorial
controversies mentioned earlier may have occasioned this use of a
periodical of such minor status in the fields of physics and chemistry.

The source of Poggendorf's vision of the multiplier principle was a
little different from Schweigger's inspiration. Aiming at some detailed
analysis of Oersted's observation, Poggendorf ran the connecting wire of
his cell-circuit along a vertical line to just above or below the
pivot-point of the compass needle, then, after a right-angle bend,
horizontally above or below one of the poles of the needle. As he
studied the deflections produced for all four possible positions of such
a wire, with both cell polarities, he came to realize that if a
rectangular wire loop in a vertical plane enclosed a compass needle, all
parts of the horizontal sides of the loop would produce additive
deflections. By a separate experiment, he showed that the vertical sides
of the loop would also increase the deflections. He saw at the same time
that the effect of additional turns would be cumulative.

    The multiple surrounding of the needle by a silk-covered wire, in a
    plane perpendicular to the long axis of the needle, affords the
    physicist a very simple and sensitive means of detecting the
    slightest trace of galvanism, or of magnetism produced by it, so
    that I have given the name of magnetic condenser to this
    construction, though I attach no special value to this name ...

    In analyzing the astonishingly increased power which the condenser
    gives to the magnetic effect of a circuit, the first question that
    arises is how the effect varies with the number of turns, whether it
    increases indefinitely or reaches a maximum beyond which additional
    turns have no effect. The answer to this first question is linked to
    the solution of another, viz, whether the degrees deflection are a
    direct expression of the measure of the magnetic force or not.

    To instruct myself on this point I made use of three separate
    circuits, each containing an 8-turn condenser, and put these as
    close together as possible in the magnetic meridian ... with the
    needle between the windings. Each single circuit ... gave a
    deflection of 45 deg. ... When two were connected the deflection was
    60 deg., and when finally all three were put in magnetic operation, the
    deflection grew to only 70 deg.. It appears clearly from this that the
    angle of deflection is not in a simple ratio with the magnetic force
    acting on the needle....

Neither Poggendorf nor Schweigger seems to have ruled out, on logical
grounds alone, the possibility of deflections greater than 90 deg., with the
loop-plane in the magnetic meridian, though Poggendorf does add a vague
note that if the needle deflected too far it would encounter forces of
the opposing sign.

Poggendorf experimented with the size of the circuit wires, finding that
larger wires led to greater deflections. He noted that the size of the
cell plates and the nature of the cell's moist conductors would
certainly have a great effect, but that to investigate these in detail
would take undue time, and he therefore proposed to keep this part of
the apparatus constant, using one pair of zinc and copper plates 3.6
inches in diameter, separated by cloth soaked in ammonium-chloride
solution.

Poggendorf's principal quantitative study of his magnetic condenser used
13 identical coils, each with 100 turns. In order that the turns should
all be at approximately the same distance from the needle, the coils
were wound of the finest brass wire that could be silk-insulated, the
wire diameter being 0.02 lines. On adding coils one at a time across the
cell (i.e., connecting them in parallel), the deflections were as
follows:

  Turns              100     200     300      400     500     600    700
  Deflection in
    degrees           45      50      55    59-60      62      63     64

  Turns              800     900    1000     1100    1200    1300
  Deflection in
    degrees           65    65-1/2    66       66      66      66

Adding some coils with fewer turns, and connecting various combinations
"as a _continuum_" (i.e., in series), the deflections using the same
cell were:

  Turns             1      5     10     25      50     75    100    200
  Deflection in
    degrees        10     22     27     30   35-40     40     40     40

  Turns           300    400    500    600     700    800    900   1000
  Deflection in
    degrees        40     40     41     40      40     40     40     40

Making a few coils from wire with 1/8-line diameter, the deflections,
again using the same cell were:

  Turns                      5       25      50    100    Over 100
  Deflection in degrees    20-22    40-45    45     65          65

Since the needle used in these experiments was almost as long as the
inside clearance of the coils, no simple tangent law can be applied, and
it is not possible to discover an equivalent circuit in modern terms.
However, the constancy of the deflections for large numbers of turns in
each case indicates that the cell voltage and resistance were fairly
constant, and a rough estimate suggests that the cell resistance was
comparable to the resistance of one of the 100-turn coils of fine wire.
Such a value means that cell resistance limited the maximum deflections
for the parallel-connected multipliers, while coil resistance fixed the
limit in the series case.

For all of these reasons, it was impossible that any useful functional
law could be obtained from the data.

Poggendorf concluded only that "the amplifying power of the condenser
does not increase without limit, but has a maximum value dependent on
the conditions of plate area and wire size." He added two other
significant comments derived from various observations, that the basic
Oersted phenomenon is independent of the earth's magnetism, and that the
phenomenon is localized, i.e., is not affected by distant parts of the
circuit.

Only a small fraction of Poggendorf's paper is devoted to elucidating
the properties of the condenser. A similar amount is concerned with
refuting various proposals, such as those of Berzelius and Erman, about
distributions of magnetic polarity in a conducting wire to account for
Oersted's results. More than half of the paper describes results
obtained by using the condenser to compare conductivities and cell
polarities under conditions where no effect had previously been
detectable. Notable is the observation of needle deflections in circuits
whose connecting wires are interrupted by pieces of graphite, manganese
dioxide, various sulphur compounds, etc., materials which had previously
been considered as insulators in galvanic circuits. Poggendorf gives
these the name of "semi-conductor" (_halb-Leiter_).

[Illustration: Figure 6.--ELECTROMAGNETIC INSTRUMENTS OF JAMES CUMMING,
used at Cambridge in 1821. One is a single-wire "galvanometer,"
following Ampere's definition. Cumming called the multiple-turn
construction "galvanoscopes." He showed how to increase their
sensitivity by partial cancellation of the earth's magnetism at the
location of the compass needle. (From _Transactions of the Cambridge
Philosophical Society_, vol. 1, 1821.)]

Cumming's first mention of the multiplier phenomenon, in his paper of
April 2, 1821,[22] is quite casual, and describes only a one-turn
construction. He speaks first of single-turn ring of thick, brass wire,
and after noting that the sides of a circuit produce additive effects on
a needle, he comments that a flattened rectangular loop produces nearly
quadruple the effect of a single wire. The paper is primarily a review
of Oersted's work, with references to electromagnetic observations
before Oersted, and accounts of various related but nonmultiplier
experiments that Cumming has made. His second paper, of May 21st,
contains a fine plate (fig. 6) illustrating arrangements used in
investigating the subject of the paper's title "The Application of
Magnetism as a Measure of Electricity." (Neither Poggendorf nor any of
his commentators ever illustrated his "condenser.")

Although this plate is never referred to in the paper itself, a nearby
"Description" gives a few comments. The two wire patterns shown are
noted as simply "forms of spiral for increasing the electromagnetic
intensity." The mounted wire loop, with enclosed compass needle and
terminal mercury cups, is clearly identical in principle with the
devices of Schweigger and Poggendorf, and is called a "galvanoscope."
The largest structure illustrated does not involve the multiplying
effect. It is called a "galvanometer," consistent with Ampere's
definition of that word. To use it, two leads of a voltaic circuit are
inserted into the mercury cups AC and BD, and the board EFGH carrying
the cups is moved vertically until some "standard" deflection is
obtained on the compass needle below. The relative "strength" of the
circuit is then given by the calibrated position of the sliding section.
Uncertainties are undoubtedly introduced by the arbitrary positions of
the connecting wires from the test circuit to the mercury cups, but
Cumming drew some interesting conclusions from various measurements he
made.

Observing needle deflections for various positions of the wire A-B, with
a "constant" voltaic circuit, he found that "the tangent of the
deviation varies inversely as the distance of the connecting wire from
the magnetic needle." Here is a combination of the deflection law for a
needle in a transverse horizontal field and the magnetic-force law for a
long, straight wire. The latter had been determined experimentally by
Biot and Savart, in November 1820, by timing the oscillations of a
suspended magnet.[29]

Cumming considers his straight-wire calibrated "galvanometer" to be a
device for "measuring" galvanic electricity; on the other hand, his
multiple-loop "galvanoscopes" are for "discovering" galvanic
electricity. With the multiplier instrument, he found galvanic effects
(i.e., needle deflections) using copper and zinc electrodes with several
acids not previously known to create galvanic action. A
potassium-mercury amalgam electrode created a powerful cell with zinc as
the positive electrode, establishing both the metallic nature of
potassium and the fact that it is the most negative of all metals.

In a third paper, presented April 28, 1823,[30] Cumming reports use of
the galvanoscope in experiments on the thermoelectric phenomena recently
discovered by Seebeck. His note that "for the more minute effects a
compass was employed in the galvanoscope, having its terrestrial
magnetism neutralized ..." seems to be the earliest mention of this
version of the astatic principle, a technique whose dramatic effects
were especially valuable in low-resistance thermoelectric circuits,
where the extra resistance of additional multiplier turns largely
offsets their magnetic contribution. In detail, "the needle is
neutralized by placing a powerful magnet North and South on a line with
its center; and another, which is much weaker, East and West at some
distance above it: by means of the first the needle is placed nearly at
right angles to the meridian, and the adjustment is completed by the
second."

On varying the length of the connecting wire of the circuit, Cumming
found the deflections of the multiplier needle to be in a nearly
reciprocal relation. He speaks of the "conducting power of the wire,"
and seems not far from visualizing Ohm's law, of which no published form
appeared until 1826. Ohm's own experiments were made with very similar
apparatus.

[Illustration: Figure 7.--"SCHWEIGGER MULTIPLIER" used by Oersted in
1823. A thin magnetic needle is held in a light, paper sling at F,
suspended by a fine, vertical fiber. (From _Annales de Chimie et de
Physique_.)]




Conclusions


An effort has been made to show that electrical experimenters prior to
Oersted's discovery in 1820 were in desperate need of some electrical
instrument for galvanic or voltaic circuits that would combine
sensitivity, simplicity, reliability, and quick response. The nearly
simultaneous creation by Schweigger, Poggendorf and Cumming of an
arrangement consisting of a coil of wire and a compass needle provided
the first primitive version of a device to fill that need.

[Illustration: Figure 8.--COMPLETELY USELESS ARRANGEMENT of vertical
coil and horizontal, unmagnetized needle, presented in the _Edinburgh
Philosophical Journal_ of 1821 as "Poggendorf's Galvano-Magnetic
Condenser." Almost every aspect of Poggendorf's instrument has been
incorrectly represented.]

It appears that Schweigger is clearly entitled to credit for absolute
priority in the discovery, but the original sources suggest that both
his understanding of the device and the subsequent researches he
performed with it were markedly inferior to those of the other
independent discoverers. In using the generic label, "Schweigger's
Multiplier," there have been historical examples of attributing to
Schweigger considerably more sophistication than is justified. Figure 7
shows an instrument designed by Oersted in 1823,[20] which he says
"differs in only minor particulars from that of M. Schweigger." On
comparing figure 7 with figures 3, 4, or 5, the remark seems overly
generous.

The history of the multiplier instruments has had its fair share of
erroneous reports and misleading clues. A fine example is the
illustration of figure 8, taken from what is often quoted as the first
report in English on Poggendorf's "Galvano-Magnetic Condenser."[31] The
sketch is the editor's interpretation of a verbal description given him
by a visiting Danish chemist who, in turn, had received the information
in a letter from Oersted. It incorporates, faithful to the description,
a "spiral wire ... established vertically," with a needle "in the axis
of the spiral," yet by misunderstanding of the axial relations and of
the ratio of length to diameter for the coil, a completely meaningless
arrangement has resulted. The confusion is compounded by the specifying
of an _unmagnetized_ needle.

Schweigger and Poggendorf, through their editorial positions, were among
the best known of all European scientists for several decades. On one
basis or another their reputations are firmly established. Comparison of
the accounts of the early "multipliers," however, suggests that the
Reverend James Cumming, professor of chemistry at the University of
Cambridge, was a very perceptive philosopher. This was well understood
by G. T. Bettany who wrote in the _Dictionary of National Biography_
that Cumming's early papers "though extremely unpretentious," were
"landmarks in electromagnetism and thermoelectricity," and concluded
that: "Had he been more ambitious and of less uncertain health, his
clearness and grasp and his great aptitude for research might have
carried him into the front rank of discoverers."




ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


I wish to thank Dr. Robert P. Multhauf, chairman of the Department of
Science and Technology in the Smithsonian Institution's Museum of
History and Technology, for encouragement in the writing of this paper
and for the provision of opportunity to consult the appropriate sources.
To Dr. W. James King of the American Institute of Physics, I am grateful
for many provocative discussions on this and related topics.





FOOTNOTES


   [1]  A. VOLTA, "On the Electricity Excited by the Mere Contact of
        Conducting Substances of Different Kinds," _Philosophical
        Transactions of the Royal Society of London_ (1800), vol. 90,
        pp. 403-431.

   [2]  Some little-known but delightful observations in the prehistory
        of electromagnetism are described in a letter written by G. W.
        SCHILLING from London to the Berlin Academy on July 8, 1769,
        published as "Sur les phenomenes de l'Anguleil Tremblante"
        [_Nouveaux Memoires de l'Academie Royale des Sciences et
        Belles-Lettres_, 1770 (Berlin, 1772), pp. 68-74], translated to
        French from the original German. The letter recounts a multitude
        of experiments with various electric eels. The two observations
        of electromagnetic interest are that a piece of iron held by the
        hand in the eel's tank could be felt quivering even when the
        fish was stationary several inches away, and a compass needle
        showed a deflection, both in the water near the fish, and
        outside the tank, also with the fish stationary.

   [3]  ABRAHAM BENNET, _Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
        of London_ (1787), p. 26.

   [4]  Op. cit. (footnote 1), p. 403.

   [5]  _Philosophical Magazine_ (1800), vol. 7, pp. 289-311. [For a
        facsimile reprint, see _Galvani-Volta_ (Bern Dibner's Burndy
        Library Publication No. 7), Norwalk, Connecticut, 1952.]

   [6]  MICHAEL FARADAY, _Experimental Researches in Electricity_, vol. 1
        (London, 1839), paragraph 739, dated January 1834.

   [7]  Ibid., sec. 741.

   [8]  JAMES CUMMING, "On the Application of Magnetism as a Measure of
        Electricity," _Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical
        Society_ (1821), vol. 1, pp. 282-286. [Also published in
        _Philosophical Magazine_ (1822), vol. 60, pp. 253-257.]

   [9]  H. C. OERSTED, _Experimenta Circa Effectum Conflictus Electrici in
        Acum Magneticam_ (Copenhagen, July 21, 1820).

  [10]  Full details of Oersted's work and publications are in _Oersted
        and the Discovery of Electromagnetism_ (Bern Dibner's Burndy
        Library Publication No. 18), Norwalk, Connecticut, 1961. The
        original Latin version and first English translation are
        reproduced in _Isis_ (1928), vol. 34, pp. 435-444.

  [11]  A. M. AMPERE, _Annales de Chimie et de Physique_ (1820), vol. 15,
        p. 67. The word "galvanometer" had been used much earlier by
        BISCHOF, "On Galvanism and its Medical Applications," _The
        Medical and Physical Journal_ (1802), vol 7, p. 529, for a form
        of goldleaf electroscope shown here in figure 2, but this use of
        the word does not seem to have been adopted by others.

  [12]  Op. cit. (footnote 6), paragraph 283, dated January 1833. A
        similar attitude was expressed in the same year by CHRISTIE,
        _Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London_
        (1833), vol. 123, p. 96: "I adopt the word current as a
        convenient mode of expression, ... but I would not be considered
        as adopting any theoretical views on the subject...."

  [13]  Some prominent examples of this brevity of treatment are in E.
        HOPPE, _Geschichte der Elektrizitaet_ (Leipzig, 1884); O. MAHR,
        _Geschichtliche Einzeldarstellungen aus der Elektrotechnik_
        (Berlin, 1941); R. S. WHIPPLE, "The Evolution of the
        Galvonometer," _Journal of Scientific Instruments_ (1934), vol.
        7, pp. 37-43; WILLIAM STURGEON, _Scientific Researches_ (Bury,
        1850); A. W. HUMPHREYS, "The Development of the Conception and
        Measurement of Electric Current," _Annals of Science_ (1937),
        vol. 2, pp. 164-178.

  [14]  M. SPETER, "Klaerung der Multiplikator-Prioritaetsfrage
        Schweigger-Poggendorf," _Zeitschrift fuer Instrumentenkunde_
        (1937) vol. 57, pp. 29-32.

  [15]  T. SEEBECK, "Ueber den Magnetismus der Galvanischen Kette,"
        _Abhandlungen der Koenigliche Akademie der Wissenschaften zu
        Berlin_ (1820-1821), pp. 289-346. The phrase "Schweigger's
        multiplier" is used on page 319. The many experiments described
        in this paper added little or nothing to contemporary
        appreciation of the multiplier as an instrument.

  [16]  J. S. C. SCHWEIGGER, _Journal fuer Chemie und Physik_ (1821), vol.
        31, pp. 1-18, 35-42. Pages 1-6 are the paper presented in Halle
        on September 16, 1820; pages 7-18 are the paper presented in
        Halle on November 4, 1820, and pages 35-42 are "a few additional
        words." The preface to the whole volume is dated January 1,
        1821. A somewhat earlier public announcement referring to
        Schweigger's discovery appeared in the _Allgemeine
        Literatur-Zeitung_ (November 1820), no. 296, cols. 622-624, but
        this was lacking in detail and seems not to have been noticed by
        any scientists.

  [17]  P. ERMAN, _Umrisse zu den physischen Verhaeltnissen des von Herrn
        Prof. Oersted entdeckten elektro-chemischen Magnetismus_
        (Berlin, 1821). Hoppe (footnote 13) states that Erman's book was
        published in May; however, it is referred to in a letter dated
        April 3, 1821, by RASCHIG, _Annalen der Physik_ (1821), vol. 67,
        pp. 427-436.

  [18]  Op. cit. (footnote 16), vol. 32, pp. 38-50.

  [19]  _Annalen der Physik_ (1821), vol. 67, pp. 382-426, and footnote
        on pages 429-430 of same volume. The footnote accompanies the
        article by Raschig mentioned in footnote 17.

  [20]  H. C. OERSTED, "Sur le Multiplier electro-magnetique de M.
        Schweigger, et sur quelques applications qu'on en a faites,"
        _Annales de Chimie et de Physique_ (1823), vol. 22, pp. 358-365.

  [21]  "Versuche mit dem electrisch-magnetischen Multiplicator,"
        _Annalen der Physik_ (1821), vol. 67, pp. 427-436.

  [22]  _Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical Society_ (1821),
        vol. 1, pp. 269-278.

  [23]  Op. cit. (footnote 8).

  [24]  The German word _Kette_ has been translated as "circuit"
        throughout. Although the equivalence of these words is clear,
        for example, in Ohm's work of 1826, the context in which _Kette_
        is sometimes used in 1820 and 1821 indicates that the concept of
        a "circuit," in the sense of the wiring external to the source
        of electricity, has not been established. The wiring is regarded
        more as something incidental, used to "close" the cell, the cell
        being considered essentially the whole of the apparatus. This
        view underlies the many attempts to correlate the Oersted
        phenomena with cell materials and design, and with the use of
        such terms as "chemical magnetism" by Erman and others.

  [25]  The reference here is to the Oersted-type experiments described
        in two papers by authors other than Schweigger on pages 19 to 34
        of the volume.

  [26]  Op. cit. (footnote 19), pp. 422-426.

  [27]  One "line" seems to have been about 1/12 inch.

  [28]  J. G. POGGENDORF, "Physisch-chemische Untersuchungen zur naeheren
        Kenntniss des Magnetismus der voltaischen Saeule," _Isis von
        Oken_ (1821), vol. 8, pp. 687-710. Most of Poggendorf's
        numerical data is also in C. H. PFAFF, _Der Elektromagnetismus_
        (Hamburg, 1824), along with some of Pfaff's own work.

  [29]  Reported in _Annales de Chimie et de Physique_ (1820), vol. 15,
        pp. 222-223.

  [30]  "On the Development of Electro-Magnetism by Heat," _Transactions
        of the Cambridge Philosophical Society_ (1823), vol. 2, pp.
        47-76.

  [31]  "Account of the New Galvano-Magnetic Condenser invented by M.
        Poggendorf of Berlin," _Edinburgh Philosophical Journal_ (July
        1821), vol. 5, pp. 112-113.