There was no sharp line between craftsman and shopkeeper or
between shopkeeper and wholesale merchant. In London, an enterprising
citizen could pass freely from one occupation to another. Borrowing
money for a new enterprise was common. Industrial suburbs grew up
around London and some towns became known as specialists in certain
industries. The building crafts in the towns often joined together into
one company, e.g. wrights, carpenters, slaters, and sawyers, or
joiners, turners, carvers, bricklayers, tilers, wallers, plasterers,
and paviors. These companies included small contractors, independent
masters, and journeymen. The master craftsman often was a tradesman as
well, who supplied timber, bricks, or lime for the building being
constructed. The company of painters was chartered with a provision
prohibiting painting by persons not apprenticed for seven years.

        The prosperous merchants began to form a capitalistic class as
capitalism grew. Competition for renting farm land, previously unknown,
caused these rents to rise. The price of wheat rose to an average of
14s. per quarter, thereby encouraging tillage once more. There was
steady inflation.

        With enclosure of agricultural land there could be more
innovation and more efficiency, e.g. the time for sowing could be
chosen. It was easier to prevent over-grazing and half-starved animals
as a result. The complications of the open system with its endless
quarrels and lawsuits were avoided. Now noblemen talked about manure
and drainage, rotation of crops, clover, and turnips instead of
hunting, horses, and dogs. The breed of horses and cattle was improved.
There were specializations such as the hunting horse and the coach
horse. By royal proclamation of 1562, there were requirements for the
keeping of certain horses. For instance, everyone with lands of at
least 1,000 pounds had to keep six horses or geldings able for
demi-lances [rider bearing a light lance] and ten horses or geldings
for light horsemen [rode to battle, but fought on foot]. One with under
100 pounds but over 100 marks yearly had to keep one gelding for a
light horseman. Dogs had been bred into various types of hounds for
hunting, water and land spaniels for falconry, and other dogs as house
dogs or toy dogs. There were no longer any wild boar or wild cattle.
The turkey joined the cocks, hens, geese, ducks, pigeons, and peacocks
in the farmyard. Manure and dressings were used to fertilize the soil.
Hay became a major crop because it could be grown on grazing lands and
required little care.

        There are new and bigger industries such as glassware, iron,
brasswares, alum and coppers, gunpowder, paper, coal, and sugar. The
coal trade was given a monopoly. Coal was used for fuel as well as
wood, which was becoming scarce. Iron smelters increasingly used coal
instead of charcoal, which was limited. Iron was used for firebacks,
pots, and boilers. Good quality steel was first produced in 1565 with
the help of German craftsmen, and a slitting mill was opened in 1588.
Small metal goods, especially cutlery, were made, as well as nails,
bolts, hinges, locks, ploughing and harrowing equipment, rakes, pitch
forks, shovels, spades, and sickles. Lead was used for windows and
roofs. Copper and brass were used to make pots and pans. Pewter was
used for plates, drinking vessels, and candlesticks. Competition was
the mainspring of trade and therefore of town life.

        The mode of travel of the gentry was riding horses, but most
people traveled by walking. People carried passes for travel that
certified they were of good conduct and not a vagrant or sturdy rogue.
Bands of roving vagabonds terrorized the countryside. After a land
survey completed in 1579 there arose travel books with maps,
itineraries, and mileage between towns in England and Wales. Also, the
Queen sent her official mail by four royal postal routes along high
roads from London to various corners of the nation. Horses are posted
along the way for the mail-deliverer's use. However, private mail still
goes by packman or common carrier. The nation's inland trade developed
a lot. There were many more wayfaring traders operating from town inns.
In 1564, the first canal was built with locks at Exeter. More locks and
canals facilitated river travel. At London Bridge, waterwheels and
pumps were installed.

        New sea navigation techniques improved voyages. Seamen learned
to fix their positions, using an astrolabe or quadrant to take the
altitude of the sun and stars and to reckon by the north star. They
used a nocturnal, which was read by touch, to help keep time at night
by taking the altitude of the stars. They calculated tides. To measure
distances, they invented the traverse board, which was bored with holes
upon lines, showing the points of the compass; by means of pegs, the
steersman kept an account of the course steered. A log tied to a rope
with knots at equal intervals was used to measure speed. There were
compasses with a bearing dial on a circular plate with degrees up to
360 noted thereon. Seamen had access to compilations of Arab
mathematicians and astronomers and to navigational manuals and
technical works on the science of navigation and the instruments
necessary for precision sailing. For merchants there were maps, books
about maps, cosmographical surveys, and books on the newly discovered
lands. In 1569 John Mercator produced a map taking into account the
converging of the meridians towards the pole. On this chart, a straight
line course would correspond to a mariner's actual course through the
water on the earth's sphere, instead of having the inaccuracies of a
straight line on a map which suggested that the world was flat. It was
in use by 1600.

        In 1600 William Gilbert, son of a gentleman, and physician to
Queen Elizabeth, wrote a book on the magnetic properties of the earth.
He cultivated the method of experiment and of inductive reasoning from
observation and insisted on the need for a search for knowledge not in
books but in things themselves. He showed that the earth was a great
magnet with a north pole and a south pole, by comparing it to
lodestones made into spheres in which a north and south pole could be
found by intersecting lines of magnetism indicated by a needle on the
stone. The vertical dip of the needle was explained by the magnetic
attraction of the north pole. He showed how a lodestone's declination
could be used to determine latitude at sea. He showed how the charge of
a body could be retained for a period of time by covering the body with
some non-conducting substance, such as silk. He distinguished magnetism
from electricity, giving the latter its name. He discovered that
atmospheric conditions affected the production of electricity, dryness
decreasing it, and moisture increasing it. He expounded the idea of
Copernicus that the earth revolves around the sun in a solar system.
However, the prevailing belief was still that the earth was at the
center of the universe.

        Christmas was an especially festive time of good fellowship.
People greeted each other with "Good cheer", "God be with you", or
"Against the new year". Carols were often sung and musicians played
many tunes. There was dancing and gambling. There were big dinners with
many kinds of meat and drink. A hearty fire heated all the house. Many
alms were given to beggars.

        Parliament enacted laws and voted taxes. The Queen, House of
Lords, and House of Commons cooperated together. There was relatively
little dissension or debating. Bills in the House of Lords were read,
voted on, discussed, and passed with the lords, peers, bishops, and
justices sitting in their places according to their degree. The
justices sat on the wool sacks. A bar separated this area from the rest
of the room, where the members of the commons stood. There were many
bills concerning personal, local, or sectional interests, but priority
consideration was given to public measures. The House of Lords still
had 55 members. The Queen appointed and paid the Speaker, Clerk, and
Sergeant at Arms of the Commons. The knights in the Commons were almost
invariably from the county's leading families and chosen by consensus
of knights with free land of at least 40s. in the county court. In the
towns, the electors might be the town corporation, holders of certain
properties, all the freemen, all the rate-payers, or all the male
inhabitants. Disputed elections were not usually concerned with
political issues, but were rivalries for power. The Commons gradually
won for its members freedom from arrest without its permission and the
right of punishing and expelling members for crimes committed. Tax on
land remained at 10% of its estimated yearly income. The Queen deferred
to the church convocation to define Christian faith and religion, thus
separating church and state functions.

        The Treasury sought to keep a balanced budget by selling royal
land and keeping Crown expenditures down. The Crown carried a slight
debt incurred before the Queen's accession.

        Violence was still a part of the texture of everyday life.
Private armories and armed gangs were not uncommon. Agricultural
laborers kept sword and bow in a corner of their fields. Non-political
brutal crime and homicides were commonplace. There were frequent local
riots and disturbances, in the country and in the towns. Occasionally
there were large-scale rebellions. But the rebellion of the Earl of
Essex in 1601 had no aftermath in violence. In 1590, the Queen issued a
proclamation enforcing curfew for London apprentices, who had been
misruly. The Queen issued proclamations to certain counties to place
vagrant soldiers or vagrants under martial law because of numerous
robberies. She ordered the deportation of vagrant Irishmen in 1594.

        Theft and robbery were so usual that there were names for
various techniques used. A Ruffler went with a weapon to seek service,
saying that he was a servitor in the wars, but his chief "trade" was to
rob poor wayfaring men and market women. A Prigman went with a stick in
his hand like an idle person, but stole clothes off hedges. A Whipjack
begged like a mariner, but with a counterfeit license (called a
"gibe"); he mostly robbed booths in fairs or pilfered ware from stalls,
which was called "heaving of the booth". A Frater had a counterfeit
license to beg for some hospital, but preyed upon poor women coming and
going to market. A Quire Bird was a person recently let out of prison,
and was commonly a horse stealer. An Upright Man carried a truncheon of
a staff and called others to account to him and give him a share or
"snap" of all that they had gained in one month, and he often beat
them. He took the chief place at any market walk and other assemblies.
Workers at inns often teamed up with robbers, telling them of wares or
money travelers were carrying so the robber could profitably rob them
after they left the inn.

        Francis Drake sailed around the world from 1577 to 1580. Walter
Ralegh made an expedition to North America in 1584 with the Queen's
authority to "discover barbarous countries, not actually possessed of
any Christian prince and inhabited by Christian people, to occupy and
enjoy". He found and named the land of Virginia in honor of the Queen,
who was a virgin, and started a colony on Roanoke Island there. Drake
and Ralegh plundered Spanish ships for cargo such as American gold and
silver, much of which was used to pay for the war with Spain and much
going to investors. Seamen on navy and pirate ships raided captured
vessels to seize personal possessions of the Spanish on board. The
experience fighting Spanish ships led to improvements in ship design;
building ships was no longer merely by copying another ship or a small
model. When the seas were unsafe because of the war with Spain, the
export of English wool was disturbed and later replaced by trading from
world ports. Many London merchants grew rich from using their ships for
pirating.

        In 1588, a Spanish Armada came to invade England, return it to
Catholicism, and stop the pirating of Spanish ships. In that battle off
England's shores, Drake and other experienced sea fighters led two
hundred English ships, of which about 20 were built to sink other ships
rather than to board and capture them. These new English ships were
longer and narrower and did away with the towering superstructures at
bow and stern. This made them more maneuverable and easier to sail.
Also, the English guns were lighter, more numerous, and outranged the
Spanish guns. So the smaller English ships were able to get close
enough to fire broadside after broadside against the big Spanish
troop-transport galleons, without being fired upon. The English sent
fire ships into the Spanish fleet when it was anchored, causing it's
ships to disperse in a panic. Then the direction of the wind forced the
Spanish galleons northward, where most of them were destroyed by
storms. The English seamen had been arbitrarily pressed into this
service.

        A royal proclamation of 1601 offered a reward of 100 pounds for
information on libels against the Queen. There had been mounting
demonstrations against her monopolies, which mostly affected household
items. There had been abuses of monopolies, such as the steel monopoly
had been sold for 12 pounds 10s., but steel was then sold at 5d. per
pound instead of the former 2 1/2 d. per pound. Further the steel was
mixed and of a lesser quality. This so damaged the knife and sword
industry that about 2000 workers lost their jobs from it and became
beggars. Monopoly was a severe burden to the middle and poorer classes.
Also, the power of patent holders to arrest and imprison persons
charged with infringing upon their rights was extended to any disliked
person.

        When the House of Commons protested against monopolies in 1601,
Elizabeth reduced them. She addressed her Council and the Commons
saying that "Mr. Speaker, you give me thanks, but I doubt me that I
have more cause to thank you all than you me; and I charge you to thank
them of the Lower House from me. For had I not received a knowledge
from you, I might have fallen into the lapse of an error only for lack
of true information. Since I was queen yet did I never put my pen to
any grant but that upon pretext and semblance made unto me, it was both
good and beneficial to the subject in general, though a private profit
to some of my ancient servants who had deserved well. But the contrary
being found by experience, I am exceedingly beholding to such subjects
as would move the same at the first. And I am not so simple to suppose
but that there be some of the Lower House whom these grievances never
touched; and for them I think they speak out of zeal to their countries
and not out of spleen or malevolent affection, as being parties
grieved. And I take it exceedingly gratefully from them, because it
gives us to know that no respects or interests had moved them other
than the minds they bear to suffer no diminution of our honor and our
subjects' love unto us, the zeal of which affection tending to ease my
people and knit their hearts unto me, I embrace with a princely care.
For above all earthly treasures I esteem my people's love, more than
which I desire not to merit. That my grants should be grievous unto my
people and oppressions to be privileged under color of our patents, our
kingly dignity shall not suffer it. Yea, when I heard it I could give
no rest unto my thoughts until I had reformed it. Shall they (think
you) escape unpunished that have thus oppressed you, and I have been
respectless of their duty and regardless of our honor? No, no, Mr.
Speaker, I assure you, were it not more for conscience' sake than for
any glory or increase of love that I desire, these errors, troubles,
vexations, and oppressions done by these varlets and low persons (not
worthy the name of subjects) should not escape without condign
punishment. But I perceive they dealt with me like physicians who,
ministering a drug, make it more acceptable by giving it a good
aromatical savor; or when they give pills, do gild them all over. I
have ever used to set the Last Judgment day before my eyes and so to
rule as I shall be judged, to answer before a higher judge. To whose
judgment seat I do appeal that never thought was cherished in my heart
that tended not unto my people's good. And now if my kingly bounties
have been abused and my grants turned to the hurts of my people,
contrary to my will and meaning, or if any in authority under me have
neglected or perverted what I have committed to them, I hope Good will
not lay their culps [sins] and offenses to my charge. Who, though there
were danger in repealing our grants, yet what danger would I not rather
incur for your good than I would suffer them still to continue? I know
the title of a king is a glorious title, but assure yourself that the
shining glory of princely authority hath not so dazzled the eyes of our
understanding but that we well know and remember that we also are to
yield an account of our actions before the great Judge. To be a king
and wear a crown is a thing more glorious to them that see it than it
is pleasant to them that bear it. For myself, I was never so much
enticed with the glorious name of a king or royal authority of a queen
as delighted that God hath made me His instrument to maintain His truth
and glory, and to defend this kingdom from peril, dishonor, tyranny,
and oppression. There will never queen sit in my seat with more zeal to
my country, care to my subjects, and that will sooner with willingness
venture her life for your good and safety, than myself. For it is not
my desire to live or reign longer than my life and reign shall be for
your good. And though you have had and may have many princes more
mighty and wise sitting in this seat, yet you never had or shall have
any that will be more careful and loving."

        About 1584, Richard Hakluyt, a Bristol clergyman, wrote "A
Particular Discourse concerning Western Discoveries". This was to
become the classic statement of the case for English colonization. It
held out hope that the English would find needed timber for masts,
pitch, tar, and ashes for soap.

        In Rome in 1600, Giordano Bruno, an Italian monk and priest,
was burned alive at the stake by a court of the inquisition for not
recanting, although tortured, his heretical and blasphemous philosophy.
He had opined that Christianity was irrational and had no scientific
basis. He declared that Christ was only a skillful magician, that the
Bible could not be taken literally, that God and nature were not
separate as taught by Genesis, that the Catholic Church encouraged
ignorance from the instinct of self-preservation, and that the earth
and planets revolved around the sun, as did other planets around the
"fixed" stars and other suns.

        The Jesuits, a new Catholic order brimming with zeal, sent
missionaries to England to secretly convert people to Catholicism. The
practice of Catholicism had gone underground in England, and some
Catholic householders maintained Catholic priests in hidden places in
their homes.

Although estate tails (estates descendible only to the heirs of the
body of the original feofee) by law could not be sold or given away,
this was circumvented by the fraudulent use of a "straw man". In
collaboration with the possessor of the property, this straw man sued
the possessor asserting that the property had been wrongfully taken
from the straw man. The possessor pleaded that the crier of the court
who had warranted the title should be called to defend the action. He
failed to appear until after judgment had been given to the straw man.
Then the straw man conveyed it to the possessor or his nominee in fee
simple.


                      The Law

        The following statute of artificers regulated labor for the
next two centuries: No master or mistress may employ a servant for a
term less than one year in the crafts of clothiers, woolen cloth
weavers, tuckers, fullers, clothworkers, shearmen, dyers, hosiers,
tailors, shoemakers, glovemakers, tanners, pewterers, bakers, brewers,
cutlers, smith, farriers, curriers, saddlers, spurriers, turners,
cappers, hatmakers, feltmakers, bow-makers, arrow-makers,
arrowhead-makers, butchers, cooks, or millers. Also, every craftsman
unmarried or under age 30 who is not working must accept employment by
any person needing the craft work. Also, any common person between 12
and 60 who is not working must accept employment in agriculture. And,
unmarried women between 12 and 40 may be required by town officials to
work by the year, the week, or day for wages they determine.

All artificers and laborers hired by the day or week shall work from 5
am to 7 PM. All artificers must labor at agriculture at haytime and
harvest to avoid the loss of grain or hay. Every householder who raises
crops may receive as an apprentice a child between 10 and 18 to serve
in agriculture until he is age 21. A householder in a town may receive
a child as an apprentice for 7 years, but merchants may only take as
apprentices children of parents with 40s. freehold.

No one may be a craftsman until he has served seven years as an
apprentice. These artificers may have children as apprentices: smith,
wheelmaker, ploughmaker, millmaker, miller, carpenter, rough mason,
plasterer, a timber sawer, an ore burner, a lime burner, brickmaker,
bricklayer, tilemaker, tiler, layer of slate roofs, layer of wood
shingle roofs, layer of straw roofs, cooper, earthen potter, linen
weaver, housewife who weaves wool for sale or for household use.

Purposes of the statute of artificiers were to advance agriculture,
diminish idleness, and inhibit migration to the towns. It excluded
three fourths of the rural population.)

        Troops of vagabonds with weapons in the highways who pretend to
be soldiers or mariners have committed robberies and murders. So all
vagabonds shall settle down in some service or labor or trade.

        A vagabond or mighty strong beggar [able to work] shall be
whipped.

        Incorrigible and dangerous rogues shall be branded with an "R"
mark on the left shoulder and be put to labor, because banishment did
not work as they came back undetected. If one is caught again begging,
he shall be deemed a felon.

        If a person marries a second time while the first spouse is
still living, it shall be a felony and thus punishable by death.

        No attainder shall result in the forfeiture of dower by the
offender's wife nor disinheritance of his heirs.

        No one shall forge a deed of land, charter, sealed writing,
court roll or will.

        No one shall libel or slander so as to cause a rebellion.

        Embezzlement or theft by a servant of his master's goods of
40s. or more is a felony.

        Cut-purses and pick-purses shall not have benefit of clergy.

        A person robbing a house of 5s. by day when no one is there
shall not have benefit of clergy, because too many poor persons who
cannot hire a servant to look after their house when they go to work
have been robbed.

        Benefit of clergy may not be had for stabbing a person who has
no weapon drawn, if he dies within six months.

        Fraudulent and secret conveyances made to retain the use of
one's land when one sells the land to a bona fide purchaser for value
in fee simple, fee tail, for life, for lives, or for years are void.

        Crown officials such as treasurers, receivers, accountants, and
revenue collectors shall not embezzle Crown funds and shall be
personally liable for arrears.

        Persons forcibly taking others across county lines to hold them
for ransom and those taking or giving blackmail money and those who
burn barns or stacks of grain shall be declared felons and shall suffer
death, without any benefit of clergy or sanctuary.

        Any person killing any pheasant, partridge, dove, pigeon, duck
or the like with any gun, crossbow, stonebow, or longbow, or with dogs
and nets or snares, or taking the eggs of such from their nests, or
tracing or taking hares in the snow shall be imprisoned for three
months unless he pays 20s. per head or, after one month's imprisonment,
have two sureties bound for 400s. This is because the past penalty of
payment hasn't deterred offenders, who frequently cannot pay.

        Persons affected by the plague may not leave their houses or be
deemed felons and suffer death. This is to avoid further infection. The
towns may tax their inhabitants for the relief of infected persons.

        Devising or speaking seditious rumors are penalized by the
pillory and loss of both ears for the first offense; and 200 pounds and
six months imprisonment for the second offense. Slandering the Queen is
penalized by the pillory and loss of one ear, or by 100 marks and three
months imprisonment, at the choice of the offender. The second offense
is a felony. Printing, writing, or publishing seditious books is a
felony without benefit of clergy. Wishing the Queen dead, prophesying
when she would die, or who would succeed her to the Crown is a felony
without benefit of clergy. Attainders for these felonies shall not work
corruption of the blood [heirs may inherit the property of the felon].

        A debtor may not engage in a fraudulent collusion to sell his
land and goods in order to avoid his creditors. This was designed to
remedy the following problem:

        A native or denizen merchant in wholesale or retail goods who
leaves the nation to defraud his creditors shall be declared a
bankrupt. The Chancellor may conduct an investigation to ascertain his
land, house, and goods, no matter who may hold them. They shall be
appraised and sold to satisfy his debts.

        Lands, tenements, goods and chattels of accountants teller, or
receiver who are in debt may be obtained by court order to satisfy the
debt by garnishing the heir of the debtor after the heir has reached 21
and for the 8 years next ensuing.

        Loan contracts for money lent may not be for more than 200s.
for each 2000s. yearly (i.e. 10% interest). All loans of money or
forbearing of money in sales of goods not meeting this requirement
shall be punishable by forfeit of the interest only.

        Pawn brokers accepting stolen goods shall forfeit twice their
value to the owner from whom stolen.

        When the hue and cry is raised for a robbery in a hundred, and
other hundreds have been negligent, faulty, or defective in pursuit of
the robber, then they must pay half the damages to the person robbed,
while the hundred in which the robbery occurred pays the other half.
Robbers shall be pursued by horse and by foot.

        The mother and reputed father of any bastard who has been left
to be kept at the parish where born must pay weekly for the upkeep and
relief of such child, so that the true aged and disabled of the parish
get their relief and to punish the lewd life.

        Any innkeeper, victualer, or alehouse keeper who allows
drinking by persons other than those invited by a traveler who
accompanies him during his necessary abode there or other than laborers
and handicraftsmen in towns upon the usual working days for one hour at
dinner time to take their diet in an alehouse or other than laborers
and workmen following their work to any given town to sojourn, lodge,
or victual in any inn, alehouse or victualing house shall forfeit 10s.
for each offense. This is because the use of inns, alehouses, and
victualing houses was intended for relief and lodgings of traveling
people and people not able to provide their own victuals, but not for
entertainment and harboring of lewd and idle people who become drunk.

        No butcher may cut any hide or any ox, bull, steer, or cow so
that it is impaired or may kill any calf under five weeks old. No
butcher may be a tanner. No one may be a tanner unless that person has
apprenticed as such for seven years, or is the son or wife of a tanner
who has tanned for four years, or is a son or daughter of a tanner who
inherits his tanhouse. Tanners may not be shoemakers, curriers,
butchers, or leatherworkers. Only tanners may buy raw hides. Only
leatherworkers may buy leather. Only sufficiently strong and
substantial leather may be used for sole-leather. Curriers may not be
tanners. Curriers may not refuse to curry leather. London searchers
shall inspect leather, seal and mark that which is sufficient, and
seize any that is insufficiently tanned, curried, wrought, or used.

        The incorporated company of ship masters may erect beacons and
marks on the seashores and hills above, because certain steeples and
other marks used for navigation have fallen down and ships therefore
have been lost in the sea.

        There shall be one sheriff per county, because now there are
enough able men to supply one per county.

        No one shall bribe an elector to vote for a certain person for
fellow, scholar, or officer of a college, school, or hall or hospital
so that the fittest persons will be elected, though lacking in money or
friends, and learning will therefore be advanced.

        No master at a university may lease any land unless 1/3 of it
is retained for raising crops to supply the colleges and halls for food
for their scholars.

        Fish, but no meat, may be eaten on Wednesdays so that there
will be more fishermen and mariners and repair of ports. (This was done
because fishing had declined since the dissolution of the monasteries,
where fissh was eaten eveery Friday. Eating fish instead of meat in
Lent in the springtime remained a tradition.)

        Every person over 6 years of age shall wear on Sundays a wool
knitted cap made by the cappers, except for maidens, ladies,
gentlewomen, noble persons, and every lord, knight, and gentlemen with
2,667s. of land, since the practice of not wearing caps has damaged the
capping industry. This employed cappers and poor people they had
employed and the decrepit and lame as carders, spinners, knitters,
parters, forsers, thickers, dressers, dyers, battelers, shearers,
pressers, edgers, liners, and bandmakers.

        No man under the degree of knight may wear a hat or cap of
velvet. Caps may not be made of felt, but only knit wool. Only hats may
be made of felt. This is to assist the craft of making wool caps.

        No one may make any hat unless he has served as apprentice for
at least seven years. This is to prevent false and deceitful hat-
making by unskillful persons.

        No one shall make false linen by stretching it and adding
little pieces of wood, which is so weak that it comes apart after five
washings.

        Timber shall not be felled to make logs for fires for the
making of iron.

        No one may take small fish to feed to dogs and pigs. Only nets
with mesh leaving three inches spaces may be used to catch fish.

        Cottage and dwelling houses for workmen or laborers in mineral
works, coal mines, or quarries of stone or slate for the making of
brick, tile, lime, or coals shall be built only within a mile from such
works. Dwelling houses beyond this must be supported by four acres of
land to be continually occupied and manured as long as the dwelling
house is inhabited or else forfeit 40s. per month to the Queen.
Cottages and dwelling houses for sailors or laborers working on ships
for the sea shall be built only within a mile of the sea. A cottage may
be built in a forest or park for a game keeper of the deer. A cottage
may be built for a herdman or shepherd for the keeping of cattle or
sheep of the town. A cottage may be built for a poor, lame, sick, aged,
or disabled person on waste or common land. More families than one may
not be placed in one cottage or dwelling house. (This is a zoning law.)

        Any person with land in fee-simple may establish a hospital,
abiding place, or house of correction to have continuance forever as a
corporation for the sustenance and relief of the maimed, poor, or
disabled people as to set the poor to work. The net income shall not
exceed 40,000s. yearly.

        No new iron mills or furnaces for making or working of any iron
or iron metal shall be established in the country around London and the
owners of carriages of coals, mines and iron which have impaired or
destroyed the highways shall also carry coal ashes, gravel, or stone to
repair these highways or else make a payment of 2s.6d. for each cart
load not carried.

        For repairing of highways, the supervisors may take the rubbish
or smallest stones of any quarry along the road in their precinct.

        Persons with 100s. in goods or 40s. in lands shall find two
able men in their parish community to repair the highways yearly.

        Landowners of Oxford shall be taxed for the repair of the
highway and bridge there.

        The price of barrels shall be set by mayors of the towns where
they are sold.

        Rugs shall weigh 44 pounds at least and be 35 yards at least in
length and at most 3/4 yard wide.

        No cattle may be put in any enclosed woods that have been
growing less than five years. At the end of five years growth, calves
may be put in. At the end of six years growth, cattle may be put in.

        Woods around London shall not be felled to be converted to
coals for iron-works because London needs the wood to make buildings
and for fireplaces.

        Every melter and maker of wax from honeycombs shall put his
mark on every piece of his wax to be sold. Wrought wax such as in
lights, staff-torches, red wax or sealing wax, book candles, or searing
candles shall bear its maker's mark. All barrels of honey shall bear
the mark of the honeymaker.

        Wool cloth, cotton cloth, flannel cloth, hose-yarn, hats, and
caps shall be dyed black only with dye from the woad plant and not with
any false black dye.

        No one shall take or kill any pheasants with nets or devices at
nighttime because such have become scarce.

        Pontage [toll for upkeep and repair of bridges] shall be taken
at certain bridges: carts 2d., horse and pack 1d., a flock of sheep 2d.

        No bishop may lease land for more than twenty-one years or
longer than the lives of three designated persons.

        No bishop may alienate any possession of their sees to the
crown. Such are void.

        Watermen transporting people on the Thames River shall have
served as apprentice to a waterman for five years or have been the son
of a waterman. This is to prevent the loss of lives and goods by
inexperienced watermen.

        Spices and potions, including pepper, cloves, mace, nutmeg,
cinnamon, ginger, almonds, and dates, which have usually been garbled
[cleaned or sorted by sifting] shall be garbled, cleaned, sorted, and
sealed by the Garbler before sale. This is to prevent mingled, corrupt,
and unclean spices and potions from being sold.

        Plasterers shall cease painting because it has intruded upon
the livelihoods of painters who have been apprenticed as such.

        Fishermen and their guides may continue to use the coastland
for their fishing activities despite the trespass to landowners.

        Since sails for ships in recent years have been made in the
realm instead of imported, none shall make such cloth unless he has
been apprenticed in such or brought up in the trade for seven years.
This is to stop the badness of such cloth.

        Tonnage and poundage on goods exported and imported shall be
taken to provide safeguard of the seas for such goods.

        All persons must go to the established church on Sundays and
holy days. The penalty was at first forfeiture 12d. along with church
punishment, and later, 20 pounds per month and being bound by two
sureties for 200 pounds for good behavior, and if the 20 pounds is not
paid, then forfeiture of all goods to be applied to the amount due and
two-thirds of one's land.

        These laws were directed against Catholicism, but were laxly
enforced as long as worship was not open and no one wore priestly
clothes:

1) The writing, preaching, or maintaining of any foreign spiritual
jurisdiction shall be punished by forfeiture of goods or, if the goods
are not worth 20 pounds, one year imprisonment, for the first offense;
forfeiture of goods and lands and the King's protection, for the second
offense; and the penalty for high treason for the third offense.

2) Any person leading others to the Romish [Catholic] religion is
guilty of high treason. The penalty for saying mass is 200 marks and
one year's imprisonment. The penalty for hearing mass is 100 marks and
one year's imprisonment. If one is suspected of being a Jesuit or
priest giving mass, one must answer questions on examination or be
imprisoned.

3) Papists [those who in conscience refused to take the oath of
supremacy of the Crown over the church] must stay in their place of
abode and not go five miles from it, unless licensed to do so for
business, or else forfeit one's goods and profits of land for life. If
a copyholder, land is forfeited to one's lord. But if the goods are not
worth 800s. or the land is not worth at least 267s., the realm must be
abjured. Otherwise, the papist is declared a felon without benefit of
clergy.

4) If a child is sent to a foreign land for Catholic education, he
cannot inherit lands or goods or money, unless he conforms to the
established church on his return. There is also a 100 pound penalty for
the persons who sent him.


                  Judicial Procedure

        The Star Chamber became the central criminal court after 1560,
and punished perjury, corruption, malfeasance throughout the legal
system such as jury corruption and judicial bribery, rioting, slander,
and libel. Its procedure was inquisitory rather than accusative. It
heard witnesses in camera [not in the presence of the suspected]. Trial
was by systematic interrogation of the suspected on oath, with torture
if necessary in treason cases. Silence could be taken for a confession
of guilt. There was no jury. Queen Elizabeth chose not to sit on this
court. Punishments were imprisonment, fines, the pillory, ear cropping
or tacking, whipping, stigmata on the face, but not death or any
dismemberment except for the ears. (The gentry was exempt from
whipping.)

        Because the publication of many books and pamphlets against the
government, especially the church, had led to discontents with the
established church and to the spreading of sects and schisms, the Star
Chamber in 1585 held that the printing trade was to be confined to
London, except for one press at Oxford and one at Cambridge. No book or
pamphlet could be printed unless the text was first seen, examined, and
allowed by the Archbishop of Canterbury or the Bishop of London. Book
publishers in violation were to be imprisoned for six months and banned
from printing; their equipment was to be destroyed. Wardens were
authorized to search wherever "they shall have reasonable cause of
suspicion", and to seize all such books and pamphlets printed. But
printers continued to print unlicensed material.

        The Ecclesiastical High Commission [later called the Court of
High Commission or High Court of Ecclesiastical Causes] took over
criminal cases formerly heard by the church courts. It also heard
matters of domestic morals. It was led by bishops and Privy Council
members who in 1559 were authorized by a statute of Parliament to keep
order within the church, discipline the clergy, and punish such lay
offenses as were included in the ecclesiastical jurisdiction. Obstinate
heresy is still a crime punished by death, but practically, the bishops
have little power of forcing heretics to stand trial. If anyone
maintains papal authority, he forfeits his goods; on a third
conviction, he is a traitor. The clergyman who adopts a prayer book
other that the prescribed one commits a crime. Excommunication has
imprisonment behind it. Elizabeth gave this court the power to fine and
imprison, which the former church courts had not had. At first, the
chief work was depriving papists of their benefices.

        Suits on titles to land were restricted to the common law
courts and no longer to be heard in the Star Chamber, Chancery Court,
or in the Court of Requests (equity for poor people).

        The Queen's Privy Council investigated sedition and treason,
security of the regime, major economic offenses, international
problems, civil commotion, officials abusing their positions, and
persons perverting the course of justice. It frequently issued orders
to Justices of the Peace, for instance to investigate riots and crimes,
to enforce the statutes against vagrancy and illegal games, to regulate
alehouses, to ensure that butchers, innkeepers, and victualers did not
sell meat on fish days, and to gather information needed from the
counties. The Justices of the Peace decided misdemeanors such as
abduction of heiresses, illegal entry, petty thievery, damage to crops,
fence-breaking, brawling, personal feuds, drunken pranks, swearing,
profanation of the Sabbath, alehouse nuisances, drunkenness, perjury,
and malfeasance by officials. They held petty and quarter sessions. The
Justices of the Peace had administrative duties in control of vagrancy,
upkeep of roads and bridges, and arbitration of lawsuits referred to
them by courts. They listed the poor in each parish community, assessed
rates for their maintenance, and appointed overseers to administer the
welfare system, deploying surplus funds to provide houses of correction
for vagrants. Raw materials such as wool, flax, hemp, and iron were
bought upon which the able-bodied unemployed could be set to work at
the parochial level. They determined wages in their districts, with no
statutory ceiling on them, for all laborers, weavers, spinsters,
workmen and workwomen working by the day, week, month, or year, or
taking any work at any person's hand. There were about 50 Justices of
the Peace per county. All were unpaid. They performed these duties for
the next 200 years.

        The Court of Queen's Bench and Exchequer indirectly expanded
their jurisdiction to include suits between citizens, formerly heard
only the Court of Common Pleas or Chancery. Chancery interrogated
defendants. Chancery often issued injunctions against suits in the
common law courts. Trial by combat was very rare.

        The Justices of Assize rode on circuit twice a year to enforce
the criminal law and reported their assessment of the work of the
Justices of the Peace back to the Privy Council. The duty to hear and
determine felonies was taken from Justices of the Peace by 1590. The
Justices of Assize did this work. Accused people could wait for years
in gaol before their case was heard. Felonies included breach of
prison, hunting by night with painted faces, taking horses to Scotland,
stealing of hawks' eggs, stealing cattle, highway robbery, robbing on
the sea, robbing houses, letting out of ponds, cutting of purses,
deer-stealing at night, conjuring and witchcraft, diminution of coin,
counterfeiting of coins, and impenitent roguery and idleness. The
penalty was death. Many people were hanged for the felony of theft over
12d. Some bold men accused of felony refused to plead so that they
could not be tried and found guilty. They died of heavy weights being
placed on their bodies. But then their property could go to their heirs.

        Trials of noblemen for treason shall be by their peers.

        Stewards of leet and baron courts may no longer receive, in
their own names, profits of the court over 12d. since they have vexed
subjects with grievous fines and amercements so that profits of justice
have grown much.

        Jurors shall be selected from those people who have at least
80s. annual income instead of 40s. because sheriffs have been taking
bribes by the most able and sufficient freeholders to be spared at home
and the poorer and simpler people, who are least able to discern the
causes in question, and most unable to bear the charges of appearance
and attendance in such cases have been the jurors. Also there had been
inflation.

        Defendants sued or informed against upon penal statutes may
appear by attorney so that they may avoid the inconvenience of
traveling a long distance to attend and put to bail.

        Not only sheriffs, but their employees who impanel juries or
execute process in the courts shall take an oath of office.

        A hundred shall answer for any robbery therein only if there
has been negligence or fault in pursuit of the robber after a hue and
cry is made because the past law has been too harsh and required
payment for offenses from people unable to pay who have done everything
reasonable to catch the robber.

        Pleadings had to be in writing and oral testimony was given by
sworn witnesses. Case decisions are in books compiled by various
reporters who sit in on court hearings rather than in year books.

        In the common law, trespass has given rise to the offshoot
branch of "ejectment", which becomes the common means of recovering
possession of land, no matter what kind of title the claimant asserts.
Trespass on the case has given rise to the offshoot branch of "trover"
[finding another's goods and converting them to one's own use]. The use
of the action of trover gradually supplants the action of detinue,
which involves compurgation.

        In the common law courts, the action of assumpsit for enforcing
certain promises is used more than the action of debt in those cases
where there is a debt based on an agreement. The essential nature of
"consideration" in contract is evolving from the procedural
requirements for the action of assumpsit. Consideration may consist in
mutual promises, a precedent debt, or a detriment incurred by one who
has simultaneously received a promise related to the detrimental
action. Consideration must be something, an act, or forbearance of an
act that is of value. For instance, forbearance to sue a worthless
claim is not consideration.

        The abstract concept of contract as an agreement between two
parties which is supported by consideration is developing as the number
of various agreements that are court enforceable expands. For instance
the word "consideration" is used in Hayward's Case in 1595 in the Court
of Wards on the construction of a deed. Sir Rowland Hayward was seised
in fee of the Doddington manor and other lands and tenements, whereof
part was in demesne, part in lease for years with rents reserved, and
part in copyhold, by indenture, "in consideration of a certain sum of
money" paid to him by Richard Warren and others, to whom he demised,
granted, bargained and sold the said manor, lands and tenements, and
the reversions and remainders of them, with all the rents reserved upon
any demise, to have and to hold to them and their assigns, presently
after the decease of Sir Rowland, for the term of 17 years. It was held
that the grantees could elect to take by bargain and sale or by demise,
each of which had different consequences.

In another case, A delivered 400s. to B to the use of C, a woman, to be
delivered to her on the day of her marriage. Before this day, A
countermanded it, and called home the money. It was held in the
Chancery Court that C could not recover because "there is no
consideration why she should have it".

In a case concerning a deed, A sold land to B for 400s., with
confidence, that it would be to the use of A. This bargain "hath a
consideration in itself ... and such a consideration is an indenture of
bargain and sale". It was held that the transaction was not examinable
except for fraud and that A was therefore estopped.

A court reporter at the King's Bench formulated two principles on
consideration of the case of Wilkes against Leuson as: "The heir is
estopped from falsifying the consideration acknowledged in the deed of
feoffment of his ancestor. Where a tenant in capite made a feoffment
without consideration, but falsely alleged one in the deed on an office
finding his dying seised, the master of the wards cannot remove the
feoffees on examining into the consideration, and retain the land until
&c. and though the heir tended, still if he do not prosecute his
livery, the Queen must admit the feoffees to their traverse, and to
have the farm, &c." The court reporter summarized this case as follows:
Wilkes, who was merchant of the staple, who died in February last past,
made a feoffment in the August before his death to one Leuson, a
knight, and his brother, and another, of the manor of Hodnel in the
county of Warwick; and the deed, (seen) for seven thousand pounds
[140,000s.] to him paid by the feoffees, of which sum he made
acquittance in the same deed (although in fact and in truth not a
half-penny was paid), gave, granted, and confirmed &c "habendum eir et
hoeredibus suis in perpetuum, ad proprium opus et usum ipsorum A. B. et
C. in perpetuum," and not "hoeredum suorum," together with a clause of
warranty to them, their heirs and assigns, in forma proedicta: and
notwithstanding this feoffment he occupied the land with sheep, and
took other profits during his life; and afterwards his death was found
on a diem clausit extremum by office, that he died seised of the said
manor in fee, and one I. Wilkes his brother of full age found his next
heir, and a tenure in capite found, and now within the three months the
said feoffees sued in the court of wards to be admitted to their
traverse, and also to have the manor in farm until &c. And although the
said I. Wilkes the brother had tendered a livery, yet he had not
hitherto prosecuted it, but for cause had discontinued. And whether now
the master of the wards at his discretion could remove the feoffees by
injunction out of possession upon examination of the said consideration
of the said feoffment which was false, and none such in truth, and
retain it in the hands of the Queen donec et quousque &c. was a great
question. And by the opinion of the learned counsel of that court he
cannot do it, but the Queen is bound in justice to give livery to him
who is found heir by the office, or if he will not proceed with that,
to grant to the tenderers the traverse, and to have the farm, &c. the
request above mentioned. And this by the statutes ... And note, that no
averment can be allowed to the heir, that the said consideration was
false against the deed and acknowledgment of his ancestor, for that
would be to admit an inconvenience. And note the limitation of the use
above, for divers doubted whether the feoffees shall have a fee-simple
in the sue, because the use is not expressed, except only "to
themselves (by their names) for ever;" but if those words had been
wanting, it would have been clear enough that the consideration of
seven thousand pounds had been sufficient, &c. for the law intends a
sufficient consideration by reason of the said sum; but when the use is
expressed otherwise by the party himself, it is otherwise. And also the
warranty in the deed was "to them, their heirs, and assigns, in form
aforesaid," which is a declaration of the intent of Wilkes, that the
feoffees shall not have the use in fee simple; and it may be that the
use, during their three lives, is worth seven thousand pounds, and more
&c. And suppose that the feoffment had been "to have to them and their
heirs to the proper use and behoof of them the feoffees for the term of
their lives for ever for seven thousand pounds," would they have any
other estate than for the term of their lives in the use? I believe
not; and so in the other case.

A last example of a case concerning consideration is that of Assaby and
Others against Lady Anne Manners and Others. The court reporter
characterized the principle of the case as: "A. in consideration of his
daughter's marriage covenants to stand seised to his own use for life,
and that at his death she and her husband shall have the land in [fee]
tail, and that all persons should stand seised to those uses, and also
for further assurance. After the marriage he bargains and sell with
fine and recovery to one with full notice of the covenants and use;
this is of no avail, but on the death of A. the daughter and her
husband may enter." The court reporter summarized this case as follows:
A. was seised of land in fee, and in consideration of a marriage to be
had between his daughter and heir apparent, and B. son and heir
apparent of C. he covenanted and agreed by indenture with C. that he
himself would have, hold, and retain the land to himself, and the
profits of during his life, and that after his decease the said son and
daughter should have the land to them and to the heirs of their two
bodies lawfully begotten, and that all persons then or afterwards
seised of the land should stand and be seised immediately after the
marriage solemnized to the use of the said A. for the term of his life,
and after his death to the use of the said son and daughter in tail as
above, and covenanted further to make an assurance of the land before a
certain day accordingly &c. and then the marriage took effect; and
afterwards A. bargained and sold the land for two hundred marks (of
which not a penny is paid) to a stranger, who had notice of the first
agreements, covenants, and use, and enfeoffed divers persons to this
last use, against whom a common recovery was had to his last use; and
also A. levied a fine to the recoverers before any execution had, and
notwithstanding all these things A. continued possession in taking the
profits during his life; and afterwards died; and the son and daughter
entered, and made a feoffment to their first use. And all this matter
was found in assize by Assaby and others against Lady Anne Manners and
others. And judgment was given that the entry and feoffment were good
and lawful, and the use changed by the first indenture and agreement.
Yet error was alleged. The judgment in the assize is affirmed.

        The famous Shelley's Case stands for the principle that where
in any instrument an estate for life is given to the ancestor, and
afterwards by the same instrument, the inheritance is limited whether
mediately, or immediately, to his heirs, or heirs of his body, as a
class to take in succession as heirs to him, the word "heirs" is a word
of limitation, and the ancestor takes the whole estate. For example,
where property goes to A for life and the remainder goes to A's heirs,
A's life estate and the remainder merge into a fee in A. A can sell or
devise this interest.

Edward Shelley was a tenant in fee tail general. He had two sons. The
older son predeceased his father, leaving a daughter and his wife
pregnant with a son. Edward had a common recovery (the premises being
in lease for years) to the use of himself for term of his life, after
his decease to the use of the male heirs of his body, and of the male
heirs of the body of such heirs, remainder over. After judgment and the
awarding of the writ of seisin, but before its execution, Edward died.
After his death, and before the birth of his older son's son, the writ
of seisin was executed. The younger son entered the land and leased it
to a third party. Afterwards, the son of the older son was born. He
entered the land and ejected the third party. It was held that the
younger son had taken quasi by descent until the birth of the older
son's son. The entry by the older son's son was lawful. The third party
was lawfully ejected. (Shelley's Case, King's Bench, 1581, English
Reports - Full Reprint, Vol. 76, Page 206.)

        About 1567, London authorities punished Nicholas Jennings alias
Blunt for using elaborate disguises to present himself as an epileptic
to beg for handouts from the public. He was pilloried, whipped, and
pulled behind a cart through the streets. He was kept at the Bridewell
and was set to work at a mill.



                      Chapter 14


                  The Times: 1601-1625

        Due in part to increasing population, the prices of foodstuffs
had risen sixfold from the later 1400s, during which it had been
stable. This inflation gradually impoverished those living on fixed
wages. Landlords could insist on even shorter leases and higher rents.
London quadrupled in population. Many lands that were in scattered
strips, pasture lands, waste lands, and lands gained from drainage and
disafforestation were enclosed for the introduction of convertible
agriculture (e.g. market-oriented specialization) and only sometimes
for sheep. The accompanying extinguishment of common rights was
devastating to small tenants and cottagers. Gentry and yeomen benefited
greatly. There was a gradual consolidation of the land into fewer hands
and demise of the small family farm. In towns, the mass of poor,
unskilled workers with irregular work grew. Prices finally flattened
out in the 1620s.

        Society became polarized with a wealthy few growing wealthier
and a mass of poor growing poorer. This social stratification became a
permanent fixture of English society. Poverty was no longer due to
death of a spouse or parent, sickness or injury, or a phase in the life
cycle such as youth or old age. Many full-time wage earners were in
constant danger of destitution. More subdivided land holdings in the
country made holdings of cottagers minuscule. But these were eligible
for parish relief under the poor laws. Beside them were substantial
numbers of rogues and vagabonds wandering the roads. These vagrants
were usually young unmarried men. There were no more licensed liveries
of lords.

        During the time 1580 to 1680, there were distinct social
classes in England which determined dress, convention in comportment
which determined face-to-face contacts between superiors and inferiors,
order of seating in church, place arrangement at tables, and rank order
in public processions. It was influenced by power, wealth, life-style,
educational level, and birth. The various classes lived in separate
worlds; their paths did not cross each other. People moved only within
their own class. Each class had a separate existence as well as a
different life style from the other classes. So each class developed a
wariness of other classes. However, there was much social mobility
between adjacent classes.

        At the top were the gentry, about 2% of the population. Theirs
was a landed wealth with large estate mansions. They employed many
servants and could live a life of leisure. Their lady wives often
managed the household with many servants and freely visited friends and
went out shopping, riding, or walking. They conversed with neighbors
and made merry with them at childbirths, christenings, churchings, and
funerals. Gentlemen usually had positions of responsibility such as
lords of manors and leaders in their parishes. These families often
sent the oldest son to university to become a Justice of the Peace and
then a member of Parliament. They also served as county officers such
as High Constable of their hundred and grand jury member. Their social,
economic, and family ties were at least countywide. They composed about
700 gentle families, including the peers, who had even more landed
wealth, which was geographically dispersed. After the peers were:
baronets (created in 1611), knights, esquires, and then ordinary
gentlemen. These titles were acquired by being the son of such or by
purchase. Most gentry had a house in London, where they spent most of
their time, as well as country mansions. About 4/5 of the land was in
the hands of 7,000 of the nobility and landed gentry due in part to
estate tails constructed by attorneys to favor hereditary interests.
The gentry had also profited by commerce and possessions in the
colonies. The country life of a country squire or gentleman dealt with
all the daily affairs of a farm. He had men plough, sow, and reap. He
takes part in the haying and getting cut grass under cover when a rain
came. His sow farrows; his horse is gelded; a first lamb is born. He
drags his pond and takes out great carps. His horses stray and he finds
them in the pound. Boys are bound to him for service. He hires
servants, and some work out their time and some run away. Knaves steal
his sheep. His hog is stabbed. He and a neighbor argue about the
setting up of a cottage. He borrows money for a daughter's dowry. He
holds a leet court. He attends church on Sunday and reads the lesson
when called upon. He visits the local tavern to hear from his
neighbors. Country folk brawl. Wenches get pregnant. Men commit
suicide, usually by hanging. Many gentlemen spent their fortunes and
died poor. New gentlemen from the lower classes took their places.

        The second class included the wealthier merchants and
professional men of the towns. These men were prominent in town
government. They usually had close family ties with the gentry,
especially as sons. When wealthy enough, they often bought a country
estate. The professional men included military officers, civil service
officials, attorneys, some physicians, and a few clergymen. The
instabilities of trade, high mortality rates in the towns, and high
turnover rate among the leading urban families prevented any separate
urban interest group arising that would be opposed to the landed
gentry. Also included in this second group were the most prosperous
yeomanry of the countryside.

        The third class was the yeomanry at large, which included many
more than the initial group who possessed land in freehold of at least
40s., partly due to inflation. Freehold was the superior form of
holding land because one was free to sell, exchange, or devise the land
and had a political right to vote in Parliamentary elections. Other
yeomen were those who possessed enough land, as copyholder or
leaseholder, to be protected from fluctuations in the amount of the
annual harvest, that is, at least 50 acres. A copyholder rented land
from a lord for a period of years or lives, usually three lives
including that of the widow, and paid a substantial amount whenever the
copyhold came up for renewal. The copyholder and leaseholder were
distinguished from the mere tenant-at-will, whose only right was to
gather his growing crop when his landlord decided to terminate his
tenancy. The average yeoman had a one and a half story house, with a
milkhouse, a malthouse, and other small buildings attached to the
dwelling. The house would contain a main living room, a parlor, where
there would be one or more beds, and several other rooms with beds. No
longer was there a central great hall. Cooking was done in a kitchen or
over the open fire in the fireplace of the main room. Furniture
included large oak tables, stools, long bencches with or without backs,
chests, cupboards, and a few hard-backed simple chairs. Dishware was
wood or pewter. The yeomen often became sureties for recognizances,
witnesses to wills, parish managers, churchwardens, vestrymen, the
chief civil officers of parishes and towns, overseers of the poor,
surveyors of bridges and highways, jurymen and constables for the
Justices of the Peace, and sheriffs' bailiffs. The families and
servants of these yeomen ate meat, fish, wheaten bread, beer, cheese,
milk, butter, and fruit. Their wives were responsible for the dairy,
poultry, orchard, garden, and perhaps pigs. They smoked and cured hams
and bacon, salted fish, dried herbs for the kitchen or lavender and
pot-pourri for sweetening the linen, and arranged apples and roots in
lofts or long garrets under the roof to last the winter. They preserved
fruits candied or in syrup. They preserved wines; made perfumes, washes
for preserving the hair and complexion, rosemary to cleanse the hair,
and elder-flower water for sunburn; distilled beverages; ordered wool
hemp, and flax to spin for cloth (the weaving was usually done in the
village); fashioned and sewed clothes and house linens; embroidered;
dyed; malted oats; brewed; baked; and extracted oils. Many prepared
herb medicines and treated injuries, such as dressing wounds, binding
arteries, and setting broken bones. Wives also ploughed and sowed,
weeded the crops, and sheared sheep. They sometimes cared for the poor
and sold produce at the market. Some yeomen were also tanners,
painters, carpenters, or blacksmiths; and as such they were frequently
brought before the Justices of the Peace for exercising a craft without
having served an apprenticeship. The third class also included the
freemen of the towns, who could engage independently in trade and had
political rights. These freemen were about one-third of the male
population of the town.

        The fourth class included the ordinary farmer leasing by
copyhold, for usually 21 years, five to fifty acres. From this class
were drawn sidesmen [assistants to churchwardens] and constables. They
had neither voice nor authority in government. Their daily diet was
bacon, beer, bread, and cheese. Also in this class were the independent
urban craftsmen who were not town freemen. Their only voice in
government was at the parish level.

        The fifth and lowest class included the laborers and cottagers,
who were usually tenants at will. They were dependent on day labor.
They started work at dawn, had breakfast for half an hour at six,
worked until dinner, and then until supper at about six; in the summer
they would then do chores around the barns until eight or nine. Some
were hedgers, ditchers, ploughmen, reapers, shepherds, and herdsmen.
The cottagers' typical earnings of about 1s. a day amounted to about
200 shillings a year, which was almost subsistence level. Accordingly
they also farmed a little on their four acres of land with garden. Some
also had a few animals. They lived in one or two room cottages of clay
and branches of trees or wood, sometimes with a brick fireplace and
chimney, and few windows. They ate bread, cheese, lard, soup, and
greens. If a laborer was unmarried, he lived with the farmer. Theirs
was a constant battle for survival. They often moved, because of
deprivation, to seek opportunity elsewhere. The town wage-earning
laborers ranged from journeymen craftsmen to poor casual laborers. The
mass of workers in London were not members of guilds, and the crime
rate was high.

        The last three classes also contained rural craftsmen and
tradesmen, who also farmed. The variety of trades became very large,
e.g. tinsmiths, chain smiths, pewterers, violin makers, and glass
painters. The curriers, who prepared hides for shoemakers, coachmakers,
saddlers, and bookbinders, were incorporated.

        The fourth and fifth classes comprised about three fourths of
the population.

        Then there were the maritime groups: traders, ship owners,
master and seamen, and the fishers.

        Over one fourth of all households had servants. They were the
social equals of day laborers, but materially better off with food and
clothing plus an allowance of money of two pounds [40s.] a year. Those
who sewed got additional pay for this work. There was no great chasm
between the family and the servants. They did not segregate into a
parlor class and a kitchen class. The top servants were as educated as
their masters and ate at the same table. Great households had a
chaplain and a steward to oversee the other servants. There was usually
a cook. Lower servants ate together. Servants were disciplined by cuffs
and slaps and by the rod by master or mistress. Maids wore short gowns,
a large apron, and a gypsy hat tied down over a cap. Chamber maids
helped to dress their mistresses. Servants might sleep on trundle beds
stored under their master's or mistress's bed, in a separate room, or
on the straw loft over the stables. A footman wore a blue tunic or
skirted coat with corded loop fasteners, knee-britches, and white
stockings. He walked or ran on foot by the side of his master or
mistress when they rode out on horseback or in a carriage and ran
errands for him, such as leading a lame horse home or running messages.
A good footman is described in this reference letter: "Sir, - You wrote
me lately for a footman, and I think this bearer will fit you: I know
he can run well, for he has run away twice from me, but he knew the way
back again: yet, though he has a running head as well as running heels
(and who will expect a footman to be a stayed man) I would not part
with him were I not to go post to the North. There be some things in
him that answer for his waggeries: he will come when you call him, go
when you bid him, and shut the door after him; he is faithful and
stout, and a lover of his master. He is a great enemy to all dogs, if
they bark at him in his running; for I have seen him confront a huge
mastiff, and knock him down. When you go a country journey, or have him
run with you a-hunting, you must spirit him with liquor; you must allow
him also something extraordinary for socks, else you must not have him
wait at your table; when his grease melts in running hard, it is
subject to fall into his toes. I send him to you but for trial, if he
be not for your turn, turn him over to me again when I come back..."

        Dress was not as elaborate as in Elizabethan times. For
instance, fewer jewels were worn. Ladies typically wore a brooch,
earrings, and pearl necklaces. Men also wore earrings. Watches with
elaborate cases were common. Women's dresses were of satin, taffeta,
and velvet, and were made by dressmakers. Pockets were carried in the
hand, fastened to the waist by a ribbon, or sewn in petticoats and
accessible by a placket opening. The corset was greatly reduced.
Women's hair was in little natural-looking curls, a few small tendrils
on the forehead with soft ringlets behind the ears, and the back coiled
into a simple knot. Men also wore their hair in ringlets. They had
pockets in their trousers, first as a cloth pouch inserted into an
opening in the side seam, and later sewn into the side seam. The
bereaved wore black, and widows wore a black veil over their head until
they remarried or died. Rouge was worn by lower class women.
Toothbrushes, made with horsehair, were a new and costly luxury. The
law dictating what classes could wear what clothes was difficult to
enforce and the last such law was in 1597.

        Merchants who had become rich by pirating could now afford to
extend their trading ventures well beyond the Atlantic sea. Cotton
chintzes, calicoes, taffetas, muslins, and ginghams from India now
became fashionable as dress fabrics. Simple cotton replaced linen as
the norm for napkins, tablecloths, bed sheets, and underwear. Then it
became the fashion to use calicoes for curtains, cushions, chairs, and
beds. Its inexpensiveness made these items affordable for many. There
was a cotton-weaving industry in England from about 1621, established
by cotton workmen who fled to England in 1585 from Antwerp, which had
been captured. By 1616, there were automatic weaving looms in London
which could be operated by a novice.

        Even large houses now tended to do without a courtyard and
became compacted into one soaring and stately whole. A typical country
house had deep-set windows of glass looking into a walled green court
with a sundial in it and fringed around with small trees. The gables
roofs were steep and full of crooks and angles, and covered with rough
slate if there was a source for such nearby. There was an extensive use
of red tile, either rectangular or other shapes and with design such as
fishscales. The rooms are broad and spacious and include hall, great
parlor, little parlor, matted chamber, and study. In the hall was still
the great, heavy table. Dining tables were covered with cloth, carpet,
or printed leather. Meals were increasingly eaten in a parlor. Noble
men now preferred to be waited upon by pages and grooms instead of by
their social equals as before. After dinner, they deserted the parlor
to retire into drawing rooms for conversation and desserts of sweet
wine and spiced delicacies supplemented by fruit. Afterward, there
might be dancing and then supper. In smaller parlors, there was
increasing use of oval oak tables with folding leaves. Chests of
drawers richly carved or inlaid and with brass handles were coming into
increased use. Walls were lined with panels and had pictures or were
hung with tapestry. Carpets, rugs, and curtains kept people warm. There
were many stools to sit on, and some arm chairs. Wide and handsome open
staircases separated the floors. Upstairs, the sitting and bedrooms
open into each other with broad, heavy doors. Bedrooms had four-post
beds and wardrobes with shelves and pegs. Under the roof are garrets,
apple-lofts, and root-chambers. Underneath is a cellar. Outside is a
farmyard with outbuildings such as bake house, dairy, cheese-press
house, brewery, stilling house, malt house, fowl house, dove cot, pig
stye, slaughter-house, wood house, barns, stable, and sometimes a mill.
There were stew-ponds for fish and a park with a decoy for wild fowl.
There was also a laundry, carpenter's bench, blacksmith's forge, and
pots and equipment of a house painter.

        In the 1600s, towns were fortified by walled ditches instead of
relying on castles, which couldn't contain enough men to protect the
townspeople. Also in towns, water was supplied by local pumps and
wells. In 1613, a thirty-eight-mile aqueduct brought spring water into
London. In the country, floors were of polished wood or stone and
strewn with rushes. A ladies' attendant might sleep the same bedroom on
a bed which slid under the ladies' bed. Apprentices and shop boys had
to sleep under the counter. Country laborers slept in a loft on straw.
Bread was made in each household. There were bedroom chairs with
enclosed chamber pots.

        Wood fires were the usual type. Coal was coming into use in the
towns and near coal mines. Charcoal was also used. Food was roasted on
a spit over a fire, baked, or broiled. People still licked their
fingers at meals. The well-to-do had wax candles. Tallow dips were used
by the poor and for the kitchen. People drank cordials and homemade
wines made with grapes, currants, oranges, or ginger. Some mead was
also drunk.

        Tobacco, potatoes, tea, asparagus, kidney beans, scarlet
runners, cardoons (similar to artichokes), horseradish, sugarcane, and
turkeys for Christmas, were introduced from the New World, China, and
India. Tea was a rare and expensive luxury. Coffee was a new drink.
With the cane sugar was made sweetened puddings, pies, and drinks. The
potato caused the advent of distillation of concentrated alcohol from
fermented potato mashes. There was a distiller's company by 1638.
Distilleries' drinks had higher alcoholic content than wine or beer.

        The Merchant Adventurers sold in town stores silks, satins,
diamonds, pearls, silver, and gold. There were women peddlers selling
hats and hosiery from door to door and women shopkeepers, booksellers,
alehouse keepers, linen drapers, brewers, and ale- wives. London had
polluted air and water, industrial noise, and traffic congestion.

        Work on farms was still year-round. In January and February,
fields were ploughed and harrowed and the manure spread. Also, trees
and hedges were set, fruit trees pruned, and timber lopped. In March
and April, the fields were stirred again and the wheat and rye sown. In
May gardens were planted, hop vines trained to poles, ditches scoured,
lambs weaned, and sheep watched for "rot". In June sheep were washed
and sheared, and fields were spread with lime and clay, and manured. In
July hay was cut, dried, and stacked. In August crops were harvested,
which called for extra help from neighbors and townsmen who took
holidays at harvesting. Then there was threshing, and the sowing of
winter wheat and rye. In the autumn, cider from apples and perry from
pears might be made. By November the fall planting was finished and the
time had come for the killing of cattle and hanging up their salted
carcasses for winter meat. Straw would be laid down with dung, to be
spread next spring on the fields. Stock that could not live outdoors in
winter were brought into barns.

        Government regulated the economy. In times of dearth, it
ordered Justices of the Peace to buy grain and sell it below cost. It
forbade employers to lay off workers whose products they could not
sell. It used the Star Chamber Court to enforce economic regulations.

        Enclosures of land were made to carry on improved methods of
tillage, which yielded more grain and more sheep fleece. Drainage of
extensive marsh land created more land for agriculture. Waste land was
used to breed game and "fowling" contributed to farmers' and laborers'
livelihoods. Killing game was not the exclusive right of landowners,
but was a common privilege. The agricultural laborer, who worked for
wages and composed most of the wage- earning population, found it hard
to make ends meet.

        There were food riots usually during years of harvest failure,
in which organized groups seized foodstuffs being transported or in
markets. Also, there were enclosure riots, in which organized groups
destroyed hedges and fences erected in agrarian reorganization to
restrict access to or to subdivide former common pasture land. These
self- help riots were last resorts to appeals. They were relatively
orderly and did not expand into random violence. The rioters were
seldom punished more than a fining or whipping of the leaders and
action was taken to satisfy their legitimate grievances.

        The poor came to resent the rich and there was a rise in crime
among the poor. Penal laws were frequently updated in an effort to
bring more order.

        In 1610, weekly wages for a mason were 8s. or 5s., for a
laborer were 6s. or 4s., for a carpenter 8s. or 6s. An unskilled
laborer received 1s. a day.

        There were conventions of paternalism and deference between
neighbors of unequal social status. A social superior often protected
his lessers from impoverishment For instance, the landlord lessened
rents in times of harvest failure. A social superior would help find
employment for a lesser person or his children, stand surety for a
recognizance, intervene in a court case, or have his wife tend a sick
member of his lesser's family. A social obligation was felt by most of
the rich, the landlords, the yeomen farmers, and the clergy. This
system of paternalism and social deference was expressed and reinforced
at commonly attended village sports and games, dances, wakes and "ales"
(the proceeds of which went to the relief of a certain person in
distress), "rush-bearings", parish feasts, weddings, christenings,
"churchings" to give thanks for births, and funerals. Even the poor
were buried in coffins. Also there was social interaction at the local
alehouse, where neighbors drank, talked, sang, and played at bowls or
"shove goat" together.

        Quarrelling was commonplace. For instance, borough authorities
would squabble over the choice of a schoolmaster; the parson would
carry on a long fight with parishioners over tithe hens and pigs; two
country gentlemen would continue a vendetta started by their
great-grandfathers over a ditch or hunting rights; the parishioners
would wrangle with the churchwardens over the allocation of pews. The
position of one's pew reflected social position. Men tried to keep the
pews of their ancestors and the newly prosperous wanted the recognition
in the better pews, for which they had to pay a higher amount. But, on
the other hand, farmers were full of good will toward their neighbors.
They lent farm and kitchen equipment, helped raise timbers for a
neighbor's new barn, sent food and cooked dishes to those providing a
funeral feast and to the sick and incurable.

        Village standards of behavior required that a person not to
drink to excess, quarrel, argue, profane, gossip, cause a nuisance,
abuse wife or children, or harbor suspicious strangers, and to pay scot
and bear lot as he was asked. Neighbors generally got along well and
frequently borrowed and loaned small sums of money to each other
without interest for needs that suddenly arose. Bad behavior was
addressed by the church by mediation and, if this failed, by exclusion
from holy communion. There was also whipping and the stocks.

        Marital sex was thought to be good for the health and happiness
of the husband and enjoyable by wives. The possibility of female orgasm
was encouraged. Both women and men were thought to have "seed" and
drank certain potions to cause pregnancy or to prevent birth. Some
argued that orgasm of both partners was necessary for the "seed" of the
male and female to mix to produce pregnancy. Most women were in a
virtual state of perpetual pregnancy. Both Catholics and Protestants
thought that God wanted them to multiply and cover the earth. Catholics
thought that the only goal of sex was procreation. Men were considered
ready for marriage only when they could support a family, which was
usually at about age 30. Brides were normally virgins, but there was
bridal pregnancy of about 20%. Women usually married at about age 25.
Marriages were usually within one's own class and religion. The
aristocracy often initiated matches of their children for the sake of
continuity in the family estates and tried to obtain the consent of
their children for the match in mind. The age of consent to marry was
14 for boys and 12 for girls. Girls in arranged marriages often married
at 13, and boys before they went to university. But the girls usually
stayed with their parents for a couple of years before living with
their husbands. If married before puberty, consummation of the marriage
waited for such time. In other classes, the initiative was usually
taken by the child. Dowries and marriage portions usually were given by
the parents of the bride. Wet-nurses frequently were used, even by
Puritans. There were no baby bottles. Many babies died, causing their
parents much grief. About 1/4 of women's deaths occurred during
childbirth. A child was deemed to be the husband's if he was within the
four seas, i.e. not in foreign lands, for an agreed length of time.
Illegitimacy was infrequent, and punished by church-mandated public
penance by the mother and lesser penance and maintenance by the father.
The church court punished adultery and defamation for improper sexual
conduct.

        The established church still taught that the husband was to be
the authority in marriage and had the duty to provide for, protect, and
maintain his wife. Wives were to obey their husbands, but could also
admonish and advise their husbands without reproach. In literature,
women were portrayed as inferior to men intellectually and morally as
well as physically. In reality wives did not fit the image of women
portrayed by the church and literature. Quarrels between husband and
wife were not uncommon and were not stopped by a husband's assertion of
authority. Wives were very active in the harvesting and did casual
labor of washing, weeding, and stone-picking. Farmers' and tradesmen's
wives kept accounts, looked after the garden, orchard, pigs, and
poultry; brewed beer; spun wool and flax; and acted as agents in
business affairs. Wives of craftsmen and tradesmen participated
actively in their husbands' shops. Wives of weavers spun for their
husband's employers. Wives of the gentry ran their households with
their husbands. The lady of a large mansion superintended the
household, ordering and looking after the servants, and seeing to the
education of her children. Mothers handed down their recipes to their
daughters. Women still did much needlework and embroidering for
clothing and house, such as cushions, screens, bed curtains, window
curtains, hangings, footstools, book covers, and small chests of
drawers for valuables. Liking simplicity, Puritan women did less of
this work.

        Naming one's wife as executor of one's will was the norm.
Jointures [property for a widow] were negotiated at the betrothal of
ladies. Widows of manorial tenants were guaranteed by law one-third of
family real property, despite creditors. But most testators went beyond
this and gave a life interest in the farm or family house. So it was
customary for a widow to remain in occupation of the land until her
death or remarriage. Few widows or widowers lived with one of their
children. Widows usually had their husband's guild rights and
privileges conferred upon them, e.g. to receive apprentices. In London,
custom gave 1/3 of a deceased husband's estate to his wife on his
death, but 2/3 if there were no children. The other part went according
to his will. If a widow         did not remarry in memory of her
husband, she was esteemed. But remarriage was common because the life
expectancy after birth was about 35 years.

        Sons of the well-to-do went into law, the Church, the army, or
the navy. If not fit for such, they usually went into a trade,
apprenticing, for instance, with a draper, silk merchant, or goldsmith.
Sometimes a son was sent to the house of a great man as a page or
esquire to learn the ways of courtiers and perhaps become a diplomat.

        The guild with its master and their employees was being
replaced by a company of masters.

        James I ruled over both England and Scotland. He had come from
Scotland, so was unfamiliar with English love of their rights, passion
for liberty and justice, and extensive discussing of religion and
quoting scripture. When he came to the throne, he had a conference with
a group of Puritans who asked for certain reforms: ceremonies such as
the cross in baptism and the ring in marriage should not be used, only
educated men competent to preach should be made ministers, bishops
should not be allowed to hold benefices that they did not administer,
and minor officials should not excommunicate for trifles and
twelve-penny matters. He not only denied their requests, but had the
English Bible revised into the King James version, which was published
in 1611. This was to replace the popular Geneva Bible written by
English Protestant refugees from Catholic Queen Mary's reign, which he
did not like because some of its commentary was not highly favorable to
kings. James didn't believe a king had to live by the law; he hadn't as
king of Scotland. He tried to imbue into England the idea of a divine
right of kings to rule that he had held in Scotland. The established
church quickly endorsed and preached this idea.

        The selection of the clergy of the parish churches was now
often in the hands of the parishioners, having been sold to them by the
patron lord of the manor. Some patrons sold the right of selection to a
tradesman or yeoman who wished to select his son or a relative. Some
rights of selection were in the hands of bishops, the colleges, and the
Crown. The parish clergyman was appointed for life and removed only for
grave cause. Most parishioners wanted a sermon created by their
minister instead of repetitious homilies and constant prayer. They
thought that the object of worship in church was to rouse men to think
and act about the problems of the world.

        In 1622, the King mandated that clergymen quote scripture only
in context of the Book of Articles of Religion of 1562 or the two Books
of Homilies and not preach any sermon on Sunday afternoon except on
some part of the Catechism or some text out of the Creed, Ten
Commandments, or the Lord's Prayer.

        The Puritan movement grew. About 5% of the Protestants were
Puritans. These included country gentlemen and wealthier traders. They
dressed simply in gray or other drab colors and wore their hair short
to protest the fashion of long curls. They lived simply and disapproved
of dancing because it induced lasciviousness and of theater because of
its lewdness. Theaters and brothels still shared the same
neighborhoods, the same customers, and sometimes the same employees.
Prostitutes went to plays to find customers; men shouldered and shoved
each other in competing to sit next to attractive women to get to know
them. The Puritans also disapproved of cock fights because they led to
gambling and disorder, and Maypole celebrations because of their
paganism. There was less humor. Many became stoics. The Puritan church
ceremonies were plain, with no ornamentation. Puritans prayed several
times a day and read the Bible to each other in family groups to look
for guidance in their conduct and life. They asked for God to intervene
in personal matters and looked for signs of his pleasure or displeasure
in happenings such as a tree falling close but not touching him, or his
horse throwing him without injury to him. When there was an illness in
the family or misfortune, they examined their past life for sins and
tried to correct shortcomings. They circulated records of puritan lives
including spiritual diaries. They believed in the equality of men and
that a good man was better than a bad peer, bishop, or king. Puritan
influence made families closer and not merely dependent on the will of
the husband or father. There was a sense of spiritual fellowship among
family members as individuals. They emphasized the real need of a
lasting love relationship between husband and wife, so a mutual liking
that could develop into love between a young couple in an arranged
match was essential.

        Most Puritans felt that the bishops were as tyrannical as the
pope had been and that more reform was needed. They favored the
Presbyterian form of church government developed by John Calvin in
Switzerland. The presbyter was the position below bishop. Parishes were
governed by boards consisting of a minister and lay elders elected by
the parishioners. These boards sent elected representatives to
councils. All lay elders and ministers had equal rank with each other.
The Calvinist God preordained salvation only for the elect and
damnation and everlasting punishment for the rest of humanity, but the
Puritans had an optimism about avoiding this damnation. They believed
that at his conversion a person received grace, which was a sign that
he was predestined for salvation. They rejected all ecclesiastical
institutions except as established by each parish over its own elected
pastor and members. They rejected the established church's control from
the top by bishops. They believed in negotiating directly with God for
the welfare of the soul without the priest or church organization.

        The fear of witchcraft grew with Puritanism. Poor decrepit old
defenseless women, often deformed and feeble-minded, were thought to be
witches. Their warts and tumors were thought to be teats for the devil
to suck or the devil's mark. Cursing or ill-tempers, probably from old
age pains, or having cats were further indications of witchery.

        When the king learned in 1618 that the English Puritans had
prevented certain recreations after the Sunday service, he proclaimed
that the people should not be restrained from lawful recreations and
exercise such as dancing, May-games, Whitsunales, Morris-dances,
May-pole sports, archery for men, leaping, and vaulting. Also women
could carry rushes to decorate the church as they had done in the past.
His stated purpose was to prevent people such as Catholics from being
deterred from conversion, to promote physical fitness for war, and to
keep people from drinking and making discontented speeches in their ale
houses. Still unlawful on Sunday were bear and bull baitings and
bowlings.

        Besides the Puritans, there were other Independent sects, such
as the Congregationalists, whose churches gathered together by the
inspiration of Jesus. This sect was started by English merchants
residing in Holland who set up congregations of Englishmen under their
patronage there; they kept minister and elders well under their
control. The Baptists emerged out of the Independents. They believed
that only adults, who were capable of full belief, and not children,
could be baptized. They also believed that it was the right of any man
to seek God's truth for himself in the scriptures and that obedience to
the state should not extend beyond personal conscience.

        One fourth of all children born did not live to the age of ten,
most dying in their first year. Babies had close caps over their head,
a rattle, and slept in a sturdy wood cradle that rocked on the floor,
usually near the hearth. Babies of wealthier families had nurses. The
babies of ladies were suckled by wet nurses. Parents raised children
with affection and tried to prepare them to become independent
self-sustaining adults. There was less severity than in Tudor times,
although the maxim "spare the rod and spoil the child" was generally
believed, especially by Puritans, and applied to even very young
children. In disciplining a child, an admonition was first used, and
the rod as a last resort, with an explanation of the reasons for its
use. There were nursery rhymes and stories such as "Little Bo-Peep",
"Jack and the Beanstalk", "Tom Thumb", "Chicken Little", and Robin Hood
and King Arthur tales, and probably also "Puss in Boots", "Red
Ridinghood", "Cinderella", "Beauty and the Beast", "Bluebeard" and
Aesop's Fables. "Little Jack Horner" who sat in a corner was a satire
on the Puritan aversion to Christmas pudding and sense of conscious
virtue. Toys included dolls, balls, drums, and hobby horses. Children
played "hide and seek", "here we go around the Mulberry bush", and
other group games. School children were taught by "horn books". This
was a piece of paper with the alphabet and perhaps a religious verse,
such as the Paternoster prayer, that was mounted on wood and covered
with thin horn to prevent tearing. Little girls cross-stitched the
alphabet and numerals on samplers. Block alphabets were coming into
use. Most market towns had a grammar school which would qualify a
student for university. They were attended by sons of noblemen, country
squires [poor gentlemen], merchants, and substantial yeomen, and in
some free schools, the poor. School hours were from 6:00 a.m. to noon
or later. Multiplication was taught. If affordable, families had their
children involved in education after they were small until they left
home at about fifteen for apprenticeship or service. Otherwise,
children worked with their families from the age of seven, e.g. carding
and spinning wool, until leaving home at about fifteen.

        There were boarding schools such as Winchester, Eton,
Westminster, St. Paul's, and Merchant Taylors'. There, senior boys
selected for conduct and ability supervised younger boys. They thereby
got experience for a future in public life. The system was also a check
on bullying of the weak by the strong. The curriculum included Lilly's
"Grammar"; Aesop; Terence's Roman comic plays; Virgil's "Aeneid", the
national epic of Rome; Cicero's "Letters" reflecting Roman life;
Sallust's histories showing people and their motives; Caesar's
"Commentaries" on the Gallic and civil wars; Horace's "Epistles" about
life and poetry; poet Ovid's "Metamorphoses" on adventures and love
affairs of deities and heroes, "Fasti" on Roman religious festivals and
customs; Donatus' grammar book; and other ancient Latin authors.
Football, with hog bladders, and tennis were played. These schools were
self-supporting and did their own farming.

        Private schools for girls were founded in and around London.
They were attended by daughters of the well-to-do merchant class,
nobility, and gentry. They were taught singing, playing of instruments,
dancing, French, fine sewing, embroidery, and sometimes arithmetic.
There were not many girls' boarding schools. Fewer served in the house
of some noble lady as before. Most commonly, the sons and daughters of
gentlemen and nobles were taught by private tutors. A tutor in the
house educated the girls to the same extent as the boys. Frequently,
the mother educated her daughters. A considerable number of girls of
other backgrounds such as the yeomanry and the town citizenry somehow
learned to read and write.

        Boys began at university usually from age 14 to 18, but
sometimes as young as 12. The universities provided a broad-based
education in the classics, logic and rhetoric, history, theology, and
modern languages for gentlemen and gave a homogenous national culture
to the ruling class. There was a humanist ideal of a gentleman scholar.
The method of study was based largely on lectures and disputations.
Each fellow had about five students to tutor. In many cases, he took
charge of the finances of his students, paying his bills to tradesmen
and the college. His reimbursement by the students' fathers put them
into friendly contact with the family. The students slept in trundle
beds around his bed and had an adjacent room for study. Aristotle,
whose authority was paramount, remained the lynch pin of university
studies, especially for logic and dialectic. The study of rhetoric was
based on Quintilian, the Latin writer, and the Greek treatise of
Hermogenes of Tarsus. Also studied was Cicero's orations as models of
style. Examination for degrees was by disputation over a thesis of the
student. The B.A. degree was given after four years of study, and the
M.A. after three more. There were advanced degrees in civil law, which
required seven more years of study, medicine, seven years, divinity,
more than seven years, and music. Many of the men who continued for
advanced degrees became fellows and took part in the teaching. Most
fellowships were restricted to clerics. Oxford and Cambridge
Universities operated under a tutorial system. Access to grammar
schools and universities was closed to girls of whatever class. Oxford
University now had the Bodleian Library. In the universities, there
were three types of students: poor scholars, who received scholarships
and also performed various kinds of service such as kitchen work and
did errands for fellows such as carrying water and waiting on tables;
commoners, who paid low fees and were often the sons of economical
gentlemen or businessmen; and the Fellow Commoners, a privileged and
well-to-do minority, usually sons of noblemen or great country
gentlemen. The Fellow Commoners paid high fees, had large rooms,
sometimes had a personal tutor or servant, and had the right to eat
with the Fellows at High Table. Here, gentlemen made friends with their
social equals from all over the country. Students wore new- fashioned
gowns of many colors and colored stockings. They put on stage plays in
Latin and English. The students played at running, jumping, and
pitching the bar, and at the forbidden swimming and football. They were
not to have irreligious books or dogs. Cards and dice could be played
only at Christmas time. Students still drank, swore, and rioted, but
they were disallowed from going into town without special permission.
Those below a B.A. had to be accompanied by a tutor or an M.A. They
were forbidden from taverns, boxing matches, dances, cock fights, and
loitering in the street or market. Sometimes a disputation between two
colleges turned into a street brawl. Punishment was by flogging. Each
university had a chancellor, usually a great nobleman or statesman, who
represented the university in dealings with the government and
initiated policies. The vice-chancellor was appointed for a year from
the group of heads of college. He looked out for the government of
halls, enforced the rules of the university, kept its courts, licensed
wine shops, and shared control of the town with the mayor.

        Tutors were common. They resided at the boy's house or took
boys to board with them at their houses in England or on the continent.
The tutor sometimes accompanied his student to grammar school or
university. Puritans frequently sent their sons to board in the house
of some Frenchman or Swiss Protestant to learn the Calvinist doctrines
or on tour with a tutor. Certain halls in the universities were
predominately Puritan. Catholics were required to have their children
taught in a home of a Protestant, a relative if possible.

        The Inns of Court were known as "the third university". It
served the profession of law, and was a training ground for the sons of
nobility and the gentry and for those entering the service of the
commonwealth. The Inns were self-governing and ruled by custom.
Students were to live within the Inn, two to a room, but often there
were not enough rooms, so some students lived outside the quadrangles.
Every student was supposed to partake of Commons or meals for a certain
fraction of the year - from eight weeks to three months and there to
argue issues in cases brought up by their seniors. In hall the students
were not allowed to wear hats, though caps were permitted, nor were
they to appear booted or spurred or carrying swords. For the first two
years, they would read and talk much of the law, and were called Clerks
Commoners. After two years they became Mootmen or Inner Barristers. In
five or six years they might be selected to be called to the bar as
Utter Barristers, whose number was fixed. There was no formal
examination. The Utter Barrister spent at least three more years
performing exercises and assisting in directing the studies of the
younger men. After this time, he could plead in the general courts at
Westminster, but usually carried on law work in the offices of other
men and prepared cases for them. Participating in moots (practice
courts) was an important part of their education. Lectures on statutes
and their histories were given by Readers.

        Physicians were licensed by universities, by the local bishop,
or in London, by the College of Physicians and Surgeons. Most were
university graduates, and because of the expense of the education, from
well-to-do families. For the B.A., they emphasized Greek. For the M.A.,
they studied the works of Greek physicians Galen and Hippocrates, Roman
physician Claudius, and perhaps some medieval authorities. After the
M.A., they listened to lectures by the Regius Professor of Medicine and
saw a few dissections. Three years of study gave them a M.B., and four
more years beyond this the M.D. degree. A physician's examination of a
patient cost 10s. The physician asked about his symptoms and feelings
of pain, looked at his eyes, looked at his body for spots indicative of
certain diseases, guessed whether he had a fever, felt his pulse, and
examined his urine and stool. There were no laboratory tests. Smallpox
was quickly recognized. Wrapping red cloth around the person and
covering the windows with red cloth being promoted healing without
scarring. Gout was frequent. Syphilis was common in London and other
large centers, especially in Court circles. It was ameliorated by
mercury. An imbalance of the four humors: blood, phlegm, choler, bile
was redressed by bloodletting, searing, draining, and/or purging. Heart
trouble was not easily diagnosed and cancer was not recognized as a
life-threatening disease. Childbirth was attended by physicians if the
patient was well-to-do or the case was serious. Otherwise women were
attended only by midwives. They often died in childbirth, many in their
twenties.

        A visit by a physician cost 13s.4d. Melancholia, which made one
always fearful and full of dread, and mania, which made one think he
could do supernatural things, were considered to be types of madness
different from infirmities of the body. Despite a belief held by some
that anatomical investigation of the human body was a sin against the
holy ghost, physicians were allowed to dissect corpses. So there were
anatomy textbooks and anatomy was related to surgery. Barber-surgeons
extracted teeth and performed surgery. The white and red striped barber
pole initially indicated a place of surgery; The red represented blood
and the white bandages.

        The theory of nutrition was still based on the four humors and
deficiency diseases were not understood as such. Physician William
Harvey, son of a yeoman, discovered the circulation of the blood from
heart to lungs to heart to body about 1617. He had studied anatomy at
Padua on the continent and received an M.D. there and later at
Cambridge. Then he accepted a position at the hospital of St.
Bartholomew to treat the poor who came there at least once a week for a
year. He agreed to give the poor full benefit of his knowledge, to
prescribe only such medicines as should do the poor good without regard
to the pecuniary interest of the apothecary accompanying him, to take
no reward from patients, and to render account for any negligence on
his part. He also dissected animals. One day he noted when stroking
downward on the back of one hand with the finger of the other, that a
vein seemed to disappear, but that it reappeared when he released his
finger. He surmised that there was a valve preventing the blood's
immediate return to the vein. Then he ascertained that the heart was a
pump that caused pulses, which had been thought to be caused by
throbbing of the veins. He tied the arteries and found that the
arterial blood flowed away from the heart. He tied the veins and found
that venal blood flowed into the heart. He found that the blood flowed
from the lungs to the left side of the heart, and from thence was
pumped out to the body. Blood also flowed from the body to the right
side of the heart, from which it was pumped to the lungs. The two
contractions closely followed one another, rather than occurring at the
same time. The valves in the veins prevented backflow. It was now clear
why all the blood could be drained away by a single opening in a vein.
It was also clear why a tight ligature, which blocked the arteries,
made a limb bloodless and pale and why a looser ligature, which pressed
only on the veins, made a limb swell turgid with blood. Multiplying an
estimate of the amount of blood per beat with the number of beats, he
concluded that the amount of blood did not change as it circulated. He
concluded that the only purpose of the heart was to circulate the
blood. This diminished the religious concept that the heart was the
seat of the soul and that blood had a spiritual significance and was
sacred.

        The physicians turned surgery over to the surgeons, who
received a charter in 1605 by which barbers were excluded from all
surgical work except bloodletting and the drawing of teeth. Surgeons
dealt with skin disease, ulcers, hernia, bladder stones, and broken
bones, which they had some skill in setting. They performed
amputations, which were without antiseptics or anesthesia. Internal
operations usually resulted in death. Caesarian section was attempted,
but did not save the life of the mother. Apprenticeship was the route
to becoming a surgeon. A College of Surgeons was founded. Students
learned anatomy, for which they received the corpses of four executed
felons a year.

        The apothecaries and grocers received a charter in 1607, but in
1618, the apothecaries were given the sole right to purchase and sell
potions, and to search the shops of grocers and stop the sale by them
of any potions. In London, the apothecaries were looked over by the
College of Physicians to see that they were not selling evil potions or
poisons. In 1618 was the first pharmacy book.

        There were three hospitals in London, two for the poor, and
Bedlam [Bethlehem] Hospital for the insane. Others were treated at home
or in the physician's home.

        Theaters were shut down in times of plague to prevent spread of
disease there. Towndwellers who could afford it left to live in the
country.

        Shakespeare wrote most of his plays in this period. Most
popular reading was still Bibles, prayer books, psalm books, and
devotional works. Also popular were almanacs, which started with a
single sheet of paper. An almanac usually had a calendar; information
on fairs, roads, and posts; farming hints; popularized scientific
knowledge; historical information; sensational news; astrological
predictions; and later, social, political, and religious comment. Many
households had an almanac. Books tried to reconcile religion and
science as well as religion and passion or sensuality. Walter Ralegh's
"History of the World", written while he was in prison, was popular.
Ben Johnson wrote poetry and satiric comedies. Gentlemen read books of
manners such as James Cleland's "Institution of a Young Noble Man"
(1607). In 1622, the first regular weekly newspaper was started.

        Although there was a large advance in the quality of boys'
education and in literacy, the great majority of the people were unable
to read fluently. Since writing was taught after one could read
fluently, literacy was indicated by the ability to sign one's name.
Almost all gentlemen and professional men were literate. About half the
yeomen and tradesmen and craftsmen were. Only about 15% of husbandmen,
laborers, servants, and women were literate.

        The Elizabethan love of madrigal playing gradually gave way to
a taste for instrumental music, including organs and flutes. The violin
was introduced and popular with all classes. Ballads were sung, such as
"Barbary Allen", about a young man who died for love of her, after
which she died of sorrow. When they were buried next to each other, a
rose from his grave grew around a briar from her grave. The ballad
"Geordie" relates a story of a man hanged for stealing and selling
sixteen of the king's royal deer. The ballad "Matty Groves" is about a
great Lord's fair young bride seducing a lad, who was then killed by
the Lord. In the ballad "Henry Martin", the youngest man of three
brothers is chosen by lot to turn pirate to support his brothers. When
his pirate ship tries to take a merchant ship, there is sea fight in
which the merchant ship sinks and her men drown. The ballad "The Trees
They Do Grow High" tells of an arranged marriage between a 24 year old
woman and the 14 year old son of a great lord. She tied blue ribbons on
his head when he went to college to let the maidens know that he was
married. But he died at age 16, after having sired a son.

        May Day was a holiday with dancing around a Maypole and people
dressed up as characters such as Queen of the May, Robin Hood, Little
John, Friar Tuck, Maid Marion, the fool, and the piper. New Year's Day
was changed to January 1st.

        Golf was played in Scotland, and James introduced it into
England. James I was the last monarch to engage in falconry.

        Francis Bacon wrote the "Advancement of Learning" and "Novum
Organum" (New Learning) in which he encouraged the use of the inductive
method to find out scientific truths and also truths in general, that
is reasoning from a sample to the whole. According to him, the only way
to arrive at the truth was to observe and determine the correlations of
facts. He advocated a process of elimination of hypothesized ideas.
First, experiments were made, then general conclusions were drawn from
them, and then these generalizations were tested in further
experiments. His "New Learning" showed the way out of the scholastic
method and reverence for dogma into the experimental method. He wrote
"Natural and Experimental History". He studied the effect of cold in
preventing animal putrefaction.

        By this time, what was known about mathematics included
fractional exponents, trigonometry in terms of arcs of angles, long
division, square root symbol, decimal fractions, methods for solving
cubic equations, trigonometry in terms of ratios of sides of a right
triangle, equal sign, plus and minus signs, and a consistent theory of
imaginary numbers.

        John Napier, a large Calvinist landholder in Scotland who had
built his own castle, did mathematics in his older years. He explored
imaginary numbers, which involve square roots of negative numbers. By
1614, he had started and developed the theory of logarithms: the
relationships among positive and negative exponents of numbers. This
simplified calculations because the multiplication and division of
numbers with a common base could be done by addition and subtraction of
their exponents. His table of logarithms, which took him twenty years
to compile, was used in trigonometry, navigation, and astronomy. It
reduced the enormous labor involved in trigonometric calculations. In
1622, Willliam Oughtred invented the slide rule for calculations.

        Galileo Galilei was a professor of mathematics at the
University of Padua in Italy and was later a protege of the powerful
Medici family. He pioneered the scientific method of theory building by
observation of phenomena instead of resort to sources such as
Aristotle. He conducted experiments, e.g. throwing objects off the
tower of Pisa in 1590 to show that all, whether light or heavy, fall at
the same rate. This disproved the widely held belief that heavier
objects fall faster than light objects. He reasoned by induction from
experiments that the force of gravity has the same effect on all
objects regardless of their size or weight. His law stated that the
speed of their descent increases uniformly with the time of the fall,
i.e. speed [velocity] = gravity's acceleration multiplied by time. This
was a pioneering mathematization of a physical phenomenon.

        From his observation that an object sliding along a plane
travels increasingly farther and slows down at a decreasing rate as the
surfaces become smoother and more lubricated, he opined that the
natural state of a body in motion is to stay in motion, and that it is
slowed down by a resistant force, which he called "friction". He
conceived of the air giving a frictional force to an object moving
through the air. From his experiments showing that a rolling ball rolls
up a plane farther the lesser the slope of the plane, he intuited that
if the plane were horizontal, the ball would never stop rolling except
for friction. He opined that bodies that are at rest stay at rest and
bodies that are in motion stay in uniform motion ("inertia"), unless
and until acted upon by some force. This was a radical departure from
Aristotle's theory that any horizontal motion requires a prime mover.
Galileo drew a graph of distance versus time for the rolling ball,
which indicated that the distance traveled was proportional to the
square of the time elapsed.

        He put his ideas of vertical and horizontal motion together to
explain the movement of projectiles, which travel horizontally, but
also fall downward vertically. He realized that the movement of a
projectile involved a horizontal impetus of projection and a vertical
force of gravity, each being independent of the other, but acting
simultaneously, instead of sequentially. He demonstrated that a
projectile follows the path of a parabola, instead of a straight line,
and that it descends a vertical distance which is proportional to -the
square of the time taken to fall. That is, a thrown object will strike
the ground in the same amount of time as an object simply dropped from
the same height. This suggested that gravity was a constant force.

        Galilieo described mathematically the motion of a lever such as
a seesaw in which the weight on one side multiplied by its distance
from the fulcrum is equal to the weight on the other side multiplied by
its distance from the fulcrum.

        Galileo determined that a pendulum, such as a hanging lamp,
swings back and forth in equal intervals of time. He measured this time
with water running through a tube; the weight of the water was
proportional to the time elapsed. Also, pendulums with equal cord
length swing at the same rate, regardless of the substance, weight, or
shape of the material at the end. So a pendulum could be a mechanical
clock. - Galileo knew that ice floated on water because ice is less
dense and therefore lighter than water. It had formerly been thought
that ice was heavier than water, but floated on water because of its
shape, especially broad, flat-bottomed pieces of ice.

        The telescope was invented in 1608. The next year, Galileo
built a greatly improved telescope to observe bodies in the skies. He
observed that the spots on the moon had shifting illumination and that
the moon's perimeter had a jagged outline. From this he deduced that
the surface of the moon had mountains, valleys, and craters much like
the earth, and was illuminated by reflected light. He noticed that the
planet Jupiter had moons orbiting it in a manner similar to the orbit
of the Earth's moon. He observed that when the planet Venus was very
small it had a round shape and when it was very large, and therefore
nearer the earth, it had a crescent shape. Also, Venus progressed
through periodic phases of increasingly wide crescent shapes in a
manner similar to the phases of crescent shapes of the Earth's moon. He
realized that these features of Venus could be explained only if Venus
revolved around the sun, rather than around the earth. This finding
added credence to the Copernican theory that the earth and all planets
revolve around the sun. But church doctrine that the sun revolved
around the earth was supported by the Biblical story of God making the
sun stand still to give additional sunlight on a certain day so a
certain task could be completed that day. Galileo argued against a
literal interpretation of the Bible, so he was denounced by the church.
His finding of sunspots on the sun conflicted with church doctrine that
the celestial bodies such as the sun were perfect and unblemished. His
observation that certain sun spots were on certain locations of the
sun, but changed location over time, suggested that the sun might be
rotating. He observed that when air was withdrawn by a suction pump
from the top of a long glass tube whose lower open end was submerged in
a pan of water, the water rose to a height of 34 feet and no higher.
This result indicated that the evacuated space above the water was a
vacuum: an empty space. The notion of a vacuum, a space where there is
nothing or void, was difficult for philosophers to accept. They
believed that nature abhored a vacuum and would prevent it. About 1600,
Galileo invented the first thermometer by heating air at the top of a
tube whose open end was in a bowl of water; as the top end cooled, the
air contracted and water rose part way up the tube; the column of water
rose or fell with every change of temperature. Galileo invented the
compound refracting microscope, which used more than one lens, about
1612.

        Galileo's book on the arguments for and against the Copernican
theory was unexpectedly popular when published in 1632. The general
public was so persuaded by the arguments that the earth revolved around
the sun that Papal authority felt threatened. So Galileo was tried and
convicted of heresy and sentenced to house arrest as an example to
others who might question church doctrine, even though the seventy year
old Galileo recanted and some of the inquisition judges who convicted
him believed the Copernican theory and their decision did not assert
the contrary.

        Johannes Kepler was a mathematician from Germany who made his
living as an astrologer. He was in contact with Galileo by letter, as
most scientists of Europe were with each other. Kepler was fascinated
with perfect geometric shapes, which he tried to relate to celestial
phenomenon. He discerned that the orbit of Mars was not perfectly
circular. He knew that the apparent path of the sun with respect to the
constellation of fixed stars differed in speed at different times of
the year. He opined that this showed that the speed of the earth
revolving around the sun varied according to the time of year. Then he
measured the angles between the earth and the sun and the earth and
Mars as they changed through the Martian year. He noted when the earth,
Mars, and the Sun were on the same straight line. Then he deduced the
earth's true orbit, and from this the true orbits of the other planets.
Then by trial and error, he attempted to match this empirical data with
regular mathematically defined shapes, until he discovered in 1609 that
these paths were elliptical. Also, the planets each move faster when
they are nearer the sun and more slowly when they are farther from the
sun so that in equal time intervals, a line from the planet to the sun
will sweep out equal areas. This observation led him to opine that
there is a force between the sun and each planet, and that this force
is the same as that which keeps the moon in its orbit around the earth.
Thirdly, in 1619, he found that the square of the time for each
planet's orbit about the sun is proportional to the cube of that
planet's mean distance from the sun, so that the farther planets orbit
at a slower speed. He connected the earth's tides with the
gravitational pull of the moon. Kepler also confirmed that the paths of
comets were governed by a law and were farther from the earth than the
moon. This contradicted the church's explanation that what lies within
the moon's orbit pertains to the earth and is essentially transitory
and evil, while what lies beyond belongs to the heavens and is
permanent and pure.

        Renee Descartes, a French mathematician, scientist, and
philosopher, had a revelation that the structure of the universe was
mathematical and that nature obeyed mathematical rules. In 1637, he
invented analytic [Cartesian] geometry, in which lines and geometric
shapes can be described by algebraic equations and vice-versa. All
conic sections: circles, ellipses, parabolas, and hyperbolas, could be
represented by equations with two unknowns, or variables, on a
coordinate system in which each point is represented by a pair of
numbers representing distances from the two axis lines. An algebraic
equation with two unknowns, could be represented as a shape thereon. An
algebraic equation with one unknown represented a straight line
thereon. The points of intersection geometrically were equivalent to
the common solution of the associated algebraic equations. He started
the convention of representing unknown quantities by x, y, and z and
known quantities by a, b, and c. So, for instance, a circle with center
at point 2,3 and a radius of 4 was represented by the equation: (x-2)
squared + (y-3) squared = 4. He pioneered the standard exponential
notation for cubes and higher powers of numbers. Analytic geometry
aided in making good lenses for eyeglasses. The glass was first
manufactured with attention to quality. Then, after it cooled and
solidified, the clearest pieces were picked and their surfaces ground
into the proper curvature.

        Descartes formulated the law of refraction of light, which
deduces the angle of refraction [deflection] of light through a medium
from the lights' angle of incidence and the speed of light in each
media in which the light passes. This explained why a rainbow is
circular. In 1644, he described the universe in terms of matter and
motion and suggested that there were universal laws and an evolutionary
explanation for such. He opined that all effects in nature could be
explained by spatial extension and motion laws that 1) each part of
matter retains the shape, size, motion, or rest unless collision with
another part occurs; 2) one part of matter can only gain as much motion
through collision as is lost by the part colliding with it; and 3)
motion tends to be in a straight line. Descartes feared persecution by
the church because his ideas did not correlate with the Biblical notion
of God's creation of the universe in the order of light, then sky and
oceans and dry land, then plants, then seasons and the sun and moon and
stars, then fish and birds, then all animals, and finally man.
Descartes believed in a good and perfect God, and thought of the world
as divided into matter and spirit. The human mind was spirit and could
exist outside the human body. Without the mind, human body was a
machine. The human mind had knowledge without sense experience, e.g.
the truths of mathematics and physics. Ideas and imagination were
innate. His observation that sensory appearances are often misleading,
such as in dreams or hallucinations, led him to the conclusion that he
could only conclude that: "I think, therefore I am." He rejected the
doctrine that things had a proper behavior according to their natures,
e.g. the nature of acorns is to develop into oak trees. As an example
of erroneous forming of conceptions of substance with our senses alone,
he pointed out that honeycomb has a certain taste, scent, and texture,
but if exposed to fire, it loses all these forms and assumes others. He
considered to be erroneous the belief that there are no bodies around
us except those perceivable by our senses. He was a strong proponent of
the deductive method of finding truths, e.g. arguing logically from a
very few self- evident principles, known by intuition, to determine the
nature of the universe.

        Christian Huygens, a Dutch physicist, used the melting and the
boiling point of water as fixed points in a scale of measurements,
which first gave definiteness to thermometric tests.

        There was much mining of coal, tin, copper, lead, and iron in
the 1600s. Coal was transported from the coal pits down to the rivers
to be loaded onto ships on coal wagons riding on wooden rails. The full
coal cars could then be sent down by gravity and the empty wagons
pulled up by horses. Sheet metal, e.g. lead, was used for roofing. Coal
was much used for heating houses, and for laundry, cooking, and
industrial use, such as extraction of salt, soap boilers, and
manufacture of glass, bricks and tiles for buildings, anchors for
ships, and tobacco pipes. It was used in the trades: bakers,
confectioners, brewers, dyers, sugar refiners, coopers, starch makers,
copper workers, alum makers, and iron workers.

        In 1604 the Haberdashers, who sold imported felt for hats, got
a charter of incorporation.

        A tapestry factory was established in 1619.

        Flax-working machines came into existence.

        The royal postal system carried private as well as royal
letters, to increase income to the Crown. Postmasters got regular pay
for handling without charge the mail of letters that came from or went
to the letter office in London. The postmaster kept horses which he
let, with horn and guide, to persons riding "in post" at 3d. per mile.
The post was to travel 7 mph in summer and 5 mph in winter and sound
his horn four times in every mile or whenever he met travelers.

        Wool and animals for butchering were sold in London with the
sellers' agent in London taking the proceeds and paying out to their
order, the origin of check writing.

        Scriveners drew up legal documents, arranged mortgages, handled
property transactions, and put borrowers in touch with lenders. They
and the goldsmiths and merchants developed promissory notes, checks,
and private paper money.

        The influx of silver from the New World was a major factor in
the second great inflation in England and in the devaluation of money
to about one third of what it had been. Also contributing to the
inflation was an outracing of demand over supply, and a debasement of
the coinage. This inflation benefited tenants to the detriment of their
lords because their rents could not be adjusted upward.

        There was an increase in bankruptcies. Houses of Correction
were built.

        As Attorney General, Edward Coke was impassioned and
melodramatic. He once described the parts of the penalty of treason as
follows: being drawn to the place of execution reflected the person's
not being worthy any more to tread upon the face of the earth; being
drawn backward at a horse tail was due to his retrograde nature; being
drawn head downward on the ground indicated that he was unfit to
breathe the common air; being hanged by the neck between heaven and
earth indicated that he was unworthy of either; being cut down alive
and his privy parts cut off and burnt before his face indicated he was
unworthily begotten and unfit to leave any generation after him; having
his bowels and inners taken out and burnt indicated he had inwardly
conceived and harbored such horrible treason; his head cut off, which
had imagined the treason, and his body to be quartered and the quarters
set up to the view and detestation of men a prey for the fowls of the
air. Coke was subsequently elevated to the position of Chief of Common
Pleas and then to Chief of the King's Bench. But there Coke propounded
a doctrine of the supremacy of the law over the king as well as over
Parliament. For instance, Coke would not agree to stay any case in
which the king had a concern in power or profit, to consult with him.
But the other eleven justices did agree. Since James I believed in the
divine right of kings, he therefore dismissed Coke from his position as
Chief Justice of the King's Bench. James even believed that he could
suspend any law for reasons known only to him and issue proclamations
that were not limited to the reinforcement of old laws, but made new
offenses with punishment of fine and/or imprisonment.

The old writ of habeas corpus [produce the body] had been just to bring
to court those persons needed for proceedings, but Coke in 1614 had
cited the writ with a new meaning "to have the body together with the
cause of detention".

        Coke then became a member of Parliament and led the Commons,
where he exalted the authority of Parliament vis a vis the king; that
is, the king could not make any changes in law, religion, or taxation
without consent of Parliament. James arrested Coke and two other
members of the Commons and put its leader John Pym under house arrest
for their outspoken opinions against the King's intended alliance with
Catholic Spain and intended taking of a Spanish wife. Because of the
deadlock that developed between the king and Parliament, certain
matters could not be addressed by legislation and were left to be
decided judicially. This made judicial review of disputes important.

        James vastly increased the number of peerages, selling many,
for example for 10,000 pounds. Since there was a tacit understanding
that members of Parliament would not accept remuneration, this
restricted eligibility for membership to the rich. The House of Commons
was composed mostly of attorneys, merchants from the large towns, and
country gentlemen. The gentry members had 600 pounds [12,000s] annual
income from land and the burgess members had 300 pounds [6,000s.].
There were two knights from every county, elected by men holding at
least forty-shilling freeholds; four representatives from London, and
one or two from every other borough, generally elected by the top
business families'; and a representative from each of the two
universities. For Speaker, they always chose someone suggested to them
by the Crown. He decided who would talk and could hasten or delay
bills, usually for the benefit of the Crown. The Clerk, a lifetime
appointment of the Crown, wrote out the bills and their amendments and
kept track of proceedings. Many in the Commons were Puritan in
sympathy. In 1607, the House of Commons developed a committee system to
avoid being presided over by the royally designated speaker. A
committee could consist of all the members of the House of Commons with
an elected chairman. An increasing number of issues were discussed in
committee before coming to the Commons and the Commons came to ratify
readily what had been done in committee.

        By 1610, there had developed in the House of Commons an
opposition to feudal tenures, purveyance, wardships, and impositions
(special import and export duties on aliens set by the king without the
consent of Parliament that were supposed to be for the purpose of
regulating trade instead of for revenue). There was also a call for
free speech and an end to the King's habit at the end of Parliament of
imprisoning for a time those who had been too outspoken. The Commons
also asserted itself into foreign affairs by expressing an opinion
against a treaty proposed by the king on which war could ensue. The
treaty was abandoned. In London, organized groups such as the
apothecaries, the skinners, and the grocers, were circulating printed
statements of their cases to members of committees of the House of
Commons rather than just seeking out a friendly Privy Council member.
In 1621, the protests made to committeemen about monopolies sold by
James frightened him into canceling many of them. He had made many
grants against competition in violation of law. The right of the
Commons to expel a member was asserted by the expulsion of a
monopolist. By 1629, the speeches of prominent members and the course
of proceedings were copied by stationers and sold in a weekly news
report.

        The King's Privy Council dealt constantly with foreign affairs,
and also with the great companies, and problems arising such as gold
leaving the country, the Dutch ships increased efficiency in
transporting goods, the declining market for English cloth, strikes in
the mining industry, decaying harbor works, the quality of food and
drink, the wrongs done to the poor, and above all, the general peace
and order. They formed commissions to study situations and sent orders
to Justices of the Peace on methods to address certain problems and to
Sheriffs to carry out certain acts. About 1618, a group within the
Privy Council began to concentrate on foreign affairs, especially
"cabinet counsels", that is, with secret matters. James sold high
offices of state to supplement his income. His income from customs had
increased so much that it was now three times that from Crown lands.

        The Sheriff looked after Crown lands and revenues in his
county. He gathered the rents, the annuities, the stray animals, the
deodands, the fees due to the King, the goods of felons and traitors.
He was still a means of communication between the Privy Council and the
county. He announced new statutes of Parliament and proclamations by
the king at the county courts and in the markets. He used posse
comitatus to disperse riots. He was the functionary of the assize
court, impaneling its juries, bringing accused men before it, and
carrying out its penalties. He carried out elections of members of the
House of Commons.

        There were two high constables for each hundred. They were
chosen by the Justices of the Peace at quarter sessions, and were
usually small gentry or well-to-do yeomen. They were the intermediaries
between the justices and the petty constables. The petty constable was
the executive official of the village. He was usually elected by the
suitors to the leet court of the manor for a year. He might be a
farmer, an artisan, a carpenter, a shoemaker, or many times a
tradesman, a butcher, or baker. He often visited the alehouse to learn
of any trouble in the making. He would intervene in quarrels and riots
and tell the participants to desist in the King's name. If they didn't,
he could call on all bystanders to help him "force a quiet". He had to
lead the rioters and causers of injuries to others, hold them there
until he could bring him before the nearest justice. He would inform
the justice of plots to trespass or forcibly enter land to take
possession. He saw to it that no new cottages were built in the
villages without due authority. He supervised markets and inns. He
reported lapses of care for apprentices by their masters to the
justice. At harvest time, he called upon all able bodied persons to
assist and punished those who didn't respond by putting them in the
stocks or fining them forty shillings. He arrested and whipped vagrants
and sturdy rogues and sent them back to their place of birth through
constables on the way. If a horse was stolen, he raised the hue and cry
to all neighboring constables. He made inquiry into the paternity of
the coming child of an unmarried pregnant girl to make him take
responsibility for the child and pay her 8d. a week lest it fall into
the responsibility of the village. In a town, he might have watchmen to
help him see that the streets were peaceful at night. The constable
assisted the Justice of the Peace, the high constable, and the Sheriff.
He pressed men into military service. He collected taxes for the
Sheriff and collected the money for purveyance, the money for the poor,
maimed soldiers, and various kinds of prisoners, which the parish had
to pay. He was often the spokesman for the village in village concerns,
such as too many alehouses, brought to the attention of justices at
quarter sessions. The constable and churchwardens together collected
money for the parish, looked after the needy, and kept in close touch
with the overseers of the poor, who cared for the sick and old, found
work for the idle, took charge of bastards, apprenticed orphan
children, and provided supplies for the workhouse.

        In 1609 the East India Company was given a monopoly by the
Crown that was indefinitely long as long as it was profitable to the
realm in the King's opinion. Interlopers were to forfeit their ships
and goods, one-half to the Company and one-half to the Crown. Monopoly
status made the Company competitive with the Dutch and Portuguese
monopoly companies. The Crown received a gift or a loan from the
Company in return. At first, the Company raised capital for each
separate voyage. But voyages tried to undercut each other and rival
factions squabbled over cargoes. So the company then raised a
"terminable joint-stock" for a period of years. The first of these was
issued in 1613-16 and financed a fleet every year for four years.
Subscriptions were called in by yearly installments and dividends paid
out yearly. The voyage of 1613 brought shareholders a profit equivalent
to about 11% a year. By 1620, the Company operated thirty to forty
"tall ships", many built in its own dockyards. These dockyards were so
technologically advanced that they were daily viewed by visitors and
ambassadors. Here, besides wet and dry docks, there were timber yards,
a foundry and cordage works for supplying the ships' hardware and a
bakery and saltings for their provisioning. More than 200 craftsmen
were directly employed in the yard. Overall the company was one of
London' largest employers.

        In 1607, the Muscovy Company, hired Henry Hudson to find a
northwest passage through North America to the Pacific Ocean.

        In 1606, the first charter of the Virginia Company was issued
for trading purposes. It gave the settlers "all liberties, franchises,
and immunities" they had in England. To oversee this colony, the Crown
appointed a council. Virginia established the Episcopal Church by law.
Virginia became a joint-stock company in 1609. But exports were few
(timber, soap ashes, pitch, tar, and dyes) for several years, and then
tobacco emerged as a source of profit. King James imposed a heavy
duties on imported tobacco because it corrupted man's breath with a
stinking smoke.

        Life was difficult for Puritan Separatists, who wanted to
separate from the established church. They were imprisoned and their
houses were watched day and night for illegal meetings. In 1620, after
trying Holland and when there was a depression in England, a few
Puritan Separatists, along with other pilgrims, left for Virginia in
the Mayflower, but landed in New England and founded Plymouth Colony.
They were led by William Bradford and William Brewster, their spiritual
leader. They planted fields and made friends with the Indians. In 1621,
they secured a patent to the merchants and planters together for a
voluntary joint-stock company in New England. Later, it became the
self-governing Massachusetts Bay Colony.

        The canons of the church of 1604 provided for excommunication
for anyone who propounded that the king did not have the same authority
in ecclesiastical matters as the godly kings among the Jews and
Christian emperors in the primitive church, that the Church of England
was not a true and apostolic church, that worship according the Book of
Common prayer and administration of sacraments was corrupt or
superstitious, or that other methods of the church were wicked,
unchristian, or superstitious.

        Church sanctuary was abolished for those accused of criminal
offenses because it had been abused by thieves paying their rent by
thieving at night. It remained available to those accused of civil
offenses.

        About 5% of the population was Catholic, although it was
against the law to practice this religion. Indeed it long been the
practice to sequester their lands, punish them for going to mass, fine
them for not attending the established church, banish their priests,
and imprison those who aided priests. There was a Catholic plot in 1605
to blow up Parliament and the king with gunpowder and to restore
Catholicism as the state religion with a Catholic king. It was
discovered and the conspirators were executed. Then there was a
crackdown on Catholics, with houses being searched for hiding places
for priests. Also, legislation was passed barring Catholics from many
offices.


                    The Law

        Churchwardens of every parish shall oversee the poor in their
parish. They shall, with consent of the Justices of the Peace, set to
work children whose parents cannot maintain them and also set to work
married or unmarried persons who have no trade and no means to maintain
themselves. Churchwardens shall tax every inhabitant, including parson
and vicar and every occupier of land and houses, as they shall think
fit. There will be a convenient stock of flax, hemp, wool, thread, iron
and other necessary ware and stuff to set the poor on work. There will
be competent sums of money for the relief of the lame, impotent, old,
blind, and others not able to work, and also for the putting out of
children to be apprentices. Child apprentices may be bound until 21
years of age or until time of marriage. They shall account to the
Justices of the Peace for all money received and paid. The penalty for
absence or neglect is 20s. If any parish cannot raise sufficient funds,
the Justices of the Peace may tax other nearby parishes to pay, and
then the hundred, and then the county. Grandparents, parents, and
children of every poor, old, blind, lame, or impotent person not able
to work, being of sufficient ability, shall at their own charge,
relieve and maintain every such poor person in that manner and
according to that rate as Justices of the Peace of that county
determine, or else forfeit 20s. per month. Two Justices of the Peace
may commit to gaol or house of correction persons refusing to work and
disobedient churchwardens and overseers. The overseers may, with the
consent of the lord of the manor, build houses on common or waste land
for the poor at the expense of the parish, in which they may place more
than one family in each house.

        Every parish shall pay weekly 2-10d. toward the relief of sick,
hurt, and maimed soldiers and mariners. Counties with more than fifty
parishes need pay only 2-6d. The county treasurer shall keep registers
and accounts. Soldiers begging shall lose their pension and shall be
adjudged common rogues or vagabonds subject to imprisonment and
punishment.

        A seminal patent-protection law was passed in 1624. It stated
that all monopolies to any person or persons, bodies politic or
corporate for the sole buying, selling, making, working, or using of
anything within the realm are void. This does not include London or
towns. Parties aggrieved by such may recover treble damages in the
superior courts, with double costs. Excepted are existing patents, for
21 years or less, for new inventions and for future patents for 14
years or less. Excepted also are patents for printing or making
saltpeter, gunpowder, shot or ordinance, etc.; patents concerning allum
mines or Newcastle coal or glass making or export of calves' skins or
making smalts [deep-blue pigment or glass] or melting iron ore; grants
of office; and licenses for taverns.

        Persons stealing crops from lands or fruit from trees shall be
whipped.

        Every person shall receive the holy communion in church at
least once a year or else forfeit 20 pounds for the first year and 40
pounds for the second year, and threescore pounds for every year after
until he takes the said sacrament.

        Every person convicted of drunkenness shall be penalized 5s. or
else placed in the stocks for six hours, because the loathsome and
odious sin of drunkenness has grown into common use lately and it is
the root of many other sins, such as bloodshed, stabbings, murder,
swearing, fornication, and adultery, and is detrimental to the arts and
manual trades and diverse workmen, who become impoverished. Offenders
convicted a second time shall be bound with two sureties to the sum of
200s.

        Lewd women, having bastards, chargeable to the parish, shall be
committed to the house of correction to be punished and set to work for
one year.

        Mothers concealing the death of a bastard baby shall suffer as
for murder, unless one witness proves the child was born dead.

        Persons deserting their families shall be deemed incorrigible
rogues and punished as such.

        Persons such as sorters who purloin or embezzle wool or yarn
delivered to them by clothiers and the receivers thereof, knowing the
same, shall recompense the party grieved or else be whipped and set in
the stocks.

        Because benefit of clergy is not allowed to women convicted of
felony by reason whereof many women suffer death for small causes, any
woman convicted for the felonious taking of any money, goods or
chattels greater than 12d. and less than 10s. other than burglary or
robbery on the highway or from the person of any man or woman without
their knowledge, shall be branded and marked in the hand upon the
brawne of the left thumb with a "T" and imprisonment, whipping,
stocking, or sending to the house of correction for a year or less.

        Actors profaning God, Jesus, or the Holy Ghost on stage are to
be penalized 200s.

        In 1604 it was decided that it was not necessary to prove that
witchcraft caused the death of a person for there to be punishment for
the witchcraftery. All that was necessary now was the practice of
witchcraft. The punishment was death by hanging. Also, consulting or
feeding an evil spirit was felony.

        Sheriffs summoning defendants without a writ shall pay 200s.
and damages to the defendant, and 400s. to the King.

        Since administrators of goods of people dying intestate who
fail to pay the creditors of the deceased often can't pay the debts
from their own money, the people (who are not creditors) receiving the
goods shall pay the creditors.

        No merchant may dress black rabbit skins, nor export them,
unless dressed by skinners and bought from them because the skinners
have been thus deprived of their livelihoods to their impoverishment
throughout the realm.

        Beer may be exported when malt is at 16s. per quarter because
exporting beer instead of barley and malt will (1) increase the export
tax to the King, (2) increase income for coopers and brewers, and (3)
provide more jobs in transporting beer, which is more voluminous, to
the great comfort of the port towns.

        Fish which are spawning and growing in harbors may not be taken
by any net or weirs because this practice has hurt fishermen and the
realm.

        No one shall sell beer or ale to an unlicensed alehousekeeper
because abuses there have become intolerable.

        No person at least 18 years of age may be naturalized or
restored in blood after being attainted unless he takes the sacrament
and the Oath of Supremacy [of the king over the church of England], and
Oath of Allegiance [to the king].

        Money given by will for the apprenticeship of poor children
shall be managed by incorporated towns and unincorporated parishes.
Masters receiving such apprentices shall become bound with sufficient
sureties.

        Houses of correction shall be built in every county.

        London may make a trench to bring water to the north part of
the city and shall compensate the owners of lands by agreement with
them of an amount or an amount determined by commissioners.

        All hospitals and abiding places for the poor, lame, maimed,
and impotent persons or for houses of correction founded according to
the statute of Elizabeth shall be incorporated and have perpetual
succession.

        Only lands and hereditaments paying rents to the Crown within
the last sixty years shall be claimed by the Crown; the title of all
persons and corporation who have enjoyed uninterruptedly against the
Crown for the last sixty years are confirmed against the Crown.

        No one may take more than 8% interest on loans because 10% has
caused many, including gentry, merchant, farmer, and tradesman, to sell
their land and forsake their trade to pay their debts.

        As Attorney General, Edward Coke introduced the crime of
"seditious libel" in a case before the Star Chamber in 1606. These
written slanders or libels were viewed as incitements to disorder and
private vengeance. Because the tendency to cause quarrels was the
essence of the crime, the truth of the libel was not a defense, but
might be an aggravation of criminality.

        Edward Coke, former Chief Justice of both the Court of Common
Pleas and Court of the Queen's Bench, wrote his Reports on court cases
of all kinds through forty years and his Institutes on the law, in
which he explained and systematized the common law and which was
suitable for students. This included a commentary and update of
Littleton, published in 1627; old and current statutes; a description
of the criminal law; and lastly an explanation of the court system, the
last two published in 1644. Coke declared that "a man's house is his
castle".

        Coke waged a long battle with his wife over her extensive lands
and personal property and the selection of a husband for their
daughter. In his Institutes, he described the doctrine of coverture as
"With respect to such part of the wife's personality as is not in her
possession, as money owing or bequeathed to her, or accrued to her in
case of intestacy, or contingent interests, these are a qualified gift
by law to the husband, on condition that he reduce them into possession
during the coverture, for if he happen to die, in the lifetime of his
wife, without reducing such property into possession, she and not his
representative will be entitled to it. His disposing of it to another
is the same as reducing it into his own possession." He further states
that "The interest of the husband in, and his authority over, the
personal estate of the wife, is, however, considerably modified by
equity, in some particular circumstances. A settlement made upon the
wife in contemplation of marriage, and in consideration of her fortune,
will entitle the representatives of the husband, though he die before
his wife, to the whole of her goods and chattels, whether reduced into
possession or not during the coverture. ... A settlement made after
marriage will entitle the representative of the husband to such an
estate in preference to the wife. ... A court of equity will not
interfere with the husband's right to receive the income during the
coverture, though the wife resist the application."

        No person convicted of Catholicism may practice the common law
as a counsellor, clerk, attorney, or solicitor, nor may practice civil
law as advocate, or proctor, nor shall be justice, minister, clerk, or
steward in any court, nor practice medicine, nor perform as apothecary,
nor be officer in a town, in the army, or navy, or forfeit 100 pounds
as punishment. Nor may they be administrators of estates, or have
custody of any child as guardian. Nor may they possess any armor,
gunpowder, or arms. Nor may anyone print or import Popish books
rosaries, or else forfeit 40s

        Papists running a school must forfeit 40s. a day for such.
Anyone conveying a child beyond the seas to be educated in popery may
not sue in the courts, may not hold any office, and shall forfeit 100
pounds and all lands. But the child returning may have his family lands
restored to him if he receives the sacrament of the lord's supper in
the established church after reaching 18 years of age.


                Judicial Procedure

        James I asserted an authority to determine the jurisdiction
between the various courts.

        The Court of the King's Bench had the major part of the civil
business of the courts.

        The Star Chamber Court still was primarily directed against
force and fraud and defended the common people from over-mighty lords
and over-pliable Justices of the Peace, for instance by deterring
enclosure. It also enforced monopolies. However, there was a growing
tendency for King James, who sat on it, to abuse its power with high
fines. For instance, a lord accused with foul language by a huntsman of
following hounds of a chase too closely threatened to use his horse
whip on the huntsman's master when the huntsman threatened to complain
to his master. The lord was fined 10,000 pounds. James' council used
torture to obtain information from accused felons about possible
conspiracies against him.

        The ordinary administrative court of first instance is formed
by the single Justices of the Peace, who issue orders regarding public
safety, order, public morals, health, the poor, highways, water,
fields, forests, fisheries, trade, building, and fire, and particularly
begging and vagrancy as well as regulations of wages, servants,
apprentices, and day laborers. For more important resolutions, the
special sessions of the Justices of the Peace of a hundred for a court
of intermediate instance and appointed overseers of the poor. All
Justices of the Peace were present at the quarter sessions, which were
held at least four times a year, and were primarily a court of appeal
from penal sentences, but also make the county rate, appoint county
treasurers and county prison and house of correction governors,
regulate prices and wages, settle fees of county officials, grant
licenses for powder mills, and register dissenting chapels. It heard
appeals expressly allowed by statute. The central courts also heard
appeals by writ of certiorari as to whether an administrative act was
in accordance with existing law, whether the court is competent, and
whether the administrative law has been rightly interpreted. This writ
of certiorari ceased in the 1700s.

        Justices of the Peace who have the power to give restitution of
possession to tenants of any freehold estate of their lands or
tenements which have been forcibly entered and withheld, shall have
like power for tenants for term of years, tenants by copy of court
roll, guardians by knight service, and tenants by elegit statute
merchant and staple of lands or tenements [tenant-plaintiffs holding
property to receive income therefrom for satisfaction of a debt of
defendants].

        The Justices of the Peace were chosen by the Crown, usually by
the Chancellor. The qualifications were residence in the county,
suitability of moral character, religious uniformity, and the
possession of lands or tenements with twenty pounds a year. They were
almost exclusively country gentlemen, except in the towns. In the
corporate towns, the mayor, bailiff, recorder, and senior aldermen were
ex officio [by virtue of the office] Justices of the Peace. Their main
duty was to keep the peace. If a justice heard of a riot in the making,
he could compel individuals at the place to give bonds of
"good-a-bearing" and cause a proclamation to be made in the King's name
for them to disperse. Two justices or more had the authority to arrest
the rioters and send a record of it to the assizes and to the Privy
Council. If the riot had taken place before their arrival, they could
make an inquiry by a jury and certify the results to the King and his
Council. The justices had men brought before them on many kinds of
charges, on their own summons, or on initiative of the petty constable.
They tried to draw these men into confession by questioning. After
indictment, a person had the choice of a petty jury trial or paying a
fine. The Justices of the Peace could insist upon presentment juries or
surveys of offenses by local officers, but, without the institution of
policemen, not many crimes were prosecuted because victims were
unwilling or could not afford to initiate judicial action. Their
unwillingness was partly due to the severity of penalties, e.g. death
for the theft of over 12s. and whippings and fines for misdemeanors.
Further, the offender was frequently a neighbor with whom one would
have to live. Mediation by the local constable often took place. When
there an outbreak of lawlessness in an area, a commission might be set
up especially for that area to enforce the law.

        Assault cases were common in courts of assize and courts of
quarter sessions. The quarter sessions were those of a number of
Justices of the Peace held for a couple of days four times a year for
the more important cases in the jurisdiction of the Justices of the
Peace. Assault was violence or threat of imminent violence. Fines were
graduated according to the means of the offender, who was usually bound
over to keep the peace. Most involved offenders and victims who were
neighbors and included people of substantial standing in the village.
Also, a sizable minority were directed against local officers such as
constables, bailiffs, or tax- collectors.

        Three-fourths of all assize indictments and many
quarter-sessions indictments were for various types of theft, including
petty larceny, grand larceny, housebreaking, burglary, sheep stealing,
and robbery. These offenses were mostly opportunistic rather than
planned, except for London's underworld of professional thieves and the
cutpurses of country markets and highway robbers on lonely roads. There
were substantial peaks in theft in periods of harvest failure and
industrial depression, especially by vagrants. But most of the poor
never stole.

        The Justices of the Peace usually deferred to the learned
Justices of Assize for cases of felony, murder, rape, highway robbery,
and witchcraft. Most homicides were the result of an impassioned
argument leading to blows inflicted by nearby commonplace items picked
up and used as weapons. Only 18% of homicides were within the family.
Men were still declared outlaw if they failed to come to court after
repeated summons.

        The Lord Keeper regularly advised the assize justices, before
each circuit departure, to relieve the poor, supply the markets,
maintain the roads (which were frequently impassable in winter for
wagons or coaches), enforce church attendance, suppress superfluous and
disorderly alehouses, and put down riots, robberies, and vagrancy, and
in times of dearth, to suppress speculation in foodstuffs, prevent
famine, and preserve order. In fact, the justices were most attentive
to offenses which affected them as rate payers for the poor. These were
offenses against cottaging laws (e.g. erection of cottages which lacked
the statutory four acres of land), harboring of "inmates", disputes of
settlement of paupers, bastardy, vagrancy, church nonattendance, and
above all, disorderly alehouses. Alehousing had been a well-
established means of poor employment since the 1200s, so it was hard to
enforce licensing laws. Further, alehouses were the centers of social
life for the common people; both women and men met their friends there.
If an attorney or solicitor delays his client's suits to work his own
gain or over charges his client, the client can recover his costs and
treble damages and the attorney and solicitor shall be disbarred. None
may be admitted to any court of the king but such as have been brought
up in the same court or is otherwise well-practiced in soliciting of
causes and has been found by their dealings to be skillful and honest.
An attorney who allows another to use his name shall forfeit 400
shillings and be disbarred.

        Offenders shall pay the charge of their own conveyance to gaol
or the sum shall be levied by sale of their goods so that the King's
subjects will no longer be burdened thereby.

        Plaintiffs' costs shall be paid by the defendants only where
there is a judgment against the defendant in all actions in which the
plaintiff is entitled to costs on judgment for him, to discourage
frivolous and unjust suits.

        Defendants may not petition to remove a case to the Westminster
courts after a jury is selected because such has resulted in
unnecessary expense to plaintiffs and delay for defendants in which
they suborn perjury by obtaining witnesses to perjure themselves.

        In 1619, by the writ of quo warranto, a government office or
official could be made to explain by what right he performed certain
acts.

        The Court of High Commission heard mostly matrimonial cases,
but also moral offenses both of clergy and laity, and simony [buying or
selling ecclesiastical preferment, ecclesiastical pardons, or other
things regarded as sacred or spirtual], plurality, drunkenness, and
other clerical irregularities.

        By 1616, Chancery could order injunctions to stop activities.

        In Slade's case of 1602, the Court of the Queen's Bench held
that assumpsit may be brought in place of the action of debt. So
assumpsit supplants debt for recovering liquidated sums and is then
called "indebitatus assumpsit".

        The trial of Sir Walter Ralegh in 1603 began a call by people
for a right to confront and question one's accusers. Before trial,
privy counselors who in theory sat as impartial justices,
cross-examined Ralegh in prison. With a carefully selected jury
present, the trial began with reading of the indictment, which Ralegh
had not yet seen. He was charged with treason in plotting with Catholic
Spain to put Arabella Stuart on the throne. Arabella was to write to
Spain promising peace, toleration of Catholics in England, and
direction by Spain in her marriage choice. He pled not guilty and took
no exception to any jurors, stating that he knew them all to be honest
men. Next, Attorney General Edward Coke, his enemy and rival, and he
engaged in a debate about who was right, with Coke outright bullying
him. Coke then produced a signed confession by Lord Cobham that
implicated him in the alleged conspiracy and accepting 10,000 crowns
for his part. Ralegh was given permission to speak. He said that Cobham
had retracted his confession. He ridiculed the idea that he would
betray England to Spain for gold after fighting against Spain,
including risking his life three times, and spending 4,000 pounds for
the defeat of Spain. He pointed to a treatise he had written to the
king on the present state of Spain and reasons against peace. Then
there was a discussion on the validity of Cobham's confession. Cecil
gave an oration of Ralegh. Coke gave a speech. Ralegh asked to have his
accuser brought before him face to face. He cited law that two
witnesses were necessary for a conviction for treason. Chief Justice
Popham replied that only one witness was necessary under common law,
which applied to his case, and that the trial was properly conducted by
examination of the defendant. Coke added that it would be improper to
call Cobham because he was a party. Then Coke surprised Ralegh with a
letter from Cobham stating that Ralegh had asked Cobham to procure him
an annual pension of 1500 pounds from Spain for disclosing
intelligence. Ralegh acknowledged that a pension was offered, but
denied that he had ever intended to accept it. He admitted that it was
a fault not to inform authorities of this offer. The jury deliberated
for fifteen minutes and returned with a verdict of guilty. The Chief
Justice delivered the sentence for treason: drawing, hanging,
disemboweling, beheading, and quartering. The whole trial was not so
much to access guilt, but to show the general public that the person
was guilty.

        Church courts were revived after a period of disuse. They could
annul an unconsummated or legally invalid marriage (e.g. consanguinity,
impotence, a witnessed precontract to marry) and order judicial
separations in case of adultery, cruelty, or apostasy. Annuled
marriages made a person's children illegitimate. An action at common
law for "criminal conversation" [adultery] with the plaintiff's spouse
or for assault and battery could result in an order for separation. But
only a private statute of Parliament could grant a divorce, which
allowed remarriage. It was granted in only a few cases and only to the
very wealthy. Church officials spied upon people's conduct to draw them
into their courts and gain more money from the profits of justice.

        In 1610, Edward Coke, Chief Justice of the Court of Common
Pleas, decided that the statute giving the Royal College of Physicians
power to imprison and fine those practicing without a license was
invalid and unenforceable because it gave the college half of each fine
awarded, which was a conflict of interest with its role as an
adjudicator. Coke said that a maxim of the common law was that no man
ought to be judge in his own cause. By this decision, he asserted a
court supremacy over Parliament with respect to the validity of
statutes. He opined that the courts should not only be independent of
the Crown, but should act as arbiter of the Constitution to decide all
disputed questions. In his words, "When an Act of Parliament is against
common right and reason, the common law will control it and adjudge
such Act to be void."

        Justices still explained and in some degree interpreted
legislative acts of Parliament as they had since the 1500s, but their
right to do so was coming into question and was slowly lost.

        Female scolds were still dunked into water as punishment.

        Only barristers, who were called to the bar after being in long
residence in one of the Inns of Court, could practice before the King's
court. Attorneys and solicitors prepared cases for barristers and
practiced before minor courts.

        The king appointed the justices, with the advice of the
Chancellor. James I often intimidated the justices to see things his
way.

        The oath of a justice was: "Well and truly ye shall serve the
King and his people. And ye shall take no fee or livery of none but the
King, nor gift or reward of none that hath a do before you except it
shall be meat or drink of small value, as long as the plea hangs before
you. And ye shall do equal law and execution of Right to all the King's
subjects rich and poor, without regard to any person. Ye shall counsel
our Sovereign Lord the King in his need. And ye shall not delay any
person of common right for the letters of the King or of any person or
for any other cause ... So help you God."

        The courts of King's Bench and Common Pleas, and the Chancery
all met simultaneously in Westminster Hall. Throngs passed up and down
the middle aisles between the courts, including booksellers,
stationers, scriveners, and vendors of bread and hot meat. The hall was
so cold that people kept on their coats and hats.

        The last court case concerning villeinage was in 1618.



                     Chapter 15


                 The Times: 1625-1642

        The entourage of Charles I came to be called "Cavaliers". They
were named by their opponents for the Spanish caballero who was a
Catholic who prosecuted Protestants. Their hair had long, curled, and
flowing locks. They wore a broad-rimmed decorated hat. Their fancy
jackets and breeches were loose. Boots were wide and folded over at the
top. Young men wore earrings and painted their faces. A lady wore her
hair in ringlets on each side of her face. Her dress was fitted at the
waist, with a peaked bodice. It was low at the shoulders with a scoop
neckline in front. She often wore much lace, especially at the neck
down to the bust line. Her outer dress and under-skirt that was
revealed in front, were full and made of satin and stiff silk or
velvet. Only hose of silk were worn at court.

        A majority of prosperous industrial towns and fee farmers, led
sometimes by lords or old landed gentry, were Puritans. They dressed
plainly and in somber colors such as black, grey, and buff, with no
ornamentation except plain white collars and cuffs of linen rather than
of lace. Wool replaced silk and velvet. No jewelry was worn. The
Puritan women also wore long white aprons. The Puritan women smoothed
their hair back into little knobs and covered their hair and head with
a white covering. Both Puritan men and women wore broad-rimed hats and
plain shoes. The ordinary country man wore a felt hat, broadcloth coat,
woolen trousers, hand-knitted worsted stockings, and plain, strong
shoes. The Puritan men for a time had short-cut hair. The Puritan-
Parliamentarians were given the name "Roundheads" after the crop-
headed London apprentices whose rioting had marked every stage of the
conflict between king and Parliament.

        Religion was a favorite and serious topic of discussion, even
among the illiterate. Nine-tenths of the people were Protestant. On the
whole, they were more inclined to salvation by grace than to salvation
by good works. Popular reading included guides for good manners such as
"The Rich Cabinet" by Thomas Gainsford, and "Youths Behavior"
translated from the French by Francis Hawkins. It advised not to sit
with one leg on the other, but with the feet even; not to spit on one's
fingers; and not to sniffle in the sight of others. Books for ladies
such as "Delights for Ladies" by Hugh Platt told them how to adorn
themselves, tables, closets, and rooms with beautiful objects,
perfumes, and waters. It taught preserving and the making of candy
preserved by sugar, cooking, and housewifery. Gervase Markham wrote
advice for men in "Hobsons Horse-load of Letters", which addressed
serious negotiations, private businesses, amorous accomplishment,
wanton merriment, and the defense of honor and reputation. "A Helpe to
Discourse" primed a man to meet company with suggested questions and
answers, epigrams, riddles, and jests. In Henry Peacham's "The Compleat
Gentleman" (1622), the model Cavalier is portrayed in terms of
horsemanship, tilting, sports, choice of companions, reserved and
dignified conduct, good scholarship, and responsibility. This popular
book was a guide to university, where there was a seven year course of
classroom lectures. It advised conversation with men of the soundest
reputation for religion, life, and learning, but recreation with those
of the same rank and quality. First place was to be given to religion,
so that the foundation of all studies would be the service of God.
Following in importance were: speaking and writing in English or Latin
(grammar, syntax, and rhetoric), astronomy, astrology, geography (whose
authorities were Pliny, Strabo, and the pagan writers of the first
century), chorography [map-making], mathematics (including arithmetic
and geometry), poetry, (reading, writing, and criticizing), music
(including part-music), drawing, limning [putting drawings in books],
painting, art history, exercise (riding, running, leaping, tilting,
throwing, wrestling, swimming, shooting, and falconry), logic and
disputation (if related to one's intended profession such as the law),
philosophy (Plato and Aristotle), and some medicine and botany.

        Richard Brathwaite's "The English Gentleman" portrays the
somber Puritan who accepts the gospel of work. He is a staid and
serious businessman. "Matrimonial Honour" by Daniel Rogers opined that
for success, a marriage must be godly, with the parties equally
religious, worshipping together in private and in public. A hasty or
worldly marriage would bring repentance. The spouses should agree, but
keep to their spheres. Children should not be spoiled.

        Large households were more or less self-supporting and were
managed by their ladies. Work included ordering wool, hemp, and flax;
making cloth and dying it; dairy work; brewing; malting; baking;
preserving wines; extracting oils; distilling perfume; and putting on
banquets. Couches were coming into use in parlors.

        The king and his court entourage settled for most of the year
in Whitehall instead of traveling around the country. The king let the
public into Hyde Park, the king's private hunting park, for recreation.
The City of London and Westminster were still separate, but a mass of
hovels was springing up in between them. In certain areas there were
houses crowded with those wanted for minor offenses, small thefts, and
debt. Bailiffs did not dare venture into these areas because the
inhabitants hid and defended each other unless the offense was a major
one. The penalty for stealing even small sums was still death. The
water carrier was still active and the night transport of sewage
necessary.

        Inigo Jones was the first architect of consequence. He had
studied in Italy and designed and built the Banqueting House at
Whitehall, near Westminster, in London in 1622. It had classical
proportions and nice shaping and dressing in stone. He was now an
arbiter of taste for the King Charles and his Queen and built many
structures for them, including the Queen's Chapel at St. James Palace
and her bedroom in the Queen's Hose in Greenwich. All over London and
the country he and his pupils built many classical buildings, including
houses, churches, stables, lodgings, out-buildings, staircases,
galleries, watergates, and archways. They stood in stark contrast to
the Tudor buildings around them. In the 1632, Jones started town
planning in London with Covent Garden fruit and vegetable market and
terraced houses around a central piazza surrounded by open arcades with
a Tuscan church at one end. In 1634, a man from the suburb of Hackney
introduced a line of coaches rented at 1s. per hour. They soon became
very popular.

        The Flemish Johann Baptista van Helmont demonstrated that
metals dissolved in acid can be recovered through chemical means and
enunciated the doctrine that each thing in nature has its own specific
organization.

        A large part of England was rebuilt as yeomen expanded their
houses and others lower in rank replaced mud and wood hovels with brick
and stone cottages. A separate kitchen appeared. The ground floors are
boarded over to create bedrooms. Permanent stairs replace ladders.
Glass appears in windows. Glass and crockery replace wood and pewter,
Chairs replace benches. Knives and forks become common.

        About 1640 began travel between towns by covered wagons called
stage coaches. They carried passengers and goods and stopped at inns
for stabling and repairs.

        Work was begun in 1630 to make canals that would make marsh
waters run to the sea. Barges on canals were the most efficient mode of
transportation. A barge could carry 50 tons on a canal and only 30 tons
on a river. A single horse could haul an 8-ton wagon on iron rails or
on a soft road, but only 1/8 of a ton on his back.

        A new trend of spring-sown crops led to better crop balance and
reduced the risks of scarcity in a bad year. But the economy was still
volatile.

        There were riots in London in 1640-1 from a complete breakdown
in political consensus, the factions being the Royalist City elite
versus the middling and lesser merchants and craftsmen.

        In 1631, the clock makers broke away from the control of the
Blacksmiths. The gunmakers also broke away from the Blacksmiths. The
tinplate workers broke away from the Ironmongers.

        "Searching" for bad cloth became more difficult as the industry
became more diversified. For instance, a new machine called a gig- mill
did the work of many hand finishers. In 1633, Charles issued a
commission for the reformation of the cloth industry with minute
directions for the manufacture of cloth. But there were many
disagreements over the details of manufacture and reform was difficult
to enforce.

        By the 1630s, many parishes had a resident intellectual for the
first time. The parish priests came from gentry, upper yeomanry, urban
tradesmen and clerical families. They were educated and highly learned.
They had libraries and were in touch with contemporary religious
debates. They saw their role primarily as pastoral care. Many wanted to
improve the religious knowledge and moral conduct of their
parishioners. Puritan influence deepened as they forbade dancing,
games, minstrels, and festivals. They punished superstitious conduct.
They initiated prosecutions in church courts for sexual lapses and
drunkenness. The church court had little coercive power and its
punishments were restricted to penance or excommunication. Many Puritan
sects espoused equality for women. By the 1640s women were preachers,
e.g. in the Baptist and Anabaptist religions and, until 1660,
prophetesses. These sects were mostly composed of the lower echelons of
society.

        Poor people did not respond to sermons as did the well-to-do.
Nor were they as involved in church activity, attending church only for
marriages, baptisms, and funerals.

        Charles I not only believed in the divine right of kings and
was authoritarian; he was the ultimate autocrat. He had an unalterable
conviction that he was superior to other men, who were insignificant
and privileged to revolve around him. He issued directives to reverse
jury verdicts. Parliamentarians Oliver Cromwell and other educated men
opposed this view. The Commons voted not to grant Charles the usual
custom-dues for life, making it instead renewable each year,
conditioned on the king's behavior. Charles dissolved Parliament before
this passed. He continued to take tonnage and poundage.

        Charles wanted money for war so he imposed many taxes, but
without the consent of Parliament. They included many of which had
fallen into disuse. He imposed a compulsory "loan" on private
individuals, which the courts held was illegal, and imprisoned those
who refused. Bail was denied to these men. Simpler people who refused
were threatened with impressment into the Navy, which included being
landed on shore to fight as marines and soldiers. They sought to revive
the old writ of habeas corpus to get released, but to no avail. Charles
billeted unpaid and unruly soldiers in private homes, which they
plundered. It was customary to quarter them in inns and public houses
at royal expense. Martial law was declared and soldiers were executed.
But the citizens did not want martial law either.

        The Magna Carta was now seen as a protector of basic liberties,
instead of a restoration of certain past rights.. Both attorneys and
laymen read "The Pastyme of People" written by John Rastell in 1529,
which described the history of the Magna Carta from 1215 to 1225. Also
read was the "Great Abridgment" of the English law written by Rastell
in 1527, and Coke's volume of his Institutes which dealt with the Magna
Carta, which the Crown took to prevent being published until 1642, when
Parliament allowed it. Broad-scale pamphleteering turned England into a
school of political discussion. Oxford University favored the
established church and Cambridge University was Puritan.

        The House of Commons asserted a preeminence to the House of
Lords for the following reasons: The estates of the members of the
House of Commons were three times the extent of the members' of the
House of Lords. Bishops' estates had diminished considerably because of
secularization. The members of the House of Commons were elected
[chosen] by the people.

        The House of Commons drew up a Petition of Right in 1627, which
expanded upon the principles of Magna Carta and sought to fix definite
bounds between royal power and the power of the law. It protested the
loans compelled under pain of imprisonment and stated that no tax or
the like should be exacted without the common consent of Parliament. It
quoted previous law that "...no freeman may be taken or imprisoned, or
be disseised of his freeholds or liberties, or his free customs, or be
outlawed or exiled; or in any manner destroyed, but by the lawful
judgment of his peers, or by the law of the land" and that "...no man
of what estate or condition that he be, should be put out of his land
or tenements, nor taken, nor imprisoned nor disinherited, nor put to
death without being brought to answer by due process of law". It
continued that "... divers of your subjects have of late been
imprisoned without any cause showed; and when for their deliverance
they were brought before your Justices by your Majesty's writs of
Habeas Corpus, there to undergo and receive as the court should order,
and their keepers commanded to certify the causes of their detainer, no
cause was certified, but that they were detained by your Majesty's
special command, signified by the Lords of your Privy Council, and yet
were returned back to several prisons, without being charged with
anything to which they might make answer according to the law." It also
protested the billeting of soldiers in private houses and martial law
trying soldiers and sailors. If these terms were agreed to by the King,
he was to be given a good sum of money. Since he needed the money, he
yielded. He expected tonnage and poundage for the Navy for life, as was
the custom. But he got it only for one year, to be renewable yearly.
The King agreed to the petition, quietly putting his narrow
interpretation on it, and it was put into the statute book.

        In 1629 Parliament distinguished between treason to the king
and treason to the Commonwealth.

        The Chief Justice held in 1638 that acts of Parliament to take
away the King's royal power in the defense of his kingdom were void;
the king may command his subjects, their persons, their goods, and
their money and acts of Parliament make no difference. But the people
refused to pay these taxes.

        Charles thought of more ways to obtain money and disregarded
his agreement to the Petition of Right.

        Without the consent of Parliament, Charles extended ship money
to all the kingdom instead of just the ports. It was used to outfit
ships for the protection of the coasts. Hampden refused to pay it on
principle and the courts ruled against him in the case of King v. John
Hampden and he was sent to prison. When distraints were tried, the
common people used violence to prevent them. The bailiffs were pelted
with rocks when they came to distrain property. One man used his
pitchfork to take back his steer being taken by the bailiff. If a
distraint was successful, people would refuse to buy the distrained
property of their neighbors.

        Charles revived the right of the Crown to force knighthood on
the landed gentry for a fee.

        Charles sold monopolies in such goods as soap, leather, salt,
wine, coal, and linen rags although they had been abolished in the last
Parliament of James. This made employment uncertain for workers and
prices high for the public, and put masters in danger of loss of
capital.

        Fines were levied on people for the redress of defects in their
title deeds. Crown forest boundaries were arbitrarily extended and
landowners near Crown forests were heavily fined for their
encroachments on them. Money was extorted from London by an illegal
proclamation by which every house had to pay three years' rental to the
Crown to save itself from demolition.

        But what incensed the people more than the money issue were the
changes in the established church. High churchmen, called Ritualists,
enforced ceremonies offensive to Puritan feeling in every parish. The
centrally placed communion tables were to be placed at the east end
within railings and called "altars", or "mercy seats" as if for mass.
They were to be ornamented with crucifixes, images, pretty trifles,
books, candles and rich tapestries. Bowing was to be done when
approaching them. Clergymen were to be called "priests" and their
authority treated as divine. Worship was to be done in accordance with
the prescribed forms of Romish Breviars, Rituals, and Mass-books. Its
ritual was to have pomp and ceremony, including kneeling for communion.
Rings were to be used in marriages and crosses used in baptisms.
Churches, fonts, tables, pulpits, chalices and the like were to be
consecrated, thereby putting holiness in them. Churches that did not do
this but used unconsecrated or "polluted" articles were closed by
interdiction [a Catholic censure withdrawing most sacraments and
Christian burial]. Days, postures, meats, and vestments were to be
regarded. The clergy was to wear supplices [white linen vestments
flowing to the foot with lawn sleeves] and embroidered copes [vestment
over the head]. A Bishop wore a four-cornered cap, cope and surplice
with lawn-sleeves, tippet (long, black scarf), hood, and canonical
coat. Churchwardens were to take oaths to inform against any who
disobeyed. The law still required that all attend Sunday sermons. But
parishes had some control over who was their preacher, even though a
minister could be assigned to a parish by the bishops without the
consent of the patron of the church or parish people. By increasing the
meager pay of a parish clergyman, they could choose one with a
compatible theology or employ a lecturer from outside. The Ritualists
scolded clergymen for "gospel preaching" and suppressed Puritan
preaching in public meetings. Preaching or printing matter concerning
the controversy of free will versus predestination was forbidden.
Geneva Bibles, which were popular among laymen, were prohibited from
being imported. Many were excommunicated for sitting instead of
kneeling at communion. The clergy prohibited marriage if they liked by
withholding their license, and they licensed marriages without banns.
The Ritualists encouraged certain sports to be played after church on
Sunday. The Puritans protested vehemently to this because they wanted
to strictly observe the Sabbath. The Puritans saw the high churchmen as
wanting to return to the doctrine and customs they thought to be
Papist. The Ritualists were absolutists in their political views and
accepted the King's intervention in church matters. The ecclesiastical
Court of High Commission enforced the edicts of the church,
excommunicating those who did not conform and expelling clergymen who,
for instance, did not bow at the name of Jesus or wear the surplice. It
was used against the Puritans and imposed high fines and imprisonment
for religious eccentricity and Puritan preaching. Charles supported the
established church in this endeavor because it agreed that he had a
divine right to rule.

        The universities and high churchmen were beginning to adopt the
doctrine of free will over predestination. Parliamentarian and Puritan
Oliver Cromwell and others feared this presaged a return to
justification by works and the popish faith. In Parliament, he spoke
out against the tyranny of the bishops, whose offices he wanted
abolished, and the elaborateness of church services.

        To avoid persecution, many Puritans emigrated to Virginia and
New England. They were led by magistrates, country gentlemen, prominent
businessmen, attorneys, and other professionals. In 1629, the
Massachusetts Bay Colony was chartered at the instigation of John
Winthrop as a Puritan refuge. Its leaders led a migration of Puritans
organized to include five each of armorers, bakers, blacksmiths,
carpenters, shoemakers, merchants; three each of clothiers, chandlers,
coopers, military officers, physicians, and tailors; two each of
fishermen, herdsmen, and masons; on tanner, and one weaver. The fare
was five pounds and an applicant was interviewed to make sure he was a
Puritan. He got 50 acres, or more for a larger family. But if he paid
50 pounds into the common stock he received 200 acres of land, plus 50
more for each dependent. Maryland was founded in 1632 as a haven for
Catholics, but its charter precluded a government-established religion.
It was granted to Lord Baltimore to hold in free socage and was named
after Charles' wife, who was Catholic. Catholics in England could
practice their religion only in their homes and could not carry arms.

        As hostility grew, censorship of books and plays accelerated
and the number of authorized printers was reduced in 1637 by decree of
the Star Chamber. In 1640s effective government control of the press
collapsed. Then there were many pamphlets and newspapers with all
variety of interpretation of the Bible and all sorts of political
opinion, such as on taxation; law and the liberties of the subject;
religion; land and trade; and authority and property. Twenty-two
pamphlets were published in 1640 and 1,996 in 1642.

        In 1640 the canons of the church included a requirement for
parsons to exclaim divine right of kings every year. The Commons soon
resolved that this was contrary to the fundamental laws and liberties
of the realm.

        The Short Parliament of 1640 was dissolved soon because the
Commons demanded redress of its grievances. The Long Parliament of
1640-1653 requested by the House of Lords was agreed to by Charles
because he still wanted money. In election of members to the Long
Parliament, voters wanted to know where contenders stood on certain
political issues. In this Parliament, the Commons ceased to agree on
all issues and started to rely on majority rule.

        The House of Commons was led by John Pym, a middle class
landholder with extensive commercial interests. The Commons treated the
King's refusal to act with them as a relinquishment of his power to
Parliament. When it met at the Long Parliament, Pym expressed the
grievances of the King's actions against the privileges of Parliament,
against religion, and against the liberties of the subjects.
Specifically, he decried the disregard of free speech and of freedom
from prosecution afterward, and the arbitrary dissolution of
Parliament. Secondly, he alleged popery had been encouraged and the
ecclesiastical jurisdiction enlarged. Thirdly, he protested the patent
monopolies given to favorites to the detriment of the buying public,
the imposition of ship money levies beyond the need of national defense
and without the consent of Parliament, the revival of the feudal
practice of imposing a fine for refusal to accept a knighthood with its
attendant obligations, the enlargement of the King's forests and
driving out from hence tenants with lucrative holdings, extra judicial
declarations of justices without hearing of counsel or argument in many
criminal matters, and the abuses of the prerogative courts in defending
monopolies. Parliament's assertion into religious matters and foreign
affairs was unprecedented, those areas having been exclusively in the
power of the King.

        The Long Parliament begun in 1640 removed many of the King's
ministers and forbade clergy from sitting in Parliament or exercising
any temporal authority. It passed measures which were not agreed to by
the King. It undid the lawless acts of the King and the court decision
in the case of King v. Hampden. Ship money was declared illegal. The
new concept that the present Parliament should not be dissolved but by
its own consent was adopted. The Star Chamber and Court of High
Commission were abolished. The oath ex officio, an oath to answer all
questions, was originally meant for facts at issue, but had been
extended by these courts to opinions, beliefs, and religion and had led
to abuses. The Star Chamber had been the only court which punished
infractions of the Kings' edicts, so now his proclamations were
unenforceable. Protection against self-incrimination was given by the
provision that no person be forced "to confess or accuse him or herself
of crime, offense, delinquency, or misdemeanor, or any neglect... or
thing whereby, or by reason whereof, he or she shall or may be liable
or exposed to any censure, pain, penalty, or punishment whatsoever, as
had been the practice in the Star Chamber and the Court of High
Commission.

        These measures were also adopted: No one may be compelled to
take knighthood nor undergo any fine for not so doing. The forest
boundaries are returned to their former place. All subjects may now
import gunpowder; they may also make and sell gunpowder and import
saltpeter.

        The Root and Branch Petition of 1640 to abolish episcopacy
roots and branches complained about pressure on ministers by bishops on
threat of dismissal not to preach about predestination, free grace,
perseverance, original sin remaining after baptism, the Sabbath,
doctrine against universal grace, election for faith foreseen,
free-will against anti-Christ, non- residents, nor human inventions in
God's worship. It also complained about the great increase of idle,
lewd, and dissolute, ignorant and erroneous men in the ministry who
wanted only to wear a canonical coat, a surplice, and a hood, bow at
the name of Jesus, and be zealous of superstitious ceremonies. It also
complained about the swarming of lascivious, idle, and unprofitable
books, pamphlets, play-books, and ballads, such as Ovid's "Fits of
Love", "The Parliament of Women", Barn's "Poems", and Parker's
"Ballads". Further it opposed the restraint of reprinting books
formerly licensed without relicensing. It protested the growth of
popery and increase of priests and Jesuits, the strict observance of
saints' days whereby large fines were imposed on people working on
them, the increase of whoredoms and adulteries because of the bishops'
corrupt administration of justice and taking of bribes, and the
practice of excommunicating for trivial matters such as working on a
holy day or not paying a fee. It further protested the fining and
imprisoning of many people; breaking up men's houses and studies;
taking away men's books, letters, and writings; seizing upon their
estates; removing them from their callings; and separating them from
their wives, to the utter infringement of the laws and of people's
liberties. It complained that these practices caused many clothiers,
merchants, and others to flee to Holland, thus undermining the wool
industry. It finally complained of the multitude of monopolies and
patents, large increase of customs, and ship-money. Many Londoners
signed this petition.

        The House of Commons decided to forbid bowing at the name of
Jesus. When the House of Lords disagreed with this, the House of
Commons claimed that it represented all the people and didn't need the
concurrence of the House of Lords. The House of Commons ordered that
all communion tables be removed from the east end of churches, that the
railings be taken away, and all candles and basins be removed from it.
Further, all crucifixes, images of the Virgin Mary, and pictures of any
of the Trinity were to be demolished, including those in markets and
streets. Further, all bowing at the name of Jesus or toward the east
end of the church or toward the communion table was forbidden. All
dancing or other sports on Sunday was forbidden. Enforcement was to be
done by Justices of the Peace and Mayors. But these orders never became
statutes.

        Enforcement of the law for not coming to church was not now
regularly enforced, so Catholics had a respite.

        Rebellion of Irish Catholics against England and English
Protestants broke out in Ireland in 1641. Parliament didn't trust the
King with an army that he could use against themselves so it passed the
following two measures expanding the Navy and calling out the militia
and naming certain persons to be Lieutenants of each county.

        The Admiral shall impress as many seamen as necessary for the
defense of the realm. This includes mariners, sailors, watermen, ship
carpenters, but no one over the age of 50 or masters or masters' mates.
If one hides, he shall be imprisoned for three months without bail.

        Justices of the Peace shall impress as many soldiers as the
king may order for war in Ireland. This is despite the right of a
citizen to be free from being compelled to go out of his county to be a
soldier because the danger from Ireland is imminent. Excluded are
clergymen, scholars, students, those rated at a subsidy of land of
three pounds or goods of five pounds, esquires or above, the sons of
such or their widows, those under eighteen or over sixty years of age,
mariners, seamen, and fishermen. The penalty for disobeying is
imprisonment, without bail or misprise, and a fine of ten pounds. If an
offender can't pay the fine, he shall be imprisoned a year more,
without bail or misprise.

        The right to call out the county militia had been a prerogative
of the Crown, so the King issued a Proclamation ordering the soldiers
to ignore this order and obey him. So Parliament declared this
Proclamation void.

        The King accused five leaders of Parliament, including Pym, of
trying to subvert the government of the kingdom, to deprive the King of
his regal power, to alienate the affections of the people toward their
King, forcing the Parliament to their ends by foul aspersions, and
inviting the Scots to invade England. In 1642, the King entered
Parliament with 300 soldiers to arrest these five. They had flown, but
Parliament was shocked that the King had threatened the liberties of
Parliament with military force. The citizens of London, in their fear
of popery, rose in arms against the King, who left the city. Both sides
raised big armies. The goal of the Parliamentarians was to capture the
King alive and force him to concessions.

        When the Parliamentarians took Oxford in 1648, they purged its
faculty of royalists.


                     The Law

        Real wages, which had been falling, reached their low point and
the gap between the poor and others widened. There were depressions
from 1629-32 and from 1636 to about 1640, which called for Royal
proclamations for the relief and distress, especially among the poor.
The Book of Orders, for the relief of distress in earlier reigns, was
to be reissued. The assize of beer and bread maintaining quality,
prices, weights, and measures, was to be duly kept. Hoarding of
foodstuffs was to be punished. Fish days and lent were to be observed
to maintain the fishers. Abstaining from suppers on Fridays and on the
eves of feasts was ordered in all taverns and commended to private
families. City corporations were to give up their usual feasts and half
the charge given to the poor. Foreign ships were not to be supplied
with food for long voyages. The revised Book of Orders also covered the
regulation of beggary, the binding of apprentices, and the general
relief of the poor. All magistrates were to enforce the rules and raise
special rates from all parishes, the richer of these to help the poorer.

        From 1625 to 1627 these statutes were passed:

No one shall engage in sports or any pastimes outside his own parish or
bearbaiting, bullbaiting, interludes, plays or other unlawful pastimes
inside his parish on Sundays because such has led to quarrels and
bloodshed and nonattendance at church. The fine is 3s.4d. or if the
offender does not have the money or goods to sell to pay, he shall be
set in the public stocks for three hours.

No carrier with any horse or wagon or cart or drover with cattle may
travel on Sunday or else forfeit 20s.

No butcher may kill or sell any victual on Sunday or else forfeit 6s.8d.

Every innkeeper, alehousekeeper, and other victualer permitting a
patron who is not an inhabitant of the area to become drunk shall
forfeit 5s. or be place in the stocks for six hours. Offenders
convicted a second time shall be bound by two sureties to the sum of
200s.

        As of 1627, a parent sending a child out of the country to go
to a Catholic school was to forfeit 100 pounds, one half to the
informer and one half to the king.

        The Petition of Right herebefore described was passed as a
statute in 1627.


              Judicial Procedure

        The Star Chamber decided cases as diverse as a case of
subordination of witnesses, cases of counterfeiters of farthing tokens,
and cases of apothecaries compounding ill medicines. It tried to keep
down the prices of foodstuffs for the benefit of the poor; it repressed
extortion and false accusations, and disbarred an attorney for sharp
practices; it punished defamation, fraud, riots, forgery of wills; it
forbade duels. A special virtue of its position was that it could
handle without fear matters in which men of social or local influence
might intimidate or overawe juries or even country justices. It
punished a lord who caused records to be forged, unlawfully entered
lands, and seized tithes. It disciplined a nobleman for drawing a sword
on a lord hunting hare.

        In one of its cases, Sir Edward Bullock, a knight wanting to
enclose a common of a thousand acres threatened his neighbor Blackhall
when he would not sell his lands and rights. The knight hired a man to
break down the hedges and open a gate that had been staked up, so that
his neighbor's cattle would stray. He sued his neighbor three times for
trespass, lost his cases, and threatened revenge on all the witnesses
who testified against him. He had the house of one pulled down. The
pregnant wife and a naked child were turned out and had to lie in the
streets because no one dared to take them in, even when a justice so
directed. The witness, his wife, and family took refuge in an unheated
outbuilding in the winter. He and his wife and one child died there.
The knight had another witness cudgeled so that she was black and blue
from the waist up, and could not put on her clothes for a month. The
knight threatened to set fire to the house of another witness, and sent
his men to pull him out of doors and keep him prisoner for some hours.
The Star Chamber imprisoned the knight and his men. The knight was
fined 1,000 pounds and the men 50 pounds each. The knight also had to
pay one witness 100 pounds in reparation to the surviving children of
the family whose house had been pulled down.

        But the power of the Star Chamber was abused by King Charles I.
For instance, one lord was accused by another of calling him a base
lord. The evidence was paltry. But he was fined 8,000 pounds, one-half
going to the King. A lord who was accused of converting agricultural
land to pasture was fined 4,000 pounds. A person who exported fuller's
earth, contrary to the King's proclamation, was pilloried and fined
2,000 pounds. A man who defaced a stained-glass window in a church was
fined 500 pounds and ordered to pay for a plain glass replacement. A
man who became sheriff of a county and had taken the oath which bound
him to remain in the county was elected to Parliament and stood in
opposition to the king on many matters. He was imprisoned for many
years until he made a humble submission and had to pay a heavy fine. A
London importer who was alleged to have said "That the Merchants are in
no part of the world so screwed and wrung as in England; That in Turkey
they have more encouragement" was fined 2,000 pounds for seditious and
slanderous words against his majesty's happy government. A Scottish
minister circulated a book appealing to Parliament to turn out the
bishops and to resist its own dissolution by the King. In it he called
the bishops men of blood, anti-Christian, satanical, ravens, and
magpies, preying on the state. He was against kneeling at the sacrament
and denounced the Queen for her Catholic religion. He blamed the state
for the death of citizens of a certain town by famine. For as he did
"scandalize his Majesties Sacred Person, his Religious, Wise, and just
Government, the Person of his Royal Consort the Queen, the Persons of
the Lords and Peers of this realm, especially the Reverend Bishops", he
was fined 10,000 pounds, was to be unfrocked (which was done by the
Court of High Commission), and was whipped, pilloried, one ear nailed
to the pillory and cut off, his cheek branded, and his nose slit. Then
he was imprisoned for life, but only served ten years, being released
by a statute of the Long Parliament. A Puritan writer Pyrnne wrote a
book that included a condemnation of masks and plays, and all who took
part, and all who looked on as sinful, pernicious, and unlawful. It
opined that Nero had attended plays and deserved to be murdered. Since
Charles had attended plays and the Queen had taken part in a mask, it
was inferred that Pyrnne meant them harm. His indictment alleged that
"he hath presumed to cast aspersions upon the King, the Queen, and the
Commonwealth, and endeavored to infuse an opinion onto the people that
it is lawful to lay violent hands upon Princes that are either actors,
favorers, or spectators of stage plays". The justices saw in the book
an attempt to undermine authority. The Chief Justice called the book a
most wicked, infamous, scandalous, and seditious libel. Pyrnne was
sentenced to be degraded by Oxford and disbarred by Lincoln's Inn, to
be fined 5,000 pounds, to be pilloried and to have his ears cut off,
and then to be imprisoned for life. Three men who wrote attacks on the
bishops and ecclesiastical courts, such as alleging that the bishops
suppression of fasts and preaching had brought the pestilence upon the
people and that the bishops had dishonored God and exercised papal
jurisdiction in their own names, were each sentenced to 5,000 fine, the
pillory, where their ears were cut off, and to life imprisonment. One,
who had been convicted for libel before, was branded on both cheeks:
"S.L." for Seditious Libeller. Others printed similar material. In vain
the Star Chamber limited the number of London printers to twenty, and
made licensing stricter. These prisoners were set free by the Long
Parliament.

        Charles I intimidated justices to obey him in decision-making
even more than James I.

        Charles I so abused the power of the Star Chamber court that it
was abolished by the Long Parliament and with it, the involvement of
the King's Council in civil and criminal cases.

        The regular church courts punished people for heresy, non-
attendance at church, sexual immorality, working on the Sabbath or a
holy day, non-payment of tithes, and lending money at interest. The
special ecclesiastical court, the Court of High Commission, was
composed of clerics appointed by the king and decided cases of marriage
annulment, alimony, adultery, married couples living separately,
cruelty of husbands to wives, and habitual drunkenness. But it also
took on cases of schismatics and extended its power over them to
include staid and solid Puritans, who uniformly believed that salvation
was the only worthy earthly aim. Acting on information attained through
secret channels or from visitations, it would summon the accused, who
was required to give, under oath, "full, true, and perfect" answers to
broad and undetailed charges made by secret informants. Refusal to take
the oath resulted in commitment for contempt of court. If he denied the
charges and fled, the court could hold the hearing without him. Many
fled out of the country or went into hiding in it. If the accused went
to the hearing, he could not take an attorney with him. Most of the
issues involved clergy refusing to use the litany, to make the sign of
the cross in baptism, to wear the surplice, or to publish the Book of
Sports, and insistence on extempore prayer and preaching. Other issues
were clergy who, from the pulpit, inveighed against ship-money and
unjust taxes, and spoke rudely against the bishops and tyrannical
princes. One case is that of Samuel Ward, the town preacher of a large
town, heard in 1635. He neglected bowing or kneeling on coming to his
seat in church and preached against the Book of Sports. He did not read
the set prayers from the official book, but said prayers he had himself
conceived. To this he replied that a parrot could be taught to repeat
forms and an ape to imitate gestures. But his most serious offenses had
to do with his utterances from the pulpit derogatory to the tenets and
discipline of the church. He was accused of saying that he believed
that congregations still had the right of election of all officers,
including ministers. Also, he allegedly said that in preaching on the
Christmas holidays he told his people "that in the following days they
might do their ordinary business, intending to cross that vulgar
superstitious belief, that whoever works on any of those twelve days
shall be lousy". He allegedly warned his people to beware of a relapse
into popery. Ward was convicted of depraving the liturgy, tending
toward schism, frightening the people, and encouraging the overthrow of
all manner of government. He was removed from his position, deprived of
his ministerial function, suspended and silenced during the King's
pleasure. He was ordered to make submission and recantation both in
court and in his church and to give bond for 200 pounds. When he did
not do this, he was sent to prison and lay there nearly four years, and
died a few months later. In another case, a Mrs. Traske was imprisoned
for at least eleven years for keeping Saturday as her Sabbath. Many
people were excommunicated and books censored for essentially political
reasons.

        In 1637, the king proclaimed that the common law courts could
not intervene in ecclesiastical courts.

        The Court of High Commission was abolished by the Long
Parliament.

        Justices of the Peace had general and quarter sessions, the
latter of which were held four times a year with all Justices of the
Peace attending. It was primarily a court of appeal from penal
sentences. But it was also an administrative body to determine taxes
and make appointments of officials and grant licenses for businesses.

        In 1638, in distributing a deceased person's estate, the
Chancery court upheld a trust designed to hold the property for an
heiress so that it did not become her husband's property.

        At the request of Parliament, the King had all justices serve
during their good behavior instead of serving at the King's will, which
had been the practice for ages. This increased the independence of the
judiciary.

        The rack was used for the last time in 1640 before the Long
Parliament met. It was used to torture a rioter before hanging.

        Men were still pressed to death for failure to plead,
pickpockets still executed for the first offense, and husband murderers
still burned.



                   Chapter 16


              The Times: 1642-1660

        For four years, there was civil war between the King, backed
generally by the upper class, the established church, and most of the
gentry, against the Parliamentarians, backed generally by middle class
yeomen, town dwellers, some of the gentry, most of the great
corporations, the City of London, the ports, the seamen, and the Navy.
Oxford University was royalist, and Cambridge University was Puritan in
sympathy. Archery was not used in the war, having become just sport by
1633. Flint-lock pistols, which relied on flint striking steel to
ignite the powder, as well as swords were used by horsemen in the civil
war. Footmen were musketeers using a match lock with a cord boiled in
vinegar as the match, and dressed in leather doublets and an iron-pot
headpiece; or pikemen with long wooden poles with spearheads of iron or
steel and short swords, and dressed in armor. This was the last time
armor was used. The Parliamentarians wore orange scarves to distinguish
themselves from their enemy. Cromwell, who had a natural aptitude for
military matters, selected for his troops, Puritan zealots with a
Puritan code of behavior which included no drinking or swearing. He
selected horsemen based on ability rather than social class. He was
regarded as one of the leaders of the Independents, who wanted total
abolition of the monarchy and of the aristocracy. When made a leader of
the New Model Army, Cromwell dressed all his foot men in red with only
the facings being regimental colors. The New Model Army had been
assembled because there had been disagreement about policy among the
members of Parliament who held commissions. Almost all members gave up
their commissions. For their continued support, many wives and also
prostitutes put on men's clothing and followed the troops. They nursed
the wounded. Those many wives who stayed at home pleaded and answered
in court; petitioned to the House of Commons, e.g. for release of
debtors from prison, high taxes, lack of work, and arbitrary
government; and made other public appearances. Puritan and royalist
newspapers printed the news at least once weekly. Poet John Milton pled
for civil and religious freedom, freedom of social life, and freedom of
the press. He stated: "Give me the liberty to know, to utter, and to
argue freely, according to conscience, above all liberties."

        The Mayor and citizens of London were given authority in 1642
to fortify all highways leading to the city and levy a tax on
inhabitants for this purpose. When London was deprived of coal during
the war, trees and flowers again flourished there.

        Officers and seamen in navy ships were authorized in 1642 to
take one-third of all prize goods captured, the other two-thirds going
to the state.

        Parliament approved certain persons to set forth ships at their
own expense to defend the realm in 1643. They were allowed to keep any
ships, goods, ammunition, or moneys they seized.

        Saltpeter men were appointed by Parliament in 1643 and later
times to search and dig for saltpeter in pigeon houses, stables, and
outhouses, but not dwelling, shops, or milkhouses. They had to repair
any damage done to the contentment of the owners.

        Complaints were made to Parliament that there were scandalous
and ill-affected fomenters of the civil war and disobeyers of the
ordinaries of Parliament and deserters of their ordinary places of
residence. These complaints were made by members of the University of
Cambridge, students, clergy in surrounding counties, and schoolmasters.
So a committee was established in 1643 to investigate and sequester
their lands and goods, excepting one- fifth of the estate for the wife
and children.

        When Charles was captured in 1646, the episcopacy of the
bishops was abolished. When Parliament was about to reinstate Charles
as king with weakened powers and establish a Presbyterian state church,
the soldiers, who were religious Independents and who still had not
been fully paid (the infantry pay was 18 weeks in arrears and the
cavalry 43 weeks) despite plans to disband them, spontaneously took the
King by force. They demanded liberty of conscience to practice their
own religion and their pay. Cromwell sided with the army and then
became leader of the House of Commons. Charles dissembled in his
negotiations with the army generals. He felt freed from his promises as
soon as the pressure was removed. The army could not forgive Charles'
duplicity and deceitfulness and insisted upon his death as the only way
to bring peace. Cromwell gave up hope on negotiations with Charles when
he intercepted a letter by Charles to his Queen decreeing the final
doom of the army adherents in favor of the Scottish Presbyterians.
During protracted negotiations over months between the army and
Parliament over a new constitution, a renewed support for the King,
which was inspired by him, necessitated a second civil war to put down
this revolt and subdue its Scot supporters. Eventually the army took
control of Parliament by force, only allowing the few members who
agreed with them on the trial of the King into Parliamentary meetings.
So Charles was tried in 1649, found guilty of "an unlimited and
tyrannical power to rule according to his will, and to overthrow the
rights and liberties of the people ... which by the fundamental
constitutions of this kingdom were reserved on the peoples' behalf in
the right and power of frequent and successive parliaments or national
meetings in council", and maintaining a war against his subjects, which
amounted to treason. To prevent his adherents from trying to reinstate
him, he was condemned to death and beheaded in January 1649.

        To pay for the civil war, an assessment tax on the yearly value
of rents, annuities, and offices was often levied. The main burden of
this tax fell on the gentry rather than the merchants and smaller men
of property, as previous taxes had. An excise tax, a tax on
consumption, was begun on ale and beer and then extended to meat, salt,
starch, soap, and paper. It was gradually extended to many goods. The
excise taxes were paid, as was the customs tax, by manufacturers on
goods made in England and by foreign manufacturers on goods at the
ports.

        Parishes had to give maintenance to maimed soldiers and
provision for the livelihood to the wives and children of killed
soldiers. Masters of apprentices who became soldiers had to take them
back as apprentices without loss for their absence in defense of the
Commonwealth. Masters who received considerable loss by the absence of
their apprentices received reasonable satisfaction from the public
stock.

        From 1640-60, Royalists were purged from Oxford and a group of
Baconians moved into the university behind Parliamentary armies. At the
two universities, books were no longer chained to the bookcases. The
universities were freed from taxation.

        After the civil wars, Cromwell led the country. He was a
military, political, and religious leader. He had become a Puritan
zealot after a youth of gambling, drinking, debauchery, and rioting. He
believed that military success was a reflection of divine favor and he
regarded himself as one the few elect preordained for salvation. Those
in power in the new Commonwealth tended to explain their regime in
terms of popular consent, and the takeover from Charles I as due to his
breaking of a contract with the people.

        Most people dressed in Puritan fashion. A Puritan's favorite
readings were the Old Testament, Epistles of St. Paul, and writings of
John Calvin.

        Wealth and prosperity steadily increased in spite of the civil
wars. During Cromwell's tenure, there was a marked revival of economic
prosperity. By the mid-1600s, landlords had been able to shorten their
leases so that a lease of twenty-one years was the predominant form of
landholding.

        Patent protection was given in 1642 for seven years to the
inventors of a device for salvaging ships' goods and cannons from the
seas. With it they could convert to their own use one half of the items
retrieved, the other half going to the Navy and Parliament. Patent
protection was given in 1650 to George Manby on his new invention for
boiling liquors and making salt with less coal and wood and iron, lead,
and copper for fourteen years. Patent protection was given in 1651 for
fourteen years to Jeromy Buck for melting iron, lead, tin, copper,
brass, and other metals with coal without burning charcoal.

        The Merchant Adventurers were incorporated again in 1643 to
have a monopoly. It was required to admit into membership for 100
pounds anyone free of London and bred as a merchant, and for 50 pounds
any non-inhabitant of London. The penalty for trading for one who was
not free of the corporation was forfeiture of his goods.

        In 1648, the House of Commons abolished the monarchy and in
1649 the House of Lords. Also in 1649 it declared that England "should
thenceforth be governed as a commonwealth and free state by the supreme
authority of this nation, the representatives of the people in
Parliament." It made a new constitution.

        John Milton defended the Commonwealth as superior to the
monarchy because it could not deteriorate into tyranny in his books:
"First Defense of the People of England" in 1651, and "Second Defense"
in 1654. He lauded Cromwell as great in war and great in peace, and
exemplifying the principle that "nature appoints that wise men should
govern fools".

        Thomas Hobbes, the son of a clergyman, and tutor to students,
wrote "Leviathan" in 1651 on his theory of sovereignty. Hobbes thought
that states are formed as the only alternative to anarchy, barbarism,
and war, so that supremacy and unity of a sovereign power is essential
to a civilized life and the protection of the citizenry. A sovereign
may be a man or body of men as long as his or its authority is
generally recognized. There must be a social contract among the
citizenry to obey a certain sovereign. To avoid religious conflict,
there must be a complete subordination of the church to the state and
the religion of a state must be dependent upon its secular sovereign.
Hobbes thought that knowledge of the world came through experience and
not reason alone. Only matter exists, and everything that happens can
be predicted in accordance with exact, scientific laws. He regarded
human societies as purely mechanical systems set in motion by human
desires. He saw self interest as the mainspring of moral law.
Conflicting self interests transformed into a lawful system of
agreements. Hobbes opined that all power really originated in the
people and that the end of all power was for the people's good.

        On the other hand, James Harrington, who wrote "The
Commonwealth of Oceana" in 1656, opined that a stable society depended
on a direct relationship between the distribution of property and
political power; no one with property worth more than 2,000 pounds
should be allowed to acquire more and property should be divided among
children. A senate of mature property owners were to make and debate
the laws while an assembly elected by universal suffrage was to vote on
them because "a popular assembly without a senate cannot be wise and a
senate without a popular assembly will not be honest". A third of the
Senate would turn over every year. John Milton defended the execution
of the King in "The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates" in which he
maintained that the people may "as often as they shall judge it for the
best either to choose him or reject him or depose him, though no
tyrant, merely by the liberty and right of freeborn men to be governed
as seems to the best". He also wrote in favor of liberty of the press.
Ordinary speech found its way into prose writing.

        Lands of more than 700 Royalists, including church lands, were
confiscated and sold or leased by county committees. Many Royalists put
their lands into trusts or turned them over to relatives or sold them
outright to prevent confiscation. It was an upheaval comparable to the
dissolution of the monasteries. Also, specified Papists who had taken
up arms against the realm lost their lands, goods, money, rents, and
two-thirds of their personal estates. But allowance was made for the
maintenance of their wives and children.

        The Book of Common Prayer was abolished because of its
burdensome ceremonies. It was replaced by a Directory for Public
Worship. According to this, the Sunday service was to include reading
of the Scriptures, prayer, and a sermon, ordinarily on some text of
scripture which would be explained with reasons therefore and applied
to peoples' lives so they could see if they had sinned or not. The
ending of episcopal patronage gave some parishes the right to elect
their own ministers.

        All festivals and holy days were abolished, e.g. Christmas,
Easter, Whitsuntide. Instead, scholars, apprentices, and servants were
to have recreation and stores were to be closed every second Tuesday of
the month. The usual merry-making, music, dancing, and sports after the
Sunday service were discontinued.

        A day for fasting: the last Wednesday of every month, was
declared by statute. This day was to be "kept with the more solemn
humiliation, because it may call to remembrance our sins, and the sins
of our forefathers, who have turned this Feast, pretending the memory
of Christ into an extreme forgetfulness of him, by giving liberty to
carnal and sensual delights, being contrary to the life which Christ
himself led here upon earth, ...". This statute lasted for only five
years from 1644 because observance of it was not consistent throughout
the country.

        Educational opportunities such as in grammar schools were more
widespread and stronger than ever before or since until the 1800s.
About 78% of men in London were literate, and 30% of men nationwide.
About half the women in London were literate by 1700.

        In 1645, the marshalls of the admiralty and five major ports
were ordered to search all ships for stolen children since it had been
a problem in London.

        The elderships of the church were given power in 1645 to
suspend from the sacrament of the Lord's Supper all ignorant and
scandalous persons. Ignorance was lack of knowledge that there is a God
and this is the one true God we worship, that this God is one, yet
three persons: Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, that God created man in his
own image, that all have sinned and therefore shall die, that there is
one mediator between God and man: Jesus Christ, who died on the cross
to save men from their sins, that he rose from the dead, ascended into
heaven, sits at the right hand of God, and intercedes for us, that
Christ and his benefits are applied only by faith, that the souls of
the faithful live with Christ in blessedness, that non-believers and
non-repenters shall perish eternally, that the sacraments are baptism
and communion, and that there is a judgment day on which the righteous
will be given life eternal and the wicked shall receive everlasting
punishment. Scandalous persons are those who blasphemously speak or
write anything of God, his holy work or the sacraments; an incestuous
person; an adulterer; a fornicator; a drunkard; a profane swearer or
cursor; a murderer; a worshipper of images, crosses, crucifixes,
relics, saints, or angels; makers of images of the trinity; one who
professes not to be in charity with his neighbor; any challenging
another to fight or accepting such challenge; on the Lord's day,
dancing, dicing, cards, masking, wake, shooting, bowling, football,
wrestling, plays, interludes, fencing, bullbaiting, bearbaiting,
hawking, hunting, coursing [hunting with hounds], fishing, fowling,
selling wares, travel without reasonable cause; a brothel-house keeper;
one who solicits the chastity of another; one who marries a Papist or
consents to the marriage of his child to a Papist; own who goes for
advice to a witch, wizard, or fortune-teller; one who assaults his
parents, or any magistrate, minister, or elder in the execution of his
office; and one attainted of barratry [purchase or sale of office or
preferment], forgery, extortion, or bribery. If such a person persists,
he shall be excommunicated.

        Cromwell did not disapprove of activities prohibited because of
the recreation they provided, but thought that they had become too
central to people's lives. He did not close the taverns or ale houses.

        In 1653 it was required that public preachers be approved by a
commission nominated by the Lord Protector and Parliament because there
had been too many "weak, scandalous, popish, and ill- affected" ones.
In 1654 named persons were ejected as scandalous, ignorant and
insufficient ministers and schoolmasters.

        Because the poorer parishes of London were having problems
supporting their poor, a Corporation for the poor of London was
established in 1647 with authority to erect workhouses and houses of
correction.

        Imprisoned debtors who had less than five pounds and less that
five pounds worth of trade tools and clothing and bedding for his
family were ordered released in 1649.

        Wardship was abolished. Military tenures were abolished. Feudal
tenures were converted into freehold in 1646.

        In 1653 those living in Crown forest land were given free
socage in that land. The game laws were not enforced, so people could
eat deer.

        Enclosures were increasing and Parliament was disinclined to
protect copyholders against enclosures, favoring those with rights of
ownership. Enclosure was no longer deterred especially after abolition
of the Star Chamber. The legal device of "strict settlement" evolved to
prevent heirs from breaking up estates enabled families to concentrate
land and capital into large units. The oldest son inherited the land
and the younger sons now received money. Clover seed was sold in London
by 1650. It revolutionized the cultivation of barren land. England
began to export instead of import grain. But vagrancy increased from
people dispossessed of land. And the village artisan, when deprived of
his field and of his rights of common, could not continue to work at
home, but had to accept the wages offered to him in an employer's
workshop.

        Employers and entrepreneurs were now free from control by the
Crown. There were no more attempts to supervise quality of manufactures
or to fix prices or regulate wages. There was greater freedom
established in relations between employers and workers. The government
no longer tried to compel employers to keep employees in times of
economic slump. The requirement of seven year apprenticeships and being
the son of a freeholder to be an apprentice were not enforced.

        The economy was still volatile due ostensibly to variable
harvests, amount of gold and money in circulation, and balances of
trade, and to periods of plague. Wages rose steadily. The rise in
prices ended about 1650, and prices remained stable until about 1775.
There was more mobility of people. Taxation became regular and it was
controlled by representatives of the taxpayers. Population growth
gradually stabilized.

        Capitalism was coming into being. For instance, the clothier
was now a manufacturer. He had become a contractor, taking wool to the
specialist spinner, the yarn to the specialist weaver, the rough cloth
to be washed and stretched, and finally to the dyer. This cloth was
sold at retail by the drapers. Tin on the surface was exhausted, so
capital was used to drive deep shafts in tin mines. No longer did a
single man with a single ship sail around until he found a market, but
companies trading overseas had their ships, wharves, and depots
furnished by men's savings put into a common stock. The first major
capitalist industries were coal mining, iron mining, and foreign trade
because they all needed large investments, and thus joint-stock company
organization.

        Cromwell reconstituted the East India Company on a wider and
more permanent basis. He gave it a new charter in 1657 which included
authority to make stock permanent, thus ensuring a continuity of
capital. This solved the problem of the competition of overlapping
voyages which still occurred despite their terms of several years. The
company became one of the first permanent joint-stock companies. Now
the stock was never wound up. The Company had permanent capital which
could grow. The absence of competition among voyages made the Company
stronger in the face of a common enemy, such as a rival trading country
or Indian groups. The charter also authorized the company to fortify
and colonize any of its establishments and to transport to them
settlers, stores, and ammunition.

        Later in 1657, the Company threw open the freedom of the
Company to the public for a nominal sum of five pounds. Now the
Merchant Adventurers and private traders could participate. It provided
that dividends were to be paid only in cash and not in kind (goods). It
also provided for appraisals of the Company's property to be made every
three years, so any shareholders could redeem their shares
proportionately. His shares would then be resold. People began to buy
and sell their shares among each other. The Company made the minimum
subscription 100 pounds. Each person holding 500 pounds worth of shares
had one vote. Holding 1,000 pounds worth of shares qualified one for
election to the committee of twenty-four. The seats of the members of
this committee and of the Governor and Deputy Governor could no longer
be permanent, but had limited and staggered terms. The continuity of
capital took the place of the permanence of the governing body in
providing stability. There was a regular scale of salaries for
employees, and rules of conduct such as the one disallowing any clerk
of the India House from going to play houses, dancing schools, or
taverns. The Company established almshouses for its widows and orphans.

        In 1657 the Muscovy Company, renewed its charter for trade in
Russia and established a New General Stock. If a man bought a share, he
bought freedom of the company. An annual dividend was declared from the
annual profits.

        Commercial men regularly kept accounts with bankers. Merchants
used division to apportion profits or losses to the parties whose
capital was involved. Simple and compound interest were used. The
concept of contract became a familiar one.

        Regular private bankers of London emerged from the Goldsmiths
from 1640 to 1675. They issued bank notes and paid checks.

        Cromwell increased trade by seizing territories, establishing
colonies, and warring with competitors for master of the seas and
trade. In 1649 it was provided that no one who paid his assessment for
soldiers' pay would have to quarter any of them.

        Authority was given in 1649 to impress seamen: mariners,
sailors, watermen, surgeons, gunners, ship carpenters, caukers,
coopers, whoymen, and carmen for carriage of victuals.

        English ships were embellished with decoration. Their sail area
was increased by triangular fore and aft sails. The Navy increased from
39 to 80 vessels.

        After serving in foreign wars, ex-soldiers were allowed in 1654
to practice any trade without serving a seven year apprenticeship.

        Colonies New Hampshire and Maine were established in 1635,
Connecticut in 1636, and Rhode Island in 1638, as offshoots from other
colonies.

        In 1649 a corporation was established to teach the Gospel of
Jesus Christ in New England to Indians.

        About 1650, steel was hardened by repeated quenchings and
temperings when the steel had reached certain colors. Brass was made
from copper and zinc alloyed together.

        There were power-driven rolls for the coinage from 1657. Strips
of silver were passed between engraved rolls. Then coins were punched
out and their edges serrated.

        In the 1650s, Huygens made the first pendulum that worked
practically in a mechanical clock. This new clock increased the
accuracy of time-keeping tenfold. He also introduced the concept of
mathematical expectation into probability theory.

        There was a thermometer which used liquid such as water or
alcohol in a glass tube instead of air.

        Dutchman Stevinus showed that the pressure at the bottom of a
column of liquid is proportional to the height of the column, and not
to its bulk, about 1634. He also studied oblique forces, and the
balancing of such that could bring about "stable equilibrium".

        Evangelista Torricelli, an Italian student of Galileo,
discovered in 1643 that any fluid will be supported at a definite
height, according to its relative weight, as compared with air. He
realized that a mercury column, 30 inches in height, in a long glass
tube inverted in a cup of mercury, was being supported by air pressure
exerted on the mercury in the cup. When he observed that this height
changed with the weather, he had invented the mercury barometer. In his
work, he created and used vacuums.


Blaise Pascal, a French mathematician, physicist, and religious
philosopher, was a child prodigy. At the age of 12, he proved Euclid's
32nd theorem that the sum of the angles of a triangle is equal to two
right angles. Before age 16, he wrote a book on conic sections. He is
famous for his theorem that a hexagon inscribed in a conic section has
the property that the three meeting points of the opposed sides are
always in a straight line. He constructed a calculator, which could
handle nine-digit numbers, in 1644 to assist his father, also a gifted
mathematician, in tax computations he did as a local government
official. He had Torricelli's mercury barometer carried up a mountain
and found that the height of the column dropped as altitude increased,
and thus that air pressure decreased with altitude. This showed that
the attribution of these effects to nature's abhorrence of a vacuum
were due instead solely to the weight and pressure of air. He
determined that the height to which the mercury rose was the same
regardless of the shape of the vessel containing it. Around 1646, he
did experiments with double vacuums and on the results formulated his
principle that pressure applied to a confined liquid is transmitted
undiminished through the liquid in all directions regardless of the
area to which the pressure is applied. Around 1653, he laid the
foundations for the theory of probabilities after being asked by a
gambling friend why, in playing dice, some frequencies came up more
often than others. He developed a means of calculating probabilities
with his "Pascal's Triangle" of coefficients of (a+b) raised to the nth
power. Each row represents the coefficients of a power one greater than
the power of the previous row. Each number is the sum of the nearest
two numbers in the row above it. He and lawyer and mathematician Pierre
Fermat invented the theory of probabilities.

Fermat also proved that the law for refraction (bending) of light
results from light's following the path that takes the shortest time.
He founded number theory, the study of properties of whole numbers, in
1640. Fermat formulated the notion of a line tangent to a curve and
started the development of differential calculus, in which a rate of
change is expressed as a function of time in equation form and also as
a tangent to the curve associated with that equation. This work helped
lay the foundation for the mathematics field of analysis. He and German
Gottfried Leibniz formulated the principle that an equation with two
unknown quantities can represent a curve. Leibnitz believed that man's
mind can arrive at truths about entities by pure thought.

        Jean Ray from France concluded from his experiments that every
piece of material has a given weight, including air and fire. Otto von
Guericke from Germany discovered that, in a vacuum, sound does not
travel, fire is extinguished, and animals stop breathing.

        At a time when mathematics was only a business of traders,
merchants, seamen, carpenters, and surveyors, mathematician John
Wallis, the son of a minister, studied sections of cones [circles,
ellipses, parabola, and hyperbolas] as curves of the second algebraic
degree, i.e. with an exponent of two, i.e. y = (a (x squared)) + b. He
also worked with negative and fractional exponents. Around 1655 he
invented the infinite arithmetic and introduced the symbol for
infinity. He determined that the area under any curve defined by the
equation y = (x to the nth power), was x to the (n+1)th power divided
by n+1. He introduced the concept of the limit of a string of numbers.
He wrote a treatise on algebra which was historical as well as
practical. He also decoded enemy cyphers for the sovereign.

        Some English gentlemen interested in the new scientific methods
originated by Galileo had meetings beginning about 1645 to discuss
scientific topics. One group met at Gresham College and was headed by
Wallis. Another group was led by Robert Boyle, a philosopher,
physicist, and chemist. They wrote in English instead of Latin. These
meetings later gave rise to the Royal Society for science.

        Since the Puritans forbade music in churches, but enjoyed it in
domestic circumstances, much secular music was composed, published, and
played. There were many musical clubs. The violin became very popular.
Solo songs were much sung. The first English opera: "The Siege of
Rhodes" was written and performed with women on stage. Writers of the
time included John Milton, political philosopher James Harrington, poet
Edmund Waller, Thomas Fuller, poet Abraham Cowley, and biographer Issak
Walton. John Aubrey wrote anecdotes about famous men. Jeremy Taylor,
chaplain to Charles I, wrote on theology. People still read French
romances translated into English. Dancing was still popular. Coffee
houses came into prominence as places of social discourse. The first
coffee house was established in London in 1652; ten years later, there
were 82 coffee houses in the City. There were elegant pleasure gardens,
with a fee for access. They were used for promenades and picnics.
Ladies and their gallants rendezvoused there. Cromwell introduced the
habit of port drinking to England.

        In 1657, one general Post Offices was established with one
Postmaster General for all of England. No other person could have the
horsing of the through-posts. It cost 2d. for a letter to or from 80
miles of London and 3d. for one outside 80 miles of London.

        The Society of Friends was founded by the son of a weaver. They
greeted everyone as "friend" and did not bow; remove their hat, as was
the custom when before the king or an earl; or otherwise show any
reverence to anyone. From 1650, they were called Quakers because they
trembled when religiously stirred. They reverted to the ancient "thou"
and "thee" appellations. Their dress was particularly simple, with no
buttons, lace, ruffles, or embroidery. They hated ritual so much that
they rejected baptism and communion. They did not observe the Sabbath
as a special day different from other days. They derided the holiness
of churches. No clergy were admitted into their sect. When they met for
divine worship, each rose to deliver extemporaneous inspirations of the
Holy Ghost. Women were admitted to teach the brethren and were
considered proper vehicles to convey the dictates of the spirit.
Quakers believed that every man, in his own life, could be fully
victorious over sin. They denied any clerical authority and all texts.
They believed in the separation of church and state. They refused to
swear to any oath, e.g. in court, or to participate in war. They
refused to take off their hats to anyone but God. It was their practice
to turn the other cheek when one cheek had been struck. If asked for
his cloak, a Quaker would give it. He never asked more for his wares
than the precise sum which he was determined to accept. The Quakers
encouraged widows and widowers to provide for children from a first
spouse when remarrying. They carefully selected masters and mistresses
who wanted to take on child apprentices for their suitability for such
responsibility. The education of Quaker women did not decline, as it
did for other women. From the fervor of their zeal, the Quakers broke
into churches, disturbed public worship, and harassed the clergyman and
audience with railing and reproaches. When brought before a magistrate,
they show no reverence but treated him as an equal. Sometimes they were
thrown into mad house or prisons and sometimes whipped or pilloried.
They endured stoically under this suffering. Mary Fisher from Yorkshire
introduced Quakerism to colonial New England.

        In 1653 there were separation agreements between spouses as to
property, e.g. support and maintenance.

        Cromwell had bad experiences with Parliaments. The Rump
Parliament was a remnant of the Long Parliament. The army and then
Cromwell, although a member, came to believe that its members were
self- interested, preoccupied with perpetuating themselves in seats of
power, and corrupt. They thought that their own hopes of reform in the
law, in the church, and in public finances were being deliberately
frustrated. Cromwell came to doubt that it would ever give the people
adequate government and protection. He started to believe that one man
as chief executive could do this better. Cromwell dismissed the Rump
Parliament in 1653. A new constitution created a Puritan "Parliament of
Saints". These men were nominated in various ways, such as by church
parishes, and selected by Cromwell. This one-house Parliament of Saints
in 1653 made Cromwell Lord Protector for life with executive power of
the state, with responsibility for making peace and establishing order
after a decade of civil strife and political chaos. He was to
administer the government and be the chief magistrate. It also provided
for triennial Parliaments consisting of one house, and religious
freedom for all except Roman Catholics and adherents of the formerly
established Church of England. Cromwell did not tolerate the ritual of
the formerly established English church nor allow any of its adherents
to have any office under him. His was a purely Puritan government. He
did not sell offices. The Parliament of Saints challenged many vested
interests in property such as sales of delinquents' and Papists' lands.
It clashed severely over the continuation of tithes to the church. It
became disorderly when some declared the Parliament dissolved and left.
Others remained in their seats. To avoid a Parliamentary crisis,
Cromwell had soldiers close the Parliament of Saints and lock its
doors. The people supported this action because they were dissatisfied
with the state of public affairs. The next Parliament that was tried
was elected on a new constitutional basis of men with 200 pounds, but
these men voted to make Parliament sovereign without a chief executive,
thereby abolishing the protectorate. Cromwell was distressed that this
Parliament had also voted themselves to be the sole determinors of
atheism and blasphemy instead of advancing liberty of religious
conscience and religious toleration as Cromwell had advocated. He
dissolved this Parliament, declaring that it was not acting for the
public good. A last Parliament was also dissolved by Cromwell for
tending to loosen the bonds of government and thereby threatening the
peace of the nation.

        Cromwell had first ruled as a democratic leader who did not
believe in force, but preferred to persuade with reason. He initially
believed that people would do the right thing according to their
consciences, but was disillusioned and then became autocratic. He came
to rule as a military dictator. Payment of taxes was enforced by
distraint. After 1654, he issued about 100 proclamations covering
public amusements, roads, finances, the condition of prisons, the
imprisonment of debtors, banning of dueling and cockfighting, law
reform, control of religion and education, and reorganization of the
army. The singing of ballads was banned. The Court of Chancery was
reformed by proclamation. The established church was reformed and the
power to interfere with different faiths was denied to it. Each parish
could choose its form of service, whether Presbyterian, Congregational,
Baptist, or any other seen as fundamental by the Puritans. No one was
compelled to attend any particular church or to accept the discipline
of any particular minister. But the Book of Common Prayer was
forbidden. There was freedom of worship for Presbyterians,
Independents, Baptists, Quakers, Catholics, and Jews who had secretly
migrated to England to avoid persecution on the continent, but not
Prelatists , who favored government of the church by bishops).

        In 1655, Cromwell placed major generals in charge of eleven
newly- established provinces. As their Governors, they had authority to
levy troops, exact taxes imposed by the Protector, disarm Royalists and
Catholics, examine into the conduct of the clergy and schoolmasters,
arrest dangerous and suspicious persons, prevent unlawful assemblies,
and to enforce the existing laws against immorality and blasphemy. The
only appeal was to the Protector. Since they were Puritans, they
ordered public ale houses to close as dusk, banned idlers, minstrels,
and actors, forbade exercising of horses on Sunday and the holding of
markets on Saturday as well as Sunday, censored the press, and
proscribed newspapers. Horse races, which meetings were used for
seditious purposes, were closed. Theaters were closed. Dancing was
discontinued. Organs and choirs in churches were prohibited. Court
masks continued because they provided soothing music. After a year,
Cromwell withdrew the major-generals. From this time, men of property
hated the idea of a standing army.

        In 1657, the officers of a new Parliament modified the
constitution and Cromwell approved it. It was to secure liberties of
the people as they never before had. Under the modified constitution,
there were again two houses. The Commons regained its old right of
exclusively deciding on the qualification of its members. Parliamentary
restrictions were imposed on the choice of members of the Council,
officers of state, and officers of the army. A fixed revenue was voted
to the Protector. No moneys were to be raised except by consent of
Parliament. Liberty of worship was guaranteed to all except Papists;
Prelatists; Socinians, who denied the divinity of Jesus; for those who
denied the inspiration of the Scriptures. Liberty of conscience was
secured for all. In 1658, Cromwell tried another Parliament, but
dissolved it because it wrangled without resolution.

        There was continual problem with Catholics. Mayors, Justices
and capital burgesses of towns where Papists or others had caused
rebellion and insurrection and plundered, robbed, pillaged, murdered
and raped, were given the power in 1642 to call, assemble, train, and
arm soldiers for defense. The Committee of the Militia of London was
given authority in 1647 to search all houses and places for Papists and
to search for and seize any arms, ammunition, and war materials in
custody of such persons. In 1648, all Papists and soldiers of fortune
who had borne arms against Parliament were ordered to depart from
within twenty miles of London and Westminster or be imprisoned as
traitors. In 1657 convicted Papists and people marrying convicted
Papists were required to take an oath renouncing the pope and Catholic
Church or lose two-thirds of their lands and estate, retaining their
house on the remaining one-third. If one went to mass in an
ambassador's house, the fine was 100 pounds and imprisonment for six
months, one half going to the informer. In 1659 all householders in
London and Westminster had to give a list of persons lodging in their
house, and the horses and arms there. But the laws against Catholics
practicing their religion were not rigorously enforced, nor were those
against adherents of the formerly established Church of England.

        After Cromwell died, the people demanded the return of a
genuine and free Parliament. The old constitution was restored and a
new House of Commons was elected. It called Charles II to return to be
king if he promised religious freedom and backpay to the army, which
had not recently been paid. When Cromwell's Puritan soldiers were
disbanded, they did not drift into thievery as royalists soldiers had
before, but took up honest work such as baker, mason, brewer, baker, or
haberdasher. Puritanism now made itself felt not by the sword, but in
literature and politics. It affected the character of the English, who
tend to be stoics, and imbued capitalists with a hard-working attitude.


                     The Law

        After the civil wars, the law against enclosure was not
enforced.

        What was passed in Parliament in Cromwell's time were called
statutes, but after Cromwell's time, these statutes were not recognized
as legitimate.

        "whereas Public Sports do not well agree with Public
Calamities, not Public Stage-plays with the Seasons of Humiliation,
this being an Exercise of sad and pious Solemnity, and the other being
Spectacles of Pleasure, too commonly expressing lascivious Mirth and
Levity ... Public Stage Plays shall cease, and be forborne instead of
which are recommended to the People of this Land the profitable and
seasonable considerations of Repentance, Reconciliation, and Peace with
God, ..."

        No book or pamphlet may be printed, bound, stitched, or sold or
imported unless licensed and entered into the Register Book of the
Company of Stationers. Officials of this company and of Parliament may
search all places which they shall think meet for all unlicensed
printing presses and all suspected printing houses, warehouses, and
shops and other places for unlicensed books and pamphlets and papers
and seize them and apprehend all authors, printers, and other involved
people and bring them before Parliament or the Committee on
Examinations for punishment. Justices of the Peace and other officers
may order doors and locks broken for this purpose. The fine is ten
pounds for authors, five pounds for printers, two pounds for
booksellers, and one pound for buyers who conceal a book bought. One
half of each fine shall go to the person who discovers and prosecutes
the offender, and the other half shall go to the poor. This law
suppressed royalist newspapers but was enforced only with great
difficulty.

        All shall observe Sunday and days of Thanksgiving in their
"duties of Piety and true Religion publicly and privately" and none may
sell wares or goods, including fruit or herbs upon pain of forfeiture
of such. None may, without reasonable cause, travel, carry burdens, or
do any worldly labors or work whatsoever or pay a fine of 10s. This
work shall include grinding grain, fulling in mills, burning turf or
earth, gathering taxes, melting wax for candles, brewing, baking,
butchering cattle, tailors fitting or carrying clothes, barbers
trimming hair, being present at fairs or markets, or washing, whiting,
or drying clothes. Nor may any one maintain or be present at
wrestlings, shooting, bowling, ringing of bells for pleasure or
pastime, masks, wake, church-ale, dancing, games, sport or, for those
over 14, forfeit 5s., and for those having care or education of a child
under 14, 12d. Maypoles, a "Heathenish vanity, generally abused to
superstition and wickedness", shall be taken down by officers or else
forfeit 5s. per week. If any offender can't pay his fine, he shall be
put in the stocks for three hours. However meat maybe dressed in
private families, and victual sold in inns and victualing houses in a
moderate way, and milk sold before 9a.m. or after 4p.m.

        Persons of the trinity, angels, or saints shall be demolished.
Altar and communion tables must not be raised but leveled. There may be
no copes, surplices, superstitious vestments, or holy water fonts.
There may be no crosses, crucifixes, pictures of the trinity, angels or
saints on plates. All organs must be taken away.

        The fine for using the Book of Common Prayer is five pounds for
the first offense, ten pounds for the second offense, and one year
imprisonment without bail for the third offense. The penalty for
writing or preaching against the Directory for Public Worship is five
to fifty pounds.

        Blasphemies and heresies such as teaching or writing or
printing that there is no God, that God is not almighty, that Jesus was
not divine, that the resurrection of Jesus did not occur, that the
Bible is not the word of God, or that there is no judgment day after
death, are felony without benefit of clergy. If such an offender
recants, he shall stay in gaol until he obtains two sureties. If he
offends again after recantation, it is felony without benefit of clergy.

        In 1650 adultery was declared to be a felony, except for a wife
whose husband had been beyond the seas for three years or had been
reputed to be dead. Incest was also declared to be a felony. It was
defined as marrying or having carnal knowledge of one's grandparent,
parent, sibling, mother's brother or sister, father's wife, mother's
husband, son's wife, daughter's husband, wife's mother or daughter, or
husband's father or son. Fornication was given a punishment of three
months imprisonment and until security was obtained for one year for
good behavior. It was defined as carnal knowledge of a virgin,
unmarried woman, or widow. A common bawd or one keeping a brothel or
bawdy house was to be whipped, set in the pillory, marked in the
forehead by a hot iron with the letter: B, and then imprisoned for
three years without bail and until there were sureties for good
behavior for life. The second offense was felony without benefit of
clergy. There was to be no corruption of the blood. However, juries
were reluctant to convict for adultery and incest.

        There shall be no profane swearing or cursing of forfeit by a
lord 30s., a baronet or knight 20s., an esquire 10s., a gentleman
6s.8d., and all others 3s.4d. There is a double fine for the second
offense. For the tenth offense, the offender shall be bound by sureties
for good behavior for three years.

        A person equating himself or another with God or not believing
in God shall be imprisoned for six months without bail. For the second
offense, he shall be banished from the nation.

        No longer shall people be punished for nonattendance at church
on Sunday or days of Thanksgiving, but may be at some other place of
prayer, preaching, reading, or the scriptures.

        Hawkers and ballad singers have been libelous, so are to be
whipped as common rogues and then dismissed. Also, their ballads and
pamphlets are to be confiscated. Vagrant, idle, loose, dissolute and
disorderly persons and fiddlers in inns, alehouses, and taverns are to
be punished as rogues, vagabonds, and sturdy beggars, that is, whipped.

        In 1649, treason against Parliament was defined as writing,
printing, or declaring that the government is tyrannical, usurped, or
unlawful; or that Parliament is not the supreme authority of the
nation; or plot, contrive, or endeavor to stir up or raise force
against the government. Attainder for such would not work corruption of
the blood.

        Treason to the Protector was defined the same as it was to the
King.

        Army deserters are to be corporally punished or executed.

        Fellable wood and underwood, but no timber trees, may be cut
within 60 miles of London because fuel is needed, especially by the
poor. This will be supervised by overseers appointed by Parliament.

        No one may import foreign hats or hatbands to relieve that
industry in England.

        As of 1656, certain food could not be exported when the prices
of such exceeded a stated amount. For instance, 5 pounds for a 36
gallon barrel of beef, 6d. for a pound of bacon, 4 pounds and 10s. for
a 224 gallon barrel of butter, and 24s. for 64 pounds of rye, pease, or
beans. The customs for such items was more for foreigners than for
natives, for instance 3s. for natives and 5s. for foreigners for a
barrel of beef.

        Butter for sale must not be corrupt and be properly weighed.

        One must obtain a license to buy wheat or other grain and put
it to sale in meal or flour or else forfeit three times the value.

        All books of the law, writs, pleadings, and patents shall be in
English or else forfeit 20 pounds.

        No deer may be killed or else forfeit 15 pounds, half to the
informer and half to the poor.

        Interest may not exceed 6 pounds for a loan of 100 pounds
yearly as of 1651.

        No goods are to be imported from America, Asia, or Africa
except in English ships or else forfeit all goods and the ship, one
half of which goes to the one who seizes the goods and prosecutes. None
may be imported from Europe except in English ships or ships from the
country of origin of the goods. No salt fish may be imported or
exported but in English vessels.

        There is a 10 pound reward for discovery of highwaymen and
burglars or persons who break and enter into houses and there use
violence.

        No cart or wagon or carriage on the road may be drawn by more
than five horses or six oxen and a horse except for military vehicles.

        Notice of intended marriages shall be published once a week for
three weeks in a public meeting place called church or a public market
place next to church. Exceptions to the marriage shall be noted by the
Register and considered by the Justice of the Peace before the marriage
is performed. The words used shall be: "...promise to be unto thee a
loving and faithful husband..." and "promise to be unto thee a loving,
faithful, and obedient wife...".

        There shall be no cock-fighting because it disturbs the peace
and usually is accompanied by gaming, drinking, swearing, and
quarreling.

        Anyone challenging or accepting a challenge to duel shall be
imprisoned for six months without bail, and must acquire two sureties
for a year. Anyone fighting a duel in which death ensues, shall be
banished for life.

        Horse races were forbidden in 1654 for six months to discourage
mischievous plots and designs by enemies of the state. The penalty was
forfeiting the horse. Attendees were to be brought to justice.

        As of 1657, a house or building built within ten miles of the
walls of the City of London not having at least four acres had to pay a
fine of one year's rent. All houses within London or Westminster or the
suburbs must be brick or stone, and built straight up without
protruding into the street or else forfeit 100 pounds.

        As of 1657 persons living extravagantly without visible estate
or calling may be made by Justices of the Peace to acquire sureties for
good behavior or go to gaol. They would also be sent to the house of
correction to work for three months for the first offense and for a
time specified by the Justice of the Peace for the second offense.

        Anyone winning at betting or playing at cards, dice, tennis,
and horse races shall forfeit double his winnings.

        Excluded from pardon were buggery with man [sodomy] or animal
[bestiality], carnal ravishment of women, and bigamy.

        Husbands were responsible for their wives' oaths and fathers
for their daughters'.

Drunkenness was much punished.


              Judicial Procedure

        The Protector is the supreme magistrate of the Commonwealth,
with power to pardon all crimes, except murder and treason.

        Parliament was no longer a court.

        Use of the torture was proscribed in 1649.

        In 1652, the justices were given a salary of 1,000 pounds and
forbidden to take fees or rewards. They also got tenure, thus freeing
them from government pressure. Now civil justice was honestly dispensed
and justices were learned and honest.

        The jurisdiction of Admiralty court was defined to include:
ships and vessels with tackle, apparel and furniture thereof;
repairing, victualing, and furnishing provisions of ships and vessels
for sea; all cases of bottomry [ship-owner indemnified if the vessel
were lost, but paid over a substantial share of the profits if it
reached its destination safely], contracts beyond the seas concerning
shipping or navigation; charter, parties, contracts for freight; bills
of lading; mariners wages; damage of goods on board ships; and damage
by one ship to another including by anchors or want of laying buoys. It
did not include contracts between merchants.

        Military tenure was abolished in 1660.



                     Chapter 17


                  The Times: 1660-1702

        The monarchy was restored and Charles II came to the throne.
The episcopacy of the bishops and the Book of Common Prayer were
restored. This book retained all its ceremonies, despite opposition by
the Presbyterians. The confiscated Royalist, church, and Crown lands
were ordered to be restored, and most were. Charles II was presented
with the traditional rights of choosing his own Privy Council,
ministers of state, and justices; making foreign policy; controlling
the armed forces; and approving statutes. He was also presented with
the power to call and dismiss Parliament, but later, in 1694, a statute
required that Parliament be held at least once every three years, to
avoid royal schemes of non-parliamentary government. The House of Lords
was reestablished and there were again bishops in it, though fewer than
before - about 1/8 instead of about 1/3. There were 160 peers for the
next century. The House of Commons was elected in the usual way, but
without a king's writ. The Commons was composed mostly of royalist
established church members. Its leaders were important members of the
King's Privy Council.

        The feudal tenures of the crown, such as knights' service, were
converted into free socage. They were discharged of homage, reliefs,
escuage, and aids. Charles relinquished purveyance, wardships, and
forfeitures of marriage. In return, Parliament granted him a fixed
yearly income of 100,000 pounds from excise tax on beer, cider, and tea.

        Several hundreds of dissenter ministers and school teachers
were ejected from their positions, but later those who were not
Baptists were returned by statute of Parliament because Baptists did
not believe in an established church.

        Charles II was an easygoing and kindly man and hard to ruffle.
He had a weariness in the folly of men and a cynical disbelief in human
virtue. His wit and great sense of humor softened many a potentially
tense situation. His restoration to the throne brought in a time of
enjoyment of life in reaction to the Puritanism of before. At his
succession, the elected Parliament was oriented toward royalty and the
established church. He was voted an income of 1,200,000 pounds a year.
He also sold many of the last crown lands. But he always had great
debts, which he described as a "desperate but not serious" situation.
This was in part due to his generous maintenance of several successive
mistresses and more than about a dozen illegitimate children. His
entourage also included physicians, surgeons, a librarian, a poet
laureate, chaplains, painters, an historiographer, musicians, a royal
composer, and an astronomer. Charles even joked on his deathbed that "I
am sorry gentlemen, for being such an unconscionable time a-dying."

        The day of Charles II's restoration and birthday was designated
as a day of thanksgiving when all were to participate in prayers and
the singing of psalms at some church or other suitable public place.

        Charles initiated the return of Sunday afternoon wrestling,
archery, music, and dancing. Theaters reopened with actresses playing
women's parts, an audience only in front of the stage instead of around
it, a drop curtain, and painted two-dimensional scenery. Actresses were
allowed pursuant to royal proclamation so that plays should become
"useful and instructive representations of human life" rather than
"harmless delights". Charles went to plays regularly. Actresses were
assumed to be mistresses of patrons in return for their jobs, but one
fourth were actually chaste women married to actors. Comedies were the
preferred plays. Courtesans were sympathetically and even admirably
treated in plays, which mocked all restraints and glorified immorality
with the exception of pornography, which was banned. Bad actors were
hissed off the stage. Henry Purcell wrote religious music for churches,
ceremonial music for the English court, and theater music for English
opera. Opera made music a vehicle for human emotions. The gentry sang
to the lute and danced to string instruments. Many owned and played
musical instruments. Humble people had folksongs and instruments like
the pipe and tabor for dancing. Singing in parts was popular in town
and country. In 1672 John Banister started the first regular series of
public concerts in his house. There were lovely formal gardens in which
to walk, to see fireworks, and to buy the new ice cream. Charles did
much garden and park planning and let the public enjoy the royal St.
James Park. He loved hunting too and had the royal forests replenished
with deer after poaching during the Cromwell era had greatly reduced
their numbers.

        Charles II introduced sailing and yacht racing for pleasure. He
also participated in and promoted horse racing. The breeding of
thoroughbred horses began with breeding to Arab mares. Gelding horses
were now preferred over stallions. There were trotters, cart horses,
and some "fast" race horses. Boxing (with no gloves nor ring) was a
national sport. Ice skating with iron blades was popular. Valentine's
day was celebrated. Italian puppet shows played in London.

        Dress returned to elaborateness. Gentlemen wore Cavalier-style
long wigs with curls, despite the church's dislike of wigs. This could
hide the short hair of a former Puritan Roundhead. In 1666, Charles
introduced a new mode of inexpensive court dress which was made
entirely from English textiles. This gave rise to gentlemen's weskits
to below the knee with a coat of the same length and full sleeves.
Stockings and shoes replaced the long fitted boots. Charles set a court
tradition of men wearing a scarf tied around the neck. Ladies often
wore their hair in masses of ringlets with little corkscrew curls on
each side of their heads, and later piled their hair up elaborately on
their heads. They wore satin or silk dresses fitted at the waist with a
pointed bodice, and full skirt. The shoulder line was low and the
sleeves full and open at the front with fastenings of jeweled clasps.
The only fast colors were reds, blues, purple, and yellow, but not
green. They kept their hands warm in muffs. Women wore perfume, rouge,
and face patches. Some women put on a lot of make-up. Many men dressed
effeminately with rouge, face patches, heavily scented clothing, muffs,
and many ribbons of many colors. The facial beauty patches were in
shapes such as stars, crescent moons, and hearts; they diverted
attention from the common smallpox scars. There were Oxford shoes,
which laced up the front through eyelets. The members of the House of
Commons dressed like the gentry and assumed their manners. There was
exaggeration in all complimentary and ceremonial language.

        The gentry were beginning to be thought of as a "squirearchy".
They owned about half the land of the country.

The population according to class was as follows: N: Number of
Households. T: Titles, Degrees. Social Ranks, H: Household Size, and Y:
Household Yearly Income in Pounds.

___N_______________T______________________________S___________Y__16
     Temporal lords                       40       3,200
26          Spiritual lords                      20       1,300
800         Baronets                             16       880
600         Knights                              13       650
3,000       Esquires                             10       450
12,000      Gentlemen                             8       280
5,000       Persons in greater offices and places 8       240
5,000       Persons in lesser offices and places  6       120
2,000       Eminent merchants and traders by sea  8       400
8,000       Lesser merchants and traders by sea   6       198
10,000      Persons in the law                    7       154   2,000
    Eminent clergymen                     6        72
8,000       Lesser clergymen                      5        50
40,000      Freeholders of the better sort        7        91
120,000     Freeholders of the lesser sort        5.5      55
150,000     Farmers                               5        42.5
15,000      Persons in liberal arts and sciences  5        60
50,000      Shopkeepers and tradesmen             4.5      45
60,000      Artisans and handicrafts              4        38
5,000       Naval officers                        4        80
4,000       Military officers                     4        60
50,000      Common seamen                         3        20
364,000     Laboring people and out-servants      3.5      15
400,000     Cottagers and paupers                 3.25      6.5
35,000      Common soldiers                       2        14
25,000      Vagrants, as gypsies, thieves, beggars

As can be seen, agriculture is still the most common occupation.

        Great houses now had a central dining chamber for dining, with
sets of suites, usually for couples, around it. Each suite had an
ante-chamber and/or drawing room, and then a bedchamber, off of which
there was a servant's room and a closet [cabinet]. No longer did
personal servants bed down in the drawing room or outside their
master's door or in a truckle bed at his feet. The servant's room was
connected to a back staircase for use by servants. Secret guests also
used it. The csbinet room was the innermost sanctum for privacy and
gave its name to the later cabinet of the government.

        There were fewer servants and they were of a lower social
status than before. They were often sons of merchants, clergymen, and
army officers. Gentlemen no longer advanced by service to a great man,
but instead through grammar school and university education, commerce,
the law, or the armed services. This change came about because the
state now maintained reasonable law and order. There were more female
servants, who were paid less to cook and to clean as well as do laundry
and nursing. Servants were kept more in the background, preferably out
of sight. The elaborate ceremonial ritual with sewer, carver, and
cupbearer was gone. A butler replaced the yeomen of the buttery, ewery,
and pantry, and footmen began to wait on the table at which the lord,
his lady, and other couples sat. Servants no longer had meals in the
hall, which now had a grand staircase up to the dining chamber. The
highest servants, the officers: clerk of the kitchen, clerk of the
check [comptroller], head cook, butler, and groom of the chambers, and
female housekeeper ate in the gentleman-of the-horse's room, although
at a separate table. The kitchen staff ate in the kitchen. The footmen,
underbutler, porters, coachmen, grooms, stable-boys, gardeners, maids
ate in a servants' room. The steward was no longer the chief household
officer, but had a room near the kitchen. The bulk of the servants
slept in the basement or subordinate wings of the house.

        Great houses of nobles had more rooms, such as a chapel,
library, parlors, dressings rooms, and galleries; there was a variety
of architectural floor plans. The structure of a noble household of an
earl was as follows: The chief official was the receiver general. He
had financial responsibility for the household and prepared accounts
for the household and for the tenants' estates. These were checked by
an auditor. The receiver general was often the son of a country
gentleman and had a salary of 50 pounds raised to 100 pounds with
longevity. He had a servant and an assistant. If married, he had a
house on the property. There was perhaps an attorney on retainer who
were paid for a certain number of hours per week or month. The
gentleman of the privy purse kept the accounts of the family and bought
them apparel and toiletries. He was in close personal attendance upon
the earl. His salary was 20 pounds a year. Besides the receiver general
and the gentleman of the chamber, the tutor and chaplain had the
closest personal contact with the family. The lady had a gentlewoman
with a maid servant. The receiver general supervised most of the staff.
There was a steward of 40 pounds a year. He supervised a clerk of the
kitchen and a house bailiff of 20 pounds a year. The bailiff had
responsibility for the produce of the estate, e.g. the gardens, the
deer park, and the fish ponds. Under the clerk of the kitchen was the
cook man and kitchen boys, the latter of whom were clothed and fed, but
not paid. The steward also supervised the 4 pound yearly porters, who
kept the gates; the watchmen outside; and the head housekeeper, usually
a woman of 2 to 6 pounds yearly. She supervised the laundry maid and
general maids, who spent much of their time sewing. The steward was
also responsible for the wine cellar. A dozen footmen belonged partly
to the house and partly to the stables and received 2 to 6 pounds
yearly. They waited on the lord and lady in the house and accompanied
them in travels and did errands for them. The gentleman of the horse
supervised the stables, coach, dogs, kennels, and 16 pound yearly
huntsman. Boy pages also worked partly in the house and partly in the
stables. They were clothed and fed, but not paid. The head gardener
received 80 pounds for tending the flowers, vegetables, and fruit
trees. He had casual workers as needed to assist him. The steward was
also responsible for the London house. Here there was a housekeeper, a
watchman, and a 40 pound a year gardener, all there permanently. When
the lord was there, bargemen were employed for his barge. The salaries
for the family estate totaled about 600 pounds a year. Sometimes
married sons' or daughters' families stayed for months at the family
estate; then they would pay for their part of the food.

        Well-to-do people drank imported tea and coffee, sometimes from
porcelain ware, and usually after dinner or supper. Most tea leaves
were brewed first for the family and guests and a second time for the
servants; then they were given to the servants' relatives or friends.
Queen Mary encouraged the fashion of collecting Chinese porcelain. The
rich had red or black and gilt lacquered cabinets and cupboards. Oak
gave way to walnut, with its variegated surfaces. There were
grandfather clocks. Some fireplaces now had cast-iron firebacks.
Stuffing began to be upholstered to woodwork benches. Chairs were
taller in the back. Ladies did needlework to cover them and also made
patchwork quilts. Cane seats came into fashion.

        From the spring of 1665 to the end of 1666 there was a Great
Plague, mostly in London. It was the last and worst plague since the
Black Death of 1348. It lasted over a year and about one-third died
from it. Households with a plague victim were walled up with its
residents inside to reduce contagion, and then marked with a red cross.
Church bells tolling their requiems clanged in ceaseless discord. The
mournful cry "bring out your dead" echoed in deserted streets. At night
groups of people shoveled the corpses into open graves. To prepare for
this revolting task, they often first became drunk out of their senses.
People acquired wild beliefs in hope of avoiding the plague. For
instance, at one time it was thought that syphilis would prevent it, so
maddened hordes stormed the brothels. At another time, it was rumored
that the plague could be burned out of the air, and all one day
bonfires blazed outside every door and people sweltered in the heat.
Other localities posted sentries on the road to keep Londoners out of
their areas to prevent the plague from spreading there. Since sneezing
was thought to be the first sign of a person getting the plague, it
became common to ask God to bless a person who sneezed. In London,
statistics were collected on the number of plague victims and their
places of death to try to determine the cause of the plague by
correlation, a new method. This was a natural sequent to merchant John
Gaunt's 1662 book "Natural and Political Observations Made upon the
Bills of Mortality", which compiled yearly vital statistics from which
to analyze, for instance, causes of death due to particular diseases.
It reached conclusions such as that fall was the most unhealthy season;
females had longer life spans than males; and infant mortality was very
high.

        In 1666 a fire destroyed three-fourths of the City of London.
The blazing buildings were so hot that people with leather buckets of
water, hand squirts, and manually operated water-pumping machines could
not get near them. There was a lot of noise from falling buildings.
Panic and desperation were widespread. There was a lot of crying out
and running about distractedly. People saved some of their possessions
by burying them or removing them from the fire's path as they moved to
different lodgings. The streets were full of carts piled high with
furniture and merchandise. The Thames River was thick with heavily
laden barges. Melting lead from St. Paul's church ran down the streets
in a stream. The Tower of London, upwind of the fire, was saved by
blowing up surrounding buildings. Eventually the wind abated and the
fire was put out. A Fire Court with royal justices was created to offer
settlement terms about property that were free, fair, fast, and final.
Army tents and supplies, and soup kitchens sustained the citizens in
the fields.

        After the fire, buildings had to be brick or stone rather than
wood, except for doors and windows. Also, more plaster and tile was
used. All roofs had to be of tile or slate, rather than thatch. There
was a general use of tile for roofing. About 1714, came slate for
roofings. All buildings had to be at least two stories high, with flat
facades rather than overhanging upper floors. They had to have wide
brick walls around them to avoid the spread of fires. Many streets,
squares, and alleys were professionally planned, after the example of
Inigo Jones, who had continued his town planning with Lincoln's Inn
field's open square surrounded by houses with iron balconies. Another
example was Leiscester Square. Main streets had to be wide enough to
stop a fire. The street selling that had caused so much congestion was
removed to new market places. The massive rebuilding of London ended
the monopoly of the building trade claimed by the Mason's Company.
Astronomer and geometrician Christopher Wren designed and built a new
St. Paul's Cathedral and many churches in London, thus becoming
England's first architect. He worked up from a square base through all
sorts of shapes to a circular double dome on top. The fire put an end
to Whitehall as a royal residence and St. James Palace was used
instead. But at least one fire hazard remained: the practice of
lighting new fires by taking buckets of hot coals from one room or
house to another. This was faster than the several minutes it took to
use a tinder box to start a flame, i.e. striking a piece of flint upon
a piece of steel making a spark which was dropped onto tinder and then
blown upon. Matches were invented in this period, but expensive and
unsafe.

        Nicholas Barbon began fire insurance in the 1670s. If fire
broke out on an insured premises, the insurance company's firemen would
come with leather buckets and grappling irons, and later small hand
pumps. Barbon also redeveloped many districts in London, tearing down
old buildings without hesitation. He started the system of selling off
leases to individual builders, who hoped to recover their building
costs by selling their houses before they were completed and before
substantial payments on the lease became due. Entrepreneurial
master-builders subcontracted work to craftsmen and took a large profit
or a large loss and debt. Aristocrats bought large parcels of land on
which they built their own mansions surrounded by lots to be rented to
building contractors and speculators like Barbon. The houses built on
these lots were sold and the underlying land rented. These rentals of
land made the mansions self-supporting. Barbon built rows of identical
townhouses. Sometimes houses were built on all the lots around a
square, which had gardens reserved for the use of those who lived on
the square. Most of the new building was beyond the old City walls.
Marine insurance for storms, shipwreck, piracy, mutiny, and enemy
action was also initiated. Before the fire, e.g. in Tudor times, the
writing of risks had been carried on as a sideline by merchants,
bankers, and even money lenders in their private offices and was a
private transaction between individuals.

        London was residential and commercial. Around the outside were
tenements of the poor. From 1520 to 1690, London's population had risen
tenfold, while the nation's had only doubled. London went from 2% to
11% of the nation's population. In 1690, London's population was about
half a million. After 1690, London's population grew at the same rate
as the nation's. The first directory of addresses in London was
published in 1677. Business began to follow the clock more strictly and
many people thought of their watches as a necessity.

        London coffee houses, which also sold wine, liquors, and meals,
became specialty meeting places. They were quieter and cheaper than
taverns; for a penny, one could sip a cup of coffee by the fire, read
the newspapers, and engage in conversation. Merchants, stock jobbers,
politician groups, soldiers, doctors and clergymen, scholars, and
literary men all had special coffee house meeting places. Notices and
letters of general interest were posted therein. Many merchants,
brokers, and underwriters, especially those whose houses had been
burned in the fire, conducted their business at their coffee house and
used it as their business address. Men in marine insurance and shipping
met at Lloyd's Coffeehouse, which was run by Edward Lloyd who
established it for this purpose in 1687. Lloyd provided reliable
shipping news with a network of correspondents in the principal ports
at home and on the continent and circulated a handwritten sheet of
lists of vessels and their latest movements at his coffeehouse. The
patrons cheered safe arrivals and shared their grief over ships lost.
They insured their own risks at one moment and underwrote those of
their friends the next. Auctions of goods and of ships and ship
materials which had been advertised in the newspapers were conducted
from a pulpit in the coffeehouse.

        French wine was consumed less because of heavy taxation and
spirits and beer were consumed more. The streets were alive with
taverns, coffee houses, eating houses, and hackney coaches past 9 p.m.
at night. Coffee houses were suppressed by royal proclamation in 1675
because "malicious and scandalous reports" defaming his majesty's
government were spread there, which disturbed the peace and quiet of
the realm. But this provoked such an uproar that it was reduced to a
responsibility of the owner to prevent scandalous papers and libels
from being read and hindering any declarations any false and scandalous
reports against the government or its ministers.

        London air was filthy with smoke from coal burning. In 1684 the
streets were lit with improved lights which combined oil lamps with
lenses and reflectors. Groups of householders combined to hire lighting
contractors to fulfill their statutory responsibility to hang candles
or lights in some part of their houses near the street to light it for
passengers until 9:00 p.m., and later to midnight. In 1694 a monopoly
was sold to one lighting company. In 1663 a body of paid watchmen was
established in London. An office of magistrate was created and filled
with tradesmen and craftsmen, who could make a living from the fines
and fees. This was to supplement the unpaid Justices of the Peace. The
public was encouraged to assist in crime prevention, such as being
witnesses, but most policing was left to the parishes. Crowds punished
those who transgressed community moral standards, threatened their
economic or social interests, or offended their religious or patriotic
beliefs. Often a crowd would react before the call of "stop thief" or
the hue and cry from the local constable. Pickpockets would be drenched
under a pump. Cheats would be beaten up. Dishonest shops and brothels
would be ransacked or destroyed. The most common targets were
promiscuous women and pregnant servants.

        There were many highway robberies and mob actions in London.
Mobs in the thousands would turn out against the Catholics, especially
at times of unemployment and trade depression. Working people still saw
demonstrations and violence as the best way to achieve their economic
goals, since strikes didn't work. For example, the silk workers used
street violence to get protective legislation against imports and
mechanization in 1675. The manufacture of silk material had been
brought to England by French workers driven from France. In 1697, three
thousand London silk weavers demonstrated outside the Commons and East
India House against the importation of raw silks by the East India Co.,
and a couple months later, they attacked a house in the city owned by a
gentleman of the company. In 1701, heavy duties were imposed on the
import of Indian silks and wearing of Indian silks was prohibited by
statute. Sometimes mobs would break open the prisons to release fellow
rioters or take action against strike breakers or informers. Parish
constables elected by their neighbors could not control the mobs and
stayed within their parishes. Dueling was still prevalent, even though
against the law.

        In London and Westminster, it was hard to enforce the
requirement that inhabitants keep the street in front of their house
clean and store the filth until the daily raker or scavenger came with
cart and dung pot. So a commission was made responsible for paving and
keeping clean the streets, making and repairing vaults, sewers, drains,
and gutters, and removing encroachments. It compensated those with
encroachments of over 30 years. It assessed inhabitants of such streets
16d. per square yard from the front of their building to the center of
the street. Women continued to empty their pails and pans outside their
doors and did their washing on stools in the streets. There was a
penalty of 5d. for throwing filth in front of one's house, and 20d. for
throwing it elsewhere in the streets. Scavengers and rakers could lodge
their coal ashes, dust, dirt, and other filth in such vacant public
places as the commission deemed convenient for accommodating country
carts returning otherwise empty after their loads were sold.

        However, this system did not work because people would not pay
their assessments. So there was a return to the former system of
requiring citizens to sweep and clean the streets in front of their
buildings twice a week and keep the filth until a scavenger or raker
came. The penalty for not doing so was 3s.4d., later raised to 10s. Any
one throwing coal ashes, dust, dirt, rubbish, or dung onto the streets
or lanes incurred a fine of 5s. There was a fine of 20s. for hooping or
washing any pipes or barrels in any lane or open passage or repairing
coaches, sawing wood, or chiseling stones in the streets. Pigs kept in
or about one's house had to be forfeited.

        One way that people traveled was to be carried in sedan chairs
held up by two horizontal poles with one man at the front ends and
another man in back. There were so many sedan chairs and coaches for
hire in London that the watermen lost business. All hackney coaches in
London or Westminster were required to be licensed and marked with
their owner's distinctive mark so that complaints could be made. Their
maximum rate was 10s. for a 12 hour day, and 18d. for the first hour
and 12d. for every hour thereafter. Licensed coachmen were not allowed
to practice any other trade. The coaches paid the commission 5 pounds
yearly. Hay sold along the road brought 6d. per load, and straw 2d. per
load, to the commission. There had to by paid 3d. for every cart load
of hay sold at the hay market and 1d. for every cart of straw, to go
towards paving and repairing the hay market street.

Overall, agriculture improved. Fields that would have been left fallow
were planted with new crops which restored indispensable chemical
elements to the soil. At the same time, they supplied winter food for
stock. The size and weight of animals for slaughter grew. There was so
much stock breeding that it was more economical for a family to buy
meat, milk, and eggs, than to maintain its own animals. There was an
explosion in the growing of beans, peas, lettuce, asparagus,
artichokes, and clover. The demand for food in London and other urban
areas made enclosure for crop cultivation even more profitable than for
sheep grazing. The government made no more attempts to curtail the
enclosure of farm lands. The number of enclosures grew because
copyholders were not successful in obtaining the legal security of
tenure. But most land was not enclosed.

        In 1661 in the county of Essex, the wages for mowing one acre
of grass were 1s.10d.; for reaping, shearing, binding one acre of wheat
4s.; and for threshing a quarter of wheat or rye 1s.

        Wives participated with their husbands in general agricultural
chores and did the dairy work including making cheese. Every
householder kept chickens because egg production was cheap, their
market price being only 1s. for a hundred. Wives also took care of the
gardening work and traditionally kept for their own the cash that came
in from garden, dairy, and poultry products. A wife made jellies and
preserves when the fruit trees, bushes, and vines were bearing.
Imported sugar enabled fruit to be preserved as jam in jars sealed with
a layer of mutton fat to make them airtight. She was likely to concoct
medications from her herbs. Meat had to be smoked or salted when there
was not enough fodder to keep animals alive through the winter. She saw
to it that the soap was boiled and the candles molded. She cooked the
daily meals, did the washing, produced cloth for the family's use, and
sewed the family's clothing.

        Women had less work and lower pay than men. Since most cottages
had a spinning wheel, spinning work was readily available to wives. In
the 1670s, a female weaver or spinner was paid 2-4d. per day. A
domestic servant, who was usually female, was paid 40-80s. a year. Men
in the trades objected to competition from lower-paid women.
Aristocratic ladies actively managed their family's household and
estates. The only work available to a high middle- class woman who was
waiting to get married was to be a governess in another household or a
lady-in-waiting to a gentlewoman. Children often worked; this was
recommended so that they were under the direct supervision of their
parents rather than getting into mischief in the village. The mother
typically mingled severity with gentleness, but the father did not dare
to err on the side of leniency. Discipline was by whipping. Children
were treated as little adults. The lack of a conception of childhood
innocence even extended to the practice of adults to tell bawdy jokes
in their presence or play with their children's genitals.

        About 1660, the Royal Society of London for the Promotion of
Natural Knowledge was founded by Charles II, who became its patron. It
was formed from discussion groups of the new experimental philosophy.
It included the Baconians formerly at Oxford and Cambridge, who were
ejected at the Restoration, and a group of Gresham professors of
geometry and astronomy. The Royal Society met at Gresham College. Its
goal was to compare ideas in mathematics and science and identify
specific aims of science. It published scientific reports to make its
findings generally known. This was a great improvement over the private
correspondence among scientists, which was limited by the use of
various languages. Charles himself had his own laboratory and dabbled
in chemistry and anatomy. Similar societies were formed in many places
in the world. Theologicians warned that scientific research was
dangerous. But it's advances improved agriculture, manufactures,
medicine, surgery, navigation, naval architecture, gunnery, and
engineering.

        Issac Newton was a genius, who in his childhood designed and
built model windmills, water wheels, water clocks, sundials, and kites.
He came from a family which had risen from the yeomen ranks to the
gentry. For a few years after graduating from Cambridge University in
1665, he secluded himself in the countryside to study. Here, using the
work of John Wallis, he formulated the binomial theorem that expands
(A+B) raised to the nth exponent power, where n is an integer. He also
worked with numbers that had exponents that were fractions, unending
decimals, or negative numbers. Certain patterns of numbers, such as the
sum of doubling each number in a series as in: 1+2+4+8+...never
terminates; the series is infinite. He then developed the notion of a
number being the limit of the summation of an infinite converging
series of a pattern of numbers, such as the limit of
1+(1/2)+(1/4)+(1/8)...= 2. By considering the state of motion of a
mass-point in an infinitely short time under the influence of an
external force, he developed rules for finding areas under algebraic
curves [integration], such as the hyperbola, and finding tangents to
algebraic curves [differentiation], which he recognized as inverse
processes. That is, differentiating the integral of a function results
in a return to that function.

        Newton discovered that colors arose from the separation, rather
than a modification, of white light, that is natural sunlight. He did
this using a prism to dissect the white light into its spectrum of
constituent colors and then using a prism and lens to recombine the
colors to reconstitute white light. The spectrum was the same as that
of a rainbow. He determined the angle of refraction of each color by
beaming white light through a prism, and then through a hole in a board
which isolated one color, to another prism. When he discovered that all
colors reflect from a mirror at the same angle, he invented and built
the reflecting telescope, which used a parabolic concave mirror and a
flat mirror instead of a convex lens, thereby eliminating the
distortions and rainbow coloring around the edges that resulted from
the refraction of different colors at different angles. He deemed a ray
of light to consist of a rapidly moving stream of atomic particles,
rather than Robert Hooke's pulses or Christian Huygens' waves, because
shadows showed a sharp boundary between the light and the absence of
light. He reasoned that if light was made up of pulses or waves, it
could spread around obstacles or corners as sound seemed to do. He
approximated the speed of sound by timing echoes in corridors of
various lengths.

        Newton was methodical and combined the inductive and deductive
methods of inquiry, first making observations, and then generalizing
them into a theory, and finally deducing consequences from the theory
which could be tested by experimentation. This was the first clear
expression of the basis of the "scientific method". He carried
mathematization of data from experiments as far as possible.

        Newton theorized that the same gravity force that pulled an
apple down from a tree extended out to the moon to hold it in its orbit
around the earth. He saw a connection between these movements by
imagining a cannon on a mountain shooting a series of cannonballs
parallel to the earth's surface. The first shot has only a tiny charge
of explosive, and the cannonball barely makes it out of the muzzle
before falling to the ground. The second shot is propelled by a larger
charge, and follows a parabolic arc as it falls. The next shots, fired
with increasingly more propellant, eventually disappear over the
horizon as they fall. Lastly, with enough gunpowder, a speeding
cannonball would completely circle the earth without hitting it. By
extrapolating from these ever faster projectiles, he opined that the
moon was held in its orbit by the same earth force that operated on the
projectiles. He correlated the moon's orbit with the measured
acceleration of gravity on the surface of the earth. He put various
substances with different masses and weights into the shell of a
pendulum and observed that the pendulum had the same period [time for
one oscillation] and fell at the same rate as free-falling objects.
Then he formulated the idea that the ultimate agent of nature was a
force acting between bodies rather than a moving body itself. Gravity
did not act in proportion to the surfaces of bodies, but in proportion
to quantity of matter. Gravity penetrated to the very center of all
bodies without diminution by the body. Gravity's force extended to
immense distances and decreased in exact proportion to the square of
the distance.

        Newton opined that an object moves because of external forces
on it rather than by forces internal to the object. These are his three
laws of motion. 1) He connected the concepts of force and acceleration
with a new concept, that of mass. Mass is a quantity intrinsic to an
object that determines how it responds to forces, such as the force of
gravity. The greater the mass of a body, the stronger the force of
gravity on it, and the more difficult it is to get it moving. He found
that the acceleration of a body by a force is inversely proportional to
its mass, and formulated the equation that force equals mass multiplied
by acceleration. So if a force acts on a planet, it produces a change
in velocity that is proportional to the force and in the same direction
as the force.2) His law of inertia is that any body, persists in its
state of rest or of uniform motion in a straight line, unless affected
by an outside force. 3) His next law is that when a body A exerts a
force on a body B, then B also exerts a force on A which is equal in
amount but opposite in direction. This means that forces that operate
between different parts of a planet produce no net force upon the whole
planet, so that the mass of a planet can be treated as if it is
concentrated at a point.

        His law of gravitation explains how the whole universe is held
together. This law holds that every object in the universe attracts
every other object with a single gravitational force that is directly
proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional
to the square of the distance between their centers. Newton had at
first accepted the Cartesian system of celestial vortices of aether
that swirled the planets and comets around their orbits. He determined
that Kepler's law that areas were swept out in equal times implied that
gravity acts in the direction of a line between the planet and the sun.
The gross features of the universe and Kepler's observations led to his
recognition that the attraction between two bodies decreases inversely
in proportion to the square of the distance between them. Only one kind
of force would satisfy Kepler's requirement that the sun was a focus of
an ellipse and still be consistent with Kepler's law that the square of
a planet's period was proportional to the cube of its mean distance
from the sun; that was the inverse square law. Then he came to accept
Robert Hooke's hypothesis that planets are kept in their orbits by the
combination of an attractive power of the sun and of motion in a
straight line that was tangential to their orbits. From astronomical
data, he calculated this centripetal acceleration of each planet
towards the sun to be proportional to the inverse square of its
distance from the sun. He also calculated the "centrifugal"
accelerations in a straight line. His experiments showed that the
centripetal force in a circular orbit was equal to the mass of the body
multiplied by the square of its velocity, all divided by the radius of
the circular path. He used calculus and differential equations to
determine centripetal forces of elliptical orbits, where the distance
from the sun, the velocity, and the acceleration were variables.

        Newton showed that his single gravitational force could account
for the way free-falling objects descend to the ground, the parabolic
trajectory of projectiles, the path of the moon in its orbit around the
earth, the course of the tides every twelve hours, the lower densities
of the earth's atmosphere at greater heights, the paths of Jupiter's
moons, the paths of comets, and the elliptical paths of the planets in
their orbits around the sun. This determination discredited the
previous belief that invisible angels moved the planets. Newton proved
from his law of gravitation and his three laws of motion the truth of
Kepler's laws of elliptical planetary motion. Newton demonstrated from
data collected from the comet of 1680 that comets moved according to
his law of gravitation. He showed that the path of a body traveling
within the gravitational force of the sun is a circle, an ellipse, a
parabola, or a hyperbola. He used the concept of a common center of
gravity as a reference point for other motions. The fact that the
center of gravity of the solar system was within the body of the sun
verified that the sun was indeed at the center of the solar system.

        Newton deduced that the tides were created by the rotation of
the earth with bulges of water on the earth's surfaces that were
closest and farthest from the moon. The moon "pulled" the water nearest
to it with a greater force than average. It "pulled" the water farthest
from it with a force weaker than average. These two moving bulges
created two tides a day.

        Newton's "Principia Mathematica Philosophiae Naturalis", was
published in 1687. The established church denounced it as being against
the scripture of the Bible. Newton did not agree with the established
church on many points, such as the trinity, and was considered a
heretic. He had his own interpretations of the Bible and doubted the
divinity of Jesus. But it was accepted for dissenters like Newton to
qualify for full civil rights by maintaining an outward conformity and
taking the sacrament in the established church once a year. Newton was
given a royal dispensation from taking holy orders as prescribed by the
rules for tenure of fellows of his college at Cambridge University. He
did believe in a God who created the universe and who had a ubiquitous
presence in all space. When Catholic King James II tried to have a
Catholic monk admitted to the degree of a Master of Arts at Cambridge
University without taking the oath of adherence to the established
Protestant church, so that he could participate in the business of the
university, Newton was active in the opposition that defeated this
attempt. As a result, he was elected to Parliament by Cambridge.

        When Olaus Roemer, a Danish astronomer, was applying Newton's
laws to the paths of the moons of Jupiter to make a table of eclipses
of Jupiter's moons for use in determining one's longitude, he noticed
that the eclipses were five hundred seconds ahead of average time at
that time of year when the earth and Jupiter were on the same side of
the sun, and five hundred seconds behind average time six months later,
when Jupiter was on the other side of the sun. He reasoned that this
difference was due to the light from Jupiter's moons taking more time
to reach the earth when Jupiter was farther from the earth, i.e. on the
other side of the sun. He concluded that light does not travel
instantaneously, but at a certain speed. From the fact that it took
1000 seconds for light to travel the diameter of the earth's orbit, he
calculated its speed in 1676.

        In 1668, Christian Huygens formulated the law of conservation
of momentum [mass multiplied by velocity], which held that when objects
collide, they may each change direction, but the sum of all their
momenta will remain the same. Huygens also recognized the conservation
of what was later called "kinetic energy", which is associated with
movement. He developed laws of centrifugal force for uniform motion in
a circle. He derived the formula for computing the oscillations of a
simple pendulum. In 1690, he posited the theory that light consists of
a series of waves. It states that all points of a wave front of light
in a vacuum may be regarded as new sources of wavelets that expand in
every at a rate depending on their velocities. He thought this a better
explanation of bending and interference of light than Newton's particle
theory.

        In 1661, Robert Boyle, called the father of modern chemistry,
defined an element as a substance that cannot be further decomposed. He
distinguished an element from both a mixture, which is easily
separable, and a compound, which is not easily separable. He used an
air pump he developed and a glass jar to create a confined vacuum space
for experiments to find the properties of heat, light, and sound. He
noted that burning objects such as candles and coal, when placed in the
receiver of his air pump, went out after a time although air was still
present. He opined that animals were dependent upon a fresh supply of
air to live. He studied the relationship between the volume, density,
and pressure of air and gases. He proved by experiment that the volume
of a gas at a constant temperature varies in inverse proportion to the
pressure applied to the gas. Since gas is compressible, he opined that
gases must be composed of discrete particles separated by void, and
also that basic physical properties were due to motions of particles,
or atoms, which was an ancient Greek conjecture. This cast doubt on the
long-held belief that everything was composed from four basic elements:
air, water, fire, and earth. Boyle's laboratory at Oxford was denounced
by the Oxford clergy as destroying religion. In 1679, the steam
pressure cooker was invented by Denis Papin from France. He invented
the atmospheric engine in 1690.

        Robert Hooke helped Boyle build his air pump. Hooke was
thirteen when his father, a minister, died. Hooke was a genius with
innate mechanical skill and was an able mathematician. He applied a
spiral spring to regulate the balance of watches. A lord financed him
as a Gresham lecturer of geometry for 50 pounds a year. In 1666, he
used a pendulum to measure the force of gravity and showed that the
center of gravity of the earth and moon is a point describing an
ellipse around the sun. In 1667, he explained the twinkling of the
stars by irregular atmospheric refractions. He formulated the theory
that light is composed of pulses. Hooke's Law states that the amount an
elastic body such as a spring stretches out of shape is in direct
proportion to the force acting on it: its tension. He invented the
odometer, a wheel to measure distances. He constructed an arithmetical
machine. He invented the universal joint, which can move in many
angles. His book of drawings of microscopic animals is a classic. He
proposed that fossils can be used as a source of information about the
earth's history. Hooke became rich from his inventions, but this was
not known until his death, when thousands of pounds were found in his
iron chest.

        In 1668, Wallis postulated the correct theory of impacts of
inelastic bodies, based on the principle of conservation of momentum.
In 1685, he introduced the first graphical representation of complex
numbers.

        Royal astronomer and genius Edmond Halley, the son of a soap
maker, studied tides, magnetism, and the paths of comets and stars. He
went on voyages to study the heavens from different positions, thereby
laying the foundations of physical geography. He showed that the stars
change in position in relation to each other. With Newton's help, he
calculated the orbit of a comet he saw in 1682 to be elliptical rather
than parabolic and then proved it was the same comet that had appeared
in 1531 and 1607, indicating it's regularity; it was then named
"Halley's comet". However, the Church of England still embraced the
idea that comets and eclipses were evidence of God's wrath. Greenwich
Observatory was built in 1675. Halley used a barometer to measure the
density of the atmosphere and related its readings to elevations into
the atmosphere and to weather. He determined that the cause of the
tropical trade winds was the sun warming the tropical air at the
equator, causing it to rise and move north as it was replaced by cooler
air from the north. This body of air was deflected by the rotation of
the earth. He illustrated the tropical winds with the first
meteorological map. He made a descent in a diving bell, which was used
to try to reach wrecked treasure ships. He studied fossils and
perceived them as remnants of living beings that had died long ago, and
imagined a succession of living things. Halley surveyed the tides and
coasts of the British Channel for the king in 1701.

        In 1675, apothecary Nicolas Lemery divided substances into
mineral, vegetable, and animal. He wrote a dictionary of
pharmaceuticals.

        John Ray and Francis Willoughby were friends who traveled
together to study plants and animals respectively. John Ray started the
science of zoology with his edition of Francis Willoughby's
"Ornithology" on birds and his own "History of Fishes". He also
attempted the first scientific classification of animals in his
"Synopsis of Quadrupeds". Ray compared anatomies and experimented on
movements of plants and the ascent of sap. He knew that fossils were
remnants of old animals. Ray first suggested the concept of species in
classification of animals and plants. He opined that the goodness and
wisdom of God was shown not only by the usefulness of animals to man's
uses as taught by the church, but also by the adaptation of animals to
their own lives and surroundings. The vast array and dispersal of
animals found by world explorers all over the world cast doubt on the
biblical story of Noah putting two of every kind of animal on an ark.
The science of botany began with Ray's "History of Plants" and the
researches of Robert Morrison, who was Charles' physician and keeper of
his gardens.

        Nicholaus Steno, a Danish physician, diagrammed six levels of
stratification on the earth's surface and demonstrated in 1669 that
layers of strata of rock are always deposited with the oldest layers on
the bottom and the youngest layers on the top. This began the science
of geology. He argued that shifts in the earth's strata caused the
formation of mountains. He identified fossils as ancient creatures. The
idea that fossils were remnants of dead animals existing before man
conflicted with the religious idea that Adam's fall began sin and
caused death. The idea from fossils that existing species of animals
were modifications of predecessor animals conflicted with the religious
belief that Noah's ark had preserved all the varieties of animals. John
Aubrey described Stonehenge, thus founding prehistoric archaeology. He
thought it to be a Druid temple.

        The telescope and compound microscope, which has an objective
lens and an eyepiece lens for producing a wide range of magnifications,
were further developed. The cellular basis of life was discovered and
described by Robert Hooke. Nehemia Grew, the son of a grammar school
master who became a physician, observed and drew plant anatomy,
including leaves, flowers, fruits, seeds, ovules, pollen grains, and
stamens. He was the first to observe the existence of plant sexuality.
Italian Marcello Malpighi, a physician, used the new compound
microscope to study human skin, spleen, kidneys, and liver and also
compared the livers of several types of animals. He discovered
capillaries linking the arterial and venous circulation in the lungs.
Dutchman Anton van Leeuwenhock, a cloth manufacturer who made
microscopes to inspect the quality of cloth, turned them to use in
understanding the life cycles of mites, lice, and fleas. He correctly
described human blood cells. When he found what he described as tiny
animals (bacteria, protozoa, and rotifers), he sent clear descriptions
of them to the Royal Society in London as proof against the theory of
spontaneous generation, which held that lower forms of life could arise
from nonliving matter. This started the science of bacteriology. With
the discovery of the egg in the female reproductive system, the status
of women was lifted.

        Physician Thomas Willis, son of a farmer, dissected brains of
men and animals to study the anatomical relations of nerves and
arteries. Excess urine had been associated with a wasting disease.
Willis identified diabetes mellitus with excess of urine that was
sweet. Physician Thomas Sydenham, son of a gentleman, observed epidemic
diseases of London over successive years, thus founding epidemiology.
He also furthered clinical medicine by emphasizing detailed
observations of patients and maintaining accurate records. He wrote a
treatise on gout and identified scarlet fever. He introduced a cooling
method of treating smallpox. But he still relied on the big three
treatments: bloodletting, purging, and sweating. Bloodletting was to
draw off bad blood so that it could be replaced by a better fluid.
Another treatment used was cupping, whereby a vacuum was created by
heated glass cups to draw blood to the surface of the skin. John Locke
performed one of the first successful operations draining a kind of
abscess of a man's liver. It was common for people who felt ill to take
a laxative and rest at home.

        In 1690, physicians opened the first dispensaries, which gave
treatment and medicine together, to take business away from their
rivals: the apothecaries. London's apothecaries were released in 1694
from jury service and service as constable, scavenger, or other parish
or ward office because it was necessary that they be available to
attend the sick at all times. Peruvian bark which had quinine as its
alkaloid had been introduced as a proven cure for the ague, a fever
with chills usually due to malaria, in 1653. The English ceased to
believe in holy wells, but went to spas such as Bath for treatment of
disease.

There was more bathing because private homes in towns now had indoor
baths. The public baths came into disuse.

For childbirth, only rich women were attended by physicians. Most
physicians used talismen such as the eagle stone at deliveries.
Caesarian section almost always led to the death of the mother.
Midwives were licensed by the church and could baptize babies. Jane
Sharp wrote "The Midwives Book" with anatomical illustrations.

Women over thirty had fewer children and the last child born was at an
earlier age than before. This was in part due to birth control such as
coitus-interruptus, long breast-feeding of a current child and/or the
taboo against sex if the wife was still breast-feeding. Rich women
often employed wet-nurses to breast- feed their babies. Babies seldom
thrived, or even survived, without out a regular supply of breast milk.

John Locke, an Oxford don, physician, and son of an attorney, expressed
a view that the monarchy was not based on divine right, but rather on a
contractual relationship with the people, who were reasonable, free,
and equal by nature. This idea was first adopted by revolutionists and
then became accepted as orthodoxy. Also, he articulated the right of
resistance, the supremacy of legislative assemblies, and the
responsibility of rulers to answer to their subjects. He theorized that
men turn to forming a civil government when there is a need to protect
accumulated property from some unreasonable men. This, along with the
protection of life and liberty, was the primary function of government,
before royal pleasure, national pride, or foreign conquest. He wrote
theories on the interaction of supply, demand, interest rates, rents,
coinage, and foreign exchange rates. He believed that interest rates
should be the natural ones determined by market forces rather than by
the legislature, especially if there was an attempt to lower interest
rates below their natural rate, which was not only undesirable but
easily circumvented. He thought that attempting to legislate contrary
to natural economic laws, e.g. prices, was doomed to failure from
unexpected consequences. He agreed with most mercantilists that by
maintaining a large inflow of precious metals through consistent export
of surpluses in foreign trade would lead to low interest rates,
increased trade, increased capital stock, high employment, and high
prices, and therefore a healthy economy and enrichment of the nation.

        Locke thought that knowledge comes primarily from experience,
i.e. sensation and reflection, rather than from innate ideas placed in
the mind by God, so that observation and experimentation are necessary
to find truth. He theorized that propositions of truth have probability
rather than certainty. Probable propositions included opinion, belief,
and revelation. His "Thoughts on Education" was a great book on the
formation of character. Locke also advocated the use of a large field
for inventing labor-saving and economic devices for agriculture. He
espoused freedom of thought in "Letters on Toleration" and wrote "An
Essay Concerning Human Understanding", which described how the mind
functions in learning about the world and which attempted to reconcile
science and Christianity. He was a great admirer and friend of Newton
and they shared religious views. He was also a member of the Royal
Society.

        At Oxford and Cambridge Universities, there were the most
enlightened theologians, classicists, orientalists, philologists,
mathematicians, chemists, architects, and musicians. There were
professors of Anglo-Saxon, Hebrew, and Arabic. John Locke's influence
caused modern philosophy to supercede traditional scholasticism. There
were no more disputations to qualify for degrees. Some of the students
were the sons of noblemen and sat at meals with the heads, tutors, and
fellows of the colleges. Most students were the sons of landowners,
clergymen, professional men, or prosperous men of business. They were
known as the gentlemen commoner students. The few poor students were
known as servitors and paid for their education by menial work.
Corporal punishment ceased. Instead there were fines, suspension, and
expulsion. Fellows of colleges had common rooms for drinking and
smoking together as they had done in taverns outside college walls. The
king had authority to grant licenses in sell or give land in
perpetuity, to encourage founding and augmenting colleges and schools.
The two universities were vested with the presentation of benefices
that had belonged to Papists.

        English nonconformists such as Presbyterians were excluded from
Oxford and Cambridge Universities, so they were educated at Glasgow in
Scotland.

        Grammar schools were blamed for the past civil war by educating
too many people above their station, so ecclesiastical control now
stifled them. A few dissenting schools were established. Charity was
given to schools for children of the poor for placement as apprentices,
but not to educate them above their stations.

        In the 1670s, about 70% of males in London were literate. By
1680, illiteracy was a special characteristic of the poor instead of a
characteristic of the vast majority of common people as in 1580.
Fountain pens came into use.

        Many books written tended to be about the author's experiences,
for instance Samuel Pepys' "Diary", Gilbert Burnet's "History of my own
Times", John Evelyn's lifelong diary with vivid descriptions of
striking events of the day, and nonconformist Celia Fiennes'
description of her tour of England on horseback. There were many
political biographies. Historians did not yet study history as a
continuous process, but narrated self-contained stories to instruct by
example. William Fleetwood wrote about economic history in "Chronicon
Preciogum". George Hicks put together a "Thesaurus" of the northern
languages. Thomas Hyde wrote on ancient Persian religion. John Spenser
compared Jewish rites with those of other Semitic people, thus starting
comparative religion. Richard Bentley, William's librarian, wrote a
"Dissertation" on the ancient Greeks. He compared the ancient Greek
life with modern life. He also confuted atheism on the Newtonian
system. A translated version of "Critical History of Old Testament" by
Frenchman Richard Simon identified the old testament as history instead
of divine revelation. John Milton wrote "Paradise Lost", which retells
the Biblical story of the Creation and the fall of Adam and Eve against
the backdrop of Satan's rebellion and expulsion from heaven and
emphasized God's justice in spite of everything. The poem deals with
the puritan struggling against evil and the problem of sin and
redemption. It has a cold and severe conception of moral virtue and
stoical self-repression in its characters. There is no sympathy with
the human condition. Reading this book made the English more serious,
earnest, and sober in life and conduct and more firm in the love of
freedom. John Bunyan wrote "Pilgrim's Progress" in which a tinker takes
a journey to find the Everlasting City of heaven and on the way meets
people who try to harm him. But he derives strength from his
adversities. The journey is a metaphor for the Christian soul trying to
find salvation. It is Puritan in its sympathies and has insights into
human nature. John Dryden wrote on large social, political, and
humanistic issues, often by political satire. William Congreve wrote
plays such as a comedy on manners. William Wycherley wrote cynical
satires and portrayed folly, affection, and vice. John Vanbrugh wrote
plays satirizing London high society and social institutions. John
Toland wrote "Christianity and Mysterious" on deism. "Puss in Boots",
"Red Ridinghood", and "Cinderella" became available in print. There
were many female poets, bookwriters, and playwrights. Anne Finch, later
Vicountess Conway, wrote the philosophical book: "Principle of the Most
Ancient and Modern Philosophy" to reconcile the new science with
Christian belief. In it every creature had a body and a spirit. Mrs.
Aphra Behn wrote "Oroonoko", one of the first novels. Basua Makin,
governess of the little sister of Charles II wrote an essay to revive
the education of women, arguing that women's activity in wartime showed
that they were fit to be educated. Elizabeth Elstob, who studied
Teutonic languages, was one of the founders of women's education. Mary
Astell proposed a college for women. Some women painted portraits.

        There were rigid censorship acts from 1662 to 1695. The first
required that no one could print a book without first registering it
with the Company of Stationers of London and having it licensed by
appropriate authority: common law books by the Lord Chancellor or the
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, affairs of state and history books by
the Secretaries of State, heraldry books by the Earl Marshall or Kings
of Arms Garter, university books by the Chancellor or Vice Chancellor
of either of the universities, and all others including divinity,
physics, and philosophy by the Archbishop of Canterbury, or Bishop of
London. Books could be imported only into London and not sold until
approved by the Archbishop of Canterbury or Bishop of London after
being opened and viewed by a scholar appointed by these bishops and a
representative of the Company of Stationers. If heretical, seditious,
scandalous, schismatic or otherwise dangerous or offensive, the
importer could be punished. No one could print or import copies of any
books without consent of the owner with right by letters patent. The
penalty for not doing so was to forfeit 6s.9d. for each such book, of
which the king would receive one half and the owner one half. Printers
had to set their own name to the books they printed and also the name
of the author or else forfeit such book. Only freemen of London who
were members of the Company of Stationers could sell books. The Company
of Stationers had the authority accompanied by a constable to search
all houses and shops where they knew or had "probable reason" to
suspect books were being printed. They could search houses of persons
of other trades only by special warrant. They could examine books found
to determine if they were licensed and, if not, to seize them. Justices
could imprison offenders. The first offense by offending printers was
to be punished by suspension from printing for three years, the second
offense by permanent disallowance from printing, fine, imprisonment,
and corporal punishment not extending to life or limb. This statute was
enforced by frequent prosecutions, such as of publishers of
pornographic books.

        The only newspapers to appear between 1660 and 1679 were
official government sheets. But in 1695 the requirement to license
publications, including newspapers, was abolished, thereby giving some
freedom to the press. Locke had argued for this freedom, stating "I
know not why a man should not have liberty to print whatever he would
speak and to be answerable for the one just as he is for the other..."
In 1702 the first daily newspaper in the world came into existence in
England. The Stationer's Company monopoly of printing also ended in
1695. Printing was not regulated and no longer criminal just because it
was unauthorized. Printing could now be done in other places than
London, York, Oxford, and Cambridge.

        The rich got richer and the poor got poorer. Many successful
merchants and manufacturers bought landed estates and established a
line of country squires or baronets or even peers. The fashion started
in the nobility and the richest mercantile families that their wives
should become ladies of leisure. For workers though, there was constant
underemployment. In periods of economic crisis industrial workers lost
their jobs. Much work was seasonal. Anyone who could work most of the
time was fortunate. Laboring and out- servants, who comprised one
fourth of the population, and cottagers and paupers, who comprised
another fourth of the population, had to spend more than they earned.
The poor rate collected from the parishes for the cottagers and paupers
was 3d. per week. There was an agricultural depression that was deepest
in the 1680s after the collapse of a boom. It was the only bad
depression experienced in peace time. There was famine in 1698.

        Any person receiving relief from any parish and his family
members cohabiting with him was required to wear a badge with a "P"
which identified his parish. This was to differentiate them from idle,
sturdy, and disorderly beggars who were not entitled to relief.

        There were more poor people and, despite the poor laws, many
became rogues or vagabonds or starved to death. Many went from parish
to parish to build cottages and consumed all the wood there and then
went to another parish. So the parishes were allowed by statute to
remove any person coming to settle in any tenement under the value of
ten pounds who was likely to be chargeable to it. They were then
removed to the last parish were they had resided for at least forty
days. Excepted were people temporarily moving to another parish to work
at harvest time. The overall effect was to decrease the mobility of
people. But a later statute permitted greater movement of poor people
by allowing those who were poor for want of work to go to another
parish where labor was wanted. They had to bring a certificate of their
present parish membership to the new parish, where they could settle if
they rented a tenement worth ten pounds a year or served in a parish
office. Later, settlement had to be given to inhabitants paying its
parish's rates, and unmarried inhabitants hired for one year, and
apprentices bound by indenture. But parishes were displeased with the
requirement to give settlements to these people because they feared
they would become poor and need parish assistance, thereby increasing
the rates to be paid.

        Parish poor houses were converted into spinning schools to
obtain an income. Parishes of large towns were combined to set up large
workhouses, where the poor could be set to unskilled manufacture, but
the managers lacked the character and education to make them work.

        Because prisoners often died before trial and the poor
prisoners became instructed in the practice of thievery in prison, they
were set to work on materials provided to them at public expense. No
parish was rated at more than 6d. per week for such. The president and
governors of corporations oversaw rogues, vagrants, sturdy beggars, and
idle or disorderly persons working in corporations or workhouses.

        Assessments were made for building and repairing gaols in order
to maintain the health and safe custody of the prisoners. Also, gaol
fever, a virulent form of typhus, was so prevalent in the large prisons
for criminals and debtors that it frequently spread through the
adjacent towns. During some assizes, it killed sheriffs, lawyers, and
justices.

        In 1692, London lands were taxed for the relief of orphans.
Churchwardens could seize the goods and chattels of putative fathers
and mothers deserting bastard children.

        From 1691 to 1740, Societies for the Reformation of Manners
prosecuted poor people for moral offenses.

        All hackney coaches and stage coaches in all the realm became
required to be licensed. The turnpike system came into use. Tolls were
paid for road upkeep and repair by private companies. The local
parishes ceased to have this responsibility. John Ogilby wrote the
first road book based on actual surveys of the roads. Stage coaches
cost a shilling for every five miles and went 40-50 miles a day. The
trip from London to Oxford was twelve hours. The company of Coach and
Coach Harness Makers was founded with the consent of the king. The body
of a coach hung from the frame by leather braces. One axle pivoted for
turns. Plate glass was used in the windows. Rivers improved so that
most places were no more distant from navigable waters than a long
day's haul on land.

        The several post offices were put under the authority of one
Postmaster General appointed by the king for the purpose of speed and
safety of dispatches, which were carried by horseback. One sheet letter
going less than 80 miles cost 2d., and more than 80 miles, 4d.

        When the army was disbanded after the Restoration, its officers
and soldiers were allowed return to their trades and their
apprenticeships without serving the usual seven years. Parishes were
required to provide for poor and maimed officers and soldiers who
served Charles I or Charles II. The Royal Hospital founded by Charles
as a home for veteran soldiers opened in 1692. Greenwich palace was
converted to a hospital for seamen and their widows and children to
encourage men to become seamen: mariner, seaman, waterman, fisherman,
lighterman, bargeman, keelman, or seafaring man in the king's Navy.
Also, children of disabled seamen were to be educated at the expense of
the hospital.

        Charles retained one regiment from which he started a small
standing army, which slowly increased in size ever after. The army was
primarily mercenary, as it had been in medieval times, with officers
buying their commissions. Colonels were the proprietors of their
regiments and captains were the proprietors of their companies. The
soldiers were ill mannered, swearing and cursing and stealing,
sometimes from peoples' homes, and intimidating people with their
swords. The bayonet was invented to attach onto a gun, which were
muzzle-loading with a match lock. So pikemen with their long spears
became obsolete. Hand grenades and small explosive bombs came into use
about 1670.

        Explosives were also used in mines. Mines for coal became
deeper as coal replaced the use of increasingly expensive wood charcoal
for brewing and for brick, glass, and china manufacture. Flooding of
coal, tin and copper mines became a problem. In 1698, Thomas Savery
invented the Miner's Friend, a practical atmospheric steam engine
without a piston.

        There was resort to many devices to fund wars. The land tax was
still the primary tax. The customs and excise taxes were often extended
to more goods and wares. Sometimes there were duties imposed on
marriages, births, and deaths. Also, hawkers, peddlers, and other
trading persons going from town to town to other men's houses on foot
or on horse carrying wares had to buy a license. There were also loans
from privileged companies such as the Bank of England, East India Co.,
and the South Sea Co. Commissioners were appointed to take and state
the account of all money in the public revenue. This discouraged the
prevalent corruption of government officials and thereby the people
were encouraged to pay their taxes.

        The Goldsmiths loaned money to the king and to private persons
and to the Exchequer. Receipts from Goldsmiths for storage in strong
boxes had become a de facto paper currency. But when the Goldsmiths had
no more money to lend, the Bank of England was founded in 1694 under
whig auspices to provide money for war. It was the first institution to
issue notes in excess of its total deposits. However, it was not
allowed to lend money to the Crown without the consent of Parliament.
It was incorporated as the first English joint-stock bank and had about
1,300 shareholders. These original subscribers were individuals from
London from many walks of life, including well-to-do tradesmen and
about 12% of whom were women: wives, widows, or spinsters. Not many
corporations were original subscribers. Holders of at least 500 pounds
could vote, of 2000 pounds could be directors, and of 4000 pounds could
be Governor. The Bank issued notes payable to bearer and discounted
bills, but these were not legal tender. It lent at 8% to the Crown and
occasionally to corporations. Money was also borrowed by offering
annuities on single lives. This was the first time the government
borrowed directly from the public on a long- term basis.

        In 1695 there was inflation due to over issue by the Bank
because of inexperience, pressure from government, and the Bank's greed
for business. After a dividend of 5% in 1695, the next year there was
no dividend and so the bank stock price fell. In 1696, five pound and
ten pound short term bonds were sold to the public. Also in that year
was the first run on the bank. This occurred two days after clipped
money lost currency; people wanted the new recoined money, but the Mint
had not supplied the Bank with sufficient supplies. Interest instead of
cash was given for notes. Cash was short for months. The Bank's credit
was much shaken. It was then given a monopoly so that its notes would
not have competition. Thereafter, its dividends were good - about 12%
per year. Because of its monopoly, its dividends were about 3% above
the current going rate of interest. About this time, Exchequer Bills,
with interest, were started by the Exchequer and circulated by the Bank
of England. They were frequently endorsed many times by successive
holders.

        The Bank simply took over from the goldsmiths its main everyday
business of deposit, with a running cash note [cashier's note, specie
note, cash note], which was payable on demand and normally did not bear
interest; and a drawn note [precursor to the check, but not on special
paper]. The Bank gradually convinced many of its clients to use its
"check" [cheque] paper when drawing. The check paper was unique to the
Bank and embellished with distinctive scroll work to serve as an
obstacle to fraud. Over time the running cash note tended to be for
round sums of at least twenty pounds and multiples of five pounds. The
Bank of England had a monopoly on issuing notes in the London area.
Country banks arose and issued bearer notes payable on demand and
interest-bearing notes in their areas. The Bank of England gave to its
depositors the service of paying annually to a designee without further
order.

        A decision of the common law courts held that bills of exchange
(written orders to pay a given a sum on a given date) were transferable
to other people by successive endorsements. So long distance payments
no longer had to be made in coin, with all the dangers of highway
robbery.

        The financial revolution of the 1690s meant that the merchant
elite could invest in government bonds or company bonds at 5-6%, or
London leases at 10%, as opposed to income from landed estates, which
was under 3%. Shareholders were no longer personally liable for company
losses. Interest on loans was no longer considered sinful as long as it
was not oppressive. The greater ability to borrow spurred the growth of
capitalism.

        All brokers and stock jobbers in London and Westminster of bank
stock, bank bills, shares and interests in joint stock must be licensed
by the mayor, which shall necessitate their taking an oath to exercise
their office without fraud or collusion to the best of his skill and
knowledge as of 1697. This is to avoid the collusion of fixing values
to their own advantage.

        Compilations of tables of mortality originated the science of
life-statistics. This made life insurance possible. But it was
administered by ad hoc offices rather than companies and was not
reliable in making payments.

        William Petty made a statistical study of economics and
determined that the basic values of an economy derive not from its
store of treasure, but from its capacity for production. Trade was
studied empirically by statistics by new offices such as the Inspector
General of Imports and Exports.

        Charles instituted a hearth tax of 2s. per year in 1662, with
constables and officers authorized to verify the number of hearths and
stoves in houses. It was repealed in 1688 because it could not be
enforced except by exposing every man's house to be entered and
searched at pleasure by persons unknown to the people, which was
oppressive and a badge of slavery.

        By bribes, Charles built up a body of support in Parliament
which could be relied upon for a majority. They came to be called
"tories" by their opponents. "Tory" had been a term of abuse for Irish
Catholic bandits. The tory and whig groups were known by their
disagreement over the authoritarianism of the Crown. The tories were
sympathetic to the doctrine of divine right and favored a doctrinally
high church. The tories represented landed property and the established
church, and usually wore blue in contrast to the purple of royalty.
Many royalists became tories. The whigs refused to accept the
sacrosanct character of the monarchy. The whigs opined that government
depended upon consent of the people and that the people had a right of
resistance. They subordinated the Crown to Parliament. The whigs
represented the dissenters and the mercantile classes, and often wore
red. Many former Puritans became whigs. "Whig" had been a term of abuse
for Scots Presbyterian rebels and horse thieves.

        The gout and venereal disease were common among political
leaders. A primitive condom just introduced to the aristocracy from
France helped deter syphilis, but was uncomfortable and unreliable.

        Under Charles II, the Treasury as a supreme financial body
separated from the Exchequer as a depository of revenue. A gold guinea
coin was issued. From 1690, government policy was controlled by
specific appropriations. Money bills had to originate in the Commons,
and could not be amended by the House of Lords.

        Boards became independent of the king's Privy Council and
answerable to the secretary of state.

        In the 1680s, Charles compelled some of the livery companies in
London to give up their charters to him and he called in many
corporation charters of boroughs whenever some light excuse could be
found to justify it. This was done by the use of the writ of quo
warranto [by what authority] before a court. In London he had the tory
mayor revive an ancient custom of selecting a sheriff by drinking to
him at the annual feast. Two tory sheriffs were installed into office.
All these actions gave the king a voice in selection of the officers of
London and boroughs, since Royal commissioners would then determine who
the officers would be. This was to assure London's representation in
Parliament by Crown loyalists as London had been whig. It also allowed
influenced selection of sympathetic jurors.

        Criminal seditious libel was brought into the common law courts
in 1664, when Benjamin Keach was tried for writing a book containing
contradictions of the doctrine of the established church. He wrote
against infant baptism and asserted that laymen might preach the
gospel. The justice intimidated the jury to find him guilty. He was
sentenced to be fined, to spend two hours in the pillory in two
successive weeks, and his book to be burned before his face. He was to
be imprisoned until he found sureties for his good behavior and
renunciation of his doctrine and for his future appearance in court.
Juries were loath to find anyone guilty of seditious libel.

        James II succeeded Charles II to the throne and fostered Roman
Catholicism by appointments and by attempting to suspend laws
unfavorable to Catholics. He commanded all bishops to read in the
churches his Declaration of Indulgence exempting both Catholic and
Protestant dissenters from all penal statutes based on religion. Seven
bishops refused to obey and jointly petitioned him, stating that his
action was illegal according to Parliament. He prosecuted them for
seditious libel in the petition. The jury found them not guilty. James
discharged the two justices of the five who had rejected the seditious
libel doctrine which had been created by the Star Chamber Court. This
roused the whigs and tories in turn to discharge him by joining in
inviting Protestants William of Orange and Mary to take the throne in
his place. James was effectively chased out of England by William's
advancing army in the Glorious Revolution of 1688-9, which took away
the powers of final authority from the king, but without transferring
them to any other body. A "Bill of Rights" stated that

 1. -The king may not suspend laws or dispense with them without
consent of Parliament.

2. -The establishment of a Court of Commissioners and like bodies for
ecclesiastical causes is illegal.

3. -The king may not levy money or extend an authorized levy without
consent of Parliament.

4. -Subjects have a right to petition the king without prosecution.

5. -The king may not raise or keep a standing army within the country
in time of peace without the consent of Parliament.

6. -Protestants may have arms for their defense as allowed by law.

7. -The elections of members of Parliament should be free.

8. -The freedom of speech or debates or proceedings in Parliament
should not be impeached or questioned in any court or place outside of
Parliament.

9. -Excessive bail should not be required, nor excessive fines imposed,
nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted (so no more men were
whipped to death).

10. Jury selection should not be tampered with, and jurors who try men
for high treason should be freeholders.

11. All grants and promises of fines and forfeiture of particular
persons, before conviction, are illegal and void.

12. Parliament should be held frequently for redress of grievances and
for the amending, strengthening, and preserving of the laws.

13. All Protestants may freely exercise their religion and the king
will maintain the Protestant religion and the law and liberty of the
realm.

        The right of the peoples' representatives to select and depose
the king and to change the order of succession was established. There
was no divine right or hereditary right to the Crown. An English
monarch was created by an act of Parliament. The king still called and
dissolved Parliaments, except that Parliament continued for six months
after the death of a king. From 1689, Parliament sat every year.
Freedom of speech for members of Parliament was established by a
resolution overturning a King's Bench felony conviction of Sir John
Elliot.

        By the act of settlement of 1701, no officer or pensioner of
the king could be a member of Parliament. All resolutions by the Privy
Council had to be signed by the members consenting to them. No one born
outside the realm could be a member of the Privy Council or of
Parliament, or could have any civil or military office or place of
trust, or any grants of land or tenements from the king. Justices
served during good behavior instead of at the pleasure of the king.

        After the Glorious Revolution, Tories tended to accept of the
Whig principles of limited constitutional monarchy instead of rule by
divine right.

        Under William and Mary, the ministers were first chosen by them
but could be impeached by the Commons and then removed by the
Parliament. The Commons removed anyone who disagreed with them as soon
as he made a mistake. But the king could pardon anyone convicted by
Parliamentary bill of attainder. This was inconsistent, so no one was
allowed to plead pardon by the king in an impeachment by the Commons.
Thus Parliament gained control of who would be ministers.

        The Glorious Revolution favored the capitalists and the
commercial magnates even though it had been started by the landed
families, with whom they now intermarried. There were companies in the
fishing, silk, baize [a coarse wool], sugar, rope, paper, iron,
hardware, cutlery, gunpowder, saw milling, and pottery trades. These
industries for manufacturing were organized on capitalist lines rather
than being subject to guilds. That is, production was controlled by men
with money and the means of manufacture. The largest pottery workshops
employed about six men. One man shaped the pots, another made the
handles and put them on, while the others did the decoration, the
glazing, and the firing. New companies could be formed without royal or
Parliamentary consent. Regulated companies declined. There were no more
commercial monopolies. The Merchant Adventurers lost their last
monopoly privileges and their entrance fees were abolished. Their
method of limiting the volume of their exports of English cloth to
Germany to keep up prices was obsolete. Now they tried to capture the
market by selling cheap. There were more joint-stock companies and on a
larger scale. They also no longer restricted output to keep prices
high, but geared to export many inexpensive goods.

        Drinking of gin, which had first been made by a Flemish
physician, became popular under King William, who was Dutch. The year
of his accession, the gin monopoly ended.

        From the mid-1500s to 1700, coal production increased fourteen
times. Sir Ambrose Crowley, an iron maker with coal works, established
disability and medical benefits and pensions for his workers.

        The capitalist organization of the mining, glass manufacture,
salt, soap, wire and other monopolized industries was made possible
only by government support. Salt and glass manufacture expanded. Glass
drinking vessels were in common use. Mirrors of blown plate glass were
manufactured in England. In 1670, Vauxhall glass works were opened with
workmen brought from Venice to blow their fine glass and make mirrors.
Some plate glass by casting was imported. Plate glass was a large and
strong glass piece, which was formed by the liquid glass being poured
on a table. This glass was not distorted, so mirrors could be made
perfectly reflective. Then plate glass for coaches, mirrors, and
windows became manufactured in England; this new industry was organized
on capitalist lines.

        The domestic or "putting out" system came into use. In this
system, the worker usually owned his own machinery and the capitalist
owned the material, which he put out to the worker at home. The
merchant manufacturer bought raw wool and had it carded, spun, woven,
fulled, and dressed at his own expense. Some farmers became spinners in
the winter when outside work was impossible. The manufacture of nails
was also done by this system. Accordingly, the guilds and municipal
corporations in towns ceased to control the recruiting, conditions of
work, and pay of industries. Only a quarter of 200 towns had any
organized guilds at all. The growing town of Birmingham was not a
chartered borough, so never was encumbered with guild regulations.
Overall, the guild and apprentice regulations were effectively enforced
only in agriculture work. Artisans became known as tradesmen. Work was
usually irregular, some seasonal. In bad years, when a worker had to
borrow money, he used work tools, such as his loom, as security. In
this way, one's work tools often became the property of a merchant.
Some merchant clothiers also owned a fulling mill and a shop where the
cloth was sold. The capitalists first became owners of the materials,
then of the implements, and then of the work places. But production was
still confined to the known wants of its habitual market. Men used to
working at home were generally not inclined to go to work in a factory.
So there was an assortment of unskilled factory labor, such as country
people driven from their villages by the growth of large estates,
disbanded soldiers, and paupers. They had to be taught, trained, and
above all disciplined.

        Smiths used trip hammers powered by watermills which turned
axles with cams on them. They made iron gates, fences, balconies, and
staircases with hammer, anvil, and chisel. Cast iron was made by
running liquefied metal into molds. This was harder but more brittle
than the tough but malleable wrought iron. Tinkers went from house to
house to repair metal items such as pots and pans.

        The East India Company had about half the trade of the nation.
Its shares were frequently bought and sold. It responded to anger over
its semi-monopoly status by granting liberty to all English subjects
below the age of forty to live in its Indian settlements and to trade
practically everywhere. Bombay, India became subject to the East India
Company. Charters gave the East India Company the right to coin money,
to exercise jurisdiction over English subjects, to levy taxes, to build
and command fortresses, to command English and Indian troops, to make
peace and war, and to enter into alliances with Indian rulers. The
Company always paid high dividends and the market price of its shares
generally rose. 100 pound stock was worth 130 pounds in 1669, 245
pounds in 1677, 280 pounds in 1681, 360 and even up to 500 pounds in
1683, and then fell to 190 pounds in 1692. In 1693 a new charter for
the Company included loss of monopoly status by resolution of the
Commons. With this resolution, Parliament assumed the right of
regulating commerce, now no longer the king's province. Thereafter the
Commons regulated trade with India and determined who could participate
in trade there. Political issues developed, which initiated corruption
at elections by entertainment and bribes to candidates, which were
later proscribed. The trade opened up to many more traders and
investors. Ordinary investors came to include women and Quakers. The
Stock Exchange was incorporated about 1694.
        Exports included grain, silk, metal wares, foodstuffs, lead,
and tin. Cloth and manufactures were exported to America. Dyeing and
dressing of cloth became the norm and undressed cloth exports fell
sharply. Imports included linen; flax; hemp; timber; iron; raw, thrown,
and woven silk; wine; brandy; fruit; coffee; chocolate, served as a
drink or used in cooking; cauliflower; and oil. From America came
molasses, sugar, tobacco, and dyes. Sugar was in great demand for tea,
coffee, and chocolate. The East India Company imported calico, silk,
pepper, spices, China tea, potions, and saltpeter. Tonnage of English
shipping doubled by 1688 Exports and imports increased 50% by 1700.

        When there was a surplus of grain, it was exported. About 1696,
the king set up a board of trade of eight paid members and great
officers of state, who nominally belonged to it, and a staff. This was
to achieve a favorable balance of trade. For instance, it imposed
tariffs to protect internal markets and put restraints on imports of
goods producible in the country, e.g. live cattle, dairy products, and
woolen goods. It also restricted the export of raw wool. England led
the way in protectionist measures.

        Parliament required an oath of allegiance to the new sovereigns
William and Mary from all those in public functions, including the
clergy. By extending this rule to the clergy, Parliament asserted a
supremacy of Parliament over the church. It also asserted a supremacy
over the king by requiring all monarchs to take a coronation oath
promising to govern according to the statutes, laws, and customs of
Parliament, to make judgments with law and justice in mercy, and to
maintain the Protestant religion established by law.

        England competed with other nations for land in the New World.
Carolina, named for Charles II, was colonized for commerce in 1663. The
Episcopal Church, an analogue of the Church of England, was established
there by law. The whole coast became English after war with the
Netherlands gave New York, named for Charles II's brother the Duke of
York, and New Jersey to England in 1667. Presbyterians and Baptists
fled from religious tests and persecutions in England to colonize New
Jersey. For free passage to the English colonies, people became
indentured servants, agreeing to serve the master of the ship or his
assigns with a certain kind of labor for a term of a few years
according to a written contract made before departure. Also, various
statutes made transportation to any part of America available to any
person who would pay for his transportation, for a term of years,
usually seven, as a new possible penalty for offenses. In 1636, Harvard
College was founded in New England to advance literature, arts, and
sciences, as well as to train ministers. Some American colonists sent
their sons to be educated at the Inns of Court in London.

        In 1682, Quaker William Penn, son of an Admiral, founded the
colony of Pennsylvania for Quakers in a "Holy Experiment" in political
and religious freedom. The king had granted proprietary rights to this
land to him to discharge a Crown debt to his father. When Penn refused
to take off his hat before King Charles and asked why Charles took off
his own, Charles, unruffled, replied that "It's the custom of this
place that only one man should remain uncovered at a time". The
Pennsylvania Charter of 1701 went beyond Magna Carta and England's law
in guaranteeing right to counsel and giving a right to defendants to
summon witnesses in all criminal cases. It gave Penn absolute authority
and he established liberty of conscience, i.e.freedom of religion, and
freedom from arbitrary arrest. In 1751, some Quakers founded a small
hospital in Pennsylvania as an asylum for the insane, where they would
be treated humanely.

        Proprietary colonies, in which an individual or syndicate held
under the crown a sort of feudal overlordship, were founded in America:
namely, Virginia, Maryland, Carolina, New York and New Jersey in 1663,
and Pennsylvania and Delaware in 1682. New Hampshire was made a royal
province in 1680 to cut off the expansion of Massachusetts, which had
been avoiding the trade laws. These colonies were distinguished from
the corporate colonies of Massachusetts, Plymouth, Connecticut, and
Rhode Island, which made their own arrangements for internal government
without a royal executive. Charles persuaded the Chancery Court to
declare the charter of Massachusetts void; it was given a new charter
in 1691 which made it a royal province. New York was made a royal
province in 1691. Maryland's proprietor gave way to a royal governor in
1692. Soon all colonies except Rhode Island, Connecticut, Pennsylvania
were royal provinces, with governors nominated by the Crown. This
bringing of union to the colonies was done for maintenance of order, to
coordinate defense, and to enforce trade laws.

        In 1670, the Hudson's Bay Company was incorporated to engage in
fur trade with Indian trappers in the Hudson Bay and to find a
northwest passage to China.

        In 1701 the founding of the "Society for the Propagation of the
Gospel in Foreign Parts" by the Church of England created many
missionaries in the colonies, where they called their churches
"Episcopalian".

        Increase Mather and his son Cotton Mather were Puritan
ministers in colonial Boston. Increase was for a time the President of
Harvard College and participated in obtaining the new charter of
colonial Massachusetts of 1691. He and his son tried to maintain the
principles of the Puritan founders of Massachusetts, which included the
theories of diabolical possession and witchcraft. But the thought of
Presbyterians, Anglicans, and Baptists became influential also. In 1692
in the small town of Salem, Massachusetts, some hysterical girls
showing strange spasms and sounds charged they had been bewitched by
certain other residents. Victims were deceived, flogged, or tortured
into forced confessions and then excommunicated from the church. They
were then hanged and their property confiscated. One man endured being
pressed to death for refusal to plead so that his property would be
inherited by his family rather than confiscated due to being convicted.
Eventually, some prominent citizens including judges were accused. Then
the more thoughtful people began to doubt the whole phenomenon and
admitted error. The excommunications were revoked. Cotton Mather came
to accept Newton's science and advocated inoculation. He encouraged
Puritanism into a simpler piety and charity. This influenced American
Protestantism toward a generalized concern with good works, morality,
and social leadership.


                   The Law

        Treason to the king is to compass, imagine, or intend death or
any bodily harm tending to death, or maiming or wounding, or
imprisonment, or restraint as well as trying to depose him or levy war
against him. Also included is printing, writing, preaching, or
malicious speaking. Traitors shall suffer death and forfeiture as in
high treason.

        The fine for having, buying, or selling clipped coins is 500
pounds, one-half going to the informer, and one-half going to the king.
The offender shall also be branded in the right cheek with the letter
"R". He shall be imprisoned until he pays the 500 pounds. No hammered
coins are lawful. Anyone except a smith in the king's mint making tools
or presses or other machines that can make counterfeit coins or having
such which were stolen from the mint shall be guilty of high treason.

        Any malicious and willful burning or destroying of stacks of
hay, grain, or barns, or killing any horses, sheep, or cattle at
nighttime shall be felony and punished by transportation to the
American colonies for seven years.

        Any person apprehending a thief or robber on the highway will
be rewarded 40 pounds from the local sheriff, to discourage the many
robberies and murders which have made travel dangerous. Also, executors
of persons murdered while trying to apprehend a robber shall have the
reward.

        Anyone killing, hurting, or taking away deer from any forest or
park or other ground without consent of the owner or custodian shall
pay a 20 pound fine. This was later increased to 20 pounds for hunting
deer and 30 pounds for wounding or killing deer, with the pillory for
one hour on market day and gaol for a year without bail for those who
couldn't pay.

        Any person privately and feloniously stealing any goods,
including horses, by day or night, in any shop, warehouse, coach
stable, or stable, whether there is a break-in or not, and whether or
not the owner is present, or anyone assisting or hiring such person may
not have benefit of clergy. Any person who apprehends and prosecutes
such person is excused from having to serve in parish and ward offices.
An offender being out of prison who informs against two other offenders
who are convicted is to be pardoned. Any person convicted of theft or
larceny and having benefit of clergy is to be burnt in the cheek
nearest the nose instead of on the hand.

        When a bill of exchange drawn to at least five pounds is not
paid on demand at the time it is made payable, the person who accepted
it may make a protest in writing before a notary public, which shall be
served on the maker of such bill, who must pay it and all interest and
charges from the date of the protest. But if a bill of exchange is lost
or miscarried, another shall be given in its place.

        No one may take more than 6 pounds in interest for a 100 pound
loan.

        Persons seeking election to Parliament may not give or promise
money, meat, drink, entertainment, present or gift to any elector.

        Because the gaols were full of people in debt due to the late
unhappy times such as the London fire, all prisoners for debt were
released upon taking an oath that they had no property over ten pounds
nor had disposed or conveyed property to defraud creditors. Creditors
not wanting them released had to contribute to their maintenance in
gaol.

        Any sale of land or lease or estate of freehold or copyhold
shall be in writing and signed. An interest in land given orally shall
have only the force of estates at will. All contracts for sale of goods
or merchandise for the price of at least 10 pounds shall be in writing
and signed by the parties or shall be accompanied by part payment or
partial acceptance of the goods. This is to deter fraud. This statute
caused many small freeholders, including yeomen, who paid rent by
custom to be dispossessed.

        Mortgagees can hold the land of any mortgagor who borrows money
upon security of the land or obtains another mortgage without prior
notice to the initial mortgagee. The mortgagor has six months to pay
off the mortgage and all interest and charges or vacate the land and
lose his equity therein. But a widow's dower will not be affected if
she did not join with her husband in the mortgage.

        If rent is not paid in a reasonable time, the renter's goods
and grain may not only be distrained, but sold.

        One coparcener [one person of two or more persons who inherit
as co-owners of land] of a joint tenancy [land held that descends to
the heir of a co-owner who dies] or tenancy in common [land held that
accrues to the surviving co-owner if one dies] may have a court
partition the property without the presence of other coparceners,
because such coparceners are often difficult to find. This is to avoid
wasting of land lying uncultivated and unmanured.

        After the intestate death of a father of any sons or daughters
without wives or children of their own in the life time of their
mothers, the mother and every brother and sister shall share equally
except the customs of London and York shall not be affected.
Administrators have to make an inventory. They have to account on
request by an interested person. They must be bonded by two sureties.

        Executors and administrators of estates of deceased persons
must pay the debts of the deceased person rather than waste or convert
the goods and chattels to their own use. Creditors may recover their
debts from heirs or devisees of the will of a debtor.

        Men gone beyond the sea who could not be accounted for were
deemed dead after seven years, so their life estates could be
terminated.

        Whereas lawful games are not to be used as constant callings
for a livelihood, and young people are deceived and debauched and their
money taken, anyone "winning" money by deceitful or fraudulent gambling
shall forfeit three times his "winnings".

        The making or selling of fireworks is forbidden or else forfeit
5 pounds. Firing or throwing such from one's house onto or across the
street is a common nuisance with a penalty of 20s. This is to avoid the
loss of life and of eyes.

        No more than 20 people may petition the king nor more than 10
people may assemble to present a petition to the king, because more has
been tumultuous and disorderly.

        Anyone may without fee set up a hemp business including
breaking, hatchelling [separating the coarse part and broken pieces of
the stalk from the fine, fibrous parts by drawing the material through
long iron teeth set in a board], and dressing it; or a flax business,
including making and whitening thread, spinning, weaving, making,
whitening, or bleaching hemp or flax cloth; making twine or nets for
fishing or treating cordage for tapestry or hangings, because the daily
importation of such has in effect taken the work from the poor and
unemployed of England.

        No sheep, wool, woolfells, shearlings, yarn, fuller's earth, or
fulling clay may be exported as has secretly been done, so that the
poor of the realm may have work.

        Fishermen may sell their fish to others than Fishmongers at
Billingsgate fish market because the Fishmongers have forestalled the
market and set their own prices. The buyers of such fish may resell
them in any other London market by retail, except than only Fishmongers
may sell in shops or houses.

        No tanned or untanned skin or hide of any ox, steer, bull, cow,
or calf may be exported because the price of leather has risen
excessively and leather workers can't get enough raw material to carry
on their trade and because poor people cannot afford leather items they
need.

        The newly incorporated Company of Silk Throwers (drew the silk
off the cocoon) employs many of the poor, but others practice the
trade, so an apprenticeship of seven years is required to practice the
trade in the realm. Winders or doublers who purloin or embezzle and
sell silk from the thrower who employs him and the buyer of such silk
shall make such recompense as ordered by a Justice of the Peace or be
whipped or set in the stocks for the first offense.

        The regulation of the Silk Throwers company restricting the
number of spindles to be worked at one time is voided because it has
taken livelihoods away and caused foreign thrown silk [silk twisted
from cocoons into thread] to be imported.

        Buttons on garments must be made of silk, mohair, gimp, and
thread and by needle to keep employed the many throwers, twisters,
spinners, winders, and dyers preparing the materials for these buttons.
No button may be made of cloth or wood.

        When a bill of exchange drawn to at least five pounds is not
paid on demand at the time it is made payable, the person who accepted
it may make a protest in writing before a notary public, which shall be
served on the maker of such bill, who must pay it and all interest and
charges from the date of the protest. But if a bill of exchange is lost
or miscarried, another shall be given in its place.

        No one may take more than 6 pounds in interest for a 100 pound
loan.

        Persons seeking election to Parliament may not give or promise
money, meat, drink, entertainment, present or gift to any elector.

        Because the gaols were full of people in debt due to the late
unhappy times such as the London fire, all prisoners for debt were
released upon taking an oath that they had no property over ten pounds
nor had disposed or conveyed property to defraud creditors. Creditors
not wanting them released had to contribute to their maintenance in
gaol.

        Retailers of wine may not add to imported wines cider, honey,
sugar, molasses, lime, raisin juice, or herbs.

        Butter sold must be of one sort and not contain bad butter
mixed in with good butter. Butter pots must bear the name or mark of
their potter.

        Salt may be sold only by weight, to avoid deceit by retailers
and wrong to buyers.

        No tobacco maybe grown in England because the colonies would be
discouraged from growing it and the king would not receive customs from
it.

        No goods are to be imported to or exported from America, Asia,
or Africa except in English ships, with masters and 3/4 of the mariners
Englishmen. No manufacture of Europe may be imported into any colony or
territory except shipped from England in English ships manned by
Englishmen. As of 1672, if bond is not given for colonial exports of
sugar, ginger, tobacco, cotton, indigo, cacao nuts, or fustic [tree
that yields a yellow dye] and other dye- woods going to England, a duty
must be paid. As of 1696, no colonial goods are to be imported or
exported or carried from one colony to another, except in ships owned
and built in England, Ireland, or the colonies with the masters and
three fourths of the mariners from such places. These navigation acts
were strictly enforced.

        Only persons with lands and tenements or estate worth over 100
pounds per year or having a lease of at least 99 years worth 150 pounds
per year and owners and keepers of forests or parks may have any guns,
bows, greyhounds, hunting dogs such as setting dogs, snares, or other
hunting equipment. These persons may kill hare, pheasants, partridges,
and other game. Gamekeepers authorized by Justices of the Peace may
search houses and outhouses and seize unlawful hunting equipment. If
hunting equipment or game is found in a house without good account to
the Justices of the Peace, they shall impose a fine of 5s. to 20s.,
one-half going to the informer and one-half going to the poor of the
parish.

        Army officers or soldiers who desert or mutiny shall suffer
death or such other punishment as decided by a court martial of senior
officers rather than the usual form of law, which is too slow.

        Seamen not showing up on board after notice shall serve six
months without pay, but shall not suffer as deserters. Seamen do not
have to perform service in the Army.

        Pirates may be punished by death and loss of all lands and
chattels. Any person aiding, advising, or concealing pirates may be
likewise punished. Officers and seamen killed or wounded in the defense
of a ship or who seize or destroy pirates may be paid by the owners an
amount up to 2 pounds per 100 pounds of freight as determined by a
group of disinterested merchants and the judge. The amount due to a man
killed will be paid to his widow and children. This is to be done when
the ship arrives in port. Any person who informs of any combinations or
confederacies planning to run away with or to destroy a ship shall be
rewarded by the commander or master of such 10 pounds for a ship 100
tons or under, and 15 pounds for a ship over 100 tons. The trial may be
in England or the American colonies, whose authorities may issue
warrants for arrest of alleged pirates. Deserters from ships, because
they often become pirates, shall forfeit all wages. Masters forcing any
man fit to travel to stay on shore or willfully leaves him behind shall
suffer three months in prison without bail.

        Persons may mine for ores on their own land, but must turn it
over to the king who will give compensation for it, including gold,
silver, copper (16 pounds per tun), lead (9 pounds per tun), tin (40s.
per tun), and iron (40s. per tun).

        By statutes of 1660 and 1662, when goods have been carried off
ships without customs being paid, the Chief Magistrate of the place
where the offense was committed or the adjoining place, or the Lord
Treasurer, or a Baron of the Exchequer may, upon oath, issue out a
warrant to any person to enter, with the assistance of a sheriff,
constable or other public official, any house, shop, cellar, warehouse,
or room in the day time where the contraband goods are "suspected to be
concealed", and in case of resistance, to break open doors, chests,
trunks, or other packages and to seize such goods, provided that if the
information whereupon any house is searched proves to be false, the
injured party shall recover his full damages and costs against the
informer by action of trespass. This was extended to the colonies in
1696.

        The penalty for cursing or swearing by a servant, day laborer,
soldier, or seaman is 1s. For others, it is 2s. The fine is doubled for
the second offense, and tripled for the third offense. If an adult
offender can't pay, he shall be put in the stocks for one hour. If a
child offender can't pay, he shall be whipped by the constable or by a
parent in the presence of the constable.

        The equity courts are now conceding limited proprietary rights
to married women by enforcing premarital settlements or trust
arrangements that designate certain property as a wife's separate
estate and exempt it from control by the husband. Such protective
devices generally reflected a father's desire to shield his daughter
from poverty and benefited only the landed aristocracy in practice.
Also, husbands are not allowed to punish and beat their wives as
before. But the lower rank of men were slow to give this up. A wife
could have the security of the peace against her husband. He could
restrain her liberty only for gross misbehavior.

        In 1685, the courts ruled that apprenticeships were necessary
only for servants hired by the year, thus exempting most wage laborers.

        There were many variations in religious practices for statutes
to address. The Quakers and Baptists were opposed to any state church.
The Independents and Presbyterians accepted the idea of a state church.
The members of the established church and Roman Catholics adhered to
their version the state church as they had experienced it in the past.
Atheism had a bad reputation. In 1662, the Jews established the first
synagogue in London. The Privy Council recognized their religious
status as long as they were peaceful and obeyed the laws. They engaged
in pawn-broking as well as money-lending.

        There were various statutes enacted over the course of time
regarding religion, as follows:

        All ministers, school teachers, mayors and other town
officials, including magistrates, were required to take the oaths of
allegiance and supremacy [of the King over the church] or be removed
from office.

        A great number of people refused to come to their parish church
or other public place where common prayer and sacraments were
administered and the word of God was preached according to the
established church. The morning and afternoon Sunday services with
sermons, sometimes by guest preachers, continued. So factions and
schisms developed. In response, the king changed the Book of Common
Prayer and its prayers were required by statute in 1662 to be read by
some priest or deacon in all the churches and places of public worship
wherever and whenever there was any preaching or lecturing. Attendance
at one's local parish church was never again required.

        Attendance at the established Church of England was never again
required. Nor was preaching or lecturing constrained. Instead, a
statute was passed in 1677 that: Every person shall be pious and
exercise religion publicly and privately on Sunday. No work may be done
or goods sold or else forfeit 5s. or the goods respectively. No one may
travel or else forfeit 5-20s. In a further statute of 1688, because
some ease to scrupulous consciences in the exercise of religion may be
an effectual means to unite Protestant subjects in interest and
affection, Protestant nonconformists who took the oaths, or declaration
in the case of Quakers, and a declaration that they were not Catholic,
did not adore the Virgin Mary or any saint, and did not go to mass were
declared not liable for punishment in any ecclesiastical court by
reason of their nonconformity to the Church of England, except
Protestant dissenters meeting behind locked doors. But payment of
tithes and performance of parish duties were still obligatory.
Non-conformist preachers had to subscribe to the tenets of belief
listed in the first eighteen Articles of Religion, but were exempted
from the articles on expounding inconsistencies in scripture, the
traditions of the church, homilies, and consecration of bishops and
ministers of the Elizabethan statute and the statute on uniformity of
prayers and sacraments of Charles II.

        As of 1665, no nonconformist minister, i.e. one who endeavored
any alteration of government either in church or state, was allowed to
live or visit within five miles of any corporate town or any place
where he had acted as minister or else forfeit 40 pounds. Persons not
frequenting the established church were not allowed to teach in any
public or private school or else forfeit 40 pounds.

        By statute of 1670, anyone at least sixteen years old who is
present at any assembly, conventile [private meeting of religious
dissidents to pray and expound scripture], or meeting under pretence of
any exercise of religion in other manner than according to the
established Church of England at which there are at least five persons
present shall be fined 5s. for the first offense and 10s. for the
second offense. This does not include members of the same household
meeting in their home. Anyone who preaches or teaches at such a meeting
shall pay 20 pounds for the first offense, and 40 pounds for further
offenses. The householder who permits such a meeting shall pay 20
pounds. A justice or Justice of the Peace or chief magistrate may break
open doors and enter by force any house or other place where they have
been informed of any such meeting and take persons there into custody
for prosecution. This is to discourage the growing of dangerous
seditious persons under pretence of tender consciences.

        Religious nonconformity continued especially among the humble
people. The penal statutes caused hundreds of these nonconformists to
be put in gaol. From time to time, the king would release them and
suspend these laws. Sometimes, Charles II allowed dissenters to meet in
private for worship if they got a license from him. Religious
gatherings grew in numbers, size, and geographical extent. Dissenters
were then allowed by statute to meet behind locked or barred doors. But
they had to pay tithes and could be prosecuted in the ecclesiastical
courts for not doing so. By statute, all congregations and assemblies
for religious worship had to register with the local bishop or
archbishop. Disturbers of religious worship were required to find two
sureties for the amount of 50 pounds.

        Quakers were active in the countryside. They were about one
tenth of the population and did not believe in a state church. There
were some Quakers schools and some Quaker workhouses to give work to
the poor. For the reason that they met together in large numbers to the
great endangering of public peace and safety and to the terror of the
people, and because they had secret communications and separated
themselves from the rest of the people and from the usual places of
worship, a statute was passed in 1662, that any Quakers who assembled
to the number of five or more under the pretense of unauthorized
religious worship and any person maintaining that taking an oath before
a magistrate was unlawful and contrary to the word of God or refusing
to take a required oath was to forfeit 5 pounds for the first offense
or be imprisoned for 3 months if he couldn't pay. For the second
offense, the penalty was 10 pounds or imprisonment for 6 months with
hard labor. The third offense required abjuring the realm or being
transported to a plantation of the king beyond the seas. The policy of
Charles II was to allow Quakers to meet undisturbed, to keep their hats
on before magistrates, and to not come to the parish church. But this
policy was only partially adopted in the country. From 1689, by
statute, the Quakers were allowed to affirm or declare instead of
making the customary oath.

        Many Presbyterians became Unitarians, who rejected the trinity
of "Father, Son, and Holy Ghost" and doubted the divinity of Jesus, but
accepted revelation. This statute was then passed in 1697: Any person
having been educated in or having at any time made profession of the
Christian religion who, by writing, printing, teaching, or advised
speaking, denies the Holy trinity, asserts that there is more than one
god, or that the Bible is not of divine authority, shall be disabled
for any ecclesiastical, civil, or military office. The penalty for a
second offense is being disabled from suing or pleading any action in
any court, being guardian of any child, or executor or administrator of
any estate, or receiving any legacy or deed of gift and imprisonment
for three years without bail or mainprize.

        Catholicism was always disfavored. Catholic priests were
executed with little evidence. At times, Charles commuted the death
penalty for them to banishment. Sometimes there were effigies of the
pope burned in the streets. Such burnings were later banned. At times
Charles allowed Catholics to attend mass.

        By statute of 1672, all civil and military officers and king's
officials must take the oaths of supremacy and allegiance and take the
sacrament of the established Church of England or be incapable of
office. They also had to make a declaration that they believed that
there is not any transubstantiation in the sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, or in the elements of bread and wine, when they were
consecrated. This is to prevent dangers from Papists. As of 1678, no
one may be a member of Parliament if he has refused to take the oaths
of allegiance and supremacy and the declaration that they were not
Catholic, did not adore the Virgin Mary or any saint, and did not go to
mass.

        Papists were made to pay higher taxes. Every temporal and
spiritual person, corporation, and guild had to pay taxes to subsidize
the king in the amount of 2s.8d. for every pound's worth of personal
property and money. But Papists had to pay 5s.4d. for such. Persons and
corporations having land worth at least 20s. yearly, had to pay 4s. for
every pounds' worth. But Papists and aliens had to pay 8s. for such.

        But Charles' successor, King James II was Catholic and gave
many offices to Catholics. This prompted a reaction against Papists and
more statutes restricting them. After James II was chased out of
England, a statute of 1688 required suspected Papists in London to make
a declaration that they were not Catholic, did not adore the Virgin
Mary or any saint, did not go to mass, or else stay ten miles outside
of London. Excluded were tradesmen and manual workers, who had only to
register. All Papists had to forfeit their arms and any horse worth
more than 5 pounds. Also, no King or Queen or spouse of such could be a
Papist, but had to make the same declaration as members of Parliament,
and join in the communion of the established Church of England. As of
1696, a person who was serjeant at law, counsellor at law, barrister,
advocate, attorney, solicitor, proctor, clerk, or notary had to take
the oath of supremacy and allegiance. As of 1698, Papists who kept a
school or tried to educate the young were threatened with perpetual
imprisonment. Also, Popish parents were prohibited from forcing their
children who were inclined towards Protestantism to become Catholic by
refusing them suitable maintenance. As of 1699, a reward of 100 pounds
was offered to any person who apprehended a Popish bishop, priest, or
Jesuit saying mass. Also, no Papist was allowed to buy land.


               Judicial Procedure

        After the Restoration, all legal decisions of the Commonwealth
and Protectorate were confirmed subject to a right of appeal.

        The Star Chamber was not restored, and Parliament assumed its
control of the press. The King's Bench succeeded to most of the Star
Chamber's jurisdiction. No longer could the Privy Council influence
criminal cases and the general supervision of legal processes through
the Star Chamber.

        The High Commission court was not restored, but church courts
were, but with depleted powers. They accepted subordination to the
common law courts. Because the church's administration was inefficient
and corrupt and its punishments inadequate, they gradually lost their
power to the common law justices and Justices of the Peace. They had
virtually no authority over laymen. They could still punish heresy, but
lost jurisdiction over the law of libel and slander, which then were
transformed by the civil courts, and over prostitution and scandalous
lewdness. Local ordinances for suppression of brothels, which were run
by madams, were founded on breach of the peace. In 1678, the death
sentence was taken away from the church courts. In 1697, church
sanctuary was abolished.

        The county courts faded into insignificance, as the Justices of
the Peace took on more jurisdiction.

        In 1668, new justices were issued patents with "at pleasure"
instead of "during good behavior" describing their tenure. Charles II
and James II frequently dismissed justices not favorably disposed to
the Crown. In 1697, they were to have fixed salaries instead of the
profits of justice. By statute of 1701, justices' commissions were to
be made with an established salary determined by Parliament and a
tenure to last during good behavior. They could be removed only by the
address of both Houses of Parliament. This gave them independence from
the king. Their tenure lasted for the life of the monarch.

        As of 1679, no man could be held in prison but on a charge or
conviction of crime or for debt. Every prisoner on a criminal charge
could demand as a right from the Court of the King's Bench the issue of
a writ of habeas corpus which bound his gaoler to produce the prisoner
and the warrant on which he was imprisoned for review as to legality.
This forced trials to be speedy, which they had not hitherto been. Now
it was impossible for the Crown to detain a person for political
reasons in defiance of both Parliament and the courts, as Charles I had
done. The writ was suspended in times of war and domestic unrest: 1689,
1696, 1708.

        In 1670, William Penn was arrested for sedition for delivering
a sermon in London, contrary to the statute that only the Church of
England could conduct meetings for worship. The jurors would not
convict him, so were gaoled and fined by the justices. The jurors filed
a writ of habeas corpus in the Court of Common Pleas, which held in
their favor. Thereafter the English jury had full independence to
decide verdicts. By court decision of 1679, jurors were held not to be
responsible to the justice for their verdict.

        After 1688, hearsay was inadmissible as evidence, which Coke
had recommended. The old system of original writs was abandoned, and
the general concept or a wrong to person or property took its place.

        A person who was sergeant at law, counselor at law, barrister,
advocate, attorney, solicitor, proctor [supervisor of students taking
an eexam], clerk, or notary in the courts had to take the required
oaths of allegiance and supremacy.

        As of 1692, persons outlawed could appear by attorney as well
as in person to argue reversal of such outlawry, except in cases of
treason and felony.

        As of 1696, persons accused of high treason where there might
be corruption of the blood or for misprison [concealing knowledge] of
such treason had to be taken before a grand jury for indictment within
three years of the offense. Those indicted or outlawed for such were
given a copy of the whole indictment, but not the names of witnesses,
at least five days before trial in order to prepare their defense. They
could have a copy of the panel of jurors at least two days before
trial. They could be represented in their defense by not more than two
counsel learned in the law and assigned by the court. Their counsel had
free access to them at all reasonable hours. They could make proof
through lawful witnesses under oath. In a trial of commoners for their
lives, a jury of twelve freeholders had to all agree on acquittal or
conviction. In a trial of a peer, the others peers in Parliament
determined the outcome by a majority vote.

        Jurors were required to have at least 20 pounds income from
freehold land or rents in fee, fee tail, or for life. This increase in
the quality of the jury enabled it to better discern the issues in
dispute.

        Jury sympathy was determined by the sheriff who chose the jury.
So if a sheriff was popularly elected, as in London, he chose jurors
who favored individual and corporate liberty. If the king selected the
sheriff, he chose tories, who supported the Crown.

        Issues of bastardy or lawfulness of marriage had to be tried by
a jury.

        The civil suit of trespass on the case branched into assumpsit
[a promise], trover [to recover goods converted to the use of another],
deceit, negligence, and libel and slander. The latter supplements bad
words punished by the local courts and defamation punished by the
church courts. Trover becomes the normal mode of trying the title to
personal property and goods as the courts oblige the defendant to
answer the charge of conversion without permitting him to dispute the
loss and finding of the goods by the plaintiff.

This is an example of the initiation of a suit by a writ for trespass
on the case: "The King to the sheriff &c. as in Trespass to show:
wherefore (e.g.:___) he fixed piles across the water of Plim along
which, between the Humber and Gaunt, there is a common passage for
ships and boats, whereby a certain ship, with thirty quarters of malt
of him the said A, was sunk under water, and twenty quarters of the
malt of the price of one hundred shillings perished; and other wrongs
&c. as in trespass."

        This is an example of a writ for trespass on the case in
assumpsit: "The King to the sheriff greeting &c. as in Trespass to
show: wherefore whereas he the Said X undertook well and competently to
cure the right eye of the Said A, which was accidentally injured, for a
certain sum of money beforehand received, he the same X so negligently
and carelessly applied his cure to the said eye, that the said A by the
fault of him the said X totally lost the sight of the said eye, to the
damage of him the said A of twenty pounds, as he saith, and have there
&c. wherefore whereas he the said X undertook to make and build three
carriages for conveying victuals of him the said A to parts beyond the
sea for a certain sum of money beforehand received, within a certain
term between them agreed; he the said X did not take care to make and
build the carriages aforesaid within the term aforesaid, by which he
the said A hath wholly lost divers his goods and chattels, to the value
of one hundred marks, which ought to have been conveyed in the
carriages aforesaid, for want thereof to the great damage of him the
said A as it is said: and have there &c."

        This is an example of a writ for case on indebitatus assumpsit:
"The King to the sheriff &c. as in Trespass to show: for that, whereas
the said X heretofore, to wit (date and place) was indebted to the said
A in the sum of for divers goods wares and merchandises by the said A
before that time sold and delivered to the said X at his special
instance and request, and being so indebted, he the said X in
consideration thereof afterwards to wit (date and place aforesaid)
undertook and faithfully promised the said A to pay him the said sum of
money when he the said X should be thereto afterwards requested. Yet
the said X, not regarding his said promise and undertaking but
contriving and fraudulently intending craftily and subtly to deceive
and defraud the said A in this behalf, hath not yet paid the said sum
of money or any part thereof to the said A (although oftentimes
afterwards requested). But the said X to pay the same or any part
thereof hath hitherto wholly refused and still refuses, to the damage
of the said A of ------ pounds as it is said. And have you there &c."

        This is an example of a writ for case for trover: "The King to
the sheriff greeting &c. as in Trespass to show: for that, whereas the
said A heretofore to wit [date and place] was lawfully possessed as of
his own property, of certain goods and chattels to wit, twenty tables
and twenty chairs of great value to wit of the value of ___ pounds of
lawful money of great Britain; and, being so possessed thereof he the
said A afterwards, to wit (date and place aforesaid) casually lost the
said goods and chattels out of his possession: and the same afterward,
to wit (date and place aforesaid) came into the possession of the said
X by finding; Yet the said X well knowing the said goods and chattels
to be the property of the said A and of right to belong and appertain
to him, but, contriving and fraudulently intending craftily and subtly
to deceive and defraud the said A in this behalf, hath not as yet
delivered the said goods and chattels, or any part thereof, to the said
A (although often requested so to do) but so to do hath hitherto wholly
refused and still refuses; and afterwards to wit (date and place
aforesaid) converted and disposed of the said goods and chattels to his
the said X's own use, to the damage of the said A of ____ pounds as it
is said; and have you there &c."

        The rigid writs with specific forms of action for common law
cases started to fall into disuse. Later, trespass on the case
bifurcates into misdemeanor and the tort of trespass.

        Persons in prison on suspicion of treason could not be released
on bail as of 1688.

        If one of several defendants of a case was acquitted, all
defendants recovered their costs from the plaintiffs. A person found
guilty of malicious prosecution recovered his costs from his accuser.

        Mercantile cases were decided in light of mercantile custom
rather than according to the strict rules of the common law.

        Merchants and traders could settle their trade disputes by
arbitration, which decision could be enforced by court order.

        The chief justice could empower persons by commission to take
affidavits from people in the country for court proceedings in
Westminster.

        Judgments were docketed so they could easily be found e.g. by
heirs, executors, administrators, purchasers, and mortgagees.

        Court judgments and fines could be challenged for error only
within twenty years.

        Court decisions were still appealable to the House of Lords. In
1668, Skinner v. East India Company held that the House of Lords could
not exercise original jurisdiction in civil cases between commoners as
it had claimed, but retained its appellate jurisdiction. In 1675, the
House of Lords acquired the new judicial function of hearing appeals
from the Chancery Court by virtue of the case of Shirley vs. Fagg.

        Any gaol keeper allowing a prisoner to escape in return for
money lost his office forever and had to forfeit 500 pounds.

        The last burning of a woman as a penalty for an offense, which
had been only occasional, was in 1688.

        The last bill of attainder, which condemned a person to death,
occurred in 1697.

        The pillory was still in use.

        Benefit of clergy was taken away from those who stole cloth or
woolen manufactures from their drying racks or who embezzled military
stores or ammunition worth at least 20s, or stole goods of over 5s.
value from a dwelling house with a person therein put in fear, a
dwelling house in daytime with a person therein, or by day or night a
shop or warehouse.

        A statute of 1661 gave jurisdiction to naval courts-martial to
decide cases at sea, e.g. insubordination; failure to fight the enemy,
a pirate, or rebels; not assisting a friend, mutiny, drunkenness,
creating a disturbance to protest the quality of the food, quarreling,
sleeping on watch, sodomy, murder, robbery, theft, and misdemeanors.
Usually the penalty was to be determined by the courts-martial, but
sometimes death was decreed.

        In the American colonies, judges were still appointed by the
royal governors and paid by the local legislatures. They still served
at the pleasure of the king.



                       Chapter 18


                    The Times: 1702-1776

        Dress was plainer than before. Gentlemen wore white linen
shirts; waistcoats fitted at the waist and covering the trunk at least;
long lawn ties wound around the throat and tied in front with the tails
tucked in, knee-length coats that were wide in the skirts and in the
sleeve cuffs and having large gold, silver, or bronze buttons which
didn't reach to the buttonholes on the other side of the coat; knee
breeches of cloth, knitted wool, thread, and silk; and silk stockings
rolled up at the knee. Some shoes had metal buckles. Gold fobs with
watches or seals hung from the breeches pocket. The clothes were made
of silk, satin, or velvet and often in colors such as yellow, orange,
scarlet, blue, violet, pink, and dull slate, and decorated with gold
and silver trimmings. A slender sword was worn on the side. Short wigs,
often powdered with heavily scented white or gray wheat flour, with
rolls over the ears and hair tied at the back, were worn for formal
occasions. Wigs were made of human, horse, goat, or cow hair, or
mohair, worsted, silk, or wire. Sometimes feathers and cork were also
used. There were new colors and cuts of dress for every season. By
1750, wearing a sword was just a symbol of gentility. Gentlemen often
had valets to help them dress. Ladies wore fitted full-length dresses
held out by hoops with shoulders hidden, sometimes with a laced bodice
with stays, and lace at the neck. The waistline fashion fluctuated
between high and low and in tightness. The dress could be brocade,
satin, velvet, silk, etc. Some put jewels in their hair and had high
elaborate hats with wide brims tilted forward. Hair was in ringlets at
the side or dressed close to the head with a small top knot covered
with a laced cap. They also wore wigs when dressing up, decorated with
ribbons and artificial flowers. Hooded cloaks were used outdoors and
hoods were used for sun or wind. They carried leather purses with
gloves at elbow length. Both gentlemen and ladies wore cosmetics and
face patches and used tooth powders, breath sweeteners, lip salves, and
choice perfume. Some had false teeth of bone or ivory wired into place.
Both gentlemen and ladies had accessories such as fans, handkerchiefs,
head scratchers, and elaborately designed snuff boxes, patch boxes, and
perfume containers. Both sniffed tobacco snuff but only men smoked it.
They walked with tall, elegant canes, and women also carried parasols.
Hats were made of wool and hair of beaver, rabbit, or camel. A popular
hat was three-cornered, and usually of beaver or dark felt. There was
often a rosette or such to show one's political opinion. Straw hats
were worn in the summer. There were ready-made clothes and shoes,
especially for children. Night gowns and night caps were worn to bed.
About 1714, umbrellas for rain were introduced. They were made of waxed
silk or taffeta. All but the poorest wore silk and lace. A prosperous
countryman wore riding clothes consisting of breeches and boots,
cut-away coat, and low top hat.

        The highest class were the peers and peeresses of the House of
Lords and their spouses and families. They were the nobility and held
the high political offices, the high ranks in the army and navy, and
owned large estates, usually scattered over the country. Some were
lawyers or merchants. There was much intermarriage among these
families. Indeed, many a noble family had salvaged its fortunes by
marriage to a London merchant. The richest people in London were
international merchants. These high class families lived in mansions
with four or five living rooms, two to five acre gardens, and stables.

        The next class were the gentry. Their family heads had land and
were often Justices of the Peace. They were sometimes members of the
House of Commons. The oldest son took over from his father, while the
others had to find a living such as in the church, law, medicine, or
trade. The gentry usually lived in mansions.

        The old yeoman class was disappearing due to their selling
their land to larger landowners. Farming on a large scale was more
productive.

        The next class were the "middling sort". In this class were
merchants, lawyers, substantial tenant farmers, smaller freeholders,
millers, innkeepers, in town traders, middlemen, clothiers,
ironmongers, goldsmiths, grocers, linen drapers, apothecaries, school
masters, clerks and civil servants, customs and excise men, and
.shopkeepers, who now kept their wares inside and lived on the second
floor. The town people lived in town houses of two stories plus an
attic.

        The next class were the manual workers. These were wage earners
or independent craftsmen, farriers, rural smiths (who shod horses and
made stair rails, window-bars, torch extinguishers, lamp irons, bells,
bolts, hinges, locks, and fire-grates), sawyers, carpenters, joiners,
wheelwrights, nail makers, brick makers, plumbers (made lead cisterns,
kitchen sinks, rainwater heads, drain pipes and lead flats for houses
and ornaments), thatchers, spinners (silk, flax, hemp, wool, hair),
dyers, wool combers, weavers, shoemakers, hat makers, belt and buckle
makers, dressmakers, milliners (hats, caps, bonnets, cloaks, hoods,
muffs), feather workers, button makers, lace makers, steel pin makers,
brewers, cutlery makers, soap makers, candle makers (made from beeswax,
tallow, mutton-fat, or beef-drippings), comb makers,
barber/hairdressers (shaved, cut hair, made wigs and braids, and let
blood), curriers, leather workers, carpet weavers, paper makers,
tin-plate makers, printers, enamel workers, braziers and coppersmiths
(made kettles, saucepans, canisters, milk pails, lanterns, candle
boxes, candle sticks, and lamp lighters), basket makers, jewelers (made
rings, perfumes, match boxes, buckles, and tops of canes), watch and
clock makers, type founders, letter cutters, trunk and chest makers,
cabinet makers, saddlers, coach body builders, coach carriage makers,
shipwrights, rope makers, and sail makers. These workers typically
worked in their stone or brick houses in a rural setting, with gardens,
a cow, a horse, pigs, and poultry around them on 2-6 acres. They now
ate white or wheaten bread instead of rye bread, much meat and cheese,
and drank tea. Working men could now afford leather shoes. These people
also worked in the harvesting of grain. Some consolidation of work was
starting. For instance, the weaver, who had furnished himself with warp
and weft, worked it up, and brought it to market himself was being
displaced by weavers who worked under supervision for one merchant in a
town on looms the merchant had acquired. Many women and children were
so employed. It was not unusual for a man to work 13 hours a day for 6
days a week. The wage earners were well above the subsistence level as
long as trade was good. Real wages were higher than at any time since
the mid-1400s. But eventually, as the employer came to realize how
dependent the weaver had become on him, wages tended to fall. In 1757 a
Gloucester weaver, with his wife to help him, could earn, when work was
good, from 13s. to 18s. a week. A few years later, he could only earn
about 11s. A woman spinner earned 10-15d. a day in 1764, but 3-5d. in
1780. In the same period, men's wages fell from 17d. to 10d. a day.
Only certain workers, whose special occupation needed greater skill,
e.g. the wool-combers, whose wool was longer and of better quality than
carded wool, and shearers, were better paid. In 1770, wool combers made
13s. a week; their wage was about the same all over the country because
they traveled form town to town in search of work and always supported
each other. Also in 1770, Newcastle miners earned 15s. a week,
Sheffield cutlers 13s.6d. a week, a Rotherham blacksmith 13s. a week, a
furnace keeper at Horsehay about 12s. a week, a Staffordshire potter
from 8-12s., a Witney blanket weaver or a Wilton carpet weaver 11s. or
more a week, a Manchester cotton weaver from 7-10s. a week, and a Leeds
cloth weaver about 8s. In this class also were ploughmen, cowmen,
dairymaids of the bigger farms. They had cottages of wood, clay, and
straw, with clay floors and low ceilings, and a divided ground floor. A
few had homes built of stone, covered with slate or thatch.

        Wages of industry were higher than those of agriculture. In
1770, a day laborer earned 5-6s. a week in winter and 7-9s. in summer,
without board or lodging. In the short harvest time, he could earn 12s.
a week.

        Lastly were the mass of the population of London: hordes of
laborers who depended on casual employment and could be dismissed at
will.

        About half the population had no resources but their labor,
which was usually unskilled and lowly paid. In good times they had just
enough to feed themselves.

        The gap between rich and poor became greater. Marriage remained
a main way to wealth. Also, one trained in the law could aspire to have
a successful career in high political office, which also brought
wealth. But there was less social mobility than in the previous century
and many landed families were consolidating their position.
Industrialists who had made a fortune for example, in steel, cotton,
coal mining, and porcelain, and merchants who wanted to turn themselves
into landed gentlemen found it very difficult to buy landed estates.
Old dissenter families, Quakers in particular, who were highly esteemed
as businessmen, as industrialists, and as model employers were excluded
from the Anglican landowning society. Rich tradesmen, artists, actors,
and writers found it difficult to buy substantial houses in the small
market towns and countryside because of an entrenched hierarchical
atmosphere there that didn't exist in London. The only gentlemen who
were in household service were librarians, tutors, or chaplains. They
ate with the family and did not consider themselves servants. Servants
were kept more at a distance. By the 1750s the servant class was
clearly defined. Their quarters were moved to the basement of the house
and they ate together in the kitchen. But some householders still had
special occasions when everyone ate together in the dining room, with
the servants at one end of the table. Servants had no right to free
time or to holidays. In 1767 about one tenth of the population in
London had servants. Even bricklayers and milk sellers had a servant.
Most families had just one servant. Most wives employed some other
woman or child to help in washing and scouring or in the minding of the
children.

        London had grown beyond the locations of its walls around the
City. London stretched ten miles along the Thames, and was three miles
wide in the center. On the east of the City was the port and industry.
The west side ended at Hyde Park and Regent's Park and was residential.
In 1710 it was still possible to shoot woodcock in Regent Street. In
1750, Westminster Bridge was opened. In 1760, the City walls were taken
down to ease congestion. The typical London house, usually brick, was
on a rectangular plan and had a basement to utilize all the space
possible. Walls were now more covered with hung damask, brocade, silk,
and wallpaper or plain paint rather than by wood paneling. There were
pictures on the walls. On the first floor was a front hall or parlor
and a back parlor. One of these parlor rooms was the most important
room, where the family entertained or spent leisure time. In it were
sofas, armchairs, and stools of mahogany or white gilded wood. They
were upholstered with damask or needlework. Imported mahogany was
replacing the favorite walnut that had replaced oak. Much wood was
inlaid with a variety of other types of woods. There was also a carved
tripod table, china table, card table, and perhaps bookcases and/or
tea-table. Furniture with original designs made by the cabinet-maker
Chippendale was available. His genius was in combining various motifs
into one harmonious design. Cabinet makers had to keep abreast of his
standards and to imitate them to conform with their customers' orders.
Cabriole legs with claw and ball feet came into fashion with Queen Anne
about 1712. Between windows were tall mirrors. From 1760, glass
chandeliers hung from the ceiling to reflect candlelight coming from
standing candlesticks or glazed hanging lanterns with brass frames. The
fireplace had an elaborate mantel. The fire was kept going all day. It
was lit by a tender box, which was unreliable. An iron fireback was
behind the fire. The firewood was placed on andirons. Fire grates were
used from about 1712. At a corner of the building was added a closet.
On the second floor was a dining room, continuation of the closet
below, and a drawing room, dressing room, or bedroom, and perhaps a
study or music room with harpsichord. The dining room had a fireplace;
curtains over the windows looped up at the cornices; one or more
mahogany tables; a set of mahogany chairs with leather or hair- cloth
seats fixed with brass nails, perhaps with some sort of metal
springing; two mahogany sideboards with marble tops; cupboards or
shelves or cabinets with displays of china porcelain; a wine-cooler; a
dumb-waiter; and a folding leather screen. The china, which was
displayed, was mostly imported, but there was some English china.
Later, there was famous Wedgwood stoneware and pottery with bright,
unfading glaze, or with dull black and red surfaces, biscuit ware of
pale green, blue or purple, upon which white designs stood out like
cameos. They came from the pottery factory at Staffordshire founded by
potter Josiah Wedgwood in 1769. There were silver and pewter plates and
serving pieces, silver candlesticks, silver knives, spoons, and two and
three pronged forks, glass saltcellars from 1724, and fingerbowls from
which one rinsed one's mouth or cleaned one's fingers after dinner
which were made of glass from about 1760. On the third floor were
bedrooms and a nursery. In the bedrooms, there was a high bed with
curtains, canopies, piles of blankets and pillows, and steps up to it;
wardrobe; chairs; a hand wash stand; chests of drawers; writing bureau;
dressing table with a couple drawers and a mirror; swing standing
mirror; tin rush candle canister; and night commode. Children and
servants slept on low wooden bedsteads. Walls were stucco, a form of
cement that could be sculpted, or paneled or hung with silk and printed
paper. Servants, such as the page and footmen, slept in the attic and
perhaps in the kitchen or cellar. There was a wood staircase for the
family and a back staircase for the servants. The floors and stairs
were protected with carpeting. The kitchen was in the basement or in a
covered shed in the back. It had an open fire and a tin oven. The cold
water tap over the stone sink could supply cold water from a cistern in
the basement or hand-pumped to a roof cistern through wooden pipes at
very low pressure at stated hours for a fee. There was a wash shed in
back. Water pumped from the Thames into underground pipes was thus
distributed to householders three times a week. Some water came from a
well or spring, rain, and street water sellers. Water carriers were
still employed at set fees. Water was kept in lead cisterns. The
wealthy had basement cisterns filled by a commercial company. The free
public conduits of water were out of use by 1750. The front door of the
house had two strong bolts on the inside and a heavy chain. The windows
could be shuttered and barred. There were sash windows with cords and
brass pulleys. At the back of the house was a garden and perhaps a
coach house or stables. Landscaping to reproduce an idealized country
scene replaced formal gardens. Foreign trees were imported. The latrine
was usually not in the house, but somewhere in the back garden area.
Under it was a brick drain leading to a public sewer or to a cesspool.
Smelly gases arose from it. Sometimes people gathered such waste up to
sell to farmers returning home in an otherwise empty wagon. In 1760,
patented inside toilets began to be used. Each stood in its own room. A
watchmaker named Alexander Cummings patented in 1775 the water-closet,
which had a stink trap u-bend behind which, after flushing, water
resided and prevented the backflow of noxious sewer gas. Its pans and
overhead cisterns were made of pottery. They were supported by wood
structures. There were better cements for building. Chinese porcelain,
embroidery, and lacquer work were popular. Furniture and landscaped
gardens were often done in a Chinese style.

        Many of the well-to-do now lived in districts without as well
as within the city limits. Many streets east of the City were named
after the governing families whose estates were there. Their mansions
had interior columns, archways, marble halls and fireplaces, carving,
gilding, rich colors, and high ornamented ceilings. They each had a
picture gallery, a library, stables with coachmen, grooms, and
stableboys, and a still-room for concocting liquors and cordials such
as cherry brandy, sloe gin, and elderberry wine. Medicine and scents
were also developed in the still-room. Hands were washed in bowls held
up by wooden stands. There were built-in bathtubs, but they usually
lacked hot and cold running water, so hot water usually had to carried
up to them.

        In these mansions, there were many private parties and balls.
The standard for politeness here was high and gentlemen were expected
to keep their tempers. This came about because impoliteness could
easily lead to a quarrel and then a duel. The pistol was replacing the
sword as the weapon of choice for duels. Good manners developed for all
occasions, with much less swearing and less rudeness. By gentlemen's
agreements, men did favors for each other without a monetary price, but
with the expectancy of a favor in return. The love of one man for
another was recognized as the highest and noblest of human passions.
People of high social standing left their country estates to spend the
winter season in their townhouses in London with its many recreations
such as receptions, routs ]fashionable gatherings], levies,
masquerades, balls, dinner parties, clubs, pleasure gardens, theaters,
shops, shows, taverns, and chocolate and coffee houses. Coffee houses
provided Turkish coffee, West Indian sugar and cocoa, Chinese tea,
Virginia tobacco, and newspapers. They were frequented by learned
scholars and wits, dandies, politicians, and professional newsmongers.
Men of fashion often engaged in wagers and gambling at their clubs and
coffee houses. There were wagers on such matters as the longevity of
friends and prominent people, fertility of female friends, wartime
actions, and political matters. Gentlemen often had valets. Carriage by
sedan-chair was common. In 1776, Buckingham House was bought as a
palace for the royal couple.

        Physicians and lawyers lived in two-story brick mansions with
attics and sash windows that could be lifted up and down with the help
of a pulley. They had rectangular wood panes each with a sheet of glass
cut from a circle of blown glass. The old blown glass was not regular,
but had a wrinkled appearance. The center of each pane of glass was
thicker with a knot in the middle left from the blow pipe. In front of
the house were railings which supported two lanterns at the doorway.

        People from different parts of London differed in ways of
thinking, conversation, customs, manners, and interests. For instance
there were sections where sailors lived, and where weavers,
watchmakers, and cow keepers each lived and worked. There were many
specialized craftsmen who worked with their own tools in their own
shops or houses, for some superior who had contact with the market and
who supervised the final processes of manufacture. These included the
goldsmiths, upholsterers, coach makers, saddlers, and watchmakers, all
of whom had many dependents. The watchmakers had specialists making
wheels, pinions, springs, hands, dials, chains, keys, caps, and studs
in their own houses. The type of industrial organization most common in
London was that in which work was given out to be done in the homes of
the workers: the putting out system. Some industries, such as
watchmaking, silk weaving, and shoemaking were on both a putting out
system and a system of an apprenticeship to journeymen working on piece
work. Shoes were made to order and ready made. The customer was
measured in a shop, the clicker cut out the upper leathers, which were
given to the closer to be closed, and then to the maker for the sole
and heel to be put on. Another class of shoemaker worked alone or with
an apprentice in a garret, cellar, or stall, using pieces of leather
cut out for him by the currier or leather cutter. London industries
included the making of bread, beer, spirits, and vinegar; sugar
refining; tobacco refining and snuffmaking; spinning and/or weaving of
woolens, worsteds, silk ribbons, tape, and cloth; and making printed
calico, clothes, linens, laces, tassels, fancy embroidery, stays,
stockings, hats, shoes, leather goods such as boots, shoes, hats,
gloves, harnesses, and saddles, jewelry, glass, candles, tapestry,
musical instruments, cutlery, furniture, paint, varnish, paper, tools,
swords, guns, heavy artillery, ships, sails, rope, carriages, precious
and base metalwares such as brass and pewter ware, and printer's ink
and glue; printing; and publishing. Surgical instruments made included
straight and curved knives and probes, lancets, scissors, spatulas,
trepans (for cutting bone), and cupping cases. Optical instruments made
included eyeglasses, telescopes, and microscopes. In 1727 eyeglasses
were held in place by frames that went over the ears, which replaced
unreliable cords over the ears and leather straps tied behind one's
head. Also made were nautical instruments, quadrants, sundials,
sectors, globes, scales, model solar systems, and air pumps.

        In London, the old distinction between craftsmen and laborers
was blurred by the existence of trades which employed workmen under a
skilled foreman instead of journeymen who had served an apprenticeship.
These trades were, on a large scale, new. Among the most important of
these trades were the distillers and brewers of liquors, the
tobacconists and snuff makers, the sugar refiners and soap boilers, the
vinegar makers, and makers of varnish, glue, printers' ink, and colors.
The latest chemical theories and the chemical explanation of dying
brought about the invention of new colors and new processes in dying
cloth. Workers in these trades were considered as laborers, but their
wages were high and their positions relatively secure. They learned
their jobs by doing them. The older trades of a similar character, such
as tallow melters and chandlers, wax chandlers, fellmongers [removed
hair or wool from hides in preparation for leather making], and the
tanners, employed journeymen.

        The skilled artisan who worked at home and either made goods
for a master or sold to the trade verged into the shopkeeping class. On
the other hand, the lowest type of shopkeeper, the chandler, the dealer
in old iron, the tripe shop, the milk retailer, the keeper of a cook
shop or a green cellar belonged to the class of casual and unskilled
labor. The lowly chimney sweep, paid 6d. a day, served an
apprenticeship as a boy, and then was his own master.

        The watermen and lightermen, by virtue of their fellowship and
their apprenticeship and often the ownership of a boat, belonged to the
class of skilled laborers. Craftsmen in the building trades and
paviours had their laborers as smiths had their hammermen to do the
heavy work at laborers' pay. The street ragpickers, the ballad sellers,
and the match sellers belonged to the class of beggars.

        There were buildings for boiling and distilling turpentine, for
casting brass or iron, and for making glass for chemical works for sale.

        Working women in London in 1750 were employed in domestic
service: 25%, nursing and midwifery: 12%, cleaning and laundry: 10%,
vitiating: 9%, shopkeeping: 8%, hawking: 6%, and textiles: 5%. Those
employed in domestic service were mostly young women who later married.
Some women were schoolteachers, innkeepers, or manufacturers, which
were middle-class employments. Many women in the realm engaged in a
variety of occupations from fanmaking and hairdressing to catering,
and, as widows, often carried on their husband's trade, including
bookselling, hatmaking, building or ironmongery.

        Although shops still had small frontages of about 15 feet and
the windows had small panes of bottle glass which partly obscured the
view of the goods, there were magnificent shops with large windows
displaying fine goods. There were bookshops, and print shops with
prints of political satire with caricatures. The shops were generally
open six days a week from 7 a.m. to 8 p.m., and years later to 10 p.m.
In 1675 Josiah Wedgwood opened a showroom in London for his high
quality pottery from Staffordshire. Consumption was on a mass scale,
many people buying what they wanted instead of just what they needed.
There were circulating libraries, public concert halls, and
professional boxing matches. At coffee houses, chocolate houses, and
taverns, people played at dice and cards, gambled, talked politics and
read daily newspapers, in which there was advertising, reports of
marriages and deaths, grain prices, and book reviews. Different
professions and classes and groups, such as the whigs, the tories,
classical scholars, scientists, clergymen, intellectuals, actors,
writers, and journeymen of particular crafts, had their favorite
meeting places. Coffee houses reflected the character of their
neighborhoods. They acted as postal centers, lost property offices,
business addresses, physicians' consulting rooms, lawyers' and
merchants' businesses, matrimonial agencies, masonic lodges, auction
rooms, and gambling dens. Some retained a supply of prostitutes. Many
taverns had a rentable private room for the better-off to drink wine,
have meals, meet friends, gamble, do business, and hold meetings of
societies and clubs, especially political clubs. From this beginning
sprang private clubs such as the Blue Stocking Club in 1750 and the
Literary Club in 1764, Lloyd's for sale and insurance of ships in 1771,
and the stock exchange in 1773. The Blue stocking Club was established
by women who organized conversational parties with guests of intellect
and wit. There was opera, playhouses, concerts usually with Georg
Handel's oratorios such as The Messiah or the foreigners Bach and
Haydn, tea-gardens, fire works, balls, masquerades, wax works, beer
shops, and bawdy houses, except on Sunday. There were straight plays,
comic operas, and melodramas. Three-dimensional sets replaced the two-
dimensional backdrop. Plays containing thinly veiled satires on
politicians were becoming popular. Some plays had crude and licentious
material. Theaters still shared a close association with brothels.
Unlicensed theaters were closed down by a statute of 1737, but most
came to acquire patronage to get a license. This shaped the development
of drama in London for a century.

        The Beggar's Opera depicting an immoral society unable to
master its bandits was written by John Gay as a powerful attack on a
government which most of London hated. With its many ballads it became
very popular. One such ballad goes:

"Through all the employments of life -
Each neighbor abuses his brother;
Whore and Rogue they call Husband and Wife;
All professions be-rogue one another.
The Priest calls the Lawyer a cheat,
The Lawyer be-knaves the Divine;
And the Statesman, because he's so great, Thinks his trade as honest as
mine."

        Another is:

"A Fox may steal your hens, sir,
A Whore your health and pence, sir,
Your daughter rob your chest, sir,
Your wife may steal your rest, sir,
A thief your goods and plate.
But this is all but picking,
With rest, pence, chest and chicken,
It ever was decreed, sir,
If Lawyer's hand is fee'd, sir,
He steals your whole estate."

        The Thames was crowded with sailing boats and with a line of
boats waiting to unload. Foreign and native ships lined the river banks
in rows. Theft of cargo from docked ships was still a problem and
pirates were still executed at low tide on gallows. Londoners went to
the bridges crossing the Thames to breathe fresh air. London air was so
smoky and polluted by coal-burning in kitchens and factories that it
gave a cough to newcomers. The river was so polluted by the sewers by
1760 that all the swans and most of the fish had disappeared. A Mansion
House was built for the Mayor in 1753. The king's zoo had ten lions,
one panther, two tigers, and four leopards. Deer hunting in Hyde Park
was now confined to its northwest corner, which was enclosed for the
king, who occasionally hunted there. Elsewhere in the park were laid
out walks and fountains. Gardens were now natural instead of formal.
The streets were usually crowded with people and traffic. Many people
traveled by sedan chair. On the streets were barrows with goods such as
lace, threads, fruits, and chickens; beggars, ballad singers,
musicians, bands, street dancers, apple women, piemen, muffin men,
fruit sellers, nut sellers, pudding sellers, milk maids selling milk
from buckets, milk sold directly from the cow, vendors of asses' milk,
hawkers, newspaper boys, scavengers with carts, postal collectors,
lamplighters on their ladders, wenches, chimney sweeps, rat catchers,
pick pockets, swaggering bravados, strolling strumpets, brawling
watermen, card sharps, overdressed beaux, dancing dogs, and acrobatic
monkeys. Each trade had it own call. Billingsgate open-air market was
now exclusively for the sale of fish. Small tradesmen such as dairymen,
butchers, bakers, fishmongers, and chandlers delivered to regular
customers food bought from distributing centers. Workers by necessity
lived near their place of work because there was no cheap transport and
walking through the streets after dark was unpleasant and dangerous.
Hours of work for most craftsmen was from 6 a.m. to 8 p.m., six days a
week.

        It was common for working class families in London to live in a
single room of their house and rent the rest, furnished, to people of
different degrees of prosperity and even of different social grades.
Servants and apprentices slept in the kitchen, the shop, or the garret.
The very poor, such as casual laborers and street sellers, silk
winders, charwomen, usually lived in damp cellars subject to floods
from excessive rain, or in cold and windy garrets. Tenancy was usually
on a weekly basis because of the general uncertainty of life and trade.
Conditions were so cramped that cabinet makers made beds which
masqueraded in the day time as tables, bureaus, cupboards, or
bookcases. The very poor slept in common lodging houses, sleeping
uncovered on the floor, twenty to a room. Some poor families slept in
small hovels made of mud and straw with their pigs, domestic fowl,
dogs, and even asses and horses. Homeless children slept on the
streets. All classes lived so much at coffee houses, alehouses or
clubs, which they often used as their addresses, that house room was a
secondary consideration. There was an alehouse on almost every street
in London to provide cheap food and beer, lodging, employment
information, credit, newspapers, tobacco, and meeting places for
tradesmen. Some alehouses were recognized employment agencies for
certain trades, such as the hatters, smiths, carpenters, weavers, boot
and shoe makers, metal workers, bakers, tailors, plumbers, painter and
glaziers, and bookbinders. They were often run by one of the trade,
retired or otherwise. Some alehouses catered to criminals and
prostitutes. For cheap and simple eating there were chophouses,
cookshops, and beef steak houses.

        There were about 10,000 English immigrants a year to London in
the 1700s. They were mostly young people. London needed many immigrants
because of its high death rate. Over twenty London people a week died
from starvation alone; they were mostly women. Only about one-fourth of
London's population had been born in London. Especially welcome were
sturdy country people for heavy manual labor, the better educated boys
from the north for shops and offices, and the honest country people, as
contrasted with London's poor, for domestic service. Girls mostly
looked for domestic service, but were sometimes made the mistress of
the housekeeper or steered into prostitution as soon as they entered
the city. An ambitious young man would seek an apprentice job, work
hard, flatter his master, and try to marry his master's daughter. It
was easier to find a place to live in London than in the villages,
though there was much overcrowding. Many shopkeepers and workshop
owners in London were involved in leasing, purchases, and contracts.

        Queen Anne was authorized by Parliament to build about 50 more
churches in London and Westminster and their suburbs, to be paid for by
a coal tax on imports into the port of London. Churches in London were
to be rebuilt with money paid by funeral rates, rates for tolling the
bells, and rates for the use of palls [altar cloths]. Queen Anne also
appropriated all her revenues from the first fruits and tenths of
ecclesiastical benefices: 16,500 pounds, to the clerical poor in 1704.

        There were fewer quarrels among passersby on the London
streets; men were less likely to wear their swords. But there were fist
fights by common men which gathered crowds and occasioned betting. Most
crime was petty theft, but mobs and riots were frequent, as there were
no police. Watchmen and constables were often old and physically
incapacitated. The watchmen were householders taking their turn. This
duty of householders watching the streets had evolved from the ancient
obligation of wards to provide men to guard the walls at night. But few
wanted these jobs by which they could offend their neighbors. Many
citizens paid a rate to be excused from watch and ward duty. Constables
were often tavern keepers. Many riots were started when penal laws
against the Catholics were repealed. They began with the cries of "no
popery", but then targeted rich men's houses. Mobs sacked and pillaged
at will, burned houses, and flung open the prisons to increase their
numbers. There were political riots between Tories and Whigs. Working
men still used violence to protect their livelihoods, such as
destroying the lodgings and public houses of cheap immigrant labor such
as the Irish. The stocking-knitters destroyed stocking-knitting frames
so that the number of apprentices who could be employed would not reach
the limit specified by its guild's regulations. Parish workhouse
children also provided a cheap supply of labor which forced down the
wages of the stocking knitters. In 1720 a statute banned wearing of
calico after mobs tore calico garments off women. In 1765, thousands
marched on Parliament and persuaded it to ban foreign silk imports. But
when a mob destroyed engine-looms, the army was used against the
rioters and two of them were hanged. This was the last major mob
action. Around the Tower, there were still demagogues standing on
upturned carts haranguing passing crowds. The Tower area was a favorite
place for demonstrators, and for unemployed and dissatisfied workmen,
particularly coal heavers and underpaid seamen protesting their low pay
and poor living conditions. There was more crime, especially at night,
now with organized bands of men or gangs of children. Bounty hunters
made a lot of money catching offenders. In 1736, to deter the frequent
robberies, burglaries, and other felonies at night, many glass lamps
were set up in places determined by the mayor. They had to burn from
sunset to sunrise. In 1736, a lighting rate was imposed by the City to
pay for all night lighting all year by hired lamplighters. Anyone
breaking or damaging the lights of London would forfeit 40s. for the
first offense, 50s. for the second offense, and 3 pounds for the third
offense. The aldermen had to contract to pay for lighting, trimming,
snuffing, cleaning, supplying, maintaining, and repairing them. To pay
for this system, citizens paid according to the amount of rent their
holdings were worth. If they didn't pay, they could not vote.

        Bad areas of thieves and prostitutes and the slums east of the
City were gradually being replaced by warehouses and offices. In 1757,
London Bridge was widened and the houses were cleared off it. There
were lanes for carriages in the middle and for pedestrians on each
side. Its arches were also widened to make the passage of vessels
underneath easier. Lights were put on it to be lit all night. And
watchmen were put on it for protection and safety of passengers. This
was paid for by tolls of 1/2 d. per horse, 1d. per carriage, and
2d.-1s. for vessels with goods passing underneath. About 1762, a body
of enterprising citizens secured private acts of Parliament which
allowed them to levy a house tax in return for providing paving and
lighting, which then greatly improved, as did sanitation. Sidewalks
were raised between the street proper and the buildings, replacing the
protective posts which had lined the roads. Flat stones were put in
place of the pebbles on the roadway. Signs hanging out from stores,
which had blocked the sunlight, were placed flat on the front of the
buildings. This also made the streets more airy. The buildings were
given numbered addresses and street names were placed on buildings.
Loading and unloading could not exceed one hour. Nuisances like empty
carts could be removed. Cranes used in warehouses had to be stored in
unobtrusive places. One who drove on the foot pavement had to forfeit
10s. for the first offense, 20s. for the second offense, and 40s. for
other offenses. Wells were dug and pumps erected for watering the
streets. Pavements were to be repaired on complaint. Dust boxes and
dust holes were built and had to be used for refuse awaiting pickup by
the raker or else forfeit 10s. In 1762, the system of having every man
responsible for cleaning the street in front of his door, which
occasioned piles of rubbish in the central troughs of the streets
waiting for the next rain to be washed away, was abandoned. But house
occupants were required to keep the sidewalk in front of their house
clean or else forfeit 2s. If one broke a light, he had to pay damages
if it was accidental, and also 20s. if willful. Wards were to choose
substantial inhabitants to be collectors for a year at a time to
collect the rates, which were not to exceed 1s.6d. per pound of rents.
If one declined to be a collector, he had to forfeit 50 pounds. There
were special stands for hackney coaches, which were 12s.6d. for a day
of twelve hours. Their regulations were extended to Sundays.

        In London, the normal system of building was for builders to
buy up leases, put up a new building, and sell it before the lease
became due. The rules for party walls between buildings were made more
stringent: 2 1/2 bricks thick in cellar, 2 bricks thick to the garret
floor, and 1 1/2 bricks above the roofs or gutters. They had to be made
of brick or stone. In 1772, rain water from roofs had to be carried to
the streets in lead or other pipes that were affixed against the side
of the building. In 1774, iron, copper, or other pipe or funnel for
conveying smoke or steam were not to be near any inside timber, or in
front of most any building or next to any public street, square, or
court.

        In the 1720s firefighters had to fill a tank on a wagon by hand
with buckets. On top of the tank was a hose that could spray water
high. London parishes were authorized to place upon the water pipes
underground stop-blocks of wood with a plug and firecocks to go into
such pipe at various distances so that there would be no loss in time
in digging down to the pipes to get water to fight fires. Parishes were
required to keep at known places, ladders and a large engine and a hand
engine to throw up water to extinguish fires including one leather hose
with socket fitting the plug or firecock, so that buckets would not be
needed. The Sun Insurance Company was incorporated for fire insurance
in 1711. Insurance offices were authorized to employ watermen with
poles, hooks, and hatchets to be always ready at a call to extinguish
fires.

        No more than 12 sacks of meal, 12 quarters of malt, 750 bricks,
or 1 chalder of coal per load on wagons or carts with wheels bound with
[narrow] iron tire are allowed within ten miles of London or
Westminster, or else forfeit one horse. This is to prevent decay of the
roads.

        For every wagon and cart in London, there must be a person on
foot to guide it to prevent the maiming, wounding, and killing of
people, especially the old and children, when drivers ride on their
wagons and carts. Later, it was required that carts must display the
name of the owner and be registered. Still later, there was a penalty
of 10s. for not having a person on foot to guide any cart. Later still,
in 1757, if a new owner of a cart did not put his name thereon, he had
to forfeit 40s., and the cart and horse could be seized and sold to pay
the forfeiture. Persons willfully obstructing passage on streets with
empty carts or barrels or pipes shall forfeit 5-12s. or do hard labor
up to one month. The justices of London assessed rates and made
regulations for carriage of goods. Certain houses and buildings were
bought and pulled down to widen several streets, lanes, and passages.

        In 1774, persons driving cattle in London, whose negligence or
improper treatment of such cattle cause them to do mischief shall
forfeit 5-20s. or else go to a House of Correction for up to one month
or be publicly whipped.

        The roads around London were neither very attractive nor very
safe. Along them was land covered with water from drains and refuse and
dung heaps. Hogs were kept in large numbers on the outskirts and fed on
the garbage of the town. Smoking brick kilns surrounded a great part of
London. In the brickyards vagrants lived and slept, cooking their food
at the kilns.

        Queen Anne's drinking of tea made it a popular drink, but it
was still expensive. This habit improved health because to make tea,
the water had to be boiled before drunk. Breakfast included tea and
bread and butter, and later toast with melted butter. The rich also had
coffee and chocolate. The morning newspaper was often read at
breakfast. The chief dinner dishes were roast beef, roast mutton,
boiled beef or pork, with puddings and vegetables. Roast meat was still
the basic diet of town and country gentlemen. There were also fowls,
tripes, rabbits, hares, pigeons, and venison. Many elaborate sauces
were made. The national dish was the pudding, a compound of steak,
kidney, larks, and oyster. Drinks included ginger beer, lemonade,
barley water, coffee, chocolate, tea, and foreign wine. Port from
Portugal was introduced about 1703, and rum about 1714. Rum, made from
sugar, first became popular as a medicine, well-whisked with butter.
Beer was drunk by the poorer and middle classes. The poor could afford
very little meat now, unlike 200 years ago. Their standard fare was
cheese, bread, and tea, the latter of which was usually from used tea
leaves bought from rich houses.

        Households were smaller; a peer had a household of about 25-50.
The proportion of women in a household grew to one-third to one-half.
Dinner guests sat and were served in order of rank, with gentlemen on
one side of the table and ladies on the other. Later, a fashion came in
to sit alternately by sex. Dinner was in several courses and lasted a
few hours. Toasts might be made. It was bad manners to put one's elbows
on the table, to sniff the food, to eat too slowly or too quickly, to
scratch, spit, or blow one's nose at the table, or to pick one's teeth
with a toothpick before the dishes were removed. After dinner, the men
drank, smoked, and talked at the table. There was a chamber pot under
the sideboard for their use. Politics was a popular subject. The women
talked together in the drawing room. Later, the men joined the women
for tea and coffee. The evening often finished with card games, reading
newspapers, verse-making, fortune-telling, walks in the garden,
impromptu dancing, perhaps gambling, and supper.

        The nobility and gentry became more mobile and now mixed
together at parties. At these afternoon parties, there were a variety
of simultaneous activities, instead of everyone participating in the
same activities together as a group. Guests could choose to engage in
conversation, news, cards, tea-drinking, music, dancing, and even go
into supper at different times. Sometimes a man other than her husband
escorted a lady to a party. Having lovers outside marriage was socially
accepted if discrete.

        Single women were discouraged from thinking of their
independent status as desirable. Their single status was to be regarded
as unfortunate. Weddings took place in public in church instead of
privately. There were banns, or announcements, publicized before the
wedding so that anyone who knew of a reason why the marriage should not
take place could speak up. Brides wore a white silk or satin dress with
a train. Over one third of brides who were capable of having children
were already pregnant when they married. In 1753 a marriage statute
required licenses to marry, the consent of parents or guardians for
minors to marry, the calling of banns, and four weeks residence in the
parish where the license was given by bishop or other authority. These
requirements addressed the problems of the kidnapping of heiresses,
prostitutes trapping unwary youths after getting them drunk, and
priests performing marriages clandestinely and not in church, which
required banns. Two witnesses to the marriage were required to sign a
certificate of marriage, which was then to be registered in the parish
books. Manufactured goods relieved ladies from baking of bread,
brewing, and spinning. So they often visited with friends, wrote
letters, embroidered, and supervised the servants.

        Funerals ceremonies started with socializing at the house with
refreshments, then going in a procession to the church for burial, and
finally returning to the house for more socializing.

        It was possible for a woman-covert to be seized of land in fee
simple or in tail general or special to her separate use, free from
control or intermeddling of her husband.

        Houses were warmed in winter by burning coal. Moderate homes
had tent-beds in use, with which cloth was hung on all four sides of
the bed from a light iron framework above the bed. The beds were warmed
with a warming pan heated in a fire before use. There were often bed
bugs and fleas. Everyone wore nightcaps to bed. Pewter tableware was
used, but the poor used tinware instead. Copper, brass, and iron pots
and pans were increasingly common.

        Most towns had a regular market once or twice a week. In them,
street cleaning was still a responsibility of individual householders.
Water was still obtained from wells and pumps. There was no municipal
government as such. Public works were done by special commissions set
up for particular purposes, such as lighting, cleaning and paving the
streets, night watchmen, traffic regulation, removing nuisances, and
improving local amenities. Large towns had hospitals for the poor. In
the larger manufacturing towns, there were literary and philosophical
societies for debates and discussions. These put together libraries for
use of their members. Also in these large towns, there were
booksellers' shops, printing houses, weekly newspapers, playhouses,
concerts, and horseracing courses, the latter of which was mostly
patronized by gentlemen. Some private citizens of various towns
followed the example of London and obtained from Parliament the right
to levy a house rate for paving and lighting.

        Towns tended to be known for certain specialties, such as
seaside holiday resorts, spas like Bath, cathedral towns, fashionable
shopping for gentry, and towns with certain industries like glass and
china manufacture, pinmaking, pottery, tanning, manufacture of linen,
silk, cotton, and the knitting trade. Certain towns were famous for
certain varieties of wool cloth. Before 1750, a town with more than
5,000 inhabitants was considered a large town. Shopkeeping was
supplanting fairs and markets. Certain industries were done on a large
scale and required workers to be at the same site, e.g. brewing and
distilling; building ships; printing fustians; making paper, soap from
animal fat or candles; coal mining, iron production, mining and
smelting of tin and copper, refining of salt, and digging of clay.
Certain other industries also required some kind of power or team work
for their production, e.g. refining sugar; finishing cloth; making
bricks; glassmaking; manufacture of ropes and sails, and processing of
copper and brass into rods and sheets. Often the manufacturer's house
was surrounded by the many cottages of his workers. There the wife and
children usually were busy carding and spinning. Putting out work and
subcontracting were widespread and created many small-scale
capitalists. Workers' hours were typically 6 a.m. to 8 p.m.

        Though grammar schools were endowed for the education of local
poor boys, they sought fee-paying sons of gentlemen. They taught
arithmetic as well as reading and writing. Translation and reading of
Latin was still important, e.g. Aesop's Fables, Virgil, Cicero's
Letters, Caesar's Commentaries, Horace, Pliny, Juvenal, Ovid, Livy, and
Plautus. The "Eton Grammar" book replaced the "Royal Grammar" as the
standard for Latin and English grammar. The boys lived in boarding
houses superintended by "dames" or older boys. There were usually two
boys to a bed. There was bullying and initiation ceremonies such as
tossing small boys up from a held blanket or having younger boys run
naked in the snow. There were occasional rebellions by the boys and
fights with the townspeople. Flogging with a birch or caning with a rod
until blood was drawn from the bare buttocks was the usual punishment.
There were some national boys' boarding schools such as Eton,
Winchester, and Westminster. In these schools, boys could mix with sons
of rich and powerful people, thus establishing important connections
for their adult life. But there was more bullying of small boys by
large boys at these schools and the smaller boys became menial servants
of their seniors. Occasionally there were student riots. However, most
grammar schools were not residential. Because the grammar schools were
limited to boys, many boarding schools for girls were established.
Tradesmen's daughters were often sent to these to learn to act like
ladies. Most upper class girls were taught, at home or at school,
English, writing, arithmetic, drawing, courtly dancing, needlework,
music, and French. Dissenting academies were established for those who
did not pass the religious tests of the grammar schools. Pencils were
now in use.

        Sons of gentlemen usually took "The Grand Tour" of the
continent before going to university. These tours lasted for months or
years, and always included Paris and a Protestant French university.
The students went in groups with tutors. The chief purpose was now
cultural, instead of practical. On these tours there was often
misbehavior such as drinking and fighting. In 1720, Travelers Checks
were developed for those on the Grand Tour.

        The universities began to teach science. The new professorships
at Cambridge University were: chemistry, astronomy, experimental
philosophy, anatomy, botany, geology, geometry, and Arabic. Ideas in
geology challenged the Bible's description of the creation of the world
and there was a controversy over the origin and nature of fossils. In
1715, a large pointed weapon of black flint was found in contact with
the bones of an elephant in a gravel bed in London. Oral and written
examinations began to replace disputations. Few professors lectured.

        Dissenters were excluded from universities as well as from
offices and grammar schools. Oxford and Cambridge Universities were
open only to members of the Church of England, so other universities
were established for dissenters. They taught geography, mathematics,
science, physics, astronomy, mechanics, hydrostatics, and anatomy. At
Oxford and Cambridge and Harvard Universities, students in science were
relegated to different instructors, buildings, and degree ceremonies
than students in literature, who often looked down on them as socially
and intellectually inferior.

        The Inns of Court had ceased to provide residence. The period
of education at law school at the Inns of Court was now reduced in 1760
from seven to five years for ordinary students and to three years for
graduates of Oxford or Cambridge Universities. The textbooks were:
"Doctor and Student" by Christopher Saint-German in 1518 and
"Institutes of the Laws of England" by Thomas Wood in 1720. Most landed
families tried to ensure that at least one member of the family in each
generation was educated at the Inns of Court after going to Oxford or
Cambridge. In 1739, attorneys formed a "Society of Gentlemen
Practitioners in the Courts of Law and Equity". In order to earn a
living, most attorneys had to attach themselves to some great patron
and serve his interests. So it was hard for an ordinary person to find
an impartial attorney or to find any attorney willing to contest a
powerful family.

        The first encyclopedia came into existence in 1728. In 1740 was
the first public circulating library in London. Samuel Johnson put
together the first dictionary in 1755. It standardized spelling and
pronunciation. Then came dictionaries for the arts, sciences, and
commerce. There were histories with political biases such as the Earl
of Clarendon's "History of the Great Rebellion". Alexander Pope wrote
witty satire on human faults of the period such as "Rape of the Lock".
Daniel Defoe wrote "Robinson Crusoe", "Moll Flanders", and "The Poor
Man's Plea" protesting disparity of judicial treatment of rich and
poor, for instance for drunkenness. Henry Fielding wrote one of the
first novels: "Tom Jones". Joseph Addison wrote essays on social
behavior. Jonathan Swift wrote the satire on the times, "Gulliver's
Travels". Samuel Richardson wrote some of the first novels, such as
"Clarissa"; he wrote on values such as religious faith, moral virtue,
and family closeness. Catherine Macaulay started writing her weighty
and impressive "History of England". Many schoolmistresses wrote
textbooks on a variety of subjects. Poet and essayist Hester Chapone
wrote "Letters on the Improvement of the Mind". Elizabeth Carter wrote
poetry and translated Greek works; her work was published in "The
Gentleman's Magazine". Hannah More wrote the play "The Inflexible
Captive". The diaries of Caroline Girle Powys Daniel told of her
extensive travels in the nation, and the various life styles of polite
society she visited. Defoe's newspaper was the first great political
journal. He claimed that the people have a right to control the
proceedings of Parliament. Essayists like Richard Steele, who
introduced the periodical essay in his newspaper, and Joseph Addison,
in his newspaper, wrote in a conversational style about the social life
around them and the thoughts and behavior of common men and women in a
light and good-humored way. They separated humor from the old-style
farce and gave it taste and gentility. And with this came a moderation,
reserve, and urbanity in matters of religion, politics, and society.
Religious issues even became a matter of indifference. Fairies,
witches, astrology, and alchemy were no longer taken seriously by
educated men. Tales of fairies, witches, ghosts, and miracles were
deemed appropriate for children. Childrens' stories were becoming a
distinct literary form. Nursery rhymes included "Hush-a-bye baby on the
tree top" and the five little piggies. "Mother Goose's Melody" was
published in 1765. There were picture books for children such as
Cinderella, Red Riding Hood, and Sleeping Beauty. Craftsmen made small
models of their wares, such as dolls' china, dolls' furniture, silver,
and flat lead soldiers. Babies had rattles and teething rings.

        In 1710 copyrights for books was given for 14 years, renewable
for another 14 years. Alexander Pope's translation of the Iliad and
Odyssey made him financially independent. He collected advance payments
from subscribers who would be listed in the book. A new book industry
emerged in London with booksellers as master manufacturers who employed
writers, authors, copyers, and subwriters. Booksellers sold books of
sermons, histories, political and literary satires, literary criticism,
and dictionaries. There was a growing popularity of novels. Books were
expensive to buy. Regular magazines on the new and strange were
published. There were three daily, six weekly, and ten thrice yearly
newspapers. Newspapers increased in number from 8 founded in 1700 to a
total of 25 in 1727. By 1753, there were over a million throughout the
country. Workmen usually began their day by reading a newspaper at a
coffee house.

        Authors of books which have been registered at the Stationers
Hall had the sole liberty of printing and reprinting such book for 14
years. Others who printed or sold or published such -forfeited the
books and paid one penny for each sheet found in their custody, 1/2 to
the Queen and 1/2 to the suer. The printer had to give a copy of each
book printed to the Company of Stationers, the Royal Library, the
libraries of the Oxford and Cambridge universities, and certain other
libraries.

        In 1775, the two universities in England, the four universities
in Scotland, and the several colleges of Eton, Westminster, and
Winchester were given in perpetuity a copyright in books given or
bequeathed to them.

        The British Museum was incorporated to hold the collections of
Robert Cotton of manuscripts, books, records, coins, and medals and of
Hans Sloane, which contained rare books, coins, precious stones,
pictures, plants, and mathematical instruments and had been left to the
public.

        Italian opera was introduced in 1706 by Georg Handel on his
visit to England. His music became the standard music of Georgian
England. The Academy of Ancient Music was founded in 1710. It set the
standard of selection and performance. In existence were the violin
(including ones made by Stadivari), viola, cello, double bass, oboe,
trumpet, clarinet, bassoon, trombone, horn, flute, harp, organ,
harpsichord, in which the strings were plucked, and piano, in which the
strings are struck by little hammers. Orchestras had at least thirty
members. Many hymns were written.

        Painting by artists developed. Gentlemen had portraits painted
of their horses and dogs as well as of family. Joshua Reynolds painted
the wealth and beauty of England. Painters such as Gainsborough did
landscapes and dramatic history paintings too, but neither of these
sold as well as portraits. Scenery was painted for the theater. Places
of business had signs painted which portrayed animals. Coaches were
painted with mythological creatures and such. Gentlemen collected
antique statuary and painting, such as by Rembrandt and Rubens. In 1711
an academy of painting was founded, which included women painters. The
first public exhibition of paintings was in 1760. The Society of
Artists was formed in 1761 and incorporated by royal charter in 1765.
This differentiated them from the Painter-Stainers Company of face
painters, coach painters, and house painters. The Royal Academy of
London was founded in 1768 to merge all private academies and societies
into one official body and to recognize the best artistic work. Joshua
Reynolds was its first president. It was at first financed by the king.
Under George I, sculptors became distinct from masons. They did
monuments and portrait busts of the royal family, nobles, and great
men. From Italian influence, Palladian architecture came into vogue. It
was typified externally by a panoramic look achieved by horizontal
lines, balanced alternatives of plain wall and openings, and portico
with a heavy pediment like the front of a Roman temple. Stucco was
often used to plaster housefronts, flute columns, and ornament
pediments. Architects took students. Designers of engraved, etched, and
historical prints were given the sole right to print them for 14 years.
Copiers had to forfeit 5s. per print.

        Foreigners were now interested in learning about English life,
philosophy, and opinion. They learned English to read English
literature such as Shakespeare. No longer were France and Italy the
only centers of culture and influence on other nations. By 1713,
England was the leading sea power by far.

        The Royal Society was still the principal focus of scientific
activity. Issac Newton was its President for several years and drew in
more foreigners. Its members were mathematicians, chemists, botanists,
physicians, engineers, authors, poets, and theologians. Papers given
there generated much discussion at its meetings. Newton opined that
small particles attract each other by some force in a similar way that
large bodies attracted each other. This force in immediate contact was
exceedingly strong and performed chemical interactions, but at greater
distances had no effect. Also there were local associations and
societies. There were learned journals such as "Philosophical
Transactions".

        Drovers bought cattle in the countryside, drove them to big
towns, and sold them to fattening graziers or fatted them themselves.
Then they were driven into town and sold to the wholesale butcher, who
sold the carcass to the retail butcher, the hides to the tanner, and
the bones to the glue maker. Flocks of geese were also driven into
towns, after their feet were given a protective covering of tar. There
were also middlemen wholesalers for cheese, butter, cloth, and iron.

        There was a rage of distemper among the cattle so serious that
to prevent its spread, the king was authorized by Parliament to make
regulations for prohibiting the removal or sale of cattle and for the
burial of distempered cattle. Later, the king was authorized to
prohibit the killing of cow calves. No one was to sell any ox, bull,
cow, calf, steer, or heifer until he had possession of such for forty
days or else forfeit ten pounds, Later, the king was authorized to
regulate the movement of cattle from one place to another.

        The main industry of the country was still agriculture. In the
countryside, about half the arable land was under the open field
system, in which land was cultivated in common. Enclosures of land were
still taking place. The enclosures were now done by statutory
commissions to ensure equitable allotments.

        Agricultural improvements came first to enclosed land, which
comprised about half of the agricultural land. In the 1733, Jethro Tull
published a book about his 1701 invention of the seed-drill to first
pulverize the soil for cultivation without manure and then to deposit
seed at a uniform depth in regulated quantities and in rows instead of
being thrown haphazardly. Also explained was the horse-hoe to stir the
soil about the roots of the plants to preserve moisture, promote
aeration, admit warmth, and destroy weeds. There were more horses than
oxen in use now in the fields. -The horse-hoe was first used by large
independent farmers on enclosed land. Also invented was a threshing
machine with a set of sticks to replace hand threshing with flails.
Under-drainage as well as irrigation was practiced. Lord Townshend
alternated turnips, grasses, and grain in his fields, and thus provided
winter food for his cattle. The two-field crop rotation with fallow
periods was often displaced by the three-field system rotating grain
crops, legumes, and fallowness. Independent farming gave rise to the
improvement of breeds of livestock by selective breeding.

        Enclosed land produced 26 bushels of grain compared to 18
bushels for common field land. It produced 9 pounds of sheep fleece
compared to 3 1/2 pounds for common field land. Overall, soils were
improved by being treated with clay, chalk, or lime. Artificial pasture
was extended and there was increased use of clover, sainfoin, and
rye-grass. Grain productivity was four times that of 1200. A fatted ox
was 800 pounds compared to the former 400 pounds which it weighed from
the 1300s to the 1600s. The fleece of sheep increased fourfold.

        By statute of 1756, persons having rights of common in certain
land may, by the major part in number and in value of each's tenement,
enclose such land for planting and growth of timber or underwood.

        Every village had a smith, carpenter, and miller. The larger
villages also had a potter, a turner, a malster, a weaver, a tanner,
and perhaps a mercer or grocer middleman. Wheelwrights made ploughs,
harrows, carts, and wagons. Ploughs had one, two, or no wheels. Poor
farming families took up extra work in the villages such as making
gloves, knitting stockings, or spinning yarn. Craftsmen still helped
farmers at harvest time.

        Much of the rural population was now dispersed over the
countryside instead of being concentrated in villages because so many
small holders had sold out due to enclosures of farm land, especially
of common land and waste land. The rural working class lived in two
room cottages, with low ceilings, small windows, and an earth floor.
Patience was required for those willing to wait for an existing cottage
in a village to be vacated. Most laborers did not marry unless and
until they found a cottage. Ancient custom that a person could build a
home for himself on waste land if he did it in one night was ceasing to
be respected. Farmers usually preferred employing day-laborers than
keeping servants. There were many migrant workers, mainly from Ireland,
for the busy summer haymaking and harvesting.

        The children of laborers and of small farmers had little
schooling because they were needed for work. They scared the birds,
weeded the fields, picked the stones, tended the poultry, set beans,
combed the wool, and collected the rushes and dipped them in the tallow.

        Farm people relied on well water or rain water collected in
lead cisterns. A farmhouse fireplace had pots hung from iron rods.
Saucepans sat on iron stands, which were stored above the mantel when
not in use. Spits were rotated by pulleys powered by the upward current
of hot air or by a mechanical device. Bacon was smoked in the chimney
accessible by a staircase or upper floor.

        There still existed customary freeholders, who owned their land
subject to certain customary obligations to the lord of a manor.

        The people displaced by enclosure became laborers dependent on
wages or paupers. Their discontent was expressed in this poem:

 - "They hang the man and flog the woman - - That steals a goose from
off the common - - But leave the greater criminal loose - - That steals
the common from the goose."

        Eventually there was some relief given to the poor workers. By
statute of 1773, wastes, commons, and fields having several owners with
different interests might by three-quarters vote in number and in value
of the occupiers cultivate such for up to six years. However, cottagers
and those with certain sheep walks, or cattle pasture, could not be
excluded from their rights of common. By statute of 1776, the
Elizabethan statute restricting locations where cottages could be
erected and their inhabitants was repealed because the industrious poor
were under great difficulties to procure habitations.

        Land could be rented out at ten times the original value. Land
was typically rented out for 7, 14, or 21 years. Great fortunes were
made by large landowners who built grand country estates. The
manufacturers and merchants made much money, but agriculture was still
the basis of the national wealth. As the population grew, the number of
people in the manufacturing classes was almost that of the
agriculturalists, but they had at least twice the income of the
agriculturalists.

        The greatest industry after agriculture was cloth. Most of this
activity took places in the homes, but families could earn more if each
family member was willing to exchange the informality of domestic work
for the long hours and harsh discipline of the factory or workshop.
More wool was made into cloth in the country. Dyed and finished wool
cloth and less raw wool and unfinished broadcloth, was exported.
Bleaching was done by protracted washing and open-air drying in "bleach
fields". There were great advances in the technology of making cloth.

        Thomas Lombe, the son of a weaver, became a mercer and merchant
in London. He went to Italy to discover their secret in manufacturing
silk so inexpensively. He not only found his way in to see their silk
machines, but made some drawings and sent them to England hidden in
pieces of silk. He got a patent in 1718 and he and his brother set up a
mill using water power to twist together the silk fibers from the
cocoons into thread -in 1719. His factory was five hundred feet long
and about five stories high. One water wheel worked the vast number of
parts on the machines. The machines inside were very tall, cylindrical
in shape, and rotated on vertical axes. Several rows of bobbins, set on
the circumference, received the threads, and by a rapid rotary movement
gave them the necessary twist. At the top the thrown silk was
automatically wound on a winder, all ready to be made into hanks
[coils] for sale. The workman's chief task was to reknot the threads
whenever they broke. Each man was in charge of sixty threads. There
were three hundred workmen. Lombe made a fortune of 120,000 pounds and
was knighted and made an alderman of London. After his patent expired
in 1732, his mill became the prototype for later cotton and wool
spinning mills in the later 1700s. There were many woolen manufacture
towns. Clothiers might employ up to three thousand workers. At these,
the spinning was done by unskilled labor, especially women and children
in villages and towns. Weaving, wool combing, and carding were skilled
occupations.

        In 1733, clockmaker and weaver John Kay invented a flying
shuttle for weaving. It was fitted with small wheels and set in a kind
of wooden groove. On either side there were two wooden hammers hung on
horizontal rods to give the shuttle and to and fro action. The two
hammers were bound together by two strings attached to a single handle,
so that with one hand the shuttle could be driven either way. With a
sharp tap by the weaver, first one and then the other hammer moved on
its rod. It hit the shuttle, which slid along its groove. At the end of
each rod there was a spring to stop the hammer and replace it in
position. The flying shuttle doubled the weavers' output. Now the
broadest cloth could be woven by one man instead of two. This shuttle
was used in a machine for cotton. But the manufacturers who used the
flying shuttle combined together and refused to pay royalties to Kay,
who was ruined by legal expenses. Now the price of thread rose because
of increased demand for it. The weavers, who had to pay the spinners,
then found it hard to make a living. But the process of spinning was
soon to catch up.

        In 1738, John Wyatt, a ship's carpenter who also invented the
harpoon shot from a gun, patented a spinning machine whereby carded
wool or cotton was joined together to make a long and narrow mass. One
end of this mass was drawn in between a pair of rotating rollers, of
which one surface was smooth and the other rough, indented, or covered
with leather, cloth, shagg, hair, brushes, or points of metal. From
here, the mass went between another set of rollers, which were moving
faster than the first pair. This stretched the mass and drew it into
any degree of fineness of thread by adjusting the speed of the second
pair of rollers. Then the thread went by a flier, which twisted it.
After this the thread was wound off onto spindles or bobbins, whose
rotation was regulated by the faster pair of rollers. Or the mass could
be drawn by rotating spindles directly from one pair of rollers. This
machine was worked by two donkeys and was tended by ten female workers.
Because of bankruptcy in 1742, the invention was sold to Edward Cave,
the editor of "Gentleman's Magazine". He set up a workshop with five
machines, each fitted with fifty spindles and worked by water wheels.
Carding was done by cylindrical carding machines invented by Lewis Paul.

        In 1764, the plant was bought by carpenter and weaver James
Hargreaves. He was watching his wife spin when the spinning wheel
tipped over onto its side. It continued to revolve, while the thread,
held between two fingers, seemed to be spinning itself, even though the
spindle was in a vertical instead of a horizontal position. It occurred
to him that a large number of vertical spindles arranged side by side
could be turned by the same wheel and that, therefore, many threads
could be spun at once. He named his machine the "the Jenny" after his
wife. This "spinning Jenny" could spin a hundred threads at a time. He
patented it about 1770. The machine consisted of a rectangular frame on
four legs. At one end was a row of vertical spindles. Across the frame
were two parallel wooden rails, lying close together, which were
mounted on a sort of carriage and slid backwards and forwards as
desired. The cotton, which had been previously carded, stretched, and
twisted passed between the two rails and then was wound on spindles.
With one hand the spinner worked the carriage backwards and forwards,
and with the other he turned the handle which worked the spindles. In
this way, the thread was drawn and twisted at the same time. The jenny
did the work of about 30 spinning wheels. No longer did it take ten
spinners to keep one weaver busy. But manufacturers refused to pay him
royalties for his invention. He was offered 3,000 pounds for his rights
in the jenny, but refused it. The courts held that the model of his
jenny had been used in industry before it was patented and any rights
he may have had were declared to have lapsed. Nevertheless, he made
over 4,000 pounds. The spinning jenny was used in many homes.

        Richard Arkwright came from a poor family and was taught to
read by an uncle. He became a barber and made wigs. He taught himself
crafts necessary to invent and patent in 1769 a spinning frame worked
by a water wheel, which he called a" water frame". He strengthened
cotton thread by adding rollers to the spinning process which were able
to strengthen the cotton thread and make it of even thickness so that
it could be used instead of costly linen as the warp. With capital from
two rich hosiers, he set up a workshop next to a swift and powerful
river running down a narrow gorge. Then he turned his attention to
weaving this thread with multiple spinning wheels in the first
practical cotton mill factory. In 1773, he set up weaving workshops
making pure cotton calicoes which were as good as Indian calicoes. This
was the first all-cotton cloth made in England. He had confronted and
solved the problem of a statute of 1721 which proscribed wearing or
using printed, painted, stained or dyed calicoes e.g. in apparel, bed,
chair, cushion, window curtain, and furniture, except those dyed all in
blue, or else forfeit 20 pounds by a seller, 5 pounds by a wearer, and
20 pounds by other users. The purpose was to provide wool-working jobs
to the poor, whose numbers had been increasing excessively because of
lack of work. Arkwright argued that the statute should not include
printed or painted cloth made in Great Britain in its ancient tradition
of fustians with an all linen warp for strength and a cotton weft for
fineness. This statute was so "clarified" in 1735. When wool-weavers
had expressed their opposition to imported printed cottons and calicoes
by tearing them off people, a statute of 1720 provided that any one who
willfully and maliciously assaulted a person in the public streets or
highways with an intent to tear, spoil, cut, burn, or deface the
garments or clothes of such person and carried this out was guilty of
felony punishable by transportation for seven years. The prohibition
against the manufacture and wearing and using of pure cotton fabrics
came to an end in 1774 on arguments of Arkwright made to Parliament
that his pure cottons would bleach, print, wash and wear better than
fustians.

        In 1775, Arkwright added machines to do work prefatory to
spinning. Raw cotton was first fed by a sloping hose to a feeder that
was perpetually revolving. From here it went a carding machine of three
rollers of different diameters covered with bent metal teeth. The
first, with teeth bent in the direction of its revolution, caught up
the cotton fibers. The second, revolving in the same direction but much
faster, carded the fibers into the requisite fineness by contact with
the third, whose teeth and motion were in the opposite direction. Next,
a crank and comb detached the carded cotton so that it came off as a
continuous ribbon. Then the ribbon went into a revolving cone, which
twisted it on itself. Eventually Arkwright became rich from his
creation of the modern factory, which was widely copied. He established
discipline in his mills and he made his presence felt everywhere there,
watching his men and obtaining from them the steadiest and most careful
work. He provided housing and services to attract workers.

        After cotton, the inventions of the spinning jenny and the
water- powered frame were applied to wool. Silk and cotton manufacture
led the way in using new machinery because they were recently imported
industries so not bound down by tradition and legal restraint. Yarn
production so improved that weavers became very prosperous. Cards with
metal teeth challenged the use of wood and horn cards with thistles on
them in carding wool. Merchants who traveled all over the world and saw
new selling opportunities, and therefore kept encouraging the
manufacturers to increase their production and improve their methods.
Factory owners united to present suggestions to Parliament.

        Manufacturing broke loose from traditional confines in several
ways. To avoid the monopolistic confines of chartered towns, many
entrepreneurs set up new industries in Birmingham or Manchester, which
grew enormously. Manchester had no municipal corporation and was still
under the jurisdiction of a manor court. It sent no representative to
the House of Commons. All over the country the Justices of the Peace
had largely ceased regulating wages, especially in the newer industries
such as cotton, where apprenticeship was optional. Apprenticeship
lapsed in many industries, excepting the older crafts. Several legal
decisions had declared seven years practice of a trade as good as an
apprenticeship.

        Apprentices still lived in their masters' houses and were still
treated as family members. The regulations of the Cutlers' Company
remained in force as its masters used their great manual skill to make
cutlery in their own homes with the help of their children and
apprentices. Trades in some towns which had guild regulations that had
the force of law hung on to their customs with difficulty.

        Although there were few large factories in the country under
effective management of a capitalist, trade unionism was beginning as
two distinct classes of men were being formed in factories. The factory
owner was so high above his workmen that he found himself on the same
level as other capitalists, the banker, who gave him credit, and the
merchant, who gave him customers. Journeymen in factories could no
longer aspire to become masters of their trade and no longer socialized
with their employers. Hard and fast rules replaced the freedom of the
small workshops. Each worker had his allotted place and his strictly
defined and invariable duty. Everyone had to work, steadily and without
stopping, under the vigilant eye of a foreman who secured obedience by
means of fines, physical means, or dismissals. Work started, meals were
eaten, and work stopped at fixed hours, signaled by the ringing of a
bell. Factory hours were typically fourteen hours or more. Organized
resistance, as usual, began not with those most ill-treated, but with
those men who had some bargaining power through their skills.

        Wool-combers, who worked next to a charcoal stove where they
heated the teeth of the comb, were the most skilled of the cloth
industry were hard to replace. Since they were nomadic, they quickly
organized nation-wide. They agreed that if any employer hired a comber
not in their organization, none of them would work for him. They also
would beat up and destroy the comb-pot of the outsider. In 1720 and
1749, the Tiverton wool-combers objected to the import of combed wool
from Ireland by burning Irish wool in clothiers' stores and attacking
several houses. They had strike funds and went on strike in 1749. Their
bloody brawls caused the military to intervene. Then many of them left
town in a body, harming the local industry. The earnings of
wool-combers was high, reaching from 10s. to 12s. a week in 1770, the
highest rate of a weaver.

        In 1716, the Colchester weavers accused their employers of
taking on too many apprentices. When the weavers organized and sought
to regulate the weaving trade, a statute was passed in 1725 making
their combinations void. Strike offenses such as housebreaking and
destruction of goods or personal threats had penalties of
transportation for seven years. Still in 1728, the Gloucester weavers
protested against men being employed who had not served their
apprenticeship.

        When the journeymen tailors in and around London organized a
union, a statute made their agreements entering into combinations to
advance their wages to unreasonable prices and to lessen their usual
hours of work, illegal and void, because this had encouraged idleness
and increased the number of poor. Tailors' wages were not to exceed 2s.
per day and their hours of work were to be 6 a.m. to 8 p.m. for the
next three months, and 1s.8d. per day for the rest of the year. A
master tailor paying more would forfeit 5 pounds. A journeyman
receiving more was sent to the House of Correction for 2 months.
Justices of the Peace could still alter these wages and hours depending
on local scarcity or plenty. Despite this statute, the journeymen
tailors complained to Parliament of their low wages and lack of work
due to their masters calling them to work only about half the year.
There was much seasonal fluctuation in their trade as there was in all
trades. The slack period for the tailors was the winter, when the
people of fashion retired to their country estates. After their
complaint, their wages then rose from 1s.10d. per day in 1720, to
1s.8d.- 2s. in 1721, to 2s.- 2s.6d. in 1751, to 2s.2d.- 2s.6d. in 1763,
to up to 2s.7 1/2 d. in 1767, and to 3s. in 1775. Foremen were excluded
from wage control. When they complained of their long hours, which were
two hours longer than the 6 a.m. to 8 p.m. of most handicraft trades,
their hours were reduced in 1767 by one hour to 6 a.m. to 7 p.m. and
their pay was set at 6d. per hour for overtime work at night during
periods of general mourning, e.g. mourning for a deceased courtier.
Their work hours were lowered another hour to 6 a.m. to 6 p.m. in 1768.

        The stocking frame-knitters guild, which had been chartered in
1663, went on strike to protest the use of workhouse children as an
abuse of apprenticeship which lowered their wages. They broke many of
their frames, which belonged to their employers, to limit their number.

        In 1749, combinations to advance wages, decrease hours of work,
or regulate prices were declared void for journeymen dyers, journeyman
hot pressers, all wool workers, brickmakers and tilemakers, journeymen
servants, workmen, laborers, felt and hat makers, and silk, linen,
cotton, iron, leather, and fur workers in and around London. The
penalty was prison or hard labor at a House of Correction for three
months without bail. In 1756, Justices of the Peace were to determine
the rates of wages of wool workers according to numbers of yards. But
this was repealed the next year to prevent combinations of workers.
Wage agreements between clothiers and weavers were declared binding.
Clothiers not paying wages within two days of delivery of work
forfeited 40s.

        In 1763 the silk weavers in east London drew up a scale of
wages, and upon its being rejected, 2000 of them broke their tools,
destroyed the materials, and left their workshops. A battalion of
guards had to take possession of the area. In 1765, the silk weavers
marched on Westminster to stop the import of French silks. In 1768, the
weavers rebelled against a 4d. per yard reduction in their wages,
filling the streets in riotous crowds and pillaging houses. After the
garrison of the Tower came, the workmen resisted with cudgels and
cutlasses, resulting in deaths and woundings. The throwsters [those who
pulled the silk fibers from the cocoons of the silk worms and twisted
them together to make a thread] and the handkerchief weavers also
became discontent. A battle between soldiers and silk weavers at their
meeting place resulted in several men on both sides being killed. In
1773, wages and prices for the work of journeymen silk weavers in and
around London were designated to be regulated by the Mayor and Justices
of the Peace. Foremen were excluded. No silk weaver could have more
than two apprentices or else forfeit 20 pounds. Journeymen weavers
entering into combinations forfeited 40s. This statute satisfied the
weavers, but they formed a union to ensure that it was followed.

        In 1750, 1761, and 1765, there were strikes which stopped the
work of the coal industry and harbor at Newcastle for weeks. In 1763,
the keelmen formed a combination to force their employers to use the
official measure fixed by statute for the measurement of loads of coals.

        The book "Consideration upon the East-India Trade" dating from
1701 advocated free foreign trade. It argued that the import of goods
from India not only benefited the consumer but also the nation, because
it was a waste of labor to use it in producing goods which could be
bought cheap abroad. This labor could be better put to use at easily
learned plain work in the new industries. Also the low cost of imported
goods would motivate the invention of machines in the nation which
would be even more efficient in manufacturing these goods. But English
manufacturers were still suspicious of free trade.

        Making beer and distilling gin from barley were widespread. The
pastimes of gambling and drinking were popular with all classes. In the
trades, this was promoted by the uncertainties of life and work and a
general sense of instability. Many London tradesmen started their day
with a breakfast of beer, bread, and cheese, the traditional breakfast
of countrymen. Gambling and dissipation reduced some London men with
good businesses to destitution, the work house, or street begging.
Drunken gentlemen played pranks such as imitating a woman in distress
or throwing a person in a horse trough. Some innkeepers had "straw
houses" where customers who were so drunk they were unable to walk home
could sleep in fresh straw. A person could get drunk for a few pence.
Gambling with cards was a popular pastime after dinner. Cricket matches
were played by all classes instead of just by humbler people; there
were county cricket matches. Gentlemen often took their coachmen with
them to public events such as cricket matches. Tennis was a sport of
the wealthy classes. Billiards, chess, and games with cards or dice
were played, especially in alehouses. There was horse racing on any
open ground to which people brought their horses to race. Jockeys tried
to unseat each other. Hunting of rabbits and then foxes replaced deer
hunting. Bird and duck hunting was usually with flint lock guns instead
of hawks, as the hedges provided cover from hawks. There was fishing
with line, hook, and bait. Watching the hanging of felons, about 35 a
year in London, was popular, as was going to Bedlam to watch for a fee
the insane being flogged. People went to the Tower to try to get a
glance at a famous prisoner looking through a window or taking a walk
along the battlements. Besides the grand pleasure gardens for gentry,
there were lesser pleasure gardens in London for working families,
which offered fresh air, tea, beer, swimming, fishing, courting,
bowling, and cheap entertainment. Running, vaulting, and leaping were
still popular in the countryside. Fairs had amusements such as fire
swallowers, ventriloquists, puppet shows, acrobats, jugglers, animal
performances, pantomimes, boxing, dwarfs, and albinos, but less
trading. In 1769 was the first circus. Circuses included feats of
horsemanship and clowns. There was also eating and drinking
competitions, foot races, football, archery, some wrestling, and some
bowling on greens or alleys. In winter there was ice skating with
blades and sliding. The right of public access to St. James Park became
entrenched by the 1700s. There was sailing, rowing, swimming, and
hopscotch. George III made sea-bathing popular and it was supposed to
be good for one's health. There was steeple chasing as of 1752.
Horse-racing was given rules. On Sunday, there was no singing, music
playing, dancing, or games, but the Bible was read aloud, prayers were
said, and hymns were sung. Sabbath-breakers were fined by magistrates.
Men often spent Sunday in a tavern.

        In general, commodity prices were stable. But when harvests
were poor, such as in 1709 when there was famine, and between 1765 and
1775, bread prices rose. The price of wheat in London, which since 1710
had been between 25s. and 45s., rose to 66s. in 1773. Then the poor
engaged in food riots. These riots were often accompanied by mob
violence, burning, and looting of grain mills, shops, and markets. The
English economy was so dependent on foreign trade, which had trebled
since the 1710s, that the slightest disturbance in the maritime trade
threatened the English with starvation. In many localities the men in
need of parochial relief were sent around from one farm to another for
employment, part of their wages being paid from the poor rates. The
poor often went from parish to parish seeking poor relief. Settled
people tended to fear wandering people. Parishes sought to keep down
their poor rates by devices such as removing mothers in labor lest the
infant be born in the parish. So a statute was passed that a child born
to a wandering woman could not have the place of birth as his
settlement, but takes the same settlement as his mother. Another device
to prevent others from establishing settlement in a parish was for its
farmers to hire laborers for only fifty-one weeks. Also, some
apprentices were bound by means other than indenture to avoid
settlement. Laborers who came to work in industries were refused
settlement and sent back to their original parishes whenever they
seemed likely to become dependent on the rates. Statutes then provided
that a parish must give settlement to apprentices bound for forty days
there, not only by indenture, but by deed, writings, or contracts not
indented. In 1722, parishes were authorized to purchase houses in which
to lodge or employ the poor and to contract with any person for the
lodging, keeping, maintaining, and employing of the poor. These persons
could take the benefit of the work, labor, and service of these poor,
which was then used for the relief of other poor. The poor refusing
such lodging could not then get relief. Many of the poor starved to
death. The propertied classes turned a blind eye to the predicament of
the poor, opining that they were idle or could save more and did not
need higher earnings.

        Charitable organizations gave to the poor and set up all day
Sunday schools to set wayward children on a moral path. The Sunday
schools could accommodate children who worked during the week.
Punishment of children by parents or others could be by whipping or
even sitting in stocks. About half of the people were dependent on poor
relief or charities.

        Desertion by a man of his family was a common offense. Parishes
providing upkeep for the family sent men to find the errant husbands.
The parish would ask unmarried mothers who was the father of their
child and then force him to marry her or pay for the upkeep of the
child. He often made a bargain with the parish to release him of his
obligation for a sum of money paid to the parish. But many young parish
children died of neglect, and later, parishes were required to list
children under four to aid in accounting for them. Divorces were still
few and expensive, but increasing in number; there were more 60 in this
period. It was easier for a man to get a divorce for one act of
adultery by his wife, than for a wife to get one for habitual
unfaithfulness.

        Vagrants and other offenders could be committed to Houses of
Correction as well as to county gaols, because of the expense of the
latter.

        Crime was exacerbated by orgies of liquor drinking by the
common people, especially between 1730 and 1750, the sale of which did
not have to be licensed as did ale. In 1736, it was required that
retailers of brandy, rum, and other distilled spirituous liquors be
licensed and to pay 50 pounds a year for their license, because
excessive use had been detrimental to health, rendering persons unfit
for useful labor and business, debauching their morals, and inciting
them to vices. Only persons keeping public victualing houses, inns,
coffee houses, alehouses or brandy shops who exercised no other trade
were allowed to obtain a license. This excluded employers who had sold
liquors to their journeymen, workmen, servants, and laborers at
exorbitant prices. Street vendors who sold liquors had to forfeit 10
pounds. A duty of 20s. per gallon was imposed on the retailers. There
were riots in London against this statute and its new duties. There had
been a tremendous growth in liquor drinking, which did not stop but
went underground after this statute. In 1753, a penalty of 10 pounds or
hard labor for two months was made for selling spirituous liquors
without a license. Also licenses were restricted to people who were
certified by four reputable and substantial householders to be of good
fame and sober life and conversation. Sellers had to maintain good
order in their premises or else forfeit 10 pounds. About 1754 only
innkeepers, victualers, and vendors paying rent of at least 200
shillings could sell gin at retail. The punishment for the second
offense was whipping and imprisonment. That for the third offense was
transportation out of the country. In 1751, additional duties were
placed on spirituous liquors to discourage immoderate drinking going on
by people of the meanest and lowest sort to the detriment of the health
and morals of the common people. In 1761, these duties were again
raised. In 1768, officers were authorized to seize all horses, cattle,
and carriages used to transport foreign spirituous liquors for which
duties had been evaded. In 1773, the penalty for selling without a
license was raised to 50 pounds, which could not be mitigated below 5
pounds. Half the forfeiture was to go to the suer.

        The informer system for enforcing laws had its drawbacks.
Informers were not trained and were sometimes retaliated against for
informing. Sometimes this meant being tortured to death. Sometimes
there were schemes in which a leader of thieves, would take a profit in
the stolen goods by posing as a good citizen who tracked down and
returned them to the owners for a fee. Also he might inform on his
companions to get the reward for informing or to punish a troublesome
one. Sometimes the owner of goods was involved in a fake robbery. An
effort in 1749 to turn the whole haphazard system of informers, into a
specialized organization for the detection and apprehension of
criminals had caused a mob to form and make threats. Englishmen
associated a police force with French tyranny. Nevertheless, about
1750, Sir John Fielding, a Bow Street magistrate, and his half-brother
picked men to police the street under the direct control of the Bow
Street magistrates. This first police district made an impact on the
increasing violence of the times. In 1753, a proposal before Parliament
to have a national census was also defeated by public fear of liberty
being curtailed by having to make account of the number and
circumstances of one's family and giving out information that could be
used by enemies both in the realm and abroad.

        In 1714, the mercury thermometer was invented by Gabriel
Fahrenheit of Germany; this was much more accurate than the alcohol and
water thermometers. Sweden's Anders Celcius invented the Celsius scale.
The hydrometer, which measures air humidity, was also invented. These
made possible weather forecasting. In 1718, the French chemist Etienne
Geoffroy published a table of affinities among chemical substances, a
precursor to the periodic table of elements. Carolus Linneaus, a
Swedish naturalist and botanist, established the scientific method of
naming plants and animals by genus and species. When he showed that
there was a sexual system in plants, church authorities were so shocked
that they suppressed this knowledge as they did other scientific
knowledge. Rev. Stephen Hales made ventilators for ships, prisons, and
granaries, using the method of injecting air with bellows. This saved
many lives in the prisons. In 1727, he discovered that water that
plants lost by evaporation was restored by the roots up the stems. He
found that gas could be obtained from plants by dry distillation and
invented a way to collect gases by heating certain substances.

        Hans Sloane, the son of a receiver-general of taxes, who became
a physician, had collected hundreds of species of plants in Jamacia
while physician to its governor. He became physician to George II and
was a benefactor to many hospitals and devised a botanic garden in
London for the Society of Apothecaries.

        Italian Luigi Marsigli started the science of oceanography with
a treatise discussing topography, circulation, ocean plants and
animals, along with many measurements. Frenchman Jean-Etienne Guettard
prepared the first true geological maps, showing rocks and minerals. He
identified heat as the causative factor of change in the earth's
landforms. John Mitchell studied earthquakes.

        In 1735, George Hadley, a London lawyer and philosopher,
determined that the cause of the prevailing westerly winds was the
rotation of the earth to the east. Benjamin Franklin in 1743 observed
that a particularly violent storm occurred in Boston a day after a
particularly violent occurred in Philadelphia, and realized that they
were the same storm, even though the storm's surface winds were from
the northeast. He determined that Atlantic coastal storms traveled from
the southwest to the northeast. In 1770, he prepared the first
scientific chart of the Gulf Stream.

        Daniel Bernoulli, a Swiss university lecturer in physics,
mechanics, medicine, and anatomy, proved his theorem that any degree of
statistical accuracy can be obtained by sufficiently increasing the
observations, thereby also representing the first application of
calculus to probability theory. In 1738, he showed that as the velocity
of horizontal fluid flow increases, its pressure decreases. This
followed from his theorem that the total mechanical energy of a flowing
liquid, comprising the energy associated with fluid pressure, the
gravitational potential energy of elevation, and kinetic energy of
fluid motion remains constant; that is, the mechanical energy is
conserved. This was the first mathematical study of fluid flow. He
demonstrated that the impact of molecules on a surface would explain
pressure, and that assuming the constant random motion of molecules,
pressure and motion will increase with temperature. He explained the
behavior of gases with changing pressure and temperature, establishing
the kinetic theory of gases. Jean Nollet from France discovered
osmosis, the passage of a solution through a semi-permeable membrane
separating two solutions with different concentrations.

        In 1754, Scotsman physician Joseph Black identified carbon
dioxide, the first gas recognized as distinct from everyday breathing
air. He did this by using a balance to weigh alkalies before and after
exposure to heat. They lost weight by losing carbon dioxide. His
development of the concept of latent heat, the quantity of heat
absorbed or released when a substance changes its physical phase at
constant temperature, was the first application of quantitative
analysis to chemical reactions. He ascertained the effects of carbon
dioxide on animals and its production by respiration, fermentation, and
burning of charcoal. At this time, all flammable materials were thought
to contain "phlogiston", which was given off as they burned and was
associated with the transfer of heat. Plants were thought to remove
phlogiston from the air and therefore burned when they were dry.

        In 1773, Joseph Priestley, a nonconformist minister,
schoolmaster, and tutor, identified oxygen by heating red oxide of
mercury. He had become interested in the study of gases by watching the
process of fermentation in a brewery next to his house. Using a candle,
mice, and plants in jars sealed over water, he showed that the
processes of combustion, respiration, and putrefaction caused one-fifth
of air exposed over water to disappear, and that plants restored air
vitiated by these processes. This discovery of where breathable air
comes from helped explain the system of life on the planet. When he
isolated oxygen, he noted that it was better than air in supporting
respiration and combustion.

        Hydrogen (inflammable air) and nitrogen were discovered. The
differences between acids, bases, and salts and their relationship to
one another became understood. There was some theoretical as well as
empirical knowledge about metals, e.g. in boiling points, intermetallic
compounds, and changes in properties.

        In 1742, Benjamin Frankin invented the Franklin stove, which
greatly improved heating efficiency. As a freestanding cast-iron
fireplace, it supplied heat in all directions instead of only from the
one direction of the usual wall fireplace. Also, the heat absorbed by
its cast-iron sides provided warmth even after the fire went out.

        Static electricity was being discerned. It had been noticed
that shaking a mercury barometer produced a strange glow in its
"vacuum". Experiments showed that a glass rubbed in vacuo would shine
brightly and that an exhausted glass globe rapidly whirled on a spindle
and rubbing against the hand produced a brilliant glow. And further, as
Newton wrote: "if at the same time a piece of white paper or white
cloth, or the end of ones finger be held at the distance of about a
quarter of an inch or half an inch from that part of the glass where it
is most in motion, the electric vapor which is excited by the friction
of the glass against the hand, will by dashing against the white paper,
cloth, or finger, be put into such an agitation as to emit light, and
make the white paper, cloth, or finger, appear lucid like a glowworm".
In the study of electricity, conductors and insulators were recognized.
There were demonstrations of electrical phenomena such as seeing the
ignition of brandy by a spark shooting from a man's finger and the
feeling the transfer of an electrical impulse created from a rubbed
glass globe among a circle of people by their holding hands. In 1733,
Frenchman Charles DuFay discovered that there are two types of static
electric charges, and that like charges repel each other while unlike
charges attract, linking electricity to magnetism.

        In 1750, Benjamin Franklin "caught" lightning with a sharp
pointed wire attached to the top of a kite which led down to a key at
the other end. When a thunder cloud electrified the kite, a charge was
seen coming from the key to an approaching finger. This charge was then
stored in an early type of capacitosr, a1745 Leyden jar, and then
reproduced to create the same feeling of transfer of electrical impulse
among a circle of hand-holders, thereby illustrating that it was the
same phenomenon as electricity. This countered the theological belief
that thunder and lightning were signs of divine displeasure or the work
of the devil. Franklin invented the lightening rod, which was then used
to protect buildings. About ten years later, the first lightening rod
on an English church was erected, which showed the church's acceptance
of his theory. Franklin theorized that there were electric charges
everywhere and designated them as positive or negative. He observed
that opposite charges attracted each other, but that like charges
repelled each other. In 1766, Joseph Priestly did an experiment
suggested by Franklin and showed that electrical force follows the same
law as gravitational force; that is, that the attraction or repulsion
between two electrical charges varies inversely in proportion to the
square of the distance between them.

        Joseph-Louis LaGrange from France developed differential
equations. Natural history museums were established. A group split off
from the Royal Society to show collections of curiosities.

        In 1754, a self-educated mechanic founded the Society for the
Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce. It had sections on
agriculture, manufactures, mechanics, chemistry, liberal arts, and
trade and colonies. It sponsored contests at which prizes were given,
such as that in 1761 for the best invention of a machine that would
spin six threads of wool, flax, cotton, or silk at one time with only
one person attending it.

        Machines still mostly relied on human, animal, and water power.

        Abraham Darby was a Quaker and millwright who made large
cooking pots of iron, which cost less than bronze. Around 1709, he
experimented with various substances to take the place of wood charcoal
in iron smelting. Coal was a remote possibility. In forging or working
metals coal had more or less the same qualities as wood charcoal, but
this was not the case in smelting ores, especially iron ore. Coal
contained sulphur compounds which caused the iron ore to deteriorate.
So he controlled the burning of coal to burn out these impurities,
which produced coke. His son took over after his death and improved the
methods of coking, strengthened the bellows, and added ore limestone
and other reagents to the mixture. By 1756, his large blast furnace
using both pit coal and wood charcoal was very productive. He made iron
goods of such quality as those imported.

        In 1767, Richard Reynolds replaced the wooden rails connecting
a blast furnace to mines with cast iron rails. He had apprenticed as a
grocer and then became a partner in a large ironworks of Darby with a
man whose daughter he married. After Darby died and before Darby's sons
became of age, Reynolds was in charge of the ironworks. He cast
cylinders of the early steam engines.

        In 1749 John Roebuck, a physician and son of a prosperous
manufacturer of Sheffield goods, found a cheaper way to manufacture
sulphuric acid. He did this by using leaden chambers instead of glass
globes to collect the vapor from burning nitre and sulphur over water.
This reduced the cost of sulfuric acid to one-fourth of its previous
cost, so that sulfuric acid came to be used to bleach linen instead of
sour milk. He also made cast iron into malleable iron by smelting iron
using coke from pit-coal instead of charcoal. But flooding in his mines
and further ventures resulted in his ruin and bankruptcy.

        Thomas Newcomen, a Baptist ironmonger, blacksmith, and
locksmith, supplied iron tools to mine workers. He was aware of the
problem of flooding of mines and the awkward system of pumps which were
used one above the other and were powered by teams of horses. He made a
very valuable contribution to power generation by inventing the
atmospheric pressure steam engine with piston around 1712. He did this
by connecting theory with experiment, through the use of scientific
knowledge, especially the Royal Society's investigation into
atmospheric pressure. First cold water was poured on a cylinder in
which a piston could move up and down. This caused steam inside the
cylinder to cool and condense into water. The vacuum created inside the
cylinder under the piston caused atmospheric pressure on top of the
piston to push the piston down. The piston was attached by a rod to the
end of a beam which end then swung down from a point on a vertical
stand to which it was attached. When the beam swung, its other end,
which was attached to a rod connected to a pump, rose, thus working the
pump. Then steam from water heated in a boiler under and communicating
with the cylinder was allowed into the cylinder under the piston. This
overcame the atmospheric pressure on the piston from above and allowed
the piston to rise by a counterweight on the rod over and connecting to
the pump. Boys opened and closed the steam valve, which let steam into
the cylinder from below, and the water valve, which let cold water pour
on the cylinder from above. Then the boys were replaced by the valves
being connected to the swinging beam which caused them to open and
close at perfectly regular intervals. A story gives the credit for this
improvement to an inventive valve boy who wanted to play with his
friends. In 1712, the mining industry used this steam engine to pump
water out of mine-shafts which had flooded. These engines were also
used to supply water to reservoirs' locks at canals, and drinking water
facilities in towns. One such engine developed power equivalent to
fifty horses working at one sixth the cost. It was the first automatic
machine since the clock.

        Then James Watt invented the steam engine which used steam as a
force acting on the piston. Watt made his living making scientific
instruments for Glasgow University. Around 1764, he was fixing one of
Newcomen's engines belonging to the university, when he saw its
inefficiencies, such as the loss of heat when the cylinder was cooled.
He saved this heat energy by having the steam condensed in another
vessel distinct but connected to the cylinder. This condenser was kept
constantly cool by cold water. So the condensed steam was pumped back
into the boiler and it circulated continuously, thus obviating the need
for constant resupply of water. In order to avoid the necessity of
using water to keep the piston air-tight, and also to prevent the air
from cooling the cylinder during the descent of the piston, he used the
expansion of the steam to push the piston instead of atmospheric
pressure. Then, in order to expand the use of the steam engine beyond
that of a pump, he converted the oscillating motion of the beam into
rotary motion. He formed a partnership with John Roebuck, who had a
two-thirds interest. But when Roebuck needed money, he sold his
interest to Matthew Boulton. Boulton wanted better power that that of
his watermill for his workshops that made metal buttons, watch chains,
shoebuckles of engraved steel, ornamental bronzes, vases, chandeliers,
tripods, silver and plated wares, and imitation gold and tortoiseshell
work. In dry weather, about eight horses were needed to aid in driving
the machinery. A steam pump could pump water from the bottom of the
watermill to the top to be used again. He had built up this factory of
five buildings and six hundred workers, with 9,000 pounds derived from
his marriage to an heiress. By 1774, the partnership had built a model
steam engine with rotary power whose design could be sold. The price of
the engine was set as the amount of money saved on fuel costs in the
first three years of its operation. This machine was a relatively
economical user of energy, capable of performing almost any kind of
work.

        About 1750, John Wilkinson, the son of a farmer who also
oversaw an iron furnace, substituted mineral coal for wood charcoal in
the smelting and puddling of iron ore. In 1766, he made it possible to
transport coal out of mines on rail wagons drawn by horses. As father
of the iron industry, he made iron chairs, vats for breweries and
distilleries, and iron pipes of all sizes. With his invention of the
first precision boring machine, he provided Watt with metal cylinders
of perfectly accurate shape, which were necessary for the smooth
working of Watt's steam engine. In 1775 he bought a pumping steam
engine from Boulton and Watt's company for his ironworks. It pumped
three times as fast as Newcomen's engine.

        Watt's steam engine came to be used for power-loom weaving and
then for all sorts of manufactures. It would put England ahead of every
manufacturing country in the world. Millwrights built, installed, and
later designed not only steam engines but the machinery that they
drove. These men were essential in setting up the first factories. They
were the most imaginative and resourceful craftsmen. They knew how to
use a turner's, a carpenter's and a blacksmith's tools and had
supervised or done smith work, brick-laying or stone-mason's work in
erecting and maintaining windmills with their many gears and bearings.
There was a good deal of variety in mills, as well as in the structure
and workmanship of them, some being worked by horses, some by wind, and
others by water. They had some knowledge of arithmetic and practical
mechanics. They could draw out a plan and calculate the speed and power
of a wheel. Although technically in a branch of carpentry, the
millwrights learned to work with metal as well. Metal was superior to
wood not only because of its strength but because wood parts were
irregular in motion and wore out rapidly. So iron and brass parts came
to replace wood and leather parts.

        In 1728, J. Paine got a patent for rolling iron instead of
hammering it. The iron bars, being heated in a long hot arch or cavern
passed between two large metal rollers, which had certain notches or
furrows on their surfaces.

        Clockmaker and Quaker Benjamin Huntsman was struck with the
difficulty of finding finely tempered steel for the springs of his
watches and pendulums of his clocks. He experimented for years to find
a homogeneous and flawless metal, and finally, in 1740, invented cast
steel, which had high tensile strength and was much harder than
ordinary steel. He did this by remelting refined high quality wrought
iron bars at very high temperatures in sealed fireclay crucibles,
together with small quantities of charcoal and ground glass as
reagents. This distributed the carbon evenly in the metal, which
hammering could not do. He approached the Sheffield cutlers, who
finally agreed to try his cast steel for fear of losing their business
to some other manufacturers who were approaching Huntsman. Since
Huntsman had no patent, he worked at night and employed only men who
would keep his secret. His steel was made at night. His factory became
prosperous about 1770 and the excellence of his steel manufacture was
never equaled. Steel and wrought iron was scarce and expensive.

        Around 1748, iron founder Samuel Walker, discovered Huntsman's
secret by appearing at Huntsman's factory disguised as a shivering
tramp who asked to warm himself by the furnace fire. He feigned sleep
while watching the whole process. When he began to make cast steel, his
annual output grew from 900 pounds in 1747 to 11,000 pounds in 1760 and
he made a fortune.

        Silver was plated over copper from 1751. White metal from tin
and antimony was used from about 1770.

        The brass industry was beginning to produce brass from copper
and zinc that was as good as foreign brass. The secret of plate-glass
manufacture came to England in the 1770s.

        In 1773, a corporation was set up for the manufacture of plate
glass. It could raise joint-stock because of the great risk and large
expense of the undertaking.

        In 1775, chemist William Cookworthy was given a fourteen year
patent for the discovery of certain clay and stone in England from
which he made England's first true porcelain, i.e. that which could
sustain the most extreme degree of fire without melting, and also had
grain as smooth and lustrous, and the transparency and beauty of color,
equal in degree to the best Chinese or Dresden porcelain.

        The import duties on diamonds, pearls, rubies, emeralds and
other precious stones and jewels was dropped to increase the business
of cutting and polishing them.

        The world's first chocolate factory was set up in England in
1728. Milk was added to chocolate.

        The Fanmakers were incorporated in 1709.

        A linen company to sell cambricks [a fine white linen] and
lawns [a thin and fine linen] was incorporated in 1763.

        A free market for fish was established in Westminster to
supplement the free fish market in London to prevent forestalling and
monopolizing of the fish industry and to increase the number of
fishermen. Duties for its maintenance were paid by the fishermen.
Certain men were given the right to incorporate fisheries of white
herring for twenty one years to improve the fisheries and give
employment to the poor. They were authorized to sell subscriptions and
to build ships provided the fishery employ 100,000 in such fishery.
There were restrictions on taking fish from rivers during their
breeding season. Herring fishermen were allowed to land and dry their
nets and erect tents and pickle, cure, and reload fish on uncultivated
land up to 100 yards beyond the high water mark all any shore,
forelands, harbors, and ports, without paying the landholder. Later, a
bounty of 30s. per ton was authorized to be given for vessels that were
fitted out and used for white herring fishery.

        Anyone wishing to be admitted to the Levant (Turkey) trading
company was to be made free of such on paying 20 pounds, so that this
trade might be increased.

        In the 1760s the first cooking school was established by Mrs.
Elizabeth Raffald, a servant.

        As for health, there were many occupational hazards. These
included paralysis by mercury of refiners of silver and gold, paralysis
by mercurial fumes of molten lead by plumbers, palsy of glaziers
working with melted lead and of watch gilders, lead poisoning of
painters, blinding by sawdust of sawyers, and the affects of fumes on
pewterers and letter founders. Particles of copper were breathed in by
copper workers, whose hair and beards then turned green. Braziers
became deaf. Hairdressers, bakers, masons, bricklayers' laborers, coal
heavers, chimney sweeps, flax and feather dressers, and workers in
leather warehouses suffered pulmonary diseases. Chimney sweeps also had
warty skin cancer from their bodies being habitually covered with soot
and the lethal cancer of the scrotum. Working with charcoal fires
affected confectioners, chocolate makers, and sail-cloth makers.
Tanners, catgut makers, and tallow-candle makers became nauseous. Heavy
work weakened many bodies and caused hernias. Bending over work for
long hours caused stooped posture and hump backs.

        The association between dirt and disease was just beginning to
be made. The principles of infection and hygiene were not well
understood. Bathing every couple of months was not unusual. There was
some theological feeling that cleanliness betokened pride and
filthiness humility. Most houses had a bathtub that could be placed
beside the fire in a bedroom. About 80% of the population had been
getting smallpox, which blinded, maimed or disfigured many. Deaths from
smallpox were only occasional in the country, but constant in London,
where about 13% of every generation died from it. Making death
commonplace, especially in the winter months when thick, dirty clothes
were worn day and night, were typhus, which was carried by lice;
typhoid, which was spread by flies from horse dung; tuberculosis; and
influenza. Dysentery and diarrhea made death commonplace especially in
the summer when flies transmitted bacteria from filth to food and the
water was its most foul. There was great meaning in the prayer "Now I
lay me down to sleep; I pray the Lord my soul to keep; if I should die
before I wake, I pray the Lord my soul to take." Thyphus spread easily
in hospitals and gaols where vermin could live in the beds made of
wood. Colds and toothache were also common. Venereal disease was not
uncommon among the well-to-do in London. Condoms were used to deter
disease, but were still crude, coarse, uncomfortable, and unreliable.
London had almost double the mortality rate of the nation. The number
of baptisms in London were about 80% of its burials. About 40% of the
deaths in London were among children under two, due to infantile
diseases fostered by malnutrition, maternal ignorance such as giving
babies adult food, ill-health, bad water, dirty food, poor hygiene, and
overcrowding. Many children died from diptheria, measles, scarlet
fever, and smallpox. Ten or twelve children with three or four
surviving was a common family pattern. Many well-to-do in London kept
their children in the country for their better health. No matter what
the ailment, physicians regularly bled patients and often gave them
enemas with wooden funnels. Sometimes a blister or irritant was applied
to the skin to draw out the evil humors. Cupping was used to provide
suction to remove pressure from various parts of the body. Also used
were poultices, ointments, and herbal treatments, notably quinine.
Opium was given to deaden pain. There were about 70 drugs in use.
Charms, spells, astrology, and folk remedies still played a major role
in medicine. A physician attended surgeries to give advice. Physicians
could visit apothecary shops once a year and throw away any drugs
falling below an arbitrary standard of excellence. In 1703 the House of
Lords decided a jurisdictional contest between the College of
Physicians and the Society of Apothecaries. It permitted the
apothecaries to direct the remedies as well as to prepare them,
although they could only charge for the drugs they provided. The poor
sought advice from apothecaries.

        There was progress in health. Scurvy virtually disappeared as a
cause of death due to the eating of more vegetables. People were
cleaner when wearing cotton, which had to be washed. In 1721, free
inoculations for smallpox began in England, pioneered by Lady Mary
Wortley Montague, also a poet and letter writer. She led the way by
having herself and her son inoculated. Theologicians denounced this
practice as a diabolical interference with disease sent by Providence
for the punishment of sin. Sarah Wallen Mapp was a famous bone-setter.
In 1727 surgeon William Cheselden, whose master was specially licensed
to perform the operation of removing stones in the hospital, reduced
the death rate for removing stones due to hemorrhage, shock, and
infection down to 17% by his invention of a lateral operation. He also
published an anatomy book and treated certain kinds of blindness by
forming an opening in the eye to serve as an artificial pupil. In 1736,
Claudius Aymand conducted the first successful appendectomy.

        Nutritional deficiency diseases were beginning to be
understood. In 1753, James Lind, a surgeon in the navy who noted that
more men died of scurvy than in battle, published his work on his
dietary controlled experiment on seamen showing that oranges, lemons,
limes, green food, and onions cured scurvy. He published his methods of
prevention and cure of malarial fevers and his method of disinfecting
ships with the smoke of wood and gunpowder. In 1761, he discovered that
steam from salt water was fresh, and proposed a method of distillation
to supply ships with fresh water. In 1761 Giovanni Morgagni from Italy
opined that disease resulted from a breakdown of organs and tissues
that was viewable on autopsy. He wrote an extensive book showing the
anatomy of diseases, e.g. affections of pericardium and aorta, (e.g.
aneurysm), valve diseases, ulceration, rupture, dilation, and
hypertrophy. He associated clinical observation with anatomy of
disease. For example, pain on the left upper chest, numbness of the
left arm, and difficulty breathing occurring together with exertion
were associated with dilation of the aorta and hardening of arteries,
which caused delay of blood in the aorta, in the heart, and in the lung
vessels. Bernoulli showed that the living human body constantly changes
so that all its particles are renewed in a certain number of years.
Stephen Hale described the first quantitative estimate of blood
pressure and fundamental characteristics of blood circulation. In 1728,
Frenchman Dr. Pierre Fauchard, the father of dentistry, recommended
rubbing one's teeth and gums with a piece of sponge.

        Since three out of four babies died shortly after birth, beds
in hospitals for pregnant women were established starting in 1739. The
next year physicians began to replace midwives. A hospital was
established for abandoned foundling children in 1739 so they wouldn't
die, as they usually did, in the care of parishes or workhouses or be
exposed in the streets or left on door steps of the wealthy. It was
besieged by women with babies in their arms. In 1762 a statute made the
principles of the foundling hospital obligatory for all London parish
children under six; they were to be sent to nurses outside London who
were to be paid at least 2s. a week by the parish. In 1766, this was
extended to all parishes, and nurses who cared for a child well for a
year was given a reward of at least 10s. Also, parish children were not
allowed to be apprenticed for more than seven years or until age 21 and
an apprentice fee of at least 4 pounds, 2s. was to be paid to the
master or mistress by the parish.

        After 1740, there was a steady growth of population due to
improved midwifery. William Smellie taught scientific midwifery in
London from 1741 and wrote a "Treatise on Midwifery" in 1752, which had
a clear explanation of the mechanism of labor. At this time there were
several maternity hospitals. Forceps existed for difficult deliveries.
In 1750, Dr. Cadogan wrote his book: "An Essay on the Nursing and
Management of Children, which made a great improvement in the care of
young children. For instance, it recommended loose clothing, no tight
swaddling clothes, and a simple diet. Swaddling clothes were used to
retain a baby's evacuations but produced discomfort and serious skin
conditions. A hospital was founded for venereal diseases in 1746,
another as an asylum for the penitent and orphaned girls who might
otherwise be inclined to prostitution, and yet another for prostitutes
in 1758. Coitus interruptus was widely used for birth control. There
were also clandestine abortions and intentional neglect of newborns.

        Melancholy was widespread. Suicides were frequent and drugs
were sold for this purpose. In 1725, the mentally ill were classified
as curable or incurable. There were many private asylums. A lunatic who
was furiously mad and dangerous was required to be safely locked up or
chained in his place of settlement. There were frequent and dangerous
abuses in madhouses, so in 1774, no one was to keep or confine more
than one lunatic without a license granted by the Royal College of
Physicians or else forfeit 500 pounds. A Justice of the Peace and a
physician inspected all madhouses to observe conditions and care of
patients there. If refused admittance, the license was forfeited.

        In 1712 was the last time a monarch touched a person to cure
him of a malady such as scrofula.

        In 1743 surgery students began to dissect corpses with their
own hands to better learn anatomy. In 1744 the Company of Surgeons was
separated out of the Company of Barber-Surgeons. The barbers were
proscribed from performing surgery and had to have a separate
corporation from the surgeons because of the ignorance and
unskillfulness of barbers healing wounds, blows, and hurts e.g. by
blood letting and drawing of teeth. There was a Surgeon's Hall,
officers chosen by the surgeons, and bylaws. The surgeons were required
to examine candidates for the position of surgeon in the king's army
and navy. They were exempted from parish, ward, and leet offices, and
juries. In 1752, a statute provided that the corpses of murderers were
to be sent to the Surgeon's Hall to be anatomized, for the purpose of
deterring murders. The penalty for rescuing the corpse of a murderer
was to suffer death.

        The first dispensary for the poor was established in 1769 to
give free medicine and treatment to the infant poor, and then to the
infants of the industrious poor.

        The progress of science was seen to threaten the authority of
the church. There was a general belief in God, but not much attention
to Jesus. Feared to come were free thought, rationalism, and atheism.
There was still a big gap between local parsons and bishops, who were
educated, well-off, and related to the aristocracy. On the whole,
preachers talked about morality and Christian belief. They stressed
good works and benevolence. But many Protestant clergy were more
concerned with their own livings than with their parishioners. They
were indolent and did not set a good example of moral living.

        From 1715, Freemasonry spread and swiftly provided a spiritual
haven for those who believed in God and desired ritual and mysticism.

        About 1744, John Wesley, the son of an Anglican clergyman,
became a religious leader for mining and industrial laborers, who were
crowded into the slums of industrializing cities, and largely ignored
by the Church of England. He had been led to this by a profound
religious experience. He led an evangelical revival with a promise of
individual salvation. He lead an aesthetic life, eating bread, and
sleeping on boards. The person to be saved from the horrors of eternal
damnation in hell was to discipline himself to regular prayer,
self-criticism, and hard work and to forsake worldly pleasures such as
drinking, overeating, and even frivolous talk. This methodical
regularity of living led to the movement being called Methodist. Wesley
believed in witchcraft and magic. He opined that bodily diseases and
insanity could be caused by devils and that some dreams are caused by
occult powers of evil. The Methodists engaged increasingly in
philanthropic activities. They gave to the poor, and visited the sick
and the imprisoned. Wesley preached in the open air where all who
wanted to attend could attend and also wear whatever clothes they had.
Large crowds of poor people gathered for these meetings. Crowds of poor
people were generally feared because of their mob potential. These
Methodist meetings were stormed as were Quaker meetings, with shouts of
"the church in danger". The Methodists' homes were invaded and their
belongings destroyed or taken or their persons beaten with tacit
permission of authorities. Some Justices of the Peace drafted preachers
into the army or navy as vagabonds. Eventually, however, the Methodist
revival imbued energy and piety into the lethargic clergy of the
established church. A new moral enthusiasm and philanthropic energy
grabbed the nation. Prisons were reformed, penal laws made more wise,
slave trade abolished, and popular education given momentum. In the
established church, charity gained precedence over theology and comfort
over self-examination and guilt. Evangelist George Whitfield preached
Calvinism and it split off from Methodism. Then Calvinism went into
full decline. Presbyterianism collapsed into Unitarianism and a general
tendency towards deism developed.

        Church sanctuary was abolished for those accused of civil
offenses.

        There was much travel by scheduled coaches, which usually
carried several passengers and were drawn by four horses. Regular
service of public vehicles to and from London went four miles an hour;
it took two days to go from London to Oxford. It was not unusual for a
coach to bog down or overturn. Sometimes it had to detour around an
impassable stretch of road or borrow a couple of oxen from a nearby
farm to get out of a quagmire. Men and horses drowned in some of the
potholes. Robbery was endemic and some of the roads were so unsafe from
highwaymen that bands of armed horsemen were hired to accompany the
coaches. It was not unusual to come across gibbets for hanging at
crossroads. In London inns at coach stops, there were casual workers
who were associated with gangs of thieves specializing in passengers'
goods. These workers would inform their associate thieves of specific
goods that had been loaded onto certain coaches, which were then robbed
selectively. Traveling merchants preferred packhorses to carts because
they could cross overland or through watercourses more easily. These
pack horses traveled in regular caravans in single file. The leader had
a bell around his neck to warn, from a distance, riders or carts coming
in the opposite direction. Carts traveled about two miles an hour. In
1711 the trustee system superseded administration by the Justices of
the Peace of the turnpike system, including tolls and toll booths. The
toll booths were frequently attacked by riotous mobs. So anyone pulling
down or destroying turnpike gates at which tolls were to be paid went
to prison or was put to hard labor in a House of Correction for three
months without bail. He was also whipped in the market place between
11:00 and 2:00. If he offended a second time, he was transported for
seven years. Later the penalty of prison up to three years was added as
an alternative. The hundred had to pay the damages up to 20 pounds. The
penalty for threatening the toll collector or forcibly passing through
was 5 pounds for the first offense, and 10 pounds for the second
offense with imprisonment for one year for those who couldn't pay.

        By 1750, about 60 miles could be made in a day. The turnpike
trusts took over most of London's major highways during the 1700s.
There was no travel on Sundays until 1750.

        In 1745, shocked by the difficulty caused by bad roads in
concentrating the royal army to stop the Scottish invasion, the king
began systematically to improve all the roads. There was much road and
highway widening and repair, and also river bank and pier repair, going
on all over the country. Marsh lands were drained. Harbors were
deepened. There were numerous statutes trying to adjust the needs of
travel with the condition of the roads. For instance, there had to be a
pole between wheel horses or double shafts. Carriages, wagons, or carts
drawn by more horses, oxen, or animals, or with very heavy loads, or
with wheels bound with iron tires were observed to cause more damage,
so they were restricted or had to pay higher tolls. Then broad and
smooth iron tires were observed to not cause the amount of damage as
did narrow or irregular iron tires and their use was encouraged. From
1741, weighing machines were kept at toll gates. By 1766, turnpike
roads had to be at least 30 feet wide, and hedges and fences thereon
had to be taken down by their owners. Cartways to markets had to be at
least 20 feet wide, and horseways 3 (later 8) feet wide. There were
ditches, drains, and gutters to carry off water. Names and abodes of
owners were to be put on carriages, wagons, and carts or forfeit 2-5
pounds, except for carriages or coaches of a nobleman or gentleman for
his private use or those drawn by only one horse or two oxen, or those
with wide wheels and a light load. There were town name signs,
direction posts, and milestones. In 1773, the Surveyors and the
Commissioners of Turnpikes were given authority to requisition local
men, carts and draught animals for compulsory labor, or money instead,
in maintaining the roads and making new ditches and drains. They could
take any local sand, gravel, chalk, or stone from waste or common land
or, if not needed by and satisfaction was made to the owner, from
enclosed land. The surveyor was to be chosen locally for a year and
could be given an allowance. New roads required the consent of the
landowners and a negotiated price.

        A driver of a carriage, wagon, or cart on the public highway
who by negligence or misbehavior caused any hurt or damage to a person
or any other carriage or hindered free passage of any other carriage
was to forfeit up to 20s. Anyone leaving an empty cart or other
obstruction on a public highway was to forfeit up to 20s. Any cart,
wagon, or carriage driven without a person on foot or on horseback
leading it had a forfeiture up to 20s. Any driver of an empty cart,
wagon, or carriage who refused or neglected to make way for any coach
or loaded cart, wagon, or carriage was to forfeit up to 20. Any
offender could be apprehended without warrant by anyone who saw his
offense, and who was then to deliver him to a constable or other peace
officer.

        By 1719, the mail service was well-regulated. Letter rates
within 80 miles of London were 3d. per piece of paper, then 12d. per
ounce. Within 60 miles of New York City in America there were 4d. per
piece of paper, then 1s.4d. per ounce. Letters were still carried by
post horses. From London to New York, they were 1s. per piece of paper
for the first three pieces, then 4s. per ounce. In 1765, this rate was
extended to all colonial ports.

        In 1754, canals began to be constructed linking the main
rivers. The barges were hauled by horses or men from the land near the
river's edge. Now goods of many inland towns cheapened and reached a
national instead of just a local market. In 1761 an almost illiterate
man called James Brindley cut the first real canal at Worsley for the
Duke of Bridgewater, who owned the coal deposits there. He kept the
line of the canal at one level to avoid having to make locks. It
crossed one river as a forty foot high aqueduct. He refused to use the
beds of small rivers, whose sluggish flow gave no adequate security
against silting. Coal at the destination point of Manchester fell to
half its former price. After Wedgwood headed a campaign to persuade
Parliament to construct a certain canal, he bought adjacent land on
which he built his great factory.

        In 1713, the maximum interest rate that could be charged was
reduced to 5% for the advancement of trade and improvement of lands
because that rate was the norm in foreign lands. Thus the maximum
interest rate fell from 10 to 8 to 6 and then to 5%. When Issac Newton
was Master of the Mint, he noted that too restricted a currency caused
a high interest rate to prevail, which was bad for commerce and the
plans to set the poor to work, but that too large a quantity of money
in circulation caused interest rates to fall, which encouraged luxury
imports and the export of bullion.

        The Bank of England provided a safer deposit and lower interest
than goldsmiths or scriveners. It also issued notes for 10 and 15
(since 1759), and 20 pounds. Outside retail trade and wages payments,
business was conducted on a credit basis with a paper promise to pay at
some future date. Check use was still formal and rare. Tradesmen
typically authorized their apprentices to "write off or draw" from
their accounts, bringing their bank books. Depositors authorized other
people such as certain servants, relatives, cashiers, or company
secretaries to make use of their accounts. After 1721, the Bank
dividend was about 6% a year.

        Promissory notes were assignable and endorsable and the holder
could recover against the signer or any endorser as was the case with
bills of exchange. In 1775, no more promissory or other notes, bills of
exchange, draughts, or undertakings in writing and being negotiable or
transferable could be made for under 20s., because it was hard for the
poorer sort of manufacturer, artificer, laborer and others to use them
without being subject to great extortion and abuse. Cash was to be used
instead.

        By 1711, government finances had become so chaotic that the
Chancellor of the Exchequer sought to re-establish public credit by
means of a chartered commercial company, the shares of which were
offered in substitution for government stock. This South Sea Company
was established in 1711 with a monopoly to trade in South America. The
prospects of huge profits sent the share prices soaring. There was also
an increase in the money supply. These factors led to a speculation
bubble in 1720 in this stock. Also, many stock-jobbers promoted
companies of every description, such as one to extract gold from
seawater. There was an insurance boom with about seventy insurance
companies in existence, many virtually gambling in life contingencies.
There was speculation in insurance for all types of occurrences, such
as housebreaking, highway robbery, death by gin-drinking, and horses
becoming disabled. The total capital invested in all these enterprises
rose to over five times the cash resources of all Europe. When the
bubble burst, 100 pound South Sea stock had gone up to 1050 pounds and
back down again to 120. Since the government had in effect bought this
stock at a low price and paid off its debt with this stock at a high
price, this bubble relieved the government of much of its massive debt.
It also redistributed wealth. After the bubble burst, investors took
refuge in investing in 3-4% government fixed-interest securities. A
result of this bubble burst was the chartering of two corporations for
marine insurance and prohibition of such by any partnership or firm.
Private persons could continue to write policies, and they chose
Lloyd's Coffeehouse as their headquarters; it came to dominate the
world of marine insurance after the two chartered companies came to
concentrate on fire and life insurance. Lloyd's list became the
foundation for a new newspaper. There were specialty boxes at Lloyd's
such as on America or the Baltic. Many ships were reported captured by
enemies or pirates, but underwriting insurance was a lucrative business
for many.

        In 1717 the gold guinea was assigned a value of 21s. In 1774,
the gold standard was introduced. In 1774, clipped and deficient gold
coin was called in to be exchanged for new coin.

        Local taxes were collected for the church, the poor, county
courts of justice, borough administration, and highways. National taxes
included the income, customs, and excise taxes. When the government
tried to levy excise taxes on wine, tobacco, and then on cider, there
was a public protest with mobs demonstrating against the power given to
excise inspectors to search in people's homes. These excise taxes were
no longer levied.

        Duties were placed on items for encouraging industries within
the country and to pay the expenses of government. There were more and
higher duties to pay for war. At various times there were duties on
hides, skins, seal skins, gilt and silver wire, malt, mum [strong beer
made from malted wheat], cider, perry, spices, tea, coffee, cocoa nuts,
chocolate, cocoa paste, snuff, chinaware, drugs, calicoes, herrings,
apples, oysters, raw Italian and Chinese silk, gum arabic, gum senega,
tallow, hogs-lard, grease, beaver skins and wool, imported brandy,
raisins, coals and coal dust, coaches for one's own use or for hire,
except licensed hackney coaches; silver plate owned by persons,
corporations, and bodies politic; leases, bonds, and other deeds;
licenses for retailing wine, beer, and ale; 5% of salaries, fees, and
perquisites from office and employments including royal pensions and
gratuities over 100 pounds. When the price of wheat was high, as in
1765, when it was 6s. per bushel, wheat products could not be exported.
At other times, they could not be imported. Duties on imported wheat,
barley, rye, oats, beans, rice, Indian corn were also dropped. The
prohibition of importing salted beef, pork, bacon, and butter was
dropped. In 1770, no live cattle, pigs, mutton, pork, beef, either
fresh or salted could be exported or forfeit 50 pounds for every such
animal or 5s. per pound of such meat. In 1773, peas, beans, bacon,
hams, and cheese could be imported duty free, and in 1775 Labrador
codfish. In 1775, raw goat skins could be imported duty-free to improve
the domestic manufacture of red, green, and blue leather.

        In 1773, there were given costs above which various commodities
could not be exported: wheat at 44s. per quarter, rye, peas, or beans
at 28s., barley and beer at 22s., oats at 14s. or else forfeit the
goods, 20s. per bushel and the ship or boat in which laden. (There are
8 bushes in a quarter.)

        A window tax replaced the hearth tax. These duties were 2s. on
dwelling houses, increased by 6d. per window for houses with 10-14
windows, and increased by 9d. per window for houses with 15-19 windows,
and increased by 1s. per window for houses with 20 or more windows, per
year to be paid by the occupant. These were increased three more times,
until the dwelling house duty was 3s. and the duty for 25 or more
windows was 2s. Another duty for war was that on imported starch,
certain imported clothes, cards, dice, soap, vellum, parchment, and
paper made in the realm (4d.-1s.6d. per ream depending on quality) or
imported (1-16s. per ream). For pamphlets and newspapers made in the
realm there was a duty of 2d. per sheet and 12d. for every
advertisement. When the duty was paid, the paper was stamped. The
penalty for nonpayment was 10 pounds for sellers and 5 pounds for those
writing or printing on the paper. Later, there was a penalty of
imprisonment in a House of Correction up to three months for sellers or
hawkers of pamphlets or newspapers, and the apprehender received a
reward of 20s. A parson marrying a couple without publishing banns or
license could forfeit 100 pounds.

        Not paying duties was punishable by various forfeitures of
money. Officers for duties could search warehouses on suspicion of
concealment of coffee, tea, chocolate, or cocoa beans with an intent to
avoid duties after making an oath before a duty commissioner or Justice
of the Peace setting forth the grounds of such suspicion. A special
warrant could be issued authorizing the officer to seize such goods.

        Wars were funded not only by some duties, but by lotteries and
short-term funding purchased at 5% yearly interest from the Bank of
England and by long-term funding by the sale of annuities.

        County militias could be raised and called out to march
together in order to be better prepared to suppress insurrections or
invasions. Their horsemen were to be provided with broad sword, a case
of pistols with 12 inch barrels, a carabine with belt and bucket, a
saddle, and a bit and bridle. Each foot soldier was to be provided with
a bayonet, a cartouch-box, and a sword. In the militia act of 1757,
there were quotas for each parish, to be chosen by lot from lists of
men 18-50 years old. After militia service for three years, one could
not be called again until by rotation, and, if married, he was allowed
to practice any trade in which he was able in any town or place. While
he was in the militia, his parish had to pay an allowance to his
family, if distressed, the usual price of an agricultural laborer,
according to the number and ages of the children. Quakers could provide
a substitute or pay money to defray expenses of a substitute for three
years. Exempt were peers, commissioned officers in royal army or royal
castle, other military personnel, members of either university,
clergymen, teachers of any separate congregation, constables and peace
officers, and watermen of the Thames River.

        This militia act was due to an invasion scare in 1756 because
Great Britain then had no allies on the continent. The old strategy of
maintaining a small army of 17,000 men and relying on volunteers had
really depended on England's allies to tie down France's land forces.
The militia act of 1757 was designed to reassure squires they would not
be used as adjuncts to the army. Only those with much property could be
officers. Enlistees could still carry on their trades and jobs. Costs
were to be from general taxation rather than by locality. But it was
almost impossible to get officers and there were many riots when parish
authorities tried to draw up lists of those liable to serve. In 1759
the navy prevented French invasion.

        Able-bodied men without a calling, employment, or visible means
of maintenance or livelihood could be searched for and conscripted into
the army. Volunteers who enlisted were paid 40s. and were not taken out
of her majesty's service by any process other than for some criminal
matter. King George II was the last king to lead his troops into
battle. Later, parishes were given 20s. for every soldier they
summoned. Also, persons who had a vote for member of Parliament were
exempted.

        Whipping was the usual punishment for offenses. A soldier who
deserted or joined in any mutiny or sedition in the royal army within
the realm was to suffer death or any other punishment determined by
court martial. In 1760, a soldier (later, or a marine) who slept at his
post, left his post before being relieved, communicated with any rebel
or enemy, struck or disobeyed any superior officer could suffer death,
including those soldiers in America.

        During war, chief officers of towns quartered and billeted
royal army officers and soldiers in inns, livery stables, alehouses,
and victualing houses for 4d. a day, but not in any private house
without consent of the owner. From 1714 to 1739, the army regiments
were split up and scattered among the ale-houses of small towns for
maintenance; this was to disperse the soldiers. It was easier to count
them, thereby keeping a check on their number, which might be
exaggerated if they were in large groups in barracks. The towns
protested having to maintain soldiers and town magistrates imposed
severe penalties for small offenses by soldiers. Their drunkenness and
violence were not tolerated as they were for ordinary people. Their
officers not being with them, the soldiers retaliated with
troublesomeness. As of 1763 English troops could be quartered in
unoccupied houses or barns and supplied with necessities such as
bedding, firewood, candles, vinegar, salt, cooking utensils, and beer
or cider. The Royal Hospital gave pensions to maimed and worn out
soldiers treated there.

        Sailors had more status than soldiers because they had regular
work as seamen in times of peace and they did not remind the people of
the idea of a standing army, which they had hated especially since
Cromwell.

        Justices of the Peace, mayors, and other officers could bind
boys as apprentices to sea service if they were at least ten and their
parents were chargeable to the parish or begged for alms. This
indenture to the masters or owners of ships lasted until the boy
reached 21. The boy's parish paid 50s. for clothing and bedding for
such sea service. No such apprentice could be impressed into the navy
until at least 18 years of age. Master and owners of ships that carried
30-50 tuns had to take one such apprentice and one more boy for the
next 50 tuns, and one more boy for every 100 tuns over 100 tuns, or
else forfeit 10 pounds to the boy's parish. Boys voluntarily binding
themselves to such sea service were exempt from impressment for the
next three years. This was to increase the number of able and
experience mariners and seamen for the navy and for the trade and
commerce of the nation.

        No masters or commanders of merchant ships were to proceed on a
voyage beyond the seas without first agreeing in writing on wages with
the seamen, except for apprentices. Such agreement had to be signed by
the seamen. Offenders were to forfeit 5 pounds per seaman, which sum
went to the use of Greenwich Hospital. Any seaman leaving the ship
before being discharged in writing was to forfeit one month's pay
because too many left the ship before it was unladen.

        There were some ships of 2000 tons. The steering wheel had been
introduced because a sudden heavy sea could wrest a tiller from the
hands of a helmsman. Triangular head-sails with jib boom and stay-sails
on stays between masts were in use so that ships could sail closer into
the wind. The length of ships was still determined by the same length
of trees that could be grown. Sailing ships were still vulnerable to a
lee shore. Latitude was easy to determine using the reflecting octant
invented by John Hadley in 1731, and a sextant invented in 1757, with
mirrors and a small telescope to measure the angle between a celestial
body such as the sun or north star and the horizon. But longitude could
not be determined with any degree of accuracy. One method relied on
accurate predictions of the future position of the moon as observed
from a fixed reference point, such as Greenwich. By precisely observing
the local time of the moon's occultation of a known star at a
particular place, and looking up in a table the predicted time of the
event at Greenwich, one could approximate the time difference of the
place from Greenwich. There were so many shipwrecks on this account
that the government offered a reward to anyone who found a way to
measure longitude accurately. In 1763 carpenter and clockmaker John
Harrison made the chronometer to do this with an accuracy of 2 1/2
seconds per month, and received 5,000 pounds. He was promised 10,000
pounds to explain the principle of his timekeeper and build three more.
The chronometer kept time with extreme accuracy and was mounted to
remove the effect of the ship's motion. To find a ship's position, a
navigator noted the time and measured the positions of certain stars.
He compared these positions with tables that showed the stars'
positions at Greenwich mean time, and then calculated the ship's
position.

        Officer positions were no longer bought, but were subject to
examination for a minimum of knowledge, especially in navigation. In
1729 the Naval Academy was established. Boys entered at age 13 to 16
and spent two or three years there.

        Only about 15% of the crew of navy ships were volunteers. Many
were gaolbirds, having chosen the Navy over more gaol time for debt.
Press gangs seized men in the port towns and from ships coming into
harbor. From 10% to 20% of the crew were foreigners, many of these
pressed men. About 1756, the Marine Society was founded for training
and placing poor boys in work in naval and merchant ships. This not
only supplied men and boys for the Navy, but saved boys from a life of
vagrancy and crime. These boys usually became reliable and obedient
sailors.

        The life of a sailor was a hard one, requiring much strength.
Sailors did not know how to swim, so falling overboard usually meant
death. Flogging was the usual punishment in the Navy, even for small
offenses. The amount of flogging due for each offense rose over time.
If flogging were fatal, there would be an inquiry and occasionally
punishment. A sailor's meals were usually hard bread invested with
weevils and maggots, dried or salted meat or fish, and small quantities
of oatmeal, butter, and cheese. Many sailors had scurvy or other
deficiency diseases. Experiments with lime and lemon juice as remedies
for scurvy were made around 1764, but were not used in the Navy until
about 1800. Many more sailors died from these diseases than from
battle. Rum and water was a daily ration introduced in 1745. The
ordinary sailor was paid about one pound a month, a rate established in
1650s which became outdated. This was not in cash, but in a ticket
which entitled him to payment in full if he presented it at the pay
office in London, but was subject to swinging deductions if he tried to
cash it in another port.

        Prize money from conquered ships was substantial. To encourage
seamen to enter the navy, Parliament provided that the prizes be
divided among flag officers, commanders, other officers, seamen,
marines, and soldiers on board every ship of war, including private
ships commissioned by the Admiral, as directed by the king, or as
agreed with the owner of a private ship. It included an enemy's ships,
and goods and arms on the ships or in fortresses on the land. There was
also bounty money for enemy ships taken or destroyed. For retaking or
salvaging English goods taken by the enemy, 1/8th their value was paid.
Privateers colluding with others to fraudulently take their merchant
ships forfeited their ships, with 1/3rd going to the person who made
the discovery and prosecuted.

        Later, any able seaman volunteering for the navy was to receive
5 pounds bounty. Any seaman volunteering for the navy was to receive a
bounty of 3 pounds. If a navy seaman was killed or drowned, his widow
was to receive a year's pay as bounty. No seaman in a merchant ship was
to receive more than 35s. per month because of war at that time.

        Still later, anyone who ran goods or avoided customs was
excused and indemnified if he enlisted in the navy as a common sailor
for three years.

        Those under 18 or over 55 were made exempt from impressment
into the king's service. The time of service was limited to five years
if the serviceman so demanded. Worn out and decrepit seamen no longer
being treated at the Royal Hospital for Seamen at Greenwich received a
pension as determined by the hospital.

        In war, the Navy favored blockading tactics over attack by
fireships, which grew obsolete. In peace, when not used in convoys to
remote lands, many ships of war were used as cruisers to guard the
coast, to trade, and to accompany merchant ships going out and
returning home. About 1755, marine forces of the navy were raised and
quartered on shore.

        No war ship could carry goods except gold, silver, and jewels
and except the goods of a ship in danger of shipwreck or already
shipwrecked.

        The king was authorized to prohibit the export of gunpowder,
saltpeter, ammunition, and arms.

        When a ship had been forced on shore or stranded on the coast,
it had been the practice for people to plunder it and to demand high
payment for salvaging its goods. So a statute required that salvage
only be done by sheriff, mayors, and other officials. A person who
defaced the marks on goods or hindered the saving of the ship had to
pay double satisfaction to the person aggrieved and spend 12 months at
hard labor in a House of Correction. If a person unduly carried off
goods, he forfeited treble damages. If he made a hole in the ship or
stole the pump from the ship, he was guilty of felony without benefit
of clergy.

        The owner of the island of Skerries was allowed to erect a
lighthouse and charge passing ships other than Navy ships 1d. per tun.

        Only pilots examined and admitted into the society of pilots
and, if no such pilot was readily available, a ship's own owner,
master, or mate could pilot ships up the Thames River, or else forfeit
10 pounds for the first offense, 20 pounds for the second, and 40
pounds thereafter. Any pilot losing a ship could no longer be a pilot.
There had to be at least 120 qualified pilots. The prices of piloting
were 3 pounds 10s. for ships drawing 7 feet of water, and 10s. more for
each additional foot drawn up to 8 pounds 10s. for ships drawing 17
feet of water.

        To preserve navigation, ships were not to throw any ballast,
filth, rubbish, gravel, earth, stone, or filth into rivers or ports
where the tide or water flowed or ran or else forfeit 50s.- 5 pounds.
Ships on the Thames River could take as ballast to stabilize a ship
without cargo: dung, compost, earth, or soil from laystalls in London.
There was a toll on ships entering the port of London to pay for
repairs to its walls.

        Many persons insuring ships for large premiums became bankrupt,
thus ruining or impoverishing many merchants and traders. So the king
was authorized to grant charters to two distinct corporations for the
insurance of ships, goods, and merchandise or going to sea or for
lending money upon bottomry [borrowing money and and pledging the ship
as security]. Each corporation had to pay 300,000 pounds to the
Exchequer and to have sufficient ready money to pay for losses insured
by them. They were to raise capital stock and could make calls of money
from their members in proportion to their stocks for any further money
required.

        Any owner, master, or mariner who cast away, burned, or
otherwise destroyed a ship to the prejudice of underwriters of policies
of insurance or of any merchants whose goods have been loaded on the
ship was to suffer death.

        The owners of ships were not liable for losses by reason of
theft without their knowledge by the master or mariners of goods beyond
the value of the ship. This was to prevent the discouragement of owning
ships.

        The insurance of merchant ships must give salvage rights
[rights to take what may be left of the ships insured after paying the
insurance on them] to the insurer. A lender on bottomry had benefit of
salvage. No insurance could be for a greater amount than the value of
one's interest in the ship or in the goods on board.

        No waterman carrying passengers or goods for hire e.g. by
wherryboat, tiltboat, or rowbarge, on the Thames River could take an
apprentice unless he was a housekeeper or had some known place of abode
where he could keep such apprentice or else forfeit ten pounds, and if
he couldn't pay, do hard labor at the House of Correction for 14-30
days. Also he could not keep the apprentice bound to him. No apprentice
could be entrusted with a vessel until he was 16 if a waterman's son
and 17 if was he the son of a landman, and he had at least two years'
experience. None but freemen, i.e. one having served an apprenticeship
of seven years, could row or work any vessel for hire or be subject to
the same punishment. This was to avoid the mischiefs which happen by
entrusting apprentices too weak, unable, and unskillful in the work,
with the care of goods and lives of passengers. Later amendment
required that apprentices be age 14 to 20 and that there be no more
than 40 passengers, with the penalty of transportation if there were
over 40 and one drowned.

        No boat on the Thames River could be used for selling liquors,
tobacco, fruit, or gingerbread to seamen and laborers because such had
led to theft of ropes, cables, goods, and stores from the ships.
Excepted were boats registered at the guilds of Trinity and of St.
Clement, but they had to show their owner's name and could only operate
in daylight hours. The penalty was forfeiture of the boat.

        All ships coming from places infected with the plague had to be
quarantined and any person leaving a quarantined ship had to return and
later forfeit 20 pounds, of which 1/3 could go to the informer, the
rest to the poor. This was later raised to 200 pounds and six months in
prison, and if the person escaped, he was to suffer death. Also later,
a master of a ship coming from infected places or having infected
people on board was guilty of felony and forfeited 200 pounds. If he
did not take his vessel to the quarantine area on notice, he forfeited
a further 200 pounds (later 500 pounds) and the ship, which could then
be burned. The king was authorized to prohibit commerce for one year
with any country infected by the plague and to forbid any persons of
the realm from going to an infected place.

        By 1714, there was a clear distinction between a king's private
income and the Crown's public revenue. From 1714, the king's Treasurer
as a matter of routine submitted annual budgets to Parliament. He was
usually also the leader of the House of Commons and the Chancellor of
the Exchequer.

        Proclamations by the Crown were more restricted to colonial and
foreign affairs, to executive orders, and to instructions to officials.
The high offices included the Chancellor, Treasurer, Keeper, President
of the Council, Privy Seal, and two Secretaries of State, who were in
charge of all foreign and domestic matters other than taxation, one for
the north and one for the south. With Thomas More, the Chancellor had
become more of a judge and less of a statesman. Other offices were:
Paymaster General, Secretary of War, and Treasurer of the Navy.
Starting with the monarch, government positions were given by patronage
to friends and relatives, or if none, to the highest bidder. These
offices were usually milked for fees and employed deputies, clerks, and
scribes who worked for long hours at very modest wages. Most people
believed that the offices of power and influence in the realm belonged
to the nobility and gentry as indubitably as the throne belonged to the
king. Assaulting, wounding, striking, or trying to kill a member of the
Privy Council engaged in his duties was punishable by death without
benefit of clergy. Civil and military commissions, patents, grants of
any office or employment, including Justice of Assize, Justice of the
Peace, court writs, court proceedings continued in force for six months
after a king's death, unless superceded in the meantime.

        The king's ministers were those members of his Privy Council
who carried out the work of government. By distributing patronage, the
ministers acquired the influence to become leading members of the House
of Commons or the House of Lords. They made policy, secured the king's
consent, and then put through the necessary legislation. The king was
to act only through his ministers and all public business was to be
formally done in Privy Council with all its decisions signed by its
members. The king gradually lost power. The last royal veto of a
Parliamentary bill was in 1708. By 1714, the Privy Council ceased
making decisions of policy. Instead a cabinet not identified with any
particular party was chosen by the Queen, who presided over their
meetings, which were held every Sunday. It dealt with Parliament. In
1720, the number of peers in the House of Lords was fixed, so that the
Crown could create no more. About 1720, Robert Walpole, son of a
country squire, who came to be first minister of the Crown and the
leader of the Whigs, organized the cabinet so that it was of one view.
He led it for twenty years and thus became the first prime minister. A
prime minister was needed because the king spoke no English. Walpole
was brilliant at finance and lessened taxation. He restored trust in
the government after the South Sea bubble scandal. He was successful in
preserving the peace with other nations and providing stability in
England that led to prosperity. The Whigs opposed a standing army and
over-reaching influence of the Crown. They espoused the liberty of
individual subjects. Their slogan was "liberty and property". They
generally favored foreign wars.

        Members of the Parliament felt responsible for the good of the
whole country instead of accounting to their electors, but self-
interest also played a part. Leading commercial magnates of the realm
sought to be members of Parliament or governors of the Bank of England
so they could take up government loans at advantageous rates, snap up
contracts to supply government departments at exorbitant prices, and
play an important part in deciding what duties should be charged on
what goods. About 5% of the population could vote. Voting was open,
rather than by secret ballot. Seats in Parliament could normally be
bought either by coming to an arrangement with some landowner who had
the right to nominate to a closed seat or by buying enough votes in
constituencies where the electorate was larger and the contest more
open. Factory owners and leading landowners sat together on committees
drawing up plans for public works such as canal building, obtained the
necessary permits from public authorities and organized the whole
enterprise. In 1714, Parliament was allowed to last for seven years
unless sooner dissolved by the king because of the expense and tumult
of elections, which frequently occasioned riots, and sometimes battles
in which men were killed and prisoners taken on both sides. Politics
had become a career. Members of Parliament could not be arrested while
Parliament was in session.

        As of 1710, electees to the Commons had to have 600 pounds
annual income for knights or 300 pounds annually for burgesses. This
did not include the eldest son or heir apparent of any peer or lord of
Parliament or any person with the above qualifications. The
universities were exempted.

        As of 1729, a person electing a member of the Commons had to
swear or affirm that he had not received any money, office, employment,
or reward or promise of such for his vote. If he swore falsely, it was
perjury and he was to forfeit 500 pounds and his right to vote. Later,
voters for member of Parliament had to have residence for a year. Still
later, voters were required to have been freemen of the city or town
for one year or else forfeit 100 pounds, except if entitled to freedom
by birth, marriage, or servitude according to the custom of such city
or town. Voters were still required to have a freehold of land of 40s.
a year income, but holders of estates by copy of court roll were
specifically precluded from voting or else forfeit 50 pounds.

        In 1724, since unauthorized persons had intruded into
assemblies of citizens of London and presumed to vote therein, the
presiding officer -appointed clerks to take the poll and oath required
for elections for Parliament, mayor, sheriffs, chamberlains,
bridgemasters, and auditors of chamberlains. The oath was that one was
a freeman of London, a liveryman of a certain named company, had been
so for 12 months, and had named his place of abode. The oath for
alderman or common council elections was that the voter was a freeman
of London and a householder in a named ward who had paid scot of at
least a total of 30s. and bore lot. A list of the voters and of persons
disallowed was given to candidates by the presiding officer.

        Soldiers could not be quartered within 20 miles of a place of
election so that the election was kept free.

        Voters in public corporations must have held their stock for
six months before voting them to discourage splitting stock and making
temporary conveyances thereof to give certain people more of a vote,
e.g. in declaring dividends and choosing directors.

        Ambassadors were made immune from arrest, prosecution and
imprisonment to preserve their rights and privileges and protection by
the Queen and the law of nations.

        The Supporters of the Bill of Rights Society was founded and
paid agents to give speeches throughout the country and used the press
for its goals.

        James Burgh demanded universal suffrage in his 1773 book:
"Political Disquisitions".

        In 1707 there was union with Scotland, in which their
Parliaments were combined into one. The country was known as Great
Britain. The last Scottish rebellion resulted in attainder of its
leaders for levying war against the king. In 1746, they were given the
chance to surrender by a certain date, and receive a pardon on
condition of transportation. In 1747, anyone impeached by the Commons
of high treason whereby there could be corruption of the blood or for
misprison of such treason could make his defense by up to two counsel
learned in the law, who were assigned for that purpose on the
application of the person impeached. In 1748, counsel could interrogate
witnesses in such cases where testimony of witnesses were not reduced
to writing.

        There was a steady flow of emigrants to the American colonies,
including transported convicts and indentured servants. Delaware became
a colony in 1703. In 1729, the king bought Carolina from its seven
proprietors for 2,500 pounds apiece. Person having estates, rights,
titles, or interest there, except officers, were allowed by Parliament
to sue the king with the court establishing the value to be paid, but
no more than at a rate of 2,500 pounds per 1/8 of the property. Georgia
was chartered in 1733 on request of James Oglethorpe, who became its
first governor, as a refuge for debtors and the poor and needy. It
established the Episcopal Church by law. In 1730 Carolina and 1735
Georgia were allowed to sell rice directly to certain lands instead of
to England only. Later, sugar was allowed to be carried directly from
America to European ports in English ships without first touching some
English port. Foreigners who had lived in the American colonies for
seven years, and later foreigners who served two years in the royal
army in America as soldiers or as engineers, were allowed to become
citizens of Great Britain on taking oaths of loyalty and Protestantism.
This included Quakers and Jews. The Jews could omit the phrase "upon
the true faith of a Christian."

        In 1756, indentured servants in America were allowed to
volunteer as soldiers in the British army serving in America. If his
proprietor objected, the servant was to be restored to him or
reasonable compensation given in proportion to the original purchase
price of his service and the time of his service remaining.

        There was much competition among countries for colonies. Quebec
and then Montreal in 1760 in Canada were captured from the French.
About 1768 James Cook discovered New Zealand and Australia; his maps
greatly helped future voyages. The English East India Company took over
India as its Mogul Empire broke up.

        Manufacturing in the American colonies that would compete with
British industry was suppressed by Great Britain. There were increasing
duties on goods imported into the colonies and restrictions on exports.
In 1763, Parliament imposed duties on foreign imports going to America
via Britain: to wit, sugar, indigo, coffee, certain wines, wrought
silks, calicoes, and cambrick linen. Foreign vessels at anchor or
hovering on colonial coasts and not departing within 48 hours were made
liable to be forfeited with their goods. Uncustomed goods into or
prohibited goods into or out of the colonies seized by customs
officials on the ship or on land and any boats and cattle used to
transport them occasioned a forfeiture of treble value, of which 1/3
went to the king, 1/3 went to the colonial governor, and 1/3 went to
the suer. Any officer making a collusive seizure or other fraud was to
forfeit 500 pounds and his office. In 1765, there was imposed a duty on
papers in the colonies to defray expenses of their defense by the
British military. The duty on every skin, piece of vellum [calf skin]
or parchment, and sheet of paper used in any law court was 3d.- 2
pounds. There were also duties on counselor or solicitor appointments
of 10 pounds per sheet. Duties extended to licenses for retailing
spirituous liquors and wines, bonds for payment of money, warrants for
surveying or setting out of any lands, grants and deeds of land,
appointments to certain civil public offices, indentures, leases,
conveyances, bills of sale, grants and certificates under public seal,
insurance policies, mortgages, passports, pamphlets, newspapers (about
1s. per sheet), advertisements in papers (2s. each), cards, and dice.
The papers taxed were to carry a stamp showing that the duties on them
had been paid. Parliament thought the tax to be fair because it fell on
the colonies in proportion to their wealth. But the colonists saw this
tax as improper because it was a departure from the nature of past
duties in that it was an "internal tax". All of the original thirteen
American colonies had adopted Magna Carta principles directly or
indirectly into their law. The stamp duties seemed to the colonists to
violate these principles of liberty. Patrick Henry asserted that only
Virginia could impose taxes in Virginia. Schoolmaster and lawyer John
Adams in Massachusetts asserted that no freeman should be subject to
any tax to which he had not assented. In theory, colonists had the same
rights as Englishmen per their charters, but in fact, they were not
represented in Parliament and Englishmen in Parliament made the laws
which affected the colonists. They could not be members of the House of
Lords because they did not have property in England. There were
demonstrations and intimidation of stamp agents by the Sons of Liberty.
Merchants agreed to buy no more goods from England. The stamp duty was
repealed the same year it had been enacted because it had been
"attended with many inconveniences and may be productive of
consequences greatly detrimental to the commercial interests of these
kingdoms".

        To counter the wide-scale running of goods to avoid the customs
tax, the customs office was reorganized in 1766 to have commissions
resident in the colonies and courts of admiralty established there to
expedite cases of smuggling. This angered the colonists, especially
Boston. Boston smuggling had become a common and respectable business.
It was the port of entry for molasses from the West Indies from which
New England rum was made and exported. The entire molasses trade that
was essential to the New England economy had been built upon massive
customs evasions; royal customs officials had participated in this by
taking only token customs for the sake of appearance in London and
thereby had become rich.

        In 1766 Parliament imposed a duty of 3d. per pound weight on
tea and duties on reams of paper, glass, and lead into the colonies.
These import duties were presented as external rather than internal
taxes to counter the rationale the colonies gave against the stamp tax.
But these items were of common use and their duties raised the cost of
living. The king's customs officials were authorized to enter any
house, warehouse, shop, or cellar to search for and seize prohibited or
uncustomed goods by a general writ of assistance.

        These writs of assistance had been authorized before and had
angered Bostonians because they had been issued without probable cause.
In Paxton's case of 1761, the Massachusetts Superior Court had declared
legal the issuance of general writs of assistance to customs officers
to search any house for specific goods for which customs had not been
paid. The authority for this was based on the Parliamentary statutes of
1660 and 1662 authorizing warrants to be given to any person to enter,
with the assistance of a public official any house where contraband
goods were suspected to be concealed, to search for and seize those
goods, using force if necessary. They were called "writs of assistance"
because the bearer could command the assistance of a local public
official in making entry and seizure. A "general" writ of assistance
differed from a "special" writ of assistance in that the latter was
issued on a one-time basis. The general writ of assistance in Boston
was good for six months after the death of the issuing sovereign.
Authority relied on for such writs was a 1696 statute giving customs
officers in the colonies the same powers as those in England, a 1699
act by the Massachusetts Provincial Legislature giving the Superior
Court of Massachusetts the same such power as that of the Exchequer,
and the Massachusetts' Governor's direction about 1757 to the
Massachusetts Superior Court of Judicature to perform the function of
issuing such warrants. The Massachusetts court issued them in the
nature of the writs of assistance issued from the Exchequer court in
England, but had issued them routinely instead of requiring the showing
of probable cause based on sworn information that the Exchequer court
required. Few judges in the other American colonies granted the writ.

        Seditious libel trials in England and the colonies were
followed closely and their defendants broadly supported. John Wilkes, a
member of the House of Commons, published a criticism of a new minister
in 1763. He called King George's speech on a treaty "the most abandoned
instance of ministerial effrontery ever attempted to be imposed on
mankind". After being found guilty of seditious libel, he again ran for
the House of Commons, and was repeatedly elected and expelled. He was
subsequently elected alderman, sheriff, and mayor of London. In 1770,
Alexander MacDougall was voted guilty of seditious libel by the New
York Colonial Assembly for authoring a handbill which denounced a
collusive agreement by which the assembly voted to furnish supplies for
the British troops in New York in exchange for the royal governor's
signature to a paper-money bill. When he was arrested, the Sons of
Liberty rallied to his support, demanding freedom of the press.
Benjamin Franklin's brother had been imprisoned for a month by the
Massachusetts assembly for printing in his newspaper criticisms of the
assembly. He was forbidden to print the paper. Benjamin supported him
by publishing extracts from other papers, such as "Without freedom of
thought, there can be no such thing as wisdom; and no such thing as
public liberty without freedom of speech... Whoever would overthrow the
liberty of a nation must begin by subduing the freeness of speech; a
thing terrible to public traitors."

        By statute of 1766, the New York house of representatives was
prohibited from meeting or voting until they provisioned the King's
troops as required by law.

        In 1769, Harvard College seated its students in class in
alphabetical order instead of by social rank according to birth.

        By 1769, the colonies' boycott of British goods in protest of
the new duties cause these imports to decline so much that British
merchants protested. So the duties were dropped, except for that on
tea, which was retained as a matter of principle to assert the power of
the crown to tax the colonies. Then in 1773 the East India Company was
allowed to sell tea directly to the colonies to help it avoid
bankruptcy. The effect of this was to lower the cost of tea in the
colonies by avoiding the English middleman, and the American middleman,
but also to give the East India Company a monopoly. The colonies felt
threatened by this power of Britain to give monopolies to traders. When
the tea ships arrived in Boston in late 1773, Bostonians held a town
meeting and decided not to let the tea be landed. They threw this cargo
of tea, worth about 18,000 pounds, overboard. This Boston Tea Party was
a direct challenge to British authority. In response, Parliament closed
the port of Boston until compensation was made to the East India
Company. By statute of 1774, no one was to enter or exit the port of
Boston or else forfeit goods, arms, stores, and boats that carried
goods to ships. Every involved wharf keeper was to forfeit treble the
value of the goods and any boats, horses, cattle, or carriages used.
Ships hovering nearby were to depart within six hours of an order by a
navy ship or customs officer or be forfeited with all goods aboard,
except for ships carrying fuel or victuals brought coastwise for
necessary use and sustenance of inhabitants after search by customs
officers, and with a customs official and armed men for his defense on
board. This statute was passed because of dangerous commotions and
insurrections in Boston to the subversion of the king's government and
destruction of the public peace in which valuable cargoes of tea were
destroyed. Later, the Governor was given the right to send colonists or
magistrates charged with murder or other capital offenses, such as
might be alleged to occur in the suppression of riots or enforcement of
the revenue laws, to England or another colony for trial when he opined
that an impartial trial could not be had in Massachusetts Bay. A later
statute that year altered the charter of Massachusetts Bay province so
that the choice of its council was transferred from the people to the
King to serve at his pleasure, and the appointment and removal of
judges and appointment of sheriffs was transferred to the Governor to
be made without the consent of the council. This was due to the open
resistance to the execution of the laws in Boston. Further, no meeting
of freeholders or inhabitants of townships was to be held without
consent of the Governor after expressing the special business of such
meeting because there had been too many meetings that had passed
dangerous and unwarranted resolutions. Also, jurors were to be selected
by sheriffs rather than elected by freeholders and inhabitants.

        The commander of the British troops in North America was made
Governor of Massachuseetts. King George thought that the colonists must
be reduced to absolute obedience, even if ruthless force was necessary.
The people of Massachusetts were incensed. They were all familiar with
the rights of Magna Carta since mandatory education taught them all to
read and write. Mandatory education every township of fifty households
had to appoint one person to teach all children to read and write.
Every one hundred families had to set up a grammar school.) The example
in Massachusetts showed other colonies what England was prepared to do
to them. Also disliked was the policy of restricting settlement west of
the Allegheny mountains; the take over of Indian affairs by royal
appointees; the maintenance of a standing army of about 6,000 men which
was to be quartered, supplied, and transported by the colonists; and
expanded restrictions on colonial paper currencies.

        The Virginia House of Burgesses set aside the effective date of
the port bill as a day of prayer and fasting, and for this was
dissolved by its governor. Whereupon its members called a convention of
delegates from the colonies to consider the "united interests of
America". This congress met and decided to actively resist British
policy. As opposition to British rule spread in the colonies, a statute
was passed stating that because of the combinations and disorders in
Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Connecticut, and Rhode Island to the
destruction of commerce and violation of laws, these inhabitants should
not enjoy the same privileges and benefits of trade as obedient
subjects and that therefore no goods or wares were to be brought from
there to any other colony, and exports to and imports from Great
Britain were restricted, on pain of forfeiting the goods and the ship
on which they were laden. There vessels were restricted from fishing
off Newfoundland. These conditions were to be in force until the
Governors were convinced that peace and obedience to laws was restored.
Later in 1775, these trade restrictions were extended to New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia, and South Carolina. In 1776, since
all the thirteen colonies had assembled an armed force and attacked
British forces, these trade restrictions were extended to Delaware, New
York, Georgia, and North Carolina and expanded to prohibit all trade
during the present rebellion to prevent assistance to them. War had
started; the new rifle was used instead of the musket.

        By statute of 1775, anyone harboring of army or marine
deserters in the colonies forfeited 5 pounds Anyone persuading a
soldier or marine to desert drew a forfeiture of 40 pounds or else up
to six months in prison without bail and one hour in the pillory on
market day.

        Bounties were made available to vessels from and fitted out in
Great Britain for Newfoundland fishing.

        Any shipmaster carrying as passengers any fisherman, sailor, or
artificer to America forfeited 200 pounds because such men had been
seduced from British fishing vessels in Newfoundland, to the detriment
of the fishing industry.

        The many years of significant achievements of the colonists,
such as taming the wilderness and building cities, had given them
confidence in their ability to govern themselves. The average colonial
family had a better standard of living than the average family in
England. Many of its top citizenry had reached their positions by hard
work applied to opportunities for upward mobility. With the confidence
of success, the American colonies in 1776 declared their independence
from Britain, relying on the principles stated by John Locke and Jean
Jacques Rousseau that man was naturally free and all men equal, and
that society was only created with their consent. Issac's Newtons's
unified laws of the universe had contributed to this idea of a natural
law of rights of men. Thomas Jefferson wrote a Declaration of
Independence which listed the colonies' grievances against the Crown
which reiterated many of the provisions of the Petition of Right and
Bill of Rights, specifically dispensing with and suspending laws,
maintaining a standing army and quartering troops without legislative
consent, imposing arbitrary taxation, encouraging illegal prosecutions
in strange courts, and corrupting the jury process. It was adopted
about July 4, 1776. Thereafter, the American colonies did not follow
English law. Past English law became the legal heritage of the United
States of America.


                  The Law

        Anyone who feloniously steals or aids in the stealing of goods,
wares, or merchandise over 5s. from a shop, warehouse, coach house, or
stable, by night or by day, whether the owner is present or not,
whether there is a break in or not, may not have benefit of clergy.

        Anyone stealing goods of 40s. worth from a ship on any river or
in any port or creek or from any wharf may not have benefit of clergy.

        Anyone receiving or buying goods they know to be stolen or who
harbors or conceals any burglars, felons, or thieves knowing them to be
such shall be taken as accessory to the felony and shall suffer death
as punishment if the principal felon is convicted.

        A person taking money or reward for helping any other person to
stolen goods or chattels is guilty of felony unless he brings the thief
to trial.

        As of 1717, any person convicted of grand or petty larceny or
any felonious stealing or taking of money, goods, or chattels, either
from the person or from the house of any person who is entitled to
benefit of clergy and who is liable only to whipping or burning in the
hand may instead be transported to the American colonies to the use of
any person who will pay for his transportation for seven years. Any
person convicted of an offense punishable by death and without benefit
of clergy and buyers and receivers of stolen goods may be given mercy
by the king on condition of transportation to any part of America to
the use of any person who will pay for his transportation, for fourteen
years or other term agreed upon. Returning before the expiration of the
term is punishable by death.

        Anyone assaulting another with an offensive weapon with a
design to rob may be transported for seven years.

        Any person armed with swords, firearms, or other offensive
weapons and having their faces blackened or otherwise being disguised,
who appears in any forest, park, or grounds enclosed by a wall or fence
wherein deer are kept (including the king's deer) or in any warren or
place where hares or conies are kept or in any high road, open heath,
common, or down, or who unlawfully hunts, wounds, kills, or steals any
deer or steals any hare or rabbit or steals any fish out of any river
or pond or who unlawfully and maliciously breaks down the head or mound
of any fish pond, causing the loss of fish, or who unlawfully and
maliciously kills, maims, or wounds any cattle, or who cuts down any
trees planted in any avenue or growing in any garden or orchard for
ornament, shelter, or profit, or who sets fire to any house, barn or
out house [outer building], hovel, or stack of grain, straw, hay or
wood, or who willfully and maliciously shoots any person in any
dwelling house or other place, or who sends any letter with no
signature or a fictitious signature, demanding money, venison, or other
valuable thing, or who forcibly rescues any person lawfully in custody
for any of these offenses, or who procures others by gift or promise of
money or other reward to join with him in any such unlawful act is
guilty of felony and shall suffer death without benefit of clergy.
Persons abetting them are also guilty of felony and shall suffer death
without benefit of clergy. Attainder shall not work corruption of the
blood, loss of dower, or forfeiture of lands, goods, or chattel. The
persons sustaining damages can recover 200 pounds or less from the
hundred, with inhabitants paying proportionately, unless one of the
offenders is convicted within six months. If other hundreds have not
diligently followed the hue and cry, they shall pay half such damages.
In 1735, it was required that there be notice to the constable or other
officer or tythingman and public notice in the London Gazette
describing the robbery, offenders, and goods taken before the hundred
had to pay damages. Also, it did not have to pay damages if one
offender was apprehended with 40 days of publication in the London
Gazette, but did have to pay the apprehender 10 pounds. In 1754 was
also included letters threatening killing people or burning houses,
barns or stacks of grain, hay, or straw, without any demand. Also,
persons who rescued such offenders from gaol were given the same
penalty.

        Later, persons obtaining money or goods by false pretenses with
an intent to defraud or cheat or sending a letter without a true
signature threatening to accuse any person of a crime with an intent to
extort money or goods, are punishable by fine and prison, pillory, or
whipping or transportation for seven years.

        Later, no person may recover more than 200 pounds after a hue
and cry unless there are at least two witnesses to the robbery.

        No one may advertise a reward for return of things stolen or
lost with no questions asked, because this has resulted in thefts and
robberies.

        Anyone stealing sheep or cattle or parts thereof is a felon and
shall suffer death without benefit of clergy.

        Persons who steal or aid in stealing any lead, iron bar, iron
gate, palisade, or iron rail fixed to any house or its outhouses,
garden, orchard, or courtyard is guilty of felony and may be
transported for seven years. In 1756 also included was copper, brass,
bell-metal, and solder; buyers and receivers; and mills, warehouses,
workshops, wharves, ships, barges, and other vessels. Search warrants
were authorized in case of suspicion. Officers and solicited buyers and
receivers were required to take persons who at night were reasonably
suspected of having or carrying such items, to an accounting before a
Justice of the Peace. Also a notice was put in the newspaper for any
owners to claim such. If the person did not give a satisfactory account
of the items, he was guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by forfeiture
of 2 pounds or prison up to one month for the first offense, 4 pounds
or prison for two months for the second offense, and 6 pounds or prison
for any subsequent offense (without bail). An officer or solicited
buyer or receiver who did not take a suspect to a Justice of the Peace
was punishable by the same penalties except the amounts of forfeiture
were 1 pound, 2 pounds, and 4 pounds respectively. A felon who brought
two buyers or receivers to justice was to be pardoned.

        A description of any goods and the appearance of a rogue or
vagabond or idle and disorderly person shall be advertised in a public
paper for identification by the owner as stolen.

        Pawning goods without consent of the owner is punishable by
forfeiture of 20s. or hard labor for fourteen days with whipping there.

        Maliciously destroying river banks resulting in lands being
overflowed or damaged is a felony for which one shall suffer death
without benefit of clergy. Later, transportation for seven years was
made an alternative.

        The punishment for forgery or counterfeiting or assisting in
such or claiming a counterfeit item is good while knowing that it is
not, with an intent to defraud is death without benefit of clergy. The
punishment for perjury or subordination of perjury is hard labor in the
House of correction for up to seven years or transportation for up to
seven years. The punishment for altering numbers on bills of exchange
or other payment papers is death.

        It is high treason to counterfeit the coinage. A person who
tenders coin, knowing it to be false, shall spend six months in prison
and acquire sureties for good behavior for the next six months. If he
offends again, he shall spend two years in prison and acquire sureties
for good behavior for the next two years. The third offense is felony
without benefit of clergy.

        In 1773, making or possessing any frame, mould, or instrument
for forging paper notes of the Bank of England and putting this
identification thereon is felony with penalty of death without benefit
of clergy. Anyone who forges promissory notes, bills of exchange, or
inland bills of the Bank of England by engraving or etching on metal or
wood "Bank of England" or "Bank Post Bill" shall go to gaol for up to
six months.

        Anyone selling gold or silver ware, vessel, plate or other item
large enough to be marked which has not been marked by its maker shall
forfeit 10 pounds or be kept at hard labor up to six months. Anyone
counterfeiting such mark shall forfeit 100 pounds. Later, vendors of
these items were required to be licensed and the penalty for
counterfeiting was raised to felony for which one shall suffer death
without benefit of clergy. Later still, transportation for fourteen
years was allowed as an alternative. If an item was not all silver,
e.g. had metal underneath, 100 pounds was to be forfeited.

        In 1769, receivers of stolen jewels and gold and silver plate
and watches knowing them to be stolen, in cases of burglary and highway
robbery, were subject to transportation for 14 years.

        Anyone who willfully and maliciously set on fire any mine or
pit of coal is guilty of felony and shall suffer death without benefit
of clergy. Anyone who willfully and maliciously floods a coal work,
mine pit or who makes underground cavities or passages with intent to
destroy or damage such, or obstructs any sough or sewer made for
draining such, which has been held in common for 50 years, shall
forfeit treble damages. This is to deter these offenses, which have
been done to enhance the price of coals and gain a monopoly thereof.

        If twelve or more people who riotously and tumultuously
assemble and disturb the peace, do not disburse within an hour of an
order to disburse by a justice or sheriff or mayor, they shall be
deemed felons without benefit of clergy. Any people pulling down or
destroying a church, dwelling house, barn, stable, or other out house;
any mill; any engine used for draining water from any coal, lead, tin,
or copper mines, or for drawing coals from mines; or bridge, wagon, or
fences used in such industry will be deemed felons without benefit of
clergy and may be transported for seven years. The cost of repair is to
be borne by the hundred or town.

        The earlier statute that substituted burning in the cheek for
burning in the hand is repealed because this not only did not deter
offenders, but on the contrary, made them unfit for honest livelihoods
and therefore more desperate. Those convicted of theft or larceny shall
be burnt in the hand and may be kept at hard labor in a House of
Correction for 2-24 months, without bail.

        Anyone stealing goods off shipwrecks, or putting out a false
light to bring a ship to danger, or beating or wounding with an intent
to kill or otherwise obstructing a person escaping from the ship to
save his life shall suffer death without benefit of clergy. Except that
goods of small value taken without violence shall be punished as petty
larceny. The houses of suspect people may be searched by warrant. If
there are goods found or if people are found offering goods to sell,
they may be ordered by a justice to give an account of these goods. If
the account is not satisfactory, the punishment is forfeiture of treble
their value or six months in prison. A reasonable reward may be given
to the discoverer. Anyone assaulting a magistrate or officer involved
in salvage work shall be transported for seven years.

        Armed persons up to three in number assembled to assist in
illegal exporting or running, landing, or carrying away prohibited or
uncustomed goods, and any person apprehended by any revenue officer,
and anyone with his face blackened or masked who obstructs, assaults,
opposes, or resists any revenue officer seizing such goods, or who
shoots at or maims or wounds any revenue officer attempting to go on
any ship shall suffer death as felons without benefit of clergy or
serve as commons sailors in the navy for at least one year. Harborers
of such offenders will be transported for seven years. The hundreds
shall pay 100 pounds for each revenue officer killed, and up to 40
pounds for each one beaten, wounded, or maimed, and damages up to 200
pounds for goods, unless an offender is caught and convicted in six
months. There is a reward of 500 pounds to an apprehender, and 50
pounds for an attempt to apprehend in which one loses a limb or eye or
is maimed or wounded, and 100 pounds to his family if he is killed. An
offender who brings two of his accomplices to justice will be acquitted
and rewarded 50 pounds for each such accomplice. Later, an incentive
was given to customs officers to have a portion of the proceeds of the
sale of such goods seized by them, such as 2/3 for wrought silks and
calicoes, and 1/3 for tea, coffee, foreign brandy, and rum. Still
later, any person could seize wrought silk, including ribbons, laces,
and girdles containing it, from the importer or retailer, and the
importer was to forfeit 100 pounds, and any import assistants 50
pounds, and retailers or concealers 50 pounds, with one half going to
the suer. Also, the goods were to be publicly burnt. Still later, the
penalty was increased to forfeiture of 200 pounds for all offenders,
but not including wearers, and the goods were to be publicly sold for
export rather than burnt. Then the import of silk stockings, silk
mitts, and silk gloves was prohibited for the support of the English
silk industry. Retailers, sellers, and concealers of such were to
forfeit the goods and 200 pounds. Search warrants could be issued. In
1765, importers, sellers, and manufacturing users of most foreign
wrought silks or velvets were to forfeit the goods and 100 pounds. The
goods were sold for export with the proceeds going 1/2 to the king, and
1/2 to the seizing officer. The wearer was not liable. The burden of
proof of the place of manufacture was on the person prosecuted rather
than on the prosecutor. Persons breaking into houses or shops to
destroy any wool or silk being made or tools or racks used shall suffer
death as felons, to prevent combinations of workmen. In 1768, bounties
were made available to American exporters of raw silk to Great Britain,
whose climate was not conducive to the growing of mulberry trees on
which silk worms feed. In 1774, cotton printed, stained, or dyed that
has been manufactured in Great Britain may be worn and used, but must
have a mark woven in the warp that it was manufactured in Great
Britain. Persons importing other such cloth shall forfeit it and ten
pounds per piece. Persons selling such with a counterfeit stamp with an
intent to defraud shall suffer death without benefit of clergy. The
protective measures for English silk manufacture did not work well.

        Any pirate, accessory to piracy, commander or master or other
person of any ship or vessel who trades with a pirate or furnishes him
with ammunition or provisions of fits out a ship to trade with pirates
shall suffer death and loss of lands, goods, and chattels. Seamen
maimed in fighting pirates may be admitted into Greenwich Hospital.
(This hospital received support from duties paid by vessels of the
realm and of the colonies.) Masters or seamen not fighting shall
forfeit their wages and spend 6 months in prison if the ship is taken.
Masters shall not advance to any seamen above half his wages since
deserting is the chief occasion of their turning into pirates.

        In London penalties for crimes against property rose so that by
1740, a child could be hanged for stealing a handkerchief worth 1s.
from a person's body.

        Trade and the economy boomed in time of war, buttressed by the
increased production in the coal, iron, steel, shipbuilding, and cloth
industries. But peace brought depression and much misery, including the
imprisonment of many debtors. When very many were imprisoned, statutes
allowed release on certain conditions. After assets were paid to
creditors in proportion to the amounts owed to them, debtors could be
discharged from prison if they owed no party more than 100 pounds
(later no restriction and still later, 50 pounds, and even later, 500
pounds, and in 1772, 1000 pounds, and in 1774, 2000 pounds) and take an
oath that they have less than 10 pounds (20 in 1772) worth of property
(including 40s. in money in 1774), because there were so many debtors
in prison who were impoverished by war losses and other misfortunes in
trades and professions, and were totally disabled from paying their
creditors, and they and their families either starved or became a
burden to their parishes and became an occasion of pestilence and other
contagious diseases. Exempted were those debtors for whom there was an
objection by one of their creditors who paid for the maintenance of
that debtor in prison. Prisoners discharged were also discharged from
chamber [cell] rent and gaolers' fees, but not from their debts to
creditors. During war, no male prisoner could be discharged unless he
enlisted in the royal army or navy until the end of the war. In 1774,
the discoverer of any asset of a debtor not listed by that debtor was
to receive a reward of 20 pounds per hundred, and anyone concealing an
asset of a debtor was to forfeit 100 pounds as well as double the value
of the asset.

        A person declared bankrupt shall subsequently be examined from
time to time as to their goods, money, or other effects or estate to
prevent the frauds frequently committed by bankrupts. A default or
willful omission shall be deemed felony without benefit of clergy.

        A bankrupt or other person concealing goods to the value of at
least 20 pounds or his books with intent to defraud is a felony without
benefit of clergy.

        A debtor refusing to come to court for examination or hiding
assets of more than 20 pounds is guilty of felony and his goods and
estate shall be divided among his creditors.

        Later, a bankrupt coming to an examination was allowed to keep
5 (or 7 1/2 or 10) pounds per 100, up to a maximum of 200 (or 250 or
300, respectively) pounds if he paid his creditors 10s. (or 12s.6d. or
15s. respectively) per pound. His future estate was still liable to
creditors, excepting tools of trade, necessary household goods,
bedding, furniture, and wearing apparel of the family up to 10 pounds,
if it could pay every creditor 15s. per pound. If he didn't pay this,
he could be imprisoned. Bankrupts excepted from the benefits of this
act are those who lost 5 pounds in any one day or 100 pounds in the
preceding year from gambling or wagers.

        No goods or chattels on lands or tenements which are leased for
life or lives or term of years or at will or otherwise "shall be liable
to be taken by virtue of any Execution on any pretence whatsoever
unless the party at whose suit the said Execution is sued out shall
before the removal of such goods from off the said premises by virtue
of such Execution or Extent pay to the landlord" all money due as rent.
If the lessee fraudulently or clandestinely conveys or carries off his
goods or chattels with intent to deprive the landlord or lessor from
distraining the same for arrears of such rent, the lessor or landlord
may, within five days, seize such goods and chattels as a distress for
the arrears of rent and may sell them as if actually distrained on the
premises.

        Every person under 21 and every woman-covert who is entitled by
descent or will to be admitted tenants of any copyhold lands or
hereditaments may be ordered to appear by a guardian or attorney to be
compelled to be so admitted and to pay such fines as are owing by the
lands. If one is so admitted, but does not pay, the lord may enter the
lands and receive its rents, but not sell timber, until the fine and
costs are satisfied, after which the land is to be given back and may
not be forfeited to the lord.

        Tenants holding over any lands after their term expired and
after demand for possession was made shall pay double the yearly value
of such to the landlord. The landlord may reenter and eject a tenant if
rent is in arrears for 1/2 year.

        Landlords may distrain within 30 days and sell goods and
chattels fraudulently or clandestinely carried off the premises by
renters in arrears of rent. This applies to goods sold to others privy
to the fraud. They may use force if necessary to break open houses upon
giving a Justice of the Peace reasonable grounds to suspect and to
break open other buildings in the presence of a constable. The renter
is to forfeit double the value of such. The landlord may distrain the
renter's cattle on any common or any growing grain, roots, or fruit.
Attornments of renters made to strangers who claim title and turn the
landlord out of possession are void.

        Chief leases may be renewed without surrendering all the under
leases. This is to prevent subtenants from delaying the renewal of the
principal lease by refusing to surrender their leases, notwithstanding
that they have covenanted to do so. But the rents and duties of the new
subleases may not exceed those of their former leases.

        Any person claiming a remainder, reversion, or expectancy in
any estate upon a person's death, who has cause to believe that that
person is dead and that the death is being concealed by the person's
guardian, trustee, husband, or other person, may request yearly an
order in chancery for the production of such tenant for life. Upon
refusal, the tenant for life shall be deemed dead.

        As of 1752, all devices, legacies, and bequests made by will in
Great Britain or the colonies had to be in writing and witnessed by
three witnesses, or would be held void. No witness was to receive
anything by the will that he witnessed.

        An accessory before or after the fact of felony may be
prosecuted and tried not only if the principal accused felon has been
convicted, but even if he stood mute or peremptorily challenged over 20
persons to serve on the jury. The accessories shall be punished the
same as if the principal had been attainted. Buyers and receivers of
stolen goods may be prosecuted and punished if they knew the goods to
be stolen, even if the principal felon has not been convicted. The
punishment will be as for misdemeanor by fine and imprisonment. This is
to deter the counselors and contrivers of theft and other felonies and
the receivers of stolen goods from taking advantage of the former rule
that an accessory could not be convicted or punished unless the
principal had first been attainted. And if any captain or mariner or
other officer belonging to any ship willfully casts away, burns, or
otherwise destroys that ship to the prejudice of its owners or
merchants loading goods onto the ship, he shall suffer death as a felon.

        Journeymen shoemakers or employees of such who sell or pawn
boots, shoes, slippers, cut leather or other materials for making such
goods which are not his proper goods, or exchange for worse good
leather which has been entrusted to them, shall for the first offense,
recompense the injured person, or if his goods are insufficient for
distress, may be whipped. For the second offense, he shall be sent to
hard labor in a House of Correction for 14-30 days. A person who buys
or receives or takes in pawn such goods shall suffer the same
penalties. Justices of the Peace may issue warrants to search houses
and buildings in the daytime if there is "just cause to suspect" such
goods therein based upon information given to him under oath.

        Anyone employed in the working up of woolen, linen, fustian,
cotton, or iron manufacture who embezzles or purloins any materials for
their work shall forfeit double the value of the damages done and
anyone convicted thereof may be put into the House of Correction until
he pays, or if he can't pay, to be publicly whipped and kept at hard
labor for no more than 14 days. Persons convicted of buying or
receiving such materials shall suffer like penalties and forfeitures as
one convicted of embezzling or purloining such materials. Laborers
employed in such manufacture must be paid in coin and not in cloth,
victuals, or commodities in lieu thereof. Leatherworkers were added
with a penalty of up to double the value. Later this statute was
amended to include a penalty for the second offense of forfeiture of
four times the value, or else hard labor at a House of Correction for
1-3 months and whipping once or more in the market town. Like penalties
were given for buyers of such material knowing it to be false. One who
neglected finishing and delivering such goods because he was leaving
this employment was to be sent to the House of Correction for up to one
month.

        The penalty for possessing or offering to sell any hare,
pheasant, partridge, moor or heath game or grouse by any carrier,
innkeeper, victualer, or alehouse keeper is 5 pounds, 1/2 to the
informer, and 1/2 to the poor of the parish. If unable to pay, the
offender shall be placed in the House of Correction for three months
without bail. Unauthorized persons keeping or using greyhounds, setting
dogs, or any engine to kill game shall suffer the same penalties. In
1770, anyone killing hare at night or using any gun, dog, or other
engine to take or kill or destroy any hare, pheasant, partridge, moor
game, heath game, or grouse in the night shall be whipped and also go
to gaol or the House of Correction for 3-6 months without bail for the
first offense, and for 6-12 months without bail for any further
offense. If such occurs on a Sunday, the offender must forfeit 20-30
pounds or go to gaol for 3-6 months. In 1773, no one may kill or take
or possess any heath fowl or any grouse except at a limited period
during the year.

        Each manor may have only one gamekeeper allowed to kill game
such as hare, pheasant, partridge and only for his household's use.
This gamekeeper must be either qualified by law or a servant of the
land's lord. Other persons possessing game or keeping a greyhound or
setting dogs or guns or other devices to kill game must forfeit them
and five pounds.

        Anyone killing or attempting to kill by shooting any house dove
or pigeon shall forfeit 20s. or do hard labor for one to three months.
Excepted are owners of dove cotes or pigeon houses erected for the
preservation and breeding of such.

        A gamekeeper or other officer of a forest or park who kills a
deer without consent of the owner must forfeit 50 pounds per deer, to
be taken by distress if necessary, and if he can't pay, he is to be
imprisoned for three years without bail and set in the pillory for two
hours on some market day. A later penalty was transportation for seven
years. Anyone pulling down walls of any forest or park where deer are
kept, without the consent of the owner, must forfeit 30 pounds and if
he can't pay, he is to be imprisoned for one year without bail and
spend one hour in the pillory on market day. Later, the killing of deer
in open fields or forests was given the same penalties instead of only
the monetary penalty prescribed by former law (former chapter). The
penalty for a second offense was given as transportation for seven
years. Anyone beating or wounding a gamekeeper with an intent to kill
any deer in an open or closed place was to be transported for seven
years.

        Anyone who apprehends and prosecutes a person guilty of
burglary or felonious breaking and entering any house in the day time
shall be rewarded 40 pounds in addition to being discharged from parish
and ward offices.

        Justices of the Peace may authorize constables and other peace
officers to enter any house to search for stolen venison. Any person
apprehending an offender or causing such to be convicted who is killed
or wounded so as to lose an eye or the use of a limb shall receive 50
pounds. Any person buying suspect venison or skin of deer shall produce
the seller or be punished the same as a deer killer: 30 pounds or, if
he couldn't pay, one year in prison without bail and one hour in the
pillory on market day. An offender who discloses his accomplices and
their occupations and places of abode and discovers where they may be
found and they are subsequently convicted, shall be pardoned.

        All persons pretending to be patent gatherers or collectors for
prison gaols or hospitals and all fencers, bearwards, common players of
interludes, minstrels, jugglers, and pretended gypsies, and those
dressing like Egyptians or pretending to have skill in physiognomy,
palm-reading, or like crafty science, or pretending to tell fortunes,
and beggars, and all persons able in body who run away and leave their
wives or children to the parish shall be deemed rogues and vagabonds.
Apprehenders of such persons bringing them before a Justice of the
Peace may be rewarded 2s. Any constable not apprehending such shall
forfeit 10s. Persons wandering outside the place determined by a
Justice of the Peace to be his settlement may be whipped on the back
until it is bloody or sent to hard labor at a House of Correction. If
he was dangerous and incorrigible, for instance as indicated by
swearing falsely before a Justice of the Peace, he could suffer both
punishments with the whipping being on three market days. If he escaped
from the House of Correction, it was felony. If he has been absent for
more than two years, he could be put out as an apprentice for seven
years in the realm, in the colonies, or in a British factory beyond the
seas. Included later were performers for gain from outside their parish
of any play, tragedy, comedy, opera, farce or other entertainment of
the stage, including performances in public places where wine, ale,
beer, or other liquors are sold, or else forfeit 50 pounds. Exempted
were performances authorized by the king in Westminster.

        Unlicensed places of entertainment are deemed disorderly (like
bawdy houses and gaming houses) because they increase idleness, which
produces mischief and inconvenience. Persons therein may be seized by a
constable. Persons keeping such a place shall forfeit 100 pounds. No
licensed place of entertainment may be opened until 5:00 p.m.

        Later there was an award of 5s. for apprehending a person
leaving his wife and children to the parish, living idly, refusing to
work at going rates, or going from door or placing themselves in the
streets to beg. This includes begging by persons who pretend to be
soldiers, mariners, seafaring men, or harvest workers. These rogues and
vagabonds shall be sent to hard labor at a House of Correction for up
to one month. The real soldiers, mariners, seafaring men, and harvest
workers shall carry official documents indicating their route and
limiting the time of such passage.

        Persons pretending to be lame who beg are to be removed. If he
comes back to beg, his back may be whipped until bloody. If a constable
neglects this duty, he shall forfeit 10s.

        Masters of ships bringing in vagabonds or beggars from Ireland
or the colonies shall forfeit five pounds for each one. This money
shall be used for reconveying such people back at a price determined by
a Justice of the Peace. A master of a ship refusing to take such a
person shall forfeit five pounds. These vagabonds and beggars may be
whipped.

        Anyone who profanely curses or swears shall suffer the
following penalties: day laborer, common soldier, common sailor, common
seaman - 1s., anyone else below the degree of gentleman - 2s.,
gentlemen and above - 5s., and for the second offense, a double fine,
for further offense, a treble fine. If a person can't pay, he shall be
put to hard labor at a House of Correction for ten days, or if a common
soldier, common sailor, or common seaman, he shall be set in the stocks
for 1-2 hours. This is to prevent the provocation of divine vengeance.

        Anyone setting up or maintaining lotteries or deceitful games
must forfeit 200 pounds, or go to prison up to 6 months. Any one who
plays at such, such as by drawing lots or using cards or dice, must
forfeit 50 pounds. Sales of lottery items, such as houses, lands,
plate, jewels, or ships, are void and these items will be forfeited to
any person who sues. Such have caused many families to become
impoverished, especially through their children or through the servants
of gentlemen, traders, and merchants. Backgammon games are exempt.
Later, People who lost up to ten pounds in deceitful gaming were
allowed to sue to recover this money from the winners. Also, anyone
winning or losing ten pounds at one time or twenty pounds within 24
hours shall be fined five times the value of such. Offenders
discovering others, who are convicted, are indemnified from all
penalties and shall be admitted to give evidence.

        No one may run more than one horse, mare, or gelding in a horse
race. No prize may be under 50 pounds value. This is because a great
number of horse races for small prizes have contributed to idleness, to
the impoverishment of the meaner sort of people, and has prejudiced the
breed of strong and useful horses.

        Wagers and agreements in the nature of puts and refusals
relating to prices of stocks or securities are void. Those making or
executing such agreements must forfeit 500 pounds. Those selling stock
which one does not possess must forfeit 500 pounds. Brokers negotiating
such agreements must forfeit 100 pounds.

        Only a person with an interest in the life or death of another
may have insurance on this other, to prevent the mischievous kind of
gaming that has been introduced.

        Apples and pears may not be sold by any measure other than a
standard water measure, or else forfeit 10s., one-half to the informer,
and one-half to the poor, except for measures sealed by the Company of
Fruiterers. This is to decrease the suits between buyers and sellers.

        There shall be enough silver and gold on silver and gold plated
silk thread and wire so that it does not crumble off, thereby wasting
the bullion of the nation. This is also to encourage its export by
making it competitive in trade with such foreign articles, which may
not be imported.

        Malt to be sold or exported must not be fraudulently mixed with
unmalted grain to lower duties payable or else forfeit 5s.

        Any one who adulterates coffee with water, grease, butter, and
such shall forfeit 20 pounds, 1/2 to the king, and 1/2 to the suer.

        Walnut tree leaves, hop leaves, sycamore leaves and such may
not be made to imitate tobacco leaves for sale or else forfeit 5s. per
pound.

        Persons near London may not make unsound, hollow, or improperly
heated bricks.

        Makers of narrow woolen cloths must weave or set in the head of
every piece his initials or else forfeit one pound. This is to prevent
frauds and abuses, particularly in stretching and straining the cloth.
The fulling mill owner must append his seal of lead with his name and
with his measurements. The searcher to be appointed must measure such
cloths when wet for conformity to standard measurements and append his
seal with his measurements. He may also inspect any places he chooses.

        In 1774, any wool-making employee not returning all working
tools and implements and wool and all materials with which entrusted
back to his employer, or who fraudulently steams, damps, or waters such
wool, or who takes off any mark on any piece of cloth, shall go to the
House of Correction for one month. If he absconds with or sells such or
anyone fraudulently buys or receives such from him, a search warrant
may be issued to seize any other such tools or material. If found, the
possessor may be brought to account before a Justice of the Peace, and
if his account is not satisfactory, he shall forfeit such. A search
warrant may also be issued for houses on "just cause to suspect" by
oath of a credible witness. For a second offense, the penalty is up to
three months in a House of Correction. For a third offense, the penalty
is up to six months in a House of Correction and public whipping.

        Bakers must mark their bread with W for white, WH for wheaten,
and H for household or else forfeit 20s. to the informer. In 1758, a
new assize of bread set prices for rye, barley, oats, and beans by the
bushel. The prices for the three qualities of wheat, for wheaten
(prized and unprized), and for household grain by the bushel were to be
determined from within a statutory range by the local Mayor or Justice
of the Peace. Mayors and Justices of the Peace were to determine a fair
profit for their local bakers for all the types of bread. A miller,
mealman, or baker adulterating bread was to forfeit 40s. 10 pounds,
part of which money could be used in publishing his name, abode, and
offense in the local newspaper. Later, there was a forfeiture of 1-5s.
for every ounce underweight. Household bread was to be 1/4 cheaper than
wheaten or forfeit 10-40s. Bread inferior to wheaten was not to be sold
at a price higher than household or else forfeit up to 20s. If the
forfeiture was not paid, it could be levied by distress, or otherwise
the offender was to spend one month in gaol or a House of Correction.

        Straw to be sold in London must be sound, firmly bound in a
truss, and of a given weight or else forfeit it and 20s. if no truss,
and 1s. if in truss but underweight or of mixed quality. Handlers must
keep registers of sellers, buyers, weights, dates of sale, and prices
or else forfeit 10-20s.

        Frame-work knitted pieces and stockings shall be marked with
the correct number of threads by the master, frame-work knitter, or
master hosier, or forfeit the goods and 5 pounds. If a journeyman
apprentice, or servant employ does not mark correctly, he shall forfeit
the goods and 5s.-40s. Sellers of such shall forfeit the goods and 5
pounds per piece.

        At every fishing season, the quantity of salt, foreign or
domestic, used by a proprietor for curing fish for export shall be
accounted and sworn to so that it can be compared with the quantity of
fish exported by the proprietor to ensure that the salt duties are
fully paid, or else forfeit 40 pounds. If such salt is sold for other
uses than curing fish, the proprietor is to forfeit 20s. per bushel
sold and the users thereof, to forfeit 20s. per bushel bought,
delivered, or used. If one can't pay, he is to be whipped and put to
hard labor in a House of Correction for up to three months.

        Agreements between coal owners, lightermen, fitters, master or
owners of ships, hindering the free sale, loading, and unloading,
navigating, or disposing of coals are illegal, null, and void. This is
engrossing and has caused the price of coals to go up.

        No coal trader or dealer may use his own lighters, barges, or
other vessels to carry coals on the Thames River to and from any ship
and to and from any wharf, dock, or creek because this has impaired the
business of the watermen and wherrymen, whose vessels must now be
registered and display such mark on their hulls. No lightermen nor
buyers of coals may act as agent for any master or owner of a ship
importing coals into London or else forfeit 200 pounds, because this
combination has caused the price of coal to go up. Selling one sort of
coal for another is punishable by forfeiture of 500 pounds. Only
standard size coal sacks may be used for selling coal and they must be
sealed and stamped by an official at the Guildhouse before sale. The
mayor and aldermen of London may set the price of coals coming into
this port. In other areas, Justices of the Peace set the prices of
coals which allowed "a competent profit". If a merchant refused to sell
at that price, the Justice of the Peace could authorize seizure and
sale by officers.

        Later, coal measurers must give the coal cart driver a ticket
with the name of the sellers and consumers, the quantity and quality of
the coal, its price, the date of sale, and the name of the cart driver
or else forfeit 5 pounds. The cart driver must give this ticket to the
consumer or forfeit 5 pounds. If coal is carried by cart without a
ticket, the seller forfeits 50 pounds and the driver 5 pounds.

        Any owner of timber trees, fruit trees, and other trees used
for shelter, ornament, or profit, which are cut down or otherwise
destroyed shall be made good by his parish or town, as is an owner of
hedges and dikes overthrown by persons in the night. In 1765, anyone
cutting down or destroying any oak or other timber trees at night shall
forfeit up to 20 pounds for the first offense, up to 30 pounds for the
second offense, and shall be transported to the colonies for seven
years for any further offense. Anyone digging up or destroying or
carrying away any root, shrub, or plant worth up to 5s. in a garden,
nursery, or other enclosed ground at night shall forfeit up to 2 pounds
for the first offense, up to 5 pounds for the second offense, and shall
be transported to the colonies for seven years for any further offense.
Anyone not paying is to be gaoled. Aiders and buyers who know the item
was stolen shall incur the same penalties. Later, many other types of
trees, such as beach, ash, elm, cedar, and walnut were included as
timber trees, and hollies, thorns, and quicksets included as plants.

        Any person using violence to hinder the purchase or
transportation of grain, e.g. by beating or wounding a buyer; beating
or wounding the driver or horse of a cart loaded with wheat, flour,
meal, malt, or other grain, or cutting the harness of or driving away
the horse, or cutting or carrying away the sacks of grain is to be put
in the common gaol or House of Correction with hard labor for 1-3
months, and whipped in the market place between 11:00 and 2:00. The
penalty for a second offense or for destroying a storehouse or granary
where grain is kept to be exported or for taking or spoiling such
grain, or for throwing such off a ship or vessel is transportation for
seven years. The hundreds concerned are to pay damages up to a total of
100 pounds, but only if notice is given to the constable within two
days and there is an oath and examination before a Justice of the Peace
within ten days of the owner or his servants. If any offender is
convicted within a year, the hundreds are released.

        Anyone who steals at night any cloth or wool or woolen goods
set out to dry on racks shall forfeit treble damages, or if he can't
pay, be sent to prison for three months without bail. For the second
offense, he shall forfeit treble damages and be sent to prison for six
months without bail. For the third offense, he shall be transported for
seven years. Upon complaint, a Justice of the Peace may authorize a
constable or other peace officer to enter and search houses, outhouses,
yards, and gardens of a person suspected by the owner. This person
shall account to the Justice of the Peace and may bring a witness to
his purchase of the items. If the account is unsatisfactory, he shall
be penalized.

        Anyone taking linens, fustians, or cottons set out for
whitening, bleaching, or printing up to the value of 10s. in lands,
grounds, or buildings may be transported for seven years. Later, this
penalty was increased to death without benefit of clergy or
transportation for fourteen years.

        Anyone stealing or maliciously pulling up or destroying any
turnips on a person's land must pay damages or go to gaol for up to one
month. He may be whipped. The penalty for a second offense is three
months in a House of Correction. This statute of 1750 was, in 1773,
extended to include potatoes, cabbages, parsnips, peas, and carrots. A
penalty up to 10s. was added. Evidence of the owner was to be taken.

        In 1769, anyone who steals a dog or receives such knowing it to
be stolen shall forfeit 20-30 pounds for the first offense, and 30-50
pounds for the second offense or go to gaol or the House of Correction
for 12-18 months and be publicly whipped there. Search warrants may be
issued to search for stolen dogs or their skins. One-half of the
forfeiture will go to the informer.

        Officers of the revenue who collude with importers to return to
them goods which have been seized for nonpayment of duties shall
forfeit 500 pounds and lose office, unless they disclose their
accomplices within two months. The importer shall forfeit treble the
value of such goods.

        Any ship not more than 50 tons hovering on the coast with
customable or prohibited goods may be boarded by a customs officer, who
may demand bond for treble the value of the goods.

        In 1724, persons contracting with artificers and manufacturers
of wool, iron, steel, brass, and other metals, clockmakers, or
watchmakers, to go to a foreign country and there receive greater wages
and advantages shall forfeit 100 pounds and spend 3 months in prison
for the first offense, and shall forfeit a sum determined by the court
and spend 12 months in prison for the second offense. An artificer or
manufacturer not returning after warning is given by the ambassador is
to forfeit hereditaments, goods, and lands and to be deemed an alien.
Later, in 1750, cotton and silk were included and the penalty was
increased to 500 pounds and 12 months in gaol for the first offense,
and 1000 pounds and 2 years in prison for the second offense. Also,
anyone exporting tools of wool or silk manufacture was to forfeit the
tools and 200 pounds. This statute was strictly enforced. In 1774,
tools of cotton and linen manufacture were included.

        In 1772, all statutes against engrossing, forestalling, and
regrating were repealed because they had prevented free trade and
tended to increase prices, e.g. of grain, meal, flour, cattle, and
other victuals.

        Anyone assisting a felon (except for petty larceny) to try to
escape from gaol, is guilty of felony and shall be transported for
seven years. Anyone assisting a person who owes or is to pay 100 pounds
to try to escape from gaol is guilty of a misdemeanor. In 1772, prison
keepers were indemnified from creditors for any escapes of debtors due
to conspiracy and break out with weapons and firearms rather than due
to negligence of the prison keeper, as had been occurring.

        No more than 600 pounds of gunpowder may be kept in any
building in London or Westminster or suburbs thereof. Later, no more
than 200 pounds of gunpowder were allowed to be kept therein for more
than 24 hours. Buildings may be searched on "reasonable cause" shown to
a Justice of the Peace. Later, no more than 400 pounds of gunpowder
could be kept for more than 24 hours near any town, or more than 300
pounds for more than 24 hours in any place. Then no gunpowder could be
conveyed by land over 25 barrels or by water over 200 barrels.

        It was customary for officers to take the oaths of allegiance
and supremacy to any new monarch. When George I became king in 1714,
all civil and military officers, clergy, schoolmasters, and lawyers,
solicitors, clerks, etc. living within 30 miles of London had to take
an oath of allegiance and a new oath that the person was not Papist and
agreed that no foreigners had jurisdiction in the realm, such as to
excommunicate someone and thus declaring he could be legitimately
killed. Soon after, it was required that Papists had to register their
names and real estates. Commissioners were appointed to make inquiries.
If a person did not take the oaths or did not register, he was to
forfeit 2/3 of his land to the king and 1/3 to a Protestant who sued
for such. This was in order to deter future rebellions against the king
and efforts to destroy the Protestant religion.

        As late as 1722, there was a Papist conspiracy to take the
Tower of London and the King, and make a Catholic king. This resulted
in the imprisonment of the conspirators and a new statute: Persons not
taking the oath of allegiance and above oath that they were not Papist
shall register their lands and yearly rents and pay double the land tax
and 100,000 pounds. After payment, they are discharged from forfeiting
2/3 of their lands' rents for one year.

        Papists enlisting in the army are liable to corporal
punishment, but not death, as determined by a court martial.

        Any mayor, bailiff, or other magistrate who is present at any
meeting for public worship other than the Church of England will lose
office and is barred from any public office or employment.

        Jews may not refuse suitable maintenance to their children who
are Christian to pressure them to convert back to Judaism.

        Black slaves were common for a time in London. This was a
result of the voluminous triangle trade of manufactured goods from
England, slaves from West Africa, and sugar and tobacco from the West
Indies. Slavery was largely abolished by judicial decision of Chief
Justice Mansfield in 1772.

        If a sheriff does not answer for money collected for the
Exchequer, he shall forfeit treble damages to the aggrieved person,
double the sum missing to the aggrieved person, 100 pounds to the king,
and 100 pounds to the party who sues. If a sheriff take a fee for
levying or collecting money due to the king (except 4d. for an
acquittance) or take a sum for not levying money due, he is guilty of
extortion, injustice, and oppression and shall forfeit treble damages
and costs to the aggrieved person, and double the sum extorted to the
aggrieved person. A sheriff may not levy more than 12d. for every 20s.
of yearly income of any manor for up to 100 pounds of income, and 6d.
for value over 100 pounds.

        No one may cut pine trees that are fit for masts of ship in New
England without license by the Queen or else forfeit 100 pounds. Later,
pine trees on private property were exempted.

        Citizens of Great Britain may sue colonial debtors by oath
before British magistrates and a debtor's colonial lands and houses and
negroes may be used to satisfy his debts.

        Anyone pretending to act under a charter and taking
subscriptions in Great Britain or the colonies must forfeit treble
damages.

        No hats, including beaver hats, may be exported from any colony
even to another colony because this has hurt British hat manufacture.
The penalty is 500 pounds. No one in the colonies except present
hatmakers who are householders and journeymen may make hats unless they
serve a seven year apprenticeship. No hatmaker in the colonies may have
more than two apprentices at once.

        Whaling ships near Greenland were prohibited from returning
until their hulls were full. Vessels built or fitted out in America may
engage in whaling.

        Pig iron from the colonies may be imported free, but there may
be no mill for slitting or rolling iron and no plateing-forge or other
engine to work with a tilt hammer and no furnace for making steel
erected or used in the colonies or else forfeit 200 pounds.

        No paper bills of credit may be used in New England because
such have depreciated.

        William Blackstone lectured on law at Oxford University in
1753. As a result, the first professorship of English law was
established. His lectures were published in 1769 as the "Commentaries
on the Laws of England". They greatly influenced the American colonists
and were the basis of legal education in England and America for years.
They were comprehensive and covered real property, crime and
punishment, court procedure, contract, corporations, and commercial
law. He wrote "The Great Charter and Charter of the Forest" in 1759.


               Judicial Procedure

        There were twelve common law justices of the Court of the
King's Bench, Court of Common Pleas, and Court of the Exchequer. The
Chief Justices of all of these courts were paid partly from fees paid
to the court. The other Justices of these courts were paid completely
by salary, which in 1759 was well over 500 pounds per year. These
justices were to continue in office even after a king died and could be
removed only for good cause upon the address of both houses of
Parliament. The officers of these courts were attorneys. There was one
justice at Doctors' Commons. The two chancery justices (since Edward I)
were the Lord Chancellor and the Master of the Rolls. The salary of the
eleven masters of the court of chancery in 1765 was 400 pounds per
year. The officers of this court were solicitors.

        Appeals from the Exchequer could be made to a court of the
King's Bench and Common Pleas combined. Appeals from Common Pleas could
be made to the King's Bench. Decisions of the King's Bench and other
common law courts could be appealed to Parliament's House of Lords.

        The common law courts rode circuit twice a year in five
circuits and once a year in the north circuit. So an accused person
could spend up to a year in gaol waiting for trial. Few prisoners were
granted bail. In each common law court, the law justices in banc would
hear demurrers [contentions that the other party was wrong in the law].
No one with an interest in a suit, including the plaintiff and the
defendant, could give evidence. There was no power to amend pleadings,
so misspelling of the defendant's name, for instance, could result in
dismissal of the suit. In 1730, the pleadings and indictments ceased to
be in Latin.

In the common law courts, trespass in ejectment served the purposes of
most of the actions involving land. Assumpsit covered the whole
province of debt, for which compurgation still existed, and much more.
Trover more than covered the old province of detinue, for which
compurgation still existed. Trespass still served for all cases in
which the defendant had been guilty of directly applying force to the
plaintiff's body, goods or chattels. Trespass on the case covered
miscellaneous torts. Replevin was still used. Covenant remained in use
for the enforcement of promises under seal.

Account gradually came under the equity jurisdiction of Chancery.
Common law writs of dower are largely superseded by the relief given to
the doweress in the courts of equity, where new and valuable rights
were given to her and to her personal representatives against the heir
and his representatives. The actions of indebitatus assumpsit is being
extended to actions upon quasi-contract, in which the element of
contract is not required e.g. quantum meruit, where a contract is
implied from the facts of the case. The deodand doctrine is still in
force.

        In Chancery, a plaintiff filed a complaint and interrogatories
prepared by counsel. Only in Chancery could there be discovery, such as
interrogatories [written questions]. Court officials asked the
questions of witnesses without the presence of the parties or their
lawyers. Officials wrote down the answers in their own terms. So there
was no cross-examination possible. Most decrees took many years to be
made.

        The ordinary administrative court of first instance is that of
one or two Justices of the Peace who issued orders in matters of public
safety, public order, public morals, health, the poor, highways, water,
fields, forests, fisheries, trade, building, fire, begging, and
vagrancy. They examined suspicious persons and issued warrants for the
removal of any person likely to become a public charge. The Justice of
the Peace also regulated wages, servants, apprentices, and day
laborers. In his judicial capacity, he tried all crimes and felonies
except treason, though in practice death penalty cases were transferred
to the assize justices. The Justices of the Peace of a hundred hold
special sessions such as for appointment of parochial officers, highway
disputes, and the grant of wine, beer, and spirit licenses. The
appointment of overseers of the poor, authorization of parish rates,
and reading of the Riot Act to mobs to disperse them, required more
than one of the Justices of the Peace of the hundred to participate.
All the Justices of the Peace of the county met four times a year at
Quarter Sessions to hear appeals from penal sentences, to determine the
county rate of tax, to appoint treasurers of the county and governors
of the county prison and house of correction, to issue regulations on
prices of provisions and on wages, to settle fees of the county
officials, to grant licenses for powder-mills and other industries, to
hear nuisance complaints such as those against parishes failing to keep
their roads in repair, to make regulations for the holding of markets,
to hear complaints concerning local government, and to register
dissenting chapels. In more and more matters specified by statute, the
Quarter Sessions heard appeals from the orders of individual Justices
of the Peace instead of common law courts hearing them by writ of
certiorari. The writ of certiorari allowed administrative decisions to
be reviewed by the common law courts for compliance with law,
competency of the court, and interpretation of the administrative law.
The writ of habeas corpus appealed administrative decisions to imprison
not only after arrest for criminal proceedings, but any coercive
measure for enforcing an administrative order. The writ of mandamus was
available for enforcing the injunctions of administrative law against
towns, corporations, and all other authorities and private persons,
where the ordinary punishments were insufficient. Justices of the Peace
in rural areas were squires and in towns aldermen.

        In 1747, Justices of the Peace were authorized to decide issues
between masters and mistresses and their employees who were hired for
at least one year. If a servant misbehaved, they could authorize
reduction of wage, discharge, and hard labor at a house of Correction
up to one month. If a servant was not paid, he could authorize payment
of wages up to 10 pounds for an agricultural servant, and up to 5
pounds for an artificer, handicraftsman, miner, collier, keelman,
pitman, glassman, potter, or ordinary laborer. Later, tinners and
miners were added to the last category. In 1758, employees of less than
a year were included.

        In 1775, Justices of the Peace were authorized to administer
any oath for the purpose of levying penalties.

        To be a Justice of the Peace, one must have income of 100
pounds a year from a freehold, copyhold, or customary estate that is
for life or for a term of at least 21 years, or be entitled to a
reversion of lands leased for 1 or 2 or 3 lives, or for any term of
years determinable on the death of 1 or 2 or 3 lives. Excepted were
peers, justices, and heads of colleges or vice chancellors at the
universities. The Justices of the Peace were selected by the
superintending Sheriffs and Lords Lieutenant, the latter of whom were
usually peer with a ministers' office or a high court official. No
attorney or solicitor or proctor could be a Justice of the Peace unless
the locality had Justices of the Peace by charter.

        No one may practice as an attorney in the courts of King's
Bench, Common Pleas, or Exchequer until he has been examined by a judge
of such court on his fitness and qualifications and has taken the oath
to honestly demean himself and practice according to his best knowledge
and ability. The same applies to a solicitor in the equity courts. This
shall not exclude persons who have been bound to an attorney or
solicitor for four years. Attorneys and solicitors, with consent of an
attorney of another court, may participate in proceedings of such other
court. No attorney may have more than two clerks bound to him at one
time. Attorneys may be admitted as solicitors and vice-versa.

        The qualification for jury service is having land with an
income over rents of at least 20 pounds, with leases for 500 years or
more, or 99 years, or any term determinable on one or more lives. Being
a freeholder is not necessary. In London, the qualification is being a
householder and having lands to the value of 100 pounds. No sheriff may
excuse a qualified person from jury service for money or other reward.
Selection of jurors for each case is to be done by some impartial
person pulling their names from a box. Later, persons refusing jury
service could be fined.

        In 1763, the homes of John Wilkes and others were searched for
a seditious and treasonous published paper and all related papers
because they had been rumored to have some relationship to the
conception, writing, publication, or distribution of the paper. Wilkes
had such papers and was convicted of libel. He countersued for damages
due to criminal trespass. The court held that general search warrants
were subversive of the liberty of the subject of the search in
violation of the British Constitution, declared the statute void, and
found for Wilkes. The Court of Common Pleas agreed on appeal and put
the burden of proof on the persons searching to justify the search
warrant. His decision gave support to William Pitt's assertion that
"every man's home is his castle".

        For actions under 10 pounds in a superior court and actions
under 40s. in an inferior court, the offender shall be served with
process to appear in court rather than being arrested. For money at
issue, an affidavit shall be taken. No more money may be taken for bail
than the amount at controversy. This is to prevent frivolous and
vexatious arrests. Perjurers, forgers, those involved in barratry or
suborning perjury, and pretenders practicing as attorneys or solicitors
in the courts of law or equity shall be transported for seven years to
the American colonies. Unqualified people acting as attorneys or
solicitors in the county court shall forfeit 20 pounds.

        Writs of error at variance from the original record or
otherwise defective may be amended to correct the defect by the court
where such writ is returnable. No judgment is to be reversed for any
defect in any bill or writ, excepting an appeal of felony or murder, or
misdemeanor. This is to prevent delays of justice. Justices of the
Peace may correct defects of form on appeals to them.

        Plaintiffs neglecting to go to trial after an issue has been
joined may be nonsuited.

        Poor persons may be paid up to 6d. to give evidence against
felons.

        Pirates may not be tried again for the same crime or for a
certain crime and high treason. When the marine force was raised, the
marines were also given protection from double jeopardy.

A request for Certiorari for removal of convictions, judgments, orders
made by Justices of the Peace must be made within six months and after
notice to the Justice of the Peace who may argue cause against granting
certiorari.

        Mercantile law was developed by the common law courts,
especially the King's Bench.

        The king was to appoint the marshal of the King's Bench. The
marshal was to select his inferior officers to hold office as long as
they "behave themselves well within". These offices had been sold by
James I to a certain person, his heirs, and assigns. The marshal was to
keep the prison of this court in good repair from his fees and profits
of office.

        The office of sheriff was now an accessory department of the
common law courts for summons, executions, summoning the jury, and
carrying out the sentence of the law.

        Summons for excise offenses may be left at a person's abode,
workhouse, or shop as well as on his person.

        The coroner's office now investigated unusual deaths with a
jury from the neighborhood elected by county freeholders.

        The last beheading was of a Scottish lord in 1747; he had been
involved in an attempt to restore the Stuarts to the throne. So many
people came that some overcrowded bleachers fell down and crushed about
20 spectators. Henceforth, every sentence of death was by hanging, even
for peers.

        In 1772, the process of pressing a man to death, if he refused
to plead to an indictment was abolished. Instead, persons accused or
indicted, in Great Britain or America, of felony or piracy who stand
mute shall be convicted of such charge. Property of a felon was still
forfeited to the crown.

        From 1749 on were established special procedures for speedy
decisions in local courts in some areas for debts or damages under 40s.
and imprisonment for such was limited for up to three months.
Otherwise, sentences were longer, and debts grew during the time in
prison. When prisons were overcrowded, Parliament let the inmates out
if they gave up their possessions. They could go to Georgia.

        There were felons' prisons and debtors' prisons. Sometimes they
were one and the same. There was much fighting among inmates. The
inmates slept on hay if lucky. There were no washing facilities and
little light. Counties or friends paid for their bread. They were also
sold beer, which made them drunk and riotous. The sale of beer was a
recognized and legitimate source of profit to the keeper. This was
remedied by statute of 1760 that no sheriff or other officer may take
an arrested person to a tavern or other public house or charge him for
any wine, beer, ale, victuals, tobacco or other liquor without his
consent and shall allow prisoners to be brought beer, ale, victuals,
bedding, and linen as the prisoner sees fit. Sheriffs often kept people
imprisoned unless and until they paid all their fees due to the
sheriff. In 1772 was founded the Society for the Discharge and Relief
of Persons Imprisoned for Small Debts for those inmates unfortunate
instead of fraudulent or extravagant. Legacies were often made to
debtors. There was much Gaol Distemper fever with fatal consequences.
When John Howard, a grocer who had inherited wealth, but poor health,
became a sheriff, he visited many gaols. When he saw the squalid
conditions there, he advocated hygienic practices. In 1774, Justices of
the Peace were authorized to order walls and ceilings of gaols to be
scraped and washed, ventilators for supplies of fresh air, a separate
room for the sick prisoners, commodious bathing tubs, provision of
clothes for prisoners, keeping of prisoners not below the ground, and
apothecaries at a stated salary to attend and to report the state of
health of prisoners.

        In 1773, clergymen were employed in gaols to alleviate the
distress of prisoners and to contribute to morality and religion. Also,
no longer may any fees be taken by gaol keepers or sheriffs because
persons not indicted or found not guilty have been kept in prison
pending payment of such fees. Instead, the counties shall pay to gaol
keepers up to 13s.4d. per prisoner so discharged.

        Colonials acts which infringed upon the English common or
statutory law, or were against the interests of other American colonies
were submitted to the Privy Council, which allowed or disallowed them.
Appeals from the colonial courts came to the Privy Council.

        Judges in the colonies were appointed by royal governors and
paid by colonial legislatures. They served at the pleasure of the king.
Colonial courts included superior courts of judicature, courts of
assize, general gaol delivery, general sessions of the peace, inferior
court of common pleas, and commissions of Oyer and Terminer. There were
also Justices of the Peace, marshals, provosts, and attorney generals.
There were few cases of vagrancy, theft, or homicide. This may have
been because the people were few and dependent on each other, and
economic opportunities were great.


        Benefit of clergy for certain crimes was available in the
American colonies to all who could read and write. For instance, it
could be used in trials for manslaughter.



            Appendix: Sovereigns of England

Accession - - Name - - - - - - - - - Relation

871 - Alfred the Great
899 - Edward the Elder - - - - - - - son of Alfred
924 - AEthelstan - - - - - - - - - - son of Edward the Elder
939 - Edmund - - - - - - - - - - - - son of Edward the Elder
946 - Eadred - - - - - - - - - - - - son of Edward the Elder
955 - Eadwig - - - - - - - - - - - - son of Edmund
959 - Edgar - - - - - - - - - - - -  son of Edmund
975 - Edward the Martyr - - - - - -  son of Edgar
978 - AEthelred the Unready - - - -  son of Edgar
1016 - Edmund Ironside - - - - - - - son of AEthelred the Unready
1016 - Canute
1035 - Harold I Harefoot - - - - - - son of Canute
1040 - Hardicanute - - - - - - - - - son of Canute
1042 - Edward the Confessor - - - - -son of Aethelred the Unready
1066 - Harold II
1066 - William I, the Conquerer
1087 - William II - - - - - - - - - -son of William I
1100 - Henry I (and Matilda) - - - - son of William I
1135 - Stephen 1154 - Henry II(and Eleanor) - grandson of Henry I
1189 - Richard I, the Lion-Hearted - son of Henry II
1199 - John - - - - - - - - - - - -  son of Henry II
1216 - Henry III - - - - - - - - - - son of John
1272 - Edward I (and Eleanor) - - -  son of Henry III
1307 - Edward II - - - - - - - - - - son of Edward I
1327 - Edward III - - - - - - - - -  son of Edward II
1377 - Richard II - - - - - - - - -  grandson of Edward III
1399 - Henry IV
1413 - Henry V - - - - - - - - - - - son of Henry IV
1422 - Henry VI - - - - - - - - - -  son of Henry V
1461 - Edward IV
1483 - Edward V - - - - - - - - - -  son of Edward IV
1483 - Richard III
1485 - Henry VII (and Elizabeth)
1509 - Henry VIII - - - - - - - - -  son of Henry VII
1547 - Edward VI - - - - - - - - - - son of Henry VIII
1553 - Mary - - - - - - - - - - - -  daughter of Henry VIII
1558 - Elizabeth I - - - - - - - - - daughter of Henry VIII
1603 - James I
1625 - Charles I - - - - - - - - - - - son of James I
1649 - Oliver Cromwell
1660 - Charles II - - - - - - - - - - -son of Charles I
1685 - James II - - - - - - - - - - - -son of Charles I
1689 - William and Mary
1694 - William III
1702 - Anne - - - - - - - - - - - granddaughter of James II
1714 - George I
1727 - George II - - - - - - - - - - - son of George I
1760 - George III - - - - - - - - - -  son of George II



             Bibliography

1. - Ancient Laws and Institutes of England, Printed by command of his
late majesty King William IV under the direction of the Commissioners
of the Public Records of the         Kingdom, Vol 1; 1840.
2. - The Laws of the Kings of England from Edmund to Henry I, A.J.
Robertson, 1925.
3. - The Statutes of the Realm
4. - Statutes at Large
5. - A Treatise of the Laws of the Forest, John Manwood, 1615
6. - History of English Law; William Holdsworth
7. - History of English Law, Pollack and Maitland, 1895
8. - Anglo-Saxon Charters, A. J. Robertson, 1939
9. - Franchises of the City of London, George Norton, 1829
10. -Borough Customs Vol. 1, Selden Society, 1904
11. -Royal Writs in England from the Conquest to Glanvill, Selden
Society, 1959
12. -Lawsuits from William I to Richard I, Selden Society, 1990
13. -Treatise on the laws and customs of the realm of England, Ranulph
D. Glanvill, 1189
14. -Calendar of Wills, Court of Husting, London; Ed. Reginald R.Sharpe
15. -Calendar of Early Mayor's Court Rolls of the City of London, AD
1298-1307, Ed. A. H. Thomas
16. -Legislation of Edward I, T.F.T. Plunkett, 1949
17. -English Historical Documents, Ed. David Douglas
18. -Bracton on the Laws and Customs of England, Henry of Bratton,1257
19. -Chaucer's World, Edith Richert, 1948
20. -John, King of England, John T. Appleby, 1958
21. -A Collection of Eighteen Rare and Curious Historical Tracts and
Pamphletts, Edinburgh, Priv. Print.
22. -Doctor and Student, Christopher St. Germain, 1518
23. -Readings in Western Civilization, George Kuoles, 1954
24. -Social England, Ed.: H.D. Traill, St. John's College, Oxford; Vol.
1 and 2, 1894.
25. -Augustine of Canterbury, Margaret Deanesly, 1964
26. -The Venerable Bede, Ecclesiastical History of the English Nation
27. -Political History of England; T. Hodgkin
28. -Alfred the Great, Helm, 1965
29. -Domesday, A Search for the Roots of England, M. Wood, 1988
30. -The English Church 1000-1066; F. Barlow, 1979
31. -Life on the English Manor; H.S. Bennet; 1967
32. -The English Medieval Town; Colin Platt; 1976
33. -London Weavers' Company, Francis Consitt, 1933
34. -The Gild Merchant, Charles Gross, 1890
35. -Life and times of Roger Bacon
36. -Oxford Book of Oxford, Jan Morris, 1978
37. -A History of Oxford University, Vivian Green, 1974
38. -Lives of the Lord Chancellors, Campbell, 1880
39. -Gilds and Companies of London, George Unwin, 1966
40. -A History of Technology, Charles Singer, 1954-1978
41. -Edward I, Michael Prestwich, 1988
42. -Franchises of the City of London, George Norton, 1829
43. -The Works of Alfred
44. -Salisbury Plain, R. Whitlock, 1955
45. -William the Conqueror, F.M. Stenton, 1967
46. -Life of William the Conqueror, T. Roscoe, 1846
47. -Elizabeth I, Anne Somerset, 1992
48. -Queen Elizabeth, Katherine Anthony, 1929
49. -Industry in England, H.deB. Gibbons, 1897
50. -Henry II, W. L. Warren, 1973
51. -Edward I, L.F. Salzman, 1968
52. -The Yorkist Age, Paul Kendall, 1962
53. -Edward the Confessor, Frank Barlow, 1970
54. -The Livery Companies of the City of London, W. Carew Hazlitt, 1892
55. -Parliamentary Representation of the City of Coventry, Thomas
Whitley, 1894
56. -The Government of England under Henry I, Judith Green, 1986
57. -Lives of the Queens of England, Agnes Strickland, 1878
58. -The Oldest Version of the Customs of Newcastle, C. Johnson, 1925
59. -Charter of Henry II to the Burgesses of Newcastle, A. M. Oliver,
1175
60. -The Charters and Letters Patent Granted by the Kings and Queens of
England to         Bristol, Samuel Seyer, 1812
61. -Magna Carta, Legend and Legacy, William Swindler, 1965
62. -Chronicles and Memorials of Great Britain and Ireland During the
Middle Ages: Letters         and Papers of Richard III and Henry VII
63. -Sons of the Conqueror, G. Slocombe, 1960
64. -The Spirit of the Classical Canon Law, Richard Helmholz, 1996
65. -Open Fields, Charles Orwin, 1938
66. -The Medieval Foundation of England, Arthur Bryant, 1967
67. -From Alfred to Henry III, 871-1272, Christopher Brooks, 1961
68. -The Anglo-Norman Nobility in the Reign of Henry I: The Second
Generation, Charlotte         Newman, 1988
69. -The Birth of Britain Vol. 1, Winston S. Churchill, 1956
70. -Medieval London, Gordon Hoime, 1927
71. -A History of London, Stephen Inwood, 1998
72. -Tudor England, John Guy, 1988
73. -Reign of Henry VII, R. Storey, 1968
74. -Elizabethan Life in Town and Country, M. St. Claire Byrne, 1925
75. -The Elizabethan World, Edited by Norman Kotner, 1967
76. -The Evolution of Modern Medicine, William Osler, 1921
77. -Shakespeare's England, Oxford University Press, 1916
78. -The Lion and The Throne, Catherine Bowen, 1956
79. -Johnson's England, Ed. A.S. Turberville, 1933
80. -Education in Renaissance England, Kenneth Charlton, 1965
81. -The Scholastic Curriculum of Early Seventeenth-Century Cambridge,
William -Costello,         1958.
82. -English People on the Eve of Colonization 1603-1630, Wallace
Notestein, 1954
83. -Sir Walter Ralegh, Willard Wallace, 1959
84. -Sir Walter Ralegh, Robert Lacey, 1974
85. -Constitutional Documents of the Reign of James I, J.R. Tanner, 1961
86. -History of the English People, Volumes III and IV, Green 1890
87. -Hume's History of England, Volumes V and VI, David Hume
88. -English Society 1580-1680, Keith Wrightson, 1982
89. -The Century of Revolution 1603-1714, Christopher Hill, 1961
90. -Charles I and the Puritan Upheaval, Allen French, 1955
91. -Charles I, Christopher Hibbert, 1968
92. -Constitutional Documents of the Puritan Revolution 1625-1660,
Samuel Gardiner, 1927
93. -Life and Work of the People of England in the 17th Century,
Dorothy Hartley et al, 1929
94. -Home Life under the Stuarts, Elizabeth Godfrey, 1903
95. -Cromwell the Lord Protector, Antonia Fraser, 1973
96. -The Greatness of Oliver Cromwell, Maurice Ashley, 1957
97. -Acts and Ordinances of the Interregnum 1642-1660, C.H.Firth &
R.S.Rait, 1911
98. -History of the English People, John R. Green, 1916.
99. -A Social and Industrial History of England, F.W. Tickner, 1929
100. A History of Everyday Things in England, Marjorie and CHB
Quennell, 1919
101. The English, Norman F. Cantor, 1967
102. A Concise Economic History of Britain, John Clapham, 1951
103. World Book Encyclopedia
104. Encyclopedia Britannica
105. History of the English Constitution, Rudolph Gneist, 1889
106. The Life of the Law, Alfred Knight, 1996
107. Norton Anthology of English Literature, Ed. M.H.Abrams, 1962
108. The Bank of England, John Clapham, 1945
109. The Honorable Company, A History of the East India Company,John
Keay, 1991
110. A History of British India, W.W. Hunter, 1966
111. The Bank of England, John Clapham, 1945
112. Early Speculative Bubbles and Increase in the Supply of Money,
M.A. thesis, Douglas         E. French, 1992
113. Royal Charles, Antonia Fraser, 1980
114. Charles II, Ronald Hutton, 1989
115. The Life and Times of Charles II, Christopher Falkus, 1972
116. Life in a Noble Household 1641-1700, Gladys Thomson, 1959
117. The Weaker Vessel, Antonia Fraser, 1984
118. A Constitutional and Legal History of Medieval England, Bryce
Lyon, 1960
119. The Laws Respecting Women, J. Johnson, 1777
120. Mediaeval England, Mary Bateson, 1904
121. Elizabeth: The Struggle for the Throne, David Starkey, 2001
122. A Social History of England, Asa Briggs, 1983
123. The Year 1000, Robert Lacey, 1999
124. A History of Chemistry, Charles-Albert Reichen, 1963
125. John Locke, Economist and Social Scientist, Karen Vaughn, 1980
126. Becoming Visible, Women in European History, ed. Bridenthal &
Koonz, 1977
127. Wonder Book of the World's Progress; Inventions and Customs, Henry
Williams, 1935
128. Industrial Revolution in the Eighteenth Century, Paul Mantoux, 1961
129. Eighteenth Century England, Dorothy Marshall, 1962
130. Georgian England, A.E. Richardson, 1931
131. The Pageant of Georgian England, Elizabeth Burton, 1967
132. The Georgian Gentleman, Michael Brander, 1973
133. England in the Eighteenth Century, J.H. Plumb, 1950
134. London Life in the Eighteenth Century, M. Dorothy George, 1925
135. Law and Jurisprudence in American History, Stephen Presser &
-Jamil Zainaldin, 1995
136. England in the Age of Hogarth, Derek Jarrett, 1974
137. The First Four Georges, J.H. Plumb, 195
138. The Review of American Colonial Legislation by the King in
Council, Elmer Russell,         1915
139. Select Pleas of the Crown, F.W. Maitland, 1888
140. Select Pleas in Manorial and Other Seignorial Courts,
F.W.Maitland, 1889
141. The Forms of Action at Common Law, F.W. Maitland, 1909
142. Equity, F.W. Maitland
143. The Story of the Declaration of Independence, Ira G. Corn, Jr.,
1977
144. Internet Medieval Sourcebook
145. Out of the Fiery Furnace video, Robert Raymond
146. A History of Chemistry, Charles Reichen, 1963
147. Seven Ideas that Shook the Universe, Nathan Spielberg, 1987
148. A History of the Warfare of Science with Theology in Christendom,
Andrew White, 1955
149. American Political and Social History, Harold Faulkner, 1941
150. Essays in Science, Albert Einstein, 1934
151. The Character of Physical Law, Richard Feynman, 1965
152. Dictionary of National Biography, George Smith, 1882
153. Elizabeth I: Collected Works, ed. Leah Marcus et al, 2000
154. The Crime of Galileo, Giorgio de Santillana, 1955
155. From Copernicus to Einstein, Hans Reichenbach, 1942
156. The Horizon Book of the Elizabethan World, Ed. Richard Ketchum,
1967
157. Tower of London, Christopher Hibbert, 1971
158. Tudor Royal Proclamations, Ed. P.L. Hughes & J.F. Larkin, 1964
159. Selected Historical essays of F.W.Maitland, Ed. Helen Cam, 1957
160. Lloyd's of London, Raymond Flower & Michael Jones, 1974
161. Weather, Philip Thompson etc., 1965
162. Constitutional History of England, William Stubbs, 1891
163. Hillforts of England and Wales, James Dyer, 1981
164. The Last Two Million Years, Reader's Digest Association, 1973
165. London: The Civic Spirit, Robert Goldston, 1969
166. Domestic Life in England, Norah Lofts, 1976
167. Descartes, Tom Sorell, 1987
168. Life in the English Country House, Mark Girouard, 1978
169. Extraordinary Origins of Everyday Things, Charles Panati,1987
170. God's Peace and King's Peace: The Laws of Edward the Confessor,
Bruce O'Brien, 1999
171. The Bill of Rights, Irving Brant, 1965
172. Issac Newton, Adventurer in Thought; A. Rupert Hall, 1992
173. The Life of Issac Newton, Richard S. Westfall, -1993
174. A History of the Circle, Ernest Zebrowski, 1999
175. The World of Water, J. Gordon Cook, 1957
176. The Western Intellectual Tradition, J. Bronowski & Mazlish, 1960
177. Human Accomplishment, Charles Murray, 2003
178. Magic, Myth and Medicine, D.T.Atkinson, M.D., 1956
179. Scientists Who Changed the World, Lynn and Gray Poole, 1960
180. The New Treasury of Science, Ed. Harlow Shapley, etc., 1965
181. Food in History, Reay Tannahill, 1973
182. Home, A Short History of an Idea, Witold Rybczynski, 1986
183. English Villagers of the Thirteenth Century, George C. Homans, 1941
184. English Lawsuits from William I to Richard I, Selden Society, 1990
185. The Notebook of Sir John Port, Selden Society
186. Spellman's Reports, Selden Society
187. The Mediaeval Church, Marshall Baldwin, 1953
188. The Court of Common Pleas in Fifteenth Century England, Margaret
Hastings, 1947
189. English Courts of Law, Hanbury and Yardley, 1979
190. The Jury, W. R. Cornish, 1968
191. Women in Medieval Society, Susan Stuart, 1976
192. The King and his Courts - John and Henry III, Ralph Turner, 1968
193. Oxford History of the Laws of England. Vol 1, R. H. Helmholz, 2004
194. Leges Henrici Primi, L.J. Downer, 1972
195. Black's Law Dictionary, Henry Black, 1968
196. Webster's Dictionary, Noah Webster, 1983
197. An Introduction to Early English Law, Bill Griffiths, 1995
198. Pelican History of England:
    1)  Roman Britain, I.A. Richmond, 1955
    2) The Beginnings of English Society, Dorothy Whitelock, 1952
    3)  English Society in the Early Middle Ages, Doris Stenton, 1951
    4) England in the Late Middle Ages, A.R. Myers, 1952
    5) Tudor England, S.T. Bindoff, 1950
    6)  England in the Seventeenth Century, Maurice Ashley, 1952

 - - - - - - - - - - - - -THE END


 - - - - - - - - - - - - - INDEX

abbey; abbot, abbess; abduction; accessory; account; administrator;
admiralty; adultery; adverse possession; adulterated; advowson;
AEthelbert; AEthelred; affidavit; agreement; agriculture; Augustine.
St.; aids; alderman; ale; alehouses; Alfred; alienate; aliens;
allegiance; alms; amerce; America; Anabaptist; ancient; Anglo-Saxons;
Anglo-Saxon Chronicles; annulment; apothecaries; apparel laws; appeal;
appellate; apprentices; appurtance; archbishop; architect; Aristotle;
Arkwright, Richard; arraign; arson; Arthur; Articles of Religion;
artificer; artisan; assault; assay; assign; assize; assizes; assumpsit;
astrology; at pleasure; atheism; attainder; attaint; attorneys; babies;
bachelor; Bachelor of Arts; back-berend; Bacon, Francis; Bacon, Roger;
bacteriology; bail; bailiff; baker; ballads; Bank of England;
bankruptcy; Baptist; bar; barber; barber-surgeon; bargain and sale;
barons; baron court; barristers; bastard; bath; battery; beadle;
beating; Becket; beer; beggar; benefit of clergy; benevolence; Beowulf;
bequeath, bequest; Bible; bigamy; bill; bill of attainder; bill of
exchange; Bill of Rights; billet; Birmingham; bishops; Black Death;
Blackstone, William; blinding; blodwite; blood-letting; bocland; Book
of Common Prayer; bordars; borough; Boston; bot; Boyle, Robert;
Bracton, Henry de; brass; brawling; breach; breach of the peace; bread;
Brewster; bribery; brick; bridge; bridgebot; Bristol; brokers; Bullock,
case of; burgbot; burgess; burglary; burh; burial; burning; butcher;
butler; Calais; Calvin; Cambridge University; canals; cannon;
capitalism; carbon dioxide; carpenter; carriages; carucage; carver;
castle; castle-guard; cathedral; Catholics; cattle; cavaliers; Cecil,
William; censorship; ceorl; certiorari; challenge; champerty;
chancellor; chancery; Chancery Court; charter; chattel; Chaucer,
Geoffrey; chemistry; chevage; Chief Justice; Chief Justiciars; child;
child abuse; children; childwyte; Christian; chivalry; Christmas;
church; Church of England; church sanctuary; Cicero; circuit; citizen;
city; civil; civil courts; civil war; claim; clans; class; clergy;
clerics; cloth-maker; coaches; coal; coffee houses; coin; Coke, Edward;
College of Physicians and Surgeons; colonies; commission; common land;
common law; Commons, House of; Commonwealth; compurgation; compurgator;
confession; Congregationalists; Conqueror; consideration; constable;
constitution; contract; conventile; conveyance; conviction; cooper;
Copernicus; copper; copyhold; copyrights; cordwainer; Coronation
Charter; coroner; corporation; corruption of the blood; council;
counterfeit; county; county courts; courtesy; Court of Common Pleas;
Court of High Commission; Court of King's Bench; courtesy; court
martial; covenant; coverture; Coventry; craft; craft guild; Cranmer,
Thomas; creditor; crime; criminal; Cromwell, Oliver; Cromwell, Thomas;
crown; cupbearer; curfew; currier; custody; customary tenant; customs;
damages; danegeld; Danes; darrein presentment; daughter; death; death
penalty; debt, debtors; deceased; decree; deed; deer; defamation;
defendant; demesne; denizen; deodand; descendant; Descartes, Renee;
desertion; detinue; devise; dispensary; disseisin; dissenter;
distraint; distress; divorce; doctorate; dog; Doomsday Book; doublet;
dower; dowery; Drake, Francis; drover; drunkenness; duel; during good
behavior; duties; dwelling; dyers; earl; East India Company; Easter;
ecclesiastic; Edith; education; Eleanor, wife of Edward I; Eleanor,
wife of Henry II; election; electricity; Elizabeth, wife of Henry VII;
embroiderer; enclosure; English; engrose; Episcopal Church; equity;
equity court; Erasmus; escape from gaol; escheat, escheator; escuage;
esquire; established church; estate; estate administration; estate
tail; Euclid; Exchequer; excommunication; excise tax; executor; export;
extent; eyre; factory; fair; father; fealty; fee; fee simple; fee tail;
felony; feme covert; feme sole; feoff; Fermat, Pierre; feudal; feudal
tenures; fihtwite; fine; fire; firdfare; fire-fighters; fishermen,
fishmonger; flint; flogging; flymenfyrm; flying shuttle; folkmote; food
riots; footmen; forced loans; forced marriage; forestall; Forest
Charter; forestall; forestel; forests; forfeit; forgery; forms of
action; fornication; fortifications; foster-lean; France; frank-almoin;
Franklin, Benjamin; frankpledge; fraternity; fraud; freedom of speech;
freehold, freeholder; freeman; freemason; freewoman; friar; frith
guild; fuller; fustian; fyrd; fyrding; fyrdwite; gage; Galilei,
Galileo; gambling; games; gaols; Gaol Distemper; Gawaine; gentleman;
gentry; geology; Georgia; German, Christopher St., gift; Gilbert,
William; guildhall; guilds; gin; Glanvill; glass; Glorious Revolution;
gloves; God; godfather; gold; Goldsmiths; Good Parliament; goods;
government; grain; grammar schools; grand assize; grand jury; Grand
Tour; grants; grave; gravitation; Greek; Gresham, Thomas; grithbrice;
guardian, guardianship; Guenevere; hair; hall; Halley, Edmond;
hamsocne; hand-habbende; harboring; Harrington, James; Harvard College;
health; heir; heresy; heriot; hidage; hide; High Commission Court;
Hilda; hillforts; holidays, holydays; homage; homicide; Hooke, Robert;
horse; horse racing; hospitals; house-breaking; house-holder; House of
Commons; House of Lords; houses; houses of correction; hue and cry;
humanism, humors; hundred rolls; husbreche; Huygens, Christian;
hundred; hundred courts; hunt; husband; hustings court; hut;
illegitimacy; illness; illuminators; impeach; import; imprisonment;
incest; income tax; Independents; indenture; indictment; industry;
infangthef; infiht; inflation; inheritance; innkeeper; Inns of Court;
inoculation; inquest; insocna; insurance; interest; interrogatory;
intestate; iron; itinerant; jail; Jesus; Jews; Joan of Arc; joint
tenants; joint-stock companies; jointure; Jones, Inigo; journeyman;
judge; jurisdiction; jurors; jury; justice; justices in eyre; Justices
of Assize; Justices of the Peace; justiciar; Kent county; Keplar,
Johannes; kill; kin, kindred; king; King Alfred the Great; King Charles
I; King Charles II; King Edward I; King Edward the Confessor; King
George III; King Henry I; King Henry II; King Henry VII; King Henry
VIII; King James I; King James II; King John; King Richard the
Lion-Hearted; King William and Mary; King William I, The Conqueror;
king's peace; knight; knight's fee; knights' guild; knitting; laborer;
ladies; land; landlord; land-owner; larceny; lastage; Latin; law
merchant; lawsuit; lawyer; Laxton; lay; leap year; lease; leather; leet
court; legacy; legerwite; legislation; legitimacy; Leibniz, Christian;
Leicester; letters; libel; Liberi Quadripartitus; library; license;
life; life-estate; lighthouse; limb; linen; Lion of Justice; literacy;
literature; Littleton, Thomas; livery; Lloyds; Locke, John; London;
Long Parliament; longitude; lord; Lords, House of; loriner; lottery;
loyalty; machine; magistrates; Magna Carta; magnate; maiden; mail;
magic; malicious prosecution; maintenance; Manchester; manor; manor
courts; manufacturing; manumission; Marco Polo; market; marriage;
marriage agreement; marriage portion; marshall; marquise;
Massachusetts; Master of Arts; masters; Matilda; Mayflower; mayor;
Maypole; mead; measures; meat; medicine; melee; member; merchandise;
merchant; merchant adventurers; merchant guilds; merchet; Merciless
Parliament; mercy; Merton; mesne; Methodists; microscope; Middlesex;
midwives; military service; militia; miller; minister; minor;
minstrels; miskenning; moat; Model Parliament; monarchy; monasteries;
money; moneyer; monks; monopoly; moot; More, Thomas; morgen-gift;
morning gift; mort d'ancestor; mortgage; mortmain; mother; murder;
murdrum; mutilation; Napier, John; navy; Newcastle- on-Tyne; New
England; New Model Army; newspapers; Newton, Issac; New World;
nobility; noblemen, nobles; nonconformists; Normans; novel disseisin;
nuisance; nun; Oakham, William; oaths; offender; oil; one hundred year
war; open field system; ordeal; ordinance; orphans; outlaw; Oxford
University; oxygen; papists; parent; parishes; Parliament; Parliament
of Saints; partition; party; Pascal, Blaise; passport; patents; pauper;
pawn; Peasant's Revolt; peers; peine forte et dure; penalty;
penitentiary; Penn, William; Pennsylvania; penny; per stirpes; perjury;
personal injury; personal property; petty serjeanty; petition; Petition
of Right; physicians; Piers Plowman; pigherds; pilgrim; pillory; pipe
rolls; piracy; pirate; plague; plaintiff; Plato; plays; pleading;
pleas; police; pontage; poor; pope; popery; population; port;
portreeve; portsoken ward; posse; possess; postal system; post mortem;
pottery; praecipe in capite; pressing; Presbyterians; prescription;
presentment; priest; printing; prison; Privy Council; privy seal;
probable cause; probate; proclamation; promise under seal; promissory
note; property; prosecutor; prostitutes; protectorate; Protestants;
Puritans; purveyance; putting out system; Quakers; quaranteen, quarter
sessions; queen; Queen Elizabeth I; Queen Mary; Queen's Bench; quo
warranto; rack; Ralegh, Walter; rape; Ray, John; real action;
recognition; reeve; reformation; regrate; release; relief; religion;
remainder; renaissance; rent; replevin; residence; Restoration;
reversion; revolt; reward; rights; riot; riot act; roads; robbery;
Robin Hood; Roemer, Olaus; Roman law; Root and Branch Petition;
roundheads; royal court; Royal Navy; Royal Society; royalists; Rump
Parliament; Russia; sacrament; sacrifice; sailor; sake and soke; sale;
salt; saltworks; sanctuary; Sandwich; Saxon; scaetts; scavage; scholar;
school; science; scolds; scot; scrofula; scutage; seal; seamen;
searchers; search warrant; sedition, seditious; seisin; self- defense;
self-help; Separatists; serf; serjeanty; servant; service; servitude;
settlement; sewer; Shakespeare, William; shaving; sheep; Shelley's
case; sheriff; sheriff's turn; shillings; ships; shipwreck; shire;
shire courts; shire-gemot; shoemaker; Short Parliament; shrine;
sickness; silver; Slade's case; slander; slave; slingshot; smallpox;
smith; Smithfield; socage; sokemen; soldiers; solicitor; son; Spanish
Armada; speedy pursuit; spinning; spinning jenny; spinning wheel;
spinsters; spouse; St. Augustine; St. Germain; St. Lazarus; St. Paul's
Church; statute of laborers; squire; staple; Star Chamber Court;
strangers; steam; steel; stengesdint; Stevinus; steward; stock-and-land
lease; stocking-frame knitters; stocks; stolen goods; stone;
Stonehenge; straw; streets; stretbreche; subtenants; successor; sue;
suit; summary; summon; Sunday; Supporters of the Bill of Rights
Society; surety; surgery; surname; swearing; swords; tale; tallage;
tanner; tavern; tax; tea; team; Ten Commandments; tenancies; tenancy,
tenant; tenants in common; tenement; tenure; term; testament; Thames,
River; theft; thegn; Theodore; theology; theow; thermometer; Thirty
Years' War; tile; tiler; tin; title; tolls; tories; Torricelli,
Evangelista; tort; torture; tournament; Tower Hill; Tower of London;
town; town-reeve; trades, tradesmen; transportation; treason, high and
petit; treasure trove; treasury; trespass; trespass on the case; trial
by combat (battle); trover; turnpike; twelve; tyne; umbrella,
Unitarians; university; usury; use-trust; vagrants, vagrancy; vassal;
verderer; verdict; vessels; vikings; vill; villages; villeinage;
villeins; vintner; Virginia; wall; Wallis, John; War of the Roses;
ward, wardship; wardmoot; wardrobe; warrantor, warranty; waste; water;
watermen; watermill; waterwheel; Watt, James; wealthy; weapon; weaving,
weavers; webs; wed; wedding; weights; weir; well; wer, wergeld; Wesley,
John; Westminster; whigs; whipping; White Tower; Whitsuntide; widows;
wife; wife-beating; wills; Winchester; windmills; window tax; wine;
witch; witchcraft; wite; witan; witanagemot; witnesses; wives; Wolsey,
Thomas; Wyclif, John; woman-covert; women; wool; wounding; writs; writs
of assistance; writs of error; Year Books; yeomanry, yeomen