_Nine slaves_ left their masters in Boone County, Kentucky,
     on Sunday, June 11, 1854, having three horses with them.
     Arrived at the river, they turned the horses back, and taking
     a skiff crossed at midnight to the Ohio shore. After
     travelling two or three miles, they hid during Monday in a
     clump of bushes. At night they started northward again. A
     man, named John Gyser, met them and promised to assist them.
     He took them to a stable, where they were to remain until
     night. He immediately went to Covington, Kentucky, learned
     that $1,000 reward was offered for their apprehension, and
     gave information of their place of concealment. At evening a
     strong band of Kentuckians, with United States Deputy Marshal
     George Thayer, assisted by three Cincinnati officers,
     surrounded the stable and took the nine prisoners, on a
     warrant issued by United States Commissioner Pendery. They
     were all given up to their claimants, and taken back to
     Kentucky.

     _A New Orleans correspondent of the New York Tribune_, in a
     letter dated July 3, 1854, writes, "During a recent trip up
     the river I was on several steamers, and on every boat they
     had one or more runaway slaves, who had been caught and were
     being taken in _irons_ to their _masters_."

     _On the Steamer Alvin Adams_, at Madison, Indiana, a man was
     arrested as a fugitive and taken to Louisville, Kentucky.
     He was claimed as the slave of John H. Page, of Bowling
     Green. The _Louisville Journal_, edited by a Northern man,
     stigmatised him as a "rascal," for his attempt to be free.
     (July, 1854.)

     _Two colored men_, on their way to Chicago, were seized and
     taken from the cars at Lasalle, Illinois, by three men, who
     said they were not officers. The colored men were known to
     be free; one was "a respectable resident of Chicago." Some of
     the passengers interfered; but it being night, and very dark,
     and the cars starting on the colored men were left in the
     hands of their kidnappers.

     _Chicago, Illinois._ Three men from Missouri, with a warrant
     from the Governor of that State, to take a certain fugitive
     slave, seized a man whom they met in the street, bound him
     with a handkerchief, and to quicken his steps beat him with
     the butt of a pistol. He succeeded in shaking off his captors
     and fled, a pistol-bullet being sent after him, which did not
     hit him. He made good his escape. The men were arrested and
     held to trial for assault with deadly weapons. By an
     extraordinary conspiracy on the part of District Attorney
     Hoyne, Sheriff Bradley, and others, these men were taken from
     jail to be carried to Springfield, Illinois, two hundred
     miles distant, to appear before Chief Justice Treat, that he
     might inquire "whether said alleged kidnappers were justly
     held to bail and imprisoned." It was so suddenly done that
     the counsel for the kidnapped man and for the State of
     Illinois had not time to reach Springfield before the men
     were discharged and on their way to Missouri. The Grand Jury
     of the County (in which Chicago is) had found a true bill
     against them, of which the Sheriff professed to be ignorant,
     (which was deemed hardly possible,)--under which bill they
     would probably have been convicted and sentenced to the State
     Prison. Thus the omnipotent Slave Power reaches forth its
     hand into our most Northern cities, end saves its minions
     from the punishment which their lawless acts have justly
     merited.--_Chicago Daily Tribune_, Sept. 21, 1854.

--> The three kidnappers published a statement in the _St. Louis
Republican_ of September 26.

     HENRY MASSEY, at Philadelphia, September, 1854, was brought
     before United States Commissioner E.D. Ingraham, claimed by
     Franklin Bright, of Queen Anne's County, Maryland, as his
     slave. Arrested in Harrisburg.

     HARVEY, arrested near Cumminsville, Ohio,--escaped,--taken
     again in Goshen, about ten miles from Cincinnati, and lodged
     in the jail of that city. An investigation of the case was
     had before United States Commissioner Pendery, and the
     slave remanded to the custody of his master.--_Cincinnati
     Commercial_, September 22, 1854.

     _Byberry, Pennsylvania, September 18, 1854._ A carriage load
     of suspicious looking men came to this place in the
     afternoon. They waited until nightfall, when they burst into
     the house of a colored family, "seized the man in presence of
     his wife and another woman, threatening to shoot them if they
     interfered--dragged him out, beating him over the head with a
     mace. The poor fellow continued to scream for help until his
     voice was stifled by his groans; they forced him into their
     carriage and drove off, before any effectual assistance
     could be offered." He was a sober and industrious man, and
     much respected. His wife was left heartbroken, with one
     child.--_Norristown (Pa.) Olive Branch_.

     _The Frankfort (Ky.) Yeoman_, of November 18, 1854,
     said:--"Kidnapping free negroes in Ohio, and deluding our
     slaves from their masters to recapture and sell them, is an
     established profession of a gang located upon the borders of
     the Ohio River, combining with negro-traders in the interior
     of this State." The names of some employed in this business
     are given, two of whom, having been arrested and imprisoned,
     threatened to burn the city of Frankfort for interrupting
     their business.

     JANE MOORE, a free colored woman, at Cincinnati, November,
     1854, seized in the house of her sister, (Sycamore Street,)
     beaten, and with the help of a deputy marshal from Covington,
     Kentucky, carried over to Covington, and lodged in jail,
     on pretence of her being a fugitive slave. She was taken
     before the Mayor of Covington, "who heard the case with
     impartiality." Her freedom was established, and she released.

     _At Indianapolis, Indiana, December, 1854_, Benjamin B.
     Waterhouse was indicted for harboring fugitive slaves,
     contrary to the provisions of the Fugitive Law. He was found
     guilty, but the jury recommended him "to the favorable
     consideration of the Court, and stated that the evidence was
     barely sufficient to convict." He was fined fifty dollars and
     to be imprisoned one hour, and the government to pay the
     costs.---_Chicago Tribune_.

     _A Proposition for Kidnapping_, on a large scale, was made by
     John H. Pope, "police officer and constable," in a letter
     dated "Frederick, Maryland, United States of America, January
     1, 1855," and addressed to Mr. Hays, Sheriff of Montreal,
     Canada. "Vast numbers of slaves," says Mr. Pope, "escaping
     from their masters or owners, succeed in reaching your
     Provinces, and are, therefore, without the pale of the
     'Fugitive Slave Law,' and can only be restored by cunning,
     together with skill. Large rewards are offered and will be
     paid for their return, and could I find an efficient person
     to act with me, a great deal of money could be made, as I
     would equally divide. * * * The only apprehension we have in
     approaching too far into Canada is the fear of being
     arrested; and had I a good assistant in your city, who would
     induce the negroes to the frontier, I would be there to pay
     the cash. On your answer, I can furnish names and
     descriptions of negroes."

This letter was published, doubtless at the Montreal Sheriff's
request, in the _Montreal Gazette_, January 13, 1855.

--> The _Montreal Gazette_, of February 3, published a second letter
from J.H. Pope.

     _A warrant was issued in Boston_, January 10, 1855, by United
     States Commissioner Charles Levi Woodbury, for the arrest of
     JOHN JACKSON, as a fugitive from service and labor in
     Georgia. Mr. Jackson, who had been for some time in the city,
     was nowhere to be found.

     ROSETTA ARMSTEAD, a colored girl, was taken by writ of
     _habeas corpus_ before Judge Jamison, at Columbus, Ohio.
     Rosetta formerly belonged to Ex-President John Tyler, who
     _gave her_ to his daughter, the wife of Rev. Henry M.
     Dennison, an Episcopal clergyman of Louisville, Kentucky.
     Mrs. D. having deceased, Rosetta was to be sent back to
     Virginia in care of an infant child, both being placed in
     charge of a Dr. Miller, a friend of Mr. Dennison. Passing
     through Ohio, the above writ was obtained. Rosetta expressed
     her desire to remain in freedom in Ohio. The case was removed
     to Cincinnati, and was delayed until Mr. Dennison could
     arrive from Louisville. (_Ohio State Journal_, March 12,
     1855.) The girl was set free; "but was again arrested by the
     United States Marshal upon the same warrant which Judge
     Parker had declared illegal; thereupon another _habeas
     corpus_ was issued, which the Marshal refused to obey; when
     he was fined $50, and imprisoned for contempt." Even United
     States Commissioner Pendery, before whom the case was brought
     as that of a fugitive slave, pronounced the girl free, and
     she was placed in the care of a guardian. The United States
     Marshal being taken by _habeas corpus_ before Judge McLean,
     of the United States Supreme Court, was set at liberty, Judge
     McL. alleging that the proceedings in the State Court were
     null and void!

     GEORGE CLARK, a colored boy, eighteen years of age, in
     Pennsylvania, was decoyed into the house of one Thompson,
     (February 23, 1855,) where he was seized by three men, one of
     whom was Solomon Snyders, a well known ruffian and kidnapper
     in the neighborhood, who said to him, "Now, George, I am
     going to take you to your master." The screams of George
     fortunately brought deliverance to him. The three men were
     arrested, tried, and sentenced to imprisonment for
     kidnapping, by the Court of Dauphin County.--_Norristown
     (Penn.) Olive Branch_.

     _The Norristown (Penn.) Olive Branch_, (in connection with
     the last named case,) speaks of a case which had occurred a
     short time before, under the Fugitive Law, before United
     States Commissioner McAllister, at Harrisburg, Pennsylvania,
     and which has not yet been mentioned in this record. A
     colored man and his wife, with their infant child, were
     taken, "one morning, very early," before Commissioner Richard
     McAllister, and before any counsel could reach the spot the
     case had been decided against the man and woman; but the
     babe, having been born in Pennsylvania, they did not "dare to
     send that" into slavery; "so the only alternative was to take
     it away from its mother," which was done, and that evening
     the man and woman were taken South. No time had been allowed
     to bring forward witnesses in their behalf, and there was
     only a single witness against them, and he a boy about
     seventeen years old, and a relative of the slave-claimant.
     The woman's sufferings, on account of the separation from
     her child, seemed greater than for her own fate. The article
     from the Norristown paper is in the _National Anti-Slavery
     Standard_, June 2, 1855.

     GEORGE MITCHELL, a young colored man, at San Jose,
     California, arrested and taken before Justice Allen, April,
     1855, "charged with owing service and labor to one Jesse C.
     Cooper, of Tennessee." Mitchell was brought into California
     by his then owner, in 1849, the year before the enactment of
     the Fugitive Slave Law. His arrest was made, under a Fugitive
     Slave Law of California. By _habeas corpus_ the case was
     carried before Judge C.P. Hester, of the District Court.
     Mitchell was discharged on the ground (we believe) that the
     California Law was unconstitutional; also that the
     proceedings were "absolutely void." On the 21st April (or
     May) "another attempt was made to reduce George to slavery at
     San Francisco." He was brought before the United States
     District Court, Judge Hoffman presiding, claimed under the
     United States Fugitive Law as the property of the above-named
     Cooper. [The result of the trial not known.]--_San Jose
     Telegraph_.

     _At Dayville, Connecticut_, June 13, 1855, an attempt was
     made to seize a fugitive slave; "but the citizens interfered
     and the fugitive escaped." He was claimed by a resident of
     Pomfret, who said he had bought him in Cuba.--_Hartford
     Religious Herald_.

     _At Burlington, Iowa_, a colored man, called DICK, was
     arrested and taken before United States Commissioner Frazee.
     "Much excitement was caused." He was claimed as belonging to
     Thomas Ruthford, Clark County, Missouri. Dick was discharged
     as not being the man claimed. (June, 1855.)

     _A white girl_, fourteen years of age, daughter of Mr. Samuel
     Godshall, of Downingtown, Chester County, Pennsylvania, while
     walking upon the road, was seized by two men, a plaster put
     upon her mouth, and she taken in a close carriage in the
     direction of Maryland. After going twelve miles, they put her
     out of the carriage, "in a secluded and woody portion of the
     country, threatening to kill her if she made any alarm, when
     they drove away as fast as they could." Some colored people
     met her, got the plaster off her mouth, and aided her
     home. It was supposed the kidnappers mistook her for a
     mulatto girl; but discovering their blunder dismissed
     her.--_Philadelphia Ledger_, July 9, 1855.

     _The Norristown (Penn.) Herald_ relates a case similar to the
     preceding. Benjamin Johnson, a white lad of fifteen, on his
     way from his father's, at Evansburg, to S. Jarrett's, near
     Jeffersonville, was invited to ride by a man in a carriage.
     The man took him by an unusual route; night coming on, the
     boy was alarmed and attempted to escape, "when the villain
     caught him and drove off at full speed, and by threats and
     blows prevented him from making any alarm." He drove to a
     distance of fifteen miles beyond Jeffersonville, when the boy
     succeeded in making his escape. (July, 1855.)

     JANE JOHNSON, and her two sons, (colored,) brought into
     Philadelphia (on their way to New York and thence to
     Nicaragua) by John H. Wheeler. Stopped to dine at Bloodgood's
     Hotel. Jane there made known her desire to be free.
     Information of the same was conveyed to Passmore Williamson,
     Secretary of the Pennsylvania Abolition Society, an old
     association founded by Benjamin Franklin, Benjamin Rush, and
     others. Mr. Williamson went to the hotel, and found that the
     party had gone to the steamboat, at the foot of Walnut
     Street. He proceeded thither, found them, and told the mother
     that she and her sons had been legally made free by being
     brought by their master into a free State. After some delay,
     Jane rose to leave the boat. Wheeler endeavored to detain
     her. Williamson held Wheeler back, and the woman went on
     shore, a number of colored persons taking up the boys and
     carrying them from the boat. They were enabled to escape.
     (July 18, 1855.)

     The celebrated case of PASSMORE WILLIAMSON followed, before
     Judge Kane, of the United States District Court. (See "Case
     of Passmore Williamson," reported in full, and published in
     Philadelphia, by Uriah Hunt & Son, 1856.) On the 27th July,
     Mr. Williamson was committed to Moyamensing Prison, by Judge
     Kane, "for a contempt of the court in refusing to answer to
     the writ of _habeas corpus_;" Mr. W. _having answered_ that
     he had not, and never had had, the custody of the three
     alleged slaves, and therefore could not produce them in
     court. Mr. Williamson was kept in prison until November 3d,
     when he was discharged by Judge Kane, the technical
     "contempt" having been removed.

     CELESTE, a mulatto woman, claimed as a slave, before Judge
     Burgoyne, Cincinnati, Ohio. It appeared that she was
     brought to Cincinnati by her master, and she was set
     free.--_Cincinnati Gazette_, July 7, 1855.

     _Two fugitives_, in Indiana, (September, 1855,) requested aid
     of the conductor of the Madison and Indianapolis Railroad.
     The aid given was to take them back to Madison, whence they
     were conveyed over the river to Kentucky. Before leaving that
     State they had been hunted and attacked by dogs. These they
     had despatched with their knives. The conductor was dismissed
     from his position. An agent of the express company was said
     to have aided him in the surrender of the men.--_Madison
     Courier_.

     JACK, a colored boy, nine years of age, "claimed by Joseph
     Tucker, of Mobile, as his slave, was sent back to his master
     from Boston, in the brig Selma, Captain Rogers, on the 18th
     inst." (October, 1855.)--_Boston Times_.

     JACOB GREEN, a colored man, was seized near Hollidaysburg,
     Pennsylvania, by one Parsons, as a fugitive slave.
     Parsons could show no authority for detaining Green, who,
     with the help of some bystanders, released himself and
     escaped.--_Hollidaysburg Standard_, October 24, 1855.

     _Four men indicted for kidnapping_ at Greensburg, Indiana,
     in the Spring of 1855. Their names--David and Thomas Maple,
     Morrison, and McCloskey. Charged with kidnapping two men,
     whom they conveyed to a slave state, and sold as slaves. The
     two Maples, fearing the indictment, absconded. The other two
     were arrested, and brought to trial in October, 1855, at the
     State Court, before Judge Logan. "Defendants' counsel moved
     to quash the indictment, for the reason that the section of
     the statute of Indiana against kidnapping was in violation of
     the acts of Congress, and, therefore, void; and the Court
     accordingly quashed the indictment"--_Indianapolis Journal_.

     _Eight fugitives from Kentucky_ reached Adams County, Ohio,
     closely followed by several Kentuckians, who attempted to
     search the houses of several of the citizens. "The people,
     indignant at this outrage, assembled with arms, and placed an
     injunction upon these summary proceedings." "The men-hunters
     then offered $2,000 to any traitor who would betray the
     fugitives into their hands. But, so far as we have learned,
     the bribe was as unsuccessful as the attempted search."
     (November, 1855.)--_Carroll Free Press_.

     _At Wilson's Corner, Bensalem, Buck's County, Pa._, Dec. 13,
     1855, a colored man in the employ of John Henderson was
     seized by three men, who tied him, threw him into a wagon,
     and drove off at full speed. They were seen, and quickly
     followed by men on horseback. After two hours' hard riding,
     the kidnappers were overtaken. A fight ensued--the black man
     was released; when three pistol-shots were fired by the
     kidnappers, killing a horse, and wounding one of the rescuing
     party severely. A statement of the facts was published, as
     an advertisement, in the _Philadelphia Ledger_, signed by
     William Williams and John Henderson.

     "_Two very bright mulatto girls_," says the _Staunton (Va.)
     Spectator_, "one belonging to Mr. John Churchman, and the
     other to the estate of Colonel Crawford, deceased, took the
     cars at Staunton, on the morning of December 30, 1855, and
     made their way successfully to Baltimore, en route for a free
     State. At Baltimore they were detected just as they were
     about to take the train for Philadelphia, and information of
     their arrest was immediately forwarded to D. Churchman, of
     this place." On the following Friday they were taken back to
     Virginia. "They were so nearly white that their success in
     imposing upon the conductors of the cars is not astonishing,
     and the only wonder is that they were detected at all. Since
     their return, the negro girls have been sold--Mr. Churchman's
     for $1,050, and the other for $950."

     FANNY, a colored child of fire years old, was taken from
     Chicago, Illinois, into Tennessee, and sold for $250. A man
     named F.M. Chapman, with his servant William R. Tracy, were
     arrested as the kidnappers, and taken before Justice DeWolf.
     Chapman claimed to have owned the child in Arkansas, and to
     have brought her to Illinois [thereby making her free.] He
     procured Tracy to take the child to Tennessee and sell her.
     The result of the case not known. (January, 1856.)

     _Two fugitives_, passing through Ohio, (January, 1856,) were
     closely pursued and nearly overtaken at Columbus, Ohio. "Ten
     minutes previous warning only saved the fugitives from their
     pursuers." Deputy Marshal J. Underwood, being called on to
     act in the case, refused, and resigned his office, saying, he
     did not expect to be "called upon to help execute the odious
     Fugitive Slave Law."--_Cincinnati Commercial_.

[--> The following may, not improperly, find a place here.]

     The House of Delegates of Virginia, early in 1856, adopted
     the following:--"_Be it resolved by the General Assembly_,
     That our Representatives in Congress are requested, and our
     Senators be and are hereby instructed, to secure the passage
     of a law making full compensation to all owners whose slaves
     have or may hereafter escape into any of the non-slaveholding
     States of this Union, and there be withheld from those to
     whom such service or labor may be due."

     _Fourteen persons of color_, held at Los Angelos, California,
     early in 1856, as the servants of one Robert Smith, were
     brought before Judge Benjamin Hays, on a writ of _habeas
     corpus_. Smith alleged that he formerly resided in
     Mississippi, where he owned these persons; was now about to
     remove to Texas, and designed to take these persons with him
     as his slaves. Judge Hays decided that they were all free,
     and those under twenty-one years of age were placed in the
     charge of the sheriff, as their special guardian.--_Los
     Angelos Star._ The opinion of Judge Hays (who was said to be
     a native of South Carolina,) is a very able one, and under
     the circumstances, of much interest. It may be found in the
     _Standard_, of April 5, 1856.

     _Two colored lads_, named RALLS and LOGAN, living in
     Cincinnati, were kidnapped thence by two men, named Orr and
     Simpkins, and taken to St. Louis, Missouri, where the men
     tried to sell them. The men were arrested as kidnappers.
     (March, 1856.)

     _The Decatur (Illinois) Chronicle_ states that "a man charged
     with being a fugitive slave was recently arrested at that
     place and carried off, no one knows where. The sheriff of the
     county was the willing instrument in the hands of the
     claimants; no attempt to appeal to the law was made, the
     negro being carried off as if he were a stray horse or dog."
     The _Chicago Tribune_ says: "If this is a true statement of
     the affair, that sheriff has laid himself liable to the
     charge of kidnapping, and should at once be proceeded against
     with such rigor as his offence demands." (April, 1856.)

MARGARET GARNER _and seven others_, at Cincinnati, Ohio, January,
1856. Of this recent and peculiarly painful case we give a somewhat
detailed account, mainly taken from the Cincinnati papers of the
day.

     About ten o'clock on Sunday, 27th January, 1856, a
     party of eight slaves--two men, two women, and four
     children--belonging to Archibald K. Gaines and John Marshall,
     of Richwood Station, Boone County, Kentucky, about sixteen
     miles from Covington, escaped from their owners. Three of the
     party are father, mother, and son, whose names are Simon,
     Mary, and Simon, Jr.; the others are Margaret, wife of Simon,
     Jr., and her four children. The three first are the property
     of Marshall, and the others of Gaines.

     They took a sleigh and two horses belonging to Mr. Marshall,
     and drove to the river bank, opposite Cincinnati, and crossed
     over to the city on the ice. They were missed a few hours
     after their flight, and Mr. Gaines, springing on a horse,
     followed in pursuit. On reaching the river shore, he learned
     that a resident had found the horses standing in the road. He
     then crossed over to the City, and after a few hours diligent
     inquiry, he learned that his slaves were in a house about a
     quarter of a mile below the Mill Creek Bridge, on the river
     road, occupied by a colored man named Kite.

     He proceeded to the office of United States Commissioner John
     L. Pendery, and procuring the necessary warrants, with United
     States Deputy Marshal Ellis, and a large body of assistants,
     went on Monday to the place where his fugitives were
     concealed. Arriving at the premises, word was sent to the
     fugitives to surrender. A firm and decided negative was the
     response. The officers, backed by a large crowd, then made a
     descent. Breaking open the doors, they were assailed by the
     negroes with cudgels and pistols. Several shots were fired,
     but only one took effect, so far as we could ascertain. A
     bullet struck a man named John Patterson, one of the
     Marshal's deputies; tearing off a finger of his right hand,
     and dislocating several of his teeth. No other of the
     officers were injured, the negroes being rendered powerless
     before they could reload their weapons.

     On looking around, horrible was the sight which met the
     officers' eyes. In one corner of the room was a nearly white
     child, bleeding to death. Her throat was cut from ear to ear,
     and the blood was spouting out profusely, showing that the
     deed was but recently committed. Scarcely was this fact
     noticed, when a scream issuing from an adjoining room drew
     their attention thither. A glance into the apartment revealed
     a negro woman holding in her hand a knife literally dripping
     with gore, over the heads of two little negro children, who
     were crouched to the floor, and uttering the cries whose
     agonized peals had first startled them. Quickly the knife was
     wrested from the hand of the excited woman, and a more close
     investigation instituted as to the condition, of the infants.
     They were discovered to be cut across the head and
     shoulders, but not very seriously injured, although the blood
     trickled down their backs and upon their clothes.

     The woman avowed herself the mother of the children, and said
     that she had killed one and would like to kill the three
     others, rather than see them again reduced to slavery! By
     this time the crowd about the premises had become prodigious,
     and it was with no inconsiderable difficulty that the negroes
     were secured in carriages, and brought to the United States
     District Court-rooms, on Fourth Street. The populace followed
     the vehicle closely, but evinced no active desire to effect a
     rescue. Rumors of the story soon circulated all over the
     city. Nor were they exaggerated, as is usually the case. For
     once, reality surpassed the wildest thought of fiction.

     The slaves, on reaching the marshal's office, seated
     themselves around the stove with dejected countenances, and
     preserved a moody silence, answering all questions propounded
     to them in monosyllables, or refusing to answer at all. Simon
     is apparently about fifty-five years of age, and Mary about
     fifty. The son of Mr. Marshall, who is here, in order, if
     possible, to recover the property of his father, says that
     they have always been faithful servants, and have frequently
     been on this side of the river. Simon, Jr., is a young man,
     about twenty-two years old, of a very lithe and active form,
     and rather a mild and pleasant countenance. Margaret is a
     dark mulatto, twenty-three years of age; her countenance is
     far from being vicious, and her senses, yesterday, appeared
     partially stultified from the exciting trials she had
     endured. After remaining about two hours at the marshal's
     office, Commissioner Pendery announced that the slaves would
     be removed to the custody of the United States Marshal until
     nine o'clock Tuesday morning, when the case would come up for
     examination.

     The slaves were then taken down stairs to the street-door,
     when a wild and exciting scene presented itself; the
     sidewalks and the middle of the street were thronged with
     people, and a couple of coaches were at the door in order to
     convey the captives to the station-house. The slaves were
     guarded by a strong posse of officers, and as they made their
     appearance on the street, it was evident that there was a
     strong sympathy in their favor. When they were led to the
     carriage-doors, there were loud cries of "Drive on!" "Don't
     take them!" The coachmen, either from alarm or from a
     sympathetic feeling, put the whip to their horses, and drove
     rapidly off, leaving the officers with their fugitives on the
     sidewalk. They started on foot with their charge to the
     Hammond Street station-house, where they secured their
     prisoners for the night.

     The slaves claimed that they had been on this side of the
     river frequently, by consent of their masters.

     About three o'clock application was made to Judge Burgoyne
     for a writ of _habeas corpus_, to bring the slaves before
     him. This was put in the hands of Deputy Sheriff Buckingham
     to serve, who, accompanied by several assistants, proceeded
     to Hammond Street station-house, where the slaves were
     lodged. Mr. Bennett, Deputy United States Marshal, was
     unwilling to give them up, and a long time was spent
     parleying between the marshal and the sheriff's officers. The
     sheriff being determined that the writ should be executed,
     Mr. Bennett went out to take counsel with his friends.
     Finally, through the advice of Mayor Faran, Mr. Bennett
     agreed to lodge the slaves in the jail, ready to be taken out
     at the order of Judge Burgoyne. Mr. Buckingham obtained the
     complete control of the slaves.

     On the morning of the 29th, Sheriff Brashears, being advised
     by lawyers that Judge Burgoyne had no right to issue his writ
     for the slaves, and remembering Judge McLean's decision in
     the Rosetta case, made a return on the writ of _habeas
     corpus_, that the slaves were in the custody of the United
     States Marshal, and, therefore, without his jurisdiction.
     This returned the slaves to the custody of the Marshal. By
     agreement, the parties permitted the slaves to remain in the
     county jail during that day, with the understanding that
     their examination should commence the next morning, before
     Commissioner Pendery. An inquest had been held on the body of
     the child which was killed, and a verdict was found by the
     jury charging the death of the child upon the mother, who it
     was said would be held under the laws of Ohio to answer the
     charge of murder. An examination took place on Wednesday,
     before the United States Commissioner. Time was allowed their
     counsel to obtain evidence to show that they had been brought
     into the State at former times by their masters. A meeting of
     citizens was held on Thursday evening, to express sympathy
     with the alleged fugitives.

     The _Cincinnati Commercial_ of January 30, said:--The mother
     is of an interesting appearance, a mulatto of considerable
     intelligence of manner, and with a good address. In reply to
     a gentleman who yesterday complimented her upon the looks of
     her little boy, she said, "You should have seen my little
     girl that--that--[she did not like to say, was killed]--that
     died, that was the bird."

     The _Cincinnati Gazette_, of January 30, said:--We learn that
     the mother of the dead child acknowledges that she had killed
     it, and that her determination was to have killed all the
     children, and then destroy herself, rather than return to
     slavery. She and the others complain of cruel treatment on
     the part of their master, and allege that as the cause of
     their attempted escape.

     The coroner's jury, after examining the citizens present at
     the time of the arrest, went to the jail last evening, and
     examined the grandmother of the child--one of the slaves. She
     testified that the mother, when she saw they would be
     captured, caught a butcher knife and ran to the children,
     saying she would kill them rather than to have them return to
     slavery, and cut the throat of the child, calling on the
     grandmother to help her kill them. The grandmother said she
     would not do it, and hid under a bed.

     The jury gave a verdict as follows:--That said child was
     killed by its mother, Margaret Garner, with a butcher knife,
     with which she cut its throat.

     Two of the jurors also find that the two men arrested as
     fugitives were accessories to the murder.

     "The murdered child was almost white, and was a little girl
     of rare beauty."

     The examination of witnesses was continued until Monday,
     February 4, when the commissioner listened to the arguments
     of counsel until February 7th. Messrs. Jolliffe and Gitchell
     appeared for the fugitives, and Colonel Chambers, of
     Cincinnati, and Mr. Finnell, of Covington, Kentucky, for the
     claimants of the slaves. A great number of assistants,
     (amounting very nearly to five hundred,) were employed by the
     United States Marshal, H.H. Robinson, from the first, making
     the expenses to the United States Government very large; for
     their twenty-eight days' service alone, at $2.00 per day,
     amounting to over $22,000. February 8th, the case was closed,
     so far as related to the three slaves of Mr. Marshall, but
     the decision was postponed. The examination in regard to
     MARGARET and her children was farther continued. It was
     publicly stated that Commissioner Pendery had declared that
     he "would not send the woman back into slavery while a charge
     or indictment for murder lay against her." Colonel Chambers,
     counsel for the slave-claimants, in his argument, "read
     long extracts from a pamphlet entitled, 'A Northern
     Presbyter's Second Letter to Ministers of the Gospel of all
     Denominations, on Slavery, by Nathan Lord, of Dartmouth
     College,' approving and recommending Dr. Lord's views."
     Colonel Chambers having alluded, in his remarks, to Mrs. Lucy
     Stone Blackwell, and said that she had sought to give a knife
     to Margaret Garner, the Court gave permission to Mrs.
     Blackwell to reply to Colonel C. Mrs. B. preferred not to
     speak at the bar, but addressed the crowded court-room
     directly after the adjournment. Her eloquent remarks will be
     found in the papers of the day. At the close of the hearing,
     February 14th, the commissioner adjourned his court to the
     21st, afterwards to the 26th, when, he said, he would give
     his decision.

     Meantime the case was making some progress in the State
     courts. Sheriff Brashears having made return to the Common
     Pleas Court that the fugitives were in the custody of the
     United States Marshal, Judge Carter said this could not be
     received as a true return, as they were in the County jail,
     under the sheriff's control. The sheriff then amended his
     return, so as to state that the prisoners were in his
     custody, as required in the writ, and this was received by
     the Court. The fugitives now came fully into the charge of
     the State authorities. The sheriff held them "by virtue of a
     _capias_ issued on an indictment by the grand jury for
     murder."

     The slaves declared they would go dancing to the gallows
     rather than to be sent back into slavery.

     On the 26th February, Commissioner Pendery gave his decision.
     First, he refused to discharge Margaret and three others from
     the custody of the United States Marshal and deliver them to
     the Sheriff of Hamilton County, although held to answer,
     under the laws of Ohio, to the charge of murder. He then
     proceeded to consider the claim of Marshall to three of the
     slaves, decided it to be valid, and ordered them into
     Marshall's custody. He then considered Gaines's claim to
     Margaret and her three surviving children, decided that also
     to be good and valid, and ordered them to be delivered into
     the possession of said Gaines.

     The case of the rightful custody, as between the United
     States Marshal and the Ohio Sheriff also came on, February
     26th before Judge Leavitt, of the United States District
     Court, and was argued by counsel on both sides. On the 28th,
     Judge Leavitt decided that the custody was with the United
     States Marshal. The substance of Judge L.'s argument and
     decision is found in the following extract.

     "Judge McLean says: 'Neither this nor any other Court of the
     United States, nor Judge thereof, can issue a _habeas corpus_
     to bring up a prisoner who is in custody under the sentence
     or execution of a State Court, for any other purpose than to
     be used as a witness. And it is immaterial whether the
     imprisonment be under _civil or criminal process_.' If it be
     true, as there asserted, that no Federal Court can interfere
     with the exercise of the proper jurisdiction of a State
     Court, either in a civil or criminal case, the converse of
     the proposition is equally true. And it results that a State
     Court cannot take from an officer of the United States, even
     on a criminal charge, the custody of a person in execution on
     a civil case.

     "It is said in argument that if these persons cannot be held
     by the arrest of the Sheriff under the State process, the
     rights and dignity of Ohio are invaded without the
     possibility of redress. I cannot concur in this view. The
     Constitution and laws of the United States provide for a
     reclamation of these persons, by a demand on the Executive of
     Kentucky. It is true, if now remanded to the claimant and
     taken back to Kentucky as slaves, they cannot be said to have
     fled from justice in Ohio; but it would clearly be a case
     within the spirit and intention of the Constitution and the
     Act of Congress, and I trust nothing would be hazarded by the
     prediction that upon demand properly made upon the Governor
     of Kentucky, he would order them to be surrendered to the
     authorities of Ohio to answer to its violated law. I am sure
     it is not going too far to say that if the strictness of the
     law did not require this, an appeal to comity would not be in
     vain."

     Mr. Chambers said his client, Mr. Gaines, authorized him to
     say that he would hold the woman Margaret, who had killed her
     child, subject to the requisition of the Governor of Ohio, to
     answer for any crime she might have committed in Ohio.

     Judge Leavitt's decision covered the cases of the four adult
     fugitives. Another legal process was going on, at the same
     time, before Judge Burgoyne, of the Probate Court, viz.--a
     hearing under a writ of _habeas corpus_ allowed by Judge
     Burgoyne, alleging the illegal detention, by the United
     States Marshal, of the three negro children, Samuel, Thomas,
     and Silla Garner, which took place in the Probate Court,
     before Judge B., on the afternoon of February 27.

     Mr. Jolliffe said he represented the infants at the request
     of their father and mother, who had solicited him to save the
     children, if possible.

     Messrs. Headington and Ketchum appeared for the United States
     Marshal.

     Judge Burgoyne intimated that, in view of the serious and
     important questions involved, he should require some time to
     render a decision. He intimated, however, that a majority of
     the Judges of the Supreme Court having passed on the
     constitutionality of the Fugitive Slave Law was no reason why
     he should not take up the Constitution and read it for
     himself, being sworn to support the Constitution of the
     United States and the Constitution of the State of Ohio.

     Mr. Ketchum suggested that his Honor was as much bound in
     conscience to regard the decision of the majority of the
     Judges of the United States Courts as the express provisions
     of the Constitution itself.

     Judge Burgoyne said, that however the decisions of the Judges
     of the United States Courts might aid him in coming to a
     conclusion, where the obligations of his conscience were
     involved, he could not screen himself behind a decision made
     by somebody else.

     Judge Burgoyne subsequently decided that, in as far as the
     Fugitive Slave Law was intended to suspend the writ of
     _habeas corpus_--and he believed that it was so intended--it
     clearly transcended the limits prescribed by the
     Constitution, and is "utterly void." Judge B. required the
     United States Marshal to answer to the writ on the following
     Friday; and on his neglect to do so, fined and imprisoned
     him. Judge Leavitt, of the United States Court, soon released
     the Marshal from prison.

     The _Cincinnati Columbian_, of February 29, gave the
     following account:--The last act of the drama of the
     fugitives was yesterday performed by the rendition of the
     seven persons whose advent into the city, under the bloody
     auspices of murder, caused such a sensation in the community.
     After the decision of Judge Leavitt, Sheriff Brashears
     surrendered the four fugitives in his custody, under a
     _capias_ from an Ohio court, to United States Marshal
     Robinson. An omnibus was brought to the jail, and the
     fugitives were led into it--a crowd of spectators looking on.

     Margaret was in custody of Deputy-Marshal Brown. She appeared
     greatly depressed and dispirited. The little infant, Silla,
     was carried by Pfc. Russell, the door-keeper of the United
     States Court, and was crying violently. Pollock, the reporter
     of the proceedings in the United States Court, conducted
     another of the fugitives, and all were safely lodged in the
     omnibus, which drove down to the Covington ferry-boat; but,
     although a large crowd followed it, no hootings or other
     signs of excitement or disapprobation were shown.

     On arriving at the Kentucky shore, a large crowd was in
     attendance, which expressed its pleasure at the termination
     of the long proceedings in this city by triumphant shouts.
     The fugitives were escorted to the jail, where they were
     safely incarcerated, and the crowd moved off to the Magnolia
     Hotel, where several toasts were given and drank. The crowd
     outside were addressed from the balcony by H.H. Robinson,
     Esq., United States Marshal for the Southern District of
     Ohio, who declared that he had done his duty and no more, and
     that it was a pleasure to him to perform an act that added
     another link to the glorious chain that bound the Union.
     [What a _Union_! For what "glorious" purposes!]

     Mr. Finnell, attorney for the claimants, said he never loved
     the Union so dearly as now. It was proved to be a substantial
     reality.

     Judge Flinn also addressed to the crowd one of his peculiar
     orations; and was followed by Mr. Gaines, owner of Margaret
     and the children. After hearty cheering the crowd dispersed.

     Further to signalize their triumph, the slaveholders set on
     the Covington mob to attack Mr. Babb, reporter for one of the
     Cincinnati papers, on the charge of being an abolitionist,
     and that gentleman was knocked down, kicked, trampled on,
     and would undoubtedly have been murdered, but for the
     interference of some of the United States Deputy Marshals.

     A legal irregularity on the part of the Sheriff was brought
     to the notice of Judge Carter on the morning of February 29.
     It was passed over lightly.

     On the Sunday after the delivery of the slaves, they were
     visited in the Covington jail by Rev. P.C. Bassett, whose
     account of his interview, especially with Margaret, was
     published in the _American Baptist_, and may also be found in
     the _National Antislavery Standard_ of March 15, 1850.
     Margaret confessed that she had killed the child. "I
     inquired," says Mr. Bassett, "if she were not excited almost
     to madness when she committed the act! 'No,' she replied, 'I
     was as cool as I now am; and would much rather kill them at
     once, and thus end their sufferings, than have them taken
     back to slavery and be murdered by piece-meal.' She then told
     the story of her wrongs. She spoke of her days of suffering,
     of her nights of unmitigated toil, while the bitter tears
     coursed their way down her cheeks."

     Governor Chase, of Ohio, made a requisition upon Governor
     Morehead, of Kentucky, for the surrender of Margaret Garner,
     charged with murder. The requisition was taken by Joseph
     Cooper, Esq. to Gov. Morehead, at Frankfort, on the _6th of
     March_--an unpardonable delay in the circumstances. Gov.
     Morehead issued an order for the surrender of Margaret. On
     taking it to Louisville, Mr. Cooper found that Margaret, with
     her infant child, and the rest of Mr. Gaines's slaves had
     been sent down the river in the steamboat Henry Lewis, to be
     sold in Arkansas. Thus it was that Gaines kept his pledged
     word that Margaret should be surrendered upon the requisition
     of the Governor of Ohio! On the passage down the Ohio, the
     steamboat, in which the slaves were embarked, came in
     collision with another boat, and so violently that Margaret
     and her child, with many others, were thrown into the water.
     About twenty-five persons perished. A colored man seized
     Margaret and drew her back to the boat, but her babe was
     drowned! "The mother," says a correspondent of the
     _Louisville Courier_, "exhibited no other feeling than joy at
     the loss of her child." So closed another act of this
     terrible tragedy. The slaves were transferred to another
     boat, and taken to their destination. (_See_ Mr. Cooper's
     letter to Gov. Chase, dated Columbus, March 11, 1856.) Almost
     immediately on the above tragic news, followed the tidings
     that Gaines had determined to bring Margaret back to
     Covington, Kentucky, and hold her subject to the requisition
     of the Governor of Ohio. Evidently he could not stand up
     under the infamy of his conduct. Margaret was brought back,
     and placed in Covington jail, to await a requisition. On
     Wednesday, Mr. Cox, the prosecuting-attorney, received the
     necessary papers from Gov. Chase, and the next day
     (Thursday), two of the Sheriffs deputies went over to
     Covington for Margaret, but did not find her, as she had been
     taken away from the jail the night before. The jailor said he
     had given her up on Wednesday night, to a man who came there
     with a written order from her master, Gaines, but could not
     tell where she had been taken. The officers came back and
     made a return 'not found.'

     The _Cincinnati Gazette_ said,--"On Friday our sheriff
     received information which induced him to believe that she
     had been sent on the railroad to Lexington, thence via
     Frankfort to Louisville, there to be shipped off to the New
     Orleans slave market.

     He immediately telegraphed to the sheriff at Louisville (who
     holds the original warrant from Gov. Morehead, granted on the
     requisition of Gov. Chase,) to arrest her there, and had a
     deputy in readiness to go down for her. But he has received
     no reply to his dispatch. As she was taken out on Wednesday
     night, there is reason to apprehend that she has already
     passed Louisville, and is now on her way to New Orleans.

     Why Mr. Gaines brought Margaret back at all, we cannot
     comprehend. If it was to vindicate his character, he was most
     unfortunate in the means he selected, for his duplicity has
     now placed this in a worse light than ever before, and kept
     before the public the miserable spectacle of his dishonor.

     We have learned now, by experience, what is that boasted
     comity of Kentucky on which Judge Leavitt so earnestly
     advised Ohio to rely."

     The assertion of the _Louisville Journal_, that Margaret was
     kept in Covington jail "ten days," and that the Ohio
     authorities had been notified of the same, is pronounced to
     be untrue in both particulars by the _Cincinnati Gazette_,
     which paper also declares that prompt action was taken by the
     governor of Ohio, and the attorney and sheriff of Hamilton
     County, as soon as the fact was known.

     Here we must leave MARGARET, a noble woman indeed, whose
     heroic spirit and daring have won the willing, and extorted
     the unwilling, admiration of hundreds of thousands. Alas for
     her! after so terrible a struggle, so bloody a sacrifice, so
     near to deliverance once, twice, and even a third time, to
     be, by the villainy and lying or her "respectable" white
     owner again engulphed in the abyss of Slavery! What her fate
     is to be, it is not hard to conjecture. But friendless,
     heart-stricken, robbed of her children, outraged as she has
     been, not wholly without friends,

         "Yea, three firm friends, more sure than day and night,
          Herself, her Maker, and the angel Death."



Extract from a sermon recently delivered in Cleveland, Ohio, by Rev.
H. BUSHNELL, from the following text: "And it was so, that all that
saw it, said, There was no such deed done nor seen from the day that
the children of Israel came up out of the land of Egypt unto this
day: CONSIDER OF IT, TAKE ADVICE, AND SPEAK YOUR MINDS."--JUDGES
XIX: 30.

     A few weeks ago, just at dawn of day, might be seen a company
     of strangers crossing the winter bridge over the Ohio River,
     from the State of Kentucky, into the great city of our own
     State, whose hundred church-spires point to heaven, telling
     the travellers that in this place the God of Abraham was
     worshipped, and that here Jesus the Messiah was known, and
     his religion of love taught and believed. And yet, no one
     asked them in or offered them any hospitality, or sympathy,
     or assistance. After wandering from street to street, a poor
     laboring man gave them the shelter of his humble cabin, for
     they were strangers and in distress. Soon it was known abroad
     that this poor man had offered them the hospitalities of his
     home, and a rude and ferocious rabble soon gathered around
     his dwelling, demanding his guests. With loud clamor and
     horrid threatening they broke down his doors, and rushed upon
     the strangers. They were an old man and his wife, their
     daughter and her husband with four children; and they were of
     the tribe of slaves fleeing from a bondage which was worse
     than death. There was now no escape--the tribes of Israel had
     banded against them. On the side of the oppressor there is
     power. And the young wife and mother, into whose very soul
     the iron had entered, hearing the cry of the master: "Now
     we'll have you all!" turning from the side of her husband and
     father, with whom she had stood to repel the foe, seized a
     knife, and with a single blow nearly severed the head from
     the body of her darling daughter, and throwing its bloody
     corpse at his feet, exclaimed, "Yes, you _shall_ have us all!
     take that!" and with another blow inflicted a ghastly wound
     upon the head of her beautiful son, repeating, "Yes, you
     _shall_ have us all--take that!" meanwhile calling upon her
     old mother to help her in the quick work of emancipation--for
     there were two more. But the pious old grandmother could not
     do it, and it was now too late--the rescuers had subdued and
     bound them. They were on their way back to the house of their
     bondage--a life more bitter than death! On their way through
     that city of churches whose hundred spires told of Jesus and
     the good Father above; on their way amid the throng of
     Christian men, whose noble sires had said and sung, "Give me
     _liberty_, or give me _death_."

     But they all tarried in the great Queen City of the West--in
     chains, and in a felon's cell. There our preacher visited
     them again and again. There he saw the old grandfather and
     his aged companion, whose weary pilgrimage of unrequited toil
     and tears was nearly at its end. And there stood the young
     father and the heroic wife "Margaret." Said the preacher,
     "Margaret, why did you kill your child?" "It was my own," she
     said, "given me of God, to do the best a mother could in its
     behalf. _I have done the best I could!_ I would have done
     more and better for the rest! I knew it was better for them
     to go home to God than back to slavery." "But why did you not
     trust in God--why not wait and hope?" "I did wait, and then
     we dared to do, and fled in fear, but in hope; hope fled--God
     did not appear to save--_I did the best I could!"_

     And who was this woman? A noble, womanly, amiable,
     _affectionate mother_. "But was she not deranged?" Not at
     all--calm, intelligent, but resolute and determined. "But was
     she not fiendish, or beside herself with passion?" No, she
     was most tender and affectionate, and all her passion was
     that of a _mother's fondest love_. I reasoned with her, said
     the preacher; tried to awaken a sense of guilt, and lead her
     to repentance and to Christ. But there was no remorse, no
     desire of pardon, no reception of Christ or his religion. To
     her it was a religion of _slavery_, more cruel than death.
     And where had she lived? where thus taught? Not down among
     the rice swamps of Georgia, or on the banks of Red River. No,
     but within sixteen miles of the Queen City of the West! In a
     nominally Christian family--whose master was most liberal in
     support of the Gospel, and whose mistress was a communicant
     at the Lord's table, and a professed follower of Christ!
     Here, in this family, where slavery is found in its mildest
     form, she had been kept in ignorance of God's will and word,
     and learned to know that the mildest form of American
     slavery, at this day of Christian civilization and Democratic
     liberty, was worse than death itself! She had learned by an
     experience of many years, that it was so bad she had rather
     take the life of her own dearest child, without the hope of
     Heaven for herself, than that _it_ should experience its
     unutterable agonies, which were to be found even in a
     Christian family! But here are her two little boys, of eight
     and ten years of age. Taking the eldest boy by the hand, the
     preacher said to him, kindly and gently, "Come here, my boy;
     what is your name?" "Tom, sir." "Yes, _Thomas_." "No sir,
     _Tom_." "Well, Tom, how old are you?" "Three _months_." "And
     how old is your little brother?" "Six _months_, sir!" "And
     have you no other name but Tom?" "No." "What is your father's
     name?" "Haven't got any!" "Who made you, Tom?" "Nobody!" "Did
     you ever hear of God or Jesus Christ?" "No, sir." And this
     was slavery in its best estate. By and by the aged couple,
     and the young man and his wife, the remaining children, with
     the master, and the dead body of the little one, were
     escorted through the streets of the Queen City of the West by
     a _national guard of armed men_, back to the great and
     chivalrous State of old Kentucky and away to the shambles of
     the South--back to a life-long servitude of hopeless despair.
     It was a long, sad, silent procession down to the banks of
     the Ohio; and as it passed, the death-knell of freedom tolled
     heavily. The sovereignty of Ohio trailed in the dust beneath
     the oppressor's foot, and the great confederacy of the tribes
     of modern Israel attended the funeral obsequies, and made
     ample provision for the necessary expenses! "And it was so,
     that all that saw it, said, _There was no such deed done, nor
     seen from the day that the children of Israel came up out of
     the land of Egypt unto this day_; CONSIDER OF IT, TAKE
     ADVICE, AND SPEAK YOUR MINDS!"



With the sad case of MARGARET GARNER we close, for the present, the
record of the Fugitive Slave Law, as its history has been daily
writing itself in our country's annals. Enactment of hell! which has
marked every step of its progress over the land by suffering and by
crimes,--crimes of the bloodiest dye, groanings which cannot fully
be uttered; which is tracked by the dripping blood of its victims,
by their terrors and by their despair; against which, and against
that Wicked Nation which enacted it, and which suffers it still to
stand as their LAW, the cries of the down-trodden poor go up
continually into the ears of God,--cries of bitterest anguish,
mingled with fiercest execrations--thousands of Rachels weeping for
their children, and will not be comforted, because they _are not_.

Reader, is your patriotism of the kind which believes, with the
supporters of old monarchies, that the Sovereign Power can do no
wrong? Consider the long record which has been laid before you, and
say if your country has not enacted a most wicked, cruel, and
shameful law, which merits only the condemnation and abhorrence of
every heart. Consider that this law was aimed at the life, liberty,
and happiness of the poor and least-privileged portion of our
people--a class whom the laws should befriend, protect, and raise
up. What is the true character of a law, whose working, whose fruits
are such as this meagre outline of its history shows? Is it fit that
such deeds and such a law should have your sanction and support?
Will you remain in a moment's doubt whether to be a friend or a foe
to such a law? Will you countenance or support the man, in the
church or in the state, who is not its open and out-spoken opponent?
Will you not, rather, yourself trample it under foot, as alike the
disgrace of your country, the enemy of humanity, and the enemy of
God? And nobly join, with heart and hand, every honest man who seeks
to load with the opprobrium they deserve, the law itself and
everything that justifies and upholds it?


In this tract no mention is made of that great company of slaves
who, flying from their intolerable wrongs and burdens, are overtaken
before reaching the Free States--(alas, that we should mock
ourselves with this empty name of _free_!)--and carried back into a
more remote and hopeless slavery; nor of the thousands who, having
fled in former years, and established themselves in industry and
comfort in the Northern States, were compelled again to become
fugitives, leaving their little all behind them, into a still more
Northern land where, under British law, they find at last a
resting-place and protection; nor to any great extent of the
numerous cases of white citizens, prosecuted, fined, harassed in
every way, for the _crime_ of giving shelter and succor to the
hunted wanderers. To have included these--all emphatically _victims_
of the Fugitive Slave Law--would swell our tract into a volume. What
a testimony against our land and our people is given by their
accumulated weight! EVERY LIVING MAN AND WOMAN is GUILTY OF THIS
GREAT SIN, WHO EITHER BY APOLOGY, OR BY SILENCE, LENDS IT THE LEAST
SUPPORT.

--> In a record like the foregoing, dealing so largely with facts
and dates, perfect accuracy is not to be expected, although much
pains have been taken to make it strictly correct. Any information,
on good authority, which will help to make the record more exact,
or more complete, will be very gratefully received. It should be
addressed to SAMUEL MAY, JR., No. 21 Cornhill, Boston, Mass.



Published at the office of the AMERICAN ANTI-SLAVERY SOCIETY,
No. 138 Nassau Street, New York. Also to be had at the Anti-Slavery
Offices, No. 21 Cornhill, Boston, and No. 31 North Fifth Street,
Philadelphia; of JOEL McMILLAN, Salem, Columbiana Co., Ohio, and
of JACOB WALTON, Jr., Adrian, Michigan.