length exhausted, the last victim would be restored. This was the
notion of Origen, the basis of the doctrine of purgatory, and the
view of most of the Restorationists. Thirdly, it has been imagined
that, by the good pleasure and fixed laws of God, all men are
destined to an impartial, absolute, and instant salvation beyond
the grave: all sins are justly punished, all moral distinctions
equitably compensated, in this life; in the future an equal glory
awaits all men, by the gracious and eternal election of God, as
revealed to us in the benignant mission of Christ. This is the
peculiar conception distinguishing some members of the
denomination now known as Universalists. Finally, it has been
believed that the freedom and probation granted here extend into
the life to come; that the aim of all future punishment will be
remedial, beneficent, not revengeful; that stronger motives will
be applied for producing repentance, and grander attractions to
holiness be felt; and that thus, at some time or other, even the
most sunken and hardened souls will be regenerated and raised up
to heaven in the image of God. Almost all Universalists, most
Unitarians, and large number of individual Christians outwardly
affiliated with other denominations, now accept and cherish this
theory.

One important variation from the doctrine of the dominant sects,
in connection with the present subject, is worthy of special
notice. We refer to the celebrated controversy waged in England,
in the first part of the eighteenth century, in regard to the
intermediate state of the dead. The famous Dr. Coward and a few
supporters labored, with much zeal, skill, and show of learning,
to prove the natural mortality of the soul. They asserted this to
be both a philosophical truth proved by scientific facts and a
Christian doctrine declared in Scripture and taught by the
Fathers. They argued that the soul is not an independent entity,
but is merely the life of the body. Proceeding thus far on the
principles of a materialistic science, they professed to complete
their theory from Scripture, without doing violence to any
doctrine of the acknowledged religion.6 The finished scheme was
this. Man was naturally mortal; but, by the pleasure and will of
God, he would have been immortally preserved alive had he not
sinned. Death is the consequence of sin, and man utterly perishes
in the grave. But God will restore the dead, through Christ, at
the day of the general resurrection which he has foretold in the
gospel.7 Some of the writers in this copious controversy
maintained that previous to the advent of Christ death was eternal
annihilation to all except a few who enjoyed an inspired
anticipatory faith in him, but that all who died after his coming
would be restored in the resurrection, the faithful to be advanced
to heaven, the wicked to be the victims of unending torture.8
Clarke and Baxter both wrote with extreme ability in support of
the natural immortality and separate existence of the soul. On the
other hand, the learned Henry Dodwell cited, from the lore of
three thousand years, a plausible body of authorities to show that
the soul is in itself but a mortal breath. He also contended, by a
singular perversion of figurative phrases from the New Testament
and from some of the Fathers, that,

6 Coward, Search after Souls.

7 Hallet, No Resurrection, no Future State.

8 Coward, Defence of the Search after Souls. Dodwell, Epistolary
Discourse. Peckard, Observations. Fleming, Survey of the Search
after Souls. Law, State of Separate Spirits. Layton, Treatise of
Departed Souls.


in counteraction of man's natural mortality, all who undergo
baptism at the hands of the ordained ministers of the Church of
England the only true priesthood in apostolic succession thereby
receive an immortalizing spirit brought into the world by Christ
and committed to his successors. This immortalizing spirit
conveyed by baptism would secure their resurrection at the last
day. Those destitute of this spirit would never awake from the
oblivious sleep of death, unless as he maintained will actually be
the case with a large part of the dead they are arbitrarily
immortalized by the pleasure of God, in order to suffer eternal
misery in hell! Absurd and shocking as this fancy was, it obtained
quite a number of converts, and made no slight impression at the
time. One of the writers in this controversy asserted that Luther
himself had been a believer in the death or sleep of the soul
until the day of judgment.9 Certain it is that such a belief had
at one period a considerable prevalence. Its advocates were called
Psychopannychians. Calvin wrote a vehement assault on them. The
opinion has sunk into general disrepute and neglect, and it would
be hard to find many avowed disciples of it. The nearly universal
sentiment of Christendom would now exclaim, in the quaint words of
Henry More,

"What! has old Adam snorted all this time Under some senselesse
clod, with sleep ydead?" 10

John Asgill printed, in the year 1700, a tract called "An argument
to prove that by the new covenant man may be translated into
eternal life without tasting death." He argues that the law of
death was a consequence of Adam's sin and was annulled by Christ's
sacrifice. Since that time men have died only because of an
obstinate habit of dying formed for many generations. For his
part, he has the independence and resolution to withstand the
universal pusillanimity and to refuse to die. He has discovered
"an engine in Divinity to convey man from earth to heaven." He
will "play a trump on death and show himself a match for the
devil!"

While treating of the various Protestant views of the future life,
it would be a glaring defect to overlook the remarkable doctrine
on that subject published by Emanuel Swedenborg and now held by
the intelligent, growing body of believers called after his name.
It would be impossible to exhibit this system adequately in its
scientific bases and its complicated details without occupying
more space than can be afforded here. Nor is this necessary, now
that his own works have been translated and are easily accessible
everywhere. His "Heaven and Hell," "Heavenly Arcana," "Doctrine of
Influx," and "True Christian

9 Blackburne, View of the Controversy Concerning an Intermediate
State: appendix. It is probable that the great Reformer's opinion
on this point was not always the same. For he says, distinctly,
"The first man who died, when he awakes at the last day, will
think he has been asleep but an hour" Beste, Dr. M. Luther's
Glaubenslehre, cap. iv.: Die Lehre von den Letzen Dingen. Yet. J.
S. Muller seems conclusively to prove the truth of the proposition
which forms the title of his book, "Dass Luther die Lehre vom
Seelenschlafe nie geglaubt habe."

10 The controversy concerning the natural immortality of the soul
has within a few years raged afresh. The principal combatants were
Dobney, Storrs, White, Morris, and Hinton. See Athanasia, by J. H.
Hinton, London, 1849.


Religion," contain manifold statements and abundant illustrations
of every thing important bearing on his views of the theme before
us. We shall merely attempt to present a brief synopsis of the
essential principles, accompanied by two or three suggestions of
criticism.

Swedenborg conceives man to be an organized receptacle of truth
and love from God. He is an imperishable spiritual body placed for
a season of probation in a perishable material body. Every moment
receiving the essence of his being afresh from God, and returning
it through the fruition of its uses devoutly rendered in conscious
obedience and joyous worship, he is at once a subject of personal,
and a medium of the Divine, happiness. The will is the power of
man's life, and the understanding is its form. When the will is
disinterested love and the understanding is celestial truth, then
man fulfils the end of his being, and his home is heaven; he is a
spirit frame into which the goodness of God perpetually flows, is
humbly acknowledged, gratefully enjoyed, and piously returned. But
when his will is hatred or selfishness and his understanding is
falsehood or evil, then his powers are abused, his destiny
inverted, and his fate hell. While in the body in this world he is
placed in freedom, on probation, between these two alternatives.

The Swedenborgian universe is divided into four orders of abodes.
In the highest or celestial world are the heavens of the angels.
In the lowest or infernal world are the hells of the demons. In
the intermediate or spiritual world are the earths inhabited by
men, and surrounded by the transition state through which souls,
escaping from their bodies, after a while soar to heaven or sink
to hell, according to their fitness and attraction. In this life
man is free, because he is an energy in equilibrium between the
influences of heaven and hell. The middle state surrounding man is
full of spirits, some good and some bad. Every man is accompanied
by swarms of both sorts of spirits, striving to make him like
themselves. Now, there are two kinds of influx into man. Mediate
influx is when the spirits in the middle state flow into man's
thoughts and affections. The good spirits are in communication
with heaven, and they carry what is good and true; the evil
spirits are in communication with hell, and they carry what is
evil and false. Between these opposed and reacting agencies man is
in an equilibrium whose essence is freedom. Deciding for himself,
if he turns with embracing welcome to the good spirits, he is
thereby placed and lives in conjunction with heaven; but if he
turns, on the contrary, with predominant love to the bad spirits,
he is placed in conjunction with hell and draws his life thence.
From heaven, therefore, through the good spirits, all the elements
of saving goodness flow sweetly down and are appropriated by the
freedom of the good man; while from hell, through the bad spirits,
all the elements of damning evil flow foully up and are
appropriated by the freedom of the bad man.

The other kind of influx is called immediate. This is when the
Lord himself, the pure substance of truth and good, flows into
every organ and faculty of man. This influx is perpetual, but is
received as truth and good only by the true and good. It is
rejected, suffocated, or perverted by those who are in love with
falsities and evils. So the light of the sun produces colors
varying with the substances it falls on, and water takes forms
corresponding to the vessels it is poured into.

The whole invisible world heaven, hell, and the middle state is
peopled solely from the different families of the human race
occupying the numerous material globes of the universe. The good,
on leaving the fleshly body, are angels, the bad, demons. There is
no angel nor demon who was created such at first. Satan is not a
personality, but is a figurative term standing for the whole
complex of hell. In the invisible world, time and space in one
sense cease to be; in another sense they remain unchanged. They
virtually cease because all our present measures of them are
annihilated;11 they virtually remain because exact correspondences
to them are left. To spirits, time is no longer measured by the
revolution of planets, but by the succession of inward states;
space is measured not by way marks and the traversing of
distances, but by inward similitudes and dissimilitudes. Those who
are unlike are sundered by gulfs of difference. Those who are
alike are together in their interiors. Thought and love,
forgetfulness and hate, are not hampered by temporal and spatial
boundaries. Spiritual forces and beings spurn material
impediments, and are united or separate, reciprocally visible or
invisible, mutually conscious or unconscious, according to their
own laws of kindred or alien adaptedness.

The soul the true man is its own organized and deathless body, and
when it leaves its earthly house of flesh it knows the only
resurrection, and the cast off frame returns to the dust forever.
Swedenborg repeatedly affirms with emphasis that no one is born
for hell, but that all are born for heaven, and that when any one
comes into hell it is from his own free fault. He asserts that
every infant, wheresoever born, whether within the Church or out
of it, whether of pious parents or of impious, when he dies is
received by the Lord, and educated in heaven, and becomes an
angel. A central principle of which he never loses sight is that
"a life of charity, which consists in acting sincerely and justly
in every function, in every engagement, and in every work, from a
heavenly motive, according to the Divine laws, is possible to
every one, and infallibly leads to heaven." It does not matter
whether the person leading such a life be a Christian or a
Gentile. The only essential is that his ruling motive be divine
and his life be in truth and good.

The Swedenborgian doctrine concerning Christ and his mission is
that he was the infinite God incarnate, not incarnate for the
purpose of expiating human sin and purchasing a ransom for the
lost by vicarious sufferings, but for the sake of suppressing the
rampant power of the hells, weakening the influx of the infernal
spirits, setting an example to men, and revealing many important
truths. The advantage of the Christian over the pagan is that the
former is enlightened by the celestial knowledge contained in the
Bible, and animated by the affecting motives presented in the
drama of the Divine incarnation. There is no probation after this
life. Just as one is on leaving the earth he goes into the
spiritual world. There his

11 Philo the Jew says, (vol. i. p. 277, ed. Mangey,) "God is the
Father of the world: the world is the father of time, begetting it
by its own motion: time, therefore, holds the place of grandchild
to God." But the world is only one measure of time; another, and a
more important one, is the inward succession of the spirit's
states of consciousness. Between Philo and Swedenborg, it may be
remarked here, there are many remarkable correspondences both of
thought and language. For example, Philo says, (vol. i. p. 494,)
"Man is a small kosmos, the kosmos is a grand man."


ruling affection determines his destiny, and that affection can
never be extirpated or changed to all eternity. After death, evil
life cannot in any manner or degree be altered to good life, nor
infernal love be transmuted to angelic love, inasmuch as every
spirit from head to foot is in quality such as his love is, and
thence such as his life is, so that to transmute this life into
the opposite is altogether to destroy the spirit. It were easier,
says Swedenborg, to change a night bird into a dove, an owl into a
bird of paradise, than to change a subject of hell into a subject
of heaven after the line of death has been crossed. But why the
crossing of that line should make such an infinite difference he
does not explain; nor does he prove it as a fact.

The moral reason and charitable heart of Swedenborg vehemently
revolted from the Calvinistic doctrines of predestination and
vicarious atonement, and the group of thoughts that cluster around
them. He always protests against these dogmas, refutes them with
varied power and consistency; and the leading principles of his
own system are creditable to human nature, and attribute no
unworthiness to the character of God. A debt of eternal gratitude
is due to Swedenborg that his influence, certainly destined to be
powerful and lasting, is so clearly calculated to advance the
interests at once of philosophic intelligence, social affection,
and true piety. The superiorities of his view of the future life
over those which it seeks to supplant are weighty and numerous.
The following may be reckoned among the most prominent.

First, without predicating of God any aggravated severity or
casting the faintest shadow on his benevolence, it gives us the
most appalling realization of the horribleness of sin and of its
consequences. God is commonly represented in effect, at least as
flaming with anger against sinners, and forcibly flinging them
into the unappeasable fury of Tophet, where his infinite vengeance
may forever satiate itself on them. But, Swedenborg says, God is
incapable of hatred or wrath: he casts no one into hell; but the
wicked go where they belong by their own election, from the
inherent fitness and preference of their ruling love. The evil man
desires to be in hell because there he finds his food, employment,
and home; in heaven he would suffer unutterable agonies from every
circumstance. The wicked go into hell by the necessary and
benignant love of God, not by his indignation; and their
retributions are in their own characters, not in their prison
house. This does not flout and trample all magnanimity, nor shock
the heart of piety; and yet, showing us men compelled to prefer
wallowing in the filth and iniquities of hell, clinging to the
very evils whose pangs transfix them, it gives us the direst of
all the impressions of sin, and beneath the lowest deep of the
popular hell opens to our shuddering conceptions a deep of
loathsomeness immeasurably lower still.

Secondly, the Swedenborgian doctrine of the conditions of
salvation or reprobation, when compared with the popular doctrine,
is marked by striking depth of insight, justice, and liberality.
Every man is free. Every man has power to receive the influx of
truth and good from the Lord and convert it to its blessed and
saving uses, piety towards God, good will towards the neighbor,
and all kinds of right works. Who does this, no matter in what
land or age he lives, becomes an heir of heaven. Who perverts
those Divine gifts to selfishness and unrighteous deeds becomes a
subject of hell. No mere opinion, no mere profession, no mere
ritual services, no mere external obedience, not all these things
together, can save a man, nor their absence condemn him; but the
controlling motive of his life, the central and ruling love which
constitutes the substance of his being, this decides every man's
doom. The view is simple, reasonable, just, necessary. And so is
the doctrine of degrees accompanying it; namely, that there are in
heaven different grades and qualities of exaltation and delight,
and in hell of degradation and woe, for different men according to
their capacities and deserts. A profoundly ethical character
pervades the scheme, and the great stamp of law is over it all.

Thirdly, a manifest advantage of Swedenborg's doctrine over the
popular doctrine is the intimate connection it establishes between
the present and the future, the visible and the invisible, God and
man. Heaven and hell are not distant localities, entrance into
which is to be won or avoided by moral artifices or sacramental
subterfuges, but they are states of being depending on personal
goodness or evil. God is not throned at the heart or on the apex
of the universe, where at some remote epoch we hope to go and see
him, but he is the Life feeding our lives freshly every instant.
The spiritual world, with all its hosts, sustains and arches,
fills and envelops us. Death is the dropping of the outer body,
the lifting of an opaque veil, and we are among the spirits,
unchanged, as we were before. Judgment is not a tribunal dawning
on the close of the world's weary centuries, but the momentary
assimilation of a celestial or an infernal love leading to states
and acts, rewards and retributions, corresponding. Before this
view the dead universe becomes a live transparency overwritten
with the will, tremulous with the breath, and irradiate with the
illumination of God.

We cannot but regret that the Swedenborgian view of the future
life should be burdened and darkened with the terrible error of
the dogma of eternal damnation, spreading over the state of all
the subjects of the hells the pall of immitigable hopelessness,
denying that they can ever make the slightest ameliorating
progress. We have never been able to see force enough in any of
the arguments or assertions advanced in support of this tremendous
horror to warrant the least hesitation in rejecting it. For
ourselves, we must regard it as incredible, and think that God
cannot permit it. Instruction, reformation, progress, are the
final aims of punishment. Aspiration is the concomitant of
consciousness, and the authentic voice of God. Surely, sooner or
later, in the boonful eternities of being, every creature capable
of intelligence, allied to the moral law, drawing life from the
Infinite, must begin to travel the ascending path of virtue and
blessedness, and never retrograde again.

Neither can we admit in general the claim made by Swedenborg and
by his disciples that the way in which he arrived at his system of
theology elevates it to the rank of a Divine revelation. It is
asserted that God opened his interior vision, so that he saw what
had hitherto been concealed from the eyes of men in the flesh,
namely, the inhabitants, laws, contents, and experiences of the
spiritual world, and thus that his statements are not speculations
or arguments, but records of unerring knowledge, his descriptions
not fanciful pictures of the imagination, but literal transcripts
of the truth he saw. This, in view of the great range of known
experience, is not intrinsically probable, and we have seen no
proof of it. Judging from what we know of psychological and
religious history, it is far more likely that a man should
confound his intangible reveries with solid fact than that he
should be inspired by God to reveal a world of mysterious truths.
Furthermore, while we are impressed with the reasonableness,
probability, and consistency of most of the general principles of
Swedenborg's exposition of the future life, we cannot but shrink
from many of the details and forms in which he carries them out.
Notwithstanding the earnest avowals of able disciples of his
school that all his details are strictly necessitated by his
premises, and that all his premises are laws of truth, we are
compelled to regard a great many of his assertions as purely
arbitrary and a great many of his descriptions as purely fanciful.
But, denying that his scheme of eschatology is a scientific
representation of the reality, and looking at it as a poetic
structure reared by co working knowledge and imagination on the
ground of reason, nature, and morality,  whose foundation walls,
columns, and grand outlines are truth, while many of its details,
ornaments, and images are fancy, it must be acknowledged to be one
of the most wonderful examples of creative power extant in the
literature of the world. No one who has mastered it with
appreciative mind will question this. There are, expressed and
latent, in the totality of Swedenborg's accounts of hell and
heaven, more variety of imagery, power of moral truth and appeal,
exhibition of dramatic justice, transcendent delights of holiness
and love, curdling terrors of evil and woe, strength of
philosophical grasp, and sublimity of emblematic conception, than
are to be found in Dante's earth renowned poem. We say this of the
substance of his ideas, not of the shape and clothing in which
they are represented. Swedenborg was no poet in language and form,
only in conception.

Take this picture. In the topmost height of the celestial world
the Lord appears as a sun, and all the infinite multitudes of
angels, swarming up through the innumerable heavens, wherever they
are, continually turn their faces towards him in love and joy. But
at the bottom of the infernal world is a vast ball of blackness,
towards which all the hosts of demons, crowding down through the
successive hells, forever turn their eager faces away from God. Or
consider this. Every thing consists of a great number of perfect
leasts like itself: every heart is an aggregation of little
hearts, every lung an aggregation of little lungs, every eye an
aggregation of little eyes. Following out the principle, every
society in the spiritual world is a group of spirits arranged in
the form of a man, every heaven is a gigantic man composed of an
immense number of individuals, and all the heavens together
constitute one Grand Man, a countless number of the most
intelligent angels forming the head, a stupendous organization of
the most affectionate making the heart, the most humble going to
the feet, the most useful attracted to the hands, and so on
through every part.

With exceptions, then, we regard Swedenborg's doctrine of the
future life as a free poetic presentment, not as a severe
scientific statement, of views true in moral principle, not of
facts real in literal detail. His imagination and sentiment are
mathematical and ethical instead of asthetic and passionate. Milk
seems to run in his veins instead of blood, but he is of
truthfulness and charity all compact. We think it most probable
that the secret of his supposed inspiration was the abnormal
frequent or chronic turning of his mind into what is called the
ecstatic or clairvoyant state. This condition being spontaneously
induced, while he yet, in some unexplained manner, retained
conscious possession and control of his usual faculties, he
treated his subjective conceptions as objective realities,
believed his interior contemplations were accurate visions of
facts, and took the strange procession of systematic reveries
through his teeming brain for a scenic revelation of the
exhaustive mysteries of heaven and hell. "Each wondrous guess
beheld the truth it sought, And inspiration flash'd from what was
thought."

This hypothesis, taken in conjunction with the comprehensiveness
of his mind, the vastness of his learning, the integral
correctness of his conscience, and his disciplined habits of
thought, will go far towards explaining the unparalleled
phenomenon of his theological works; and, though it leaves many
things unaccounted for, it seems to us more credible than any
other which has yet been suggested.

The last of the three prominent phenomena which as before said
followed the Protestant Reformation was rationalism, an attempt to
try all religious questions at the tribunal of reason and by the
tests of conscience. The great movement led by Luther was but one
element in a numerous train of influences and events all yielding
their different contributions to that resolute rationalistic
tendency which afterwards broke out so powerfully in England,
France, and Germany, and, spreading thence into every country in
Christendom, has been, in secret and in public, with slow, sure
steps, irresistibly advancing ever since. In the history of
scholasticism there were three distinct epochs. The first period
was characterized by the servile submission and conformity of
philosophy to the theology dictated by the Church. The second
period was marked by the formal alliance and attempted
reconciliation of philosophy and theology. The third period saw an
ever increasing jealousy and separation between the philosophers
and the theologians.12 Many an adventurous thinker pushed his
speculations beyond the limits of the established theology, and
deliberately dissented from the orthodox standards in his
conclusions. Perhaps Abelard, who openly strove to put all the
Church dogmas in forms acceptable to philosophy, and who did not
hesitate to reject in many instances what seemed to him
unreasonable, deserves to be called the father of rationalism. The
works of Des Cartes, Leibnitz, Wolf, Kant's "Religion within the
Bounds of Pure Reason," together with the influence and the
writings of many other eminent philosophers, gradually gave
momentum to the impulse and popularity to the habits of free
thought and criticism even in the realm of theology. The dogmatic
scheme of the dominant Church was firmly seized, many errors
shaken out to the light and exposed, and many long received
opinions questioned and flung into doubt.13 The authenticity of
many of the popular doctrines regarding the future life could not
fail to be denied as soon as it was attempted as was extensively
done about the middle of the eighteenth century to demonstrate
them by mathematical methods, with all the array of axioms,
theorems, lemmas, doubts, and solutions. Flugge has historically
illustrated the employment of this method at considerable
length.14

12 Cousin, Hist. Mod. Phil., lect. ix.

13 Staudlin, Geschichte des Rationalismus. Saintes, Histoire
Critique du Rationalisme en Allemagne, Eng. trans. by Dr. Beard.

14 Geschichte des Glaubens an Unsterblichkeit, u. s. f., th. iii.
abth. ii. ss. 281-289.


The essence of rationalism is the affirmation that neither the
Fathers, nor the Church, nor the Scriptures, nor all of them
together, can rightfully establish any proposition opposed to the
logic of sound philosophy, the principles of reason, and the
evident truth of nature. Around this thesis the battle has been
fought and the victory won; and it will stand with spreading favor
as long as there are unenslaved and cultivated minds in the world.
This position is, in logical necessity, and as a general thing in
fact, that of the large though loosely cohering body of believers
known as "Liberal Christians;" and it is tacitly held by still
larger and ever growing numbers nominally connected with sects
that officially eschew it with horror. The result of the studies
and discussions associated with this principle, so far as it
relates to the subject before us, has been the rejection of the
following popular doctrines:  the plenary inspiration of the
Scriptures as an ultimate authority in matters of belief;
unconditional predestination; the satisfaction theory of the
vicarious atonement; the visible second coming of Christ, in
person, to burn up the world and to hold a general judgment; the
intermediate state of souls; the resurrection of the body; a local
hell of material fire in the bowels of the earth; the eternal
damnation of the wicked. These old dogmas,15 scarcely changed,
still remain in the stereotyped creeds of all the prominent
denominations; but they slumber there to an astonishing extent
unrealized, unnoticed, unthought of, by the great multitude of
common believers, while every consciously rational investigator
vehemently repudiates them. To every candid mind that has really
studied their nature and proofs their absurdity is now transparent
on all the grounds alike of history, metaphysics, morals, and
science.

The changes of the popular Christian belief in regard to three
salient points have been especially striking. First, respecting
the immediate fate of the dead, an intermediate state. The
predominant Jewish doctrine was that all souls went indiscriminately
into a sombre under world, where they awaited a resurrection.

The earliest Christian view prevalent was the same, with the
exception that it divided that place of departed spirits
into two parts, a painful for the bad, a pleasant for the good.
The next opinion that prevailed the Roman Catholic was the same as
the foregoing, with two exceptions: it established a purgatory in
addition to the previous paradise and hell, and it opened heaven
itself for the immediate entrance of a few spotless souls. Pope
John XXII., as Gieseler shows, was accused of heresy by the
theological doctors of Paris because he declared that no soul
could enter heaven and enjoy the beatific vision until after the
resurrection. Pope Benedict XII. drew up a list of one hundred and
seventeen heretical opinions held by the Armenian Christians. One
of these notions was that the souls of all deceased adults wander
in the air until the Day of Judgment, neither hell, paradise, nor
heaven being open to them until after that day. Thomas Aquinas
says, "Each soul at death immediately flies to its appointed
place, whether in hell or in heaven, being without the body until
the resurrection, with it afterwards."16 Then came the

15 They are defended in all their literal grossness in the two
following works, both recent publications. The World to Come; by
the Rev. James Cochrane. Der Tod, das Todtenreich, und der Zustand
der abgeschiedenen Seelen; von P. A. Maywahlen.

16 Summa iii. in Suppl. 69. 2.

dogma of the orthodox Protestants, slightly varying in the
different sects, but generally agreeing that at death all redeemed
souls pass instantly to heaven and all unredeemed souls to hell.17
The principal variation from this among believers within the
Protestant fellowship has been the notion that the souls of all
men die or sleep with the body until the Day of Judgment, a notion
which peeps out here and there in superstitious spots along the
pages of ecclesiastical history, and which has found now and then
an advocate during the last century and a half. The Council of
Elvin, in Spain, forbade the lighting of tapers in churchyards,
lest it should disturb the souls of the deceased buried there. At
this day, in prayers and addresses at funerals, no phrases are
more common than those alluding to death as a sleep, and implying
that the departed one is to slumber peacefully in his grave until
the resurrection. And yet, at the same time, by the same persons
contrary ideas are frequently expressed. The truth is, the
subject, owing to the contradictions between their creed and their
reason, is left by most persons in hopeless confusion and
uncertainty. They have no determinately reconciled and conscious
views of their own. Rationalism sweeps away all the foregoing
incongruous medley at once, denying that we know any thing about
the precise localities of heaven and hell, or the destined order
of events in the hidden future of separate souls; affirming that
all we should dare to say is simply that the souls whether of good
or of bad men, on leaving the body, go at once into a spiritual
state of being, where they will live immortally, as God decrees,
never returning to be reinvested with the vanished charnel houses
of clay they once inhabited.

Secondly, the thought that Christ after his death descended into
the under world to ransom mankind, or a part of mankind, from the
doom there, is in the foundation of the apostolic theology. It was
a central element in the belief of the Fathers, and of the Church
for fourteen hundred years. None of the prominent Protestant
reformers thought of denying it. Calvin lays great stress on it.18
Apinus and others, at Hamburg, maintained that Christ's descent
was a part of his humiliation, and that in it he suffered
unutterable pains for us. On the other hand, Melancthon and the
Wittenbergers held that the descent was a part of Christ's
triumph, since by it he won a glorious victory over the powers of
hell.19 But gradually the importance and the redeeming effects
attached to Christ's descent into hell were transferred to his
death on the cross. Slowly the primitive dogma dwindled away, and
finally sunk out of sight, through an ever encroaching disbelief
in the physical conditions on which it rested and in the pictorial
environments by which it was recommended. And now it is scarcely
ever heard of, save when brought out from old scholastic tomes by
some theological delver. Baumgarten Crusius has learnedly
illustrated the important place long held by this notion, and well
shown its gradual retreat into the unnoticed background.20

17 Confession of Faith of the Church of Scotland, ch. xxxii.
Calvin, Institutes, lib. iii. cap. xxv.; and his Psychopannychia.
Quenstedt also affirms it. Likewise the Confession of Faith of the
Westminster Divines, art. xxxii., says, "Souls neither die nor
sleep, but go immediately to heaven or hell."

18 Institutes, lib. ii. cap. 16, sects. 16, 19.

19 Ledderhose, Life of Melancthon, Eng. trans. by Krotel, ch. xxx.

20 Compendium der Christliche Dogmengeschichte, thl. ii. sects.
100-109.


The other particular doctrine which we said had undergone
remarkable change is in regard to the number of the saved. A
blessed improvement has come over the popular Christian feeling
and teaching in respect to this momentous subject. The Jews
excluded from salvation all but their own strict ritualists. The
apostles, it is true, excluded none but the stubbornly wicked. But
the majority of the Fathers virtually allowed the possibility of
salvation to few indeed. Chrysostom doubted if out of the hundred
thousand souls constituting the Christian population of Antioch in
his day one hundred would be saved! 21 And when we read, with
shuddering soul, the calculations of Cornelius a Lapide, or the
celebrated sermon of Massillon on the "Small Number of the Saved,"
we are compelled to confess that they fairly represent the almost
universal sentiment and conviction of Christendom for more than
seventeen hundred years. A quarto volume published in London in
1680, by Du Moulin, called "Moral Reflections upon the Number of
the Elect," affirmed that not one in a million, from Adam down to
our times, shall be saved. A flaming execration blasted the whole
heathen world, 22 and a metaphysical quibble doomed ninety nine of
every hundred in Christian lands. Collect the whole relevant
theological literature of the Christian ages, from the birth of
Tertullian to the death of Jonathan Edwards, strike the average
pitch of its doctrinal temper, and you will get this result: that
in the field of human souls Satan is the harvester, God the
gleaner; hell receives the whole vintage in its wine press of
damnation, heaven obtains only a few straggling clusters plucked
for salvation. The crowded wains roll staggering into the iron
doorways of Satan's fire and brimstone barns; the redeemed
vestiges of the world crop of men are easily borne to heaven in
the arms of a few weeping angels. How different is the prevailing
tone of preaching and belief now! What a cheerful ascent of views
from the mournful passage of the dead over the river of oblivion
fancied by the Greeks, or the excruciating passage of the river of
fire painted by the Catholics, to the happy passage of the river
of balm, healing every weary bruise and sorrow, promised by the
Universalists! It is true, the old harsh exclusiveness is still
organically imbedded in the established creeds, all of which deny
the possibility of salvation beyond the little circle who vitally
appropriate the vicarious atonement of Christ; but then this is,
for the most part, a dead letter in the creeds. In the hearts and
in the candid confessions of all but one in a thousand it is
discredited and sincerely repelled as an abomination to human
nature, a reflection against God, an outrage upon the substance of
ethics. Remorseless bigots may gloat and exult over the thought
that those who reject their dogmas shall be thrust into the
roaring fire gorges of hell; but a better spirit is the spirit of
the age we live in; and, doubtless, a vast majority of the men we
daily meet really believe that all who try to the best of their
ability, according to their light and circumstances, to do what is
right, in the love of God and man, shall be saved. In that moving
scene of the great dramatist where the burial of the innocent and
hapless Ophelia is represented, and Lacrtes vainly seeks to win
from the Church official

21 In Acta Apostolorum, homil. xxiv.

22 Gotze, Ueber die Neue Meinung von der Seligkeit der angeblich
guten und redlichen Seelen unter Juden, Heiden, und Turken durch
Christum, ohne dass sie an ihn glauben.


the full funeral rites of religion over her grave, the priest may
stand for the false and cruel ritual spirit, the brother for the
just and native sentiment of the human heart. Says the priest,
"We should profane the service of the dead To sing a requiem and
such rest to her As to peace parted souls." And Laertes replies,
"Lay her in the earth; And from her fair and unpolluted flesh
Shall violets spring. I tell thee, churlish priest, A ministering
angel shall my sister be When thou liest howling."

Indeed, who that has a heart in his bosom would not be ashamed not
to sympathize with the gentle hearted Burns when he expresses even
to the devil himself the quaint and kindly wish, "Oh wad ye tak' a
thought and mend!"

The creeds and the priests, in congenial alliance with many evil
things, may strive to counteract this progressive self
emancipation from cruel falsehoods and superstitions, but in vain.
The terms of salvation are seen lying in the righteous will of a
gracious God, not in the heartless caprice of a priesthood nor in
the iron gripe of a set of dogmas. The old priestly monopoly over
the way to heaven has been taken off in the knowledge of the
enlightened present, and, for all who have unfettered feet to walk
with, the passage to God is now across a free bridge. The ancient
exactors may still sit in their toll house creeds and confessionals;
but their authority is gone, and the virtuous traveller, stepping
from the ground of time upon the planks that lead over into eternity,
smiles as he passes scot free by their former taxing terrors.

The reign of sacramentalists and dogmatists rapidly declines.
Reason, common sentiment, the liberal air, the best and
strongest tendencies of the people, are against them to
day, and will be more against them in every coming day. Every
successive explosion of the Second Adventist fanaticism will leave
less of that element behind. Its rage in America, under the
auspices of Miller, in the nineteenth century, was tame and feeble
when compared with the terror awakened in Europe in the fifteenth
century by Stofler's prediction of an approaching comet.23 Every
new discovery of the harmonies of science, and of the perfections
of nature, and of the developments of the linear logic of God
consistently unfolding in implicated sequences of peaceful order
unperturbed by shocks of failure and epochs of remedy, will
increase and popularize an intelligent faith in the original
ordination and the intended permanence of the present constitution
of things. Finally men will cease to be looking up to see the blue
dome cleave open for the descent of angelic squadrons headed by
the majestic Son of God, the angry breath of his mouth consuming
the world, cease to

23 Bayle, Historical Dictionary, art. Stofler, note B.


expect salvation by any other method than that of earnest and
devout truthfulness, love, good works, and pious submissiveness to
God, cease to fancy that their souls, after waiting through the
long sleep or separation of death, will return and take on their
old bodies again. Recognizing the Divine plan for training souls
in this lower and transient state for a higher and immortal state,
they will endeavor, in natural piety and mutual love, while they
live, to exhaust the genuine uses of the world that now is, and
thus prepare themselves to enter with happiest auspices, when they
die, the world prepared for them beyond these mortal shores.

These cheerful prophecies must be verified in the natural course
of things. The rapid spread of the doctrine of a future life
taught by the "Spirit rappers" is a remarkable revelation of the
great extent to which the minds of the common people have at last
become free from the long domination of the ecclesiastical dogmas
on that subject. The leading representatives of the "Spiritualists"
affirm, with much unanimity, the most comforting conclusions
as to the condition of the departed. They exclude all wrath
and favoritism from the disposition of the Deity. They have
little in fact, they often have nothing whatever to say of hell.
They emphatically repudiate the ordinarily taught terms of
salvation, and deny the doctrine of hopeless reprobation. All
death is beautiful and progressive. "Every form and thing is
constantly growing lovelier and every sphere purer." The abode of
each soul in the future state is determined, not by decrees or
dogmas or forms of any kind, but by qualities of character,
degrees of love, purity, and wisdom. There are seven ascending
spheres, each more abounding than the one below it in beauties,
glories, and happiness. "The first sphere is the natural; the
second, the spiritual; the third, the celestial; the fourth, the
supernatural; the fifth, the superspiritual; the sixth, the
supercelestial; the seventh, the Infinite Vortex of Love and
Wisdom."24 Whatever be thought of the pretensions of this doctrine
to be a Divine revelation, whatever be thought of its various
psychological, cosmological, and theological characteristics, its
ethics are those of natural reason. It is wholly irreconcilable
with the popular ecclesiastical system of doctrines. Its epidemic
diffusion until now burdened as it is with such nauseating
accompaniments of crudity and absurdity, it reckons its adherents
by millions is a tremendous evidence of the looseness with which
the old, cruel dogmas sit on the minds of the masses of the
people, and of their eager readiness to welcome more humane views.

In science the erroneous doctrines of the Middle Age are now
generally discarded. The mention of them but provokes a smile or
awakens surprise. Yet, as compared with the historic annals of our
race, it is but recently that the true order of the solar system
has been unveiled, the weight of the air discovered, the
circulation of the blood made known, the phenomena of insanity
intelligently studied, the results of physiological chemistry
brought to light, the symmetric domain and sway of calculable law
pushed far out in every direction of nature and experience. It
used to be supposed that digestion was effected by means of a
mechanical power equal to many tons. Borelli asserted that the
muscular force of the heart was one hundred and eighty thousand
pounds. These absurd estimates only disappeared when the

24 Andrew Jackson Davis, Nature's Divine Revelations, sects. 192
203.


properties of the gastric juice were discerned. The method in
which we distinguish the forms and distances of objects was not
understood until Berkeley published his "New Theory of Vision."
Few persons are aware of the opposition of bigotry, stolidity, and
authority against which the brilliant advances of scientific
discovery and mechanical invention and social improvement have
been forced to contend, and in despite of which they have slowly
won their way. Excommunications, dungeons, fires, sneers, polite
persecution, bitter neglect, tell the story, from the time the
Athenians banned Anaxagoras for calling the sun a mass of fire, to
the day an English mob burned the warehouses of Arkwright because
he had invented the spinning jenny. But, despite all the hostile
energies of establishment, prejudice, and scorn, the earnest
votaries of philosophical truth have studied and toiled with ever
accumulating victories, until now a hundred sciences are ripe with
emancipating fruits and perfect freedom to be taught. Railroads
gird the lands with ribs of trade, telegraphs thread the airs with
electric tidings of events, and steamships crease the seas with
channels of foam and fire. There is no longer danger of any one
being put to death, or even being excluded from the "best
society," for saying that the earth moves. An eclipse cannot be
regarded as the frown of God when it is regularly foretold with
certainty. The measurement of the atmosphere exterminated the
wiseacre proverb, "Nature abhors a vacuum," by the burlesque
addition, "but only for the first thirty two feet." The madman
cannot be looked on as divinely inspired, his words to be caught
as oracles, or as possessed by a devil, to be chained and
scourged, since Pinel's great work has brought insanity within the
range of organic disease. When Franklin's kite drew electricity
from the cloud to his knuckle, the superstitious theory of thunder
died a natural death.

The vast progress effected in all departments of physical science
during the last four centuries has not been made in any kindred
degree in the prevailing theology. Most of the harsh, unreasonable
tenets of the elaborately morbid and distorted mediaval
theologyare still retained in the creeds of the great majority of
Christendom. The causes of this difference are plain. The
establishment of newly discovered truths in material science being
less intimately connected with the prerogatives of the ruling
classes, less clearly hostile to the permanence of their power,
they have not offered so pertinacious an opposition to progress in
this province: they have yielded a much larger freedom to
physicists than to moralists, to discoverers of mathematical,
chemical, and mechanical law than to reformers of political and
religious thought. Livy tells us that, in the five hundred and
seventy third year of Rome, some concealed books of Numa were
found, which, on examination by the priests, being thought
injurious to the established religion, were ordered to be
burned.25 The charge was not that they were ungenuine, nor that
their contents were false; but they were dangerous. In the second
century, an imperial decree forbade the reading of the Sibylline
Oracles, because they contained prophecies of Christ and doctrines
of Christianity. By an act of the English Parliament, in the
middle of the seventeenth century, every copy of the Racovian
Catechism (an exposition of the Socinian doctrine) that could be
obtained was burned in the streets.

25 Lib. xl. cap. xxix.


The Index Expurgatorius for Catholic countries is still freshly
filled every year. And in Protestant countries a more subtle and a
more effectual influence prevents, on the part of the majority,
the candid perusal of all theological discussions which are not
pitched in the orthodox key. Certain dogmas are the absorbed
thought of the sects which defend them: no fresh and independent
thinking is to be expected on those subjects, no matter how purely
fictitious these secretions of the brain of the denomination or of
some ancient leader may be, no matter how glaringly out of keeping
with the intelligence and liberty which reign in other realms of
faith and feeling. There is nowhere else in the world a tyranny so
pervasive and despotic as that which rules in the department of
theological opinion. The prevalent slothful and slavish surrender
of the grand privileges and duties of individual thought,
independent personal conviction and action in religious matters,
is at once astonishing, pernicious, and disgraceful. The effect of
entrenched tradition, priestly directors, a bigoted, overawing,
and persecuting sectarianism, is nowhere else a hundredth part so
powerful or so extensive.

In addition to the bitter determination by interested persons to
suppress reforming investigations of the doctrines which hold
their private prejudices in supremacy, and to the tremendous
social prestige of old establishment, another cause has been
active to keep theology stationary while science has been making
such rapid conquests. Science deals with tangible quantities,
theology with abstract qualities. The cultivation of the former
yields visible practical results of material comfort; the
cultivation of the latter yields only inward spiritual results of
mental welfare. Accordingly, science has a thousand resolute
votaries where theology has one unshackled disciple. At this
moment, a countless multitude, furnished with complex apparatus,
are ransacking every nook of nature, and plucking trophies, and
the world with honoring attention reads their reports. But how few
with competent preparation and equipment, with fearless
consecration to truth, unhampered, with fresh free vigor, are
scrutinizing the problems of theology, enthusiastically bent upon
refuting errors and proving verities! And what reception do the
conclusions of those few meet at the hands of the public? Surely
not prompt recognition, frank criticism, and grateful acknowledgment
or courteous refutation. No; but studied exclusion from notice,
or sophistical evasions and insulting vituperation.

What a striking and painful contrast is afforded by the generous
encouragement given to the students of science by the annual
bestowment of rewards by the scientific societies such as the
Cuvier Prize, the Royal Medal, the Rumford Medal and the jealous
contempt and assaults visited by the sectarian authorities upon
those earnest students of theology who venture to propose any
innovating improvement! Suppose there were annually awarded an
Aquinas Prize, a Fenelon Medal, a Calvin Medal, a Luther Medal, a
Channing Medal, not to the one who should present the most
ingenious defence of any peculiar tenet of one of those masters,
but to him who should offer the most valuable fresh contribution
to theological truth! What should we think if the French Institute
offered a gold medal every year to the astronomer who presented
the ablest essay in support of the Ptolemaic system, or if the
Royal Society voted a diploma for the best method of casting
nativities? Such is the course pursued in regard to dogmatic
theology. The consequence has been that while elsewhere the
ultimate standard by which to try a doctrine is, What do the
most competent judges say? What does unprejudiced reason dictate?
What does the great harmony of truth require? in theology it is,
What do the committed priests say? How does it comport with the
old traditions?

We read in the Hak ul Yakeen that the envoy of Herk, Emperor of
Rum, once said to the prophet, "You summon people to a Paradise
whose extent includes heaven and earth: where, then, is hell?"
Mohammed replied, "When day comes, where is night?" That is to
say, according to the traditionary glosses, as day and night are
opposite, so Paradise is at the zenith and hell at the nadir. Yes;
but if Paradise be above the heavens, and hell below the seventh
earth, then how can Sirat be extended over hell for people to pass
to Paradise? "We reply," say the authors of the Hak ul Yakeen,
"that speculation on this subject is not necessary, nor to be
regarded. Implicit faith in what the prophets have revealed must
be had; and explanatory surmises, which are the occasion of
Satanic doubts, must not be indulged."26 Certainly this exclusion
of reason cannot always be suffered. It is fast giving way
already. And it is inevitable that, when reason secures its right
and bears its rightful fruits in moral subjects as it now does in
physical subjects, the mediaval theology must be rejected as
mediaval science has been. It is the common doctrine of the Church
that Christ now sits in heaven in a human body of flesh and blood.
Calvin separated the Divine nature of Christ from this human body;
but Luther made the two natures inseparable and attributed
ubiquity to the body in which they reside, thus asserting the
omnipresence of a material human body, a bulk of a hundred and
fifty pounds' weight more or less. He furiously assailed Zwingle's
objection to this monstrous nonsense, as "a devil's mask and
grandchild of that old witch, mistress Reason." 27 The Roman
Church teaches, and her adherents devoutly believe, that the house
of the Virgin Mary was conveyed on the wings of angels from
Nazareth to the eastern slope of the Apennines above the Adriatic
Gulf.28 The English Church, consistently interpreted, teaches that
there is no salvation without baptism by priests in the line of
apostolic succession. These are but ordinary specimens of
teachings still humbly received by the mass of Christians. The
common distrust with which the natural operations of reason are
regarded in the Church, the extreme reluctance to accept the
conclusions of mere reason, seem to us discreditable to the
theological leaders who represent the current creeds of the
approved sects. Many an influential theologian could learn
invaluable lessons from the great guides in the realm of science.
The folly which acute learned wise men will be guilty of the
moment they turn to theological subjects, where they do not allow
reason to act, is both ludicrous and melancholy. The victim of
lycanthropy used to be burned alive; he is now placed under the
careful treatment of skilful and humane physicians. But the
heretic or infidel is still thought to be inspired by the devil, a
fit subject for discipline here and hell hereafter. The light shed
abroad by the rising spirit of rational investigation must
gradually dispel the delusions which lurk in the vales of
theology, as it already has dispelled those that formerly haunted
the hills of science. The spectres which have so long terrified a
childish world will successively vanish

26 Merrick, Hyat ul Kuloob, note 74.

27 Hagenbach, Dogmengeschichte, sect. 265, note 2.

28 Christian Remembrancer, April, 1855. A full and able history of
the "Holy House of Loretto."


from the path of man as advancing reason, in the name of the God
of truth, utters its imperial "Avaunt!"

Henry More wrote a book on the "Immortality of the Soul," printed
in London in 1659, just two hundred years ago. It is full of
beauty, acumen, and power. He was one of the first men of the
time. Yet he seriously elaborates an argument like this: "The scum
and spots that lie on the sun are as great an Argument that there
is no Divinity in him as the dung of Owls and Sparrows that is
found on the faces and shoulders of Idols in Temples are clear
evidences that they are no true Deities."29 He also in good faith
tells a story like this: "That a Woman with child, seeing a
Butcher divide a Swine's head with a Cleaver, brought forth her
Child with its face cloven in the upper jaw, the palate, and upper
lip to the very nose."30 The progress marked by the contrast of
the scientific spirit of the present time with the ravenous
credulity of even two centuries back must continue and spread into
every province. Some may vilify it; but in vain. Some may
sophisticate against it; but in vain. Some may invoke authority
and social persecution to stop it; but in vain. Some may appeal to
the prejudices and fears of the timid; but in vain. Some may close
their own eyes, and hold their hands before their neighbors' eyes,
and attempt to shut out the light; but in vain. It will go on. It
is the interest of the world that it should go on. It is the manly
and the religious course to help this progress with prudence and
reverence. Truth is the will of God, the way he has made things to
be and to act, the way he wishes free beings to exist and to act.
He has ordained the gradual discovery of truth. And despite the
struggles of selfish tyranny, and the complacence of luxurious
ease, and the terror of ignorant cowardice, truth will be more and
more brought to universal acceptance. Some men have fancied their
bodies composed of butter or of glass; but when compelled to move
out into the sunlight or the crowd they did not melt nor break.31
Esquirol had a patient who did not dare to bend her thumb, lest
the world should come to an end. When forced to bend it, she was
surprised that the crack of doom did not follow.

The mechanico theatrical character of the popular theology is
enough to reveal its origin and its fundamental falsity. The
difference between its lurid and phantasmal details and the calm
eternal verities in the divinely constituted order of nature is as
great as the difference between those stars which one sees in
consequence of a blow on the forehead and those he sees by turning
his gaze to the nightly sky. To every competent thinker, the bare
appreciation of such a passage as that which closes
Chateaubriand's chapter on the Last Judgment, with the huge bathos
of its incongruous mixture of sublime and absurd, is its
sufficient refutation: "The globe trembles on its axis; the moon
is covered with a bloody veil; the threatening stars hang half
detached from the vault of heaven, and the agony of the world
commences. Now resounds the trump of the angel. The sepulchres
burst: the human race issues all at once, and fills the Valley of
Jehoshaphat! The Son of Man appears in the clouds; the powers of
hell ascend from the infernal depths; the goats are separated from
the sheep; the wicked are plunged into the gulf; the just ascend
to heaven; God returns to his repose,

29 Preface, p. 10.

30 Ibid. p. 392.

31 Bucknill and Tuke, Psychological Medicine, ch. ix.


and the reign of eternity begins."32 Nothing saves this whole
scheme of doctrine from instant rejection except neglect of
thought, or incompetence of thought, on the part of those who
contemplate it. The peculiar dogmas of the exclusive sects are the
products of mental and social disease, psychological growths in
pathological moulds. The naked shapes of beautiful women floating
around St. Anthony in full display of their maddening charms are
interpreted by the Romanist Church as a visible work of the devil.
An intelligent physician accounts for them by the laws of
physiology, the morbid action of morbid nerves. There is no doubt
whatever as to which of these explanations is correct. The
absolute prevalence of that explanation is merely a question of
time. Meanwhile, it is the part of every wise and devout man,
without bigotry, without hatred for any, with strict fidelity to
his own convictions, with entire tolerance and kindness for all
who differ from him, sacredly to seek after verity himself and
earnestly to endeavor to impart it to others. To such men forms of
opinion, instead of being prisons, fetters, and barriers, will be
but as tents of a night while they march through life, the burning
and cloudy column of inquiry their guide, the eternal temple of
truth their goal.

The actual relation, the becoming attitude, the appropriate
feeling, of man towards the future state, the concealed segment of
his destiny, are impressively shown in the dying scene of one of
the wisest and most gifted of men, one of the fittest representatives
of the modern mind. In a good old age, on a pleasant spring day,
with a vast expanse of experience behind him, with an immensity of
hope before him, he lay calmly expiring.

"More light!" he cried, with departing breath; and Death, solemn
warder of eternity, led him, blinded, before the immemorial veil
of awe and secrets. It uprolled as the flesh bandage fell from his
spirit, and he walked at large, triumphant or appalled, amidst the
unimagined revelations of God.

And now, recalling the varied studies we have passed through, and
seeking for the conclusion or root of the matter, what shall we
say? This much we will say. First, the fearless Christian, fully
acquainted with the results of a criticism unsparing as the
requisitions of truth and candor, can scarcely, with intelligent
honesty, do more than place his hand on the beating of his heart,
and fix his eye on the riven tomb of Jesus, and exclaim, "Feeling
here the inspired promise of immortality, and seeing there the
sign of God's authentic seal, I gratefully believe that Christ has
risen, and that my soul is deathless!" Secondly, the trusting
philosopher, fairly weighing the history of the world's belief in
a future life, and the evidences on which it rests, can scarcely,
with justifying warrant, do less than lay his hand on his body,
and turn his gaze aloft, and exclaim, "Though death shatters this
shell, the soul may survive, and I confidently hope to live
forever." Meanwhile, the believer and the speculator, combining to
form a Christian philosophy wherein doubt and faith, thought and
freedom, reason and sentiment, nature and revelation, all embrace,
even as the truth of things and the experience of life demand, may
both adopt for their own the expression wrought for himself by a
pure and fervent poet in these freighted lines of pathetic beauty:

32 Genius of Christianity, part ii. book vi. ch. vii.


"I gather up the scattered rays Of wisdom in the early days, Faint
gleams and broken, like the light Of meteors in a Northern night,
Betraying to the darkling earth The unseen sun which gave them
birth; I listen to the sibyl's chant, The voice of priest and
hierophant; I know what Indian Kreeshna saith, And what of life
and what of death The demon taught to Socrates, And what, beneath
his garden trees Slow pacing, with a dream like tread, The solemn
thoughted Plato said; Nor Lack I tokens, great or small, Of God's
clear light in each and all, While holding with more dear regard
Than scroll of heathen seer and bard The starry pages, promise
lit, With Christ's evangel overwrit, Thy miracle of life and
death, O Holy One of Nazareth!" 33

33 Whittier, Questions of Life.


PART FIFTH.


HISTORICAL AND CRITICAL DISSERTATIONS CONCERNING A FUTURE LIFE.


CHAPTER I.

DOCTRINE OF A FUTURE LIFE IN THE ANCIENT MYSTERIES.

THE power of the old religions was for centuries concentrated in
the Mysteries. These were recondite institutions, sometimes
wielded by the state, sometimes by a priesthood, sometimes by a
ramifying private society. None could be admitted into them save
with the permission of the hierarchs, by rites of initiation, and
under solemn seals of secrecy. These mysterious institutions,
charged with strange attractions, shrouded in awful wonder, were
numerous, and, agreeing in some of their fundamental features,
were spread nearly all over the world. The writings of the
ancients abound with references to them, mostly eulogistic. The
mighty part played by these veiled bodies in the life of the
periods when they flourished, the pregnant hints and alluring
obscurities amid which they stand in relation to the learning of
modern times, have repeatedly obtained wide attention, elicited
opposite opinions, provoked fierce debates, and led different
inquirers to various conclusions as to their true origin,
character, scope, meaning, and results.

One of the principal points in discussion by scholars concerning
the Mysteries has been whether they inculcated an esoteric
doctrine of philosophy, opposed to the popular religion. Some
writers have maintained that in their symbols and rites was
contained a pure system of monotheistic ethics and religion. Our
own opinion is that in some of these institutions, at one period,
higher theological views and scientific speculations were
unfolded, but in others never. Still, it is extremely difficult to
prove any thing on this part of the general subject: there is much
that is plausible to be said on both sides of the question.
Another query to be noticed in passing is in regard to the degree
of exclusiveness and concealment really attached to the form of
initiation. Lobeck, in his celebrated work, "Aglaophamus," borne
away by a theory, assumes the extravagant position that the
Eleusinian Mysteries were almost freely open to all.1 His error
seems to lie in not distinguishing sufficiently between the Lesser
and the Greater Mysteries, and in not separating the noisy shows
of the public festal days from the initiatory and explanatory
rites of personal admission within the mystic pale. The notorious

1 Lib. i. sects. 4, 5.


facts that strict inquiry was made into the character and fitness
of the applicant before his admission, and that many were openly
rejected, that instant death was inflicted on all who intruded
unprepared within the sacred circuits, and that death was the
penalty of divulging what happened during the celebrations, all
are inconsistent with the notion of Lobeck, and prove that the
Mysteries were hedged about with dread. Aschylus narrowly escaped
being torn in pieces upon the stage by the people on suspicion
that in his play he had given a hint of something in the
Mysteries. He delivered himself by appealing to the Areopagus, and
proving that he had never been initiated. Andocides also, a Greek
orator who lived about four hundred years before Christ, was
somewhat similarly accused, and only escaped by a strenuous
defence of himself in an oration, still extant, entitled
"Concerning the Mysteries."

A third preliminary matter is as to the moral character of the
services performed by these companies. Some held that their
characteristics were divinely pure, intellectual, exalting; others
that in abandoned pleasures they were fouler than the Stygian pit.
The Church Fathers, Clement, Irenaus, Tertullian, and the rest,
influenced by a mixture of prejudice, hatred, and horror, against
every thing connected with paganism, declared, in round terms,
that the Mysteries were unmitigated sinks of iniquity and shame,
lust, murder, and all promiscuous deviltry. Without pausing to
except or qualify, or to be thoroughly informed and just, they
included the ancient stern generations and their own degraded
contemporaries, the vile rites of the Corinthian Aphrodite and the
solemn service of Demeter, the furious revels of the Bacchanalians
and the harmonious mental worship of Apollo, all in one
indiscriminate charge of insane beastliness and idolatry. Their
view of the Mysteries has been most circulated among the moderns
by Leland's learned but bigoted work on the "Use and Necessity of
a Divine Revelation." He would have us regard each one as a vortex
of atheistic sensuality and crime. There should be discrimination.
The facts are undoubtedly these, as we might abundantly
demonstrate were it in the province of the present essay. The
original Mysteries, the authoritative institutions co ordinated
with the state or administered by the poets and philosophers, were
pure: their purpose was to purify the lives and characters of
their disciples. Their means were a complicated apparatus of
sensible and symbolic revelations and instructions admirably
calculated to impress the most salutary moral and religious
lessons. In the first place, is it credible that the state would
fling its auspices over societies whose function was to organize
lawlessness and debauchery, to make a business of vice and filth?
Among the laws of Solon is a regulation decreeing that the Senate
shall convene in the Eleusinian temple, the day after the
festival, to inquire whether every thing had been done with
reverence and propriety. Secondly, if such was the character of
these secrets, why was inquisition always made into the moral
habits of the candidate, that he might be refused admittance if
they were bad? This inquiry was severe, and the decision
unrelenting. Alcibiades was rejected, as we learn from Plutarch's
life of him, on account of his dissoluteness and insubordination
in the city. Nero dared not attend the Eleusinian Mysteries,
"because to the murder of his mother he had joined the slaughter
of his paternal aunt."2 All accepted candidates were scrupulously
purified in thought and body, and clad in white robes, for nine
days previous to their reception. Thirdly, it is intrinsically
absurd to suppose that an institution of gross immorality and
cruelty could have flourished in the most polite and refined Greek
nation, as the Eleusinian Mysteries did for over eighteen hundred
years, ranking among its members a vast majority of both sexes, of
all classes, of all ages, and constantly celebrating its rites
before immense audiences of them all. Finally, a host of men like
Plato, Sophocles, Cimon, Lycurgus, Cicero, were members of these
bodies, partook in their transactions, and have left on record
eulogies of them and of their influence. The concurrent testimony
of antiquity is that in the Great Mysteries the desires were
chastened, the heart purified, the mind calmed, the soul inspired,
all the virtues of morality and hopes of religion taught and
enforced with sublime solemnities. There is no just ground for
suspecting this to be false.

But there remains something more and different to be said also.
While the authorized Mysteries were what we have asserted, there
did afterwards arise spurious Mysteries, in names, forms, and
pretensions partially resembling the genuine ones, under the
control of the most unprincipled persons, and in which
unquestionably the excesses of unbelief, drunkenness, and
prostitution held riot. These depraved societies were foreign
grafts from the sensual pantheism ever nourished in the voluptuous
climes of the remote East. They established themselves late in
Greece, but were developed at Rome in such unbridled enormities as
compelled the Senate to suppress them. Livy gives a detailed and
vivid account of the whole affair in his history.3 But the
gladiators, scoundrels, rakes, bawds, who swarmed in these stews
of rotting Rome, are hardly to be confounded with the noble men
and matrons of the earlier time who openly joined in the pure
Mysteries with the approving example of the holiest bards, the
gravest statesmen, and the profoundest sages, men like Pindar,
Pericles, and Pythagoras. Ample facilities are afforded in the
numerous works to which we shall refer for unmasking the different
organizations that travelled over the earth in the guise of the
Mysteries, and of seeing what deceptive arts were practised in
some, what superhuman terrors paraded in others, what horrible
cruelties perpetrated in others, what leading objects sought in
each.

The Mysteries have many bearings on several distinct subjects; but
in those aspects we have not space here to examine them. We
purpose to consider them solely in their relation to the doctrine
of a future life. We are convinced that the very heart of their
secret, the essence of their meaning in their origin and their
end, was no other than the doctrine of an immortality succeeding a
death. Gessner published a book at Gottingen, so long ago as the
year 1755, maintaining this very assertion. His work, which is
quite scarce now, bears the title "Dogma de perenni Animoruin
Natura per Sacra pracipue Eleusinia Propagata." The consenting
testimony of more than forty of the most authoritative ancient
writers comes down to us in their surviving works to the effect
that those who were admitted into the Mysteries were thereby
purified, led to holy lives, joined in communion with the gods,
and

2 Suetonius, Vita Neronis, cap. xxxiv.

3 Lib. xxxix. cap. viii xvi.


assured of a better fate than otherwise could be expected in the
future state. Two or three specimens from these witnesses will
suffice. Aristophanes, in the second act of the Frogs, describes
an elysium of the initiates after death, where he says they bound
"in sportive dances on rose enamelled meadows; for the light is
cheerful only to those who have been initiated."4 Pausanias
describes the uninitiated as being compelled in Hades to carry
water in buckets bored full of holes.5 Isocrates says, in his
Panegyric, "Demeter, the goddess of the Eleusinian Mysteries,
fortifies those who have been initiated against the fear of death,
and teaches them to have sweet hopes concerning eternity." The old
Orphic verses cited by Thomas Taylor in his Treatise on the
Mysteries run thus: "The soul that uninitiated dies Plunged in the
blackest mire in Hades lies." 6

The same statement is likewise found in Plato, who, in another
place, also explicitly declares that a doctrine of future
retribution was taught in the Mysteries and believed by the
serious.7 Cicero says, "Initiation makes us both live more
honorably and die with better hopes." 8 In seasons of imminent
danger as in a shipwreck it was customary for a man to ask his
companion, Hast thou been initiated? The implication is that
initiation removed fear of death by promising a happy life to
follow.9 A fragment preserved from a very ancient author is plain
on this subject. "The soul is affected in death just as it is in
the initiation into the great Mysteries: thing answers to thing.
At first it passes through darkness, horrors, and toils. Then are
disclosed a wondrous light, pure places, flowery meads, replete
with mystic sounds, dances, and sacred doctrines, and holy
visions. Then, perfectly enlightened, they are free: crowned, they
walk about worshipping the gods and conversing with good men."10
The principal part of the hymn to Ceres, attributed to Homer, is
occupied with a narrative of her labors to endow the young
Demophoon, mortal child of Metaneira, with immortality. Now, Ceres
was the goddess of the Mysteries; and the last part of this very
hymn recounts how Persephone was snatched from the light of life
into Hades and restored again. Thus we see that the implications
of the indirect evidence, the leanings and guidings of all the
incidental clews now left us to the real aim and purport of the
Mysteries, combine to assure us that their chief teaching was a
doctrine of a future life in which there should be rewards and
punishments. All this we shall more fully establish, both by
direct proofs and by collateral supports.

It is a well known fact, intimately connected with the different
religions of Greece and Asia Minor, that during the time of
harvest in the autumn, and again at the season of sowing in the
spring, the shepherds, the vintagers, and the people in general,
were accustomed to observe certain sacred festivals, the autumnal
sad, the vernal joyous. These undoubtedly grew out of the deep
sympathy between man and nature over the decay and disappearance,
the revival and return, of vegetation. When the hot season had
withered the verdure of the

4 Scene iii.

5 Lib. x. cap. xxxi.

6 Phadon, sect. xxxviii.

7 Leg., lib. ix. cap. x.

8 De Leg., lib. ii. cap. xiv.

9 St. John, Hellenes, ch. xi.

10 Sentences of Stobaus, Sermo CXIX.


fields, plaintive songs were sung, their wild melancholy notes and
snatches borne abroad by the breeze and their echoes dying at last
in the distance. In every instance, these mournful strains were
the annual lamentation of the people over the death of some
mythical boy of extraordinary beauty and promise, who, in the
flower of youth, was suddenly drowned, or torn in pieces by wild
beasts, "Some Hyacinthine boy, for whom Morn well might break and April
bloom."

Among the Argives it was Linus. With the Arcadians it was
Scephrus. In Phrygia it was Lityerses. On the shore of the Black
Sea it was Bormus. In the country of the Bithynians it was Hylas.
At Pelusium it was Maneros. And in Syria it was Adonis. The
untimely death of these beautiful boys, carried off in their
morning of life, was yearly bewailed, their names re echoing over
the plains, the fountains, and among the hills. It is obvious that
these cannot have been real persons whose death excited a sympathy
so general, so recurrent. "The real object of lamentation," says
Muller, "was the tender beauty of spring destroyed by the raging
heat, and other similar phenomena, which the imagination of those
early times invested with a personal form."11 All this was woven
into the Mysteries, whose great legend and drama were that every
autumn Persephone was carried down to the dark realm of the King
of Shadows, but that she was to return each spring to her mother's
arms. Thus were described the withdrawal and reappearance of
vegetable life in the alternations of the seasons. But these
changes of nature typified the changes in the human lot; else
Persephone would have been merely a symbol of the buried grain and
would not have become the Queen of the Dead.12 Her return to the
world of light, by natural analogy, denoted a new birth to men.
Accordingly, "all the testimony of antiquity concurs in saying
that these Mysteries inspired the most animating hopes with regard
to the condition of the soul after death."13 That the fate of man
should by imagination and sentiment have been so connected with
the phenomena of nature in myths and symbols embodied in pathetic
religious ceremonies was a spontaneous product. For how "Her fresh
benignant look Nature changes at that lorn season when, With
tresses drooping o'er her sable stole, She yearly mourns the
mortal doom of man, Her noblest work! So Israel's virgins erst
With annual moan upon the mountains wept Their fairest gone!"

And soon again the birds begin to warble, the leaves and blossoms
put forth, and all is new life once more. In every age the gentle
heart and meditative mind have been impressed by the mournful
correspondence and the animating prophecy.

11 History of the Literature of Ancient Greece, ch. iii. sects. 2
3.

12 For the connection of the Eleusinian goddesses with
agriculture, the seasons, the under world, death, resurrection,
etc., see "Demeter and Persephone," von Dr. Ludwig Preller, kap.
i. sects. 9 11.

13 Muller, Hist. Gr. Lit., ch. xvi. sect. 2.


But not only was the changing recurrence of dreary winter and
gladsome summer joined by affecting analogies with the human doom
of death and hope of another life. The phenomena of the skies, the
impressive succession of day and night, also were early seized
upon and made to blend their shadows and lights, by means of
imaginative suggestions, into an image of the decease and
resurrection of man. Among the Mystical Hymns of Orpheus, so
called, there is a hymn to Adonis, in which that personage is
identified with the sun alternately sinking to Tartarus and
soaring to heaven. It was customary with the ancients to speak of
the setting of a constellation as its death, its reascension in
the horizon being its return to life.14 The black abysm under the
earth was the realm of the dead. The bright expanse above the
earth was the realm of the living. While the daily sun rises
royally through the latter, all things rejoice in the warmth and
splendor of his smile. When he sinks nightly, shorn of his
ambrosial beams, into the former, sky and earth wrap themselves in
mourning for their departed monarch, the dead god of light muffled
in his bier and borne along the darkening heavens to his burial.
How naturally the phenomena of human fate would be symbolically
interwoven with all this! Especially alike are the exuberant joy
and activity of full life and of day, the melancholy stillness and
sad repose of midnight and of death.

The sun insists on gladness; but at night, When he is gone, poor
Nature loves to weep."

Through her yearly and her diurnal round alike, therefore, does
mother Nature sympathize with man, and picture forth his fate, in
type of autumnal decay, and wintry darkness, and night buried
seed, in sign of vernal bud, and summer light, and day bursting
fruit.

These facts and phenomena of nature and man, together with
explanatory theories to which they gave rise, were, by the
peculiar imaginative processes so powerfully operative among the
earliest nations, personified in mythic beings and set forth as
literal history. Their doctrine was inculcated as truth once
historically exemplified by some traditional personage. It was
dramatically impersonated and enacted in the process of initiation
into the Mysteries. A striking instance of this kind of theatrical
representation is afforded by the celebration, every eight years,
of the mythus of Apollo's fight with the Pythian dragon, his
flight and expiatory service to Admetus, the subterranean king of
the dead. In mimic order, a boy slew a monster at Delphi, ran
along the road to Tempe, represented on the way the bondage of the
god in Hades, and returned, purified, bringing a branch of laurel
from the sacred valley.15 The doctrine of a future life connected
with the legend of some hero who had died, descended into the
under world, and again risen to life, this doctrine, dramatically
represented in the personal experience of the initiate, was the
heart of every one of the secret religious societies of antiquity.

"Here rests the secret, here the keys, Of the old death bolted
Mysteries."

14 Leitch's Eng. trans. of K. O. Muller's Introduction to a
Scientific System of Mythology, Appendix, pp. 339-342.

15 Muller, Introduction to Mythology, pp. 97 and 241. Also his
Dorian, lib. ii. cap. vii. sect. 8.


Perhaps this great system of esoteric rites and instructions grew
up naturally, little by little. Perhaps it was constructed at
once, either as poetry, by a company of poets, or as a theology,
by a society of priests, or as a fair method of moral and
religious teaching, by a company of philosophers. Or perhaps it
was gradually formed by a mixture of all these means and motives.
Many have regarded it as the bedimmed relic of a brilliant
primeval revelation. This question of the origination, the first
causes and purposes, of the Mysteries is now sunk in hopeless
obscurity, even were it of any importance to be known. One thing
we know, namely, that at an early age these societies formed
organizations of formidable extent and power, and were vitally
connected with the prevailing religions of the principal nations
of the earth.

In Egypt the legend of initiation was this.16 Typhon, a wicked,
destroying personage, once formed a conspiracy against his
brother, the good king Osiris. Having prepared a costly chest,
inlaid with gold, he offered to give it to any one whose body
would fit it. Osiris unsuspiciously lay down in it. Typhon
instantly fastened the cover and threw the fatal chest into the
river. This was called the loss or burial of Osiris, and was
annually celebrated with all sorts of melancholy rites. But the
winds and waves drove the funereal vessel ashore, where Isis, the
inconsolable wife of Osiris, wandering in search of her husband's
remains, at last found it, and restored the corpse to life. This
part of the drama was called the discovery or resurrection of
Osiris, and was also enacted yearly, but with every manifestation
of excessive joy. "In the losing of Osiris, and then in the
finding him again," Augustine writes, "first their lamentation,
then their extravagant delight, are a mere play and fiction; yet
the fond people, though they neither lose nor find any thing, weep
and rejoice truly."17 Plutarch speaks of the death, regeneration,
and resurrection of Osiris represented in the great religious
festivals of Egypt. He explains the rites in commemoration of
Typhon's murder of Osiris as symbols referring to four things, the
subsidence of the Nile into his channel, the cessation of the
delicious Etesian winds before the hot blasts of the South, the
encroachment of the lengthening night on the shortening day, the
disappearance of the bloom of summer before the barrenness of
winter.18 But the real interest and power of the whole subject
probably lay in the direct relation of all these phenomena,
traditions, and ceremonies to the doctrine of death and a future
life for man.

In the Mithraic Mysteries of Persia, the legend, ritual, and
doctrine were virtually the same as the foregoing. They are
credulously said to have been established by Zoroaster himself,
who fitted up a vast grotto in the mountains of Bokhara, where
thousands thronged to be initiated by him.19 This Mithraic cave
was an emblem of the universe, its roof painted with the
constellations of the zodiac, its depths full of the black and
fiery terrors of grisly hell, its summit illuminated with the blue
and starry splendors of heaven, its passages lined with dangers
and instructions, now quaking with infernal shrieks, now breathing
celestial music. In the Persian Mysteries, the initiate, in
dramatic show, died, was laid in a coffin, and

16 Wilkinson, Egyptian Antiquities, series i. vol. i. ch. 3.

17 De Civitate Dei, lib. vi. cap. 10.

18 De Is. et Osir.

19 Porphyry, De Antro Nympharum. Tertullian, Prescript. ad Her.,
cap. xl., where he refers the mimic death and resurrection in the
Mithraic Mysteries to the teaching of Satan.


afterwards rose unto a new life, all of which was a type of the
natural fate of man.20 The descent of the soul from heaven and its
return thither were denoted by a torch borne alternately reversed
and upright, and by the descriptions of the passage of spirits, in
the round of the metempsychosis, through the planetary gates of
the zodiac. The sun and moon and the morning and evening star were
depicted in brilliant gold or blackly muffled, according to their
journeying in the upper or in the lower hemisphere.21

The hero of the Syrian Mysteries was Adonis or Thammuz, the
beautiful favorite of Aphrodite, untimely slain by a wild boar.
His death was sadly, his resurrection joyously, celebrated every
year at Byblus with great pomp and universal interest. The
festival lasted two days. On the first, all things were clad in
mourning, sorrow was depicted in every face, and wails and weeping
resounded. Coffins were exposed at every door and borne in
numerous processions. Frail stalks of young corn and flowers were
thrown into the river to perish, as types of the premature death
of blooming Adonis, cut off like a plant in the bud of his age.22
The second day the whole aspect of things was changed, and the
greatest exultation prevailed, because it was said Adonis had
returned from the dead.23 Venus, having found him dead, deposited
his body on a bed of lettuce and mourned bitterly over him. From
his blood sprang the adonium, from her tears the anemone.24 The
Jews were captivated by the religious rites connected with this
touching myth, and even enacted them in the gates of their holy
temple. Ezekiel says, "Behold, at the gate of the Lord's house
which was towards the north [the direction of night and winter]
there sat women weeping for Tammuz." It was said that Aphrodite
prevailed on Persephone to let Adonis dwell one half the year with
her on earth, and only the rest among the shades, a plain
reference to vegetable life in summer and winter.25 Lucian, in his
little treatise on the Syrian Goddess, says that "the river
Adonis, rising out of Mount Libanus, at certain seasons flows red
in its channel: some say it is miraculously stained by the blood
of the fresh wounded youth; others say that the spring rains,
washing in a red ore from the soil of the country, discolor the
stream." Dupuis remarks that this redness was probably an artifice
of the priests.26 Milton's beautiful allusion to this fable is
familiar to most persons. Next came he "Whose annual wound in
Lebanon allured The Syrian damsels to lament his fate In amorous
ditties all a summer's day, While smooth Adonis from his native
rock Ran purple to the sea with Thammuz' blood."

20 Julius Firmicus, De Errore Prof. Relig.

21 Mithraica, Memoire Academique sur le Culte Solaire de Mithra,
par Joseph de Hammer, pp: 66-68, 125-127. Tertullian, Prescript.
ad Her., cap. xl. Porphyry, De Abstinentia, lib. iv. sect. 16.
Hyde. Hist. Vet. Pers. Relig., p. 254.

22 Hist. du Culte d'Adonis, Mem. Acad. des Inscript., vol. iv. p.
136.

23 Theocritus, Idyl XV.

24 Bion, Epitaph Adon., l. 66.

25 See references in Anthon's Class. Dict., art. Adonis.

26 Dupuis, Orig. de Cultes, vol. iv. p. 121, ed. 1822.


There is no end to the discussions concerning the secret purport
of this fascinating story. But, after all is said, it seems to us
that there are in it essentially two significations, one relating
to the phenomena of the sun and the earth, the other to the mutual
changes of nature and the fate of humanity. Aphrodite bewailing
Adonis is surviving Nature mourning for departed Man.

In India the story was told of Mahadeva searching for his lost
consort Sita, and, after discovering her lifeless form, bearing it
around the world with dismal lamentations. Sometimes it was the
death of Camadeva, the Hindu Cupid, that was mourned with solemn
dirges.27 He, like Osiris, was slain, enclosed in a chest, and
committed to the waves. He was afterwards recovered and
resuscitated. Each initiate passed through the emblematic
ceremonies corresponding to the points of this pretended history.
The Phrygians associated the same great doctrine with the persons
of Atys and Cybele. Atys was a lovely shepherd youth passionately
loved by the mother of the gods.28 He suddenly died; and she, in
frantic grief, wandered over the earth in search of him, teaching
the people where she went the arts of agriculture. He was at
length restored to her. Annually the whole drama was performed by
the assembled nation with sobs of woe succeeded by ecstasies of
joy.29 Similar to this, in the essential features, was the
Eleusinian myth. Aidoneus snatched the maiden Kore down to his
gloomy empire. Her mother, Demeter, set off in search of her,
scattering the blessings of agriculture, and finally discovered
her, and obtained the promise of her society for half of every
year. These adventures were dramatized and explained in the
mysteries which she, according to tradition, instituted at
Eleusis.

The form of the legend was somewhat differently incorporated with
the Bacchic Mysteries. It was elaborately wrought up by the Orphic
poets. The distinctive name they gave to Bacchus or Dionysus was
Zagreus. He was the son of Zeus, and was chosen by him to sit on
the throne of heaven. Zeus gave him Apollo and the Curetes as
guards; but the brutal Titans, instigated by jealous Hera,
disguised themselves and fell on the unfortunate youth while his
attention was fixed on a splendid mirror, and, after a fearful
conflict, overcame him and tore him into seven pieces. Pallas,
however, saved his palpitating heart, and Zeus swallowed it.
Zagreus was then begotten again.30 He was destined to restore the
golden age. His devotees looked to him for the liberation of their
souls through the purifying rites of his Mysteries. The initiation
shadowed out an esoteric doctrine of death and a future life, in
the mock murder and new birth of the aspirant, who impersonated
Zagreus.31

The Northmen constructed the same drama of death around the young
Balder, their god of gentleness and beauty. This legend, as Dr.
Oliver has shown, constituted the secret of the Gothic
Mysteries.32 Obscure and dread prophecies having crept among the
gods that the death of the beloved Balder was at hand, portending
universal ruin, a consultation was held to devise means for
averting the calamity. At the suggestion of Balder's mother,
Freya, the Scandinavian Venus, an oath that they would not be
instrumental in causing his death was

27 Asiatic Researches, vol. iii. p. 187.

28 See article Atys in Smith's Class. Dict. with references.

29 Lucretius, De Rerum Natura, lib. ii. 11. 605-655.

30 Muller, Hist. Greek Lit., ch. xvi.

31 Lobeck, Aglaophamus, lib. iii. cap. 5, sect. 13.

32 History of Initiation, Lect. X.


exacted from all things in nature except the mistletoe, which, on
account of its frailty and insignificance, was scornfully
neglected. Asa Loke, the evil principle of the Norse faith, taking
advantage of this fatal exception, had a spear made of mistletoe,
and with it armed Hodur, a strong but blind god. Freya, rejoicing
in fancied security, to convince Balder of his charmed exemption
from wounds, persuaded him to be the mark for the weapons of the
gods. But, alas! when Hodur tilted at him, the devoted victim was
transpierced and fell lifeless to the ground. Darkness settled
over the world, and bitter was the grief of men and gods over the
innocent and lovely Balder. A deputation imploring his release was
sent to the queen of the dead. Hela so far relented as to promise
his liberation to the upper world on condition that every thing on
earth wept for him. Straightway there was a universal mourning.
Men, beasts, trees, metals, stones, wept. But an old withered
giantess Asa Loke in disguise shed no tears; and so Hela kept her
beauteous and lamented prey. But he is to rise again to eternal
life and joy when the twilight of the gods has passed.33 This
entire fable has been explained by the commentators, in all its
details, as a poetic embodiment of the natural phenomena of the
seasons. But it is not improbable that, in addition, it bore a
profound doctrinal reference to the fate of man which was
interpreted to the initiates.

A great deal has been written concerning the ceremonies and
meaning of the celebrated Celtic Mysteries established so long at
Samothrace, and under the administration of the Druids throughout
ancient Gaul and Britain. The aspirant was led through a series of
scenic representations, "without the aid of words," mystically
shadowing forth in symbolic forms the doctrine of the transmigration
of souls. He assumed successively the shapes of a rabbit, a hen,
a grain of wheat, a horse, a tree, and so on through a wide range
of metamorphoses enacted by the aid of secret dramatic machinery.

He died, was buried, was born anew, rising from his dark confinement
to life again. The hierophant enclosed him in a little boat and
set him adrift, pointing him to a distant rock, which he calls
"the harbor of life." Across the black and stormy waters he strives
to gain the beaconing refuge.

In these scenes and rites a recondite doctrine of the physical
and moral relations and destiny of man was shrouded, to be unveiled
by degrees to their docile disciples by the Druidic mystagogues.34

It may appear strange that there should be in connection with so
many of the old religions of the earth these arcana only to be
approached by secret initiation at the hands of hierophants. But
it will seem natural when we remember that those religions were in
the exclusive keeping of priesthoods, which, organized with
wondrous cunning and perpetuated through ages, absorbed the
science, art, and philosophy of the world, and, concealing their
wisdom in the mystic signs of an esoteric language, wielded the
mighty enginery of superstition over the people at will. The
scenes and instructions through which the priests led the
unenlightened candidate were the hiding of their power. Thus,
wherever was a priesthood we should expect to find mysteries and
initiations. Historic fact justifies the

33 Pigott, Manual of Scandinavian Mythology, pp. 288-300.

34 Davies, Mythology and Rites of the British Druids, pp. 207-257;
390-392; 420, 555, 572. The accuracy of many of Davies's
translations has been called in question. His statements, even on
the matters affirmed above, must be received with some reservation
of faith.


supposition; learning unveils the obscure places of antiquity, and
shows us the templed or cavernous rites of the religious world,
from Hindostan to Gaul, from Egypt to Norway, from Athens to
Mexico. And this brings us to the Mysteries of Vitzliputzli,
established in South America. Dr. Oliver, in the twelfth lecture
of his History of Initiation, gathering his materials from various
sources, gives a terrific account of the dramatic ritual here
employed. The walls, floor, images, were smeared and caked with
human blood. Fresh slaughters of victims were perpetrated at
frequent intervals. The candidate descended to the grim caverns
excavated under the foundations of the temple. This course was
denominated "the path of the dead." Phantoms flitted before him,
shrieks appalled him, pitfalls and sacrificial knives threatened
him. At last, after many frightful adventures, the aspirant
arrived at a narrow stone fissure terminating the range of
caverns, through which he was thrust, and was received in the open
air, as a person born again, and welcomed with frantic shouts by
the multitudes who had been waiting for him without during the
process of his initiation.

Even among the savage tribes of North America striking traces have
been found of an initiation into a secret society by a mystic
death and resurrection. Captain Jonathan Carver, who spent the
winter of 1776 with the Naudowessie Indians, was an eye witness of
the admission of a young brave into a body which they entitled
Wakou Kitchewah, or Friendly Society of the Spirit. "This singular
initiation," he says, "took place within a railed enclosure in the
centre of the camp at the time of the new moon." First came the
chiefs, clad in trailing furs. Then came the members of the
society, dressed and painted in the gayest manner. When all were
seated, one of the principal chiefs arose, and, leading the young
man forward, informed the meeting of his desire to be admitted
into their circle. No objection being offered, the various
preliminary arrangements were made; after which the director began
to speak to the kneeling candidate, telling him that he was about
to receive a communication of the spirit. This spirit would
instantly strike him dead; but he was told not to be terrified,
because he should immediately be restored to life again, and this
experience was a necessary introduction to the advantages of the
community he was on the point of entering. Then violent agitation
distorted the face and convulsed the frame of the old chief. He
threw something looking like a small bean at the young man. It
entered his mouth, and he fell lifeless as suddenly as if he had
been shot. Several assistants received him, rubbed his limbs, beat
his back, stripped him of his garments and put a new dress on him,
and finally presented him to the society in full consciousness as
a member.36

All the Mysteries were funereal. This is the most striking single
phenomenon connected with them. They invariably began in darkness
with groans and tears, but as invariably ended in festive triumph
with shouts and smiles. In them all were a symbolic death, a
mournful entombment, and a glad resurrection. We know this from
the abundant direct testimony of unimpeachable ancient writers,
and also from their indirect descriptions of the ceremonies and
allusions to them. For example, Apuleius says, "The delivery of
the Mysteries is celebrated as a thing resembling a voluntary
death: the initiate, being, after a manner, born

36 Travels in the Interior of North America, ch. vii.


again, is restored to a new life." 36 Indeed, all who describe the
course of initiation agree in declaring that the aspirant was
buried for a time within some narrow space, a typical coffin or
grave. This testimony is confirmed by the evidence of the ruins of
the chief temples and sacred places of the pagan world. These
abound with spacious caverns, labyrinthine passages, and curious
recesses; and in connection with them is always found some
excavation evidently fitted to enclose a human form. Such hollow
beds, covered with flat stones easily removed, are still to be
seen amidst the Druidic remains of Britain and Gaul, as well as in
nearly every spot where tradition has located the celebration of
the Mysteries, in Greece, India, Persia, Egypt.37

It becomes a most interesting question whence these symbols and
rites had their origin, and what they were really meant to shadow
forth. Bryant, Davies, Faber, Oliver, and several other well known
mythologists, have labored, with no slight learning and ingenuity,
to show that all these ceremonies sprang from traditions of the
Deluge and of Noah's adventures at that time. The mystic death,
burial, and resurrection of the initiate, they say, are a
representation of the entrance of the patriarch into the ark, his
dark and lonesome sojourn in it, and his final departure out of
it. The melancholy wailings with which the Mysteries invariably
began, typified the mourning of the patriarchal family over their
confinement within the gloomy and sepulchral ark; the triumphant
rejoicings with which the initiations always ended, referred to
the glad exit of the patriarchal family from their floating prison
into the blooming world. The advocates of this theory have
laboriously collected all the materials that favor it, and
skilfully striven by their means to elucidate the whole subject of
ancient paganism, especially of the Mysteries. But, after reading
all that they have written, and considering it in the light of
impartial researches, one is constrained to say that they have by
no means made out their case. It is somewhat doubtful if there be
any ground whatever for believing that traditions concerning
Noah's deluge and the ark, and his doings in connection with them,
in any way entered into the public doctrines and forms, or into
the secret initiations, of the heathen religions. At all events,
there can be no doubt that the Arkite theorists have exaggerated
the importance and extent of these views beyond all tolerable
bounds, and even to absurdity. But our business with them now is
only so far as they relate to the Mysteries. Our own conviction is
that the real meaning of the rites in the Mysteries was based upon
the affecting phenomena of human life and death and the hope of
another life. We hold the Arkite theory to be arbitrary in
general, unsupported by proofs, and inconsistent in detail, unable
to meet the points presented.

In the first place, a fundamental part of the ancient belief was
that below the surface of the earth was a vast, sombre under
world, the destination of the ghosts of men, the Greek Hades, the
Roman Orcus, the Gothic Hell. A part of the service of initiation
was a symbolic descent into this realm. Apuleius, describing his
initiation, says, "I approached to the confines

36 Golden Ass, Eng. trans., by Thomas Taylor, p. 280.

37 Copious instances are given in Oliver's History of Initiation,
in Faber's Origin of Pagan Idolatry, and in Maurice's Indian
Antiquities.


of death and trod on the threshold of Proserpine." 38 Orpheus, to
whom the introduction of the Mysteries into Greece from the East
was ascribed, wrote a poem, now lost, called the "Descent into
Hades." Such a descent was attributed to Hercules, Theseus,
Rhampsinitus, and many others.39 It is painted in detail by Homer
in the adventure of his hero Ulysses, also by Virgil much more
minutely through the journey of Aneas. Warburton labors with great
learning and plausibility, and, as it seems to us, with
irresistible cogency, to show that these descents are no more nor
less than exoteric accounts of what was dramatically enacted in
the esoteric recesses of the Mysteries.40 Any person must be
invincibly prejudiced who can doubt that the Greek Hades meant a
capacious subterranean world of shades. Now, to assert, as Bryant
and his disciples do,41 that "Hades means the interior of Noah's
ark," or "the abyss of waters on which the ark floated, as a
coffin bearing the relics of dead Nature," is a purely arbitrary
step taken from undue attachment to a mere theory. Hades means the
under world of the dead, and not the interior of Noah's ark.
Indeed, in the second place, Faber admits that in the Mysteries
"the ark itself was supposed to be in Hades, the vast central
abyss of the earth." But such was not the location of Noah's
vessel and voyage. They were on the face of the flood, above the
tops of the mountains. It is beyond comparison the most reasonable
supposition in itself, and the one best supported by historic
facts, that the representations of a mystic burial and voyage in a
ship or boat shown in the ancient religions were symbolic rites
drawn from imagination and theory as applied to the impressive
phenomena of nature and the lot of man. The Egyptians and some
other early nations, we know, figured the starry worlds in the sky
as ships sailing over a celestial sea. The earth itself was
sometimes emblematized in the same way. Then, too, there was the
sepulchral barge in which the Egyptian corpses were borne over the
Acherusian lake to be entombed. Also the "dark blue punt" in which
Charon ferried souls across the river of death. In these surely
there was no reference to Noah's ark. It seems altogether likely
that what Bryant and his coadjutors have constructed into the
Arkite system of interpretation was really but an emblematic
showing forth of a natural doctrine of human life and death and
future fate. A wavering boat floating on the deep might, with
striking fitness, typify the frail condition of humanity in life,
as when Hercules is depicted sailing over the ocean in a golden
cup; and that boat, safely riding the flood, might also represent
the cheerful faith of the initiate in a future life, bearing him
fearlessly through all dangers and through death to the welcoming
society of Elysium, as when Danae and her babe, tossed over the
tempestuous sea in a fragile chest, were securely wafted to the
sheltering shore of Seriphus. No emblem of our human state and
lot, with their mysteries, perils, threats, and promises, could be
either more natural or more impressive than that of a vessel
launched on the deep. The dying Socrates said "that he should
trust his soul on the hope of a future life as upon a raft, and
launch away into the unknown." Thus the imagination broods over
and explores the shows and secrets, presageful warnings and
alluring

38 Golden Ass, Taylor's trans., p. 283.

39 Herodotus, lib. il. cap. cxxii.

40 Divine Legation of Moses, book ii. sect. iv.

41 Faber, Mysteries of the Cabiri, ch. v.: On the Connection of
the Fabulous Hades with the Mysteries.


invitations, storms and calms, island homes and unknown havens, of
the dim seas of nature and of man, of time and of eternity.42

Thirdly, the defenders of the Arkite theory are driven into gross
inconsistencies with themselves by the falsity of their views. The
dilaceration of Zagreus into fragments, the mangling of Osiris and
scattering of his limbs abroad, they say, refer to the throwing
open of the ark and the going forth of the inmates to populate the
earth. They usually make Osiris, Zagreus, Adonis, and the other
heroes of the legends enacted in the Mysteries, representatives of
the diluvian patriarch himself; but here, with no reason whatever
save the exigencies of their theory, they make these mythic
personages representatives of the ark, a view which is utterly
unfounded and glaringly wanting in analogy. When Zagreus is torn
in pieces, his heart is preserved alive by Zeus and born again
into the world within a human form. After the body of Osiris had
been strewn piecemeal, the fragments were fondly gathered by Isis,
and he was restored to life. There is no plausible correspondence
between these cases and the sending out from the ark of the
patriarchal family to repeople the world. Their real purpose would
seem plainly to be to symbolize the thought that, however the body
of man crumbles in pieces, there is life for him still, he does
not hopelessly die. They likewise say that the egg which was
consecrated in the Mysteries, at the beginning of the rites, was
intended as an emblem of the ark resting on the abyss of waters,
and that its latent hatching was meant to suggest the opening of
the ark to let the imprisoned patriarch forth. This hypothesis has
no proof, and is needless. It is much more plausible to suppose
that the egg was meant as a symbol of a new life about to burst
upon the candidate, a symbol of his resurrection from the mystic
tomb wherein he was buried during one stage of initiation; for we
know that the initiation was often regarded as the commencement of
a fresh life, as a new birth. Apuleius says, "I celebrated the
most joyful day of my initiation as my natal day."

Faber argues, from the very close similarity of all the
differently named Mysteries, that they were all Arkite, all
derived from one mass of traditions reaching from Noah and
embodying his history.43 The asserted fact of general resemblance
among the instituted Mysteries is unquestionable; but the
inference above drawn from it is unwarrantable, even if no better
explanation could be offered. But there is another explanation
ready, more natural in conception, more consistent in detail, and
better sustained by evidence. The various Mysteries celebrated in
the ancient nations were so much alike not because they were all
founded on one world wide tradition about the Noachian deluge, but
because they all grew out of the great common facts of human
destiny in connection with natural phenomena. The Mysteries were
funereal and festive, began in sorrow and ended in joy, not
because they represented first Noah's sad entrance into the ark
and then his glad exit from it, but because they began with
showing the initiate that he must die, and ended with showing him
that he should live again in a happier state. Even the most
prejudiced advocates of the Arkite theory

42 Procopius, in his History of the Gothic War, mentions a curious
popular British superstition concerning the ferriage of souls among
the neighboring islands at midnight. See Grimm's Deutsche Mythologie,
kap. xxvi. zweite ausgabe.

43 Mysteries of the Cabiri, ch. 10: Comparison of the Various
Mysteries.


are forced to admit, on the explicit testimony of the ancients,
that the initiates passed from the darkness and horrors of
Tartarus to the bliss and splendors of Elysium by a dramatic
resurrection from burial in the black caverns of probation to
admission within the illuminated hall or dome of perfection.44
That the idea of death and of another life runs through all the
Mysteries as their cardinal tenet is well shown in connection with
the rites of the celebrated Cave of Trophonius at Lebadea in
Boeotia. Whoso sought this oracle must descend head foremost over
an inclined plane, bearing a honey cake in his hand. Aristophanes
speaks of this descent with a shudder of fear.45 The adventurer
was suddenly bereft of his senses, and after a while returned to
the upper air. What he could then remember composed the Divine
revelation which had been communicated to him in his unnatural
state below. Plutarch has given a full account of this experience
from one Timarchus, who had himself passed through it.46 The
substance of it is this. When Timarchus reached the bottom of the
cave, his soul passed from his body, visited the under world of
the departed, saw the sphere of generation where souls were reborn
into the upper world, received some explanation of all these
things: then, returning into the body, he was taken up out of the
cave. Here is no allusion to any traditions of the Deluge or the
ark; but the great purpose is evidently a doctrine of the destiny
of man after death.

Before the eyes and upon the heart of all mankind in every age has
passed in common vision the revolution of the seasons, with its
beautiful and sombre changes, phenomena having a power of
suggestion irresistible to stir some of the most profound
sentiments of the human breast. The day rolls overhead full of
light and life and activity; then the night settles upon the scene
with silent gloom and repose. So man runs his busy round of toil
and pleasure through the day of existence; then, fading, following
the sinking sun, he goes down in death's night to the pallid
populations of shade. Again: the fruitful bloom of summer is
succeeded by the bleak nakedness of winter. So the streams of
enterprise and joy that flowed full and free along their banks in
maturity, overhung by blossoming trees, are shrivelled and frozen
in the channels of age, and above their sepulchral beds the
leafless branches creak in answer to the shrieks of the funereal
blast. The flush of childish gayety, the bloom of youthful
promise, when a new comer is growing up sporting about the hearth
of home, are like the approach of the maiden and starry Spring,
"Who comes sublime, as when, from Pluto free, Came, through the
flash of Zeus, Persephone." And then draw hastily on the long,
lamenting autumnal days, when "Above man's grave the sad winds
wail and rain drops fall, And Nature sheds her leaves in yearly
funeral."

44 Faber, Mysteries of the Cabiri, ch. 10, pp. 331-356. Dion
Chrysostom describes this scene: Oration XII.

45 The Clouds, 1. 507.

46 Essay on the Demon of Socrates. See also Pansanias, lib. ix.
cap. xxxix.


The flowers are gone, the birds are gone, the gentle breezes are
gone; and man too must go, go mingle with the pale people of
dreams. But not wholly and forever shall he die. The sun soars
into new day from the embrace of night; summer restored hastens on
the heels of retreating winter; vegetation but retires and surely
returns, and the familiar song of the birds shall sweeten the
renewing woods afresh for a million springs. Apollo weeping over
the beauteous and darling boy, his slain and drooped Hyacinthus,
is the sun shorn of his fierce beams and mourning over the annual
wintry desolation: it is also Nature bewailing the remediless loss
of man, her favorite companion. It was these general analogies and
suggestions, striking the imagination, affecting the heart,
enlisting the reason, wrought out, personified, and dramatized by
poets, taken up with a mass of other associated matter by priestly
societies and organized in a scheme of legendary doctrine and an
imposing ritual, that constituted the basis and the central
meaning of the old Mysteries; and not a vapid tradition about Noah
and his ark.

The aim of these institutions as they were wielded was threefold;
and in each particular they exerted tremendous power. The first
object was to stretch over the wicked the restraining influence of
a doctrine of future punishment, to fill them with a fearful
looking for judgment in the invisible world. And a considerable
proportion of this kind of fear among the ancients is to be traced
to the secret influence of the Mysteries, the revelations and
terrors there applied. The second desire was to encourage the good
and obedient with inspiring hopes of a happy fate and glorious
rewards beyond the grave. Plutarch writes to his wife, (near the
close of his letter of consolation to her,) "Some say the soul
will be entirely insensible after death; but you are too well
acquainted with the doctrines delivered in the Mysteries of
Bacchus, and with the symbols of our fraternity, to harbor such an
error." The third purpose was, by the wonders and splendors, the
secret awe, the mysterious authority and venerable sanctions,
thrown around the society and its ceremonies, to establish its
doctrines in the reverential acceptance of the people, and thus to
increase the power of the priesthood and the state. To compass
these ends, the hidden science, the public force, the vague
superstition, the treasured wealth, and all the varied resources
available by the ancient world, were marshalled and brought to
bear in the Mysteries. By chemical and mechanical secrets then in
their exclusive possession, the mystagogues worked miracles before
the astonished novices.47 They had the powers of electricity,
gunpowder, hydrostatic pressure, at their command.48 Their rites
were carried out on the most magnificent scale. The temple at
Eleusis could hold thirty thousand persons. Imagine what effect
might be produced, under such imposing and prepared circumstances,
on an ignorant multitude, by a set of men holding all the
scientific secrets and mechanical inventions till then discovered,
illumination flashing after darkness successively before their
smitten eyes, the floors seeming to heave and the walls to crack,
thunders bellowing through the mighty dome; now yawning revealed
beneath them the ghostly chimera of Tartarus, with all the
shrieking and horrid scenery gathered there; now

47 Anthon's Class. Dict., art. "Elicius."

48 Salverte, Des Sciences Occultes, ou Essai sur la Magie. See
also editor's introduction to Thomson's Eng. trans. of Salverte's
work.


the mild beauties of Elysium dawning on their ravished vision,
amid strains of celestial music, through fading clouds of glory,
while nymphs, heroes, and gods walked apparent. Clement of
Alexandria tells us that one feature of the initiation was a
display of the grisly secrets of Hades.49 Apuleius, in his account
of his own initiation, says, "At midnight I saw the sun shining
with a resplendent light; and I manifestly drew near to the lower
and to the upper gods and adored them in immediate presence." 50
Lobeck says that, on the lifting of the veil exposing the adytum
to the gaze of the initiates, apparitions of the gods appeared to
them.51 Christie, in his little work on the Greek Mysteries, says
that the doctrines of the Eleusinian shows were explained by means
of transparent scenes, many of which were faithfully copied upon
the painted Greek vases; and these vase accordingly, were
deposited in tombs to evidence the faith of the deceased in a
future life. The foregoing conceptions may be illustrated by the
dramatic representations, scenic shadows behind transparent
curtains, in Java, alluded to by Sir Stamford Raffles.52

It is remarkable how far the Mysteries spread over the earth, and
what popularity they attained. They penetrated into almost every
nation under the sun. They admitted, in some degree, nearly the
whole people. Herodotus informs us that there were collected in
Egypt, at one celebration, seven hundred thousand men and women,
besides children.53 The greatest warriors and kings Philip,
Alexander, Sulla, Antony esteemed it an honor to be welcomed
within the mystic pale. "Men," says Cicero, "came from the most
distant shores to be initiated at Eleusis." Sophocles declares, as
quoted by Warburton, "True life is to be found only among the
initiates: all other places are full of evil." At the rise of the
Christian religion, all the life and power left in the national
religion of Greece and Rome were in the Mysteries. Accordingly,
here was the most formidable foe of the new faith. Standing in its
old entrenchments, with all its popular prestige around it, it
fought with desperate determination for every inch it was
successively forced to yield. The brilliant effort of Julian to
roll back the tide of Christianity and restore the pagan religion
to more than its pristine splendor an effort beneath which the
scales of the world's fortunes poised, tremulous, for a while was
chiefly an endeavor to revive and enlarge the Mysteries. Such was
the attachment of the people to these old rites even in the middle
of the fourth century of the Christian era, that a murderous riot
broke out at Alexandria, in which Bishop George and others were
slain, on occasion of the profanation by Christians of a secret
adytum in which the Mysteries of Mithra were celebrated.54 And
when, a little later, the Emperor Valentinian had determined to
suppress all nocturnal rites, he was induced to withdraw his
resolution by Pretextatus, proconsul in Greece, "a man endowed
with every virtue, who represented to him that the

49 Stromata, lib. iii., cited by a writer on the Mysteries in
Blackwood, Feb. 1853, pp. 201-203.

50 Taylor's trans. of Golden Ass, p. 283. In a note to p. 275 of
this work, the translator describes (with a citation of his
authorities) "the breathing resemblances of the gods used in the
Mysteries, statues fabricated by the telesta, so as to be
illuminated and to appear animated."

51 Aglaophamus, lib. i. sect. 7.

52 Discourse to the Lit. and Sci. Soc. of Java, 1815, pub. in
Valpy's Pamphleteer, No. 15.

53 Lib. ii. cap. ix.

54 Socrates, Ecc. Inst., lib. iii. cap. 2.


Greeks would consider life insupportable if they were forbidden to
celebrate those most sacred Mysteries which bind together the
human race."55 Upon the whole, we cannot fail to see that the
Mysteries must have exerted a most extensive and profound
influence alike in fostering the good hopes of human nature
touching a life to come, and in giving credit and diffusion to the
popular fables of the poets concerning the details of the future
state. Much of that belief which seems to us so absurd we can
easily suppose they sincerely embraced, when we recollect what
they thought they had seen under supernatural auspices in their
initiations.

In the Greek and Roman faith there was gradually developed in
connection chiefly with the Mysteries, as we believe an
aristocratic doctrine which allotted to a select class of souls an
abode in the sky as their distinguished destination after death,
while the common multitude were still sentenced to the shadow
region below the grave. As Virgil writes, "The descent to Avernus
is easy. The gate of dark Dis is open day and night. But to rise
into the upper world is most arduous. Only the few heroes whom
favoring Jove loves or shining virtue exalts thither can effect
it." 56 Numerous scattered, significant traces of a belief in this
change of the destination of some souls from the pit of Hades to
the hall of heaven are to be found in the classic authors. Virgil,
celebrating the death of some person under the fictitious name of
Daphnis, exclaims, "Robed in white, he admires the strange court
of heaven, and sees the clouds and the stars beneath his feet. He
is a god now." 57 Porphyry ascribes to Pythagoras the declaration
that the souls of departed men are gathered in the zodiac.58 Plato
earnestly describes a region of brightness and unfading realities
above this lower world, among the stars, where the gods live, and
whither, he says, the virtuous and wise may ascend, while the
corrupt and ignorant must sink into the Tartarean realm.59 A
similar conception of the attainableness of heaven seems to be
suggested in the old popular myths, first, of Hercules coming back
in triumph from his visit to Pluto's seat, and, on dying, rising
to the assembly of immortals and taking his equal place among
them; secondly, of Dionysus going into the under world, rescuing
his mother, the hapless Semele, and soaring with her to heaven,
where she henceforth resides, a peeress of the eldest goddesses.
Cicero expresses the same thought when he affirms that "a life of
justice and piety is the path to heaven, where patriots, exemplary
souls, released from their bodies, enjoy endless happiness amidst
the brilliant orbs of the galaxy." 60 The same author also speaks
of certain philosophers who flourished before his time, "whose
opinions encouraged the belief that souls departing from bodies
would arrive at heaven as their proper dwelling place." 61 He
afterwards stigmatizes the notion that the life succeeding death
is subterranean as an error,62 and in his own name addresses his
auditor thus: "I see you gazing upward and wishing to migrate into
heaven." 63 It was the common belief of the Romans for ages that
Romulus was taken up into heaven, where he would remain forever,
claiming Divine honors.64 The Emperor Julian says, in his Letter
on the

55 Essay on Mysteries, by M. Ouvaroff, Eng. trans. by J. D. Price,
p. 55.

56 Aneid, lib. vi. 11. 125-130.

57 Ecl. v. 11. 57, 58, 64.

58 De Antro Nympharum.

59 Phado sects. 136-138.

60 Soma. Scipionis.

61 Tusc. Quast., lib. i. cap. xi.

62 Ibid. cap. xvi.

63 Ibid. cap. xxxiv.

64 Ennius, e. g., sings, "Romulus in coelo cum diis agit avum"


Duties of a Priest, "God will raise from darkness and Tartarus the
souls of all of us who worship him sincerely: to the pious,
instead of Tartarus he promises Olympus." "It is lawful," writes
Plato, "only for the true lover of wisdom to pass into the rank of
gods." 65 The privilege here confined to philosophers we believe
was promised to the initiates in the Mysteries, as the special
prerogative secured to them by their initiation. "To pass into the
rank of the gods" is a phrase which, as here employed, means to
ascend into heaven and have a seat with the immortals, instead of
being banished, with the souls of common mortals, to the under
world.

In early times the Greek worship was most earnestly directed to
that set of deities who resided at the gloomy centre of the earth,
and who were called the chthonian gods.66 The hope of immortality
first sprung up and was nourished in connection with this worship.
But in the progress of time and culture the supernal circle of
divinities who kept state on bright Olympus acquired a greater
share of attention, and at last received a degree of worship far
surpassing that paid to their swarthy compeers below. The
adoration of these bright beings, with a growing trust in their
benignity, the fables of the poets telling how they had sometimes
elevated human favorites to their presence, for instance,
receiving a Ganymede to the joys of their sublime society, the
encouraging thoughts of the more religious and cheerful of the
philosophers, these facts, together with a natural shrinking from
the dismal gloom of the life of shades around the Styx, and a
native longing for admission to the serene pleasures of the
unfading life led by the radiant lords of heaven, in conjunction,
perhaps, with still other causes, effected an improvement of the
old faith, altering and brightening it, little by little, until
the hope came in many quarters to be entertained that the faithful
soul would after death rise into the assemblage and splendor of
the celestial gods. The Emperor Julian, at the close of his
seventh Oration, represents the gods of Olympus addressing him in
this strain:  "Remember that your soul is immortal, and that if
you follow us you will be a god and with us will behold our
Father." Several learned writers have strenuously labored to prove
that the ground secret of the Mysteries, the grand thing revealed
in them, was the doctrine of apotheosis, shaking the established
theology by unmasking the historic fact that all the gods were
merely deified men. We believe the real significance of the
various collective testimony, hints, and inferences by which these
writers have been brought to such a conclusion is this; the
genuine point of the Mysteries lay not in teaching that the gods
were once men, but in the idea that men may become gods. To teach
that Zeus, the universal Father, causing the creation to tremble
at the motion of his brow, was formerly an obscure king of Crete,
whose tomb was yet visible in that island, would have been utterly
absurd. But to assert that the soul of man, the free, intelligent
image of the gods, on leaving the body, would ascend to live
eternally in the kingdom of its Divine prototypes, would have been
a brilliant step of progress in harmony both with reason and the
heart. Such was probably the fact. Observe the following citation
from Plutarch: "There is no occasion against nature to send the
bodies of good men to heaven; but we are to conclude that virtuous
souls, by nature and the Divine justice, rise from men to heroes,
from heroes to genii; and if, as in the Mysteries, they are

65 Phado, sect. lxxi.

66 Muller, Mist. Greek Lit., cap. ii. sect. 5; cap. xvi. sect. 2.


purified, shaking off the remains of mortality and the power of
the passions, they then attain the highest happiness, and ascend
from genii to gods, not by the vote of the people, but by the just
and established order of nature." 67

The reference in the last clause is to the decrees of the Senate
whereby apotheosis was conferred on various persons, placing them
among the gods. This ceremony has often been made to appear
unnecessarily ridiculous, through a perversion of its actual
meaning. When the ancients applied the term "god" to a human soul
departed from the body, it was not used as the moderns
prevailingly employ that word. It expressed a great deal less with
them than with us. It merely meant to affirm similarity of
essence, qualities, and residence, but by no means equal dignity
and power of attributes between the one and the others. It meant
that the soul had gone to the heavenly habitation of the gods and
was thenceforth a participant in the heavenly life.68 Heraclitus
was accustomed to say, "Men are mortal gods; gods are immortal
men." Macrobius says, "The soul is not only immortal, but a god."
69 And Cicero declares, "The soul of man is a Divine thing, as
Euripides dares to say, a god." 70 Milton uses language precisely
parallel, speaking of those who are "unmindful of the crown true
Virtue gives her servants, after their mortal change, among the
enthroned gods on sainted seats." Theophilus, Bishop of Antioch in
the second century, says that "to become a god means to ascend
into heaven." 71 The Roman Catholic ceremony of beatification and
canonization of saints, offering them incense and prayers
thereafter, means exactly what was meant by the ancient
apotheosis, namely, that while the multitudes of the dead abide
below, in the intermediate state, these favored souls have been
advanced into heaven. The papal functionaries borrowed this rite,
with most of its details, from their immediate pagan predecessors,
who themselves probably adopted it from the East, whence the
Mysteries came. It is well known that the Brahmans and Buddhists
believed, centuries before the Christian era, in the contrasted
fate of good men after death to enjoy the successive heavens above
the clouds, and of bad men to suffer the successive hells beneath
the earth. A knowledge of this attractive Oriental doctrine may
have united with the advance of their own speculations to win the
partial acceptance obtained among the Greeks and Romans for the
faith which broke the universal doom to Hades and opened heaven to
their hopeful aspirations. In a tragedy of Euripides the following
passage occurs, addressed to the bereaved Admetus: "Let not the
tomb of thy wife be looked on as the mound of the ordinary dead.
Some wayfarer, as he treads the sloping road, shall say, 'This
woman once died for her husband; but now she is a saint in
heaven.'" 72

When the meaning of the cheerful promises given to the initiates
of a more favored fate in the future life than awaited others
namely, as we think, that their spirits on leaving the body should
scale Olympus instead of plunging to Tartarus had been concealed
within the

67 Lives, Romulus, sect. xxviii.

68 See a valuable discussion of the ancient use of the terms theos
and deus in note D vol. iii. of Norton's Genuineness of the
Gospels.

69 Somn. Scip., lib. ii. cap. 12.

70 Tusc. Quest., lib. i. cap. 26.

71 We omit several other authorities, as the reader would probably
deem any further evidence superfluous.

72 Alcestis, ll. 1015-1025, ed. Glasg.


Mysteries for a long time, it at length broke into public view in
the national apotheosis of ancient heroes, kings, and renowned
worthies, the instances of which became so numerous that Cicero
cries, "Is not nearly all heaven peopled with the human race?" 73
Over the heads of the devout heathen, as they gazed up through the
clear night air, twinkled the beams of innumerable stars, each
chosen to designate the cerulean seat where some soul was
rejoicing with the gods in heaven over the glorious issue of the
toils and sufferings in which he once painfully trod this earthly
scene.

Herodian, a Greek historian of some of the Roman emperors, has
left a detailed account of the rite of apotheosis.74 An image of
the person to be deified was made in wax, looking all sick and
pale, laid in state on a lofty bed of ivory covered with cloth of
gold, surrounded on one side by choirs of noble lords, on the
other side by their ladies stripped of their jewels and clad in
mourning, visited often for several days by a physician, who still
reports his patient worse, and finally announces his decease. Then
the Senators and haughtiest patricians bear the couch through the
via sacra to the Forum. Bands of noble boys and of proud women
ranged opposite each other chant hymns and lauds over the dead in
solemn melody. The bier is next borne to the Campus Martius, where
it is placed upon a high wooden altar, a large, thin structure
with a tower like a lighthouse. Heaps of fragrant gums, herbs,
fruits, and spices are poured out and piled upon it. Then the
Roman knights, mounted on horseback, prance before it in beautiful
bravery, wheeling to and fro in the dizzy measures of the Pyrrhic
dance. Also, in a stately manner, purple clothed charioteers,
wearing masks which picture forth the features of the most famous
worthies of other days to the reverential recognition of the
silent hosts assembled, ride around the form of their descendant.
Suddenly a torch is set to the pile, and it is wrapped in flames.
From the turret, amidst the aromatic fumes, an eagle is let loose.
Phoenix like symbol of the departed soul, he soars into the sky,
and the seven hilled city throbs with pride, reverberating the
shouts of her people. Thus into the residence of the gods "Sic
itur ad astra" was borne the divinely favored mortal; "And thus we
see how man's prophetic creeds Made gods of men when godlike were
their deeds."

For it was only in times of degradation and by a violent
perversion that the honor was allowed to the unworthy; and even in
such cases it was usually nullified as soon as the people
recovered their senses and their freedom. There is extant among
the works of Seneca a little treatise called Apocolocuntosis, that
is, pumpkinification, or the metamorphosis into a gourd, a sharp
satire levelled against the apotheosis of the Emperor Claudius.
The deification of mortals among the ancients has long been
laughed at. When the great Macedonian monarch applied for a decree
for his apotheosis while he was yet alive, the Lacedemonian
Senate, with bitter sarcasm, voted, "If Alexander desires to be a
god, let him be a god." The doctrine is often referred to among us
in terms of mockery. But this is principally because it is not
understood. It simply signifies the ascent of the soul after death
into the Olympian halls instead of descending into the Acheronian
gulfs. And whether we

73 Tusc. Quast., lib. i. cap. 12.

74 Lib. iv.


consider the symbolic justice and beauty of the conception as a
poetic image applied to the deathless heroes of humanity ensphered
above us forever in historic fame and natural worship, or regard
its comparative probability as the literal location of the
residence of departed spirits, it must recommend itself to us as a
decided improvement on the ideas previously prevalent, and as a
sort of anticipation, in part, of that bright faith in a heavenly
home for faithfuls souls, afterwards established in the world by
Him of whom it was written, "No man hath ascended up to heaven but
he that came down from heaven, even the Son of Man, who is now in
heaven." Indeed, so forcible and close is the correspondence
between the course of the aspirant in his initiation dramatically
dying, descending into Hades, rising again to life, and ascending
into heaven with the apostolic presentation of the redemptive
career of Christ, our great Forerunner, that some writers Nork,
for instance have suggested that the latter was but the exoteric
publication to all the world of what in the former was
esoterically taught to the initiates alone.

There was a striking naturalness, a profound propriety, in the
obscurities of secrecy and awe with which the ancient Mysteries
shrouded from a rash curiosity their instructions concerning the
future life and only unfolded them by careful degrees to the
prepared candidate. It is so with the reality itself in the nature
of things. It is the great mystery of mysteries, darkly hinted in
types, faintly gleaming in analogies, softly whispered in hopes,
passionately asked in desires, patiently confirmed in arguments,
suddenly blazed and thundered in revelation. Man from the very
beginning of his race on earth has been thickly encompassed by
mysteries, hung around by the muffling curtains of ignorance and
superstition. Through one after another of these he has forced his
way and gazed on their successive secrets laid bare. Once the
Ocean was an alluring and terrible mystery, weltering before him
with its endless wash of waves, into which the weary sun, in the
west, plunged at evening, and out of which, in the east, it
bounded refreshed in the morning. But the daring prows of his
ships, guided by pioneering thought and skill, passed its islands
and touched its ultimate shores. Once the Polar Circle was a
frightful and frozen mystery, enthroned on mountains of eternal
ice and wearing upon its snowy brow the flaming crown of the
aurora borealis. But his hardy navigators, inspired by enterprise
and philanthropy, armed with science, and supplied by art, have
driven the awful phantom back, league by league, until but a small
expanse of its wonders remains untracked by his steps. Once the
crowded Sky was a boundless mystery, a maze of motions, a field
where ghastly comets played their antics and shook down terrors on
the nations. But the theories of his reason, based on the gigantic
grasp of his calculus and aided by the instruments of his
invention, have solved perplexity after perplexity, blended
discords into harmony, and shown to his delighted vision the calm
perfection of the stellar system. So, too, in the moral world he
has lifted the shrouds from many a dark problem, and extended the
empire of light and love far out over the ancient realm of
darkness and terror. But the secret of Death, the mystery of the
Future, remains yet, as of old, unfathomed and inscrutable to his
inquiries. Still, as of old, he kneels before that unlifted veil
and beseeches the oracles for a response to faith.

The ancient Mysteries in their principal ceremony but copied the
ordination and followed the overawing spirit of Nature herself.
The religious reserve and awe about the entrance into the adytum
of their traditions were like those about the entrance into the
invisible scenes beyond the veils of time and mortality. Their
initiation was but a miniature symbol of the great initiation
through which, and that upon impartial terms, every mortal, from
King Solomon to the idiot pauper, must sooner or later pass to
immortality. When a fit applicant, after the preliminary
probation, kneels with fainting sense and pallid brow before the
veil of the unutterable Unknown, and the last pulsations of his
heart tap at the door of eternity, and he reverentially asks
admission to partake in the secrets shrouded from profane vision,
the infinite Hierophant directs the call to be answered by Death,
the speechless and solemn steward of the celestial Mysteries. He
comes, pushes the curtain aside, leads the awe struck initiate in,
takes the blinding bandage of the body from his soul; and
straightway the trembling neophyte receives light in the midst of
that innumerable Fraternity of Immortals over whom the Supreme
Author of the Universe presides.

CHAPTER II.

METEMPSYCHOSIS; OR, TRANSMIGRATION OF SOULS.

NO other doctrine has exerted so extensive, controlling, and
permanent an influence upon mankind as that of the metempsychosis,
the notion that when the soul leaves the body it is born anew in
another body, its rank, character, circumstances, and experience
in each successive existence depending on its qualities, deeds,
and attainments in its preceding lives. Such a theory, well
matured, bore unresisted sway through the great Eastern world,
long before Moses slept in his little ark of bulrushes on the
shore of the Egyptian river; Alexander the Great gazed with
amazement on the self immolation by fire to which it inspired the
Gymnosophists; Casar found its tenets propagated among the Gauls
beyond the Rubicon; and at this hour it reigns despotic, as the
learned and travelled Professor of Sanscrit at Oxford tells us,
"without any sign of decrepitude or decay, over the Burman,
Chinese, Tartar, Tibetan, and Indian nations, including at least
six hundred and fifty millions of mankind."1 There is abundant
evidence to prove that this scheme of thought prevailed at a very
early period among the Egyptians, all classes and sects of the
Hindus, the Persian disciples of the Magi, and the Druids, and, in
a later age, among the Greeks and Romans as represented by Musaus,
Pythagoras, Plato, Plotinus, Macrobius, Ovid, and many others. It
was generally adopted by the Jews from the time of the Babylonian
captivity. Traces of it have been discovered among the ancient
Scythians, the African tribes, some of the Pacific Islanders, and
various aboriginal nations both of North and of South America.
Charlevoix says some tribes of Canadian Indians believed in a
transmigration of souls; but, with a curious mixture of fancy and
reflection, they limited it to the souls of little children, who,
being balked of this life in its beginning, they thought would try
it again. Their bodies, accordingly, were buried at the sides of
roads, that their spirits might pass into pregnant women
travelling by. A belief in the metempsychosis limited in the same
way to the souls of children also prevailed among the Mexicans.2
The Maricopas, by the Gila, believe when they die they shall
transmigrate into birds, beasts, and reptiles, and shall return to
the banks of the Colorado, whence they were driven by the Yumas.
They will live there in caves and woods, as wolves, rats, and
snakes; so will their enemies the Yumas; and they will fight
together.3 On the western border of the United States, only three
or four years ago, two Indians having been sentenced to be hung
for murder, the chiefs of their tribe came in and begged that they
might be shot or burned instead, as they looked upon hanging with
the utmost horror, believing that the spirit of a person who is
thus strangled to death goes into the next world in a foul manner,
and that it assumes a beastly form. The Sandwich Islanders
sometimes threw their dead into the sea to be devoured by sharks,
supposing their souls would animate these monsters and cause them

1 Wilson, Two Lectures on the Religious Opinions of the Hindus, p.
64.

2 Kingsborough, Antiquities of Mexico, vol. viii. p. 220.

3 Bartlett, Personal Narrative of Explorations in Texas, New
Mexico, &c., ch. xxx.


to spare the living whom accident should throw within their
reach.4 Similar superstitions, but more elaborately developed, are
rife among many tribes of African negroes.5 It was inculcated in
the early Christian centuries by the Gnostics and the Manichaans;
also by Origen and several other influential Fathers. In the
Middle Ages the sect of the Cathari, the Bogomiles, the famous
scholastics Scotus Erigena and Bonaventura, as well as numerous
less distinguished authors, advocated it. And in modern times it
has been earnestly received by Lessing and Fourier, and is not
without its open defenders to day, as we can attest from our own
knowledge, even in the prosaic and enlightened circles of European
and American society.

There have been two methods of explaining the origin of the dogma
of transmigration. First, it has been regarded as a retribution,
the sequel to sin in a pre existent state:

"All that flesh doth cover,
Souls of source sublime,
Are but slaves sold over
To the Master Time
To work out their ransom
For the ancient crime."

With the ancient Egyptians the doctrine was developed in
connection with the conception of a revolt and battle among the
gods in some dim and disastrous epoch of the past eternity, when
the defeated deities were thrust out of heaven and shut up in
fleshly prison bodies. So man is a fallen spirit, heaven his
fatherland, this life a penance, sometimes necessarily repeated in
order to be effectual.6 The pre existence of the soul, whether
taught by Pythagoras, sung by Empedocles, dreamed by Fludd, or
contended for by Beecher, is the principal foundation of the
belief in the metempsychosis. But, secondly, the transmigration of
souls has been considered as the means of their progressive
ascent. The soul begins its conscious course at the bottom of the
scale of being, and, gradually rising through birth after birth,
climbs along a discriminated series of improvements in endless
aspiration. Here the scientific adaptation and moral intent are
thought to lead only upwards, insect travelling to man, man
soaring to God; but by sin the natural order and working of means
are inverted, and the series of births lead downward, until
expiation and merit restore the primal adjustment and direction.

The idea of a metempsychosis, or soul wandering, as the Germans
call it, has been broached in various forms widely differing in
the extent of their application. Among the Jews the writings of
Philo, the Talmud, and other documents, are full of it. They seem,
for the most part, to have confined the mortal residence of souls
to human bodies. They say that God created all souls on the first
day, the only day in which he made aught out of nothing; and they
imply, in their doctrine of the revolution of souls, that these
are born over and over, and will continue wandering thus until the
Messiah comes and the resurrection occurs. The

4 Jarves, Hist. Sandwich Islands, p. 82.

5 Wilson, Western Africa, p. 210.

6 Dr. Roth, Agyptische Glaubenslehre.


Rabbins distinguish two kinds of metempsychosis; namely, "Gilgul,"
which is a series of single transmigrations, each lasting till
death; and "Ibbur," which is where one soul occupies several
bodies, changing its residence at pleasure, or where several souls
occupy one body.7 The latter kind is illustrated by examples of
demoniacal possession in the New Testament. The demons were
supposed to be the souls of deceased wicked men. Sometimes they
are represented as solitary and flitting from one victim to
another; sometimes they swarm together in the same person, as
seven were at once cast out of Mary Magdalene.

More frequently, however, the range of the soul's travels in its
repeated births has been so extended as to include all animal
bodies, beasts, birds, fishes, reptiles, insects. In this extent
the doctrine was held by the Pythagoreans and Platonists, and in
fact by a majority of its believers. Shakspeare's wit is not
without historical warrant when he makes the clown say to
Malvolio, "Thou shalt fear to kill a woodcock, lest thou
dispossess the soul of thy grandam." Many the Manichaans, for
instance taught that human souls transmigrated not only through
the lowest animal bodies but even through all forms of vegetable
life. Souls inhabit ears of corn, figs, shrubs. "Whoso plucks the
fruit or the leaves from trees, or pulls up plants or herbs, is
guilty of homicide," say they; "for in each case he expels a soul
from its body." 8 And some have even gone so far as to believe
that the soul, by a course of ignorance, cruelty, and uncleanness
pursued through many lives, will at length arrive at an inanimate
body, and be doomed to exist for unutterable ages as a stone or as
a particle of dust. The adherents of this hypothesis regard the
whole world as a deposition of materialized souls. At every step
they tread on hosts of degraded souls, destined yet, though now by
sin sunk thus low, to find their way back as redeemed and blessed
spirits to the bosom of the Godhead.

Upon the whole, the metempsychosis may be understood, as to its
inmost meaning and its final issue, to be either a Development, a
Revolution, or a Retribution, a Divine system of development
eternally leading creatures in a graduated ascension from the base
towards the apex of the creation, a perpetual cycle in the order
of nature fixedly recurring by the necessities of a physical fate
unalterable, unavoidable, eternal, a scheme of punishment and
reward exactly fitted to the exigencies of every case, presided
over by a moral Nemesis, and issuing at last in the emancipation
of every purified soul into infinite bliss, when, by the upward
gravitation of spirit, they shall all have been strained through
the successively finer growing filters of the worlds, from the
coarse grained foundation of matter to the lower shore of the
Divine essence.

In seeking to account for the extent and the tenacious grasp of
this antique and stupendous belief, in looking about for the
various suggestions or confirmations of such a dogma, we would
call attention to several considerations, each claiming some
degree of importance. First, among the earliest notions of a
reflecting man is that of the separate existence of the soul after
the dissolution of the body. He instinctively distinguishes the

7 Basnage, Hist. Jews, lib. iv. cap. xxx.: Schroder, Judenthum,
buch ii. kap. iii. Eisenmenger, Entdecktes Judenthum. th. ii. kap.
i.

8 Augustine, De Morlb. Manicha., lib. ii. cap. xvii.: De Hares..
cap. xlvi.: Contra Faustum, lib. xvi. cap. xxviii.


thinking substance he is from the material vestment he wears.
Conscious of an unchanged personal identity beneath the changes
and decays everywhere visible around him, he naturally imagines
that "As billows on the undulating main, That swelling fall and
falling swell again, So on the tide of time inconstant roll The
dying body and the deathless soul."

To one thus meditating, and desiring, as he surely would, to
perceive or devise some explanation of the soul's posthumous
fortunes, the idea could hardly fail to occur that the destiny of
the soul might be to undergo a renewed birth, or a series of
births in new bodies. Such a conception, appearing in a rude state
of culture, before the lines between science, religion, and poetry
had been sharply drawn, recommending itself alike by its
simplicity and by its adaptedness to gratify curiosity and
speculation in the formation of a thousand quaint and engaging
hypotheses, would seem plausible, would be highly attractive,
would very easily secure acceptance as a true doctrine.

Secondly, the strange resemblances and sympathies between men and
animals would often powerfully suggest to a contemplative observer
the doctrine of the transmigration of souls.9 Looking over those
volumes of singular caricatures wherein certain artists have made
all the most distinctive physiognomies of men and beasts mutually
to approximate and mingle, one cannot avoid the fancy that the
bodies of brutes are the masks of degraded men. Notice an ox
reclining in the shade of a tree, patiently ruminating as if sadly
conscious of many things and helplessly bound in some obscure
penance, a mute world of dreamy experiences, a sombre mystery: how
easy to imagine him an enchanted and transformed man! See how
certain animals are allied in their prominent traits to humanity,
the stricken deer, weeping big, piteous tears, the fawning
affection and noble fidelity of the dog, the architectural skill
of the beaver, the wise aspect of the owl, the sweet plaint of the
nightingale, the shrieks of some fierce beasts, and the howls of
others startlingly like the cries of children and the moans of
pain, the sparkling orbs and tortuous stealthiness of the snake;
and the hints at metempsychosis are obvious. Standing face to face
with a tiger, an anaconda, a wild cat, a monkey, a gazelle, a
parrot, a dove, we alternately shudder with horror and yearn with
sympathy, now expecting to see the latent devils throw off their
disguise and start forth in their own demoniac figures, now
waiting for the metamorphosing charm to be reversed, and for the
enchanted children of humanity to stand erect, restored to their
former shapes. Pervading all the grades and forms of distinct
animal life there seems to be a rudimentary unity. The fundamental
elements and primordial germs of consciousness, intellect, will,
passion, appear the same, and the different classes of being seem
capable of passing into one another by improvement or deterioration.

Spontaneously, then, might a primitive observer, unhampered by
prejudices, think that the soul of man on leaving its present body
would find or construct another according to its chief intrinsic
qualities and

9 Scholz, Beweis, dass es eine Seelenwanderung bei den Thieren
giebt.


forces, whether those were a leonine magnanimity of courage, a
vulpine subtlety of cunning, or a pavonine strut of vanity. The
spirit, freed from its fallen cell, "Fills with fresh energy
another form, And towers an elephant, or glides a worm, Swims as
an eagle in the eye of noon, Or wails, a screech owl, to the deaf,
cold moon, Or haunts the brakes where serpents hiss and glare,
Or hums, a glittering insect, in the air."

The hypothesis is equally forced on our thoughts by regarding the
human attributes of some brutes and the brutal attributes of some
men. Thus Gratiano, enraged at the obstinate malignity of Shylock,
cries to the hyena hearted Jew, "Thou almost mak'st me waver in my
faith, To hold opinion, with Pythagoras, That souls of animals
infuse themselves Into the trunks of men: thy currish spirit
Govern'd a wolf, who, hang'd for human slaughter, Even from the
gallows did his fell soul fleet, And, whilst thou lay'st in thine
unhallow'd dam, Infused itself in thee; for thy desires Are
wolfish, bloody, starved, and ravenous."

Thirdly, there is a figurative metempsychosis, which may sometimes
the history of mythology abounds in examples of the same sort of
thing have been turned from an abstract metaphor into a concrete
belief, or from a fanciful supposition have hardened into a
received fact. There is a poetic animation of objects whereby the
imaginative person puts himself into other persons, into trees,
clouds, whirlwinds, or what not, and works them for the time in
ideal realization. The same result is put in speech sometimes as
humorous play: for example, a celebrated English author says,
"Nature meant me for a salamander, and that is the reason I have
always been discontented as a man: I shall be a salamander in the
next world!" Such imagery stated to a mind of a literal order
solidifies into a meaning of prosaic fact. It is a common mode of
speech to say of an enthusiastic disciple that the spirit of his
master possesses him. A receptive student enters into the soul of
Plato, or is full of Goethe. We say that Apelles lived again in
Titian. Augustine reappeared in Calvin, and Pelagius in Arminius,
to fight over the old battle of election and freedom. Luther rose
in Ronge. Take these figures literally, construct what they imply
into a dogma, and the product is the transmigration of souls. The
result thus arrived at finds effective support in the striking
physical resemblance, spiritual likeness, and similarity of
mission frequently seen between persons in one age and those in a
former age. Columbus was the modern Jason sailing after the Golden
Fleece of a New World. Glancing along the portrait gallery of some
ancient family, one is sometimes startled to observe a face,
extinct for several generations, suddenly confronting him again
with all its features in some distant descendant. A peculiarity of
conformation, a remarkable trait of character, suppressed for a
century, all at once starts into vivid prominence in a remote
branch of the lineage, and men say, pointing back to the ancestor,
"He has revived once more." Seeing Elisha do the same things that
his departed master had done before him, the people exclaimed,
"The spirit of Elijah is upon him." Beholding in John the Baptist
one going before him in the spirit of that expected prophet, Jesus
said, "If ye are able to receive it, this is he." Some of the
later Rabbins assert many entertaining things concerning the
repeated births of the most distinguished personages in their
national history. Abel was born again in Seth; Cain, in that
Egyptian whom Moses slew; Abiram, in Ahithophel; and Adam, having
already reappeared once in David, will live again in the Messiah.
The performance by an eminent man of some great labor which had
been done in an earlier age in like manner by a kindred spirit
evokes in the imagination an apparition of the return of the dead
to repeat his old work.

Fourthly, there are certain familiar psychological experiences
which serve to suggest and to support the theory of transmigration,
and which are themselves in return explained by such a surmise.

Thinking upon some unwonted subject, often a dim impression
arises in the mind, fastens upon us, and we cannot help
feeling, that somewhere, long ago, we have had these reflections
before. Learning a fact, meeting a face, for the first time, we
are puzzled with an obscure assurance that it is not the first
time. Travelling in foreign lands, we are ever and anon haunted by
a sense of familiarity with the views, urging us to conclude that
surely we have more than once trodden those fields and gazed on
those scenes; and from hoary mountain, trickling rill, and vesper
bell, meanwhile, mystic tones of strange memorial music seem to
sigh, in remembered accents, through the soul's plaintive echoing
halls, "'Twas auld lang syne, my dear, 'Twas auld lang syne."

Plato's doctrine of reminiscence here finds its basis. We have
lived before, perchance many times, and through the clouds of
sense and imagination now and then float the veiled visions of
things that were. Efforts of thought reveal the half effaced
inscriptions and pictures on the tablets of memory. Snatches of
dialogues once held are recalled, faint recollections of old
friendships return, and fragments of landscapes beheld and deeds
performed long ago pass in weird procession before the mind's half
opened eye. We know a professional gentleman of unimpeachable
veracity, of distinguished talents and attainments, who is a firm
believer in his own existence on the earth previously to his
present life. He testifies that on innumerable occasions he has
experienced remembrances of events and recognitions of places,
accompanied by a flash of irresistible conviction that he had
known them in a former state. Nearly every one has felt instances
of this, more or less numerous and vivid. The doctrine at which
such things hint that "Not in entire forgetfulness, And not in
utter nakedness," but trailing vague traces and enigmas from a
bygone history, "do we come" yields the secret of many a mood and
dream, the spell of inexplicable hours, the key and clew to
baffling labyrinths of mystery. The belief in the doctrine of the
metempsychosis, among a fanciful people and in an unscientific
age, need be no wonder to any cultivated man acquainted with the
marvels of experience and aware that every one may say,

"Full oft my feelings make me start,
Like footprints on some desert shore,
As if the chambers of my heart
Had heard their shadowy step before."

Fifthly, the theory of the transmigration of souls is marvellously
adapted to explain the seeming chaos of moral inequality,
injustice, and manifold evil presented in the world of human life.
No other conceivable view so admirably accounts for the
heterogeneousness of our present existence, refutes the charge of
a groundless favoritism urged against Providence, and completely
justifies the ways of God to man. The loss of remembrance between
the states is no valid objection to the theory; because such a
loss is the necessary condition of a fresh and fair probation.
Besides, there is a parallel fact of deep significance in our
unquestionable experience; "For is not our first year forgot? The
haunts of memory echo not."

Once admit the theory to be true, and all difficulties in regard
to moral justice vanish. If a man be born blind, deaf, a cripple,
a slave, an idiot, it is because in a previous life he abused his
privileges and heaped on his soul a load of guilt which he is now
expiating. If a sudden calamity overwhelm a good man with
unmerited ruin and anguish, it is the penalty of some crime
committed in a state of responsible being beyond the confines of
his present memory. Does a surprising piece of good fortune accrue
to any one, splendid riches, a commanding position, a peerless
friendship? It is the reward of virtuous deeds done in an earlier
life. Every flower blighted or diseased, every shrub gnarled,
awry, and blasted, every brute ugly and maimed, every man
deformed, wretched, or despised, is reaping in these hard
conditions of being, as contrasted with the fate of the favored
and perfect specimens of the kind, the fruit of sin in a foregone
existence. When the Hindu looks on a man beautiful, learned,
noble, fortunate, and happy, he exclaims, "How wise and good must
this man have been in his former lives!" In his philosophy, or
religion, the proof of the necessary consequences of virtue and
vice is deduced from the metempsychosis, every particular of the
outward man being a result of some corresponding quality of his
soul, and every event of his experience depending as effect on his
previous merit as cause.10 Thus the principal physical and moral
phenomena of life are strikingly explained; and, as we gaze around
the world, its material conditions and spiritual elements combine
in one vast scheme of unrivalled order, and the total experience
of humanity forms a magnificent picture of perfect poetic justice.
We may easily account for the rise and spread of a theory whose
sole difficulty is a lack of positive proof, but whose
applications are so consistent and fascinating alike to
imagination and to conscience. Hierocles said, and distinguished
philosophers both before and since have said, "Without the
doctrine of metempsychosis it is not possible to justify the ways
of Providence."

10 Colebrooke, Essays, vol. i. p. 286.


Finally, this doctrine, having been suggested by the various
foregoing considerations, and having been developed into a
practical system of conceptions and motives by certain leading
thinkers, was adopted by the principal philosophers and
priesthoods of antiquity, and taught to the common people with
authority. The popular beliefs of four thousand years ago depended
for their prevalence, not so much on cogent arguments or intrinsic
probability, as upon the sanctions thrown around them by renowned
teachers, priests, and mystagogues. Now, the doctrine of the
transmigration of souls was inculcated by the ancient teachers,
not as a mere hypothesis resting on loose surmises, but as an
unquestionable fact supported by the experimental knowledge of
many individuals and by infallible revelation from God. The sacred
books of the Hindus abound in detailed histories of transmigrations.
Kapila is said to have written out the Vedas from his remembrance
 of them in a former state of being.

The Vishnu Purana gives some very entertaining examples of
the retention of memory through several successive lives.11
Pythagoras pretended to recollect his adventures in previous lives;
and on one occasion, as we read in Ovid, going into the temple of
Juno, he recognised the shield he had worn as Euphorbus at the
siege of Troy.

Diogenes Laertius also relates of him, that one day meeting a man
who was cruelly beating a dog, the Samian sage instantly detected
in the piteous howls of the poor beast the cries of a dear friend
of his long since deceased, and earnestly and successfully
interceded for his rescue.

In the life of Apollonius of Tyana by Philostratus, numerous
extraordinary instances are told of his recognitions of
persons he had known in preceding lives. Such examples as these
exactly met the weakest point in the metempsychosis theory, and
must have had vast influence in fostering the common faith.
Plotinus said, "Body is the true river of Lethe; for souls plunged
in it forget all." Pierre Leroux, an enthusiastic living defender
of the idea of repeated births, attempts to reply to the objection
drawn from the absence of memory; but his reply is an appeal
rather to authority and fancy than to reason, and leaves the
doubts unsolved.12 His supposition is that in each spirit life we
remember all the bygone lives, both spiritual and earthly, but in
each earth life we forget all that has gone before; just as, here,
every night we lose in sleep all memory of the past, but recover
it each day again as we awake. Throughout the East this general
doctrine is no mere superstition of the masses of ignorant people:
it is the main principle of all Hindu metaphysics, the foundation
of all their philosophy, and inwrought with the intellectual
texture of their inspired books. It is upheld by the venerable
authority of ages, by an intense general conviction of it, and by
multitudes of subtle conceits and apparent arguments. It was also
impressed upon the initiates in the old Mysteries, by being there
dramatically shadowed forth through masks, and quaint symbolic
ceremonies enacted at the time of initiation.13

This, then, is what we must say of the ancient and widely spread
doctrine of transmigration. As a suggestion or theory naturally
arising from empirical observation and confirmed by a variety of
phenomena, it is plausible, attractive, and, in some stages of

11 Professor Wilson's translation, p. 343.

12 De l'Humanite, livre v. chap. xlii.

13 Porphyry, De Abstinentis, lib. iv. sect. 16. Davies, Rites of
the Druids.


knowledge, not only easy to be believed, but hard to be resisted.
As an ethical scheme clearing up on principles of poetic justice
the most perplexed and awful problems in the world, it throws
streams of light through the abysses of evil, gives dramatic
solution to many a puzzle, and, abstractly considered, charms the
understanding and the conscience. As a philosophical dogma
answering to some strange, vague passages in human nature and
experience, it echoes with dreamy sweetness through the deep
mystic chambers of our being. As the undisputed creed which has
inspired and spell bound hundreds of millions of our race for
perhaps over a hundred and fifty generations, it commands
deference and deserves study. But, viewing it as a thesis in the
light of to day, challenging intelligent scrutiny and sober
belief, we scarcely need to say that, based on shadows and on
arbitrary interpretations of superficial appearances, built of
reveries and occult experiences, fortified by unreliable
inferences, destitute of any substantial evidence, it is unable to
face the severity of science.

A real investigation of its validity by the modern methods
dissipates it as the sun scatters fog. First, the mutual
correspondences between men and animals are explained by the fact
that they are all living beings are the products of the same God
and the same nature, and built according to one plan. They thus
partake, in different degrees and on different planes, of many of
the same elements and characteristics. Lucretius, with his usual
mixture of acuteness and sophistry, objects to the doctrine that,
if it were true, when the soul of a lion passed into the body of a
stag, or the soul of a man into the body of a horse, we should see
a stag with the courage of a lion, a horse with the intelligence
of a man. But of course the manifestations of soul depend on the
organs of manifestation. Secondly, the singular psychological
experiences referred to are explicable so far as we can expect
with our present limited data and powers to solve the dense
mysteries of the soul by various considerations not involving the
doctrine in question. Herder has shown this with no little acumen
in three "Dialogues on the Metempsychosis," beautifully translated
by the Rev. Dr. Hedge in his "Prose Writers of Germany." The sense
of pre existence the confused idea that these occurrences have
thus happened to us before which is so often and strongly felt, is
explicable partly by the supposition of some sudden and obscure
mixture of associations, some discordant stroke on the keys of
recollection, jumbling together echoes of bygone scenes, snatches
of unremembered dreams, and other hints and colors in a weird and
uncommanded manner. The phenomenon is accounted for still more
decisively by Dr. Wigand's theory of the "Duality of the Mind."
The mental organs are double, one on each side of the brain. They
usually act with perfect simultaneity. When one gets a slight
start of the other, as the thought reaches the slow side a
bewildered sense of a previous apprehension of it arises in the
soul. And then, the fact that the supposition of a great system of
adjusting transmigrations justifies the ways of Providence is no
proof that the supposition is a true one. The difficulty is, that
there is no evidence of the objective truth of the assumption,
however well the theory applies; and the justice and goodness of
God may as well be defended on the ground of a single life here
and a discriminating retribution hereafter, as on the ground of an
unlimited series of earthly births.

The doctrine evidently possesses two points of moral truth and
power, and, if not tenable as strict science, is yet instructive
as symbolic poetry. First, it embodies, in concrete shapes the
most vivid and unmistakable, the fact that beastly and demoniac
qualities of character lead men down towards the brutes and
fiends. Rage makes man a tiger; low cunning, a fox; coarseness and
ferocity, a bear; selfish envy and malice, a devil. On the
contrary, the attainment of better degrees of intellectual and
ethical qualities elevates man towards the angelic and the Divine.
There are three kinds of lives, corresponding to the three kinds
of metempsychosis, ascending, circular, descending: the aspiring
life of progress in wisdom and goodness; the monotonous life of
routine in mechanical habits and indifference; the deteriorating
life of abandonment in ignorance and vice. Timaus the Locrian, and
some other ancient Pythagoreans, gave the whole doctrine a purely
symbolic meaning. Secondly, the theory of transmigrating souls
typifies the truth that, however it may fare with persons now,
however ill their fortunes may seem to accord with their deserts
here, justice reigns irresistibly in the universe, and sooner or
later every soul shall be strictly compensated for every tittle of
its merits in good or evil. There is no escaping the chain of acts
and consequences.

This entire scheme of thought has always allured the Mystics to
adopt it. In every age, from Indian Vyasa to Teutonic Boehme, we
find them contending for it. Boehme held that all material
existence was composed by King Satan out of the physical substance
of his fallen followers.

The conception of the metempsychosis is strikingly fitted for the
purposes of humor, satire, and ethical hortation; and literature
abounds with such applications of it. In Plutarch's account of
what Thespesius saw when his soul was ravished away into hell for
a time, we are told that he saw the soul of Nero dreadfully
tortured, transfixed with iron nails. The workmen forged it into
the form of a viper; when a voice was heard out of an exceeding
light ordering it to be transfigured into a milder being; and they
made it one of those creatures that sing and croak in the sides of
ponds and marshes.14 When Rosalind finds the verses with which her
enamored Orlando had hung the trees, she exclaimed, "I was never
so berhymed since Pythagoras' time, that I was an Irish rat, which
I can hardly remember." One of the earliest popular introductions
of this Oriental figment to the English public was by Addison,
whose Will Honeycomb tells an amusing story of his friend, Jack
Freelove, how that, finding his mistress's pet monkey alone one
day, he wrote an autobiography of his monkeyship's surprising
adventures in the course of his many transmigrations. Leaving this
precious document in the monkey's hands, his mistress found it on
her return, and was vastly bewildered by its pathetic and
laughable contents.15 The fifth number of the "Adventurer" gives a
very entertaining account of the "Transmigrations of a Flea."
There is also a poem on this subject by Dr. Donne, full of
strength and wit. It traces a soul through ten or twelve births,
giving the salient points of its history in each. First, the soul
animates the apple our hapless mother Eve ate, bringing "death
into the world and all our woe." Then it appeared

14 Sera Numinis Vindicta: near the close.

15 Spectator, No. 343.


successively as a mandrake, a cock, a herring, a whale, "Who spouted
rivers up as if he meant o join our seas with seas above
the firmament." Next, as a mouse, it crept up an elephant's sinewy
proboscis to the soul's bedchamber, the brain, and, gnawing the
life cords there, died, crushed in the ruins of the gigantic
beast. Afterwards it became a wolf, a dog, an ape, and finally a
woman, where the quaint tale closes. Fielding is the author of a
racy literary performance called "A Journey from this World to the
Next." The Emperor Julian is depicted in it, recounting in Elysium
the adventures he had passed through, living successively in the
character of a slave, a Jew, a general, an heir, a carpenter, a
beau, a monk, a fiddler, a wise man, a king, a fool, a beggar, a
prince, a statesman, a soldier, a tailor, an alderman, a poet, a
knight, a dancing master, and a bishop. Whoever would see how
vividly, with what an honest and vigorous verisimilitude, the
doctrine can be embodied, should read "The Modern Pythagorean," by
Dr. Macnish. But perhaps the most humorous passage of this sort is
the following description from a remarkable writer of the present
day:

"In the mean while all the shore rang with the trump of bull
frogs, the sturdy spirits of ancient wine bibbers and wassailers,
still unrepentant, trying to sing a catch in their Stygian lake;
who would fain keep up the hilarious rules of their old festal
tables, though their voices have waxed hoarse and solemnly grave,
mocking at mirth, and the wine has lost its flavor. The most
aldermanic, with his chin upon a heart leaf, which serves for a
napkin to his drooling chaps, under this northern shore quaffs a
deep draught of the once scorned water, and passes round the cup
with the ejaculation tr r r oonk, tr r r oonk! and straightway
comes over the water from some distant cove the same password
repeated, where the next in seniority and girth has gulped down to
his mark; and when this observance has made the circuit of the
shores, then ejaculates the master of ceremonies, with
satisfaction, tr r r conk! and each in his turn, down to the
flabbiest paunched, repeats the same, that there be no mistake;
and then the bowl goes round again and again, until the sun
disperses the morning mist, and only the patriarch is not under
the pond, but vainly bellowing troonk from time to time, and
pausing for a reply." 16

The doctrine of the metempsychosis, which was the priest's threat
against sin, was the poet's interpretation of life. The former
gave by it a terrible emphasis to the moral law; the latter
imparted by it an unequalled tenderness of interest to the
contemplation of the world. To the believer in it in its fullest
development, the mountains piled towering to the sky and the
plains stretching into trackless distance were the conscious dust
of souls; the ocean, heaving in tempest or sleeping in moonlight,
was a sea of spirits, every drop once a man. Each animated form
that caught his attention might be the dwelling of some ancestor,
or of some once cherished companion of his own. Hence the Hindu's
so sensitive kindness towards animals:

16 Thoreau, Walden, or Life in the Woods, p. 137.


"Crush not the feeble, inoffensive worm: Thy sister's spirit wears
that humble form. Why should thy cruel arrow smite yon bird? In
him thy brother's plaintive song is beard. Let not thine anger on
thy dog descend: That faithful animal was once thy friend."

There is a strange grandeur, an affecting mystery, in the view of
the creation from the stand point of the metempsychosis. It is an
awful dream palace all aswarm with falling and climbing creatures
clothed in ever shifting disguises. The races and changes of being
constitute a boundless masquerade of souls, whose bodies are
vizards and whose fortunes poetic retribution. The motive
furnished by the doctrine to self denial and toil has a peerless
sublimity. In our Western world, the hope of acquiring large
possessions, or of attaining an exalted office, often stimulates
men to heroic efforts of labor and endurance. What, then, should
we not expect from the application to the imaginative minds of the
Eastern world of a motive which, transcending all set limits,
offers unheard of prizes, to be plucked in life after life, and at
the end unveils, for the occupancy of the patient aspirant, the
Throne of Immensity? No wonder that, under the propulsion of a
motive so exhaustless, a motive not remote nor abstract, but
concrete, and organized in indissoluble connection with the
visible chain of eternal causes and effects, no wonder we see such
tremendous exhibitions of superstition, voluntary sufferings,
superhuman deeds. Here is the secret fountain of that irresistible
force which enables the devotee to measure journeys of a thousand
miles by prostrations of his body, to hold up his arm until it
withers and remains immovably erect as a stick, or to swing
himself by red hot hooks through his flesh. The poorest wretch of
a soul that has wandered down to the lowest grade of animate
existence can turn his resolute and longing gaze up the
resplendent ranks of being, and, conscious of the god head's germ
within, feel that, though now unspeakably sunken, he shall one day
spurn every vile integument and vault into seats of heavenly
dominion. Crawling as an almost invisible bug in a heap of
carrion, he can still think within himself, holding fast to the
law of righteousness and love, "This is the infinite ladder of
redemption, over whose rounds of purity, penance, charity, and
contemplation I may ascend, through births innumerable, till I
reach a height of wisdom, power, and bliss that will cast into
utter contempt the combined glory of countless millions of worlds,
ay, till I sit enthroned above the topmost summit of the universe
as omnipotent Buddha." 17

17 Those who wish to pursue the subject further will find the
following references useful: Hardy, "Manual of Buddhism," ch. v.
Upham, "History of Buddhism," ch. iii. Beausobre, "Histoire du
Manicheisme," livre vi. ch. iv. Helmont, "De Revolution Animarum."
Richter, "Das Christenthum und die Kitesten Religionen des
Orients," sects. 54-65. Sinner, "Essai sur les Dogmes de la
Metempsychose et du Purgatoire." Conz, "Schicksale der
Seelenwanderungshypothese unter verschiedenen Volkern und in
verschiedenen Zeiten." Dubois, "People of India," part iii. ch.
vii. Werner, "Commentatio Psychologica contra Metempsychosin."


CHAPTER III.

RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.

A DOCTRINE widely prevalent asserts that, at the termination of
this probationary epoch, Christ will appear with an army of angels
in the clouds of heaven, descend, and set up his tribunal on the
earth. The light of his advancing countenance will be the long
waited Aurora of the Grave. All the souls of men will be summoned
from their tarrying places, whether in heaven, or hell, or
purgatory, or the sepulchre; the fleshly tabernacles they formerly
inhabited will be re created, a strong necromancy making the rooty
and grave floored earth give up its dust of ruined humanity, and
moulding it to the identical shapes it formerly composed; each
soul will enter its familiar old house in company with which its
sins were once committed; the books will be opened and judgment
will be passed; then the accepted will be removed to heaven, and
the rejected to hell, both to remain clothed with those same
material bodies forever, the former in celestial bliss, the latter
in infernal torture.

In the present dissertation we propose to exhibit the sources,
trace the developments, explain the variations, and discuss the
merits, of this doctrine.

The first appearance of this notion of a bodily restoration which
occurs in the history of opinions is among the ancient Hindus.
With them it appears as a part of a vast conception, embracing the
whole universe in an endless series of total growths, decays, and
exact restorations. In the beginning the Supreme Being is one and
alone. He thinks to himself, "I will become many." Straightway the
multiform creation germinates forth, and all beings live. Then for
an inconceivable period a length of time commensurate with the
existence of Brahma, the Demiurgus the successive generations
flourish and sink. At the end of this period all forms of matter,
all creatures, sages, and gods, fall back into the Universal
Source whence they arose. Again the Supreme Being is one and
alone. After an interval the same causes produce the same effects,
and all things recur exactly as they were before.1

We find this theory sung by some of the Oriental poets:
"Every external form of things, and every object which
disappear'd, Remains stored up in the storehouse of fate: When the
system of the heavens returns to its former order, God, the All
Just, will bring them forth from the veil of mystery." 2

The same general conception, in a modified form, was held by the
Stoics of later Greece, who doubtless borrowed it from the East,
and who carried it out in greater detail. "God is an artistic
fire, out of which the cosmopoeia issues." This fire proceeds in a
certain fixed course, in obedience to a fixed law, passing through
certain intermediate gradations and established periods, until it
ultimately returns into itself and closes with a universal
conflagration. It is to this catastrophe that reference is made in
the following passage of Epictetus: "Some say that when Zeus is
left alone at the time of the conflagration, he is solitary, and
bewails himself

1 Wilson, Lectures on the Hindus, pp. 53-56.

2 The Dabistan, vol. iii. p. 169.


that he has no company."3 The Stoics supposed each succeeding
formation to be perfectly like the preceding. Every particular
that happens now has happened exactly so a thousand times before,
and will happen a thousand times again. This view they connected
with astronomical calculations, making the burning and re creating
of the world coincide with the same position of the stars as that
at which it previously occurred.4 This they called the restoration
of all things. The idea of these enormous revolving identical
epochs Day of Brahm, Cycle of the Stoics, or Great Year of Plato
is a physical fatalism, effecting a universal resurrection of the
past, by reproducing it over and over forever.

Humboldt seems more than inclined to adopt the same thought. "In
submitting," he says, "physical phenomena and historical events to
the exercise of the reflective faculty, and in ascending to their
causes by reasoning, we become more and more penetrated by that
ancient belief, that the forces inherent in matter, and those
regulating the moral world, exert their action under the presence
of a primordial necessity and according to movements periodically
renewed." The wise man of old said, "The thing that hath been, it
is that which shall be; and that which is done is that which shall
be done, and there is no new thing under the sun." The conception
of the destinies of the universe as a circle returning forever
into itself is an artifice on which the thinking mind early
seizes, to evade the problem that is too mighty for its feeble
powers. It concludes that the final aim of Nature is but the
infinite perfecting of her material in infinite transformations
ever repeating the same old series. We cannot comprehend and
master satisfactorily the eternal duration of one visible order,
the incessant rolling on of races and stars:

"And doth creation's tide forever flow, Nor ebb with like
destruction? World on world Are they forever heaping up, and still
The mighty measure never, never full?"

And so, when the contemplation of the staggering infinity
threatens to crush the brain, we turn away and find relief in the
view of a periodical revolution, wherein all comes to an end from
time to time and takes a fresh start. It would be wiser for us
simply to resign the problem as too great. For the conception to
which we have recourse is evidently a mere conceit of imagination,
without scientific basis or philosophical confirmation.

The doctrine of a bodily resurrection, resting on a wholly
different ground, again emerges upon our attention in the
Zoroastrian faith of Persia. The good Ormuzd created men to be
pure and happy and to pass to a heavenly immortality. The evil
Ahriman insinuated his corruptions among them, broke their primal
destiny, and brought death upon them, dooming their material
frames to loathsome dissolution, their unclothed spirits to a
painful abode in hell. Meanwhile, the war between the Light God
and the Gloom Fiend rages fluctuatingly. But at last the Good One
shall prevail, and the Bad One sink in discomfiture, and all evil
deeds be neutralized, and the benignant arrangements decreed at
first be restored. Then all

3 Epictetus, lib. iii. cap. 13. Sonntag, De Palingenesia
Stoicorum.

4 Ritter's Hist. of An. Phil., lib. xi. cap. 4.


souls shall be redeemed from hell and their bodies be rebuilt from
their scattered atoms and clothed upon them again.5 This
resurrection is not the consequence of any fixed laws or fate, nor
is it an arbitrary miracle. It is simply the restoration by Ormuzd
of the original intention which Ahriman had temporarily marred and
defeated. This is the great bodily resurrection, as it is still
understood and looked for by the Parsees.

The whole system of views out of which it springs, and with which
it is interwrought, is a fanciful mythology, based on gratuitous
assumptions, or at most on a crude glance at mere appearances. The
hypothesis that the creation is the scene of a drawn battle
between two hostile beings, a Deity and a Devil, can face neither
the scrutiny of science, nor the test of morals, nor the logic of
reason; and it has long since been driven from the arena of
earnest thought. On this theory it follows that death is a violent
curse and discord, maliciously forced in afterwards to deform and
spoil the beauty and melody of a perfect original creation. Now,
as Bretschneider well says, "the belief that death is an evil, a
punishment for sin, can arise only in a dualistic system." It is
unreasonable to suppose that the Infinite God would deliberately
lay a plan and allow it to be thwarted and ruined by a demon. And
it is unscientific to imagine that death is an accident, or an
after result foisted into the system of the world. Death that is,
a succession of generations is surely an essential part of the
very constitution of nature, plainly stamped on all those "medals
of the creation" which bear the features of their respective ages
and which are laid up in the archives of geological epochs.
Successive growth and decay is a central part of God's original
plan, as appears from the very structure of living bodies and the
whole order of the globe. Death, therefore, which furthermore
actually reigned on earth unknown ages before the existence of
man, could not have been a fortuitous after clap of human sin. And
so the foregoing theory of a general resurrection as the
restoration of God's broken plan to its completeness falls to the
ground.

The Jews, in the course of their frequent and long continued
intercourse with the Persians, did not fail to be much impressed
with the vivid melodramatic outlines of the Zoroastrian doctrine
of the resurrection. They finally adopted it themselves, and
joined it, with such modifications as it naturally underwent from
the union, with the great dogmas of their own faith. A few faint
references to it are found in the Old Testament. Some explicit
declarations and boasts of it are in the Apocrypha. In the
Targums, the Talmud, and the associated sources, abundant
statements of it in copious forms are preserved. The Jews rested
their doctrine of the resurrection on the same general ground as
the Persians did, from whom they borrowed it. Man was meant to be
immortal, either on earth or in heaven; but Satan seduced him to
sin, and thus wrested from him his privilege of immortality, made
him die and descend into a dark nether realm which was to be
filled with the disembodied souls of his descendants. The
resurrection was to annul all this and restore men to their
original footing.

We need not labor any disproof of the truth or authority of this
doctrine as the Pharisees held it, because, admitting that they
had the record of a revelation from God, this doctrine was not a
part of it. It is only to be found in their canonic scriptures by
way of vague and hasty allusion, and is historically traceable to
its derivation from the pagan oracles of Persia.

5 Frazer, History of Persia, chap. iv. Baur, Symbolik und
Mythologice thl. ii. absch. ii. cap. ss. 394-404.


Of course it is possible that the doctrine of the resurrection, as
the Hebrews held it, was developed by themselves, from imaginative
contemplations on the phenomena of burials and graves; spectres
seen in dreams; conceptions of the dead as shadowy shapes in the
under world; ideas of God as the deliverer of living men from the
open gates of the under world when they experienced narrow escapes
from destruction; vast and fanatical national hopes. Before
advancing another step, it is necessary only to premise that some
of the Jews appear to have expected that the souls on rising from
the under world would be clothed with new, spiritualized,
incorruptible bodies, others plainly expected that the identical
bodies they formerly wore would be literally restored.

Now, when Christianity, after the death of its Founder, arose and
spread, it was in the guise of a new and progressive Jewish sect.
Its apostles and its converts for the first hundred years were
Christian Jews. Christianity ran its career through the apostolic
age virtually as a more liberal Jewish sect. Most natural was it,
then, that infant Christianity should retain all the salient
dogmas of Judaism, except those of exclusive nationality and
bigoted formalism in the throwing off of which the mission of
Christianity partly consisted. Among these Jewish dogmas retained
by early Christianity was that of the bodily resurrection. In the
New Testament itself there are seeming references to this
doctrine. We shall soon recur to these. The phrase "resurrection
of the body" does not occur in the Scriptures. Neither is it found
in any public creed whatever among Christians until the fourth
century.6 But these admissions by no means prove that the doctrine
was not believed from the earliest days of Christianity. The fact
is, it was the same with this doctrine as with the doctrine of the
descent of Christ into Hades: it was not for a long time called in
question at all. It was not defined, discriminated, lifted up on
the symbols of the Church, because that was not called for. As
soon as the doctrine came into dispute, it was vehemently and all
but unanimously affirmed, and found an emphatic place in every
creed. Whenever the doctrine of a bodily resurrection has been
denied, that denial has been instantly stigmatized as heresy and
schism, even from the days of "Hymeneus and Philetas, who
concerning the truth erred, saying that the resurrection was past
already." The uniform orthodox doctrine of the Christian Church
has always been that in the last day the identical fleshly bodies
formerly inhabited by men shall be raised from the earth, sea, and
air, and given to them again to be everlastingly assumed. The
scattered exceptions to the believers in this doctrine have been
few, and have ever been styled heretics by their contemporaries.

Any one who will glance over the writings of the Fathers with
reference to this subject will find the foregoing statements amply
confirmed.7 Justin Martyr wrote a treatise on the resurrection, a
fragment of which is still extant. Athenagoras has left us an
extremely elaborate and able discussion of the whole doctrine, in
a separate work. Tertullian is author of a famous book on the
subject, entitled "Concerning the Resurrection of the Flesh," in
which he says, "The teeth are providentially made eternal to serve
as the seeds of the

6 Dr. Sykes, Inquiry when the Article of the Resurrection of the
Body or Flesh was first introduced into the Public Creeds.

7 Mosheim, De Resurrectione Mortuorum.


resurrection." Chrysostom has written fully upon it in two of his
eloquent homilies. All these, in company indeed with the common
body of their contemporaries, unequivocally teach a carnal
resurrection with the grossest details. Augustine says, "Every
man's body, howsoever dispersed here, shall be restored perfect in
the resurrection. Every body shall be complete in quantity and
quality. As many hairs as have been shaved off, or nails cut,
shall not return in such enormous quantities to deform their
original places; but neither shall they perish: they shall return
into the body into that substance from which they grew." 8 As if
that would not cause any deformity! 9 Some of the later Origenists
held that the resurrection bodies would be in the shape of a ball,
the mere heads of cherubs! 10

In the seventh century Mohammed flourished. His doctrinal system,
it is well known, was drawn indiscriminately from many sources,
and mixed with additions and colors of his own. Finding the dogma
of a general bodily resurrection already prevailing among the
Parsees, the Jews, and the Christians, and perceiving, too, how
well adapted for purposes of vivid representation and practical
effect it was, or perhaps believing it himself, the Arabian
prophet ingrafted this article into the creed of his followers. It
has ever been with them, and is still, a foremost and controlling
article of faith, an article for the most part held in its literal
sense, although there is a powerful sect which spiritualizes the
whole conception, turning all its details into allegories and
images. But this view is not the original nor the orthodox view.

The subject of the resurrection was a prominent theme in the
theology of the Middle Age. Only here and there a dissenting voice
was raised against the doctrine in its strict physical form. The
great body of the Scholastics stood stanchly by it. In defence and
support of the Church thesis they brought all the quirks and
quiddities of their subtle dialectics. As we take down their
ponderous tomes from their neglected shelves, and turn over the
dusty, faded old leaves, we find chapter after chapter in many a
formidable folio occupied with grave discussions, carried on in
acute logical terminology, of questions like these: "Will the
resurrection be natural or miraculous?" "Will each one's hairs and
nails all be restored to him in the resurrection?" "When bodies
are raised, will each soul spontaneously know its own and enter
it? or will the power of God distribute them as they belong?"
"Will the deformities and scars of our present bodies be retained
in the resurrection?" "Will all rise of the same age?" "Will all
have one size and one sex?" 11 And so on with hundreds of kindred
questions. For instance, Thomas Aquinas contended "that no other
substance would rise from the grave except that which belonged to
the individual in the moment of death."12 What dire prospects this
proposition must conjure up before many minds! If one chance to
grow prodigiously obese before death, he must lug that enormous
corporeity wearily about forever; but if he happen to die when
wasted, he must then flit through eternity as thin as a lath.

8 De Civ. Dei, lib. xxii. cap. 19, 20.

9 See the strange speculations of Opitz in his work "De Statura et
Atate Resurgentium.

10 Redepenning, Origenes, b. ii. s. 463.

11 Summa Theologia, Thoma Aquinatis, tertia pars, Supplementum,
Quastiones 79-87.

12 Hagenbuch, Dogmengeschichte, sect. 204.


Those who have had the misfortune to be amputated of legs or arms
must appear on the resurrection stage without those very
convenient appendages. There will still be need of hospitals for
the battered veterans of Chelsea and Greenwich, mutilated heroes,
pensioned relics of deck and field. Then in the resurrection the
renowned "Mynheer von Clam, Richest merchant in Rotterdam,"
will again have occasion for the services of the "patent cork leg
manufacturer," though it is hardly to be presumed he will accept
another unrestrainable one like that which led him so fearful a
race through the poet's verses.

The Manichaans denied a bodily resurrection. In this all the sects
theologically allied to them, who have appeared in ecclesiastical
history, for instance, the Cathari, have agreed. There have also
been a few individual Christian teachers in every century who have
assailed the doctrine. But, as already declared, it has uniformly
been the firm doctrine of the Church and of all who acknowledged
her authority. The old dogma still remains in the creeds of the
recognised Churches, Papal, Greek, and Protestant. It has been
terribly shattered by the attacks of reason and of progressive
science. It lingers in the minds of most people only as a dead
letter. But all the earnest conservative theologians yet cling to
it in its unmitigated grossness, with unrelaxing severity. We hear
it in practical discourses from the pulpit, and read it in
doctrinal treatises, as offensively proclaimed now as ever.
Indeed, it is an essential part of the compact system of the
ruling theology, and cannot be taken out without loosening the
whole dogmatic fabric into fragments. Thus writes to day a
distinguished American divine, Dr. Spring: "Whether buried in the
earth, or floating in the sea, or consumed by the flames, or
enriching the battle field, or evaporate in the atmosphere, all,
from Adam to the latest born, shall wend their way to the great
arena of the judgment. Every perished bone and every secret
particle of dust shall obey the summons and come forth. If one
could then look upon the earth, he would see it as one mighty
excavated globe, and wonder how such countless generations could
have found a dwelling beneath its surface." 13 This is the way the
recognised authorities in theology still talk. To venture any
other opinion is a heresy all over Christendom at this hour.

We will next bring forward and criticize the arguments for and
against the doctrine before us. It is contended that the doctrine
is demonstrated in the example of Christ's own resurrection. "The
resurrection of the flesh was formerly regarded as incredible,"
says Augustine; "but now we see the whole world believing that
Christ's earthly body was borne into heaven." 14 It is the faith
of the Church that "Christ rose into heaven with his body of flesh
and blood, and wears it there now, and will forever." "Had he been
there in body before, it would have been no such wonder that he
should have returned with it; but that the flesh of our flesh and
bone of our bone should be seated at the right hand of God is
worthy of the greatest admiration." 15 That is to say, Christ was
from eternity God, the Infinite Spirit, in

13 The Glory of Christ, vol. ii. p. 237.

14 De Civ. Dei, lib. xxii. cap. 5.

15 Pearson on the Creed, 12th ed., pp. 272-275.


heaven; he came to earth and lived in a human body; on returning
to heaven, instead of resuming his proper form, he bears with him,
and will eternally retain, the body of flesh he had worn on earth!
Paul says, "Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God."
The Church, hastily following the senses, led by a carnal,
illogical philosophy, has deeply misinterpreted and violently
abused the significance of Christ's ascension. The drama of his
resurrection, with all its connected parts, was not meant
throughout as a strict representation of our destiny. It was a
seal upon his commission and teachings, not an exemplification of
what should happen to others. It was outwardly a miracle, not a
type, an exceptional instance of super natural power, not a
significant exhibition of the regular course of things. The same
logic which says, "Christ rose and ascended with his fleshly body:
therefore we shall," must also say, "Christ rose visibly on the
third day: therefore we shall." Christ's resurrection was a
miracle; and therefore we cannot reason from it to ourselves. The
common conception of a miracle is that it is the suspension, not
the manifestation, of ordinary laws. We have just as much logical
right to say that the physical appearance in Christ's resurrection
was merely an accommodation to the senses of the witnesses, and
that on his ascension the body was annihilated, and only his soul
entered heaven, as we have to surmise that the theory embodied in
the common belief is true. The record is according to mere
sensible appearances. The reality is beyond our knowledge. The
record gives no explanation. It is wiser in this dilemma to follow
the light of reason than to follow the blind spirit of tradition.
The point in our reasoning is this. If Christ, on rising from the
world of the dead, assumed again his former body, he assumed it by
a miracle, and for some special purpose of revealing himself to
his disciples and of finishing his earthly work; and it does not
follow either that he bore that body into heaven, or that any
others will ever, even temporarily, reassume their cast off forms.

The Christian Scriptures do not in a single passage teach the
popular doctrine of the resurrection of the body. Every text in
the New Testament finds its full and satisfactory explanation
without implying that dogma at all. In the first place, it is
undeniably implied throughout the New Testament that the soul does
not perish with the body. It also appears, in the next place, from
numerous explicit passages, that the New Testament authors, in
common with their countrymen, supposed the souls of the departed
to be gathered and tarrying in what the Church calls the
intermediate state, the obscure under world. In this subterranean
realm they were imagined to be awaiting the advent of the Messiah
to release them. Now, we submit that every requirement of the
doctrine of the resurrection as it is stated or hinted in the New
Testament is fully met by the simple ascension of this
congregation of souls from the vaults of Sheol to the light of the
upper earth, there to be judged, and then some to be sent up to
heaven, some sent back to their prison. For, let it be carefully
observed, there is not one text in the New Testament, as before
stated, which speaks of the resurrection of the "body" or of the
"flesh." The expression is simply the resurrection of "the dead,"
or of "them that slept." If by "the dead" was meant "the bodies,"
why are we not told so? Locke, in the Third Letter of his
controversy with the Bishop of Worcester on this subject, very
pointedly shows the absurdity of a literal interpretation of the
words "All that are in their graves shall hear my voice and shall
come forth." Nothing can come out of the grave except what is in
it. And there are no souls in the grave: they are in the separate
state. And there are no bodies in millions of graves: they long
ago, even to the last grain of dust, entered into the circulations
of the material system. "Coming forth from their graves unto the
resurrection" either denotes the rising of souls from the under
world, or else its meaning is something incredible. At all events,
nothing is said about any resurrection of the body: that is a
matter of arbitrary inference. The angels are not thought to have
material bodies; and Christ declares, "In the resurrection ye
shall neither marry nor be given in marriage, but shall be as the
angels of heaven." It seems clear to us that the author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews also looked for no restoration of the
fleshly body; for he not only studiously omits even the faintest
allusion to any such notion, but positively describes "the spirits
of just men made perfect in the heavenly Jerusalem, with an
innumerable company of angels, and with the general assembly and
church of the first born." The Jews and early Christians who
believed in a bodily resurrection did not suppose the departed
could enter heaven until after that great consummation.

The most cogent proof that the New Testament does not teach the
resurrection of the same body that is buried in the grave is
furnished by the celebrated passage in Paul's Epistle to the
Corinthians. The apostle's premises, reasoning, and conclusion are
as follows: "Christ is risen from the dead, become the first
fruits of them that slept." That is to say, all who have died,
except Christ, are still tarrying in the great receptacle of souls
under the earth. As the first fruits go before the harvest, so the
solitary risen Christ is the forerunner to the general
resurrection to follow. "But some one will say, How are the dead
raised up? and with what body do they come?" Mark the apostle's
reply, and it will appear inexplicable how any one can consider
him as arguing for the resurrection of the identical body that was
laid in the grave, particle for particle. "Thou fool! that which
thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, but naked
grain, and God giveth it a body as it hath pleased him." "There
are celestial bodies, and terrestrial bodies;" "there is a natural
body, and there is a spiritual body;" "the first man is of the
earth, earthy; the second man is the Lord from heaven;" "flesh and
blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God;" "we shall all be
changed," and "bear the image of the heavenly, as we have borne
the image of the earthy." The analogy which has been so strangely
perverted by most commentators is used by Paul thus. The germ
which was to spring up to a new life, clothed with a new body, was
not any part of the fleshly body buried in the grave, but was the
soul itself, once contained in the old body, but released from its
hull in the grave and preserved in the under world until Christ
shall call it forth to be invested with a "glorious," "powerful,"
"spiritual," "incorruptible" body. When a grain of wheat is sown,
that is not the body that shall be; but the mysterious principle
of life, latent in the germ of the seed, springs up and puts on
its body fashioned appropriately for it. So, according to Paul's
conception, when a man is buried, the material corpse is not the
resurrection body that shall be; but the living soul which
occupied it is the germ that shall put on a new body of
immortality when the spring tide of Christ's coming draws the
buried treasures of Hades up to the light of heaven.

A species of proof which has been much used by the advocates of
the dogma of a bodily resurrection is the argument from analogy.
The intimate connection of human feeling and fancy with the
changing phenomena of Nature's seasons would naturally suggest to
a pensive mind the idea, Why, since she has her annual
resurrection, may not humanity some time have one? And what first
arose as a poetic conceit or stray thought, and was expressed in
glowing metaphors, might by an easy process pass abroad and harden
into a prosaic proposition or dogmatic formula.

"O soul of the spring time, now let us behold The stone from the
mouth of the sepulchre roll'd, And Nature rise up from her death's
damp mould; Let our faith, which in darkness and coldness has
lain, Revive with the warmth and the brightness again, And in
blooming of flower and budding of tree The symbols and types of
our destiny see."

Standing by the graves of our loved and lost ones, our inmost
souls yearn over the very dust in which their hallowed forms
repose. We feel that they must come back, we must be restored to
each other as we were before. Listening to the returned birds
whose warble fills the woods once more, gazing around on the
verdant and flowery forms of renewed life that clothe the
landscape over again, we eagerly snatch at every apparent emblem
or prophetic analogy that answers to our fond imagination and
desiring dream. Sentiment and fancy, especially when stimulated by
love and grief, and roving in the realms of reverie, free from the
cold guidance and sharp check of literal fact and severe logic,
are poor analysts, and then we easily confuse things distinct and
wander to conclusions philosophy will not warrant. Before building
a dogmatic doctrine on analogies, we must study those analogies
with careful discrimination, must see what they really are, and to
what they really lead. There is often an immense difference
between the first appearance to a hasty observer and the final
reality to a profound student. Let us, then, scrutinize a little
more closely those seeming analogies which, to borrow a happy
expression from Flugge, have made "Resurrection a younger sister
of Immortality."

Nature, the old, eternal snake, comes out afresh every year in a
new shining skin. What then? Of course this emblem is no proof of
any doctrine concerning the fate of man. But, waiving that, what
would the legitimate correspondence to it be for man? Why, that
humanity should exhibit the fresh specimens of her living
handiwork in every new generation. And that is done. Nature does
not reproduce before us each spring the very flowers that perished
the previous winter: she makes new ones like them. It is not a
resurrection of the old: it is a growth of the new. The passage of
the worm from its slug to its chrysalis state is surely no symbol
of a bodily resurrection, but rather of a bodily emancipation, not
resuming a deserted dead body, but assuming a new live one. Does
the butterfly ever come back to put on the exuvia that have
perished in the ground? The law of all life is progress, not
return, ascent through future developments, not descent through
the stages already traversed. "The herb is born anew out of a
seed, Not raised out of a bony skeleton. What tree is man the seed
of? Of a soul."

Sir Thomas Browne, after others, argues for the restoration of
man's body from the grave, from the fancied analogy of the
palingenesis or resurrection of vegetables which the magicians of
the antique East and the mystic chemists of the Middle Age boasted
of effecting. He having asserted in his "Religion of a Physician"
that "experience can from the ashes of a plant revive the plant,
and from its cinders recall it into its stalk and leaves again,"
Dr. Henry Power wrote beseeching "an experimental eviction of so
high and noble a piece of chemistry, the reindividuality of an
incinerated plant." We are not informed that Sir Thomas ever
granted him the sight. Of this beautiful error, this exquisite
superstition, which undoubtedly arose from the crystallizations of
certain salts in arborescent forms which suddenly surprised the
early alchemists in some of their experiments, we have the
following account in Disraeli's "Curiosities of Literature:" "The
semina of resurrection are concealed in extinct bodies, as in the
blood of man. The ashes of roses will again revive into roses,
though smaller and paler than if they had been planted
unsubstantial and unodoriferous, they are not roses which grew on
rose trees, but their delicate apparitions; and, like apparitions,
they are seen but for a moment. This magical phoenix lies thus
concealed in its cold ashes till the presence of a certain
chemical heat produces its resurrection." Any refutation of this
now would be considered childish. Upon the whole, then, while
recurrent spring, bringing in the great Easter of the year,
typifies to us indeed abundantly the development of new life, the
growth of new bodies out of the old and decayed, but nowhere hints
at the gathering up and wearing again of the dusty sloughs and
rotted foliage of the past, let men cease to talk of there being
any natural analogies to the ecclesiastical dogma of the
resurrection of the flesh. The teaching of nature finds a truer
utterance in the words of Aschylus: "There is no resurrection for
him who is once dead." 16

The next argument is that based on considerations of reason and of
ethics. The supporters of the doctrine of the resurrection of the
body have often disingenuously evaded the burden of proof thrown
upon them by retreating beneath loud assertions of God's power.
From the earliest dawn of the hypothesis to the present time,
every perplexity arising from it, every objection brought against
it, every absurdity shown to be involved in it, has been met and
confidently rebutted with declarations of God's abundant power to
effect a physical resurrection, or to do any thing else he
pleases, however impossible it may appear to us. Now, it is true
the power of God is competent to innumerable things utterly beyond
our skill, knowledge, or conception. Nevertheless, there is a
province within which our reason can judge of probabilities, and
can, if not absolutely grasp infallible truth, at least reach
satisfactory convictions. God is able to restore the vast coal
deposits of the earth, and the ashes of all the fuel ever burned,
to their original condition when they covered the world with

16 Eumenides, 1. 648, Oxford edition.


dense forests of ferns; but we have no reason to believe he will
do it. The truth or falsity of the popular theory of the
resurrection is not a question of God's power; it is simply a
question of God's will. A Jewish Rabbin relates the following
conversation, as exultingly as if the quibbling evasion on which
it turns positively settled the question itself, which in fact it
does not approach. A Sadducee says, "The resurrection of the dead
is a fable: the dry, scattered dust cannot live again." A by
standing Pharisee makes this reply: "There were in a city two
artists: one made vases of water, the other made them of clay:
which was the more wondrous artist?" The Sadducee answered, "The
former." The Pharisee rejoins, "Cannot God, then, who formed man
of water, (gutta seminis humida,) much more re form him of clay?"
Such a method of reasoning is an irrelevant impertinence. God can
call Nebuchadnezzar from his long rest, and seat him on his old
throne again to morrow. What an absurdity to infer that therefore
he will do it! God can give us wings upon our bodies, and enable
us to fly on an exploring trip among the planets. Will he do it?
The question, we repeat, is not whether God has the power to raise
our dead bodies, but whether he has the will. To that question
since, as we have already seen, he has sent us no miraculous
revelation replying to it we can only find an answer by tracing
the indications of his intentions contained in reason, morals, and
nature.

One of the foremost arguments urged by the Fathers for the
resurrection was its supposed necessity for a just and complete
judgment. The body was involved and instrumental in all the sins
of the man: it must therefore bear part in his punishment. The
Rabbins tell this allegory: "In the day of judgment the body will
say, The soul alone is to blame: since it left me, I have lain
like a stone in the grave. The soul will retort, The body alone is
sinful: since released from it, I fly through the air like a bird.
The Judge will interpose with this myth: A king once had a
beautiful garden full of early fruits. A lame man and a blind man
were in it. Said the lame man to the blind man, Let me mount upon
your shoulders and pluck the fruit, and we will divide it. The
king accused them of theft; but they severally replied, the lame
man, How could I reach it? the blind man, How could I see it? The
king ordered the lame man to be placed upon the back of the blind
man, and in this position had them both scourged. So God in the
day of judgment will replace the soul in the body, and hurl them
both into hell together." There is a queer tradition among the
Mohammedans implying, singularly enough, the same general thought.
The Prophet's uncle, Hamzah, having been slain by Hind, daughter
of Atabah, the cursed woman cut out his liver and gnawed it with
fiendish joy; but, lest any of it should become incorporated with
her system and go to hell, the Most High made it as hard as a
stone; and when she threw it on the ground, an angel restored it
to its original nature and place in the body of the martyred hero,
that lion of God.

The Roman Catholic Church endorses the representation that the
body must be raised to be punished. In the Catechism of the
Council of Trent, which is an authoritative exposition of Romanist
theology, we read that the "identical body" shall be restored,
though "without deformities or superfluities;" restored that "as
it was a partner in the man's deeds, so it may be a partner in his
punishments." The same Catechism also gives in this connection the
reason why a general judgment is necessary after each individual
has been judged at his death, namely, this: that they may be
punished for the evil which has resulted in the world since they
died from the evil they did in the world while they lived! Is it
not astonishing how these theologians find out so much? A living
Presbyterian divine of note says, "The bodies of the damned in the
resurrection shall be fit dwellings for their vile minds. With all
those fearful and horrid expressions which every base and
malignant passion wakes up in the human countenance stamped upon
it for eternity and burned in by the flaming fury of their own
terrific wickedness, they will be condemned to look upon their own
deformity and to feel their fitting doom." It is therefore urged
that the body must be raised to suffer the just penalty of the
sins man committed while occupying it. Is it not an absurdity to
affirm that nerves and blood, flesh and bones, are responsible,
guilty, must be punished? Tucker, in his "Light of Nature
Pursued," says, "The vulgar notion of a resurrection in the same
form and substance we carry about at present, because the body
being partaker in the deed ought to share in the reward, as well
requires a resurrection of the sword a man murders with, or the
bank note he gives to charitable uses." We suppose an intelligent
personality, a free will, indispensable to responsibleness and
alone amenable to retributions. Besides, if the body must be
raised to undergo chastisement for the offences done in it and by
means of it, this insurmountable difficulty by the same logic
confronts us. The material of our bodies is in a constant change,
the particles becoming totally transferred every few years. Now,
when a man is punished after the general judgment for a certain
crime, he must be in the very body he occupied when that crime was
perpetrated. Since he was a sinner all his days, his resurrection
body must comprise all the matter that ever formed a part of his
corporeity, and each sinner may hereafter be as huge as the
writhing Titan, Tityus, whose body, it was fabled, covered nine
acres. God is able to preserve the integral soul in being, and to
punish it according to justice, without clothing it in flesh. This
fact by itself utterly vacates and makes gratuitous the hypothesis
of a physical resurrection from punitive considerations, an
hypothesis which is also refuted by the truth contained in Locke's
remark to Stillingfleet, "that the soul hath no greater congruity
with the particles of matter which were once united to it, but are
so no longer, than it hath with any other particles of matter."
When the soul leaves the body, it would seem to have done with
that stage of its existence, and to enter upon another and higher
one, leaving the dust to mix with dust forever. The body wants not
the soul again; for it is a senseless clod and wants nothing. The
soul wants not its old body again: it prefers to have the freedom
of the universe, a spirit. Philip the Solitary wrote, in the
twelfth century, a book called "Dioptra," presenting the
controversy between the soul and the body very quaintly and at
length. The same thing was done by Henry Nicholson in a
"Conference between the Soul and Body concerning the Present and
Future State." William Crashaw, an old English poet, translated
from the Latin a poem entitled "The Complaint: a Dialogue between
the Body and the Soul of a Damned Man."17 But any one who will
peruse with intelligent heed the works that have been written on
this whole subject must be amazed to see how exclusively the
doctrine which we are opposing has rested on pure grounds of
tradition and fancy, alike destitute of authority and reason. Some
authors have indeed attempted to support the doctrine with
arguments: for

17 Also see Dialogue inter Corpus et Animam, p. 95 of Latin Poems
attributed to Walter Mapes.


instance, there are two German works, one by Bertram, one by
Pflug, entitled "The Resurrection of the Dead on Grounds of
Reason," in which recourse is had to every possible expedient to
make out a case, not even neglecting the factitious assistance of
Leibnitz's scheme of "Pre established Harmony." But it may be
deliberately affirmed that not one of their arguments is worthy of
respect. Apparently, they do not seek to reach truth, but to
bolster up a foregone conclusion held merely from motives of
tradition.

The Jews had a favorite tradition, developed by their Rabbins in
many passages, that there was one small, almond shaped bone,
(supposed now to have been the bone called by anatomists the os
coccygis,) which was indestructible, and would form the nucleus
around which the rest of the body would gather at the time of the
resurrection. This bone, named Luz, was miraculously preserved
from demolition or decay. Pound it furiously on anvils with heavy
hammers of steel, burn it for ages in the fiercest furnaces, soak
it for centuries in the strongest solvents, all in vain: its magic
structure still remained. So the Talmud tells. "Even as there is a
round dry grain In a plant's skeleton, which, being buried, Can
raise the herb's green body up again; So is there such in man, a
seed shaped bone, Aldabaron, call'd by the Hebrews Luz, Which,
being laid into the ground, will bear, After three thousand years,
the grass of flesh, The bloody, soul possessed weed called man."

The Jews did not, as these singular lines represent, suppose this
bone was a germ which after long burial would fructify by a
natural process and bear a perfect body: they regarded it only as
a nucleus around which the Messiah would by a miracle compel the
decomposed flesh to return as in its pristine life. All that the
Jews say of Luz the Mohammedans repeat of the bone Al Ajib.

This conceit of superstition has been developed by a Christian
author of considerable reputation into a theory of a natural
resurrection. The work of Mr. Samuel Drew on the "Identity and
General Resurrection of the Human Body" has been quite a standard
work on the subject of which it treats. Mr. Drew believes there is
a germ in the body which slowly ripens and prepares the
resurrection body in the grave. As a seed must be buried for a
season in order to spring up in perfect life, so must the human
body be buried till the day of judgment. During this period it is
not idle, but is busily getting ready for its consummation. He
says, "There are four distinct stages through which those parts
constituting the identity of the body must necessarily pass in
order to their attainment of complete perfection beyond the grave.
The first of these stages is that of its elementary principles;
the second is that of an embryo in the womb; the third is that of
its union with an immaterial spirit, and with the fluctuating
portions of flesh and blood in our present state; and the fourth
stage is that of its residence in the grave. All these stages are
undoubtedly necessary to the full perfection of the body: they are
alembics through which its parts must necessarily move to attain
that vigor which shall continue forever."18 To state this figment
is enough. It would be folly to attempt any refutation of a fancy
so obviously a pure contrivance to fortify a preconceived opinion,
a fancy, too, so preposterous, so utterly without countenance,
either from experience, observation, science, reason, or
Scripture. The egg of man's divinity is not laid in the nest of
the grave.

Another motive for believing the resurrection of the body has been
created by the exigencies of a materialistic philosophy. There was
in the early Church an Arabian sect of heretics who were reclaimed
from their errors by the powerful reasonings and eloquence of
Origen.19 Their heresy consisted in maintaining that the soul dies
with the body being indeed only its vital breath and will be
restored with it at the last day. In the course of the Christian
centuries there have arisen occasionally a few defenders of this
opinion. Priestley, as is well known, was an earnest supporter of
it. Let us scan the ground on which he held this belief. In the
first place, he firmly believed that the fact of an eternal life
to come had been supernaturally revealed to men by God through
Christ. Secondly, as a philosopher he was intensely a materialist,
holding with unwavering conviction to the conclusion that life,
mind, or soul, was a concomitant or result of our physical
organism, and wholly incapable of being without it. Death to him
was the total destruction of man for the time. There was therefore
plainly no alternative for him but either to abandon one of his
fundamental convictions as a Christian and a philosopher, or else
to accept the doctrine of a future resurrection of the body into
an immortal life. He chose the latter, and zealously taught always
that death is an annihilation lasting till the day of judgment,
when all are to be summoned from their graves. To this whole
course of thought there are several replies to be made. In the
first place, we submit that the philosophy of materialism is
false: standing in the province of science and reason, it may be
affirmed that the soul is not dependent for its existence on the
body, but will survive it. We will not argue this point, but
merely state it. Secondly, it is certain that the doctrine which
makes soul perish with body finds no countenance in the New
Testament. It is inconsistent with the belief in angelic spirits,
in demoniac possessions, in Christ's descent as a spirit to preach
to the spirits of departed men imprisoned in the under world, and
with other conceptions underlying the Gospels and the Epistles.
But, thirdly, admitting it to be true, then, we affirm, the
legitimate deduction from all the arrayed facts of science and all
the presumptive evidence of appearances is not that a future
resurrection will restore the dead man to life, but that all is
over with him, he has hopelessly perished forever. When the breath
ceases, if nothing survives, if the total man is blotted out, then
we challenge the production of a shadow of proof that he will ever
live again. The seeming injustice and blank awfulness of the fate
may make one turn for relief to the hypothesis of a future
arbitrary miraculous resurrection; but that is an artificial
expedient, without a shadow of justification. Once admit that the
body is all, its dissolution a total death, and you are gone
forever. One intuition of the spirit, seizing the conscious
supports of eternal ideas, casts contempt on "The doubtful
prospects of our painted dust,"

18 Drew on Resurrection, ch. vi. sect. vii. pp. 326-332.

19 Eusebius, Eccl. Hist. lib. vi. cap. xxxvii.


and outvalues all the gross hopes of materialism. Between
nonentity and being yawns the untraversable gulf of infinity. No:
the body of flesh falls, turns to dust and air; the soul,
emancipated, rejoices, and soars heavenwards, and is its own
incorruptible frame, mocking at death, a celestial house, whose
maker and builder is God.

Finally, there remain to be weighed the bearings of the argument
from chemical and physiological science on the resurrection. Here
is the chief stumbling block in the way of the popular doctrine.
The scientific absurdities connected with that doctrine have been
marshalled against it by Celsus, the Platonist philosopher, by
Avicenna, the Arabian physician, and by hundreds more, and have
never been answered, and cannot be answered. As long as man lives,
his bodily substance is incessantly changing; the processes of
secretion and absorption are rapidly going forward. Every few
years he is, as to material, a totally new man. Dying at the age
of seventy, he has had at least ten different bodies. He is one
identical soul, but has lived in ten separate houses. With which
shall he be raised? with the first? or the fifth? or the last? or
with all? But, further, the body after death decays, enters into
combination with water, air, earth, gas, vegetables, animals,
other human bodies. In this way the same matter comes to have
belonged to a thousand persons. In the resurrection, whose shall
it be? We reply, nearly in the language of Christ to the
Sadducees, "Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the will of
God: in the resurrection they have not bodies of earthly flesh,
but are spirits, as the angels of God."

The argument against the common theory of a material resurrection,
on account of numerous claimants for the same substance, has of
late derived a greatly increased force from the brilliant
discoveries in chemistry. It is now found that only a small number
of substances ever enter into the composition of animal bodies.20
The food of man consists of nitrogenized and non nitrogenized
substances. The latter are the elements of respiration; the former
alone compose the plastic elements of nutrition, and they are few
in number and comparatively limited in extent. "All life depends
on a relatively small quantity of matter. Over and over again, as
the modeller fashions his clay, are plant and animal formed out of
the same material." The particles that composed Adam's frame may
before the end of the world have run the circuit of ten thousand
bodies of his descendants: "'Twas mine, 'tis his, and has been
slave to thousands." To proclaim the resurrection of the flesh as
is usually done, seems a flat contradiction of clear knowledge.21
A late writer on this subject, Dr. Hitchcock, evades the
insuperable difficulty by saying, "It is not necessary that the
resurrection body should contain a single particle of the body
laid in the grave, if it only contain particles of the same kind,
united in the same proportion, and the compound be made to assume
the same form and structure as the natural body." 22 Then two men
who look exactly alike may in the resurrection exchange bodies
without any harm! Here the theory of punishment clashes. Does not
the esteemed author see that this would not be a resurrection of
the old bodies, but a creation of new ones

20 Liebig, Animal Chemistry, sect. xix.

21 The Circulation of Matter, Blackwood's Magazine, May, 1853.

22 The Resurrection of Spring, p. 26.


just like them? And is not this a desertion of the orthodox
doctrine of the Church? If he varies so far from the established
formularies out of a regard for philosophy, he may as well be
consistent and give up the physical doctrine wholly, because it
rests solely on the tradition which he leaves and is every whit
irreconcilable with philosophy. This device is as wilful an
attempt to escape the scientific difficulty as that employed by
Candlish to avoid the scriptural difficulty put in the way of the
doctrine by the apostolic words "Flesh and blood cannot inherit
the kingdom of God." The eminent Scottish divine affirms that
"flesh and bones"  that is, these present bodies made
incorruptible can inherit the kingdom of God; although "flesh and
blood" that is, these present bodies subject to decay cannot.23 It
is surely hard to believe that the New Testament writers had such
a distinction in their minds. It is but a forlorn resource
conjured up to meet a desperate exigency.

At the appearing of Christ in glory,

"When the Day of Fire shall have dawn'd, and sent Its deadly
breath into the firmament," as it is supposed, the great earth
cemetery will burst open and its innumerable millions swarm forth
before him. Unto the tremendous act of habeas corpus, then
proclaimed, every grave will yield its prisoner. Ever since the
ascension of Jesus his mistaken followers have been anxiously
expecting that awful advent of his person and his power in the
clouds; but in vain. "All things remain as they were: where is the
promise of his appearing?" As the lookers out hitherto have been
disappointed, so they ever will be. Say not, Lo here! or, Lo
there! for, behold, he is within you. The reason why this carnal
error, Jewish conceit, retains a hold, is that men accept it
without any honest scrutiny of its foundations or any earnest
thought of their own about it. They passively receive the
tradition. They do not realize the immensity of the thing, nor the
ludicrousness of its details. To their imaginations the awful
blast of the trumpet calling the world to judgment, seems no more,
as Feuerbach says, than a tone from the tin horn of a postillion,
who, at the post station of the Future, orders fresh horses for
the Curriculum Vita! President Hitchcock tells us that, "when the
last trumpet sounds, the whole surface of the earth will become
instinct with life, from the charnels of battle fields alone more
than a thousand millions of human beings starting forth and
crowding upwards to the judgment seat." On the resurrection
morning, at the first tip of light over acres of opening monument
and heaving turf, "Each member jogs the other, And whispers, Live
you, brother?"

And how will it be with us then? Will Daniel Lambert, the mammoth
of men, appear weighing half a ton? Will the Siamese twins then be
again joined by the living ligament of their congenital band?
Shall "infants be not raised in the smallness of body in which
they died, but increase by the wondrous and most swift work of
God"? 24

23 Candlish, Life in a Risen Savior: Discourse XV.

24 Augustine, De Civ. Dei, lib. xxii. cap. xiv.


Young sings, "Now charnels rattle; scatter'd limbs, and all The
various bones, obsequious to the call, Self moved, advance; the
neck perhaps to meet The distant head; the distant head the feet.
Dreadful to view! see, through the dusky sky Fragments of bodies
in confusion fly, To distant regions journeying, there to claim
Deserted members and complete the frame."

The glaring melodramatic character, the startling mechanico
theatrical effects, of this whole doctrine, are in perfect keeping
with the raw imagination of the childhood of the human mind, but
in profound opposition to the working philosophy of nature and the
sublime simplicity of God.

Many persons have never distinctly defined their views upon the
subject before us. In the minds even of many preachers and
writers, several different and irreconcilable theories would seem
to exist together in confused mixture. Now they speak as if the
soul were sleeping with the body in the grave; again they appear
to imply that it is detained in an intermediate state; and a
moment afterwards they say it has already entered upon its final
reward or doom. Jocelyn relates, in his Life of St. Patrick, that
"as the saint one day was passing the graves of two men recently
buried, observing that one of the graves had a cross over it, he
stopped his chariot and asked the dead man below of what religion
he had been. The reply was, 'A pagan.' 'Then why was this cross
put over you?' inquired St. Patrick. The dead man answered, 'He
who is buried near me is a Christian; and one of your faith,
coming hither, placed the cross at my head.' The saint stepped out
of his chariot, rectified the mistake, and went his way." Calvin,
in the famous treatise designated "Psychopannychia," which he
levelled against those who taught the sleep of souls until the day
of judgment, maintained that the souls of the elect go immediately
to heaven, the souls of the reprobate to hell. Here they tarry in
bliss and bale until the resurrection; then, coming to the earth,
they assume their bodies and return to their respective places.
But if the souls live so long in heaven and hell without their
flesh, why need they ever resume it? The cumbrous machinery of the
scheme seems superfluous and unmeaning. As a still further
specimen of the arbitrary thinking the unscientific and
unphilosophical thinking carried into this department of thought
by most who have cultivated it, reference may be made to Bishop
Burnet's work "De Statu Mortuorum et Resurgentium," which teaches
that at the first resurrection the bodies of the risen will be the
same as the present, but at the second resurrection, after the
millennium, from the rudiments of the present body a new spiritual
body will be developed.

The true idea of man's future destiny appears to be that no
resurrection of the flesh is needed, because the real man never
dies, but lives continuously forever. There are two reasonable
ways of conceiving what the vehicle of his life is when he leaves
his present frame. It may be that within his material system lurks
an exquisite spiritual organization, invisibly pervading it and
constituting its vital power. This ethereal structure is
disengaged at last from its gross envelope, and, unfettered, soars
to the Divine realms of ether and light. This theory of an "inner
body" is elaborately wrought out and sustained in Bonnet's
"Palingenesie Philosophique." Or it may be that there is in each
one a primal germ, a deathless monad, which is the organic
identity of man, root of his inmost stable being, triumphant,
unchanging ruler of his flowing, perishable organism. This spirit
germ, born into the present life, assimilates and holds the
present body around it, out of the materials of this world; born
into the future life, it will assimilate and hold around it a
different body, out of the materials of the future world.25 Thus
there are bodies terrestrial and bodies celestial: the glory of
the terrestrial is one, fitted to this scene of things; the glory
of the celestial is another, fitted to the scene of things
hereafter to dawn. Each spirit will be clothed from the material
furnished by the world in which it resides. Not forever shall we
bear about this slow load of weary clay, this corruptible mass,
heir to a thousand ills. Our body shall rather be such  "If
lightning were the gross corporeal frame Of some angelic essence,
whose bright thoughts As far surpass'd in keen rapidity The
lagging action of his limbs as doth Man's mind his clay; with like
excess of speed To animated thought of lightning flies That spirit
body o'er life's deeps divine, Far past the golden isles of
memory."

What man knows constitutes his present world. All beyond that
constitutes another world. He can imagine two modes in which his
desire for a life after death may be gratified, a removal into the
Unknown World, or a return into the Known World. With the latter
supposition the restoration of the flesh is involved.

Upon the whole, our conclusion is, that in the original plan of
the world it was fixed that man should not live here forever, but
that the essence of his life should escape from the flesh and
depart to some other sphere of being, there either to fashion
itself a new form, or to remain disembodied. If those who hold the
common doctrine of a carnal resurrection should carry it out with
philosophical consistency, by extending the scheme it involves to
all existing planetary races as well as to their own, should they
cause that process of imagination which produced this doctrine to
go on to its legitimate completion, they would see in the final
consummation the sundered earths approach each other, and
firmaments conglobe, till at last the whole universe concentred in
one orb. On the surface of that world all the risen races of being
would be distributed, the inhabitants of a present solar system
making a nation, the sum of gigantic nationalities constituting
one prodigious, death exempted empire, its solitary sovereign GOD.
But this is pure poetry, and not science nor philosophy.

25 Lange on the Resurrection of the Body, Studien und Kritiken, 1836.


CHAPTER IV.

DOCTRINE OF FUTURE PUNISHMENT; OR, CRITICAL HISTORY OF THE IDEA OF
A HELL.

A HELL of fire and brimstone has been, perhaps still is, the most
terrible of the superstitions of the world. We propose to give a
historic sketch of the popular representations on this subject,
trace them to their origin, and discuss the merits of the question
itself. To follow the doctrine through all its variations,
illustrating the practical and controversial writings upon it,
would require a large volume; but, by a judicious arrangement, all
that is necessary to a fair understanding of the subject, or
really interesting, may be presented within the compass of an
essay. Any one who should read the literature of this subject
would be astonished at the almost universal prevalence of the
doctrine and at the immense diversity of appalling descriptions of
it, and would ask, Whence arises all this? How have these horrors
obtained such a seated hold in the world?

In the first place, it is to be replied, as soon as reason is in
fair possession of the idea of a continued individual existence
beyond the grave, the moral sense, discriminating the deeds,
tempers, and characters of men, would teach that there must be
different allotments and experiences for them after death. It is
not right, say reason and conscience, for the coward, the idler,
fool, knave, sot, murderer, to enter into the same realm and have
the same bliss with heroes, sages, and saints; neither are they
able to do it. The spontaneous thought and sentiment of humanity
would declare, if the soul survives the body, passing into the
invisible world, its fortunes there must depend somewhat upon its
fitness and deserts, its contained treasures and acquired habits.
Reason, judging the facts of observation according to the
principles of ethics and the working of experienced spiritual
laws, at once decides that there is a difference hereafter between
the fate of the good heart and the bad one, the great soul and the
mean one: in a word, there is, in some sense or other, a heaven
and a hell.

Again: the same belief would be necessitated by the conception, so
deeply entertained by the primitive people of the earth, of
overruling and inspecting gods. They supposed these gods to be in
a great degree like themselves, partial, fickle, jealous,
revengeful. Such beings, of course, would caress their favorites
and torture their offenders. The calamities and blessings of this
life were regarded as tokens, revengeful or loving, of the ruling
deities, now pleased, now enraged. And when their votaries or
victims had passed into the eternal state, how natural to suppose
them still favored or cursed by the passionate wills of these
irresponsible gods! Plainly enough, they who believe in gods that
launch thunderbolts and upheave the sea in their rage and take
vengeance for an insult by sending forth a pestilence, must also
believe in a hell where Ixion may be affixed to the wheel and
Tantalus be tortured with maddening mockeries. These two
conceptions of discriminating justice and of vengeful gods both
lead to the theoretic construction of a hell, and to the growth of
doctrines and parables about it, though in a different sort, the
former illustrating a pervasive law which distributes men
according to their deserts, the latter speaking of beings with
human passions, who inflict outward arbitrary penalties according
to their pleasure.

Thirdly, when the general idea of a hell has once obtained
lodgment, it is rapidly nourished, developed, and ornamented,
carried out into particulars by poets, rhetoricians, and popular
teachers, whose fancies are stimulated and whose figurative views
and pictures act and react both upon the sources and the products
of faith. Representations based only on moral facts, emblems
addressing the imagination, after a while are received in a
literal sense, become physically located and clothed with the
power of horror. A Hindu poet says, "The ungrateful shall remain
in hell as long as the sun hangs in heaven." An old Jewish Rabbi
says that after the general judgment "God shall lead all the
blessed through hell and all the damned through paradise, and show
to each one the place that was prepared for him in each region, so
that they shall not be able to say, 'We are not to be blamed or
praised; for our doom was unalterably fixed beforehand.' Such
utterances are originally moral symbols, not dogmatic assertions;
and yet in a rude age they very easily pass into the popular mind
as declaring facts literally to be believed. A Talmudic writer
says, "There are in hell seven abodes, in each abode seven
thousand caverns, in each cavern seven thousand clefts, in each
cleft seven thousand scorpions; each scorpion has seven limbs, and
on each limb are seven thousand barrels of gall. There are also in
hell seven rivers of rankest poison, so deadly that if one touches
it he bursts." Hesiod, Homer, Virgil, have given minute
descriptions of hell and its agonies, descriptions which have
unquestionably had a tremendous influence in cherishing and
fashioning the world's faith in that awful empire. The poems of
Dante, Milton, and Pollok revel in the most vivid and terrific
pictures of the infernal kingdom and its imagined horrors; and the
popular doctrine of future punishment in Christendom is far more
closely conformed to their revelations than to the declarations of
the New Testament. The English poet's "Paradise Lost" has
undoubtedly exerted an influence on the popular faith comparable
with that of the Genevan theologian's "Institutes of the Christian
Religion." There is a horrid fiction, widely believed once by the
Jewish Rabbins and by the Mohammedans, that two gigantic fiends
called the Searchers, as soon as a deceased person is buried, make
him sit up in the grave, examine the moral condition of his soul,
and, if he is very guilty, beat in his temples with heavy iron
maces. It is obvious to observe that such conceptions are purely
arbitrary, the work of fancy, not based on any intrinsic fitness
or probability; but they are received because unthinking ignorance
and hungry superstition will greedily believe any thing they hear.
Joseph Trapp, an English clergyman, in a long poem thus sets forth
the scene of damnation: "Doom'd to live death and never to expire,
In floods and whirlwinds of tempestuous fire The damn'd shall
groan, fire of all kinds and forms, In rain and hail, in
hurricanes and storms, Liquid and solid, livid, red, and pale, A
flaming mountain here, and there a flaming vale; The liquid fire
makes seas, the solid, shores; Arch'd o'er with flames, the horrid
concave roars. In bubbling eddies rolls the fiery tide, And
sulphurous surges on each other ride. The hollow winding vaults,
and dens, and caves, Bellow like furnaces with flaming waves.
Pillars of flame in spiral volumes rise, Like fiery snakes, and
lick the infernal skies. Sulphur, the eternal fuel, unconsumed,
Vomits redounding smoke, thick, unillumed."

But all other paintings of the fear and anguish of hell are vapid
and pale before the preternatural frightfulness of those given at
unmerciful length and in sickening specialty in some of the Hindu
and Persian sacred books.1 Here worlds of nauseating disgusts, of
loathsome agonies, of intolerable terrors, pass before us. Some
are hung up by their tongues, or by their eyes, and slowly
devoured by fiery vermin; some scourged with whips of serpents
whose poisonous fangs lacerate their flesh at every blow; some
forced to swallow bowls of gore, hair, and corruption, freshly
filled as fast as drained; some packed immovably in red hot iron
chests and laid in raging furnaces for unutterable millions of
ages. One who is familiar with the imagery of the Buddhist hells
will think the pencils of Dante and Pollok, of Jeremy Taylor and
Jonathan Edwards, were dipped in water. There is just as much
ground for believing the accounts of the former to be true as
there is for crediting those of the latter: the two are
fundamentally the same, and the pagan had earlier possession of
the field.

Furthermore, in the early ages, and among people where castes were
prominent, when the learning, culture, and power were confined to
one class at the expense of others, it is unquestionable that
copious and fearful descriptions of the future state were spread
abroad by those who were interested in establishing such a dogma.
The haughtiness and selfishness of the hierarchic spirit, the
exclusiveness, cruelty, and cunning tyranny of many of the ancient
priesthoods, are well known. Despising, hating, and fearing the
people, whom they held in abject spiritual bondage, they sought to
devise, diffuse, and organize such opinions as would concentrate
power in their own hands and rivet their authority. Accordingly,
in the lower immensity they painted and shadowed forth the lurid
and dusky image of hell, gathering around it all that was most
abominated and awful. Then they set up certain fanciful
conditions, without the strict observance of which no one could
avoid damnation. The animus of a priesthood in the structure of
this doctrine is shown by the glaring fact that in the old
religions the woes of hell were denounced not so much upon bad men
who committed crimes out of a wicked heart, as upon careless men
who neglected priestly guidance and violated the ritual. The
omission of a prayer or an ablution, the neglect of baptism or
confession, a slight thrown upon a priest, a mental conception
differing from the decree of the "Church," would condemn a man far
more surely and deeply into the Egyptian, Hindu, Persian,
Pharisaic, Papal, or Calvinistic hell than any amount of moral
culpability according to the standard of natural ethics.

1 See Pope's translation of the Viraf Nameh. Also the Dabistan,
vol. i. pp. 295-304, of the translation by Shea and Troyer; and
Coleman's Mythology of the Hindus, chapter on the hells.


The popular hells have ever been built on hierarchic selfishness,
dogmatic pride, and personal cruelty, and have been walled around
with arbitrary and traditional rituals. Through the breaches made
in these rituals by neglect, souls have been plunged in. The
Parsee priest describes a woman in hell "beaten with stone clubs
by two demons twelve miles in size, and compelled to continue
eating a basin of putridity, because once some of her hair, as she
combed it, fell into the sacred fire." The Brahmanic priest tells
of a man who, for "neglecting to meditate on the mystic
monosyllable Om before praying, was thrown down in hell on an iron
floor and cleaved with an axe, then stirred in a caldron of molten
lead till covered all over with the sweated foam of torture like a
grain of rice in an oven, and then fastened, with head downwards
and feet upwards, to a chariot of fire and urged onwards with a
red hot goad." The Papal priest declares that the schismatic,
though the kindest and justest man, at death drops hopelessly into
hell, while the devotee, though scandalously corrupt in heart and
life, who confesses and receives extreme unction, treads the
primrose path to paradise. The Episcopalian priest dooms the
dissenter to everlasting woe in spite of every virtue, because he
has not known sacramental baptism in the apostolic line. The
Arminian priest turns the rationalist over to the penal fires of
eternity, because he is in mental error as to the explanation of
the Trinity and the Atonement. In every age it has been the
priestly spirit, acting on ritual considerations, that has
deepened the foundations, enlarged the borders, and apportioned
the victims, of hell. The perversions and excesses of the doctrine
have grown out of cruel ambition and cunning on one side, and been
received by docile ignorance and superstition on the other, and
been mutually fed by traditions and fables between. The excessive
vanity and theocratic pride of the Jews led them to exclude all
the Gentiles, whom they stigmatized as "uncircumcised dogs," from
the Jewish salvation. The same spirit, aggravated if possible,
passed lineally into Christendom, causing the Orthodox Church to
exclude all the heathen, all heretics, and the unbaptized, from
the Christian salvation.

A fifth explanation of the wholesale severity and multiplied
details of horror, which came to be incorporated with the doctrine
of hell, is to be found in the gloomy theories of certain
philosophers whose relentless speculations were tinged and moulded
by their own recluse misanthropy and the prevailing superstitions
of their time. Out of the old asceticism of the East the false
spiritualism which regarded matter as the source of evil and this
life as a penance arose the dogma of metempsychosis. The
consequence of this theory, rigidly carried out, created a
descending congeries of hells, reaching from centre to nadir, in
correspondence to an ascending congeries of heavens, reaching from
centre to zenith. Out of the myth of the Fall sprang the dogma of
total depravity, dooming our whole race to hell forever, except
those saved by the subsequent artifice of the atonement. Theories
conjured up and elaborated by fanciful and bloodless metaphysicians,
in an age when the milk of public human kindness was thinned,
soured, poisoned, by narrow and tyrannical prejudices, might
easily legitimate and establish any conclusions, however
unreasonable and monstrous. The history of philosophy is
the broad demonstration of this. The Church philosophers, (with
exceptions, of course,) receiving the traditions of the common
faith, partaking in the superstitions of their age, banished from
the bosoms of men by their monastic position, and inflamed with
hierarchic pride, with but a faint connection or intercourse
between conscience and intellect or between heart and fancy,
strove to spin out theories which would explain and justify the
orthodox dogmas.

Working with metaphysical tools of abstract reason, not with the
practical faculties of life, dealing with the fanciful materials
of priestly tradition, not with the solid facts of ethical
observation, they would naturally be troubled with but few qualms
and make but few reservations, however overwhelming the results of
horror at which they might arrive. Habituated for years to hair
drawn analyses and superstitious broodings upon the subject,
overshadowed by the supernatural hierarchy in which they lived,
surrounded by a thick night of ignorance, persecution, and
slaughter, it was no wonder they could believe the system they
preached, although in reality it was only a traditional
abstraction metaphysically wrought up and vivified by themselves.
Being thus wrought out and animated by them, who were the sole
depositaries of learning and the undisputed lords of thought, the
mass of the people, lying abjectly in the fetters of authority,
could not help accepting it. Ample illustrations of these
assertions will occur to all who are familiar with the theological
schemes and the dialectic subtleties of the early Church Fathers
and of the later Church Scholastics.

Finally, by the combined power, first, of natural conscience
affirming a future distinction between the good and the bad;
secondly, of imperfect conceptions of God as a passionate avenger;
thirdly, of the licentious fancies of poets drawing awful
imaginative pictures of future woe; fourthly, of the cruel spirit
and the ambitious plans of selfish priesthoods; and fifthly, of
the harsh and relentless theories of conforming metaphysicians,
the doctrine of hell, as a located place of manifold terrific
physical tortures drawing in vast majorities of the human race,
became established in the ruling creeds and enthroned as an
orthodox dogma. In some heathen nations the descriptions of the
poets, in others the accounts of the priestly books, were held to
be inspired revelations. To call them in question was blasphemous.
In Christendom the scriptural representations of the subject,
which were general moral adaptations, incidentally made, of
representations already existing, obtained a literal interpretation,
had the stamp of infallibility put on them and immense perverted
additions joined to them. Thus everywhere the dogma became
associated with the established authority. To deny it was heresy.
Heretics were excommunicated, loaded with pains and penalties,
and, for many centuries, often put to death with excruciating
tortures. From that moment the doctrine was taken out of
the province of natural reason, out of the realm of ethical
truth. The absurdities, wrongs, and barbarities deducible from it
were a part and parcel of it, and not to be considered as any
objection to it. No free thought and honest criticism were
allowed. Because taught by authority, it must be submissively
taken for granted. Henceforth we are not to wonder at the
revolting inhumanity of spirit and horribleness of gloating hatred
shown in connection with the doctrine; for it was not the
independent thought and proper moral spirit of individuals, but
the petrified dogma and irresponsible corporate spirit of that
towering hierarchy, the Church.

The Church set forth certain conditional offers of salvation. When
those offers were spurned or neglected, the Church felt personally
insulted and aggrieved. Her servants hurled on the hated heretics
and heathen the denunciations of bigotry and the threats of rage.
Rugged old Tertullian, in whose torrid veins the fire of his
African deserts seems infused, revels with infernal glee over the
contemplation of the sure damnation of the heathen. "At that
greatest of all spectacles, the last and eternal judgment," he
says, "how shall I admire, how laugh, how rejoice, how exult, when
I behold so many proud monarchs groaning in the lowest abyss of
darkness; so many magistrates liquefying in fiercer flames than
they ever kindled against the Christians; so many sage
philosophers blushing in red hot fires with their deluded pupils;
so many tragedians more tuneful in the expression of their own
sufferings; so many dancers tripping more nimbly from anguish than
ever before from applause."2 Hundreds of the most accredited
Christian writers have shown the same fiendish spirit. Drexel the
Jesuit, preaching of Dives, exclaims, "Instead of a lofty bed of
down on which he was wont to repose himself, he now lies frying in
the flames; his sparkling wine and delicious dainties are taken
from him; he is burnt up with thirst, and has nothing for his food
but smoke and sulphur." Jeremy Taylor3 says, in that discourse on
the "Pains of Hell" where he has lavished all the stores of his
matchless learning and all the wealth of his gorgeous imagination
in multiplying and adorning the paraphernalia of torture with
infinite accompaniments of unendurable pangs and insufferable
abominations, "We are amazed at the inhumanity of Phalaris, who
roasted men in his brazen bull: this was joy in respect of that
fire of hell which penetrates the very entrails without consuming
them;" "husbands shall see their wives, parents shall see their
children, tormented before their eyes;" "the bodies of the damned
shall be crowded together in hell like grapes in a wine press,
which press one another till they burst;" "every distinct sense
and organ shall be assailed with its own appropriate and most
exquisite sufferings." Christopher Love belying his name says of
the damned, "Their cursings are their hymns, howlings their tunes,
and blasphemies their ditties." Calvin writes, "Forever harassed
with a dreadful tempest, they shall feel themselves torn asunder
by an angry God, and transfixed and penetrated by mortal stings,
terrified by the thunderbolts of God, and broken by the weight of
his hand, so that to sink into any gulfs would be more tolerable
than to stand for a moment in these terrors." A living divine, Dr.
Gardiner Spring, declares, "When the omnipotent and angry God, who
has access to all the avenues of distress in the corporeal frame
and all the inlets to agony in the intellectual constitution,
undertakes to punish, he will convince the universe that he does
not gird himself for the work of retribution in vain;" "it will be
a glorious deed when He who hung on Calvary shall cast those who
have trodden his blood under their feet, into the furnace of fire,
where there shall be weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth."
Thousands of passages like these, and even worse, might easily be
collected from Christian authors, dating their utterance from the
days of St. Irenaus, Bishop of Lyons, who flamed against the
heretics, to the days of Nehemiah Adams, Congregational preacher
of Boston, who says, "It is to be feared the forty two children
that mocked Elisha are now in hell." 4 There is an unmerciful
animus in them, a vindictiveness of thought and feeling, far oh,
how far! removed from the meek and loving

2 De Spectaculis, cap. xxx., Gibbon's trans.

3 Contemplations of the State of Man, ch. 6 8.

4 Friends of Christ, p. 149.


soul of Jesus, who wept over Jerusalem, and loved the
"unevangelical" young lawyer who was "not far from the kingdom of
heaven," and yearned towards the penitent Peter, and from the
tenderness of his immaculate purity said to the adulteress,
"Neither do I condemn thee: go, and sin no more." There are some
sectarians in whom the arbitrary narrowness, fierceness, and
rigidity of their received creeds have so demoralized and hardened
conscience and sensibility in their native healthy directions, and
artificially inflamed them in diseased channels, that we verily
believe, if the decision of the eternal destiny of the human race
were placed in their hands, they would with scarcely a twinge of
pain perhaps some of them even with a horrid satisfaction and
triumph doom all except their own dogmatic coterie to hell. They
are bound to do so. They profess to know infallibly that God will
do so: if, therefore, the case being in their arbitration, they
would decide differently, they thereby impeach the action of God,
confess his decrees irreconcilable with reason and justice, and
set up their own goodness as superior to his. Burnet has preserved
the plea of Bloody Mary, which was in these words: "As the souls
of heretics are hereafter to be eternally burning in hell, there
can be nothing more proper than for me to imitate the Divine
vengeance by burning them on earth." Thanks be to the infinite
Father that our fate is in his hands, and not in the hands of men
who are bigots,

"Those pseudo Privy Councillors of God,
Who write down judgments with a pen hard nibb'd:
Ushers of Beelzebub's black rod,
Commending sinners, not to ice thick ribb'd,
But endless flames to scorch them up like flax,
Yet sure of heaven themselves, as if they'd cribb'd
The impression of St. Peter's keys in wax!"

It may be thought that this doctrine and its awful concomitants,
though once promulgated, are now nearly obsolete. It is true that,
in thinking minds and generous hearts, they are getting to be
repudiated. But by no means is it so in the recognised formularies
of the established Churches and in the teachings of the popular
clergy. All through the Gentile world, wherever there is a
prevailing religion, the threats and horrors of a fearful doctrine
of hell are still brandished over the trembling or careless
multitudes. In Christendom, the authoritative announcement of the
Roman and Greek Churches, and the public creeds confessed by every
communicant of all the denominations, save two or three which are
comparatively insignificant in numbers, show that the doctrine is
yet held without mitigation. The Bishop of Toronto, only a year or
two ago, published the authoritative declaration that "every child
of humanity, except the Virgin Mary, is from the first moment of
conception a child of wrath, hated by the blessed Trinity,
belonging to Satan, and doomed to hell!" Indeed, the doctrine, in
its whole naked and frightful extent, is necessarily, in strict
logic, an integral part of the great system of the popular
Christianity, that is, Christianity as falsely interpreted,
paganized, and scholasticized. For if by the sin of Adam the
entire race were totally depraved and condemned to a hopeless
hell, and only those can be saved who personally appropriate by a
realizing faith the benefits of the subsequent artifice carried
out in the atoning blood of the incarnate God, certainly the
extremist advocate of the doctrine concerning hell has not
exceeded the truth, and cannot exceed it. All the necessities of
logic rebuke the tame hearted theologians, and great Augustine's,
great Calvin's, ghost walks unapproached among them, crying out
that they are slow and inefficient in describing the enormous
sweep of the inherited penalty! Many persons who have not taken
pains to examine the subject suppose that the horrifying
descriptions given by Christian authors of the state and
sufferings of the lost were not intended to be literally received,
but were meant as figures of speech, highly wrought metaphors
calculated to alarm and impress with physical emblems corresponding
only to moral and spiritual realities. The progress of
thought and refinement has made it natural that recourse should
often be had to such an explanation; but unquestionably it is a
mistake. The annals of theology, both dogmatic and homiletic, from
the time of the earliest Fathers till now, abound in detailed
accounts of the future punishment of the wicked, whereof the
context, the train of thought, and all the intrinsic characteristics
of style and coherence, do not leave a shadow of doubt that they
were written as faithful, though inadequate, accounts of facts.
The Church, the immense bulk of Christendom, has in theory always
regarded hell and its dire concomitants as material facts,
and not as merely spiritual experiences.

Tertullian says, "The damned burn eternally without consuming, as
the volcanoes, which are vents from the stored subterranean fire
of hell, burn forever without wasting." 5 Cyprian declares that
"the wretched bodies of the condemned shall simmer and blaze in
those living fires." Augustine argues at great length and with
ingenious varieties of reasoning to show how the material bodies
of the damned may withstand annihilation in everlasting fire.6
Similar assertions, which cannot be figuratively explained, are
made by Irenaus, Jerome, Athanasius, Thomas Aquinas, Bonaventura,
Gerson, Bernard, and indeed by almost all the Christian writers.
Origen, who was a Platonist, and a heretic on many points, was
severely condemned for saying that the fire of hell was inward and
of the conscience, rather than outward and of the body. For the
strict materiality of the fire of hell we might adduce volumes of
authorities from nearly every province of the Church. Dr. Barrow
asserts that "our bodies will be afflicted continually by a
sulphurous flame, piercing the inmost sinews." John Whitaker
thinks "the bodies of the damned will be all salted with fire, so
tempered and prepared as to burn the more fiercely and yet never
consume." Jeremy Taylor teaches that "this temporal fire is but a
painted fire in respect of that penetrating and real fire in
hell." Jonathan Edwards soberly and believingly writes thus: "The
world will probably be converted into a great lake or liquid globe
of fire, a vast ocean of fire, in which the wicked shall be
overwhelmed, which will always be in tempest, in which they shall
be tost to and fro, having no rest day or night, vast waves or
billows of fire continually rolling over their heads, of which
they shall forever be full of a quick sense within and without:
their heads, their eyes, their tongues, their hands, their feet,
their loins, and their vitals shall forever be full of a glowing,
melting fire, fierce enough to melt the very rocks and elements;
and also they shall eternally be full of the most quick and lively
sense

5 Apol. cap. 47-48.

6 De Civ. Dei, lib. xxi. cap. 2 4.


to feel the torments; not for one minute, nor for one day, nor for
one age, nor for two ages, nor for a hundred ages, nor for ten
thousands of millions of ages one after another, but for ever and
ever, without any end at all, and never, never be delivered." 7
Calvin says, "Iterum quaro, unde factum est, ut tot gentes una cum
liberis eorum infantibus aterna morti involveret lapsus Ada absque
remedio, nisi quia Deo ita visum est? Decretum horribile fateor."
8 Outraged humanity before the contemplation cries, "O God, horror
hath overwhelmed me, for thou art represented as an omnipotent
Fiend." It is not the Father of Christ, but his Antagonist, whose
face glares down over such a scene as that! The above diabolical
passage at the recital of which from the pulpit, Edwards's
biographers tell us, "whole congregations shuddered and
simultaneously rose to their feet, smiting their breasts, weeping
and groaning" is not the arbitrary exaggeration of an individual,
but a fair representation of the actual tenets and vividly held
faith of the Puritans. It is also, in all its uncompromising
literality, a direct and inevitable part of the system of doctrine
which, with insignificant exceptions, professedly prevails
throughout Christendom at this hour. We know most persons will
hesitate at this statement; but let them look at the logic of the
case in the light of its history, and they must admit the
correctness of the assertion. Weigh the following propositions,
the accuracy of which no one, we suppose, will question, and it
will appear at once that there is no possibility of avoiding the
conclusion.

First, it is the established doctrine of Christendom that no one
can be saved without a supernatural regeneration, or sincere faith
in the vicarious atonement, or valid reception of sacramental
grace at the hands of a priest, conditions which it is not
possible that one in a hundred thousand of the whole human race
has fulfilled. Secondly, it is the established doctrine of
Christendom that there will be a general day of judgment, when all
men will be raised in the same bodies which they originally
occupied on earth, when Christ and his angels will visibly descend
from heaven, separate the elect from the reprobate, summon the
sheep to the blissful pastures on the right hand, but "Proclaim
The flocks of goats to folds of flame."

The world is to be burnt up, and the damned, restored to their
bodies, are to be driven into the everlasting fire prepared for
them. The resurrection of the body, still held in all Christendom,
taken in connection with the rest of the associated scheme,
necessitates the belief in the materiality of the torments of
hell. That eminent living divine, Dr. Gardiner Spring, says, "The
souls of all who have died in their sins are in hell; and there
their bodies too will be after the resurrection." 9 Mr. Spurgeon
also, in his graphic and fearful sermon on the "Resurrection of
the Dead," uses the following language: "When thou diest, thy soul
will be tormented alone; that will be a hell for it: but at the
day of judgment thy body will join thy soul, and then thou wilt
have twin hells, thy soul sweating drops of blood, and thy body
suffused with agony. In fire exactly like that which we have on
earth thy body will lie,

7 Edwards's Works, vol. viii. p. 166.

8 Instit., lib. iii. cap. xxiii. sect. 7.

9 The Glory of Christ, vol. ii. p. 258.


asbestos like, forever unconsumed, all thy veins roads for the
feet of pain to travel on, every nerve a string on which the devil
shall forever play his diabolical tune of Hell's Unutterable
Lament!" And, if this doctrine be true, no ingenuity, however
fertile in expedients and however fiendish in cruelty, can
possibly devise emblems and paint pictures half terrific enough to
present in imagination and equal in moral impression what the
reality will be to the sufferers. It is easy to speak or hear the
word "hell;" but to analyze its significance and realize it in a
sensitive fancy is difficult; and whenever it is done the fruit is
madness, as the bedlams of the world are shrieking in testimony at
this instant. The Revivalist preachers, so far from exaggerating
the frightful contents latent in the prevalent dogma concerning
hell, have never been able and no man is able to do any thing like
justice to its legitimate deductions. Edwards is right in
declaring, "After we have said our utmost and thought our utmost,
all that we have said and thought is but a faint shadow of the
reality." Think of yourselves, seized, just as you are now, and
flung into the roaring, glowing furnace of eternity; think of such
torture for an instant, multiply it by infinity, and then say if
any words can convey the proper force of impression. It is true
these intolerable details are merely latent and unappreciated by
the multitude of believers; and when one, roused to fanaticism by
earnest contemplation of his creed, dares to proclaim its logical
consequences and to exhort men accordingly, they shrink, and
charge him with excess. But they should beware ere they repudiate
the literal horrors of the historic orthodox doctrine for any
figurative and moral views accommodated to the advanced reason and
refinement of the times, beware how such an abandonment of a part
of their system affects the rest.

Give up the material fire, and you lose the bodily resurrection.
Renounce the bodily resurrection, and away goes the visible coming
of Christ to a general judgment. Abandon the general judgment, and
the climacteric completion of the Church scheme of redemption is
wanting. Mar the wholeness of the redemption plan, and farewell to
the incarnation and vicarious atonement. Neglect the vicarious
atonement, and down crumbles the hollow and broken shell of the
popular theology helplessly into its grave. The old literal
doctrine of a material hell, however awful its idea, as it has
been set forth in flaming views and threats by all the accredited
representatives of the Church, must be uncompromisingly clung to,
else the whole popular system of theology will be mutilated,
shattered, and lost from sight. The theological leaders understand
this perfectly well, and for the most part they act accordingly.
We have now under our hand numerous extracts, from writings
published within the last five years by highly influential
dignitaries in the different denominations, which for frightfulness
of outline and coloring, and for unshrinking assertions of
literality, will compare with those already quoted.

Especially read the following description of this kind from John
Henry Newman: "Oh, terrible moment for the soul, when it suddenly
finds itself at the judgment seat of Christ, when the Judge speaks
and consigns it to the jailers till it shall pay the endless debt
which lies against it! 'Impossible! I a lost soul? I separated
from hope and from peace forever? It is not I of whom the Judge so
spake! There is a mistake somewhere; Christ, Savior, hold thy
hand: one minute to explain it! My name is Demas: I am but Demas,
not Judas, or Nicholas, or Alexander, or Philetus, or Diotrephes.
What! eternal pain for me? Impossible! it shall not be!' And the
poor soul struggles and wrestles in the grasp of the mighty demon
which has hold of it, and whose every touch is torment. 'Oh,
atrocious!' it shrieks, in agony, and in anger too, as if the
very keenness of the infliction were a proof of its injustice.
'A second! and a third! I can bear no more! Stop, horrible fiend!
give over: I am a man, and not such as thou! I am not food for
thee, or sport for thee! I have been taught religion; I have had
a conscience; I have a cultivated mind; I am well versed in science
and art; I am a philosopher, or a poet, or a shrewd observer of men,
or a hero, or a statesman, or an orator, or a man of wit and humor.
Nay, I have received the grace of the Redeemer; I have attended the
sacraments for years; I have been a Catholic from a child; I died
in communion with the Church: nothing, nothing which I have ever
been, which I have ever seen, bears any resemblance to thee, and
to the flame and stench which exhale from thee: so I defy thee,
and abjure thee, O enemy of man!'

"Alas! poor soul! and, whilst it thus fights with that destiny
which it has brought upon itself and those companions whom it has
chosen, the man's name perhaps is solemnly chanted forth, and his
memory decently cherished, among his friends on earth. Men talk of
him from time to time; they appeal to his authority; they quote
his words; perhaps they even raise a monument to his name, or
write his history. 'So comprehensive a mind! such a power of
throwing light on a perplexed subject and bringing conflicting
ideas or facts into harmony!' 'Such a speech it was that he made
on such and such an occasion: I happened to be present, and never
shall forget it;' or, 'A great personage, whom some of us knew;'
or, 'It was a rule with a very worthy and excellent friend of
mine, now no more;' or, 'Never was his equal in society, so just
in his remarks, so lively, so versatile, so unobtrusive;' or, 'So
great a benefactor to his country and to his kind;' or, 'His
philosophy so profound.' 'Oh, vanity! vanity of vanities! all is
vanity! What profiteth it? What profiteth it? His soul is in hell,
O ye children of men! While thus ye speak, his soul is in the
beginning of those torments in which his body will soon have part,
and which will never die!" 10

Some theologians do not hesitate, even now, to say that "in hell
the bodies of the damned shall be nealed, as we speak of glass, so
as to endure the fire without being annihilated thereby." "Made of
the nature of salamanders," they shall be "immortal kept to feel
immortal fire." Well may we take up the words of the Psalmist and
cry out of the bottomless depths of disgust and anguish, "I am
overwhelmed with horror!"

Holding this abhorrent mass of representations, so grossly carnal
and fearful, up in the free light of to day, it cannot stand the
test of honest and resolute inquiry. It exists only by timid,
unthinking sufferance. It is kept alive, among the superstitious
vestiges of the outworn and out grown past, only by the power of
tradition, authority, and custom. In refutation of it we shall not
present here a prolonged detail of learned researches and logical
processes; for that would be useless to those who are enslaved to
the foregone conclusions of a creed and possessed by invulnerable
prejudices, while those who are thoughtful and candid can make

10 Sermon on "Neglect of Divine Calls and warnings."


such investigations themselves. We shall merely state, in a few
clear and brief propositions, the results in which we suppose all
free and enlightened minds who have adequately studied the subject
now agree, leaving the reader to weigh these propositions for
himself, with such further examination as inclination and
opportunity may cause him to bestow upon the matter.

We reject the common belief of Christians in a hell which is a
local prison of fire where the wicked are to be tortured by
material instruments, on the following grounds, appealing to God
for the reverential sincerity of our convictions, and appealing to
reason for their truth. First, the supposition that hell is an
enormous region in the hollow of the earth is a remnant of ancient
ignorance, a fancy of poets who magnified the grave into Hades, a
thought of geographers who supposed the earth to be flat and
surrounded by a brazen expanse bright above and black beneath.
Secondly, the soul, on leaving the body, is a spiritual substance,
if it be any substance at all, eluding our senses and all the
instruments of science. Therefore, in the nature of things, it
cannot be chained in a dungeon, nor be cognizant of suffering from
material fire or other physical infliction, but its woes must be
moral and inward; and the figment that its former fleshly body is
to be restored to it is utterly incredible, being an absurdity in
science, and not affirmed, as we believe, in Scripture. Thirdly,
the imagery of a subterranean hell of fire, brimstone, and undying
worms, as used in the Scriptures of the New Testament, is the same
as that drawn from heathen sources with modifications and employed
by the Pharisees before the time of Christ and his disciples; and
we must therefore, since neither Persians nor Pharisees were
inspired, either suppose that this imagery was adopted by the
apostles figuratively to convey moral truths, or else that they
were left, in common with their countrymen, at least partially
under the dominion of the errors of their time. Thus in every
alternative we deny that the interior of the earth is, or ever
will be, an abode of souls, full of fire, a hell in which the
damned are to be confined and physically tormented.

The elements of the popular doctrine of future punishment which we
thus reject are the falsities contributed by superstition and the
priestly spirit. The truths remaining in the doctrine, furnished
by conscience, reason, and Scripture, we will next exhibit, in
order not to dismiss this head, on the nature of future
punishment, with negations. What is the real character of the
retributions in the future state? We do not think they are
necessarily connected with any peculiar locality or essentially
dependent on any external circumstances. As Milton says, when
speaking of the best theologians, "To banish forever into a local
hell, whether in the air, or in the centre, or in that uttermost
and bottomless gulf of chaos deeper from holy bliss than the
world's diameter multiplied, they thought not a punishment so
proper and proportionate for God to inflict as to punish sin with
sin."

God does not arbitrarily stretch forth his arm, like an enraged
and vindictive man, and take direct vengeance on offenders; but by
his immutable laws, permeating all beings and governing all
worlds, evil is, and brings, its own punishment. The intrinsic
substances and forces of character and their organized
correlations with the realities of eternity, the ruling
principles, habits, and love of the soul, as they stand affected
towards the world to which they go, these are the conditions on
which experience depends, herein is the hiding of retribution.
"Each one," as Origen says, "kindles the flame of his own
appropriate fire." Superior spirits must look on a corrupted human
soul with a sorrow similar, though infinitely profounder, to that
with which the lapidary contemplates a splendid pearl with a dark
flaw in its centre. The Koran says, "Men sleep while they live,
and when they die they wake." The sudden infliction of pain in the
future state comes from the sudden unveiling of secrets,
quickening of the moral consciousness, and exposure of the naked
soul's fitnesses to the spiritual correspondences of its deserts.
It is said,  "Death does Away disguise: souls see each other
clear, At one glance, as two drops of rain in air Might look into
each other had they life."

The quality of the soul's character decides the elements of the
soul's life; and, as this becomes known on crossing the death
drawn line of futurity, conscious retribution then arises in the
guilty. This is a retribution which is reasonable, moral,
unavoidable, before which we may well pause and tremble. The great
moral of it is that we should not so much dread being thrust into
an eternal hell as we should fear carrying a hell with us when we
go into eternity. It is not so bad to be in hell as to be forced
truly to say, "Which way I fly is hell; myself am hell."

If these general ideas are correct, it follows even as all common
sense and reflection affirm that every real preparation for death
and for what is to succeed must be an ingrained characteristic,
and cannot consist in a mere opinion, mood, or act. Here we strike
at one of the shallowest errors, one of the most extensive and
rooted superstitions, of the world. Throughout the immense
kingdoms of the East, where the Brahmanic and Buddhist religions
hold sway over six hundred millions of men, the notion of
yadasanna that is, the merit instantaneously obtained when at the
point of death fully prevails. They suppose that in that moment,
regardless of their former lives and of their present characters,
by bringing the mind and the heart into certain momentary states
of thought and feeling, and meditating on certain objects or
repeating certain sacred words, they can suddenly obtain exemption
from punishment in their next life.11 The notion likewise obtains
almost universally among Christians, incredible as it may seem.
With the Romanists, who are three fourths of the Christian world,
it is a most prominent doctrine, everywhere vehemently proclaimed
and acted on: that is the meaning of the sacrament of extreme
unction, whereby, on submission to the Church and confession to a
priest, the venal sins of the dying man are forgiven, purgatory
avoided or lessened, and heaven made sure. The ghost of the King
of Denmark complains most of the unwarned suddenness of his
murder, not of the murder itself, but of its suddenness, which
left him no opportunity to save his soul: "Sleeping, was I by a
brother's hand Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin,

11 Hardy, Manual of Buddhism, p. 489.


Unhousel'd, disappointed, unanel'd; No reckoning made, but sent to
my account With all my imperfections on my head."

Hamlet, urged by supernatural solicitings to vengeance, finds his
murderous uncle on his knees at prayer. Stealing behind him with
drawn sword, he is about to strike the fatal blow, when the
thought occurs to him that the guilty man, if killed when at his
devotions, would surely go to heaven; and so he refrains until a
different opportunity. For to send to heaven the villain who had
slain his father,

"That would be hire and salary, not revenge. He took my father
grossly full of bread, With all his crimes broad blown, as flush
as May; And how his audit stands who knows save Heaven? But, in
our circumstance and course of thought, 'Tie heavy with him. And
am I then revenged To take him in the purging of his soul, When he
is fit and season'd for his passage? No; but when he is drunk,
asleep, enraged, Or in the incestuous pleasures of his bed, At
gaming, swearing, or about some act That has no relish of
salvation in't: Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
And that his soul may be as damn'd and black As hell, whereto it
goes."

This, though poetry, is a fair representation of the mediaval
faith held by all Christendom in sober prose. The same train of
thought latently underlies the feelings of most Protestants too,
though it is true any one would now shrink from expressing it with
such frankness and horrible gusto. But what else means the minute
morbid anatomy of death beds, the prurient curiosity to know how
the dying one bore himself in the solemn passage? How commonly, if
one dies without physical anguish, and with the artificial
exultations of a fanatic, rejoiceful auguries are drawn! if he
dies in physical suffering, and with apparent regret, a gloomy
verdict is rendered! It is superstition, absurdity, and injustice,
all. Not the accidental physical conditions, not the transient
emotions, with which one passes from the earth, can decide his
fate, but the real good or evil of his soul, the genuine fitness
or unfitness of his soul, his soul's inherent merits of bliss or
bale. There is no time nor power in the instant of death, by any
magical legerdemain, to turn away the impending retributions of
wickedness and guilt. What is right, within the conditions of
Infinite wisdom and goodness, will be done in spite of all
traditional juggles and spasmodic spiritual attitudinizations.
What can it avail that a most vile and hardened wretch, when
dying, convulsed with fright and possessed with superstition,
compels, or strives to compel, a certain sentiment into his soul,
conjures, or tries to conjure, his mind into the relation of
belief towards a certain ancient and abstract dogma?

"Yet I've seen men who meant not ill, Compelling doctrine out of
death, With hell and heaven acutely poised Upon the turning of a
breath."

Cruelly racking the soul with useless probes of theological
questions and statements, they stand by the dying to catch the
words of his last breath, and, in perfect consistence with their
faith, they pronounce sentence accordingly. If, as the pallid lips
faintly close, they hear the magic words, "I put my trust in the
atoning blood of Christ," up goes the soul to heaven. If they hear
the less stereotyped words, "I have tried to do as well as I
could: I hope God will be merciful towards me and receive me,"
down goes the soul to hell. Strange and cruel superstition, that
imagines God to act towards men only according to the evanescent
temper and technical phrase with which they leave the world! The
most popular English preacher of the present day, the Rev. Mr.
Spurgeon, after referring to the fable that those before whom
Perseus held the head of Medusa were turned into stone in the very
act and posture of the moment when they saw it, says, "Death is
such a power. What I am when death is held before me, that I must
be forever. When my spirit goes, if God finds me hymning his
praise, I shall hymn it in heaven: doth he find me breathing out
oaths, I shall follow up those oaths in hell. As I die, so shall I
live eternally!" 12

No: the true preparation for death and the invisible realm of
souls is not the eager adoption of an opinion, the hurried
assumption of a mood, or the frightened performance of an outward
act: it is the patient culture of the mind with truth, the pious
purification of the heart with disinterested love, the consecrated
training of the life in holiness, the growth of the soul in habits
of righteousness, faith, and charity, the organization of divine
principles into character. Every real preparation of the soul for
death must be a characteristic rightly related to the immortal
realities to which death is the introduction of the soul. An evil
soul is not thrust into a physical and fiery hell, fenced in and
roofed over from the universal common; but it is revealed to
itself, and consciously enters on retributive relations. In the
spiritual world, whither all go at death, we suppose that like
perceives like, and thus are they saved or damned, having, by the
natural attraction and elective seeing of their virtues or vices,
the beatific vision of God, or the horrid vision of iniquity and
terror.

It cannot be supposed that God is a bounded shape so vast as to
fill the entire circuits of the creation. Spirit transcends the
categories of body, and it is absurd to apply the language of
finite things to the illimitable One, except symbolically. When we
die, we do not sink or soar to the realm of spirits, but are in
it, at once, everywhere; and the resulting experience will depend
on the prevailing elements of our moral being. If we are bad, our
badness is our banishment from God; if we are good, our goodness
is our union with God. In every world the true nature and law of
retribution lie in the recoil of conduct on character, and the
assimilated results ensuing. Take a soul that is saturated with
the rottenness of depravity into the core of heaven, and it is in
the heart of hell still. Take a soul that is compacted of divine

12 Sermons, 3d Series. Sermon XIV., Thoughts on the Last Battle.


realities to the very bottom of hell, and heaven is with it there.

We are treading on eternity, and infinitude is all around us. Now,
as well as hereafter, to us, the universe is action, the soul is
reaction, experience is the resultant. Death but unveils the
facts. Pass that great crisis, in the passage becoming conscious
of universal realities and of individual relations to them, and
the Father will say to the discordant soul, "Alienated one,
incapable of my embrace, change and come to me;" to the harmonious
soul, "Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine."

Having thus considered the question as to the nature of future
punishments, it now remains to discuss the question concerning
their duration. The fact of a just and varied punishment for souls
we firmly believe in. The particulars of it in the future, or the
degrees of its continuance, we think, are concealed from the
present knowledge of man. These details we do not profess to be
able to settle much about. We have but three general convictions
on the subject. First, that these punishments will be experienced
in accordance with those righteous and inmost laws which
indestructibly express the mind of God and rule the universe, and
will not be vindictively inflicted through arbitrary external
penalties. Secondly, that they will be accurately tempered to the
just deserts and qualifications of the individual sufferers. And
thirdly, that they will be alleviated, remedial, and limited, not
unmitigated, hopeless, and endless.

Upon the first of these thoughts perhaps enough has already been
said, and the second and third may be discussed together. Our
business, therefore, in the remainder of this dissertation, is to
disprove, if truth in the hands of reason and conscience will
enable us to disprove, the popular dogma which asserts that the
state of the condemned departed is a state of complete damnation
absolutely eternal. Against that form of representing future
punishment which makes it unlimited by conceiving the destiny of
the soul to be an eternal progress, in which their initiative
steps of good or evil in this life place different souls under
advantages or disadvantages never relatively to be lost, we have
nothing to object. It is reasonable, in unison with natural law,
and not frightful.13 But we are to deal, if we fairly can, a
refutation against the doctrine of an intense endless misery for
the wicked, as that doctrine is prevailingly taught and received.

The advocates of eternal damnation primarily plant themselves upon
the Christian Scriptures, and say that there the voice of an
infallible inspiration from heaven asserts it. First of all, let
us examine this ground, and see if they do not stand there only
upon erroneous premises sustained by prejudices. In the beginning,
then, we submit to candid minds that, if the literal eternity of
future torment be proclaimed in the New Testament, it is not a
part of the revelation contained in that volume; it is not a truth
revealed by inspiration; and that we maintain for this reason. The
same representations of the everlasting duration of future
punishment in hell, the same expressions for an unlimited
duration, which occur in the New Testament, were previously
employed by the Hindus, Greeks, and Pharisees, who were not
inspired, but must have drawn the doctrine from fallible sources.
Now, to say the least, it is as reasonable to suppose that these
expressions, when found in the New Testament, were

13 Lessing, Ueber Leibnitz von den Ewigen Strafen.


employed by the Saviour and the evangelists in conformity with the
prevailing thought and customary phraseology of their time, as to
conclude that they were derived from an unerring inspiration. The
former is a natural and reasonable inference; the latter is a
gratuitous hypothesis for which we have never heard of any
evidence. If its advocates will honestly attempt really to prove
it, we are convinced they will be forced to renounce it. The only
way they continue to hold it is by taking it for granted. If,
therefore, the strict eternity of future woe be declared in the
New Testament, we regard it not as a part of the inspired
utterance of Jesus, but as an error which crept in among others
from the surrounding notions of a benighted pagan age.

But, in the next place, we do not admit by any means that the
literal eternity of future damnation is taught in the Scriptures.
On the contrary, we deny such an assertion, for several reasons.
First, we argue from the usage of language before the New
Testament was written. The Egyptians, Hindus, Greeks, often make
most emphatic use of phrases declaring the eternal sufferings of
the wicked in hell; but they must have meant by "eternal" only a
very long time, because a fundamental portion of the great system
of thought on which their religions rested was the idea of
recurring epochs, sundered by immense periods statedly arriving,
when all things were restored, the hells and heavens vanished
away, and God was all in all. If the representations of the
eternal punishment of the wicked, made before the New Testament
was written, were not significant, with metaphysical severity, of
an eternity of duration, but only, with popular looseness, of an
extremely long period, the same may be true of the similar
expressions found in that record.

Secondly, we argue from the usage of language in and after the New
Testament age. The critics have collected, as any one desirous may
easily find, and as every theological scholar well knows, scores
of instances from the writings of authors contemporary with Christ
and his apostles, and succeeding them, where the Greek word for
"eternal" is used popularly, not strictly, in a rhetorical, not in
a philosophical, sense, not denoting a duration literally endless,
but one very prolonged. In all Greek literature the word is
undoubtedly used in a careless and qualified sense at least a
hundred times where it is used once with its close etymological
force. And the same is true of the corresponding Hebrew term. The
writer of the "Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs," at the close
of every chapter, describing the respective patriarch's death,
says, "he slept the eternal sleep," though by "eternal" he can
only mean a duration reaching to the time of the resurrection, as
plainly appears from the context. Iamblichus speaks of "an eternal
eternity of eternities."14 Origen, and Gregory of Nyssa, and
others, the fact of whose belief in final universal salvation no
one pretends to deny, do not hesitate with earnestness and
frequency to affirm the "eternal" punishment of the wicked in
hell. Now, if the contemporaries of the evangelists, and their
successors, often used the word "eternal" popularly, in a
figurative, limited sense, then it may be so employed when it
occurs in the New Testament in connection with the future pains of
the bad.

Thirdly, we argue from the phraseology and other peculiarities of
the representation of the future woe of the condemned, given in
the New Testament itself, that its authors

14 De Mysteriis Egyptiorum, cap. viii. sect. 10.


did not consciously intend to proclaim the rigid endlessness of
that woe.15 "These shall go away into everlasting punishment."
Since the word "everlasting" was often used simply to denote a
long period, what right has any one to declare that here it must
mean an absolutely unending duration? How does any one know that
the mind of Jesus dialectically grasped the metaphysical notion of
eternity and deliberately intended to express it? Certainly the
intrinsic probabilities are all the other way. Such a conclusion
is hardly compatible with the highly tropical style of speech
employed throughout the discourse. Besides, had he wished to
convey the overwhelming idea that the doom of the guilty would be
strictly irremediable, their anguish literally infinite, would he
not have taken pains to say so in definite, guarded, explained,
unmistakable terms? He might easily, by a precise prosaic
utterance, by explanatory circumlocutions, have placed that
thought beyond possibility of mistake.

Fourthly, we have an intense conviction not only that the leaving
of such a doctrine by the Savior in impenetrable obscurity and
uncertainty is irreconcilable with the supposition of his
deliberately holding it in his belief, but also that a belief in
the doctrine itself is utterly irreconcilable with the very
essentials of his teachings and spirit, his inmost convictions and
life. He taught the infinite and unchangeable goodness of God:
confront the doctrine of endless misery with the parable of the
prodigal son. He taught the doctrine of unconquerable forgiveness,
without apparent qualification: bring together the doctrine of
never relenting punishment and his petition on the cross, "Father,
forgive them." He taught that at the great judgment heaven or hell
would be allotted to men according to their lives; and the notion
of endless torment does not rest on the demerit of sinful deeds,
which is the standard of judgment that he holds up, but on
conceptions concerning a totally depraved nature, a God inflamed
with wrath, a vicarious atonement rejected, or some other ethnic
tradition or ritual consideration equally foreign to his mind and
hostile to his heart.

Fifthly, if we reason on the popular belief that the letter of
Scripture teaches only unerring truth, we have the strongest
argument of all against the eternal hopelessness of future
punishment. The doctrine of Christ's descent to hell underlies the
New Testament. We are told that after his death "he went and
preached to the spirits in prison." And again we read that "the
gospel was preached also to them that are dead." This New
Testament idea was unquestionably a vital and important feature in
the apostolic and in the early Christian belief. It necessarily
implies that there is probation, and that there may be salvation,
after death. It is fatal to the horrid dogma which commands all
who enter hell to abandon every gleam of hope, utterly and
forever. The symbolic force of the doctrine of Christ's descent
and preaching in hell is this, as Guder says in his "Appearance of
Christ among the Dead,"  that the deepest and most horrible depth
of damnation is not too deep and horrible for the pitying love
which wishes to save the lost: even into the veriest depth of hell
reaches down the love of God, and his beatific call sounds to the
most distant distances. There is no outermost darkness to which
his heavenly and all conquering light cannot shine. The book which
teaches that Christ went even into hell itself, to seek and to
save that which was lost,

15 Corrodi, Ueber die Ewigkeit der Hollenetrafen. In den Beitragen
zur Beforderung des Vernunft. Denk. n. s. w. heft vii. ss. 41-72.


does not teach that from the instant of death the fate of the
wicked is irredeemably fixed.

Upon the whole, then, we reach the clear conclusion that the
Christian Scriptures do not really declare the hopeless eternity
of future punishment.16 They speak popularly, not scientifically,
speak in metaphors which cannot be analyzed and reduced to
metaphysical precision. The subject is left with fearful warnings
in an impressive obscurity. There we must either leave it, in awe
and faith, undecided; or, if not content to do that, we must
examine and decide it on other grounds than those of traditional
authority, and with other instruments than those of textual
interpretation.

Let us next sift and weigh the arguments from reason by which the
dogma of the eternity of future misery is respectively defended
and assailed. The advocates of it have sought to support it by
four positions, which are such entire assumptions that only a word
will be requisite to expose each of them to logical rejection.
First, it is said that sin is infinite and deserves an infinite
penalty because it is an outrage against an infinite being.17 A
more absurd perversion of logic than this, a more glaring
violation of common sense, was never perpetrated. It directly
reverses the facts and subverts the legitimate inference. Is the
sin measured by the dignity of the lawgiver, or by the
responsibility of the law breaker? Does justice heed the wrath of
the offended, or the guilt of the offender? As well say that the
eye of man is infinite because it looks out into infinite space,
as affirm that his sin is infinite because committed against an
infinite God. That man is finite, and all his acts finite, and
consequently not in justice to be punished infinitely, is a plain
statement of fact which compels assent. All else is empty
quibbling, scholastic jugglery. The ridiculousness of the argument
is amusingly apparent as presented thus in an old Miracle Play,
wherein Justice is made to tell Mercy "That man, havinge offended
God who is endlesse, His endlesse punchement therefore may nevyr
seese."

The second device brought forward to sustain the doctrine in
question is more ingenious, but equally arbitrary. It is based on
the foreknowledge of God. He foresaw that the wicked, if allowed
to live on earth immortally in freedom, would go on forever in a
course of constant sin. They were therefore constructively guilty
of all the sin which they would have committed; but he saved the
world the ravages of their actual crimes by hurling them into hell
beneath the endless penalty of their latent infinite guilt. In
reply to those who argue thus, it is obvious to ask, whence did
they learn all this? There is no such scheme drawn up or hinted in
Scripture; and surely it is not within the possible discoveries of
reason. Plainly, it is not a known premise legitimating a result,
not a sound argument proving a conclusion: it is merely a conceit,
devised to explain and fortify a theory already embraced from
other considerations. It is an imaginative hypothesis without
confirmation.

16 Bretschneider, in his Systematische Entwickelung aller in der
Dogmatik vorkommenden Begriffe, gives the literature of this
subject in a list of thirty six distinct works. Sect. 139, Ewig
keit der Hollenstrafen.

17 Thomas Aquinas, Summa, pars iii. suppl. qu. 99, art. 1.


Thirdly, it has been said that future punishment will be endless
because sin will be so. The evil soul, growing ever more evil,
getting its habits of vice and passions of iniquity more deeply
infixed, and surrounded in the infernal realm with all the
incentives to wickedness, will become confirmed in depravity
beyond all power of cure, and, sinning forever, be necessarily
damned and tortured forever. The same objection holds to this
argument as to the former. Its premises are daring assumptions
beyond the province of our knowledge. They are assumptions, too,
contrary to analogy, probability, the highest laws of humanity,
and the goodness of God. Without freedom of will there cannot be
sin; and those who retain moral freedom may reform, cease to do
evil and learn to do good. There are invitations and opportunities
to change from evil to good here: why not hereafter? The will is
free now: what shall suddenly paralyze or annihilate that freedom
when the soul leaves the body? Why may not such amazing
revelations be made, such regenerating motives be brought to bear,
in the spiritual world, as will soften the hardest, convince the
stubbornest, and, sooner or later, transform and redeem the worst?
It is true the law of sinful habit is dark and fearful; but it is
frequently neutralized. The argument as the support of a positive
dogma is void because itself only hypothetical.

Some have tried to prove eternal condemnation by an assumed
necessity of moral gravitation. There is a great deal of loose and
hasty talk afloat about the law of affinities distributing souls
hereafter in fitted companies. Similar characters will
spontaneously come together. The same qualities and grades of
sympathy will coalesce, the unlike will fly apart. And so all
future existence will be arranged in circles of dead equality on
stagnant levels of everlasting hopelessness of change. The law of
spiritual attraction is no such force as that, produces no such
results. It is broken up by contrasts, changes, multiplicity of
other interacting forces. We are not only drawn by affinity to
those like ourselves, but often still more powerfully, with
rebuking and redeeming effect, to those above us that we may
become like them, to those beneath us that we may pity and help
them. The law of affinity is not in moral beings a simple force
necessitating an endless uniformity of state, but a complex of
forces, sometimes mingling the unlike by stimulants of wedded
similarity and contrast to bless and advance all, now punishing,
now rewarding, but ever finally intended to redeem. Reasoning by
sound analogy, the heavens and hells of the future state are not
monotonous circles each filled with mutually reflecting
personalities, but one fenceless spiritual world of distinctive,
ever varying degrees, sympathetic and contrasted life, circulating
freshness, variety of attractions and repulsions, divine
advancement.

Finally, it is maintained by many that endless misery is the fate
of the reprobate because such is the sovereign pleasure of God.
This is no argument, but a desperate assertion. It virtually
confesses that the doctrine cannot be defended by reason, but is
to be thrown into the province of wilful faith. A host of gloomy
theologians have taken this ground as the forlorn hope of their
belief. The damned are eternally lost because that is the
arbitrary decree of God. Those who thus abandon reason for
dogmatic authority and trample on logic with mere reiterated
assertion can only be met with the flat denial, such is not the
arbitrary pleasure of God. Then, as far as argument is concerned,
the controversy ends where it began.

These four hypotheses include all the attempted justifications of
the doctrine of eternal misery that we have ever seen offered from
the stand point of independent thought. We submit that, considered
as proofs, they are utterly sophistical.

There are three great arguments in refutation of the endlessness
of future punishment, as that doctrine is commonly held. The first
argument is ethical, drawn from the laws of right; the second is
theological, drawn from the attributes of God; the third is
experimental, drawn from the principles of human nature. We shall
subdivide these and consider them successively.

In the first place, we maintain that the popular doctrine of
eternal punishment is unjust, because it overlooks the differences
in the sins of men, launching on all whom it embraces one infinite
penalty of undiscriminating damnation. The consistent advocates of
the doctrine, the boldest creeds, unflinchingly avow this, and
defend it by the plea that every sin, however trivial, is equally
an offence against the law of the infinite God with the most
terrible crime, and equally merits an infinite punishment. Thus,
by a metaphysical quibble, the very basis of morals is overturned,
and the child guilty of an equivocation through fear is put on a
level with the pirate guilty of robbery and murder through cold
blooded avarice and hate. In a hell where all are plunged in
physical fire for eternity there are no degrees of retribution,
though the degrees of evil and demerit are as numerous and various
as the individuals. The Scriptures say, "Every man shall receive
according to the deeds done in the body:" some "shall be beaten
with many stripes," others "with few stripes."

The first principle of justice exact discrimination of judgment
according to deeds and character is monstrously violated and all
differences blotted out by the common dogma of hell. A better
thought is shown in the old Persian legend which tells that God
once permitted Zoroaster to accompany him on a visit to hell. The
prophet saw many in grievous torments. Among the rest, he saw one
who was deprived of his right foot. Asking the meaning of this,
God replied, "Yonder sufferer was a king who in his whole life did
but one kind action. Passing once near a dromedary which, tied up
in a state of starvation, was vainly striving to reach some
provender placed just beyond its utmost effort, the king with his
right foot compassionately kicked the fodder within the poor
beast's reach. That foot I placed in heaven: the rest of him is
here." 18

Again: there is the grossest injustice in the first assumption or
fundamental ground on which the theory we are opposing rests. That
theory does not teach that men are actually damned eternally on
account of their own personal sins, but on account of original
sin: the eternal tortures of hell are the transmitted penalty
hurled on all the descendants of Adam, save those who in some way
avoid it, in consequence of his primal transgression. Language
cannot characterize with too much severity, as it seems to us, the
injustice, the immorality, involved in this scheme. The belief in
a sin, called "original," entailed by one act of one person upon a
whole immortal race of countless millions, dooming vast majorities
of them helplessly to a hopeless torture prison, can rest only on
a sleep of reason and a delirium of

18 Wilson's ed. of Mill's Hist. of British India, vol. i. p. 429,
note.


conscience. Such a "sin" is no sin at all; and any penalty
inflicted on it would not be the necessary severity of a holy God,
but a species of gratuitous vengeance. For sin, by the very
essence of ethics, is the free, intelligent, wilful violation of a
law known to be right; and every punishment, in order to be just,
must be the suffering deserved by the intentional fault, the
personal evil, of the culprit himself. The doctrine before us
reverses all this, and sends untold myriads to hell forever for no
other sin than that of simply having been born children of
humanity. Born totally depraved, hateful to God, helpless through
an irresistible proclivity to sin and an ineradicable aversion to
evangelical truth, and asked to save themselves, asked by a
mockery like that of fettering men hand and foot, clothing them in
leaden straitjackets, and then flinging them overboard, telling
them not to drown! What justice, what justice, is here in this?

Thirdly, the profound injustice of this doctrine is seen in its
making the alternative of so unutterably awful a doom hinge upon
such trivial particulars and upon merely fortuitous circumstances.
One is born of pious, orthodox parents, another of heretics or
infidels: with no difference of merit due to them, one goes to
heaven, the other goes to hell. One happens to form a friendship
with an evangelical believer, another is influenced by a
rationalist companion: the same fearful diversity of fate ensues.
One is converted by a single sermon: if he had been ill that day,
or had been detained from church by any other cause, his fated bed
would have been made in hell, heaven closed against him forever.
One says, "I believe in the Trinity of God, in the Deity of
Christ;" and, dying, he goes to heaven. Another says, "I believe
in the Unity of God and in the humanity of Christ:" he, dying,
goes to hell. Of two children snatched away by disease when twenty
four hours old, one has been baptized, the other not: the angels
of heaven welcome that, the demons of hell clutch this. The
doctrine of infant damnation, intolerably painful as it is, has
been proclaimed thousands of times by authoritative teachers and
by large parties in the Church, and is a logical sequence from the
popular theology. It is not a great many years since people heard,
it is said, the celebrated statement that "hell is paved with the
skulls of infants not a span long!" Think of the everlasting bliss
or misery of a helpless infant depending on the petty accident of
whether it was baptized or not! There are hypothetical cases like
the following: If one man had died a year earlier, when he was a
saint, he would not have fallen from grace, and renounced his
faith, and rolled in crimes, and sunk to hell. If another had
lived a year later, he would have been smitten with conviction,
and would have repented, and made his peace, and gone to heaven.
To the everlasting loss of each, an eternity of bliss against an
eternity of woe hung fatally poised on the time appointed for him
to die. Oh how the bigoted pride, the exclusive dogmatism of self
styled saints, self flatterers equally satisfied of their own
election and of the rejection of almost everybody else, ought to
sink and fade when they reflect on the slight chances, mere
chances of time and place, by which the infinite contingency has
been, or is to be, decided! They should heed the impregnable good
sense and logic conveyed in the humane hearted poet's satirical
humor when he advises such persons to

"Consider well, before, like Hurlothrumbo,
They aim their clubs at any creed on earth,
That by the simple accident of birth
They might have been high priests to Mumbo Jumbo."

It is evidently but the rankest mockery of justice to suspend an
infinite woe upon an accident out of the power of the party
concerned.

Still further: there is a tremendous injustice even in that form
of the doctrine of endless punishment, the most favorable of all,
which says that no one is absolutely foreordained to hell, but
that all are free, and that life is a fixed season of probation
wherein the means of salvation are offered to all, and if they
neglect or spurn them the fault is their own, and eternal pain
their merited portion. The perfectly apparent inconsistency of
this theory with known facts is fatal to it, since out of every
generation there are millions on millions of infants, idiots,
maniacs, heathen, within whose hearing or power the means of
salvation by a personal appropriation of the atoning merit of
Christ's blood were never brought; so that life to them is no
scene of Christian probation. But, waiving that, the probation is
not a fair one to anybody. If the indescribable horror of an
eternal damnation be the consequence that follows a certain course
while we are on trial in this life, then a knowledge of that fact
in all its bearings ought to be given us, clear, explicit, beyond
any possibility of mistake or doubt. Otherwise the probation is
not fair. To place men in the world, as millions are constantly
placed, beset by allurements of every sort within and without, led
astray by false teachings and evil examples, exposed in ignorance,
bewildered with uncertainties of conflicting doubts and surmises,
either never hearing of the way of salvation at all, or hearing of
it only in terms that seem absurd in themselves and unaccompanied
by sufficient, if by any, proof, and then, if under these fearful
hazards they waver from strict purity of heart, rectitude of
conduct, or orthodoxy of belief, to condemn them to a world of
everlasting agony, would be the very climax of cruelty, with no
touch of mercy or color of right.

Beneath such a rule the universe should be shrouded in the
blackness of despair, and God be thought of with a convulsive
shudder. Such a "probation" would be only like that on which the
Inquisitors put their victims who were studiously kept ignorant in
their dungeons, waiting for the rack and the flame to be made
ready. Few persons will deny that, as the facts now are, a good,
intelligent, candid man may doubt the reality of an endless
punishment awaiting men in hell. But if the doctrine be true, and
he is on probation under it, is it fair that he should be left
honestly in ignorance or doubt about it? No: if it be true, it
ought to be burned into his brain and crushed into his soul with
such terrific vividness and abiding constancy of impression as
would deter him ever from the wrong path, keep him in the right. A
distinguished writer has represented a condemned delinquent,
suffering on, and still interminably on, in hell, thus complaining
of the unfairness of his probation: "Oh, had it been possible for
me to conceive even the most diminutive part of the weight and
horror of this doom, I should have shrunk from every temptation to
sin, with the most violent recoil."19

19 John Foster, Letter on the Eternity of Future Punishments.

If an endless hell is to be the lot of the sinner, he ought to
have an infallible certainty of it, with all possible helps and
incentives to avoid it. Such is not the case; and therefore, since
God is just and generous, the doctrine is not true.

Finally, the injustice of the dogma of everlasting punishment is
most emphatically shown by the fact that there is no sort of
correspondence or possible proportion between the offence and the
penalty, between the moment of sinning life and the eternity of
suffering death. If a child were told to hold its breath thirty
seconds, and, failing to do it, should be confined in a dark
solitary dungeon for seventy years amidst loathsome horrors and
speechless afflictions, and be frightfully scourged six times a
day for that entire period, there would be just proportion nay, an
inexpressibly merciful proportion between the offence and the
punishment, in comparison with that which, being an absolutely
infinite disproportion, does not really admit of any comparison,
the sentence to an eternal abode in hell as a penalty for the
worst kind and the greatest amount of crime a man could possibly
crowd into a life of a thousand years. Think, then, of passing
such a sentence on one who has struggled hard against temptation,
and yielded but rarely, and suffered much, and striven to do as
well as he could, and borne up courageously, with generous
resolves and affections, and died commending his soul to God in
hope.

"Fearfully fleet is this life," says one, "and yet in it eternal
life is lost or won: profoundly wretched is this life, yet in it
eternal bliss is lost or won." Weigh the words adequately, and say
how improbable is the thought, and how terribly unjust. Perhaps
there have already lived upon this earth, and died, and passed
into the invisible world, two hundred thousand millions of men,
the everlasting doom of every one of whom, it is imagined, was
fixed unalterably during the momentary period of his mortal
transit from cradle to grave. In respect of eternity, six thousand
years and this duration must be reduced to threescore years and
ten, since that is all that each generation enjoyed is the same as
one hour. Suppose, now, that all these two hundred thousand
millions of men were called into being at once; that they were
placed on probation for one hour; that the result of their choice
and action in that hour was to decide their irrevocable fate,
actually forever, to ecstatic bliss or to ecstatic woe; that
during that hour they were left, as far as clear and stable
conviction goes, in utter ignorance and uncertainty as to the
great realities of their condition, courted by opposing theories
and modes of action; and that, when the clock of time knelled the
close of that awful, that most evanescent hour, the roaring gulf
of torture yawned, and its jaws of flame and blackness closed over
ninety nine hundredths of them for eternity! That is a fair
picture of the popular doctrine of temporal probation and eternal
punishment, when examined in the light of the facts of human life.
Of course, no man at this day, who is in his senses and thinks
honestly upon the subject, can credit such a doctrine, unless
indeed he believes that a lawless fiend sits on the throne of the
universe and guides the helm of destiny. And lives there a man of
unperverted soul who would not decidedly prefer to have no God
rather than to have such a one? Ay, "Rather than so, come FATE
into the list And champion us to the utterance."

Let us be atheists, and bow to mortal Chance, believe there is no
pilot at all at the rudder of Creation's vessel, no channel before
the prow, but the roaring breakers of despair to right and left,
and the granite bluff of annihilation full in front!

In the next place, then, we argue against the doctrine of eternal
damnation that it is incompatible with any worthy idea of the
character of God. God is love; and love cannot consent to the
useless torture of millions of helpless souls for eternity. The
gross contradiction of the common doctrine of hell to the spirit
of love is so obvious that its advocates, unable to deny or
conceal it, have often positively proclaimed it, avowing that, in
respect to the wicked, God is changed into a consuming fire full
of hatred and vengeance. But that is unmitigated blasphemy. God is
unchangeable, his very nature being disinterested, immutable
goodness. The sufferings of the wicked are of their own
preparation. If a pestilential exhalation is drawn from some
decaying substance, it is not the fault of any alteration in the
sunlight. But a Christian writer assures us that when "the damned
are packed like brick in a kiln, so bound that they cannot move a
limb nor even an eyelid, God shall blow the fires of hell through
them for ever and ever."

And another writer says, "All in God is turned into fury: in hell
he draws out into the field all his forces, all his attributes,
whereof wrath is the leader and general."20 Such representations
may be left without a comment. Every enlightened mind will
instantly reject with horror the doctrine which necessitates a
conception of God like that here pictured forth. God is a being of
infinite forgiveness and magnanimity. To the wandering sinner,
even while a great way off, his arms are open, and his inviting
voice, penetrating the farthest abysses, says, "Return." His sun
shines and his rain falls on the fields of the unjust and
unthankful. What is it, the instant mortals pass the line of
death, that shall transform this Divinity of yearning pity and
beneficence into a devil of relentless hate and cruelty? It cannot
be. We shall find him dealing towards us in eternity as he does
here. An eminent theologian says, "If mortal men kill the body
temporally in their anger, it is like the immortal God to damn the
soul eternally in his." "God holds sinners in his hands over the
mouth of hell as so many spiders; and he is dreadfully provoked,
and he not only hates them, but holds them in utmost contempt, and
he will trample them beneath his feet with inexpressible
fierceness, he will crush their blood out, and will make it fly so
that it will sprinkle his garments and stain all his raiment."21
Oh, ravings and blasphemies of theological bigotry, blinded with
old creeds, inflamed with sectarian hate, soaked in the gall of
bitterness, encompassed by absurd delusions, you know not what you
say!

A daring writer of modern times observes that God can never say
from the last tribunal, in any other than a limited and
metaphorical sense, "Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting
fire," because that would not be doing as he would be done by.
Saving the appearance of irreverence, we maintain his assertion to
be just, based on impregnable morality. A recent religious poet
describes Jesus, on descending into hell after his crucifixion,

20 For these and several other quotations we are indebted to the
Rev. T. J. Sawyer's work, entitled "Endless Punishment: its Origin
and Grounds Examined."

21 Edwards's works, vol. vii. p. 499.


meeting Judas, and when he saw his pangs and heard his stifled
sobs, "Pitying, Messiah gazed, and had forgiven, But Justice her
eternal bar opposed." 22

The instinctive sentiment is worthy of Jesus, but the deliberate
thought is worthy of Calvin. Why is it so calmly assumed that God
cannot pardon, and that therefore sinners must be given over to
endless pains? By what proofs is so tremendous a conclusion
supported? Is it not a gratuitous fiction of theologians? The
exemplification of God's character and conduct given in the
spirit, teachings, and deeds of Christ is full of a free mercy, an
eager charity that rushes forward to forgive and embrace the
sinful and wretched wanderers. He is a very different being whom
the evangelist represents saying of Jesus, "This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased," from Him whom Professor Park
describes "drawing his sword on Calvary and smiting down his Son!"

Why may not pardon from unpurchased grace be vouchsafed as well
after death as before? What moral conditions alter the case then?
Ah! it is only the metaphysical theories of the theologians that
have altered the case in their fancies and made it necessary for
them to limit probation. The attributes of God are laws, his modes
of action are the essentialities of his being, the same in all the
worlds of boundless extension and all the ages of endless
duration. How far some of the theologians have perverted the
simplicity of the gospel, or rather how utterly they have strayed
from it, may be seen when we remember that Christ said concerning
little children, "Of such is the kingdom of heaven," and then
compare with this declaration such a statement as this: "Reprobate
infants are vipers of vengeance which Jehovah will hold over hell
in the tongs of his wrath, till they writhe up and cast their
venom in his face." We deliberately assert that no depraved,
insane, pagan imagination ever conceived of a fiend malignant and
horrible enough to be worthily compared with this Christian
conception of God. Edwards repeatedly says, in his two sermons on
the "Punishment of the Wicked" and "Sinners in the Hands of an
Angry God," "You cannot stand an instant before an infuriated
tiger even: what, then, will you do when God rushes against you in
all his wrath?" Is this Christ's Father?

The God we worship is "the Father of lights, with whom there is
neither variableness nor shadow of turning, from whom cometh down
every good and every perfect gift." It is the Being referred to by
the Savior when he said, in exultant trust and love, "I am not
alone; for the Father is with me." It is the infinite One to whom
the Psalmist says, "Though I make my bed in hell, behold, thou art
there." If God is in hell, there must be mercy and hope there,
some gleams of alleviation and promise there, surely; even as the
Lutheran creed says that "early on Easter morning, before his
resurrection, Christ showed himself to the damned in hell." If God
is in hell, certainly it must be to soothe, to save. "Oh, no,"
says the popular theologian. Let us quote his words. "Why is God
here? To keep the tortures of the damned freshly plied, and to see
that no one ever escapes!" Can the climax of horror and

22 Lord, Christ in Hades.


blasphemy any further go? How much more reasonable, more moral and
Christ like, to say, with one of the best authors of our time,

"What hell may be I know not: this I know: I cannot lose the
presence of the Lord: One arm humility takes hold upon His dear
Humanity; the other love Clasps his Divinity: so, where I go He
goes; and better fire wall'd Hell with him Than golden gated
Paradise without."

The irreconcilableness of the common doctrine of endless misery
with any worthy idea of God is made clear by a process of
reasoning whose premises are as undeniable as its logic is
irrefragable and its conclusion consolatory. God is infinite
justice and goodness. His purpose in the creation, therefore, must
be the diffusion and triumph of holiness and blessedness. God is
infinite wisdom and power. His design, therefore, must be
fulfilled. Nothing can avail to thwart the ultimate realization of
all his intentions. The rule of his omnipotent love pervades
infinitude and eternity as a shining leash of law whereby he holds
every child of his creation in ultimate connection with his
throne, and will sooner or later bring even the worst soul to a
returning curve from the career of its wildest orbit. In the realm
and under the reign of a paternal and omnipotent God every being
must be salvable. Remorse itself is a recoil which may fling the
penitent into the lap of forgiving love. Any different thought
appears narrow, cruel, heathen. The blackest fiend that glooms the
midnight air of hell, bleached through the merciful purgation of
sorrow and loyalty, may become a white angel and be drawn into
heaven.

Lavater writes of himself, and the same is true of many a good
man, "I embraced in my heart all that is called man, past,
present, and future times and nations, the dead, the damned, even
Satan. I presented them all to God with the warmest wishes that he
would have mercy upon all." This is the true spirit of a good man.
And is man better than his Maker? We will answer that question,
and leave this head of the discussion, by presenting an Oriental
apologue.

God once sat on his inconceivable throne, and far around him, rank
after rank, angels and archangels, seraphim and cherubim, resting
on their silver wings and lifting their dazzling brows, rose and
swelled, with the splendors of an illimitable sea of immortal
beings, gleaming and fluctuating to the remotest borders of the
universe. The anthem of their praise shook the pillars of the
creation, and filled the vault of heaven with a pulsing flood of
harmony. When, as they closed their hymn, stole up, faint heard,
as from some most distant region of all space, in dim accents
humbly rising, a responsive "Amen." God asked Gabriel, "Whence
comes that Amen?" The hierarchic peer replied, "It rises from the
damned in hell." God took, from where it hung above his seat, the
key that unlocks the forty thousand doors of hell, and, giving it
to Gabriel, bade him go release them. On wings of light sped the
enraptured messenger, rescued the millions of the lost, and, just
as they were, covered all over with the traces of their sin,
filth, and woe, brought them straight up into the midst of heaven.
Instantly they were transformed, clothed in robes of glory, and
placed next to the throne; and henceforth, for evermore, the
dearest strain to God's ear, of all the celestial music, was that
borne by the choir his grace had ransomed from hell. And, because
there is no envy or other selfishness in heaven, this promotion
sent but new thrills of delight and gratitude through the heights
and depths of angelic life.

We come now to the last class of reasons for disbelieving the
dogma of eternal damnation, namely, those furnished by the
principles of human nature and the truths of human experience. The
doctrine, as we think can be clearly shown, is literally
incredible to the human mind and literally intolerable to the
human heart. In the first place, it is, viewed in the abstract,
absolutely incredible because it is inconceivable: no man can
possibly grasp and appreciate the idea. The nearest approximation
to it ever made perhaps is in De Quincey's gorgeous elaboration of
the famous Hindu myth of an enormous rock finally worn away by the
brushing of a gauze veil; and that is really no approximation at
all, since an incommensurable chasm always separates the finite
and the infinite. John Foster says, "It is infinitely beyond the
highest archangel's faculty to apprehend a thousandth part of the
horror of the doom to eternal damnation." The Buddhists, who
believe that the severest sentence passed on the worst sinner will
be brought to an end and his redemption be attained, use the
following illustration of the staggering periods that will first
elapse. A small yoke is thrown into the ocean and borne about in
every direction by the various winds. Once in a hundred thousand
years a blind tortoise rises to the surface of the water. Will the
time ever come when that tortoise shall so rise up that its neck
shall enter the hole of the yoke? It may, but the time required
cannot be told; and it is equally difficult for the unwise man,
who has entered one of the great hells, to obtain deliverance.
There is a remarkable specimen of the attempt to set forth the
idea of endless misery, by Suso, a mystic preacher who flourished
several centuries ago. It runs thus. "O eternity, what art thou?
Oh, end without end! O father, and mother, and all whom we love!
May God be merciful unto you for evermore! for we shall see you no
more to love you; we must be separated forever! O separation,
everlasting separation, how painful art thou! Oh, the wringing of
hands! Oh, sighing, weeping, and sobbing, unceasing howling and
lamenting, and yet never to be pardoned! Give us a millstone, says
the damned, as large as the whole earth, and so wide in
circumference as to touch the sky all around, and let a little
bird come in a hundred thousand years, and pick off a small
particle of the stone, not larger than the tenth part of a grain
of millet, and after another hundred thousand years let him come
again, so that in ten hundred thousand years he would pick off as
much as a grain of millet, we wretched sinners would desire
nothing but that thus the stone might have an end, and thus our
pains also; yet even that cannot be."23 But, after all the
struggles of reason and all the illustrations of laboring
imagination, the meaning of the phrase "eternal suffering in hell"
remains remote, dim, unrealized, an abstraction in words. If we
could adequately apprehend it, if its full significance should
burst upon us, as sometimes in fearful dreams the spaceless,
timeless, phantasmal, reeling sense of

23 Hagenbach, Dogmengeschichte, sect. 210.


the infinite seems to be threatening to break into the brain, an
annihilating shudder would seize and destroy the soul.

We say, therefore, that the doctrine of the eternity of future
punishment is not believed as an intellectually conceived truth,
because that is a metaphysical impossibility. But more: we affirm,
in spite of the general belief in it publicly professed, that it
is actually held by hardly any one as a practical vivid belief
even within the limits wherein, as an intellectual conception, it
is possible. When intellect and imagination do not fail, heart and
conscience do, with sickened faintness and convulsive protest. In
his direful poem on the Last Day, Young makes one of the condemned
vainly beg of God to grant "This one, this slender, almost no,
request: When I have wept a thousand lives away, When torment is
grown weary of its prey, When I have raved of anguish'd years in
fire Ten thousand thousands, let me then expire."

Such a thought, when confronted with any generous holy sentiment
or with any worthy conception of the Divine character, is
practically incredible. The men all around us in whose Church
creed such a doctrine is written down do not truly believe it.
"They delude themselves," as Martineau well says, "with the mere
fancy and image of a belief. The death of a friend who departs
from life in heresy affects them in the same way as the loss of
another whose creed was unimpeachable: while the theoretic
difference is infinite, the practical is virtually nothing." Who
that had a child, parent, wife, brother, or other precious friend,
condemned to be roasted to death by a slow fire, would not be
frantic with agony? But there are in the world literally millions
on millions, some of whose nearest and dearest ones have died
under circumstances which, by their professed creeds, can leave no
doubt that they must roast in the fires of hell in an anguish
unutterably fiercer, and for eternity, and yet they go about as
smilingly, engage in the battle for money, in the race for fame,
in all the vain shows and frivolous pleasures of life, as eagerly
and as gayly as others. How often do we see the literal truth of
this exemplified! It is clear they do not believe in the dogma to
whose technical terms they formally subscribe.

A small proportion of its professors do undeniably believe the
doctrine so far as it can be sanely believed; and accordingly the
world is to them robed in a sable shroud, and life is an awful
mockery, under a flashing surface of sports concealing a
bottomless pit of horror. Every observing person has probably
known some few in his life who, in a degree, really believed the
common notions concerning hell, and out of whom, consequently, all
geniality, all bounding impulses, all magnanimous generosities,
were crushed, and their countenances wore the perpetual livery of
mourning, despair, and misanthropy. We will quote the confessions
of two persons who may stand as representatives of the class of
sincere believers in the doctrine. The first is a celebrated
French preacher of a century and a half ago, the other a very
eminent American divine of the present day. Saurin says, in his
great sermon on Hell, "I sink under the weight of this subject,
and I find in the thought a mortal poison which diffuseth itself
into every period of my life, rendering society tiresome,
nourishment insipid, pleasure disgustful, and life itself a cruel
bitter." Albert Barnes writes, "In the distress and anguish of my
own spirit, I confess I see not one ray to disclose to me the
reason why man should suffer to all eternity. I have never seen a
particle of light thrown on these subjects that has given a
moment's ease to my tortured mind. It is all dark dark dark to my
soul; and I cannot disguise it."

Such a state of mind is the legitimate result of an endeavor
sincerely to grasp and hold the popularly professed belief. So
often as that endeavor reaches a certain degree of success, and
the idea of an eternal hell is reduced from its vagueness to an
embraced conception, the over fraught heart gives way, the brain,
stretched on too high a tension, reels, madness sets in, and one
more case is added to that list of maniacs from religious causes
which, according to the yearly reports of insane asylums, forms so
large a class. Imagine what a vast and sudden change would come
over the spirit and conduct of society if nineteen twentieths of
Christendom believed that at the end of a week a horrible influx
of demons, from some insurgent region, would rush into our world
and put a great majority of our race to death in excruciating
tortures! But the doctrine of future punishment professed by
nineteen twentieths of Christendom is, if true, an evil
incomparably worse than that, though every element of its
dreadfulness were multiplied by millions beyond the power of
numeration; and yet all goes on as quietly, the most of these
fancied believers live as chirpingly, as if heaven were sure for
everybody! Of course in their hearts they do not believe the
terrific formula which drops so glibly from their tongues.

Again: it is a fatal objection to the doctrine in question that if
it be true it must destroy the happiness of the saved and fill all
heaven with sympathetic woe. Jesus teaches that "there is joy in
heaven over every sinner that repenteth." By a moral necessity,
then, there is sorrow in heaven over the wretched, lost soul. That
sorrow, indeed, may be alleviated, if not wholly quenched, by the
knowledge that every retributive pang is remedial, and that God's
glorious design will one day be fully crowned in the redemption of
the last prodigal. But what shall solace or end it if they know
that hell's borders are to be enlarged and to rage with avenging
misery forever? The good cannot be happy in heaven if they are to
see the ascending smoke and hear the resounding shrieks of a hell
full of their brethren, the children of a common humanity, among
whom are many of their own nearest relatives and dearest friends.

True, a long list of Christian writers may be cited as maintaining
that this is to be a principal element in the felicity of the
redeemed, gloating over the tortures of the damned, singing the
song of praise with redoubled emphasis as they see their parents,
their children, their former bosom companions, writhing and
howling in the fell extremities of torture. Thomas Aquinas says,
"That the saints may enjoy their beatitude and the grace of God
more richly, a perfect sight of the punishment of the damned is
granted to them."24 Especially did the Puritans seem to revel in
this idea, that "the joys of the blessed were to be deepened and
sharpened by constant contrast with the sufferings of the damned."
One of them thus expresses the delectable thought: "The sight of
hell torments will exalt the happiness of the saints forever, as a
sense of the opposite misery always increases the relish of any
pleasure."

24 Summa, pars iii., Suppl. Qu. 93, art. i.


But perhaps Hopkins caps the climax of the diabolical pyramid of
these representations, saying of the wicked, "The smoke of their
torment shall ascend up in the sight of the blessed for ever and
ever, and serve, as a most clear glass always before their eyes,
to give them a bright and most affecting view. This display of the
Divine character will be most entertaining to all who love God,
will give them the highest and most ineffable pleasure. Should the
fire of this eternal punishment cease, it would in a great measure
obscure the light of heaven and put an end to a great part of the
happiness and glory of the blessed."25 That is to say, in plain
terms, the saints, on entering their final state of bliss in
heaven, are converted into a set of unmitigated fiends, out
sataning Satan, finding their chief delight in forever comparing
their own enjoyments with the pangs of the damned, extracting
morsels of surpassing relish from every convulsion or shriek of
anguish they see or hear. It is all an exquisite piece of
gratuitous horror arbitrarily devised to meet a logical exigency
of the theory its contrivers held. When charged that the knowledge
of the infinite woe of their friends in hell must greatly affect
the saints, the stern old theologians, unwilling to recede an inch
from their dogmas, had the amazing hardihood to declare that, so
far from it, on the contrary their wills would so blend with God's
that the contemplation of this suffering would be a source of
ecstasy to them. It is doubly a blank assumption of the most
daring character, first assuming, by an unparalleled blasphemy,
that God himself will take delight in the pangs of his creatures,
and secondly assuming, by a violation of the laws of human nature
and of every principle of morals, that the elect will do so too.
In this world a man actuated by such a spirit would be styled a
devil. On entering heaven, what magic shall work such a demoniacal
change in him? There is not a word, direct or indirect, in the
Scriptures to warrant the dreadful notion; nor is there any
reasonable explanation or moral justification of it given by any
of its advocates, or indeed conceivable. The monstrous hypothesis
cannot be true. Under the omnipotent, benignant government of a
paternal God, each change of character in his chosen children, as
they advance, must be for the better, not for the worse.

We once heard a father say, running his fingers the while among
the golden curls of his child's hair, "If I were in heaven, and
saw my little daughter in hell, should not I be rushing down there
after her?" There spoke the voice of human nature; and that love
cannot be turned to hatred in heaven, but must grow purer and
intenser there. The doctrine which makes the saints pleased with
contemplating the woes of the damned, and even draw much of their
happiness from the contrast, is the deification of the absolute
selfishness of a demon. Human nature, even when left to its
uncultured instincts, is bound to far other and nobler things.
Radbod, one of the old Scandinavian kings, after long resistance,
finally consented to be baptized. After he had put one foot into
the water, he asked the priest if he should meet his forefathers
in heaven. Learning that they, being unbaptized pagans, were
victims of endless misery, he drew his foot back, and refused the
rite, choosing to be with his brave ancestors in hell rather than
to be in heaven with the Christian priests. And, speaking from the
stand point of the highest refinement of feeling and virtue, who
that has a heart in his

25 Park, Memoir of Hopkins, pp. 201, 202.


bosom would not say, "Heaven can be no heaven to me, if I am to
look down on the quenchless agonies of all I have loved here!" Is
it not strictly true that the thought that even one should have
endless woe "Would cast a shadow on the throne of God And darken
heaven"?

If a monarch, possessing unlimited power over all the earth, had
condemned one man to be stretched on a rack and be freshly plied
with incessant tortures for a period of fifty years, and if
everybody on earth could hear his terrible shrieks by day and
night, though they were themselves all, with this sole exception,
blessed with perfect happiness, would not the whole human race,
from Spitzbergen to Japan, from Rio Janeiro to Liberia, rise in a
body and go to implore the king's clemency for the solitary
victim? So, if hell had but one tenant doomed to eternal anguish,
a petition reaching from Sirius to Alcyone, signed by the universe
of moral beings, borne by a convoy of angels representing every
star in space, would be laid and unrolled at the foot of God's
throne, and He would read thereon this prayer: "FORGIVE HIM, AND
RELEASE HIM, WE BESEECH THEE, O GOD." And can it be that every
soul in the universe is better than the Maker and Father of the
universe?

The popular doctrine of eternal torment threatening nearly all our
race is refuted likewise by the impossibility of any general
observance of the obligations morally and logically consequent
from it. In the first place, as the world is constituted, and as
life goes on, the great majority of men are upon the whole happy,
evidently were meant to be happy. But every believer of the
doctrine in debate is bound to be unutterably wretched. If he has
any gleam of generous sentiment or touch of philanthropy in his
bosom, if he is not a frozen petrifaction of selfishness or an
incarnate devil, how can he look on his family, friends,
neighbors, fellow citizens, fellow beings, in the light of his
faith seeing them quivering over the dizzy verge of a blind
probation and momentarily dropping into the lake of fire and
brimstone that burns forever, how can he do this without being
ceaselessly stung with wretchedness and crushed with horror by the
perception? For a man who appreciatingly believes that hell is
directly under our meadows, streets, and homes, and that nine
tenths of the dead are in it, and that nine tenths of the living
soon will be, for such a man to be happy and jocose is as horrible
as it would be for a man, occupying the second story of a house,
to light it up brilliantly with gas, and make merry with his
friends, eating tidbits, sipping wine, and tripping it on the
light fantastic toe to the strains of gay music, while,
immediately under him, men, women, and children, including his own
parents and his own children, were stretched on racks, torn with
pincers, lacerated with surgical instruments, cauterized, lashed
with whips of fire, their half suppressed shrieks and groans
audibly rising through the floor!

Secondly, if the doctrine be true, then all unnecessary worldly
enterprises, labors, and studies should at once cease. One moment
on earth, and then, accordingly as we spend that moment, an
eternity in heaven or in hell: in heaven, if we succeed in
placating God by a sound belief and ritual proprieties; in hell,
if we are led astray by philosophy, nature, and the attractions of
life! On these suppositions, what time have we for any thing but
reciting our creed, meditating on the atonement, and seeking to
secure an interest for ourselves with God by flouting at our
carnal reason, praying in church, and groaning, "Lord, Lord, have
mercy on us miserable sinners"? What folly, what mockery, to be
searching into the motions of the stars, and the occult forces of
matter, and the other beautiful mysteries of science! There will
be no astronomy in hell, save vain speculations as to the distance
between the nadir of the damned and the zenith of the saved; no
chemistry in hell, save the experiments of infinite wrath in
distilling new torture poisons in the alembics of memory and
depositing fresh despair sediments in the crucibles of hope. If
Calvin's doctrine be true, let no book be printed, save the
"Westminster Catechism;" no calculation be ciphered, save how to
"solve the problem of damnation;" no picture be painted, save
"pictures of hell;" no school be supported, save "schools of
theology;" no business be pursued, save "the business of
salvation." What have men who are in imminent peril, who are in
truth almost infallibly sure, of being eternally damned the next
instant, what have they to do with science, literature, art,
social ambition, or commerce? Away with them all! Lures of the
devil to snare souls are they! The world reflecting from every
corner the lurid glare of hell, who can do any thing else but
shudder and pray? "Who could spare any attention for the
vicissitudes of cotton and the price of shares, for the merits of
the last opera and the bets upon the next election, if the actors
in these things were really swinging in his eye over such a verge
as he affects to see?"

Thirdly, those who believe the popular theory on this subject are
bound to live in cheap huts, on bread and water, that they may
devote to the sending of missionaries among the heathen every cent
of money they can get beyond that required for the bare
necessities of life. If our neighbor were perishing of hunger at
our door, it would be our duty to share with him even to the last
crust we had. How much more, then, seeing millions of our poor
helpless brethren sinking ignorantly into the eternal fires of
hell, are we bound to spare no possible effort until the
conditions of salvation are brought within the reach of every one!
An American missionary to China said, in a public address after
his return, "Fifty thousand a day go down to the fire that is not
quenched. Six hundred millions more are going the same road.
Should you not think at least once a day of the fifty thousand who
that day sink to the doom of the lost?" The American Board of
Commissioners of Foreign Missions say, "To send the gospel to the
heathen is a work of great exigency. Within the last thirty years
a whole generation of five hundred millions have gone down to
eternal death." Again: the same Board say, in their tract entitled
"The Grand Motive to Missionary Effort," "The heathen are involved
in the ruins of the apostasy, and are expressly doomed to
perdition. Six hundred millions of deathless souls on the brink of
hell! What a spectacle!" How a man who thinks the heathen are thus
sinking to hell by wholesale through ignorance of the gospel can
live in a costly house, crowded with luxuries and splendors,
spending every week more money on his miserable body than he gives
in his whole life to save the priceless souls for which he says
Christ died, is a problem admitting but two solutions. Either his
professed faith is an unreality to him, or else he is as selfish
as a demon and as hard hearted as the nether millstone. If he
really believed the doctrine, and had a human heart, he must feel
it to be his duty to deny himself every indulgence and give his
whole fortune and earnings to the missionary fund. And when he had
given all else, he ought to give himself, and go to pagan lands,
proclaiming the means of grace until his last breath. If he does
not that, he is inexcusable.

Should he attempt to clear himself of this obligation by adopting
the theory of predestination, which asserts that all men were
unconditionally elected from eternity, some to heaven, others to
hell, so that no effort can change their fate, logical consistency
reduces him to an alternative more intolerable in the eyes of
conscience and common sense than the other was. For by this theory
the gates of freedom and duty are hoisted, and the dark flood of
antinomian consequences rushes in. All things are fated. Let men
yield to every impulse and wish. The result is fixed. We have
nothing to do. Good or evil, virtue or crime, alter nothing.

Fourthly, if the common doctrine of eternal damnation be true,
then surely no more children should be brought into the world: it
is a duty to let the race die out and cease. He who begets a
child, forcing him to run the fearful risk of human existence,
with every probability of being doomed to hell at the close of
earth, commits a crime before whose endless consequences of horror
the guilt of fifty thousand deliberate murders would be as
nothing. For, be it remembered, an eternity in hell is an infinite
evil; and therefore the crime of thrusting such a fate on a single
child, with the unasked gift of being, is a crime admitting of no
just comparison. Rather than populate an everlasting hell with
human vipers and worms, a hell whose fires, alive and wriggling
with ghastly shapes of iniquity and anguish, shall swell with a
vast accession of fresh recruits from every generation, rather
than this, let the sacred lights on the marriage altar go out, no
more bounding forms of childhood be seen in cottage or hall, the
race grow old, thin out, and utterly perish, all happy villages be
overgrown, all regal cities crumble down, and this world roll
among the silent stars henceforth a globe of blasted deserts and
rank wildernesses, resonant only with the shrieks of the wind, the
yells of wild beasts, and the thunder's crash.

Fifthly, there is one more conclusion of moral duty deducible from
the prevalent theory of infinite torment. It is this. God ought
not to have permitted Adam to have any children. Let us not seem
presumptuous and irreverent in speaking thus. We are merely
reasoning on the popular theory of the theologians, not on any
supposition of our own or on any truth; and by showing the
absurdity and blasphemy of the moral consequences and duties
flowing from that theory, the absurdity, blasphemy, and
incredibility of the theory itself appear. We are not responsible
for the irreverence, but they are responsible for it who charge
God with the iniquity which we repel from his name. If the sin of
Adam must entail total depravity and an infinite penalty of
suffering on all his posterity, who were then certainly innocent
because not in existence, then, we ask, why did not God cause the
race to stop with Adam, and so save all the needless and cruel woe
that would otherwise surely be visited on the lengthening line of
generations? Or, to go still further back, why did he not,
foreseeing Adam's fall, refrain from creating even him? There was
no necessity laid on God of creating Adam. No positive evil would
have been done by omitting to create him. An infinite evil,
multiplied by the total number of the lost, was done by creating
him. Why, then, was he not left in peaceful nonentity? On the
Augustinian theory we see no way of escaping this awful dilemma.
Who can answer the question which rises to heaven from the abyss
of the damned?  "Father of mercies, why from silent earth Didst
thou awake and curse me into birth, Push into being a reverse of
thee, And animate a clod with misery?"

Satan is a sort of sublime Guy Fawkes, lurking in the infernal
cellar, preparing the train of that stupendous Gunpowder Plot by
which he hopes, on the day of judgment, to blow up the world
parliament of unbelievers with a general petard of damnation. Will
the King connive at this nefarious prowler and permit him to carry
out his design?

The doctrine of eternal damnation, as it has prevailed in the
Christian Church, appears to the natural man so unreasonable,
immoral, and harrowingly frightful, when earnestly contemplated,
that there have always been some who have shrunk from its
representations and sought to escape its conclusions. Many of its
strongest advocates in every age have avowed it to be a fearful
mystery, resting on the inscrutable sovereignty of God, and beyond
the power of man's faculties to explain and justify. The dogma has
been eluded in two ways. Some have believed in the annihilation of
the wicked after they should have undergone just punishment
proportioned to their sins. This supposition has had a
considerable number of advocates. It was maintained, among others,
by Arnobius, at the close of the third century, by the Socini, by
Dr. Hammond, and by some of the New England divines.26 All that
need be said in opposition to it is that it is an arbitrary device
to avoid the intolerable horror of the doctrine of endless misery,
unsupported by proof, extremely unsatisfactory in many of its
bearings, and really not needed to achieve the consummation
desired.

Others have more wisely maintained that all will finally be saved:
however severely and long they may justly suffer, they will at
last all be mercifully redeemed by God and admitted to the common
heaven. Defenders of the doctrine of ultimate universal salvation
have appeared from the beginning of Christian history.27 During
the last century and a half their numbers have rapidly
increased.28 A dignified and influential class of theologians,
represented by such names as Tillotson. Bahrdt, and Less, say that
the threats of eternal punishment, in the Scriptures, are
exaggerations to deter men from sin, and that God will not really
execute them, but will mercifully abate and limit them.29 Another
class of theologians, much more free, consistent, and numerous,
base their reception of the doctrine of final restoration on
figurative explanations of the scriptural language seemingly
opposed to it, and on arguments drawn from the character of God,
from reason, and from morals. This view of the subject is
spreading fast. All independent, genial, and cultivated thought
naturally leads to it. The central principles of the gospel
necessitate it. The spirit of the age cries for it. Before it the
old antagonistic dogma must fall and perish from respect. Dr.
Spring says, in reference to the hopeless condemnation of the
wicked to hell, "It puts in requisition all our confidence

26 This theory bas been resuscitated and advocated within a few
years by quite a number of writers, among whom may be specified
the Rev. C. F. Hudson, author of "Debt and Grace," a learned,
earnest, and able work, pervaded by an admirable spirit.

27 Ballou, Ancient History of Universalism.

28 Whittemore, Modern History of Universalism.

29 Knapp, Christian Theology, Woods's translation, sect. 158.


in God to justify this procedure of his government."30

A few devout and powerful minds have sought to avoid the gross
horrors and unreasonableness of the usual view of this subject, by
changing the mechanical and arithmetical values of the terms for
spiritual and religious values. They give the word "eternity" a
qualitative instead of a quantitative meaning. The everlasting woe
of the damned consists not in mechanical inflictions of torture
and numerical increments of duration, but in spiritual discord,
alienation from God, a wretched state of being, with which times
and spaces have nothing to do.31

How much better were it for the advocates of the popular theory,
instead of forcing their moral nature to bear up against the awful
perplexities and misgivings as to the justice and goodness of God
necessarily raised in them whenever they really face the dark
problems of their system of faith,32 resolutely to ask whether
there are any such problems in the actual government of God, or
anywhere else, except in their own "Bodies of Divinity"! It is an
extremely unfortunate and discreditable evasion of responsibility
when any man, especially when a teacher, takes for granted the
received formularies handed down to him, and, instead of honestly
analyzing their genuine significance and probing their foundations
to see if they be good and true, spends his genius in contriving
excuses and supports for them.

It is the very worst policy at this day to strive to fasten the
dogma of eternal misery to the New Testament. If both must be
taken or rejected together, an alternative which we emphatically
deny, what sincere and earnest thinker now, whose will is
unterrifiedly consecrated to truth, can be expected to hesitate
long? The doctrine is sustained in repute at present principally
for two reasons. First, because it has been transmitted to us from
the Church of the past as the established and authoritative
doctrine. It is yet technically current and popular because it has
been so: that is, it retains its place simply by right of
possession. The question ought to be sincerely and universally
raised whether it is true or false. Then it will swiftly lose its
prestige and disappear. Secondly, it is upheld and patronized by
many as a useful instrument for frightening the people and through
their fears deterring them from sin. We have ourselves heard
clergymen of high reputation say that it would never do to admit,
before the people, that there is any chance whatever of penitence
and salvation beyond the grave, because they would be sure to
abuse the hope as a sort of permission to indulge and continue in
sin. Thus to ignore the only solemn and worthy standard of judging
an abstract doctrine, namely, Is it a truth or a falsehood? and
put it solely on grounds of working expediency, is disgraceful,
contemptible, criminal. Watts exposes with well merited rebuke a
gross instance of pious frail in Burnet, who advised preachers to
teach the eternity of future punishment whether they believed it
or not.33 It is by such a course that error and superstition
reign, that truckling conformity, intellectual disloyalty, moral
indifference, vice, and infidelity, abound. It is practical
atheism, debauchery of conscience, and genuine spiritual

30 Glory of Christ, vol. ii. p. 268.

31 Lange, Positive Dogmatik, sect. 131: Die Aeonen der Verdammten.
Maurice, Theological Essays: Future Punishment.

32 See Beecher's Conflict of Ages, b. ii. ch. 4, 13.

33 World to Come, Disc. XIII.


death. Besides, the course we are characterizing is actually as
inexpedient in practice as it is wrong in theory. Experience and
observation show it to be as pernicious in its result as it is
immoral in its origin. Is a threat efficacious over men in
proportion to its intrinsic terror, or in proportion as it is
personally felt and feared by them? Do the menacing penalties of a
sin deter a man from it in proportion to their awfulness, or in
proportion to his belief in their reality and unavoidableness?
Eternal misery would be a threat of infinite frightfulness, if it
were realized and believed. But it is incredible. Some reject it
with indignation and an impetuous recoil that sends them much too
far towards antinomianism. Others let it float in the spectral
background of imagination, the faint reflection of a disagreeable
and fading dream. To all it is an unreality. An earnest belief in
a sure retribution exactly limited to desert must be far more
effective. If an individual had a profound conviction that for
every sin he committed he must suffer a million centuries of
inexpressible anguish, realizing that thought, would he commit a
sin?

If he cannot appreciate that enormous penalty, much less can he
the infinite one, which is far more likely to shade off and blur
out into a vague and remote nothing. Truth is an expression of
God's will, which we are bound exclusively to accept and employ
regardless of consequences. When we do that, God, the author of
truth, is himself solely responsible for the consequences. But
when, thinking we can devise something that will work better, we
use some theory of our own, we are responsible for the
consequences. Let every one beware how he ventures to assume that
dread responsibility. It is surely folly as well as sin. For
nothing can work so well as truth, the simple, calm, living truth,
which is a chime in the infinite harmony of morals and things. It
is only the morbid melodramatic tastes and incompetencies of an
unfinished culture that make men think otherwise. The magnificent
poetry of the day of judgment an audience of five hundred thousand
millions gathered in one throng as the Judge rises to pronounce
the last oration over a dissolving universe takes possession of
the fancy, and people conceive it so vividly, and are so moved by
it, that they think they see it to be true.

Grant for a moment the truth of the conception of hell as a
physical world of fiery torture full of the damned. Suppose the
scene of probation over, hell filled with its prisoners shut up,
banished and buried in the blackest deeps of space. Can it be left
there forever? Can it be that the roar of its furnace shall rage
on, and the wail of the execrable anguish ascend, eternally?
Endeavor to realize in some faint degree what these questions
mean, and then answer. If anybody can find it in his heart or in
his head to say yes, and can gloat over the idea, and wish to have
it continually brandished in terrorem over the heads of the
people, one feels impelled to declare that he of all men the most
needs to be converted to the Christian spirit. An unmitigated hell
of depravity, pain, and horror, would be Satan's victory and God's
defeat; for the very wish of a Satanic being must be for the
everlasting prevalence of sin and wretchedness. As above the
weltering hosts of the lost, each dreadful second, the iron clock
of hell ticked the thunder word "eternity," how would the devil on
his sulphurous dais shout in triumph! But if such a world of fire,
crowded with the writhing damned, ever existed at all, could it
exist forever?

Could the saved be happy and passive in heaven when the muffled
shrieks of their brethren, faint from the distance, fell on their
ears? In tones of love and pity that would melt the very
mountains, they would plead with God to pardon and free the lost.
Many a mourning lover would realize the fable of the Thracian poet
who wandered into Hades searching for his Eurydice; many a heroic
son would emulate the legend of the Grecian god who burst through
the iron walls of Tartarus and rescued his mother, the unfortunate
Semele, and led her in triumph up to heaven.

Could the angels be contented when they contemplated the far off
lurid orb and knew the agonies that fed its conscious conflagration?
Their gentle bosoms would be racked with commiserating pangs,
they would fly down and hover around that anguished world,
to moisten its parched tongues with the dropping of their sympathetic
tears and to cool its burning brows with the fanning of their wings.

Could Christ be satisfied? he who once was rich but for our sakes
became poor? he whose loving soul breathed itself forth in the
tender words, "Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest"? he who poured his blood on
Judea's awful summit, be satisfied? Not until he had tried the
efficacy of ten thousand fresh crucifixions, on as many new
Calvaries, would he rest.

Could God suffer it? God! with the full rivers of superfluous
bliss rolling around thy throne, couldst thou look down and hear
thy creatures calling thee Father, and see them plunging in a sea
of fire eternally eternally eternally and never speak the
pardoning word? It would not be like thee, it would be like thine
adversary to do that. Not so wouldst thou do. But if Satan had
millions of prodigals, snatched from the fold of thy family, shut
up and tortured in hell, paternal yearnings after them would fill
thy heart. Love's smiles would light the dread abyss where they
groan. Pity's tears would fall over it, shattered by the radiance
into rainbows. And through that illumination THOU wouldst descend,
marching beneath the arch of its triumphal glories to the rescue
of thy children! Therefore we rest in hope, knowing that "Thou
wilt not leave our souls in hell."

CHAPTER V.

THE FIVE THEORETIC MODES OF SALVATION.

THE conceptions and fore feelings of immortality which men have
entertained have generally been accompanied by a sense of
uncertainty in regard to the nature of that inheritance, by a
perception of contingent conditions, yielding a twofold fate of
bliss and woe, poised on the perilous hinge of circumstance or
freedom. Almost as often and profoundly, indeed, as man has
thought that he should live hereafter, that idea has been followed
by the belief that if, on the one hand, salvation gleamed for him
in the possible sky, on the other hand perdition yawned for him in
the probable abyss. Heaven and Hell are the light side and shade
side of the doctrine of a future life. Few questions are more
interesting, as none can be more important, than that inquiry
which is about the salvation of the soul. The inherent reach of
this inquiry, and the extent of its philosophical and literary
history, are great. But, by arranging under certain heads the
various principal schemes of salvation which Christian teachers
have from time to time presented for popular acceptance, and
passing them before the mind in order and in mutual lights, we can
very much narrow the space required to exhibit and discuss them.
When the word "salvation" occurs in the following investigation,
it means unless something different be shown by the context the
removal of the soul's doom to misery beyond the grave, and the
securing of its future blessedness. Heaven and hell are terms
employed with wide latitude and fluctuating boundaries of literal
and figurative meaning; but their essential force is simply a
future life of wretchedness, a future life of joy; and salvation,
in its prevailing theological sense, is the avoidance of that and
the gaining of this. We shall not attempt to present the different
theories of redemption in their historical order of development,
or to give an exhaustive account of their diversified prevalence,
but shall arrange them with reference to the most perspicuous
exhibition of their logical contents and practical bearings.

The first scheme of Christian salvation to be noticed is the one
by which it is represented that the interference and suffering of
Christ, in itself, unconditionally saved all souls and emptied
hell forever. This theory arose in the minds of those who received
it as the natural and consistent completion of the view they held
concerning the nature and consequences of the fall of Adam, the
cause and extent of the lost state of man. Adam, as the federal
head of humanity, represented and acted for his whole race: the
responsibility of his decision rested, the consequences of his
conduct would legitimately descend, it was thought, upon all
mankind. If he had kept himself obedient through that easy yet
tremendous probation in Eden, he and all his children would have
lived on earth eternally in perfect bliss. But, violating the
commandment of God, the burden of sin, with its terrible penalty,
fell on him and his posterity. Every human being was henceforth to
be alien from the love of goodness and from the favor of God,
hopelessly condemned to death and the pains of hell. The sin of
Adam, it was believed, thoroughly corrupted the nature of man, and
incapacitated him from all successful efforts to save his soul
from its awful doom. The infinite majesty of God's will, the law
of the universe, had been insulted by disobedience. The only just
retribution was the suffering of an endless death. The adamantine
sanctities of God's government made forgiveness impossible. Thus
all men were lost, to be the prey of blackness, and fire, and the
undying worm, through the remediless ages of eternity. Just then
God had pity on the souls he had made, and himself came to the
rescue. In the person of Christ, he came into the world as a man,
and freely took upon himself the infinite debt of man's sins, by
his death on the cross expiated all offences, satisfied the claims
of offended justice, vindicated the inexpressible sacredness of
the law, and, at the same time, opened a way by which a full and
free reconciliation was extended to all. When the blood of Jesus
flowed over the cross, it purchased the ransom of every sinner. As
Jerome says, "it quenched the flaming sword at the entrance of
Paradise." The weary multitude of captives rose from their bed,
shook off the fetters and stains of the pit, and made the cope of
heaven snowy with their white winged ascent. The prison house of
the devil and his angels should be used no more to confine the
guilty souls of men.1 Their guilt was all washed away in the blood
of the Lamb. Their spirits, without exception, should follow to
the right hand of the Father, in the way marked out by the
ascending Redeemer. This is the first form of Universalism, the
form in which it was held by several of the Fathers in the earlier
ages of the Church, and by the pioneers of that doctrine in modern
times. Cyril of Jerusalem says, "Christ went into the under world
alone, but came out with many." 2 Cyril of Alexandria says that
when Christ ascended from the under world he "emptied it, and left
the devil there utterly alone." 3 The opinion that the whole
population of Hades was released, is found in the lists of ancient
heresies.4 It was advanced by Clement, an Irish priest, antagonist
of Boniface the famous Archbishop of Mentz, in the middle of the
eighth century. He was deposed by the Council of Soissons, and
afterwards anathematized by Pope Zachary. Gregory the Great also
refers in one of his letters with extreme severity to two
ecclesiastics, contemporaries of his own, who held the same
belief. Indeed, this conclusion is a necessary result of a
consistent development of the creed of the Orthodox Church, so
called. By the sin of one, even Adam, through the working of
absolute justice, hell became the portion of all, irrespective of
any fault or virtue of theirs; so, by the voluntary sacrifice, the
infinite atonement, of one, even Christ, through the unspeakable
mercy of God, salvation was effected for all, irrespective of any
virtue or fault of theirs. One member of the scheme is the exact
counterpoise of the other; one doctrine cries out for and
necessitates the other. Those who accept the commonly received
dogmas of original sin, total depravity, and universal
condemnation entailed upon all men in lineal descent from Adam,
and the dogmas of the Trinity, the Incarnation, and the Vicarious
Atonement, are bound, by all the constructions of logic, to accept
the scheme of salvation just set forth, namely, that the death of
Christ secured the deliverance of all unconditionally. We do not
believe that doctrine, only because we do not believe the other
associated doctrines out of which it springs and of whose system
it is the complement.

1 Doederlein, De Redemptione a Potestate Diaboli. In Opuse.
Theolog.

2 Catechesis xis. 9.

3 De Festis Paschalibus, homilia vii.

4 Augustine, De Haresibus, lxxix.


The reasons why we do not believe that our race fell into helpless
depravity and ruin in the sin of the first man are, in essence,
briefly these: First, we have never been able to perceive any
proof whatever of the truth of that dogma; and certainly the onus
probandi rests on the side of such an assumption. It arose
partially from a misinterpretation of the language of the Bible;
and so far as it has a basis in Scripture, we are compelled by
force of evidence to regard it as a Jewish adoption of a pagan
error without authority. Secondly, this doctrinal system seems to
us equally irreconcilable with history and with ethics: it seems
to trample on the surest convictions of reason and conscience, and
spurn the clearest principles of nature and religion, to blacken
and load the heart and doom of man with a mountain of gratuitous
horror, and shroud the face and throne of God in a pall of wilful
barbarity. How can men be guilty of a sin committed thousands of
years before they were born, and deserve to be sent to hopeless
hell for it? What justice is there in putting on one sinless head
the demerits of a world of reprobates, and then letting the
criminal go free because the innocent has suffered? A third
objection to this whole view an objection which, if sustained,
will utterly annihilate it is this: It is quite possible that,
momentous as is the part he has played in theology, the Biblical
Adam is not at all a historical personage, but only a significant
figment of poetry. The common belief of the most authoritative men
of science, that the human race has existed on this earth for a
vastly longer period than the Hebrew statement affirms, may yet be
completely established. It may also yet be acknowledged that each
distinct race of men had its own Adam.5 Then the dogmatic
theology, based on the fall of our entire race into perdition in
its primary representative, will, of course, crumble.

The second doctrine of Christian salvation is a modification and
limitation of the previous one. This theory, like the former,
presupposes that a burden of original sin and natural depravity
transmitted from the first man had doomed, and, unless prevented
in some supernatural manner, would forever press, all souls down
to the realms of ruin and woe; also that an infinite graciousness
in the bosom of the Godhead led Christ to offer himself as an
expiation for the sins, an atoning substitute for the condemnation,
of men. But, according to the present view, this interference
of Christ did not by itself save the lost: it only removed
the otherwise insuperable bar to forgiveness, and presented
to a chosen portion of mankind the means of experiencing
a condition upon the realization of which, in each individual
case, the certainty of salvation depends. That condition is a
mysterious conversion, stirring the depths of the soul through an
inspired faith in personal election by the unchanging decree of
God. The difference, then, in a word, between the two methods of
salvation thus far explained, is this: While both assume that
mankind are doomed to death and hell in consequence of the sin of
Adam, the one asserts that the interference of Christ of itself
saved all souls, the other asserts that that interference cannot
save any soul except those whom God, of his sovereign pleasure,
had from eternity arbitrarily elected.6 This scheme grew directly
out of the dogma of fatalism, which sinks human freedom in Divine
predestination. God having solely of his

5 Burdach, Carus, Oken, Bayrhoffer, Agassiz. See Bunsen,
Christianity and Mankind, vol. iv. p. 28; Mott and Gliddon, Types
of Mankind, p. 338.

6 Confession of Faith of Westminster Divines, ch. iii. sect. 3.


own will foreordained that a certain number of mankind should be
saved, Christ died in order to pay the penalty of their sins and
render it possible for them to be forgiven and taken into heaven
without violating the awful bond of justice. The benefits of the
atonement, therefore, are limited to the elect. Nor is this to be
regarded as an act of severity; on the contrary, it is an act of
unspeakable benevolence. For by the sin of Adam the whole race of
men, without exception, were hateful to God, and justly sentenced
to eternal damnation. When, consequently, he devised a plan of
redemption by which he could himself bear the guilt, and suffer
the agony, and pay the debt of a few, and thus ransom them from
their doom, the reprobates who were left had no right to complain,
but the chosen were a monument of disinterested love, because all
alike deserved the endless tortures of hell. According to this
conception, all men being by their ancestral act and inherited
nature irretrievably lost, God's arbitrary pleasure was the cause,
Christ's voluntary death was the means, by which a certain number
were to be saved. What individuals should compose this portion of
the race, was determined from eternity beyond all contingencies.
The effect of faith and conversion, and of the new birth, is not
to save the soul, but simply to convince the soul that it is
saved. That is to say, a regenerating belief and love is not the
efficient cause, it is merely the revealed assurance, of
salvation, proving to the soul that feels it, by the testimony of
the Holy Spirit, that it is of the chosen number. The preaching of
the gospel is to be extended everywhere, not for the purpose of
saving those who would otherwise be lost, but because its
presentation will awaken in the elect, and in them alone, that
responsive experience which will reveal their election to them,
and make them sure of it, already foretasting it; though it is
thought that no one can be saved who is ignorant of the gospel: it
is mysteriously ordered that the terms of the covenant shall be
preached to all the elect. There are correlated complexities,
miracles, absurdities, in wrought with the whole theory,
inseparable from it. The violence it does to nature, to thought,
to love, to morals, its arbitrariness, its mechanical form, the
wrenching exegesis by which alone it can be forced from the
Bible,7 its glaring partiality and eternal cruelty, are its
sufficient refutation and condemnation. If the death of Christ has
such wondrous saving efficacy, and nothing else has, what keeps
him from dying again to convince the unbelieving and to save the
lost? What man is there who, if he knew that, after thirty years
of suffering terminated by a fearful death, he should rise again
into boundless bliss and glory while rapt infinitude rung with the
paans of an applauding universe, and that by means of his
humiliation he could redeem countless millions from eternal
torture, would not with a joyous spring undertake the task? And is
a common man better than Christ?

The third general plan of Christian salvation which we are to
consider differs from the foregoing one in several essential
particulars. It affirms the free will of man in opposition to a
fatal predestination. It declares that the atonement is sufficient
to redeem not only a portion of our race, but all who will put
themselves in right spiritual relations with it. In a word, while
it admits that some will actually be lost forever, it asserts that
no one is doomed

7 Schweizer, Die Lehre des Apostels Paulus vom erlosenden Tode
Christi. Theologische Studien und Kritiken, Jahrg. 1858, heft 3.


to be lost, but that the offer of pardon is made to every soul,
and that every one has power to accept or reject it. The sacrifice
of the incarnate Deity vindicated the majesty of the law, appeased
the wrath of God, and purchased his saving favor towards all who,
by a sound and earnest faith, seize the proffered justification,
throw off all reliance on their own works, and present themselves
before the throne of mercy clothed in the righteousness and
sprinkled with the blood of Christ. Here the appropriation of the
merits of Christ, through an orthodox and vivifying faith, is the
real cause as well as the experimental assurance of salvation.
This is free to all. As the brazen serpent was hoisted in the
wilderness, and the scorpion bitten Israelites invited to look on
it and be healed, so the crucified God is lifted up, and all men,
everywhere, are urged to kneel before him, accept his atonement,
and thus enable his righteousness to be imputed to them, and their
souls to be saved. The vital condition of salvation is an
appropriating faith in the vicarious atonement. Without this no
one can be saved. Thus with one word and a single breath whole
nations and races are whiffed into hell. All that the good hearted
Luther could venture to say of Cicero, whom he deeply admired and
loved, was the kind ejaculation, "I hope God will be merciful to
him!" To those who appreciate it with hostility, and look on all
things in its light, the thought that there can be no salvation
except by belief in the expiatory death of Christ, hopelessly
dooming all the heathen,8 and all infant children, unless baptized
in a proxy faith,9 builds an altar of blood among the stars and
makes the universe reek with horror. Other crimes, though stained
through with midnight dyes and heaped up to the brim of outrageous
guilt, may be freely forgiven to him who comes heartily to credit
the vicarious death of the Savior; but he who does not trust in
that, though virtuous as man can be, must depart into the
unappeasable fires. "Why this unintelligible crime of not seeing
the atonement happens to be the only sin for which there is no
atonement, it is impossible to say." Though this view of the
method, extent, and conditions of redemption is less revolting and
incredible than the other, still, it does not seem to us that any
person whose mental and moral nature is unprejudiced, healthy, and
enlightened, and who will patiently study the subject, can
possibly accept either of them. The leading assumed doctrines
common to them, out of which they severally spring, and on which
they both rest, are not only unsupported by adequate proofs, but
really have no evidence at all, and are absurd in themselves,
confounding the broadest distinctions in morals, and subverting
the best established principles of natural religion.10

The fourth scheme of Christian salvation is that which predicates
the power of insuring souls from hell solely of the Church. This
is the sacramental theory. It is assumed that, in the state of
nature subsequent to the transgression and fall of Adam, all men
are alienated from God, and by the universal original sin
universally exposed to damnation, indeed, the helpless victims of
eternal misery. In the fulness of time, Christ appeared, and
offered himself to suffer in their stead to secure their
deliverance. His death cancelled the whole sum of

8 Bretschneider, Entwickelung der Dogmatik, sect. 112, Nos. 37 50.

9 So affirmed by the Council of Carthage, Canon II.

10 The violence done to moral reason by these views is powerfully
exposed in Bushnell's Discourse on the Atonement: God in Christ,
pp. 193-202.


original sin, and only that, thus taking away the absolute
impossibility of salvation, and leaving every man in the world
free to stand or fall, incur hell or win heaven, by his personal
merits. From that time any person who lived a perfectly holy life
which no man could find practically possible thereby secured
eternal blessedness; but the moment he fell into a single sin,
however trivial, he sealed his condemnation: Christ's sacrifice,
as was just said, merely removed the transmitted burden of
original sin from all mankind, but made no provision for their
personal sins, so that practically, all men being voluntary as
well as hereditary sinners, their condition was as bad as before:
they were surely lost. To meet this state of the case, the Church,
whose priests, it is claimed, are the representatives of Christ,
and whose head is the vicegerent of God on earth, was empowered by
the celebration of the mass to re enact, as often as it pleased,
the tragedy of the crucifixion. In this service Christ is supposed
literally to be put to death afresh, and the merit of his
substitutional sufferings is supposed to be placed to the account
of the Church.11 As Sir Henry Wotton says,  "One rosy drop from
Jesus' heart Was worlds of seas to quench God's ire."

In one of the Decretals of Clement VI., called "Extravagants," it
is asserted that "one drop of Christ's blood [una guttula
sanguinis] being sufficient to redeem the whole human race, the
remaining quantity which was shed in the garden and on the cross
was left as a legacy to the Church, to be a treasure whence
indulgences were to be drawn and administered by the Roman
pontiffs." Furthermore, saints and martyrs, by their constant self
denial, voluntary sufferings, penances, and prayers, like Christ,
do more good works than are necessary for their own salvation; and
the balance of merit the works of supererogation is likewise
accredited to the Church. In this way a great reserved fund of
merits is placed at the disposal of the priests. At their pleasure
they can draw upon this vicarious treasure and substitute it in
place of the deserved penalties of the guilty, and thus absolve
them and effect the salvation of their souls. All this dread
machinery is in the sole power of the Church. Outside of her pale,
heretics, heathen, all alike, are unalterably doomed to hell. But
whoso will acknowledge her authority, confess his sins, receive
the sacrament of baptism, partake of the eucharist, obey the
priests, shall be infallibly saved. The Church declares that those
who neglect to submit to her power and observe her rites are lost,
by excommunicating such every year just before Easter, thereby
typifying that they shall have no part in the resurrection and
ascension. The scheme of salvation just exhibited we reject as
alike unwarranted by the Scriptures, absurd to reason, absurd to
conscience, fraught with evil practices, and traceable in history
through the gradual and corrupt growths of the dogmatic policy of
an interested body. There is not one text in the Bible which
affords real argument, credit, or countenance to the haughty
pretensions of a Church to retain or absolve guilt, to have the
exclusive control of the tangible keys of heaven and hell. It is
incredible to a free and intelligent mind that the opposing fates
forever of hundreds of millions of men should turn on a mere
accident of time

11 Thomas Aquinas, Summa, Suppl. pars iii. qu. 25, art. 1.


and place, or at best on the moral contingence of their
acknowledging or denying the doubtful authority of a tyrannical
hierarchy, a mere matter of form and profession, independent of
their lives and characters, and of no spiritual worth at all. One
is here reminded of a passage in Plutarch's Essay "How a Young Man
ought to hear Poems." The lines in Sophocles which declare that
the initiates in the Mysteries shall be happy in the future life,
but that all others shall be wretched, having been read to
Diogenes, he exclaimed, "What! Shall the condition of Pantacion,
the notorious robber, be better after death than that of
Epaminondas, merely because he was initiated in the Mysteries?" It
is also a shocking violence to common sense, and to all proper
appreciation of spiritual realities, to imagine the gross
mechanical transference of blame and merit mutually between the
bad and the good, as if moral qualities were not personal, but
might be shifted about at will by pecuniary considerations, as the
accounts in the debt and credit columns of a ledger. The theoretic
falsities of such a scheme are as numerous and evident as its
practical abuses have been enormous and notorious. How ridiculous
this ritual fetch to snatch souls from perdition appears as stated
by Julian against Augustine! "God and the devil, then, have
entered into a covenant, that what is born the devil shall have,
and what is baptized God shall have!"12 We hesitate not to stake
the argument on one question. If there be no salvation save by
believing and accepting the sacraments with the authority of the
Romanist or the Episcopalian Church, then less than one in a
hundred thousand of the world's population thus far can be saved.
Death steadily showers into hell, age after age, an overwhelming
proportion of the souls of all mankind, a rain storm of agonized
drops of immortality to feed and freshen the quenchless fires of
damnation. Who can believe it, knowing what it is that he
believes?

We advance next to a system of Christian salvation as remarkable
for its simplicity, boldness, and instinctive benevolence as those
we have previously examined are for complexity, unnaturalness, and
severity. The theory referred to promises the natural and
inevitable salvation of every created soul. It bases itself on two
positions, the denial that men are ever lost, except partially and
temporarily, and the exhibition of the irresistible power, perfect
wisdom, and infinite goodness of God. The advocates of this
doctrine point first to observation and experience, and declare
that no person is totally reprobate, that every one is salvable;
those most corrupt and abandoned to wickedness, unbelief, and
hardness, have yet a spark that may be kindled, a fount that may
be made to gush, unto the illumination and purification of the
whole being. A stray word, an unknown influence, a breath of the
Spirit, is continually effecting such changes, such salvations.
True, there are many fettered by vices, torn by sins, ploughed by
the caustic shares of remorse, lost to peaceful freedom, lost to
spiritual joys, lost to the sweet, calm raptures of religious
belief and love, and, in that sense, plunged in damnation. But
this, they say, is the only hell there is. At the longest, it can
endure but for the night of this life: deliverance and blessedness
come with the morning dawn of a better world. Exact retributions
are awarded to all iniquity here; so

12 Julian, lib. vi. ix.


that at the termination of the present state there is nothing to
prevent the flowing of an equal bliss impartially over all. The
substantive faculties and forces of the soul are always good and
right: only their action is perverted to evil.13 This perversion
will cease with the accidents of the present state; and thus death
is the door to salvation. God's desires and intentions for his
creatures, again they argue, must be purely gracious and blessed;
for Nature, the Bible, and the Soul blend their ultimate teachings
in one affirmation that he is Love. Being omnipotent and of
perfect wisdom, nothing can withstand his decrees or thwart his
plans. His purpose, of course, must be fulfilled. There is every
thing to prove, and nothing, rightly understood, to disprove, that
that purpose is the eternal blessedness of all his intelligent
offspring after death. Therefore, they think they are justified in
concluding, the laws of nature, God's regular habits and course of
government, the normal arrangement and process of things, will of
themselves work out the inevitable salvation of all mankind. After
the uproar and darkness, the peril and fear, of a tempestuous
night, the all embracing smile of daylight gradually spreads over
the world, and the turmoil silently subsides, and the scene
sleeps. So after the sins and miseries, the condemnation and hell,
of this state of existence, shall succeed the redemption, the
holiness and happy peace, of heaven, into which all pass by the
order of nature, the original and undisturbed arrangement of the
creative Father. This view is advanced by some on grounds both of
revelation and reason. It is the doctrine of those Beghards who
taught that "there is neither hell nor purgatory; that no one is
damned, neither Jew nor Saracen, because on the death of the body
the soul returns to God."14 But the proper doctrine of the
Universalist denomination is founded directly on Scripture, and
seems now to be simply the absolute certainty of final salvation
for all. Balfour held that Christ, in obedience to the will of
God, secures eternal life for all men in the most literal manner,
by causing the resurrection of the dead from their otherwise
endless sleep in the grave, a doctrine nearly or quite fossil
now.15

It will be noticed that by this view salvation is an unlimited
necessity, not a contingency,  a boon thrown to all, and which no
one has power to reject:

"The road to heaven is broader than the world,
And deeper than the kingdoms of the dead;
And up its ample paths the nations tread
With all their banners furl'd."

This theory contains elements, it seems to us, both of truth and
falsehood. It casts off gross mistakes, announces some fundamental
realities, overlooks, perverts, exaggerates, some essential facts
in the case. There is so much in it that is grateful and beautiful
that we cannot wonder at its reception where the tender instincts
of the heart are stronger than the stern decisions of the
conscience, where the kindly sentiments usurp the province of the
critical reason and sit in judgment upon evidence for the
construction of a dogmatic creed. We

13 Universalist Quarterly Review, vol. x. art. xvi.: Character and
its Predicates.

14 Hagenbach, Dogmengeschichte, sect. 209, note 14.

15 See Ballou, Examination of the Doctrine of Future Punishment,
pp. 152-157. Williamson, Exposition of Universalism, Sermon XL:
Nature of Salvation. Cobb, Compend. of Divinity, ch. ix. sect. 3.


cannot accept it as a whole, cannot admit its great unqualified
conclusion, not only because there is no direct evidence for it,
but because there are many potent presumptions against it. It is
not built upon the facts of our consciousness and present
experience, but is resolutely constructed in defiance of them by
an arbitrary process of assumption and inference; for since God's
perfections are as absolute now as they ever can be, and he now
permits sin and misery, there is no impossibility that they will
be permitted for a season hereafter. If they are necessary now,
they may be necessary hereafter. An experience of salvation by
all, regardless of what they do or what they leave undone, would
also defeat what we have always considered the chief final cause
of man, namely, the self determined resistance of Evil and choice
of Good, the free formation of virtuous character. The plan of a
necessary and indiscriminate redemption likewise breaks the
evident continuity of life, ignores the lineal causative power of
experience, whereby each moment partially produces and moulds the
next, destroys the probationary nature of our lot, and palsies the
strength of moral motive. It is furthermore the height of
injustice, awarding to all men the same condition, remorselessly
swallowing up their infinite differences, making sin and virtue,
sloth and toil, exactly alike in the end. Whose earnestly embraces
the theory, and meditates much upon it, and reasons closely, will
be likely to become an Antinomian. It overlooks the loud,
omnipresent hints which tell us that the present state is
incomplete and dependent, the part of a great whole, the visible
segment of a circle whose complement overarches the invisible
world to come, where future correspondences and fulnesses will
satisfy and complete present claims and deficiencies. We reject
this scheme, as to its distinctive feature, for all those reasons
which lead us to accept that final view to which we now turn.

The theory of Christian redemption which seems to us correct,
represents the good and evil forces of personal character,
harmonious or discordant with the mind of God, as the conditions
of salvation or of reprobation. Swedenborg, who teaches that man
in the future state is the son of his own deeds in the present
state, says he once saw Melancthon in hell, writing, "Faith alone
saves," the words fading out as fast as written, because
expressive of a falsehood! It is not belief, but love, that
dominates the soul, not a mental act, but a spiritual substance.
According as the realities of the soul are what they should be,
just and pure, or what they should not be, perverted and corrupt,
and according as the realities of the soul are in right relations
with truth, beauty, goodness, or in vitiated relations with them,
so, and to that extent, is the soul saved or lost. This is not a
matter of arbitrary determination on one hand; and of helpless
submission on the other: it is a matter of Divine permission on
one hand, and of free, though sometimes unintelligent and
mistaken, choice on the other. The only perdition is to be out of
tune with the right constitution and exercise of things and rules.
That, of itself, makes a man the victim of guilt and wretchedness.
The only salvation is the restoration of the balance and normal
efficiency of the faculties, the restoration of their harmony with
the moral law, the recommencement of their action in unison with
the will of God. When a soul, through its exposure and freedom,
becomes and experiences what God did not intend and is not pleased
with, what his creative and executive arrangements are not
purposely ordered for, it is, for the time, and so far forth,
lost. It is saved, when knowledge of truth illuminates the mind,
love of goodness warms the heart, energy, purity, and aspiration
fill and animate the whole being. Then, having realized in its
experience the purposes of Christ's mission, the original aims of
its existence, it rejoices in the favor of God. In the harmonious
fruition of its internal efficiencies and external relations, all
things work together for good unto it, and it basks in the beams
of the sun of immortality. Perdition and hell are the condemnation
and misery instantaneously deposited in experience whenever and
wherever a perverted and corrupt soul touches its relations with
the universe. The meeting of its consciousness with the alienated
mournful faces of things, with the hostile retributive forces of
things, produces unrest and suffering with the same natural
necessity that the meeting of certain chemical substances deposits
poison and bitterness. Perdition being the degradation and
wretchedness of the soul through ingrained falsehood, vice,
impurity, and hardness, salvation is the casting out of these
evils, and the replacing them with truth, righteousness, a holy
and sensitive life. To ransom from hell and translate to heaven is
not, then, so much to deliver from a local dungeon of gnawing
fires and worms, and bear to a local paradise of luxuries, as it
is to heal diseases and restore health. Hell is a wrong, diseased
condition of the soul, its indwelling wretchedness and
retribution, wherever it may be, as when the light of day tortures
a sick eye. Heaven is a right, healthy condition of the soul, its
indwelling integrity and concord, in whatever realms it may
reside, as when the sunshine bathes the healthy orb of vision with
delight. Salvation is nothing more nor less than the harmonious
blessedness of the soul by the fruition of all its right powers
and relations. Remove a man who is writhing in the agonies of some
physical disease, from his desolate hut on the bleak mountain side
to a gorgeous palace in a delicious tropical clime. He is just as
badly off as before. He is still, so to speak, in hell, wherever
he may be in location. Cure his sickness, and then he is, so to
speak, saved, in heaven. It is so with the soul. The conditions of
salvation and reprobation are not arbitrary, mechanical, fickle,
but are the interior and unalterable laws of the soul and of the
universe. "Every devil," Sir Thomas Browne says, "holds enough of
torture in his own ubi, and needs not the torture of circumference
to afflict him." If there are, as there may be, two entirely
separate regions in space, whose respective boundaries enclose
hell and heaven, banishment into the one, or admission into the
other, evidently is not what constitutes the essence of perdition
or of salvation, is not the all important consideration; but the
characteristic condition of the soul, which produces its
experience and decides its destination, that is the essential
thing. The mild fanning of a zephyr in a summer evening is
intolerable to a person in the convulsions of the ague, but most
welcome and delightful to others. So to a wicked soul all objects,
operations, and influences of the moral creation become hostile
and retributive, making a hell of the whole universe. Purify the
soul, restore it to a correct condition, and every thing is
transfigured: the universal hell becomes universal heaven.

We may gather up in a few propositions the leading principles of
this theory of salvation. First, Perdition is not an experience to
which souls are helplessly born, not a sentence inflicted on them
by an arbitrary decree, but is a result wrought out by free
agency, in conformity to the unalterable laws of the spiritual
world. Secondly, heaven and hell are not essentially particular
localities into which spirits are thrust, nor states of
consciousness produced by outward circumstances, but are an outward
 reflection from, and a reciprocal action upon, internal character.

Thirdly, condemnation, or justification, is not absolute and
complete, equalizing all on each side of a given line, but is a
thing of degrees, not exactly the same in any two individuals,
or in the same person at all times. Fourthly, we have no reason
to suppose that probation closes with the closing of the
present life; but every relevant consideration leads us to
conclude that the same great constitution of laws pervades all
worlds and reigns throughout eternity, so that the fate of souls
is not unchangeably fixed at death. No analogy indicates that
after death all will be thoroughly different from what it is
before death. Rather do all analogies argue that the hell and
heaven of the future will be the aggravation, or mitigation, or
continuation, of the perdition and salvation of the present. It is
altogether a sentence of exact right according to character, a
matter of personal achievement depending upon freedom, an
experience of inward elements and states, a thing of degrees, and
a subject of continued probation.

The condition of the heathen nations in reference to salvation is
satisfactory only in the light of the foregoing theory. If a
person is what God wishes, as shown by his revealed will in the
model of Christ, pure, loving, devout, wise, and earnest, he is
saved, whether he ever heard of Christ or not. Are Plato and
Aristides, Cato and Antoninus, to be damned, while Pope Alexander
VI. and King Philip II are saved, because those glorious
characters merely lived at the then height of attainable
excellence, but these fanatic scoundrels made a technical
profession of Christianity? The "Athanasian" creed asserts that
whoever doth not fully believe its dogmas "shall without doubt
perish everlastingly." And the eighteenth article in the creed of
the Church of England declares "them accursed who presume to say
that any man can be saved by diligently framing his life according
to the law or sect which he professeth, and the light of
nature."16

Another particular in which the present view of salvation is
satisfactory, in opposition to the other theories, is in leaving
the personal nature of sin clear, the realm of personal
responsibility unconfused. Why should a system of thought be set
up and adhered to in religion that would be instantly and
universally scouted at if applied to any other subject? 17 "No one
dreams that the sin of an unexercised intellect, of gross
ignorance, can be pardoned only through faith in the sacrifice of
some incarnation of the Perfect Reason. No one expects to be told
that the violation of the bodily laws can be forgiven by the
Infinite Creator only on the ground that some perfect physician
honors them by obedience and death. It is by opening the mind to
God's published truth, and by conformity to the discovered
philosophical

16 Arnauld, Emes, Goeze, and others, have written volumes to prove
the indiscriminate damnation of the heathen. On the contrary,
Muller, in his "Diss. de Paganorum poet Mortem Conditione," and
Marmontel, in his "Belisaire," take a more favorable view of the
fate of the ethnic world. The best work on the subject a work of
great geniality and ability is Eberhard's "Neue Apologie des
Socrates." Also see Knapp's Christian Theology, sect. lxxxviii.

17 Martineau, Studies of Christianity, pp. 153-176: Mediatorial
Religion. Ibid. pp. 468-477: Sin What it is, What it is not.


order, or the reception of the adopted remedy, that the mind and
the frame experience new life. And our souls are redeemed, not by
any expiation on account of which penalties are lifted, but by
reception of spiritual truth and consecration of will, which push
away penalties by wholesome life." 18

The awful inviolability of justice is shown by the eternal course
of God's laws bringing the exactly deserved penalty upon every
soul that sinneth. Whoever breaks a Divine decree puts all sacred
things in antagonism to him, and the precise punishment of his
offences not the worth of worlds nor the blood of angels can
avert. The boundless mercy of God, his atoning love, is shown by
the absence of all vindictiveness from his judgments, their
restorative aim and tendency. Whenever the sinner repents,
reforms, puts himself in a right attitude, God is waiting to
pardon and bless him, the sun shines and the happy heart is glad
as at first, the cloudy screen of sin and fear and retributive
alienation being removed. This view, when appreciated, affords as
impressive a sanction to law, and as affecting an exhibition of
love, as are theoretically ascribed to the doctrine of vicarious
expiation. The infinite sanctity of justice and the fathomless
love of God are certainly much more plainly and satisfactorily
shown by the righteous nature and beneficent operation of the law,
than by its terrible severity and arbitrary subversion. According
to the present view, the relation of Christ to human redemption is
as simple and rational as it is divinely appointed and perfectly
fulfilled. Accredited with miraculous seals, presenting the most
pathetic and inspiring motives, he reveals the truths and
exemplifies the virtues which, when adopted, regenerate the
springs of faith and character, rectify the lines of conduct, and
change men from sinful and wretched to saintly and blessed. He
stirs the stagnant soul, that man may replunge into his native
self, and rise redeemed.

For the more distinct comprehension and remembrance of the schemes
of Christian salvation we have been considering, it may be well to
recapitulate them.

The first theory is this: When, by the fall of Adam, all men were
utterly lost and doomed to hell forever, the vicarious sufferings
of Christ cancelled sin, and unconditionally purchased and saved
all. This was the original development of Universalism. It sprang
consistently from Augustinian grounds. It was taught by a party in
the Church of the first centuries, was afterwards repeatedly
condemned as a heresy by popes and by councils, and was revived by
Kelly, Murray, and others. We are not aware that it now has any
avowed disciples.

The second conception is, in substance, that God, foreseeing from
eternity the fall of Adam and the consequent damnation of his
posterity, arbitrarily elected a portion of them to salvation,
leaving the rest to their fate; and the vicarious sufferings of
Christ were the only possible means of carrying that decree into
effect. This is the Augustinian and Calvinistic theology, and has
had a very extensive prevalence among Christians. Many church
creeds still embody the doctrine; but in its original,
uncompromising form it is rapidly fading from belief. Even now few
persons can be found to profess it without essential modifications,
so

18 T. S. King, Endless Punishment Unchristian and Unreasonable, p.
65.


qualifying it as to destroy its identity.

The third plan of delivering souls from the doom supposed to rest
on them attributes to the vicarious sufferings of Christ a
conditional efficacy, depending upon personal faith. Every one who
will heartily believe in the substitutional death of Christ, and
trust in his atoning merits, shall thereby be saved. This was the
system of Pelagius, Arminius, Luther. It prevails now in the so
called Evangelical Churches more generally than any other system.

The fourth received method of salvation, assuming the same
premises which the three foregoing schemes assume, namely, that
through the fall all men are eternally sentenced to hell, declares
that, by Christ's vicarious sufferings, power is given to the
Church, a priestly hierarchy, to save such as confess her
authority and observe her rites. All others must continue lost.19
This theory early began to be constructed and broached by the
Fathers. It is held by the Roman Catholic Church, and by all the
consistent portion of the Episcopalian. A part of the Baptist
denomination also through their popular preachers, if not in their
recognised symbols assert the indispensableness of ritual baptism
to salvation.

The fifth view of the problem is that no soul is lost or doomed
except so far as it is personally, voluntarily depraved and
sinful. And even to that extent, and in that sense, it can be
called lost only in the present life. After death every soul is
freed from evil, and ushered at once into heaven. This is the
distinctive doctrine of the ultra Universalists. It is
disappearing from among its recent advocates. As a body they have
already exchanged its arbitrary conceptions of "death and glory"
for the more rational conclusions of the "Restorationists." 20

The sixth and final scheme of Christian salvation teaches that, by
the immutable laws which the Creator has established in and over
his works and creatures, a free soul may choose good or evil,
truth or falsehood, love or hate, beneficence or iniquity. Just so
far and just so long as it partakes of the former it is saved; as
it partakes of the latter it is lost, that is, alienates the favor
of God, forfeits so much of the benefits of creation and of the
blessings of being. The conditions and means of repentance,
reformation, regeneration, are always within its power, the future
state being but the unencumbered, more favorable experience of the
spiritual elements of the present, under the same Divine
constitution and laws. This is the common belief of Unitarians and
Universalists, the latter alone teaching it as a sure doctrine of
Revelation.

Salvation by purchase, by the redeeming blood of Christ; salvation
by election, by the independent decree of God, sealed by the blood
of Christ; salvation by faith, by an appropriating faith in the
blood of Christ; salvation by the Church, by the sacraments made
efficacious to that end by the blood of Christ; salvation by
nature, by the irresistible working of the natural order of
things, declared by the teachings of Christ; salvation by a
resurrection from the dead, miraculously effected by the delegated
power of Christ; salvation by character, by conformity of
character to the spiritual laws of the universe, to the nature and
will of God, revealed, urged, exemplified, by the whole mission of
Christ; these are the different theories

19 Adams, Mercy to Babes. (A plea for the baptism of infants, that
they may not be damned.)

20 Adin Ballou, Universalism and Restorationism Moral Contraries,
1837.


proposed for the acceptance of Christians.

Outside of Christendom we discern, received and operative in
various forms, all the theoretic modes of salvation acknowledged
within it, and some others in addition. The creed and practice of
the Mohammedans afford a more unflinching embodiment of the
conception of salvation by election than is furnished anywhere
else. Islam denotes Fate. All is predestinated and follows on in
inevitable sequence. No modifying influence is possible. Can a
breath move Mount Kaf? The chosen of Allah shall believe; the
rejected of Allah shall deny. Every believer's bower is blooming
for him in Paradise; every unbeliever's bed is burning for him in
hell. And nothing whatever can avail to change the persons or the
total number elected for each.

There is one theory of salvation scarcely heard of in the West,
but extensively held in the East. The Brahmanic as well as the
Buddhist thinker relies on obtaining salvation by knowledge. Life
in a continual succession of different bodies is his perdition.
His salvation is to be freed from the vortex of births and deaths,
the fret and storm of finite existence. Neither goodness nor piety
can ever release him. Knowledge alone can do it: an unsullied
intellectual vision and a free intellectual grasp of truth and
love alone can rescue him from the turbid sea of forms and
struggles. "As a lump of salt is of uniform taste within and
without, so the soul is nothing but intelligence."21 If the soul
be an entire mass of intelligence, a current of ideas, its real
salvation depends on its becoming pure and eternal truth without
mixture of falsehood or of emotional disturbance. He "must free
himself from virtues as well as from sins; for the confinement of
fetters is the same whether the chain be of gold or of iron."22
Accordingly, the Hindu, to secure emancipation, planes down the
mountainous thoughts and passions of his soul to a desert level of
indifferent insight. And when, in direct personal knowledge, free
from joy and sorrow, free from good and ill, he gazes into the
limitless abyss of Divine truth, then he is sure of the bosom of
Brahm, the door of Nirwana. Then the wheel of the Brahmanic Ixion
ceases revolving, and the Buddhist Ahasuerus flings away his
staff; for salvation is attained.

The conception of salvation by ritual works based on faith either
faith in Deity or in some redemptive agency is exhibited all over
the world. Hani, a Hindu devotee, dwelt in a thicket, and repeated
the name of Krishna a hundred thousand times each day, 23 and thus
saved his soul. The saintly Muni Shukadev said, as is written in
the most popular religious authority of India, "Who even
ignorantly sing the praises of Krishna undoubtedly obtain final
beatitude; just as, if one ignorant of the properties of nectar
should drink it, he would still become immortal. Whoever worships
Hari, with whatever disposition of mind, obtains beatitude."24
"The repetition of the names of Vishnu purifies from all sins,
even when invoked by an evil minded person, as fire burns even him
who approaches it unwillingly."25 Nothing is more common in the
sacred writings of the Hindus than the promise that "whoever reads
or hears this narrative with a devout mind shall receive final
beatitude." Millions on millions of these docile and abject
devotees undoubtingly expect salvation by such merely ritual

21 Colebrooke, Essays, vol. i. p. 359.

22 Ibid. p. 363.

23 Asiatic Researches, vol. xvi. p. 115.

24 Eastwick, Prem Sagar, p. 56.

25 Vishnu Parans, p. 210, note 13.


observances. One cries "Lord!" "Lord!" Another thumbs a book, as
if it were an omnipotent amulet. Another meditates on some mystic
theme, as if musing were a resistless spell of silent exorcism and
invocation. Another pierces himself with red hot irons, as if
voluntary pain endured now could accumulate merit for him and buy
off future inflictions.

It is surprising to what an extent men's efforts for salvation
seem underlaid by conceptions of propitiation, the placation of a
hatred, the awakening of a love, in the objects of their worship.
In all these cases salvation is sought indirectly through works,
though not particularly good works. The savage makes an offering,
mutters a prayer, or fiercely wounds his body, before the hideous
idol of his choice. The fakir, swung upon sharp hooks, revolves
slowly round a fire. The monk wears a hair shirt, and flagellates
himself until blood trickles across the floor of his cell. The
Portuguese sailor in a storm takes a leaden saint from his bosom
and kneels before it for safety. The offending Bushman crawls in
the dust and shudders as he seeks to avert the fury of the fetich
which he has carved and set in a tree. The wounded brigand in the
Apennines, with unnumbered robberies and murders on his soul,
finds perfect ease to his conscience as his glazing eye falls on a
carefully treasured picture of the Virgin, and he expires in a
triumph of faith, saying, "Sweet Mother of God, intercede for me."
The Calvinistic convert, about to be executed for his fearful
crimes, kneels at the foot of the gallows, and exclaims, as in a
recent well known instance, "I hold the blood of Christ between my
soul and the flaming face of God, and die happy, assured that I am
going to heaven."

It is all a terrible delusion, arising from perverted sentiment
and degraded thought. Of the five theoretical modes of salvation
taught in the world, Election, Faith, Works, Knowledge, Harmony,
one alone is real and divine, although it contains principles
taken from all the rest and blended with its own. There is no
salvation by foregone election; for that would dethrone the moral
laws and deify caprice. There is no salvation by dogmatic faith;
because faith is not a matter of will, but of evidence, not within
man's own power, and a thousand varieties of faith are
necessitated among men. There is no salvation by determinate
works; for works are measurable quantities, whose rewards and
punishments are meted and finally spent, but salvation is
qualitative and infinite. There is no salvation by intellectual
knowledge; for knowledge is sight, not being, an accident, not an
essence, an attribute of one faculty, not a right state and ruling
force in all. The true salvation is by harmony; for harmony of all
the forces of the soul with themselves and with all related forces
beyond, harmony of the individual will with the Divine will,
harmony of personal action with the universal activity, what other
negation of perdition is possible? what other definition and
affirmation of salvation conceivable? By the Creator's fiat, man
is first elected to be. By the guiding stimulus of faith, he is
next animated to spiritual exertion. By the performance of good
works, he then brings his moral nature into beautiful form and
attitude. By knowledge of truth, he furthermore sees how to
direct, govern, and attune himself. And finally, by the
accomplishment of all this in the organized harmony of a wise and
holy soul, there results that state of being whose passive
conditions constitute salvation, and whose active experience is
eternal life.

CHAPTER VI.

RECOGNITION OF FRIENDS IN A FUTURE LIFE.

OF all the sorrows incident to human life, none is so penetrating
to gentle hearts as that which fills them with aching regrets,
and, for a time, writes hollowness and vanity on their dearest
treasures, when death robs them of those they love. And so, of all
the questions that haunt the soul, wringing its faculties for a
solution, beseeching the oracles of the universe for a response,
none can have a more intense interest than gathers about the
irrepressible inquiry, "Shall we ever meet again, and know, the
friends we have lost? somewhere in the ample creation and in the
boundless ages, join, with the old familiar love, our long parted,
fondly cherished, never forgotten dead?" The grief of bereavement
and the desire of reunion are experienced in an endless diversity
of degrees by different persons, according as they are careless,
hard, and sense bound, or thoughtful, sympathizing, and
imaginative; undisciplined by the mysteries and afflictions of our
mortal destiny, or profoundly tried by the disappointments and
prophecies of time and fate; and as they are shadowed by the gloom
of despair, or cheered by the radiance of belief. But to all who
feel, even the least, the uncertain but deep monitions of the
silent pall, the sad procession, and the burial mound, the
impressive problem must occur, with frequency and power, Does the
grave sunder us and the objects of our affection forever? or,
across that dark gulf, shall we be united again in purer bonds?
Outside of the atheistic dissolution and the pantheistic
absorption, it is supposable that, surviving the blow of death,
our spirits may return to God and run their endless course in
divine solitude. On the other hand, it is supposable that,
possessed with all the memories of this probationary state,
blessed by the companionship of our earthly friends, we may aspire
together along the interminable gradations of the world to come.
If the former supposition be true, and the farewell of the dying
is the announcement of an irrevocable separation, then the tears
we shed over the shrouded clay, once so prized, should be
distillations from Lethe's flood, to make us forget all. But if
the latter be true, then our deadly seeming losses are as the
partings of travellers at night to meet in the morning; and, as
friend after friend retires, we should sigh to each departing
spirit a kind adieu till we meet again, and let pleasing memories
of them linger to mingle in the sacred day dreams of remaining
life.

Evidently it is of much importance to a man which of these views
he shall take; for each exerts a distinctive influence in regard
to his peace of mind, his moral strength, and his religious
character. On one who believes that hereafter, beyond all the
partings in this land of tombs, he shall never meet the dear
companions who now bless his lot, the death of friends must fall,
if he be a person of strong sensibilities, as a staggering blow,
awakening an agony of sorrow, taking from the sky and the earth a
glory nothing can ever replace, and leaving in his heart a
wretched void nothing can ever fill. Henceforth he will be
deprived mostly for all felt connection between them is hopelessly
sundered of the good influences they exerted on him when present:
he must try, by all expedients, to forget them; think no more of
their virtues, their welcome voices and kindly deeds; wipe from
the tablets of his soul all fond records of their united happy
days; look not to the future, let the past be as though it had
never been, and absorb his thoughts and feelings in the turmoil of
the present. This is his only course; and even then, if true to
the holiest instincts of his soul, he will find the fatal
separation has lessened his being and impoverished his life,

"For this losing is true dying; This is lordly man's down lying,
This his slow but sure reclining, Star by star his world
resigning."

But to him who earnestly expects soon to be restored under fairer
auspices and in a deathless world to those from whom he parted as
he laid their crumbling bodies in the earth, the death of friends
will come as a message from the Great Father, a message solemn yet
kind, laden indeed with natural sadness yet brightened by sure
promise and followed by heavenly compensations. If his tears flow,
they flow not in scalding bitterness from the Marah fountain of
despair, but in chastened joy from the smitten rock of faith. So
far from endeavoring to forget the departed, he will cling to
their memories with redoubled tenderness, as a sacred trust and a
redeeming power. They will be more precious to him than ever,
stronger to purify and animate. Their saintly examples will
attract him as never before, and their celestial voices plead from
on high to win him to virtue and to heaven. The constant thought
of seeing them once more, and wafting in their arms through the
enchanted spaces of Paradise, will wield a sanctifying force over
his spirit. They will make the invisible sphere a peopled reality
to him, and draw him to God by the diffused bonds of a spiritual
acquaintance and an eternal love.

Since the result in which a man rests on this subject, believing
or disbelieving that he shall recognise his beloved ones the other
side of the grave, exerts a deep influence on him, in one case
disheartening, in the other uplifting, it is incumbent on us to
investigate the subject, try to get at the truth, clear it up, and
appreciate it as well as we can. It is a theme to interest us all.
Who has not endeared relatives, choice friends, freshly or long
ago removed from this earth into the unknown clime? In a little
while, as the ravaging reaper sweeps on his way, who will not have
still more there, or be there himself? Whether old acquaintance
shall be all forgot or be well remembered there, is an inquiry
which must profoundly interest all who have hearts to love their
companions, and minds to perceive the creeping shadows of mystery
drawing over us as we approach the sure destiny of age and the dim
confines of the world. It is a theme, far removed from noisy
strifes and vain shows, penetrating that mysterious essence of
affection and thought which we are. The thing of first importance
is not the conclusion we reach, but the spirit in which we seek
and hold it. The Christian says to his friend, "Our souls will be
united in yonder heaven." Danton, with a horrible travesty, said
to his comrades on the scaffold, "Our heads will meet in that
sack."

Before engaging directly in the discussion, it will be interesting
to notice, for an instant, the verdict which history, in the
spontaneous suppositions and rude speculations of ancient peoples,
pronounces on this subject.1 Among their various opinions about
the state after death, it is a prominent circumstance that they
generally agree in conceiving it as a social state in which
personal likenesses and memories are retained, fellow countrymen
are grouped together, and friends united. This is minutely true of
those nations with the details of whose faith we are acquainted,
and is implied in the general belief of all others, except those
who expected the individual spirit to be absorbed in the soul of
the universe. Homer shows Ulysses and Virgil in like manner shows
Aneas upon his entrance into the other world mutually recognising
his old comrades and recognised by them. The two heroes whose
inseparable friendship on earth was proverbial are still together
in Elysium:

"Then, side by side, along the dreary coast Advanced Achilles' and
Patroclus' ghost, A friendly pair."

In this representation that there was a full recognition of
acquaintances, all the accounts of the other world given in Greek
and Roman literature harmonize. The same is true of the accounts
contained in the literature of the ancient Hebrews. In the Book of
Genesis, when Jacob hears of the death of his favorite child, he
exclaims, "I shall go down to my son Joseph in the under world,
mourning." When the witch of Endor raised the ghost of Samuel,
Saul knew him by the description she gave of him as he rose. The
monarch shades in the under world are pictured by Isaiah as
recognising the shade of the king of Babylon and rising from their
sombre thrones to greet him with mockery. Ezekiel shows us each
people of the heathen nations in the under world in a company by
themselves. When David's child died, the king sorrowfully
exclaimed, "He will not return to me; but I shall go to him." All
these passages are based on the conception of a gloomy
subterranean abode where the ghosts of the dead are reunited after
their separation at death on earth. An old commentator on the
Koran says a Mohammedan priest was once asked how the blessed in
paradise could be happy when missing some near relative or dear
friend whom they were thus forced to suppose in hell. He replied,
God will either cause believers to forget such persons or else to
rest in expectation of their coming. The anecdote shows
affectingly that the same yearning heart and curiosity are
possessed by Moslem and Christian. A still more impressive case in
point is furnished by a picture in a Buddhist temple in China. The
painting represents the story of the priest Lo Puh, who, on
passing into paradise at death, saw his mother, Yin Te, in hell.
He instantly descended into the infernal court, Tsin Kwang Wang,
where she was suffering, and, by his valor, virtues, and
intercessions, rescued her. The picture vividly portraying the
whole story may be seen and studied at the present time by
Christian missionaries who enter that temple of the benevolent
Buddha.2 From the faith of many other nations illustrations might
be brought of the same fact, that the great common instinct which
has led men to believe in a future life has at the same time
caused them to believe that in that life there would be a union
and recognition of friends. Let this far reaching historical fact
be taken at its just value,

1 Alexius, Tod and Wiedersehen. Eine Gedankenfolge der besten
Schriftsteller aller Zeiten und Volker.

2 Asiatic Journal, 1840, p. 211.


while we proceed to the labor in hand. The fact referred to is of
some value, because, being an expression of the heart of man as
God made it, it is an indication of his will, a prophecy.

There are three ways of trying the problem of future recognition.
The cool, skeptical class of persons will examine the present
related facts of the case; argue from what they now know; test the
question by induction and inference. Let us see to what results
they will thus be led. In the first place, we learn upon
reflection that we now distinguish each other by the outward form,
physical proportion, and combination of looks, tones of voice, and
other the like particulars. Every one has his individuality in
these respects, by which he is separable from others. It may be
hastily inferred, then, that if we are to know our friends
hereafter it will be through the retention or the recovery of
their sensible peculiarities. Accordingly, many believe the soul
to be a perfect reflection or immaterial fac simile of the body,
the exact correspondence in shadowy outline of its gross
tabernacle, and consequently at once recognizable in the
disembodied state. The literature of Christendom we may almost say
of the world teems with exemplifications of this idea. Others,
arguing from the same acknowledged premises, conclude that future
recognition will be secured by the resurrection of the material
body as it was in all its perfection, in renovated and unfading
prime. But, leaving out of view the inherent absurdity of the
doctrine of a physical resurrection, there is a fatal difficulty
in the way of both these supposititious modes of mutual knowledge
in another world. It is this. The outward form, features, and
expression sometimes alter so thoroughly that it is impossible for
us to recognise our once most intimate companions. Cases are not
rare of this kind. Let one pass in absence from childhood to
maturity, and who that had not seen him in the mean time could
tell that it was he? The trouble arising thence is finely
illustrated by Shakspeare in the motherly solicitude of Constance,
who, on learning that her young son has been imprisoned by his
uncle, King John, and will probably be kept until he pines to
death, cries in anguish to her confessor,

"Father cardinal, I have  heard you say
That we shall see and know our friends in heaven:
If that be true, I shall see my boy again;
For, since the birth of Cain, the first male child,
To him that did but yesterday suspire,
There was not such a gracious creature born.
But now will canker sorrow eat my bud
And chase the native beauty from his cheek,
And he will look as hollow as a ghost,
As dim and meagre as an ague's fit;
And so he'll die; and, rising so again,
When I shall meet him in the court of heaven
I shall not know him: therefore never, never
Must I behold my pretty Arthur more."

Owing to the changes of all sorts which take place in the body,
future recognition cannot safely depend upon that or upon any
resemblance of the spirit to it. Besides, not the faintest proof
can be adduced of any such perceptible correspondence subsisting
between them.

Turning again to the facts of experience, we find that it is not
alone, nor indeed chiefly, by their visible forms and features
that we know our chosen ones. We also, and far more truly, know
them by the traits of their characters, the elements of their
lives, the effluence of their spirits, the magic atmosphere which
surrounds them, the electric thrill and communication which vivify
and conjoin our souls. And even in the exterior, that which most
reveals and distinguishes each is not the shape, but the
expression, the lights and shades, reflected out from the immortal
spirit shrined within. We know each other really by the mysterious
motions of our souls. And all these things endure and act
uninterrupted though the fleshly frame alter a thousand times or
dissolve in its native dust. The knowledge of a friend, then,
being independent of the body, spirits may be recognised in the
future state by the associations mutually surrounding them, the
feelings connecting them. Amidst all the innumerable thronging
multitudes, through all the immeasurable intervening heights and
depths, of the immaterial world, remembered and desired companions
may be selected and united by inward laws that act with the ease
and precision of chemical affinities. We may therefore recognise
each other by the feelings which now connect us, and which shall
spontaneously kindle and interchange when we meet in heaven, as
the signs of our former communion.

It needs but little thought to perceive that by this view future
recognition is conditional, being made to depend on the permanence
of our sympathies: there must be the same mutual relations,
affinities, fitness to awaken the same emotions upon approaching
each other's sphere, or we shall neither know nor be known. But in
fact our sympathies and aversions change as much as our outward
appearance does. The vices and virtues, loves and hatreds, of our
hearts alter, the peculiar characteristics of our souls undergo as
great a transformation, sometimes, as thorough a revolution, as
the body does in the interval between childhood and manhood. These
changes going on in our associates frequently change our feelings
towards them, heightening or diminishing our affection, creating a
new interest, destroying an old one, now making enemies lovers,
and now thoroughly alienating very friends. Such fundamental
alterations of character may occur in us, or in our friend, before
we meet in the unseen state, that we shall no more recognise each
other's spirits than we should know each other on earth after a
separation in which our bodily appearances and voices had been
entirely changed. These considerations would induce us to think
that recognition hereafter is not sure, but turns on the condition
that we preserve a remembrance, desire, and adaptedness for one
another.

If now the critical inquirer shall say there is no evidence, and
it is incredible, that the body will be restored to a future life,
or that the soul has any resemblance to the body by which it may
be identified, furthermore, if he shall maintain that the doctrine
of the revelation and recognition of the souls of friends in
another life by an instinctive feeling, a mysterious attraction
and response, is fanciful, an overdrawn conclusion of the
imagination, not warranted by a stern induction of the average
realities of the subject, and if he shall then ask, how are we to
distinguish our former acquaintances among the hosts of heaven?
there is one more fact of experience which meets the case and
answers his demand. When long absence and great exposures have
wiped off all the marks by which old companions knew each other,
it has frequently happened that they have met and conversed with
indifference, each being ignorant of whom the other was; and so it
has continued until, by some indirect means, some accidental
allusion, or the agency of a third person, they have been suddenly
revealed. Then, with throbbing hearts, in tears and rapture, they
have rushed into each other's arms, with an instantaneous
recurrence of their early friendship in all its original warmth,
fulness, and flooding associations. Many such instances are
related in books of romance with strict truth to the actual
occurrences of life. Several instances of it are authenticated in
the early history of America, when children, torn from their homes
by the Indians, were recovered by their parents after twenty or
thirty years had elapsed and they were identified by circumstantial
evidence. Let any parent ask his heart, any true friend ask his heart,
if, discovering by some foreign means the object of his love,
he would not embrace him with just as ardent a gratitude and
devotion as though there were no outward change and they had
known one another at sight. So, in the life beyond the
grave, if we are not able to recognise our earthly companions
directly, either by spiritual sight or by intuitive feeling, we
may obtain knowledge of each other indirectly by comparison of
common recollections, or by the mediation of angels, or by some
other Divine arrangement especially prepared for that purpose. And
therefore, whether in heaven we look or feel as we do here or not,
whether there be any provision in our present constitution for
future recognition or not, is of no consequence. In a thousand
ways the defect can be remedied, if such be the will of God. And
that such is his will every relevant fact and consideration would
seem to prove. It is a consistent and seemingly requisite
continuation and completion of that great scheme of which this
life is a part. It is an apparently essential element and
fulfilment of the wonderful apparatus of retribution, reward, and
discipline, intended to educate us as members of God's eternal
family. Because from the little which we now understand we cannot
infer with plainness and certainty the precise means and method by
which we can discriminate our friends in heaven need be no
obstacle to believing the fact itself; for there are millions of
undoubted truths whose conditions and ways of operation we can
nowise fathom. Upon the whole, then, we conclude that we cannot by
our mere understandings decide with certainty the question
concerning future recognition; but we are justified in trusting to
the accuracy of that doctrine, since it rests safely with the free
pleasure of God, who is both infinitely able and disposed to do
what is best, and we cannot help believing that it is best for us
to be with and love hereafter those whom we are with and love
here.3

There is a way of dealing with the general subject before us
wholly different from the course thus far pursued. Ceasing to act
the philosopher, laying aside all arguments and theories, all dry
speculations, we may come as simple believers to the Christian
Scriptures and investigate their teachings to accept whatever they
pronounce as the word of God's truth. Let us see to what results
we shall thus be led. Searching the New Testament to learn its
doctrine

3 Munch, Werden wir uns wiedersehen nach dem Tode. This work,
based on the Kantian philosophy, denies future recognition. There
is an able reply to it by Vogel, Ueber die Hoffnung des
Wiedersehens.


in regard to reunion in a future state, we are very soon struck
with surprise at the mysterious reserve, so characteristic of its
pages, on this entire theme. Instead of a full and minute
revelation blazing along the track of the gospel pens, a few
fragmentary intimations, incidental hints, scattered here and
there, are the substance of all that it expressly says. But though
little is directly declared, yet much is plainly implied:
especially the one great inference with which we are now concerned
may be unequivocally and repeatedly drawn. In the parable of the
Rich Man and the Beggar the Savior pictures forth the recognition
of their souls in the disembodied state. Dives also is described
as recollecting with intense interest, with the most anxious
sympathy, his endangered brethren on earth. Although this occurs
in a parable, yet it is likely that so prominent and vital a
feature of it would be moulded, as to its essential significance,
in accordance with what the author intended should be received as
truth. Jesus also speaks of many who should come from the east and
the west and sit down with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the
kingdom of heaven; from which it would appear that the patriarchs
are together in fellowship and that the righteous of after times
were to be received with them in mutual acquaintance. On the Mount
of Transfiguration the witnessing disciples saw Moses and Elias
together with Jesus, and recognised them, probably from their
resemblance to traditional descriptions of them. Jesus always
represented the future state as a society. He said to his
followers, "I go to prepare a place for you, that where I am there
ye may be also;" and he prayed to his Father that his disciples
might be with him where he was going. At another time he declared
of little children, "Their angels always behold the face of my
Father in heaven:" he also taught that "there is joy in heaven
over every sinner that repenteth;" passages that presuppose such a
community of faculties, sympathies, in heaven and earth, in angels
and men, as certainly implies the doctrine of continued knowledge
and fellowship. When heaven was opened before the dying Stephen,
he saw and instantly knew his Divine Master, the Lord Jesus, and
called to him to welcome his ascending spirit. Paul writes to the
Thessalonians that he would not have them sorrow concerning the
dead as those who have no hope, assuring them that when Christ
reappears they shall all be united again. In the Apocalypse, John
saw, in a vision, the souls of the martyrs, who had died for the
faith of the gospel, together, under the altar. From community of
suffering and a common abode together in heaven we may safely
infer their recognition of each other. The Gospels declare that
Christ after his death remembered his disciples and came back to
them to assure them that they should rejoin him on high; and the
apostles assert that we are to be with Christ and to be like him
in the future state. It follows from the admission of these
declarations that we shall remember our friends and be united with
them in conscious knowledge. Few, and brief, and vague as the
utterances of the Scriptures are in relation to this theme, they
necessarily involve all the results of an avowed doctrine. They
undeniably involve the supposition that in the other life we shall
be conscious personalities as here, retaining our memories and
constituting a society. From these implications the fact of the
future recognition of friends irresistibly results, unless there
be some special interference to prevent it; and such an
interposition there is no hint of and can be no reason for
fearing.

Such is really all that we can learn from the Scriptures on the
subject of our inquiry.4 Its indirectness and brevity would
convince us that God did not intend to betray to us in clear light
the secrets of the shrouded future, that for some reason it is
best that his teaching should be so reserved, and leave us to the
haunting wonder, the anxious surmise, the appalling mystery, the
alluring possibilities, that now meet our gaze on the unmoving
veil of death. God intends we shall trust in him without
knowledge, and by faith, not by sight, pursue his guidance into
the silent and unknown land.

Therefore, after analyzing the relevant facts of present
experience and inferring what we can from them, and after studying
the Scriptures and finding what they say, there is yet another
method of considering the problem of recognition in the future
state. That is without caring for critical discussion, without
deferring to extraneous authority, we may follow the gravitating
force of instinct, imagination, and moral reason. We are made to
love and depend on each other. The longer, the more profoundly, we
know and admire the good, the more our being becomes intertwined
with theirs, so much the more intensely we desire to be with them
always, and so much the more awful is the agony of separation.
This, what is it but great Nature's testimony, God's silent
avowal, that we are to meet in eternity? Can the fearful anguish
of bereavement be gratuitous? can the yearning prophecies of the
smitten heart be all false? Belief in reunion hereafter is
spontaneously adopted by humanity. We therefore esteem it divinely
ordered or true. Without that soothing and sustaining trust, the
unrelieved, intolerable wretchedness in many cases would burst
through the fortress of the mind, hurl reason from its throne, and
tear the royal affections and their attendants in the trampled
dust of madness. Many a rarely gifted soul, unknown in his
nameless privacy of life, has been so conjoined with a worthy
peer, through precious bonds of unutterable sympathy, that, rather
than be left behind, "the divided half of such a friendship as had
mastered time," he has prayed that they, dying at once, might,
involved together, hover across the dolorous strait to the other
shore, and

"Arrive at last the blessed goal
Where He that died in Holy Land
Might reach them out the shining hand
And take them as a single soul."

Denied that inmost wish, the rest of his widowed life below has
been one melancholy strain of "In Memoriam." Many a faithful and
noble mourner, whose garnered love and hope have been blighted for
this world, would tell you that, without meeting his lost ones
there, heaven itself would be no heaven to him. In such a state of
soul we must expect to know again in an unfading clime the
cherished dead. That belief is of Divine inspiration, an
arrangement to heal the deadly wounds of sorrow. It is madness not
to think it a verity. Who believes, as he shall float through the
ambrosial airs of heaven, he could touch, in passing, the radiant
robes of his chosen friends without a thrill of recognition, the
prelude to a blissful and immortal communion? Is there not truth
in the poet's picture of the meeting of child and parent in heaven?

4 Harbaugh, The Heavenly Recognition. Gisborne, Recollections of
Friends in the World to Come. Muston, Perpetuation of Christian
Friendship.


"It was not, mother, that I knew thy face: The luminous eclipse
that is on it now, Though it was fair on earth, would have made it
strange Even to one who knew as well as he loved thee; But my
heart cried out in me, Mother!"

Think of the unfathomable yearnings, the infinite ecstasies of
desire and faith from age to age swelling in the very heart of the
world, all set on the one hope of future union, and who then can
believe that God will coldly blast them all? They are innocent,
they are holy, they are meritorious, they are unspeakably dear. We
would not destroy them; and God will not.

Man's life is the true fable of that beautiful youth, Narcissus,
who had a twin sister of remarkable loveliness, strongly
resembling himself, and to whom he was most tenderly attached. She
dies young. He frequents fountains to gaze upon his own image
reflected in the waters, it seeming to him the likeness of her he
has lost. He is in pity transformed into a flower on the border of
a stream, where, bending on his fragile stem, he seeks his image
in the waters murmuring by, until he fades and dies. Has not God,
the all loving Author who composed the sweet poem of Man and
Nature, written at the close a reconciling Elysium wherein these
pure lovers, the fond Narcissus and his echo mate, shall wander in
perennial bliss, their embracing forms mirrored in unruffled
fountains?

Looking now for the conclusion of the whole matter, we find that
it lies in three different aspects, both of inquiring thought and
of practical morality, according to the lights and modes in which
three different classes of minds approach it. To the consistent
metaphysician, reasoning rigidly on grounds of science and
philosophy, every thing pertaining to the methods and circumstances
of the future life is an affair of entire uncertainty and hypothesis.5
If in the future state the soul retains its individuality as an
identical force, form, life, and memory, and if associates in the
present state are brought together, it is probable that old friends
will recognise each other. But if they are oblivious of the past,
if they are incommunicably separated in space or state, if one
progresses so much farther that the other can never overtake him,
if the personal soul blends its individual consciousness with the
unitary consciousness of the Over Soul, if it commences a new career
from a fresh psychical germ, then, by the terms, there will be no
mutual recognition. In that case his comfort and his duty are to
know that the anguish and longing he now feels will cease then; to
trust in the benignity of the Infinite Wisdom, who knows best what
to appoint for his creatures; and to submit with harmonizing
resignation to the unalterable decree, offering his private wish a
voluntary sacrifice on the altar of natural piety. That he shall
know his friends hereafter is not impossible, not improbable;
neither is it certain. He may desire it, expect it, but not with
speculative pride dogmatically affirm it, nor with insisting
egotism presumptuously demand it.

5 Gravell, Das Wiedersehen nach dem Tode. Wie es nur sein konne.

To the uncritical Christian the recognising reunion of friends in
heaven is an unshaken assurance.6 There is nothing to disturb his
implicit reception of the plain teaching of Scripture. The
legitimate exhortations of his faith are these. Mourn not too
bitterly nor too long over your absent dead; for you shall meet
them in an immortal clime. As the last hour comes for your dearest
ones or for yourself, be of good cheer; for an imperishable joy is
yours. You:

"Cannot lose the hope that many a year
Hath shone on a gleaming way,
When the walls of life are closing round
And the sky grows sombre gray."

Put not away the intruding thoughts of the departed, but let them
often recur. The dead are constant. You know not how much they may
think of you, how near they may be to you. Will you pass to meet
them not having thought of them for years, having perhaps
forgotten them? Let your mind have its nightly firmament of
religious communion, beneath which white and sable memories shall
walk, and the sphered spirits of your risen friends, like stars,
shed down their holy rays to soothe your feverish cares and hush
every murmuring doubt to rest. From the dumb heavings of your
loving and trustful heart, sometimes exclaim, Parents who nurtured
and watched over me with unwearied affection, I would remember you
oft, and love you well, and so live that one day I may meet you at
the right hand of God. Early friends, so close and dear once, who
in the light of young romance trod with me life's morning hills,
neither your familiar faces nor your sweet communion are forgotten
by me: I fondly think of you, and aspire towards you, and pray for
a purer soul, that I may mount to your celestial circle at last;

"For many a tear these eyes must weep,
And many a sin must be forgiven,
Ere these pale lids shall sink to sleep,
Ere you and I shall meet in heaven."

Blessed Jesus, elder Brother of our race, who sittest now by thy
Father's throne, or pacest along the crystal coast as a leader,
chief among ten thousand, whose condescending brow the bloody
thorns no longer press, but the dazzling crown of thy Divinity
encircles, oh, remember us, poor erring pilgrims after thine
earthly steps; pity us, help us, and after death bring us to thy
home.

To the sympathetic poet, the man of sentiment and meditation, who
views the question from the position of the heart, in the glory
and vistas of the imagination, but with all the known facts and
relations of the subject lying bare under his sight, the uniting
restoration, in another sphere, of earth's broken ties and parted
friends, is an unappeasable craving of the soul, in harmony with
the moral law, powerfully prophesied to his experience from all
quarters, and seemingly confirmed to his hopes by every promise of
God and nature.7

6 Grafe, Biblische Beitrage zu der Frage, Werden wir uns
wiedersehen nach dem Tode.

7 Engel, Wir werden uns wiedersehen. Halst, Beleuchtung der
Hauptgrunde fur den Glauben an Erinnerung und Wiedersehen nach dem
Tode. Streicher, Neue Beitrage zur Kritik des Glaubens an
Ruckerinnerung nach dem Tode.


Received as a truth, it is a well of inexhaustible comfort, making
experience a green oasis where it overflows. The denial of it as a
proven falsehood is a withering blast of dust blowing on the
friendly caravan of sojourners in the desert of life. If existence
is the enjoyment of a largess of social love, and death is to have
a solitary hand snatch it all away forever, how dismal is the
prospect to the poor heart that loves and clings, loses and
despairs, and can only falter hopelessly on! It cannot be so. Love
is the true prophet. Heaven will restore the treasures earth has
lost.

The mourner by the grave! Eve convulsed over the form of Abel!
Jesus weeping where Lazarus lay! America embracing the urn of
Washington! The Genius of Humanity at the Tomb of the Past! It is
the most pathetic spectacle of the world. As in the old myth the
pelican, hovering over her dead broodlets, pierced her own breast
in agony and fluttered there until by the fanning of her wings
above them and the dropping of her warm blood on them they were
brought to life again, so the great Mother of men seems in history
to brood over the ashes of departed ages, dropping the tears of
her grief and faith into the future to restore her deceased
children to life and draw them together within her embrace. And
that sublime Rachel will not easily be comforted except when her
thoughts, migrating whither her offspring have gone, seem to find
them happy in some happy heaven.

The poet, lover of his race, who cannot trust his happier
instinct, but perforce believes that beyond the sepulchral line of
mortality he shall know no more of his friends, may find, as helps
to a willing acquiescence in what is fated, either one of two
possible contemplations.8 He may sadly lay upon his heart the
stifling solace, There will be no baffled wants nor unhappiness,
but all will be over when hic jacet is sculptured on the headstone
of my grave. Or, with measureless rebound of faith, he may crowd
the capacity of his soul with the mysterious presentiment, In the
unchangeable fulness of an infinite bliss, all specialties will be
merged and forgotten, and I shall be one of those to whom "the
wearisome disease" of remembered sorrow and anticipated joy "is an
alien thing."

8 Wieland's Euthanasia expresses disbelief in the preservation of
personality and consciousness after death. The same ground had
been taken in the work published anonymously at Halle in 1775,
Plato and Leibnitz jenseits des Styx. See, on the other side of
the question, Wohlfahrt, Tempel der Unsterblichkeit, oder neue
Anthologie der wichtigsten Ausspruche, besonders neuerer Weisen
uber Wiedersehen u. s. w.

CHAPTER VII.

LOCAL FATE OF MAN IN THE ASTRONOMIC UNIVERSE.

ACCORDING to the imagining of some speculative geologists, perhaps
this earth first floated in the abyss as a volume of vapor,
wreathing its enormous folds of mist in fantastic shapes as it was
borne along on the idle breath of law. Ages swept by, until this
stupendous fog ball was condensed into an ocean of fire, whose
billows heaved their lurid bosoms and reared their ashy crests
without a check, while their burning spray illuminated its track
around the sable vault. During periods which stagger computation,
this molten world was gradually cooled down; constant rivers wrung
from the densely swathing vapor poured over the heated mass and at
last submerged its crust in an immense sea. Then, for unknown
centuries, fire, water, and wind waged a Titanic war, that
imagination shudders to think of, jets of flame licking the stars,
massive battlements and columns of fire piled to terrific heights,
now the basin of the sea suddenly turned into a glowing caldron
and the atmosphere saturated with steam, again explosions hurling
mountains far into space and tearing the earth open in ghastly
rents to its very heart. At length the fire was partially subdued,
the peaceful deep glassed the sky in its bosom or rippled to the
whispers of the breeze, and from amidst the fertile slime and
mould of its sheltered floor began to sprout the first traces of
organic life, the germs of a rude species of marine vegetation.
Thousands of years rolled on. The world ocean subsided, the peaks
of mountains, the breasts of islands, mighty continents, emerged,
and slowly, after many tedious processes of preparation, a
gigantic growth of grass, every blade as large as our vastest oak,
shot from the soil, and the incalculable epoch of ferns commenced,
whose tremendous harvest clothed the whole land with a deep carpet
of living verdure. While unnumbered growths of this vegetation
were successively maturing, falling, and hardening into the dark
layers of inexhaustible coal beds, the world, one waving
wilderness of solemn ferns, swept in its orbit, voiceless and
silent, without a single bird or insect of any kind in all its
magnificent green solitudes, the air everywhere being heavily
surcharged with gases of the deadliest poison. Again innumerable
ages passed, and the era of mere botanic growths reaching its
limit, the lowest forms of animal life moved in the waters, the
earliest creatures being certain marine reptiles, worms, and bugs
of the sea. Then followed various untimed periods, during which
animal life rose by degrees from mollusk and jellyfish, by
plesiosaurus and pterodactyl, horrible monsters, hundreds of feet
in length, whose tramp crashed through the woods, or whose flight
loaded the groaning air, to the dolphin and the whale in the sea,
the horse and the lion on the land, and the eagle, the
nightingale, and the bird of paradise in the air. Finally, when
millions of aons had worn away, the creative process culminated in
Humanity, the crown and perfection of all; for God said, "Let us
make man in our own image;" and straightway Adam, with upright
form, kingly eye, and reason throned upon his brow, stood on the
summit of the world and gave names to all the races of creatures
beneath.1

At this stage two important questions arise. The first is, whether
man is the final type of being intended in the Divine plan for
this world, or whether he too is destined in his turn to be
superseded by a higher race, endowed with form, faculties, and
attributes transcending our conceptions, even as our own
transcended the ideas of the previous orders of existence.
Undoubtedly, had the ichthyosaurus, ploughing through the deep and
making it boil like a pot, or one of those mammoth creatures of
the antediluvian age who browsed half a dozen trees for breakfast,
crunched a couple of oxen for luncheon and a whole flock of sheep
for his dinner, been consulted on a similar problem, he would have
replied, without hesitation, "I exhaust the uses of the world.
What animal can there be superior to me? beyond a question, my
race shall possess the earth forever!" The mastodon could not know
any uses of nature except those he was fitted to experience, nor
imagine a being with the form and prerogatives of man. Therefore
he would not believe that the mastodon race would ever be
displaced by the human. We labor under the same disqualification
for judgment. There may be in the system of nature around us
adaptations, gifts, glories, as much higher than any we enjoy as
our noblest powers and privileges are in advance of those of the
tiger or the lark.

It is a remarkable fact that the mature states of the antediluvian
races correspond with the foetal states of the present races, and
that the foetal states of embryonic man are counterparts of the
mature states of the lower races now contemporaneous with him.
This great discovery of modern science, though perhaps destitute
of logical value, suggests to the imagination the thought that man
may be but the foetal state of a higher being, a regent
temporarily presiding here until the birth and inauguration of the
true king of the world, and destined himself to be born from the
womb of this world into the free light and air of the spirit
kingdom!

The resources of God are inexhaustible; and in the evolution of
his prearranged ages it may be that there will arise upon the
earth a race of beings of unforetold majesty, who shall disinter
the remnant bones and ponder the wrecked monuments of forgotten
man as we do those of the disgusting reptiles of the Saurian
epoch. But this is a mere conceit of possibility; and, so far as
the data for forming an opinion are in our hands, it is altogether
incredible. So far as appears, the adaptation between man and the
earth is exhaustive. He is able to subdue all her forces, reign
over all her provinces, enjoy all her delights, and gather into
his consciousness all her prophecies. And our practical conviction
is absolute that the race of men is the climax of being destined
for this earth, and that they will occupy its hospitable bosom
forever with their toils and their homes, their sports and their
graves.2

The other question is this: Was the subjection of the human race
to physical death a part of the Creator's original plan, or the
retributive result of a subsequent dislocation of that plan by
sin? a part of the great harmony of nature, or a discord marring
the happy destiny

1 Harris, The Pre Adamite Earth.

2 Agassiz says no higher creature than man is to be expected on
earth, because the capacities of the earthly plan of organic
creation are completed and exhausted with him. Introduction to
Study of Natural History, p. 57.


of man? Approaching this problem on grounds of science and reason
alone, there can be no hesitation as to the reply. There are but
two considerations really bearing upon the point and throwing
light upon it; and they both force us to the same conclusion.
First, it is a fact admitting no denial that death was the
predetermined natural fate of the successive generations of the
races that preceded man. Now, what conceivable reason is there for
supposing that man, constructed from the same elements, living
under the same organic laws, was exempt from the same doom? There
is not in the whole realm of science a single hint to that effect.
Secondly, the reproductive element an essential feature in the
human constitution, leading our kind to multiply and replenish the
earth is a demonstration that the office of death entered into
God's original plan of the world. For otherwise the earth at this
moment could not hold a tithe of the inhabitants that would be
demanding room. When God had permitted this world to roll in space
for awful ages, a lifeless globe of gas, fire, water, earth, and
then let it be occupied for incommensurable epochs more by snails,
vermin, and iguanodons, would he wind up the whole scene and
destroy it when the race of man, crowning glory of all, had only
flourished for a petty two thousand years? It is not credible. And
yet it must have been so unless it was decreed that the successive
generations should pass away and thus leave space for, the new
comers. We conclude, then, that it is the will of God and was in
the beginning that the human race shall possess the earth through
all the unknown periods of the future, the parents continually
passing off the stage in death as the children rise upon it to
maturity. We cannot discern any authority in those old traditions
which foretell the impending destruction of the world. On what
grounds are we to believe them? The great system of things is a
stable harmony. There is no wear or tear in the perfect machinery
of the creation, rolling noiseless in its blue bearings of ether.
It seems, comparatively speaking, to have just begun. Its
oscillations are self adjusted, and science prophesies for
humanity an illimitable career on this earthly theatre. The swift
melting of the elements and restoration of chaos is a mere heathen
whim or a poetic figment. It is the bards who sing,

"The earth shall shortly die. Her grave is dug. I see the worlds,
night clad, all gathering In long and dark procession. And the
stars, Which stand as thick as glittering dewdrops on The fields
of heaven, shall pass in blazing mist."

Such pictures are delusion winning the imagination, not truth
commanding the reason. In spite of all the Cassandra screams of
the priesthood, vaticinating universal ruin, the young old earth,
fresh every spring, shall remain under God's preserving
providence, and humanity's inexhaustible generations renewedly
reign over its kingdoms, forever. Plotinus said, "If God repents
having made the world, why does he defer its destruction? If he
does not yet repent, he never will, as being now accustomed to it,
and becoming through time more friendly to it."

3 Lucan says, "Our bones and the stars shall be mingled on one
funeral pyre." Communis mundo superest rogus, ossibus astra
Misturus.

But to receive such a good piece of poetry as veritable prevision
is surely a puerile error which a mature mind in the nineteenth
century should be ashamed to commit.

The most recently broached theory of the end of the world is that
developed from some remarkable speculations as to the composition
and distribution of force. The view is briefly this. All force is
derived from heat. All heat is derived from the sun.4 The
mechanical value of a cubic mile of sunlight at the surface of the
earth is one horse power for a third of a minute; at the sun it is
fifteen thousand horse power for a minute. Now, it is calculated
that enough heat is radiated from the sun to require for its
production the annual consumption of the whole surface of the sun
to the depth of from ten to twenty miles. Of course, ultimately
the fuel will be all expended; then the forces of the system will
expire, and the creation will die.5 This brilliant and sublime
theorem assumes, first, that the heat of the sun arises from
consumption of matter, which may not be true; secondly, that it is
not a self replenishing process, as it certainly may be. Some have
even surmised that the zodiacal light is an illuminated tornado of
stones showering into the sun to feed its tremendous
conflagration. The whole scheme is a fine toy, but a very faint
terror. Even if it be true, then we are to perish at last from
lack of fire, and not, as commonly feared, from its abundance!

The belief of mankind that a soul or ghost survives the body has
been so nearly universal as to appear like the spontaneous result
of an instinct. We propose to trace the history of opinions
concerning the physical destination of this disembodied spirit,
its connection with localities, to give the historical topography
of the future life.

The earliest conception of the abode of the dead was probably that
of the Hebrew Sheol or the Greek Hades, namely, the idea born from
the silence, depth, and gloom of the grave of a stupendous
subterranean cavern full of the drowsy race of shades, the
indiscriminate habitation of all who leave the land of the living.
Gradually the thought arose and won acceptance that the favorites
of Deity, peerless heroes and sages, might be exempt from this
dismal fate, and migrate at death to some delightful clime beyond
some far shore, there, amidst unalloyed pleasures, to spend
immortal days. This region was naturally located on the surface of
the earth, where the cheerful sun could shine and the fresh
breezes blow, yet in some untrodden distance, where the gauntlet
of fact had not smitten the sceptre of fable. The paltry portion
of this earth familiar to the ancients was surrounded by an
unexplored region, which their fancy, stimulated by the legends of
the poets, peopled with mythological kingdoms, the rainbow bowers
and cloudy synods of Olympus, from whose glittering peak the
Thunderer threw his bolts over the south; the Golden Garden of the

3 Ennead ii. lib. ix.: Contra Gnosticos, cap. 4.

4 Helmholtz, Edinburgh Phil. Msg., series iv. vol. xi.:
Interaction of Natural Forces.

5 Thomson, Ibid. Dec. 1854: Mechanical Energies of the Solar
System.


Hesperides, whose dragons lay on guard in the remote west; the
divine cities of Meru, whose encircling towers pierced the eastern
sky; the Banquet Halls of Ethiopia, gleaming through the fiery
desert; the fragrant Islands of Immortality, musical and luring in
the central ocean; the happy land of the Hyperboreans, beyond the
snowy summits of northern Caucasus:

"How pleasant were the wild beliefs That dwelt in legends old!
Alas! to our posterity Will no such tales be told. We know too
much: scroll after scroll Weighs down our weary shelves: Our only
point of ignorance Is centred in ourselves."

There was a belief among the Persians that Kaf, a mountain two
thousand miles high, formed a rim to the flat world and prevented
travellers from ever falling off.6 The fact that the earth is a
globe inhabited on all sides is a comparatively recent piece of
knowledge. So late as in the eighth century Pope Zachary accused
Virgilius, an Irish mathematician and monk, of heresy for
believing in the existence of antipodes.7 St. Boniface wrote to
the Pope against Virgilius; and Zachary ordered a council to be
held to expel him from the Church, for "professing, against God
and his own soul, so perverse and wicked a doctrine." To the
ancients all beyond the region they had traversed was an unknown
land, clothed in darkness, crowded with mystery and allurement.
Across the weltering wastes of brine, in a halcyon sea, the Hindu
placed the White Isle, the dwelling of translated and immortalized
men.8 Under the attraction of a mystic curiosity, well might the
old, wearied Ulysses say,

"Come, my friends, 'Tis not too late to seek a newer world. Push
off, and, sitting well in order, smite The sounding furrows; for
my purpose holds To sail beyond the sunset, and the baths Of all
the western stars, until I die. It may be that the gulfs will wash
us down: It may be we shall touch the Happy Isles, And see the
great Achilles, whom we knew."

Decius Brutus and his army, as Florus relates, reaching the coast
of Portugal, where, for the first time, they saw the sun setting
in the blood tinged ocean, turned back their standards with horror
as they beheld "the huge corpse of ruddy gold let down into the
deep." The Phoenician traders brought intelligence to Greece of a
people, the Cimmerians, who dwelt on the borders of Hades in the
umbered realms of perpetual night. To the dying Roman, on the
farthest verge of the known horizon hovered a vision of Elysian
Fields. And the American

6 Adventures of Hatim Tai, p. 36, note.

7 Whewell, Hist. Inductive Sciences, vol. i. book iv. ch. i. sect.
7.

8 Wilford, Essays on the Sacred Isles, In Asiatic Researches,
vols. viii. xi.


Indian, sinking in battle or the chase, caught glimpses of happier
Hunting Grounds, whose woods trooped with game, and where the
arrows of the braves never missed, and there was no winter. There
was a pretty myth received among some of the ancient Britons,
locating their paradise in a spot surrounded by tempests, far in
the Western Ocean, and named Flath Innis, or Noble Island.9 The
following legend is illustrative. An old man sat thoughtful on a
rock beside the sea. A cloud, under whose squally skirts the
waters foamed, rushed down; and from its dark womb issued a boat,
with white sails bent to the wind, and hung round with moving
oars. Destitute of mariners, itself seemed to live and move. A
voice said, "Arise, behold the boat of heroes: embark, and see the
Green Isle of those who have passed away!" Seven days and seven
nights he voyaged, when a thousand tongues called out, "The Isle!
the Isle!" The black billows opened before him, and the calm land
of the departed rushed in light on his eyes. We are reminded by
this of what Procopius says concerning the conveyal of the soul of
the barbarian to his paradise. At midnight there is a knocking at
the door, and indistinct voices call him to come. Mysteriously
impelled, he goes to the sea coast, and there finds a frail, empty
wherry awaiting him. He embarks, and a spirit crew row him to his
destination.10

"He finds with ghosts His boat deep freighted, sinking to the edge
Of the dark flood, and voices hears, yet sees No substance; but,
arrived where once again His skiff floats free, hears friends to
friends Give lamentable welcome. The unseen Shore faint resounds,
and all the mystic air Breathes forth the names of parent,
brother, wife."

During that period of poetic credulity while the face of the earth
remained to a great extent concealed from knowledge, wherever the
Hebrew Scriptures were known went the cherished traditions of the
Garden of Eden from which our first parents were driven for their
sin. Speculation naturally strove to settle the locality of this
lost paradise. Sometimes it was situated in the mysterious bosom
of India; sometimes in the flowery vales of Georgia, where roses
and spices perfumed the gales; sometimes in the guarded recesses
of Mesopotamia. Now it was the Grand Oasis in the Arabian desert,
flashing on the wilted pilgrim, over the blasted and blazing
wastes, with the verdure of palms, the play of waters, the smell
and flavor of perennial fruits. Again it was at the equator, where
the torrid zone stretched around it as a fiery sword waving every
way so that no mortal could enter. In the "Imago Mundi," a Latin
treatise on cosmography written early in the twelfth century, we
read, "Paradise is the extreme eastern part of Asia, and is made
inaccessible by a wall of fire surrounding it and rising unto
heaven." At a later time the Canaries were thought to be the
ancient Elysium, and were accordingly named the Fortunate Isles.
Indeed, among the motives that animated

9 Macpherson, Introduction to the History of Great Britain and
Ireland, pp. 180-186.

10 Procopius, Gothica, lib. iv.


Columbus on his adventurous voyage no inferior place must be
assigned to the hope of finding the primeval seat of Paradise.11
The curious traveller, exploring these visionary spots one by one,
found them lying in the light of common day no nearer heaven than
his own natal home; and at last all faith in them died out when
the whole surface of the globe had been surveyed, no nook left
wherein romance and superstition might any longer play at hide and
seek.

Continuing our search after the local abode of the departed, we
now leave the surface of the earth and descend beneath it. The
first haunted region we reach is the realm of the Fairies, which,
as every one acquainted with the magic lore of old Germany or
England knows, was situated just under the external ground, and
was clothed with every charm poets could imagine or the heart
dream. There was supposed to be an entrance to this enchanted
domain at the Peak Cavern in Derbyshire, and at several other
places. Sir Walter Scott has collected some of the best legends
illustrative of this belief in his "History of Demonology." Sir
Gawaine, a famous knight of the Round Table, was once admitted to
dine, above ground, in the edge of the forest, with the King of
the Fairies:

"The banquet o'er, the royal Fay, intent
To do all honor to King Arthur's knight,
Smote with his rod the bank on which they leant,
And Fairy land flash'd glorious on the sight;
Flash'd, through a silvery, soft, translucent mist,
The opal shafts and domes of amethyst;
Flash'd founts in shells of pearl, which crystal walls
And phosphor lights of myriad hues redouble.
There, in the blissful subterranean halls,
When morning wakes the world of human trouble
Glide the gay race; each sound our discord knows,
Faint heard above, but lulls them to repose."

To this empire of moonlit swards and elfin dances, of jewelled
banks, lapsing streams, and enchanting visions, it was thought a
few favored mortals might now and then find their way. But this
was never an earnest general faith. It was a poetic superstition
that hovered over fanciful brains, a legendary dream that pleased
credulous hearts; and, with the other romance of the early world,
it has vanished quite away.

The popular belief of Jews, Greeks, Etruscans, Romans, Germans,
and afterwards of Christians, was that there was an immense world
of the dead deep beneath the earth, subdivided into several
subordinate regions. The Greenlanders believed in a separated
heaven and hell, both located far below the Polar Ocean. According
to the old classic descriptions of the under world, what a scene
of colossal gloom it is! Its atmosphere murmurs with a breath of
plaintive sighs. Its population, impalpable ghosts timidly
flitting at every motion,

11 Irving, Life of Columbus: Appendix on the Situation of the
Terrestrial Paradise. By far the most valuable book ever published
on this subject is that of Schulthess, Das Paradies, das irdische
und uberirdische historische, mythische und mystische, nebst einer
kritischen Revision der allgemelnen biblischen Geographie.


crowd the sombre landscapes in numbers surpassing imagination.
There Cocytus creeps to the seat of doom, his waves emitting
doleful wails. Styx, nine times enfolding the whole abode, drags
his black and sluggish length around. Charon, the slovenly old
ferryman, plies his noiseless boat to and fro laden with shadowy
passengers. Far away in the centre grim Pluto sits on his ebony
throne and surveys the sad subjects of his dreadful domain. By his
side sits his stolen and shrinking bride, Proserpine, her
glimmering brows encircled with a wreath of poppies. Above the
subterranean monarch's head a sable rainbow spans the infernal
firmament; and when, with lifted hand, he announces his decrees,
the applause given by the twilight populace of Hades is a rustle
of sighs, a vapor of tears, and a shudder of submission.

The belief in this dolorous kingdom was early modified by the
reception of two other adjacent realms, one of reward, one of
torture; even as Goethe says, in allusion to the current Christian
doctrine, "Hell was originally but one apartment: limbo and
purgatory were afterwards added as wings." Passing through Hades,
and turning in one direction, the spirit traveller would arrive at
Elysium or Abraham's bosom:

"To paradise the gloomy passage winds Through regions drear and
dismal, and through pain, Emerging soon in beatific blaze Of
light."

There the blessed ones found respite and peaceful joys in flowery
fields, pure breezes, social fellowship, and the similitudes of
their earthly pursuits. In this placid clime, lighted by its own
constellations, favored souls roamed or reposed in a sort of
ineffectual happiness. According to the pagans, here were such
heroes as Achilles, such sages as Socrates, to remain forever, or
until the end of the world. And here, according to the Christians,
the departed patriarchs and saints were tarrying expectant of
Christ's arrival to ransom them. Dante thus describes that great
event:

"Then he, who well my covert meaning knew,
Answer'd, Herein I had not long been bound,
When an All puissant One I saw march through,
With victory's radiant sign triumphal crown'd.
He led from us our Father Adam's shade,
Abel and Noah, whom God loved the most,
Lawgiving Moses, him who best obey'd,
Abraam the patriarch, royal David's ghost;
Israel, his father, and his sons, and her
Whom Israel served for, faithfully and long,
Rachel, with more, to bliss did He transfer:
No souls were saved before this chosen throng." 12

At the opposite extremity of Hades was supposed to be an opening
that led down into Tartarus, "a place made underneath all things,
so low and horrible that hell is its heaven." Here the old earth
giants, the looming Titans, lay, bound, transfixed with
thunderbolts, their

12 Parsons's trans. Dell' Inferno, canto iv. ii. 55-63.


mountainous shapes half buried in rocks, encrusting lava, and
ashes. Rivers of fire seam the darkness, whose borders are braided
with sentinel furies. On every hand the worst criminals,
perjurers, blasphemers, ingrates, groan beneath the pitiless
punishments inflicted on them without escape. Any realization of
the terrific scenery of this whole realm would curdle the blood.13
There were fabled entrances to the dread under world at Acherusia,
in Bithynia, at Avernus, in Campania, where Ulysses evoked the
dead and traversed the grisly abodes, through the Sibyl's cave at
Cuma, at Hermione, in Argolis, where the people thought the
passage below so near and easy that they neglected to give the
dying an obolus to pay ferriage to Charon, at Tanarus, the
southern most point of Peloponnesus, where Herakles went down and
dragged the three headed dog up into day, at the cave of
Trophonius, in Lebadea, and at several other places.

Similar conceptions have been embodied in the ecclesiastical
doctrine which has generally prevailed in Christendom. Locating
the scene in the hollow of the earth, thus has it been described
by Milton,

"A dungeon horrible on all sides round As one great furnace
flamed; yet from those flames No light, but rather darkness
visible, Served only to discover sights of woe, Regions of
anguish, doleful shades, where peace Nor hope can come, but
torture without end Still urges, and a fiery deluge fed With ever
burning sulphur unconsumed;" wherein, confined by adamantine
walls, the fallen angels and all the damned welter overwhelmed
with floods and whirlwinds of tempestuous fire. Shapes once
celestially fair and proud, but now scarred from battle and
darkened by sin into faded forms of haggard splendor, support
their uneasy steps over the burning marl. Everywhere shrieks and
moans resound, and the dusky vault of pandemonium is lighted by a
blue glare cast pale and dreadful from the tossings of the flaming
lake. This was hell, where the wicked must shrink and howl
forever. Etna, Vesuvius, Stromboli, Hecla, were believed to be
vent holes from this bottomless and living pit of fire. The famous
traveller, Sir John Maundeville, asserted that he found a descent
into hell "in a perilous vale" in the dominions of Prester John.
Many a cavern in England still bears the name of "Hell hole." In a
dialogue between a clerk and a master, preserved in an old Saxon
catechism, the following question and reply occur: "Why is the sun
so red when she sets?" "Because she looks down upon hell."
Antonius Rusca, a learned professor at Milan, in the year 1621,
published a huge quarto in five books, giving a detailed
topographical account of the interior of the earth, hell,
purgatory, and limbo.14 There is a lake in the south of Ireland in
which is an island containing a cavern said to open down into
hell. This cave

13 Descriptions of the sufferings of hell, according to the
popular notions at different periods, are given in the work
published at Weimar in 1817, Das Rad der ewigen Hollenqual. In den
Curiositaten der physisch literarisch artistisch historischen Vor
und Mitwelt, band vi. st. 2.

14 De Inferno et Statn Damonum ante Mundi Exitium.


is called St. Patrick's Purgatory, and the pretence obtained quite
general credit for upwards of five centuries. Crowds of pilgrims
visited the place. Some who had the hardihood to venture in were
severely pinched, beaten, and burned, by the priests within,
disguised as devils, and were almost frightened out of their wits
by the diabolical scenes they saw where

"Forth from the depths of flame that singed the gloom Despairing
wails and piercing shrieks were heard."

Several popes openly preached in behalf of this gross imposition;
and the Church virtually authorized it by receiving the large
revenues accruing from it, until at last outraged common sense
demanded its repudiation and suppression.15

Few persons now, as they walk the streets and fields, are much
disturbed by the thought that, not far below, the vivid lake of
fire and brimstone, greedily roaring for new food, heaves its
tortured surges convulsed and featured with souls. Few persons now
shudder at a volcanic eruption as a premonishing message freshly
belched from hell.16 In fact, the old belief in a local physical
hell within the earth has almost gone from the public mind of to
day. It arose from pagan myths and figures of speech based on
ignorant observation and arbitrary fancy, and with the growth of
science and the enlightenment of reason it has very extensively
fallen and faded away. No honest and intelligent inquirer into the
matter can find the slightest valid support for such a notion. It
is now a mere tradition, upheld by groundless authority. And yet
the dim shadow of that great idea of a subterranean hell which
once burned so fierce and lurid in the brain of Christendom still
vaguely haunts the modern world. The dogma still lies in the
prevalent creeds, and is occasionally dragged out and brandished
by fanatic preachers. The transmitted literature and influences of
the past are so full of it that it cannot immediately cease.
Accordingly, while the common understanding no longer grasps it as
a definite verity, it lingers in the popular fancy as a half
credible image. The painful attempts made now and then by some
antiquated or fanatical clergyman to compel attention to it and
belief in it as a tangible fact of science, as well as an
unquestionable revelation of Scripture, scarcely win a passing
notice, but provoke a significant smile. Father Passaglia, an
eminent Jesuit theologian, in 1856 published in Italy a work on
the Literality of Hell Fire and the Eternity of the Punishments of
the Damned. He says, "In this world fire burns by chemical
operations; but in hell it burns by the breath of the Lord!" The
learned and venerable Faber, a voluminous author and distinguished
English divine, published in the year 1851 a large octavo entitled
"The Many Mansions in the House of the Father," discussing with
elaborate detail the question as to the locality of the scenes
awaiting souls after death. His grand conclusion the unreasonableness
of which will be apparent without comment is as follows:
"The saints having first risen with Christ into the highest
regions of the air, out of reach of the dreadful heat, the
tremendous flood of fire hitherto detained inside the earth will
be let loose, and an awful conflagration rage till the whole
material globe is dissipated into sublimated particles. Then the
world will be formed anew, in three parts. First, there will be

15 Wright, St. Patrick's Purgatory: an Essay on the Legends of
Paradise, Hell, and Purgatory, current during the Middle Ages.

16 Patuzzi, De Sede inferni in Terris quarenda.


a solid central sphere of fire the flaming nucleus of Gehenna two
thousand miles in diameter. Secondly, there shall roll around this
central ball on all sides an ignited ocean of liquid fire two
thousand miles in depth, the peculiar residence of the wicked, the
sulphurous lake spoken of in the Apocalypse. Thirdly, around this
infernal sea a vast spherical arch will hang, a thousand miles
thick, a massive and unbroken shell, through which there are no
spiracles, and whose external surface, beautiful beyond
conception, becomes the heaven of the redeemed, where Christ
himself, perfect man as well as perfect God, fixes his residence
and establishes the local sovereignty of the Universal Archangel."
17 A comfortable thought it must be for the saints, as they roam
the flowery fields, basking in immortal bliss, to remember that
under the crust they tread, a soundless sea of fire is forever
plunging on its circular course, all its crimson waves packed with
the agonized faces of the damned as thick as drops! The whole
scheme is without real foundation. Science laughs at such a
theory. Its scriptural supports are either ethnic figments or
rhetorical tropes. Reason, recollecting the immateriality of the
soul, dissipates the ghastly dream beyond the possibility of
restoration to belief.

Following the historic locations of the abode of departed souls,
we next ascend from the interior of the earth, and above the
surface of the earth, into the air and the lofty realms of ether.
The ancient Caledonians fixed the site of their spirit world in
the clouds. Their bards have presented this conception in manifold
forms and with the most picturesque details. In tempests the
ghosts of their famous warriors ride on the thunderbolts, looking
on the earth with eyes of fire, and hurling lances of lightning.
They float over the summits of the hills or along the valleys in
wreaths of mist, on vapory steeds, waving their shadowy arms in
the moonlight, the stars dimly glimmering through their visionary
shapes. The Laplanders also placed their heaven in the upper air,
where the Northern Lights play. They regarded the auroral
streamers as the sport of departed spirits in the happy region to
which they had risen. Such ideas, clad in the familiar imagery
furnished by their own climes, would naturally be suggested to the
ignorant fancy, and easily commended to the credulous thoughts, of
the Celts and Finns. Explanation and refutation are alike
unnecessary.

Plutarch describes a theory held by some of the ancients locating
hell in the air, elysium in the moon.18 After death all souls are
compelled to spend a period in the region between the earth and
the moon, the wicked in severe tortures and for a longer time, the
good in a mild discipline soon purging away all their stains and
fitting them for the lunar paradise. After tarrying a season
there, they were either born again upon the earth, or transported
to the divine realm of the sun. Macrobius, too, says, "The
Platonists reckon as the infernal

17 Part iv. chap. ix. p. 417. Dr. Cumming (The End, Lect. X.)
teaches the doctrine of the literal resurrection of the flesh, and
the subsequent residence of the redeemed on this globe as their
eternal heaven under the immediate rule of Christ. Quite a full
detail of the historic and present belief in this scheme may be
found in the recent work of its earnest advocate, D. T. Taylor,
The Voice of the Church on the Coming of the Redeemer, or a
History of the Doctrine of the Reign of Christ on Earth.

18 In his Essay on the Face in the Orb of the Moon.


region the whole space between the earth and the moon."19 He also
adds, "The tropical signs Cancer and Capricorn are called the
gates of the sun, because there he meets the solstice and can go
no farther. Cancer is the gate of men, because by it is the
descent to the lower regions; Capricorn is the gate of gods,
because by it is a return for souls to the rank of gods in the
seat of their proper immortality." 20 The Manicheans taught that
souls were borne to the moon on leaving their bodies, and there
washed from their sins in water, then taken to the sun and further
cleansed in fire. They described the moon and sun as two splendid
ships prepared for transferring souls to their native country, the
world of perfect light in the heights of the creation.21

The ancient Hebrews thought the sky a solid firmament overarching
the earth, and supporting a sea of inexhaustible waters, beyond
which God and his angels dwelt in monopolized splendor. Eliphaz
the Temanite says, "Is not God in the height of heaven? And behold
the stars, how high they are; but he walketh upon the arch of
heaven!" And Job says, "He covereth the face of his throne, and
spreadeth his clouds under it. He hath drawn a circular bound upon
the waters to the confines of light and darkness." From the
dazzling realm above this supernal ocean all men were supposed,
until after the resurrection of Christ, to be excluded. But from
that time the belief gradually spread in Christendom that a way
was open for faithful souls to ascend thither. Ephraim the
Syrian,22 and Ambrose, located paradise in the outermost East on
the highest summit of the earth, stretching into the serene
heights of the sky. The ancients often conceived the universe to
form one solid whole, whose different provinces were accessible
from each other to gods and angels by means of bridges and golden
staircases. Hence the innumerable paradisal legends associated
with the mythic mountains of antiquity, such as Elborz, Olympus,
Meru, and Kaf. Among the strange legends of the Middle Age,
Gervase of Tilbury preserves the following one, illustrative of
this belief in a sea over the sky: "One Sunday the people of an
English village were coming out of church, a dark, gloomy day,
when they saw the anchor of a ship hooked to one of the
tombstones, the cable, tightly stretched, hanging down the air.
Presently they saw a sailor sliding down the rope to unfix the
anchor. When he had just loosened it the villagers seized hold of
him; and, while in their hands, he quickly died, as though he had
been drowned!" There is also a famous legend called "St. Brandon's
Voyage." The worthy saint set sail from the coast of Ireland, and
held on his way till he arrived at the moon, which he found to be
the location of hell. Here he saw Judas Iscariot in execrable
tortures, regularly respited, however, every week from Saturday
eve till Sunday eve!

The thought so entirely in accordance with the first impression
made by the phenomenon of the night sky on the ignorant senses and
imagination that the stars are set in a firm revolving dome, has
widely prevailed; and the thought that heaven lies beyond that
solid arch, in the unknown space is a popular notion lingering
still. The scriptural image declaring that the convulsions of the
last day will shake the stars from their sockets in the

19 In Somnium Scipionis, lib. i. cap. xi.

20 Ibid. cap. xii.

21 Augustine, De Natura Boni, cap. xliv.

22 De Paradiso Eden, Sermo I.


heavenly floor, "as a fig tree casteth her untimely figs when she
is shaken of a mighty wind," although so obviously a figure of
speech, has been very generally credited as the description of a
literal fact yet to occur. And how many thousands of pious
Christians have felt, with the sainted Doddridge,

"Ye stars are but the shining dust Of my Divine abode,  The
pavement of those heavenly courts Where I shall see my God!"

The universal diffusion in civilized nations of the knowledge that
the visible sky is no substantial expanse, but only an illimitable
void of space hung with successive worlds, has by no means
banished the belief, originally based on the opposite error, in a
physical heaven definitely located far overhead, the destination
of all ransomed souls. This is undoubtedly the most common idea at
the present time. An English clergyman once wrote a book,
afterwards translated into German, to teach that the sun is hell,
and that the black spots often noticed on the disk of that orb are
gatherings of damned souls.23 Isaac Taylor, on the contrary,
contends with no little force and ingenuity that the sun may be
the heaven of our planetary system, a globe of immortal
blessedness and glory.24 The celebrated Dr. Whiston was convinced
that the great comet which appeared in his day was hell. He
imagined it remarkably fitted for that purpose by its fiery vapor,
and its alternate plunges, now into the frozen extremity of space,
now into the scorching breath of the sun. Tupper fastens the
stigma of being the infernal prison house on the moon, in this
style:

"I know thee well, O Moon, thou cavern'd realm, Sad satellite,
thou giant ash of death, Blot on God's firmament, pale home of
crime, Scarr'd prison house of sin, where damned souls Feed upon
punishment: Oh, thought sublime, That amid night's black deeds,
when evil prowls Through the broad world, thou, watching sinners
well, Glarest o'er all, the wakeful eye of Hell!"

Bailey's conception is the darker birth of a deeper feeling:

"There is a blind world, yet unlit by God, Rolling around the
extremest edge of light, Where all things are disaster and decay:
That black and outcast orb is Satan's home That dusky world man's
science counteth not Upon the brightest sky. He never knows How
near it comes to him; but, swathed in clouds, As though in plumed
and palled state, it steals, Hearse like and thief like, round the
universe, Forever rolling, and returning not,

23 Swinden, On the Nature and Location of Hell.

24 Physical Theory of Another Life, chap. xvi.


Robbing all worlds of many an angel soul,  With its light hidden
in its breast, which burns With all concentrate and superfluent
woe."

In the average faith of individuals to day, heaven and hell exist
as separate places located somewhere in the universe; but the
notions as to the precise regions in which they lie are most vague
and ineffectual when compared with what they formerly were.

The Scandinavian kosmos contained nine worlds, arranged in the
following order:  Gimle, a golden region at the top of the
universe, the eternal residence of Allfather and his chosen ones;
next below that, Muspel, the realm of the genii of fire; Asgard,
the abode of the gods in the starry firmament; Vindheim, the home
of the air spirits; Manheim, the earth, or middle realm;
Jotunheim, the world of the giants, outside the sea surrounding
the earth; Elfheim, the world of the black demons and dwarfs, just
under the earth's surface; Helheim, the domain of the goddess of
death, deep within the earth's bosom; and finally, Niflheim, the
lowest kingdom of horror and pain, at the very bottom of the
creation. The Buddhist kosmos, in the simplest form, as some of
them conceived it, was composed of a series of concentric spheres
each separated from the next by a space, and successively
overarching and under arching each other with circular layers of
brightness above and blackness beneath; each starry hollow
overhead being a heaven inhabited by gods and blessed souls, each
lurid hollow underfoot being a hell filled with demons and wicked
souls in penance. The Arabian kosmos, beginning with the earth,
ascended to a world of water above the firmament, next to a world
of air, then to a world of fire, followed in rising order by an
emerald heaven with angels in the form of birds, a heaven of
precious stones with angels as eagles, a hyacinth heaven with
angels as vultures, a silver heaven with angels as horses, a
golden and a pearl heaven each peopled with angel girls, a crystal
heaven with angel men, then two heavens full of angels, and
finally a great sea without bound, each sphere being presided over
by a chief ruler, the names of all of whom were familiar to the
learned Arabs. The Syrian kosmos corresponded closely to the
foregoing. It soared up the mounting steps of earth, water, air,
fire, and innumerable choruses successively of Angels, Archangels,
Principalities, Powers, Virtues, Dominations, Thrones, Cherubim
and Seraphim, unto the Expanse whence Lucifer fell; afterwards to
a boundless Ocean; and lastly to a magnificent Crown of Light
filling the uppermost space of all.25

It is hard for us to imagine the aspects of the universe to the
ancients and the impressions it produced in them, all seemed so
different then, in the dimness of crude observation, from the
present appearance in the light of astronomic science. Anaximander
held that the earth was of cylindrical form, suspended in the
middle of the universe and surrounded by envelopes of water, air,
and fire, as by the coats of an onion, but that the exterior
stratum was broken up and collected into masses, and thus
originated the sun, moon, and stars, which are carried around by
the three spheres in which they are fixed.26 Many of the Oriental
nations believed the planets to be animated beings, conscious
divinities, freely marching around their high realms, keeping
watch and ward over the creation, smiling their favorites on to
happy fortune,

25 Dupuis, L'Origine de tous les Cultes, Planche No. 21.

26 Arist. de Coel. ii. 13.


fixing their baleful eyes and shedding disastrous eclipse on
"falling nations and on kingly lines about to sink forever." This
belief was cherished among the later Greek philosophers and Roman
priests, and was vividly held by such men as Philo, Origen, and
even Kepler. It is here that we are to look for the birth of
astrology, that solemn lore, linking the petty fates of men with
the starry conjunctions, which once sank so deeply into the mind
of the world, but is now wellnigh forgotten:

"No more of that, ye planetary lights! Your aspects, dignities,
ascendancies, Your partite quartiles, and your plastic trines, And
all your heavenly houses and effects, Shall meet no more devout
expounders here.

The joy of Jupiter, The exaltation of the Dragon's head, The sun's
triplicity and glorious Day house on high, the moon's dim
detriment, And all the starry inclusions of all signs, Shall rise,
and rule, and pass, and no one know That there are spirit rulers
of all worlds, Which fraternize with earth, and, though unknown,
Hold in the shining voices of the stars Communion on high and
everywhere."

The belief that the stars were living beings, combining with the
fancy of an unscientific time, gave rise to the stellar apotheosis
of heroes and legendary names, and was the source of those
numerous asterisms, out lined groups of stars, which still bedeck
the skies and form the landmarks of celestial topography. It was
these and kindred influences that wrought together

"To make the firmament bristle with shapes Of intermittent motion,
aspect vague, And mystic bearings, which o'ercreep the earth,
Keeping slow time with horrors in the blood;" the Gorgon's
petrific Head, the Bear's frightful form, Berenice's streaming
Hair, the curdling length of Ophiuchus, and the Hydra's horrid
shape. The poetic eye of old religion saw gods in the planets
walking their serene blue paths,

"Osiris, Bel, Odin, Mithras, Brahm, Zeus, Who gave their names to
stars which still roam round The skies all worshipless, even from
climes Where their own altars once topp'd every hill."

By selected constellations the choicest legends of the antique
world are preserved in silent enactment. On the heavenly sea the
Argonautss keep nightly sail towards the Golden Fleece. There
Herakles gripes the hydra's heads and sways his irresistible club;
Arion with his harp rides the docile Dolphin; the Centaur's right
hand clutches the Wolf; the Hare flees from the raging eye and
inaudible bark of the Dog; and space crawls with the horrors of
the Scorpion.

In consequence of the earth's revolution in its orbit, the sun
appears at different seasons to rise in connection with different
groups of stars. It seems as if the sun made an annual journey
around the ecliptic. This circuit was divided into twelve parts
corresponding to the months, and each marked by a distinct
constellation. There was a singular agreement in regard to these
solar houses, residences of the gods, or signs of the zodiac,
among the leading nations of the earth, the Persians, Chaldeans,
Hebrews, Syrians, Hindus, Chinese, Arabians, Japanese, Siamese,
Goths, Javanese, Mexicans, Peruvians, and Scandinavians. 27 Among
the various explanations of the origin of these artificial signs,
we will notice only the one attributed by Volney to the Egyptians.
The constellations in which the sun successively appeared from
month to month were named thus: at the time of the overflow of the
Nile, the stars of inundation, (Aquarius;) at the time of
ploughing, stars of the ox, (Taurus;) when lions, driven forth by
thirst, appeared on the banks of the Nile, stars of the lion,
(Leo;) at the time of reaping, stars of the sheaf, (Virgo;) stars
of the lamb and two kids, (Aries,) when these animals were born;
stars of the crab, (Cancer,) when the sun, touching the tropic,
returned backwards; stars of the wild goat, (Capricorn,) when the
sun reached the highest point in his yearly track; stars of the
balance, (Libra,) when days and nights were in equilibrium; stars
of the scorpion, (Scorpio,) when periodical simooms burned like
the venom of a scorpion; and so on of the rest.28

The progress of astronomical science from the wild time when men
thought the stars were mere spangles stuck in a solid expanse not
far off, to the vigorous age when Ptolemy's mathematics spanned
the scope of the sky; from the first reverent observations of the
Chaldean shepherds watching the constellations as gods, to the
magnificent reasonings of Copernicus dashing down the innumerable
crystalline spheres, "cycle on epicycle, orb on orb," with which
crude theorizers had crowded the stellar spaces; from the uncurbed
poetry of Hyginus writing the floor of heaven over with romantic
myths in planetary words, to the more wondrous truth of Le Verrier
measuring the steps from nimble Mercury flitting moth like in the
beard of the sun to dull Neptune sagging in his cold course twenty
six hundred million miles away; from the half inch orb of
Hipparchus's naked eye, to the six feet speculum of Rosse's awful
tube; from the primeval belief in one world studded around with
skyey torch lights, to the modern conviction of octillions of
inhabited worlds all governed by one law constitutes the most
astonishing chapter in the history of the human mind. Every step
of this incredible progress has had its effect in modifying the
conceptions of man's position and importance in nature and of the
connection of his future fate with localities. Of old, the entire
creation was thought to lie pretty much within the comprehension
of man's unaided senses, and man himself was supposed to be the
chief if not the sole object of Divine providence. The deities
often came down in incarnations and mingled with their favorites
and rescued the earth from evils. Every thing was anthropomorphized.
Man's relative magnitude and power were believed to be such
that he fancied during an eclipse that, by screams, the crashing
of gongs, and magic rites, he could scare away the monsters

27 Pigott, Scandinavian Mythology, chap. i. p. 31.

28 Volney, Ruins, chap. xxii. sect. 3. Maurice, Hist. Hindostan,
vol. i. pp. 145-147.


who were swallowing the sun or the moon. Meteors shooting through
the evening air the Arabs believed were fallen angels trying to
get back into heaven but hurled from the crystal battlements by
the flaming lances of the guardian watchers. Then the gazer saw
"The top of heaven full of fiery shapes, Of burning cressets."

Now the student contemplates an abyss swarming with orbs each out
weighing millions of our earth. Then they read their nativities in
the planets and felt how great must be the state overwatched by
such resplendent servitors. Now "They seek communion with the stars
that they may know How petty is this ball on which they come and go."

Then the hugest view of the extent of the universal sphere was
that an iron mass would require nine days and nights to plunge
from its Olympian height to its Tartarean depth. Now we are told
by the masters of science that there are stars so distant that it
would take their light, travelling at a rate of nearly twelve
million miles a minute, thirty million years to reach us. The
telescope has multiplied the size of the creation by hundreds of
millions, and the grandest conception of the stellar universe
possible to the most capacious human mind probably bears no larger
proportion to the fact than an orrery does to the solar system.
Our earth is a hundred million miles from the sun, whose diameter
is so monstrous that a hundred such orbs strung in a straight line
would occupy the whole distance. The sun, with all his attendant
planets and moons, is sweeping around his own centre supposed by
some to be Alcyone at the rate of four hundred thousand miles a
day; and it will take him eighteen million years to complete one
revolution. Our firmamental cluster contains, it has been
calculated, in round numbers about twenty million stars. There are
many thousands of such nebula visible, some of them capable of
packing away in their awful bosoms hundreds of thousands of our
galaxies. Measure off the abysmal space into seven hundred
thousand stages each a hundred million miles wide, and you reach
the nearest fixed stars, for instance, the constellation of the
Lyre. Multiply that inconceivable distance by hundreds of
thousands, and still you will discern enormous sand banks of stars
obscurely glittering on the farthest verge of telescopic vision.
And even all this is but a little corner of the whole.

Coleridge once said, "To some infinitely superior Being, the whole
universe may be as one plain, the distance between planet and
planet being only as the pores in a grain of sand, and the spaces
between system and system no greater than the intervals between
one grain and the grain adjacent." One of the vastest thoughts yet
conceived by any mortal mind is that of turning the universe from
a mechanical to a chemical problem, as illustrated by Prof.
Lovering.29 Assuming the acknowledged truths in physics, that the
ultimate particles of matter never actually touch each other, and
that water in evaporating expands into eighteen hundred times its
previous volume, he demonstrates that the porosity of our solar
system is no greater than that of steam. "The porosity of granite
or gold may be equal to that of steam,

29 Cambridge Miscellany, 1842.


the greater density being a stronger energy in the central
forces." And the conclusion is scientifically reached that "the
vast interval between the sun and Herschel is an enormous pore,
while the invisible distance that separates the most closely
nestled atoms is a planetary space, a stupendous gulf when
compared with the little spheres between which it flows." Thus we
may think of the entire universe as a living organism, like a
ripening orange, its component atoms worlds, the sidereal
movements its vital circulation.

Surely, when a man looks up from his familiar fields and household
roof to such incommensurable objects as scientific imagination
reveals in the sparkling sword handle of Perseus and the hazy
girdle of Andromeda, overpowering humility will fill his breast,
an unutterable solemnity will "fall on him as from the very
presence chamber of the Highest." And will he not, when he
contemplates the dust like shoals of stars, the shining films of
firmaments, that retreat and hover through all the boundless
heights, the Nubecula nebula, looking like a bunch of ribbons
disposed in a true love's knot, that most awful nebula whirled
into the shape and bearing the name of the Dumb Bell, the Crab
nebula, hanging over the infinitely remote space, a sprawling
terror, every point holding millions of worlds,  thinking of these
all transcendent wonders, and then remembering his own
inexpressible littleness, how that the visible existence of his
whole race does not occupy a single tick of the great Sidereal
Clock, will he not sink under helpless misgivings, will he not
utterly despair of immortal notice and support from the King of
all this? In a word, how does the solemn greatness of man, the
supposed eternal destiny of man, stand affected by the modern
knowledge of the vastness of creation? Regarding the immensities
receding over him in unfathomable abysses bursting with dust heaps
of suns, must not man be dwarfed into unmitigated contempt, his
life and character rendered absolutely insignificant, the utmost
span of his fortunes seeming but as the hum and glitter of an
ephemeron in a moment's sunshine? Doubtless many a one has at
times felt the stupendous truths of astronomy thus palsying him
with a crushing sense of his own nothingness and burying him in
fatalistic despair. Standing at night, alone, beneath the august
dome studded from of old with its ever blazing lights, he gazes up
and sees the innumerable armies of heaven marshalled forth above
him in the order and silence of their primeval pomp. Peacefully
and forever they shine there. In nebula separated from nebula by
trillions of leagues, plane beyond plane, they stretch and glitter
to the feet of God. Falling on his knees, he clasps his hands in
speechless adoration, but feels, with an intolerable ache of the
heart, that in this infinitude such an one as he can be of no
consequence whatever. He waits passively for the resistless round
of fate to bear him away, ah, whither? "Conscious that he dwells
but as an atom of dust on the outskirts of a galaxy of
inconceivable glory" moving through eternity in the arms of law,
he becomes, in his own estimation, an insensible dot lost in the
uncontainable wilderness of firmamental systems. But this
conclusion of despair is a mistake as sophistical as it is
injurious, as baseless in reality as it is natural in seeming. Its
antidote and corrective are found in a more penetrative thought
and juster understanding of the subject, which will preserve the
greatness and the immortal destiny of man unharmed despite the
frowning vastitudes of creation. This will appear from fairly
weighing the following considerations.

In the first place, the immensity of the material universe is an
element entirely foreign to the problem of human fate. When
seeking to solve the question of human destiny, we are to study
the facts and prophecies of human nature, and to conclude
accordingly. It is a perversion of reason to bring from far an
induction of nebular magnitudes to crush with their brute weight
the plain indications of the spirit of humanity. What though the
number of telescopic worlds were raised to the ten thousandth
power, and each orb were as large as all of them combined would
now be? what difference would that make in the facts of human
nature and destiny? It is from the experience going on in man's
breast, and not from the firmaments rolling above his head, that
his importance and his final cause are to be inferred. The human
mind, heart, and conscience, thought, love, faith, and piety,
remain the same in their intrinsic rank and capacities whether the
universe be as small as it appeared to the eyes of Abraham or as
large as it seems in the cosmical theory of Humboldt. Thus the
spiritual position of man really remains precisely what it was
before the telescope smote the veils of distance and bared the
outer courts of being.

Secondly, if we do bring in the irrelevant realms of science to
the examination of our princely pretensions, it is but fair to
look in both directions. And then what we lose above we gain
below. The revelations of the microscope balance those of the
telescope. The animalcula magnify man as much as the nebulsa
belittle him. We cannot help believing that He who frames and
provides for those infinitesimal animals quadrillions of whom
might inhabit a drop of water or a leaf and have ample room and
verge enough, and whose vital and muscular organization is as
complicated and perfect as that of an elephant, will much more
take care of man, no matter how numerous the constellations are.
Let us see how far scientific vision can look beneath ourselves as
the question is answered by a few well known facts. In each drop
of human blood there are three million vitalized corpuscular
disks. Considering all the drops made up in this way, man is a
kosmos, his veins galaxies through whose circuits these red
clustering planets perform their revolutions. How small the
exhaling atoms of a grain of musk must be, since it will perfume
every breath of air blowing through a hall for a quarter of a
century, and then not be perceptibly diminished. An ounce of gold
may be reduced into four hundred and thirty two billion parts,
each microscopically visible.30 There is a deposit of slate in
Bohemia covering forty square miles to the depth of eight feet,
each cubic inch of which Ehrenberg found by microscopic
measurement to contain forty one thousand million infusorial
animals. Sir David Brewster says, "A cubic inch of the Bilin
polieschiefer slate contains above one billion seven hundred and
fifty thousand millions of distinct individuals of Galionella
ferruginea."31 It is a fact that the size of one of these insects
as compared with the bulk of a man is virtually as small as that
of a man compared with the whole scheme of modern astronomy. Thus,
if the problem of our immortal consequence is prejudicially
vitiated by contemplating the immense extremity of vision, it is
rectified by gazing on the opposite extremity. If man justly
scrutinized, without comparisons, is fitted for and worthy of
eternity,

30 Lardner, Hand Book of Natural Philosophy, book i. chap. v.31
More Worlds than One, ch. viii. note 3.


no foreign facts, however magnificent or minute, should alter our
judgment from the premises.

Thirdly, is it not evident that man's greatness keeps even pace
along the scale of magnitude with the widening creation, since it
is his mind that sees and comprehends how wondrous the dimensions
of the universe are? The number of stars and the limits of space
are not more astounding than it is that he should be capable of
knowing such things, enumerating and staking them off. When man
has measured the distance and weighed the bulk of Sirius, it is
more appropriate to kneel in amazement before the inscrutable
mystery of his genius, the irrepressible soaring of his soul, than
to sink in despair under the swinging of those lumps of dirt in
their unapproachable spheres because they are so gigantic! The
appearance of the creation to man is not vaster than his
perception of it. They are exactly correlated by the very terms of
the statement. As the astronomic world expands, the astronomer's
mind dilates and must be as large as it in order to contain it in
thought. What we lose in relative importance from the enlargement
of the boundaries of the universe we gain from the new revelation
of our capacities that is made through these transcendent
achievements of our science. That we are favorites of the Creator
and destined for immortal glories is therefore logically and
morally just as credible after looking through Herschel's forty
feet reflector and reading La Place's Mecanique Celeste as it
would be were this planet, suspended in a hollow dome, the
entirety of material being.

Furthermore, we can reason only from the data we have; and, doing
that, we should conclude, from the intrinsic and incomparable
superiority of spirit to matter, that man and his kindred
scattered in families over all the orbs of space were the especial
objects of the infinite Author's care. They are fitted by their
filial attributes to commune with Him in praise and love. They
know the prodigious and marvellous works of mechanical nature;
mechanical nature knows nothing. Man can return his Maker's
blessing in voluntary obedience and thanks; matter is inanimate
clay for the Potter's moulding. Turning from the gleaming
wildernesses of star land to the intellect and heart, appreciating
the infinite problems and hopes with which they deal and aspire,
we feel the truth expressed by Wordsworth in his tremendous lines:

"I must, aloft ascending, breathe in worlds To which the heaven of
heavens is but a veil. Not chaos, darkest pit of Erebus, Nor aught
of blinder vacancy, scoop'd out By help of dreams, can breed such
fear and awe As fall upon us often when we look Into our minds,
into the mind of man."

Is not one noble thought of truth, one holy emotion of love, one
divine impulse of devotion, better than a whole planet of mud, a
whole solar system of gas and dust? Who would not rather be the
soul that gauges the deeps, groups the laws, foretells the
movements, of the universe, writing down in a brief mathematical
formula a complete horoscope of the heavens as they will appear on
any given night thousands of years hence, than to be all that
array of swooping systems? To think the world is to be superior to
the world. That which appreciates is akin to that which makes; and
so we are the Creator's children, and these crowding nebula,
packed with orbs as thick as the ocean beach with sands, are the
many mansions of the House fitted up for His abode and ours. An
only prince would be of more consideration than a palace, although
its foundation pressed the shoulders of Serpentarius, its turret
touched the brow of Orion, and its wings reached from the Great
Bear to the Phoenix. So a mind is of more importance than the
material creation, and the moral condition of a man is of greater
moment than the aspect of stellar firmaments.

Another illustration of the truth we are considering is to be
drawn from the idealist theory, to which so many of the ablest
thinkers of the world have given their devoted adhesion, that
matter is merely phenomenal, no substantial entity, but a
transient show preserved in appearance for some ulterior cause,
and finally, at the withdrawal or suspension of God's volition, to
return into annihilating invisibility as swiftly as a flash of
lightning. The solid seeming firmaments are but an exertion of
Divine force projected into vision to serve for a season as a
theatre for the training of spirits. When that process is
complete, in the twinkling of an eye the phantasmal exhibition of
matter will disappear, leaving only the ideal realm of
indestructible things, souls with their inward treasures remaining
in their native sphere of the infinite, while the outward universe
"Doth vanish like a ghost before the sun."

The same practical result may also be reached by a different path,
may be attained by the road of physics as well as by that of
transcendental metaphysics. For Newton has given in his Principia
a geometrical demonstration of the infinite compressibility of
matter. All the worlds, therefore, that cluster in yon swelling
vault can be condensed into a single globe of the size of a
walnut; and then, on that petty lump of apparent substance, the
enfranchised soul might trample in an exultation of magnanimous
scorn upon the whole universe of earths, and soar through its own
unlimited dominion, Monarch of Immortality, the snatched glory of
shrunken firmaments flashing from its deathless wings.

Finally, a proper comprehension of the idea of God will neutralize
the skepticism and despondency sometimes stealthily nourished or
crushingly impressed by contemplations of the immensity of nature.
If one, from regarding the cold and relentless mechanism of the
surrounding system, tremble for fear of there being no kind
Overruler, let him gaze on the warm beauty that flushes the
countenance of day, the mystic meditativeness that hangs on the
pensive and starry brow of night, let him follow the commanding
instincts of his own heart, and he will find himself clinging in
irresistible faith and filial love to the thought of an infinite
Father. If still the atheistic sentiment obtrudes upon him and
oppresses him, let him observe how every spot of immensity whereon
the eye of science has fallen is crowded with unnumbered amazing
examples of design, love, beneficence, and he will perceive that
the irrefragable lines of argument drawn through the boundless
spaces of creation light up the stupendous contour of God and show
the expression of his features to be love. It seems as though any
man acquainted with the truths and magnitudes of astronomy, who,
after seeing the star strewn abysses, would look in his mirror and
ask if the image reflected there is that of the greatest being in
the universe, would need nothing further to convince him that a
God, the Creator, Preserver, Sovereign, lives. And then, if,
mistakenly judging from his own limitations, he thinks that the
particular care of all the accumulated galaxies of worlds, every
world perhaps teeming with countless millions of conscious
creatures, would transcend the possibilities even of God, a
moment's reflection will dissolve that sophistry in the truth that
God is infinite, and that to his infinite attributes globule and
globe are alike, the oversight of the whole and of each part a
matter of instantaneous and equal ease. Still further: if this
abstract truth be insufficient to support faith and bestow peace,
what will he say to the visible fact that all the races of beings,
and all the clusters of worlds, from the motes in a sunbeam to the
orbs of the remotest firmament, are now taken care of by Divine
Providence? God now keeps them all in being and order, unconfused
by their multiplicity, unoppressed by their magnitude, and not for
an instant forgetting or neglecting either the mightiest or the
least. Morbidly suspicious, perversely incredulous, must be the
mind that denies, since it is so now in this state, that it may be
so as well in the other state and forever! Grasping the conception
of one God, who creates, rules, and loves all, man may
unpresumptuously feel himself to be a child of the Infinite and a
safe heir of immortality. Looking within and without, and soaring
in fancy amidst the blue and starry altitudes interspersed with
blazing suns and nebulous oceans, he may cry, from a sober
estimate of all the experimental and phenomenal facts within his
reach,

"Even here I feel,
Among these mighty things, that as I am
I am akin to God; that I am part
Of the use universal, and can grasp
Some portion of that reason in the which
The whole is ruled and founded; that I have
A spirit nobler in its cause and end,
Lovelier in order, greater in its powers,
Than all these bright and swift immensities."

Perhaps the force of these arguments may be better condensed and
expressed by help of an individual illustration. While the pen is
forming these words, the announcement of the death of Dr. Kane
saddens the world. Alas that the gallant heart no longer beats,
the story of whose noble generosity and indomitable prowess has
just thrilled the dull nations of men of meaner mould! Who even
though standing before a telescope under the full architecture of
the heavens can believe that that maiden soul of heroism and
devotion is now but an extinguished spark, that the love, honor,
intelligence, self sacrificing consecration which enswathed him as
with a saintly halo have all gone out? Turning from that pale
form, stretched on the couch of death in fatal Cuba, through the
receding gulfs of space where incomputable systems of worlds are
wheeling on their eternal courses, and then looking back again
from the noiseless glitter and awful bulk of the creation, do you
despair of the immortal consequence of the poor sufferer whose
fleshly moorings to existence are successively loosening at every
gasp? Ah, remember that Matter and the Soul are not alone! Far
above that clay bound, struggling soul, and far above those
measureless, firmamental masses, is God, the Maker of them both,
and the Lover of his child. Glancing in His omniscience down upon
that human death couch, around which affectionate prayers are
floating from every part of the earth, and from whose pallid
occupant confiding sighs are rising to His ear, He sees the
unutterable mysteries of yearning thought, emotion, and power,
which are the hidden being of man, and which so ally the filial
spirit to the parent Divinity. As beneath His gaze the faithful
soul of Elisha Kane slowly extricating itself from its overwrought
tabernacle, and also extricating itself from the holy network of
heart strings which sixty millions of men speaking one speech have
flung around him, if haply so they might retain him to earth to
take their love and waiting honors rises into the invisible,
seeking to return, bearing its virgin purity with it, to the bosom
of God, will He overlook it, or carelessly spurn it into night,
because the banks of stars are piled up so thick and high that
they absorb His regards? My soul, come not thou into the counsels
of them that think so! It should not be believed though astronomy
were a thousand times astronomy. But it shall rather be thought
that, ere now, the brave American has discovered the Mariner whom
he sought, though sailing on far other seas, where there is no
destroying winter and no need of rescue.

In association with the measureless spaces and countless worlds
brought to light by astronomic science naturally arises the
question whether the other worlds are, like our earth, peopled
with responsible intelligences. In ancient times the stars were
not generally thought to be worlds, but to be persons, genii or
gods. At the dawn of creation "the morning stars sang together;"
that is, "the sons of God shouted for joy." The stars were the
living army of "Jehovah of hosts." At the time when the
theological dogmas now prevalent were first conceived, the
greatness and glory of the universe were supposed to centre on
this globe. The fortunes of man wellnigh absorbed, it was
imagined, the interest of angels and of God. The whole creation
was esteemed a temporary theatre for the enactment of the sublime
drama of the fall and redemption of man. The entire heavens with
all their host were thought to revolve in satellite dependence
around this stationary and regal planet. For God to hold long,
anxious, repeated councils to devise means to save us, was not
deemed out of keeping with the relative dignity of the earth and
the human race. But at length the progress of discovery put a
different aspect on the physical conditions of the problem. The
philosopher began to survey man's habitation and history, and to
estimate man's comparative rank and destiny, not from the stand
point of a solitary planet dating back only a few thousand years,
but in the light of millions of centuries of duration and from a
position among millions of crowded firmaments whence our sun
appears as a dim and motionless star. This new vision of science
required a new construction of theology. The petty and monstrous
notions of the ignorant superstition of the early age needed
rectification. In the minds of the wise and devout few this was
effected; but with the great majority the two sets of ideas
existed side by side in unreconciled confusion and contradiction,
as they even continue to do unto this day.

When it came to be believed that the universe teemed with suns,
moons, and planets, composed of material substances, subject to
day and night, and various other laws and changes, like our own
abode, it was natural to infer that these innumerable worlds were
also inhabited by rational creatures akin to ourselves and capable
of worshipping God. Numerous considerations, possessing more or
less weight, were brought forward to confirm such a conclusion.
The most striking presentation ever made of the argument, perhaps,
is that in Oersted's essay on the "Universe as a Single
Intellectual Realm." It became the popular faith, and is
undoubtedly more so now than ever before. Towards the end of the
seventeenth century a work was published in explicit support of
this faith by Fontenelle. It was entitled "Conversations on the
Plurality of Worlds," and had marked success, running through many
editions. A few years later, Huygens wrote a book, called
"Cosmotheoros," in maintenance of the same thesis. The more this
doctrine obtained root and life in the convictions of men, the
more strongly its irreconcilableness with the ordinary theology
must have made itself felt by fearless and competent thinkers.
Could a quadrillion firmaments loaded with stars, each inhabited
by its own race of free intelligences, all be burned up and
destroyed in the Day of Judgment provoked on this petty grain of
dust by the sin of Adam? 32 Were the stars mere sparks and
spangles stuck in heaven for us to see by, it would be no shock to
our reason to suppose that they might be extinguished with our
extinction; but, grasping the truths of astronomy as they now lie
in the brain of a master in science, we can no longer think of God
expelling our race from the joys of being and then quenching the
splendors of his hall "as an innkeeper blows out the lights when
the dance is at an end." God rules and over rules all, and
serenely works out his irresistible ends, incapable of wrath or
defeat. Would it be more incongruous for Him to be angry with an
ant hill and come down to trample it, than to be so with the earth
and appear in vindictive fire to annihilate it?

From time to time, in the interests of the antiquated ideas,
doubts have been raised as to the validity of the doctrine of
stellar worlds stocked with intellectual families.33 Hegel, either
imbued with that Gnostic contempt and hatred for matter which
described the earth as "a dirt ball for the extrication of light
spirits," or from an obscure impulse of pantheistic thought,
sullies the stars with every demeaning phrase, even stigmatizing
them as "pimples of light." Michelet, a disciple of Hegel,
followed his example, and, in a work published in 1840, strove
vigorously to aggrandize the earth and man at the expense of the
accepted teachings of astronomy.34 With argument and ridicule, wit
and reason, he endeavored to make it out that the stars are no
better than gleaming patches of vapor. We are the exclusive
autocrats of all immensity. Whewell has followed up this species
of thought with quite remarkable adroitness, force, and
brilliance.35 Whether his motive in this undertaking is purely
scientific and artistic, or whether he is impelled by a fancied
religious animus, having been bitten by some theological fear
which has given him the astrophobia, does not clearly appear.

32 As specimens of the large number of treatises which have been
published asserting the destruction of the whole creation in the
Day of Judgment, the following may be consulted. Osiander, De
Consummatione Saculi Dissertationum Pentus. Lund, De Excidio
Universi Totali et Substantiali. Frisch, Die Welt im Feuer, oder
das wahre Vergehen und Ende der Welt durch den letzen Sundenbrand.
For a century past the opinion has been gaining favor that the
great catastrophe will be confined to our earth, and that even
this is not to be annihilated, but to be transformed, purged, and
beautified by the crisis. See, e. g., Brumhey, Ueber die endliche
Umwandlung der Erde durch Feuer.

33 Kurtz, Bibel and Astronomie. Simonton's Eng. trans., ch. vi.
sect. 14: Incarnation of God.

34 Vorlesungen uber die ewige Personlichkeit des Geistes. 35 Of a
Plurality of Worlds: An Essay.


Brewster has replied to Whewell's disturbing essay in a volume
which more commands our sympathies and carries our reason,
but is less sustained in force and less close in logic.36 Powell
has still more recently published a very valuable treatise on the
subject;37 and with this work the discussion rests thus far,
leaving, as we believe, the popular faith in an astronomic
universe of inhabited worlds unshaken, however fatal the
legitimate implications of that faith may be to other doctrines
simultaneously held.38 It is curious to observe the shifting
positions taken up by skepticism in science, now, with powerful
recoil from the narrow bigotries of theology, eagerly embracing
the sublimest dreams of astronomic speculation, and now inclining
to the faith that the remoter stars are but brilliant globules
trickling from the poles of some terrible battery in the godless
heights of space. But if there be any thing sure in science at
all, it is that the material creation is inconceivably vast,
including innumerable systems, and all governed by invariable
laws. But let us return from this episode.

The foregoing sixfold argument, preserving us from the remorseless
grasp of annihilation, leaves to us unchanged the problem of the
relations which shall be sustained by the disembodied soul to time
and space, the question as to the locality of the spirit world,
the scene of our future life. Sheol, Hades, Tartarus, Valhalla
with its mead brimmed horns, Blessed Isles, Elysium, supernal
Olympus, firmamental Heaven, paradisal Eden, definite sites of
celestial Worlds for departed souls, the Chaldee's golden orbs,
the Sanscrit Meru, the Indian Hunting Ground, the Moslem's love
bowers, and wine rivers, and gem palaces thronged with dark eyed
houris, these notions, and all similar ones, of material
residences for spirits, located and bounded, we must dismiss as
dreams and cheats of the childish world's unripe fancy. There is
no evidence for any thing of that coarse, crude sort. The
fictitious theological Heaven is a deposit of imagination on the
azure ground of infinity, like a bird's nest on Himalaya. What,
then, shall we say? Why, in the first place, that, while there are
reasons enough and room enough for an undisheartened faith in the
grand fact of human immortality, it is beyond our present powers
to establish any detailed conclusions in regard to its locality or
its scenery.

But surely, in the second place, we should say that it becomes us,
when reflecting on the scenes to be opened to us at death, to rise
to a more ideal and sublime view than any of those tangible
figments which were the products of untrained sensual imagination
and gross materialistic theory. When the fleshly prison walls of
the mind fall, its first inheritance is a stupendous freedom. The
narrow limits that caged it here are gone, and it lives in an
ethereal sphere with no impeding bounds. Leaving its natal
threshold of earth and the lazar house of time, its home is
immensity, and its lease is eternity. Even in our present state,
to a true

36 More Worlds than One the Creed of the Philosopher and the Hope
of the Christian.

37 Essay on the Unity or Plurality of Worlds. See, furthermore, in
Westminster Review, July, 1858, Recent Astronomy and the Nebular
Hypothesis.

38 Volger, Erde and Ewigkeit. (Natural History of the Earth as a
Periodical Process of Development in Opposition to the Unnatural
Geology of Revolutions and Catastrophes.) Treise, Dag Endlose der
grossen und der kleinen materiellen Welt.


thinker there is no ascent or descent or terminating wall in
space, but equal motion illimitably in all directions; and no
absolute standard of duration, only a relative and variable one
from the insect of an hour, to man, to an archangel, to that
incomprehensible Being whose shortest moments are too vast to be
noted by the awful nebula of the Hour Glass, although its rushing
sands are systems of worlds. The soul emerges from earthly bondage
emancipated into eternity, while "The ages sweep around him with
their wings, Like anger'd eagles cheated of their prey."

We have now sufficient premonitions and examples of this wondrous
enlargement to base a rational belief on. What hems us in when we
think, feel, and imagine? And what is the heaven that shall dawn
for us beyond the veil of death's domain but the realm of Thought,
the sphere of the spirit's unhampered powers? There are often
vouchsafed to us here hours of outsoaring emotion and conception
which make the enclosures in which the astronomer loiters seem
narrow. "His skies are shoal, and imagination, like a thirsty
traveller, pants to be through their desert. The roving mind
impatiently bursts the fetters of astronomical orbits, like
cobwebs in a corner of its universe, and launches itself to where
distance fails to follow, and law, such as science has discovered,
grows weak and weary." There are moods of spiritual expansion and
infinite longing that illustrate the train of thought so well
expressed in the following lines:

"Even as the dupe in tales Arabian
Dipp'd but his brow beneath the beaker's brim,
And in that instant all the life of man
From youth to age roll'd its slow years on him,
And, while the foot stood motionless, the soul
Swept with deliberate wing from pole to pole;
So when the man the Grave's still portal passes,
Closed on the substances or cheats of earth,
The Immaterial, for the things earth glasses,
Shapes a new vision from the matter's dearth:
Before the soul that sees not with our eyes
The undefined Immeasurable lies." 39

Then we realize that the spiritual world does not form some now
unseen and distant region of the visible creation, but that the
astronomic universe is a speck lying in the invisible bosom of the
spiritual world. "Space is an attribute of God in which all matter
is laid, and other attributes he may have which are the home of
mind and soul." We suppose the difference between the present
embodied and the future disembodied state to be so vast that the
conditions of the latter cannot be intelligibly illustrated by the
analogies of the former. It is not to be expected that the human
soul will ever be absolutely independent of time and space,
literally transcending them, but only relatively so as compared
with its earthly predicament.

39 Bulwer, King Arthur, book xi.


For, as an able thinker and writer a philosopher of the
Swedenborgian school, too has said, "The conception of a mind
absolutely sundered from all connection with space is a mere
pretence which words necessarily repudiate."

The soul on the hypothesis that there is a soul is now in the
body. Evidently, on leaving the body, it must either be nowhere,
and that is annihilation, which the vehement totality of our
thought denies; or everywhere, and that implies infinity, the loss
of finite being in boundless Deity, a conclusion which we know of
nothing to warrant; or somewhere,  and that predicates a surviving
individuality related to surrounding externals, which is the
prophesied and satisfactory result in which we rest in faith,
humbly confessing our ignorance as to all the minutia. It does not
necessarily follow from this view, however, that the soul is
limited to a fixed region in space. It may have the freedom of the
universe. More wonders, and sublimer than mortal fancies have ever
suspected, are waiting to be revealed when we die:

"For this life is but being's first faint ray, And heaven on
heaven make up God's dazzling day."

We are here living unconsciously engirt by another universe than
the senses can apprehend, thinly veiled, but real, and waiting for
us with hospitable invitation. "What are those dream like and
inscrutable thoughts which start up in moments of stillness,
apparently as from the deeps, like the movement of the leaves
during a silent night, in prognostic of the breeze that has yet
scarce come, if not the rustlings of schemes and orders of
existence near though unseen?" Perchance the range of the abode
and destiny of the soul after death is all immensity. The
interstellar spaces, which we usually fancy are barren deserts
where nonentity reigns, may really be the immortal kingdom
colonized by the spirits who since the beginning of the creation
have sailed from the mortal shores of all planets. They may be the
crowded aisles of the universal temple trod by bright throngs of
worshipping angels. The soul's home, the heaven of God, may be
suffused throughout the material universe, ignoring the existence
of physical globes and galaxies. So light and electricity pervade
some solid bodies, as if for them there were no solidity. So,
doubtless, there are millions of realities around us utterly
eluding our finest senses. "A fact," Emerson says, "is the last
issue of spirit," and not its entire extent. "The visible creation
is the terminus of the invisible world," and not the totality of
the universe. There are gradations of matter and being, from the
rock to the flower, from the vegetable to man. Is it most probable
that the scale breaks abruptly there, or that other ranks of
spiritual existence successively rise peopling the seeming abysses
unto the very confines of God?

"Can every leaf a teeming world contain,
Can every globule gird a countless race,
Yet one death slumber in its dreamless reign
Clasp all the illumed magnificence of space?
Life crowd a grain, from air's vast realms effaced?
The leaf a world, the firmament a waste?"

An honest historical criticism forces us, however reluctantly, to
loose our hold from the various supposed localities of the soul's
destination, which have pleased the fancies and won the assent of
mankind in earlier times. But it cannot touch the simple and
cardinal fact of an immortal life for man. It merely forces us to
acknowledge that while the fact stands clear and authoritative to
instinct, reason, and faith, yet the how, and the where, and all
such problems, are wrapped in unfathomable mystery. We are to obey
and hope, not dissect and dogmatize. However the fantastic dreams
of the imagination and the subtle speculations of the intellect
may shift from time to time, and be routed and vanish, the deep
yearning of the heart remains the same, the divine polarity of the
reason changes not, and men will never cease fondly to believe
that although they cannot tell where heaven is, yet surely there
is a heaven reserved for them somewhere within the sheltering
embrace of God's infinite providence. We may not say of that
kingdom, Lo, here! or Lo, there! but it is wherever God's
approving presence extends: and is that not wherever the pure in
heart are found? 40

Let every elysian clime the breezes blow over, every magic isle
the waves murmur round, every subterranean retreat fancy has
devised, every cerulean region the moon visits, every planet that
hangs afar on the neck of night, be disenchanted of their
imaginary charms, and brought, by the advance of discovery, within
the relentless light of familiarity, for the common gaze of
fleshly eyes and tread of vulgar feet, still the prophetic MIND
would not be robbed of its belief in immortality; still the
unquenchable instincts of the HEART would retain, uninjured, the
great expectation of ANOTHER WORLD, although no traveller returns
from its voiceless bourne to tell in what local direction it lies,
no voyager comes back from its mystic port to describe its
latitude and longitude on the chartless infinite of space.

Turn we now from the lateral distribution of notions as to a
future life, to their lineal development. We have seen that the
development of belief as to the locality of our future destination
has been a chase of places, over the earth, under the earth,
through the sky, as fast as the unknown was brought within the
known, until it has stopped at the verge of the unknowable. There
we stand, confessing our inability to fix the scene. The doctrine
of the conditions and contents of the future life has followed the
same course as that of its locality.

In the first stage of belief the future life consists of the gross
conditions and materials of the known present reflected, under the
impulse of the senses, into the unknown future. This style of
faith prevailed for a vast period, and is not yet obsolete. When
the King of Dahomey has done a great feat, he kills a man to carry
the tidings to the ghost of his royal father. When he dies
himself, a host are killed, that he may enter Deadland with a
becoming cortege. His wives also are slain, or commit suicide,
that they may rejoin him.

The second stage of belief is reached when, under the ethical
impulse, only certain refined elements of the present,
discriminated portions of the products of reason, imagination and
sentiment, are reflected into the future, and accepted as the
facts of the life there. Critical processes, applied to thought
and faith, cause the rejection of much that was received. That
alone which answers to our wants, and has coherence, continues to
be held

40 Chalmers, Sermon, Heaven a Character and not a Locality.


as truth. An example is afforded by Augustine in his essay, De
Libero Arbitrio. He argues that the wicked are kept in being on
the out skirts of the material universe; partly wretched, partly
happy; too bad for heaven, too good for annihilation; incapable of
attaining the summit of their beatified destiny. Not the crude
reflection of the present state, but a criticized and purged
portion of the results of speculation on it, is thrown forward,
and composes the doctrine of the future life. This is the
condition of faith in which civilized mankind, for the most part,
now are.

The third stage of development is that wherein the thinker
perceives that it is illegitimate to reflect into the future any
of the realities or relations of the present, and then to regard
them as the truths of the experience which awaits him after death.
His experience here is the resultant of his faculties as related
to the universe. Destroy his organization, and what follows? One
will say, "Nonentity." Another, more wise and modest, will say,
"Something necessarily unknown as yet." We have no better right to
project into the ideal space of futurity the ingredients of our
thoughts than we have to project there the objects of our senses.
Bunsen, whose thought and scholarship included pretty much all the
knowledge of mankind, represents this stage of faith. He stands on
the religious side of the movement of Science, believing in
immortality without defining it. Comte stands on the positivist
side, blankly denying all objective immortality. These two
represent the results in which, advancing from its opposite sides,
the logical development of the doctrine of a future life ends.
With Comte, atheistic dogmatism crushing every eternal hope; with
Bunsen, Christian faith pointing the child to an eternal home in
the Father. For all but fetichistic minds the only choice lies
between these two.

The organic evolution of the doctrine of a life to come is,
therefore, a process of faith beginning with the crude
transference of the elements of the present into the future,
continuing with refined modifications of that transference, ending
with an entire cessation of it as inapplicable and incompetent.
Having examined all the historic, experimental, and scientific
data within our reach, we pause on the edge of the PART which we
know, and wait, with serene trust, though with bowed head and
silent lip, before the UNKNOWABLE WHOLE.

CHAPTER VIII.

CRITICAL HISTORY OF DISBELIEF IN A FUTURE LIFE.

IF the first men were conscious spirits who, at the command of
God, dropped from the skies into organic forms of matter, or who
were created here on an exalted plane of insight and communion far
above any thing now experienced by us, then the destination of man
to a life after death may originally have been a fact of direct
knowledge, universally seen and grasped without any obscuring
peradventure. From that state it gradually declined into dubious
dimness as successive generations grew sinful, sensual, hardened,
immersed and bound in affairs of passion and earth. It became
remoter, assumed a questionable aspect, gave rise to discussions
and doubts, and here and there to positive disbelief and open
denial. Thus, beginning as a clear reality within the vision of
all, it sank into a matter of uncertain debate among individuals.

But if the first men were called up into being from the earth, by
the creative energy of God, as the distinct climax of the other
species, then the early generations of our race, during the long
ages of their wild and slowly ameliorating state, were totally
ignorant of any conscious sequel to the fate seemingly closed in
death. They were too animal and rude yet to conceive a spiritual
existence outside of the flesh and the earth. Among the
accumulating trophies of their progressive intellectual conquests
hung up by mankind in the historic hall of experience, this
marvellous achievement is one of the sublimest. What a day was
that for all humanity forever after, when for the first time, on
some climbing brain, dawned from the great Sun of the spirit world
the idea of a personal immortality! It was announced. It dawned
separately wherever there were prepared persons. It spread from
soul to soul, and became the common faith of the world. Still,
among every people there were pertinacious individuals, who swore
not by the judge and went not with the multitude, persons of less
credulous hearts and more skeptical faculties, who demurred at the
great doctrine, challenged it in many particulars, gainsaid it on
various grounds, disbelieved it from different motives, and fought
it with numerous weapons.

Whichever of the foregoing suppositions be adopted, that the
doctrine of a future life subsided from universal acceptance into
party contention, or that it arose at length from personal
perception and authority into common credit, the fact remains
equally prominent and interesting that throughout the traceable
history of human opinion there is a line of dissenters who have
thought death the finality of man, and the next world an illusion.
The history of this special department of thought opens a wide and
fertile subject. To gain a comprehensive survey of its boundaries
and a compact epitome of its contents, it will be well to consider
it in these two lights and divisions, all the time trying to see,
step by step, what justice, and what injustice, is done: first,
the dominant motive forces animating the disbelievers; secondly,
the methods and materials they have employed.

At first thought it would appear difficult to tell what impulses
could move persons to undertake, as many constantly have
undertaken, a crusade against a faith so dear to man, so ennobling
to his nature. Peruse the pages of philosophical history with
careful reflection, and the mystery is scattered, and various
groups of disbelievers stand revealed, with earnest voices and
gestures assailing the doctrine of a future life.1

One company, having their representatives in every age, reject it
as a protest in behalf of the right of private judgment against
the tyranny of authority. The doctrine has been inculcated by
priesthoods, embodied in sacred books, and wrought into the
organic social life of states; and acceptance of it has been
commanded as a duty, and expected as a decent and respectable
thing. To deny it has required courage, implied independent
opinions, and conferred singularity. To cast off the yoke of
tradition, undermine the basis of power supporting a galling
religious tyranny, and be marked as a rebellious freethinker in a
generation of slavish conformists, this motive could scarcely fail
to exhibit results. Some of the radical revolutionists of the
present time say that the doctrine of the divine right of kings
and the infallible authority of the priesthood is the living core
of the power of tyranny in the world. They therefore deny God and
futurity in order to overthrow their oppressors, who reign over
them and prey upon them in the name of God and the pretended
interests of a future life.2 The true way to secure the real
desideratum corruptly indicated in this movement is not by denying
the reality of a future life, but by removing the adjustment of
its conditions and the administration of its rewards and penalties
out of the hands of every clique of priests and rulers. A
righteously and benignly ordered immortality, based in truth and
adjudicated by the sole sovereignty of God, is no engine of
oppression, though a doctrine of heaven and hell irresponsibly
managed by an Orphic association, the guardians of a Delphic
tripod, the owners of a secret confessional, or the interpreters
of an exclusive creed, may be. In a matter of such grave
importance, that searching and decisive discrimination, so rare
when the passions get enlisted, is especially needed. Because a
doctrine is abused by selfish tyrants is no reason for supposing
the doctrine itself either false or injurious.

No little injury has been done to the common faith in a future
life, great disbelief has been provoked unwittingly, by writers
who have sought to magnify the importance of revealed religion at
the expense of natural religion. Many such persons have labored to
show that all the scientific, philosophical, and moral arguments
for immortality are worthless, the teachings and resurrection of
Christ, the revealed word of God, alone possessing any validity to
establish that great truth. An accomplished author says, in a
recent work, "The immortality of the soul cannot be proved without
the aid of revelation." 3 Bishop Courtenay published, a few years
since, a most deliberate and unrelenting attack upon the arguments
for the deathlessness of the soul, seeking with persevering
remorselessness to demolish every one of them, and to prove that
man totally perishes, but will be restored to life at the second
coming of Christ.4 There can scarcely be a question that such
statements usually awaken and confirm a deep skepticism as to a
future life, instead of enhancing a grateful estimate of the
gospel.

1 J. A. Luther, Recensetur numerus eorum, qui immortalitatem
inficiati sunt.

2 Schmidt, Geschichte der Deutschen Literatur im neunzehnten
Jahrhundert, band iii. kap. iv.: Der philosophische Radicalismus.


3 Bowen, Metaphysical and Ethical Science, part ii. ch. ix. The
Future States: Their Evidences and Nature considered on Principles
Physical, Moral, and Scriptural, with the Design of Showing the
Value of the Gospel Revelation.


If man is once annihilated, it is hardly credible that he will be
identically restored. Such a stupendous and arbitrary miracle
clashes with the continuity of the universe, and staggers rather
than steadies faith. We should beg such volunteers however sincere
and good their intentions to withhold the impoverishing gift of
their service. And when kindred reasonings are advanced by such
men as the unbelieving Hume, we feel tempted to say, in the
language of a distinguished divine speaking on this very point,
"Ah, gentlemen, we understand you: you belong to the sappers and
miners in the army of the aliens!"

Another party of disbelievers have repudiated the whole conception
of a future state as a protest against the nonsense and cruelty
associated with it in the prevailing superstitions and dogmatisms
of their time. From the beginning of history in most nations, the
details of another existence and its conditions have been
furnished to the eager credulity of the people by the lawless
fancies of poets, the fine spinning brains of metaphysicians, and
the cold blooded calculations or hot headed zeal of sectarian
leaders. Of course a mass of absurdities would grow up around the
central germ and a multitude of horrors sprout forth. While the
common throng would unquestioningly receive all these ridiculous
and revolting particulars, they could not but provoke doubt,
satire, flat rejection, from the bolder and keener wits. So we
find it was in Greece. The fables about the under world the
ferriage over the Styx, poor Tantalus so torturingly mocked, the
daughters of Danaus drawing water in sieves all were accredited by
the general crowd on one extreme.5 On the other extreme the whole
scheme, root and branch, was flung away with scorn. The following
epitaph on an unbeliever is attributed to Callimachus. "O
Charidas, what are the things below? Vast darkness. And what the
returns to earth? A falsehood. And Pluto? A fable. We have
perished: this is my true speech to you; but, if you want the
flattering style, the Pellaan's great ox is in the shades."6
Meanwhile, a few judicious mediators, neither swallowing the whole
gross draught at a gulp, nor throwing the whole away with utter
disgust, drank through the strainer of a discriminative
interpretation. Because caprice, hatred, and favoritism are
embalmed in some perverse doctrine of future punishment is no
defensible reason for denying a righteous retribution. Because
heaven has been located on a hill top, and its sublime denizens
made to eat ambrosia and sometimes to fall out among themselves,
is no adequate reason for rejecting the idea of a heavenly life.
Puerilities of fancy and monstrosities of passion arbitrarily
connected with principles claiming to be eternal truths should be
carefully separated, and not the whole be despised and trodden on
together. From lack of this analysis and discrimination, in the
presence of abnormal excrescences and offensive secretions dislike
and disbelief have often flourished where, if judicial thought and
conscience had cut off the imposed deformities

5 Plutarch, De Superstition. The reality of the popular credulity
and terror in later Rome clearly appears from the fact that Marcus
Aurelius had a law passed condemning to banishment "those who do
any thing through which men's excitable minds are alarmed by a
superstitious fear of the Deity." Nero, after murdering his
mother, haunted by her ghost and tortured by the Furies, attempted
by magical rites to bring up her shade from below, and soften her
vindictive wrath Suetonius, Vita Neronis, cap. xxxiv.

6 Epigram. XIV.


and dispelled the discoloring vengeance, faith and love would have
been confirmed in contemplating the pure and harmonious form of
doctrine left exposed in the beauty of benignant truth. The aim
ostensibly proposed by Lucretius, in his elaborate and masterly
exposition of the Epicurean philosophy, is to free men from their
absurd belief in childish legends and their painful fears of death
and hell. As far as merely this purpose is concerned, he might
have accomplished it as effectually, perhaps, and more directly,
by exposing the adventitious errors without assailing the great
doctrine around which they had been gathered. Bion the
Borysthenite is reported by Diogenes Laertius to have said, with a
sharp humor, that the souls below would be more punished by
carrying water in whole buckets than in such as had been bored! A
soul may pass into the unseen state though there be no Plutonian
wherry, suffer woe though there be no river Pyriphlegethon, enjoy
bliss though there be no cup of nectar borne by Hebe. But to fly
to rash extremes and build positive conclusions on mere ignorance
has always been natural to man, not only as a believer, but also
as an iconoclastic denier.

A third set of disbelievers in a future life consists of those who
advocate the "emancipation of the flesh" and assert the
sufficiency of this life when fully enjoyed. They attack the dogma
of immortality as the essential germ of asceticism, and abjure it
as a protest against that superstitious distrust and gloom which
put a ban on the pleasures of the world. These are the earthlings
who would fain displace the stern law of self denial with the
bland permission of self indulgence, rehabilitate the senses, feed
every appetite full, and, when satiated of the banquet of
existence, fall asleep under the table of the earth. The
countenance of Duty, severe daughter of God, looks commands upon
them to turn from dallying ease and luxury, to sacrifice the
meaner inclinations, to gird themselves for an arduous race
through difficulties, to labor and aspire evermore towards the
highest and the best. They prefer to install in her stead
Aphrodite crowned with Paphian roses, her eyes aglow with the
light of misleading stars, her charms bewitching them with fatal
enchantments and melting them in softest joys. The pale face of
Death, with mournful eyes, lurks at the bottom of every winecup
and looks out from behind every garland; therefore brim the purple
beaker higher and hide the unwelcome intruder under more flowers.
We are a cunning mixture of sense and dust, and life is a fair but
swift opportunity. Make haste to get the utmost pleasure out of it
ere it has gone, scorning every pretended bond by which sour
ascetics would restrain you and turn your days into penitential
scourges. This gospel of the senses had a swarm of apostles in the
last century in France, when the chief gates of the cemetery in
Paris bore the inscription, "Death is an eternal sleep." It has
had more in Germany in this century; and voices of enervating
music are not wanting in our own literature to swell its siren
chorus.7 Perhaps the greatest prophet it has had was Heine, whose
pages reek with a fragrance of pleasure through which sighs, like
a fading wail from the solitary string of a deserted harp struck
by a lonesome breeze, the perpetual refrain of death! death!
death! His motto seems to be, "Quick! let me

7 Pierer, Universal Lexikon, dritte Auflage, Deutsche Literatur,
sect. 42. Schmidt, Geschichte der Deutschen Literatur im
neuntzehnten Jahrhundert, band iii: kap. i.: Das junge
Deutschland.


enjoy what there is; for I must die. Oh, the gusty relish of life!
Oh, the speechless mystery, the infinite reality, of death!" He
says himself, comparing the degradation of his later experience
with the soaring enthusiasm of his youth, "It is as if a star had
fallen from heaven upon a hillock of muck, and swine were gnawing
at it!"

These men think that the doctrine of a future life, like a great
magnet, has drawn the needle of human activity out of its true
direction; that the dominant tendency of the present age is, and
of right ought to be, towards the attainment of material well
being, in a total forgetfulness to lay up treasures in heaven. The
end is enjoyment; the obstacle, asceticism; the means to secure
the end, the destruction of faith in immortality, so that man,
having nothing left but this world, will set himself to improve
and enjoy it. The monkish severity of a morbid and erroneous
theology, darkening the present and prescribing pain in it to
brighten the future and increase its pleasures, legitimates an
earnest reaction. But that reaction should be wise, measured by
truth. It should rectify, not demolish, the prevailing faith. For
the desired end is most likely to be reached by perceiving, not
that all terminates in the grave, but that the greatest enjoyment
flows from a self controlling devotedness to noble ends, that the
claims of another life are in perfect unison with the interests of
this life, that the lawful fruition of every function of human
nature, each lower faculty being subordinated to each higher one,
and the highest always reigning, at once yields the most immediate
pleasure and makes the completest preparation for the hereafter.
In the absence of the all irradiating sun of immortality, these
disbelievers, exulting over the pale taper of sensual pleasure,
remind us of a parcel of apes gathered around a cold glow worm and
rejoicing that they have found a fire in the damp, chilly night.

Besides the freethinkers, who will not yield to authority, but
insist upon standing apart from the crowd, and the satirists, who
level their shafts undiscriminatingly against what they perceive
associated with absurdity, and the worldlings, who prefer the
pleasures of time to the imaginarily contrasted goods of eternity,
there is a fourth class of men who oppose the doctrine of a
personal immortality as a protest against the burdensome miseries
of individuality. The Gipseys exclaimed to Borrow, "What! is it
not enough to have borne the wretchedness of this life, that we
must also endure another?" 8 A feeling of the necessary
limitations and suffering exposures of a finite form of being has
for untold ages harassed the great nations of the East with
painful unrest and wondrous longing. Pantheistic absorption  to
lose all imprisoning bounds, and blend in that ecstatic flood of
Deity which, forever full, never ebbs on any coast has been
equally the metaphysical speculation, the imaginative dream, and
the passionate desire, of the Hindu mind. It is the basis and
motive of the most extensive disbelief of individual immortality
the world has known. "The violence of fruition in these foul
puddles of flesh and blood presently glutteth with satiety," and
the mortal circuits of earth and time are a round of griefs and
pangs from which they would escape into the impersonal Godhead.
Sheerly against this lofty strain of poetic souls is that
grovelling life of ignorance which, dominated by selfish
instincts, crawling on brutish grounds,

8 The Zincali, part ii. ch. i.


cannot awaken the creative force of spiritual wants slumbering
within, nor lift its head high enough out of the dust to see the
stars of a deathless destiny; and a fifth group of disbelievers
deny immortality because their degraded experience does not
prophesy it. Many a man might say, with Autolycus, "For the life
to come, I sleep out the thought of it." A mind holy and loving,
communing with God and an ideal world, "lighted up as a spar grot"
with pure feelings and divine truths, is mirrored full of
incorporeal shapes of angels, and aware of their immaterial
disentanglement and eternity. A brain surcharged with fires of
hatred, drowsed with filthy drugs, and drenched with drunkenness,
will teem, on the contrary, with vermin writhing in the meshes of
decaying matter. Cleaving to evanescent things, men feel that they
are passing away like leaves on waves; filled with convictions
rooted and breathing in eternity, they feel that they shall abide
in serene survival, like stars above tempests. Turn from every
obscene sight, curb every base propensity, obey every heavenly
vision by assimilation of immortal things, sacred self denials and
toils, disinterested sympathies and hopes, accumulate divine
treasures and kindle the mounting flame of a divine life, and at
the same time consciousness will crave and faith behold an
illimitable destiny. Experiences worthy of being eternal generate
faith in their own eternity. But the ignorant and selfish
sensualist, whose total experience is of the earth earthy, who has
no realization of pure truth, goodness, beauty, is incapable of
sincere faith in immortal life. The dormancy of his higher powers
excludes the necessary conditions of such a faith. His ignoble
bodily life does not furnish the conscious basis and prophecy of a
glorious spiritual life, but shudderingly proclaims the cessation
of all his experience with the destruction of his senses. The
termination of all the functions he knows, what else can it be but
his virtual annihilation? When to the privative degradations of an
uncultivated and earthy experience, naturally accompanied by a
passive unbelief in immortality, are added the positive coarseness
and guilt of a thick insensibility and a wicked life, aggressive
disbelief is quite likely to arise, the essay of an uneasy
conscience to slay what it feels would be a foe, and strangle the
worm that never dies. The denial springing from such sources is
refuted when it is explained. Its motive should never by any man
be yielded to, much less be willingly nourished. It should be
resisted by a devout culture courting the smiles of God, by rising
into the loftier airs of meditation and duty, by imaginative
sentiment and practical philanthropy, until the eternal instinct,
long smothered under sluggish loads of sense and sin, reached by a
soliciting warmth from heaven, stirs with demonstrating vitality.

The last and largest assemblage of dissenters from the prevailing
opinion on this subject comprises those who utter their disbelief
in a future existence out of simple loyalty to seeming truth, as a
protest against what they think a false doctrine, and against the
sophistical and defective arguments by which it has been propped.
It may be granted that the five previously named classes are
equally sincere in their convictions, honest assailants of error
and adherents of truth; but they are actuated by animating motives
of a various moral character. In the present case, the ruling
motive is purely a determination, as Buchner says, to stand by the
facts and to establish the correct doctrine. The directest and
clearest way of giving a descriptive account of the active
philosophical history of this class of disbelievers will be to
follow on the lines of their tracks with statements and criticisms
of their procedures.9 Disbelief in the doctrine of a future life
for man has planted itself upon bold affirmation, and fortified
itself with arguments which may most conveniently be considered
under five distinct heads.

First is the sensational Argument from Appearance. In death the
visible functions cease, the organism dissolves, the mind
disappears; there is apparently a total scattering and end of the
individual. That these phenomena should suggest the thought of
annihilation is inevitable; to suppose that they prove the fact is
absurd. It is an arrant begging of the question; for the very
problem is, Does not an invisible spiritual entity survive the
visible material disintegration? Among the unsound and
superstitious attempts to prove the fact of a future life is that
founded on narratives of ghosts, appearances and visions of the
dead. Dr. Tafel published at Tubingen in 1853 a volume aiming to
demonstrate the immortality and personal identity of the soul by
citation of ninety cases of supernatural appearances, extending
from the history of the ghost whose address to Curtius Rufus is
recorded by Tacitus, to the wonderful story told by Renatus
Luderitz in 1837. Such efforts are worse than vain. Their data are
so explicable in many cases, and so inconclusive in all, that they
quite naturally provoke deeper disbelief and produce telling
retorts. While here and there a credulous person is convinced of a
future life by the asserted appearance of a spirit, the well
informed psychologist refers the argument to the laws of insanity
and illusions, and the skeptic adds as a finality his belief that
there is no future life, because no ghost has ever come back to
reveal and certify it. The argument on both sides is equally
futile, and removed from the true requisitions of the problem.

To the philosophical thinker a mere appearance is scarcely a
presumption in favor of a conclusion in accordance with it.
Science and experience are full of examples exposing the nullity
or the falsity of appearances. The sun seems to move around the
earth; but truth contradicts it. We seem to discern distances and
the forms of bodies by direct sight; but the truth is we see
nothing but shades and colors: all beyond is inference based on
acquired experience. The first darkness would seem to the
trembling contemplator absolutely to blot out the universe; but in
truth it only prevented him from seeing it. The first thorough
unconscious sleep would seem to be the hopeless destruction of the
soul in its perfect oblivion. Death is forever for the first time,
shrouded in the misleading obscurities of an unknown novelty.
Appearances are often deceitful, yielding obvious clews only to
mistakes and falsehoods. They are always superficial, furnishing
no reliable evidence of the reality.

"Who could have thought such darkness lay conceal'd
Within thy beams, O Sun! Or who could find,
Whilst fly and leaf and insect stood reveal'd,
That to such countless orbs thou mad'st us blind?
Why then do we shun death with anxious strife?
If light can thus deceive, wherefore not life?"

9 Spazier, Antiphadon, oder Prufung einiger Hauptbeweise fur die
Einfachheit und Unsterblichkeit der menschlichen Seele.


When the body dies, the mind is no longer manifested through it.
That is all we immediately know by perception. The inference that
the mind has therefore ceased to be at all, is a mere supposition.
It may still live and act, independently of the body. An outside
phenomenon can prove nothing here. We must by some psychological
probe pierce to the core of the being and discern, as there
concealed, the central interpretation of truth, or else, in want
of this, turn from these surface shadows and seek the solution in
some other province. Millions of appearances being opposed to the
truth or inadequate to hint it, we must never implicitly trust
their suggestions. What microscope can reveal the organic life in
a kernel of corn, and show that through the decay of that kernel a
stalk will spring up and bear a thousand kernels more? But if a
new mental life emerges from the dying form of man, it lies in a
spiritual realm whereinto we have no instruments to gaze. Every
existent thing has its metes and limits. In fact, the only final
weapon and fort of a thing is its environing limitation. It goes
into nothing if that be taken down, the atheist says; into
infinity, the mystic says. The mistake and difficulty lie in
discerning what the last wall around the essence is. "The universe
is the body of our body." The boundary of our life is boundless
life. Schlegel has somewhere asked the question, "Is life in us,
or are we in life?" Because man appears to be wholly extinguished
in death, we have no right whatever in reason to conclude that he
really is so. The star which seemed to set in the western grave of
aged and benighted time, we, soon coming round east to the true
spirit sky, may discern bright in the morning forehead of
eternity. There can be no safe reasoning from the outmost husk and
phenomenon of a thing to its inmost essence and result. And, in
spite of any possible amount of appearance, man himself may pass
distinct and whole into another sphere of being when his flesh
falls to dust. That science should search in vain with her finest
glasses to discern a royal occupant reigning in the purple
chambered palace of the heart, or to trace any such mysterious
tenant departing in sudden horror from the crushed and bleeding
house of life, belongs to the necessary conditions of the subject;
for spirit can only be spiritually discerned. As well might you
seek to smell a color, or taste a sound, tie a knot of water, or
braid a cord of wind.

Next comes the abstract Argument from Speculative Philosophy.
Under this head are to be included all those theories which deny
the soul to be a spiritual entity, but reduce it to an atomic
arrangement, or a dependent attribute, or a process of action.
Heracleitus held that the soul was fire: of course, when the fuel
was exhausted the fire would go out. Thales taught that it was
water: this might all evaporate away. Anaximenes affirmed that it
was air, of which all things were formed by rarefaction and
condensation: on such a supposition it could have no permanent
personal identity. Critias said it was blood: this might
degenerate and lose its nature, or be poured out on the ground.
Leucippus maintained that it was a peculiar concourse of atoms: as
these came together, so they might fly apart and there be an end
of what they formed. The followers of Aristotle asserted that it
was a fifth unknown substance, with properties of its own, unlike
those of fire, air, water, and earth. This might be mortal or
immortal: there was nothing decisive in the conception or the
defining terms to prove which it was. Accordingly, the Peripatetic
school has always been divided on the question of the immortality
of the soul, from the time of its founder's immediate disciples to
this day. It cannot be clearly shown what the mighty Stagyrite's
own opinion really was.

Speculative conceptions as to the nature of the soul like the
foregoing, when advanced as arguments to establish its proper
mortality, are destitute of force, because they are gratuitous
assumptions. They are not generalizations based on careful
induction of facts; they are only arbitrary hypotheses.
Furthermore, they are inconsistent both with the facts and
phenomena of experience. Mind cannot fairly be brought into the
category of the material elements; for it has properties and
performs functions emphatically distinguishing it from every thing
else, placing it in a rank by itself, with exclusive predicates of
its own. Can fire think? Can water will? Can air feel? Can blood
see? Can a mathematical number tell the difference between good
and evil? Can earth be jealous of a rival and loyal to a duty? Can
a ganglion solve a problem in Euclid or understand the Theodicee
of Leibnitz? It is absurd to confound things so distinct. Mind is
mind, and matter is matter; and though we are now consciously
acquainted with them only in their correlation, yet there is as
much reason for supposing that the former survives the close of
that correlation as for supposing that the latter does. True, we
perceive the material remaining and do not perceive the spirit.
Yes; but the differentiation of the two is exactly this, that one
is appreciable by the senses, while the other transcends and
baffles them. It is absolutely inconceivable in imagination,
wholly incredible to reason, intrinsically nonsensical every way,
that a shifting concourse of atoms, a plastic arrangement of
particles, a regular succession of galvanic shocks, a continuous
series of nervous currents, or any thing of the sort, should
constitute the reality of a human soul, the process of a human
life, the accumulated treasures of a human experience, all
preserved at command and traversed by the moral lines of personal
identity. The things lie in different spheres and are full of
incommunicable contrasts. However numerously and intimately
correlated the physical and psychical constituents of man are,
yet, so far as we can know any thing about them, they are steeply
opposed to each other both in essence and function. Otherwise
consciousness is mendacious and language is unmeaning. A recent
able author speaks of "that congeries of organs whose union forms
the brain and whose action constitutes the mind." 10 The mind,
then, is an action! Can an action love and hate, choose and
resolve, rejoice and grieve, remember, repent, and pray? Is not an
agent necessary for an action? All such speculative conceptions as
to the nature of soul as make it purely phenomenal are to be
offset, if they can be, by the view which exhibits the personal
ego or conscious selfhood of the soul, not as an empty spot in
which a swarm of relations centre as their goal point, but as an
indestructible monad, the innermost and substantial essence and
cause of the organization, the self apprehending and unchangeable
axis of all thinking and acting. Some of the most free, acute,
learned, wise, and powerful thinkers of the world have been
champions of this doctrine; especially among the moderns may be
named Leibnitz, Herbart, Goethe, and Hartenstein. Jacobi most
earnestly maintained it both against Mendelssohn and against
Fichte.

10 Bucknill and Tuke, Psychological Medicine, p. 371.


That the mind is a substantial entity, and therefore may be
conceived as immortal, that it is not a mere functional operation
accompanying the organic life, a phantom procession of conscious
states filing off on the stage of the cerebrum "in a dead march of
mere effects,"  that it is not, as old Aristoxenus dreamed, merely
a harmony resulting from the form and nature of the body in the
same way that a tune springs from the consenting motions of a
musical instrument, seems to be shown by facts of which we have
direct knowledge in consciousness. We think that the mind is an
independent force, dealing with intellectual products, weighing
opposing motives, estimating moral qualities, resisting some
tendencies, strengthening others, forming resolves, deciding upon
its own course of action and carrying out its chosen designs
accordingly. If the soul were a mere process, it could not pause
in mid career, select from the mass of possible considerations
those adapted to suppress a base passion or to kindle a generous
sentiment, deliberately balance rival solicitations, and, when
fully satisfied, proceed. Yet all this it is constantly doing. So,
if the soul were but a harmony, it would give no sounds contrary
to the affections of the lyre it comes from. But actually it
resists the parts of the instrument from which they say it
subsists, exercising dominion over them, punishing some,
persuading others, and ruling the desires, angers, and fears, as
if itself of a different nature.11 Until an organ is seen to blow
its own bellows, mend its shattered keys, move its pedals, and
play, with no foreign aid, "I know that my Redeemer liveth," or a
violin tunes up its discordant strings and wields its bow in a
spontaneous performance of the Carnival, showing us every Cremona
as its own Paganini, we may, despite the conceits of speculative
disbelief, hold that the mind is a dynamic personal entity. That
thought is the very "latch string of a new world's wicket."

Thirdly, we have the fanciful Argument from Analogy. The keen
champions of disbelief, with their athletic agility of dialectics,
have made terrible havoc among the troops of poetic arguments from
resemblance, drawn up to sustain the doctrine of immortality. They
have exposed the feebleness of the argument for our immortality
from the wonderful workmanship and costliness of human nature, on
the ground that what requires the most pains and displays the most
skill and genius in its production is the most lovingly preserved.
For God organizes the mind of a man just as easily as he
constructs the geometry of a diamond. His omnipotent attributes
are no more enlisted in the creation of the intelligence of an
elephant or the gratitude of a soul than they are in the
fabrication of the wing of a gnat or the fragrance of a flower.
Infinite wisdom and power are equally implied in each and in all.
They have shown the gross defectiveness of the comparison of the
butterfly and psyche. The butterfly, lying in the caterpillar
neatly folded up like a flower in the bud, in due time comes
forth. It is a material development, open to the senses, a common
demonstration tosensible experience. The disengagement of a spirit
from a fleshly encasement, on the other hand, is a pure hypothesis
wholly removed from sensible apprehension. There is no parallel in
the cases. So the ridiculousness has been made evident of Plato's
famous analogical argument that by a general law of nature all
things are produced contraries from contraries; warmth dies into
the

11 Plato, Phado, 98.


life of cold, and lives out of the death of cold; night is born
from the death of day, and day is born from the death of night;
and thus everywhere death springs from life, and life from
death.12 The whole comparison, considered as evidence of human
immortality, is baseless and full of astonishing sophistry. When
one hemisphere of the earth is turned away from the sun, it is
night there; when it is turned towards the sun, it is day again.
To this state of facts this revolving succession there is
obviously no parallelism whatever in the two phenomenal phases of
man, life and death, whereof one finishes its course and then the
other seems fixed forever. In like manner, when Jeremy Taylor,13
after the example of many others, especially of old Licetus,
argues soberly, as he does in a letter to Evelyn, for the
immortality of the soul from the analogy of lamps burning in tombs
for centuries with no waste of matter, there is no apposite and
valid similarity, even if the instances were not a childish fable.
An equally baseless argument for the existence of an independent
spiritual body within the material body, to be extricated from the
flesh at death and to survive in the same form and dimensions, we
recollect having seen in a work by a Swedenborgian author.14 He
reasons that when a person who has suffered amputation feels the
lost limb as vividly as ever before, the phenomenon is palpable
proof of a spirit limb remaining while the fleshly one is gone! Of
course, the simple physiological explanation is that the mind
instinctively refers the sensations brought in by the severed
nerves to the points where, by inveterate custom, it has hitherto
learned to trace their origination. The report being the same, it
is naturally attributed to the same source.

But those skeptics who have mercilessly exposed these fallacious
arguments from analogy have themselves reasoned in the same way as
fallaciously and as often. When individual life leaves the
physical man, say they, cosmical life immediately enters the
corpse and restores it to the general stock of nature; so when
personal consciousness deserts the psychical man, the universal
spirit resumes the dissolving soul. When certain conditions meet,
a human soul is formed, a gyrating current of thought, or a vortex
of force: soon some accident or a spent impulse breaks the eddy,
and the individual subsides like a whirl in the air or a water
spout in the sea. When the spirit fuel of life is exhausted, man
goes out as an extinguished candle. He ceases like a tone from a
broken harp string. All these analogies are vitiated by radical
unlikeness between the things compared. As arguments they are
perfectly worthless, being spoiled by essential differences in the
cases. Wherein there is a similarity it falls short of the vital
point. There is no justice in the conception of man as a momentary
gyre of individual consciousness drawn from the universal sea by a
sun burst of the Spirit. He is a self ruling intelligence, using a
dependent organism for his own ends, comprehending his own
destiny, successively developing its conditions and acquiring the
materials for occupying and improving them, with a prevision of
eternity. A flower may just as well perish as live, a musical
sound cease as continue, a lamp be put out as burn on: they know
not the difference. Not so with the soul of man. We here overpass
a discrete degree and enter upon a subject

12 Crawford, On the Phadon of Plato.

13 Heber's Life and Works of Jeremy Taylor, vol. i. p. 69.

14 Dee Guays, True System of Religious Philosophy, Letter V.


within another circle of categories. Let the rash reasoner who
madly tries conclusions on a matter of such infinite pith and
moment, with data so inapt and poor, pause in sacred horror
before, having first "Put out the light, he then puts out
THE LIGHT!"

There are peculiarities in the soul removing it out of the range
of physical combinations and making a distinct destiny fairly
predicable of it. When we reflect on the nature of a self
contained will, intelligent of immaterial verities and perhaps
transcendent of space and time, how burlesque is the terror of the
ancient corpuscular theorists lest the feebly cohering soul, on
leaving the body, especially if death happened during a storm,
would be blown in pieces all abroad! Socrates, in the Phado, has a
hearty laugh over this; but Lucretius seriously urges it.15 The
answer to the skeptical reasoning from analogy is double. First,
the lines of partial correspondence which visibly terminate within
our tangible reach can teach nothing as to the termination of
other lines which lead out of sight and disappear in a spiritual
region. An organized material form for instance, a tree is fatally
limited: else it would finally fill and exhaust the earth. But no
such limiting necessity can be predicated of mind. Secondly, as
far as there is genuine analogy, its implications are much
stronger in favor of immortality than against it. Matter, whose
essence is materiality, survives all apprehensible changes;
spirit, whose essence is spirituality, should do the same.

Another attack on the doctrine of a future life is masked in the
negative Argument from Ignorance. We do not know how we shall live
again; we are unable to construct the conditions and explain the
details of a spiritual state of existence; and therefore, it is
said, we should of right conclude that there is no such thing. The
proposition is not usually stated so blankly; but it really
amounts to that. The Epicureans say, as a tree cannot exist in the
sky, nor clouds in the ocean, nor fishes in the meadow, nor water
in stone, thus the mind cannot exist apart from the nerves and the
blood. This style of reasoning is a bold begging of the question.
Our present experience is vacant of any specific knowledge of the
conditions, methods, and contents of a life it has not yet
experienced: therefore there is no such life. Innumerable millions
of facts beyond our present knowledge unquestionably exist. It is
not in any way difficult to conceive that innumerable millions of
experiences and problems now defying and eluding our utmost powers
may hereafter fall within our comprehension and be easily solved.
Will you accept the horizon of your mind as the limit of the
universe? In the present, experience must be confined within its
own boundaries by the necessity of the case. If an embryo were
endowed with a developed reasoning consciousness, it could not
construct any intelligible theory of the world and life into which
it was destined soon to emerge. But it would surely be bad logic
to infer, because the embryo could not, from want of materials
within its experience, ascertain the how, the when, the where, and
the what, of the life awaiting it, that there was no other life
reserved for it. An acorn buried and sprouting in the dark mould,
if endowed with intelligent consciousness, could not know any
definite particulars of its maturer life yet to be in the upper
light and air, with cattle in its shade and

15 Lib. iii. ll. 503-508.


singing birds in its branches. Ignorance is not a ground of
argument, only of modest suspense. We can only reason from what we
know. And the wondrous mysteries or natural miracles with which
science abounds, myriads of truths transcending all fictions, melt
and remove from the path of faith every supposed difficulty. Any
quantity of facts have been scientifically established as real
which are intrinsically far more strange and baffling to belief
than the assertion of our immortality is. Indeed, "there is no
more mystery in the mind living forever in the future than in its
having been kept out of life through a past eternity. The
authentic wonder is the fact of the transition having been made
from the one to the other; and it is far more incredible that,
from not having been, we are, than that, from actual being, we
shall continue to be." 16

The unbounded possibilities of life suggested by science and open
to imagination furnish sufficient reply to the objection that we
cannot conceive the precise causes and modes of a future state.
Had one little partitular been different in the structure of the
eye, or in the radiation and media of light, we should never have
seen the stars! We should have supposed this globe the whole of
creation. So some slightest integument or hindering condition may
now be hiding from us the sublime reality and arrangements of
immortality which in death's disenveloping hour are to burst into
our vision as the stellar hemisphere through the night. Shut up
now to one form of being and one method of experience, how can we
expect an exhaustive knowledge of other and future forms and
methods of being and experience? It is a contradiction to ask it.
But the soul is warranted in having faith, like a buried mustard
seed which shall yet mount into its future life. A sevenfold
denser mystery and a seven times narrower ignorance would bring no
real argument against the survival of the soul. For in an
omnipotent infinitude of possibilities one line of ignorance
cannot exhaust the avenues and capacities of being. Escaping the
flesh, we may soar into heaven

"Upon ethereal wings, whose way
Lies through an element so fraught
With living Mind that, as they play,
Their every movement is a thought."

Ignorance of the scientific method avails nothing against moral
proofs of the fact. The physiologist studying the coats of the
stomach, the anatomist dissecting the convolutions of the brain,
could never tell that man is capable of sentiment, faith, and
logic. No stethoscope can discern the sound of an expectation, and
no scalpel can lay bare a dream; yet there are expectations and
dreams. No metaphysical glass can detect, no prognosis foresee,
the death of the soul with the dissolution of its organs: on
empirical grounds, the assertion of it is therefore unwarranted.
But though no amount of obscurity enveloping the subject, no
extent of ignorance disabling us now to grasp the secret, is a
legitimate basis of disbelief, yet actually, there can be no
doubt, in multitudes of instances, the effectual cause of
disbelief in immortality is the impossibility of vividly
conceiving its conditions and scenery; "for," as one of the
subtlest of thinkers has remarked, "however far faith may go
beyond experience, it

16 Martineau, Sermon on Immortality, in Endeavors after the
Christian Life.


must always be chained down by it at a distance." But if there are
good grounds for anticipating another life, then man should
confide in it, no matter how incompetent he is to construct its
theatre and foresee its career. A hundred years ago, one might
have scouted the statement that the most fearful surgical
operations would be performed without inflicting pain, because it
was impossible to see how it could be done. Or if a person had
been informed that two men, one in Europe and one in America,
should converse in lightning athwart the bed of the Atlantic, he
might have rejected it as an absurdity, because he could not
conceive the mode. If destined to a future life, all we could
reasonably expect to know of it now would be through hinting germs
and mystic presentiments of it. And there we do experience to the
fullest extent: their ceaseless prophecies are everywhere with us,

"Blank misgivings of a creature Moving about in worlds not
realized."

The last weapon of disbelief in a future life is the Scientific
Argument from Materialism. Lucretius says, "There is nothing in
the universe but bodies and the properties of bodies." This is a
characteristic example of the method of the materialists: to
assume, as an unquestionable postulate, the very point in debate,
and that, too, in defiance of the intelligent instincts of
consciousness which compel every unsophisticated person to
acknowledge the simultaneous existence of mind and matter as two
correlated yet distinct realities. The better statement would be,
There is nothing in the universe but forces and the relations of
forces. For, while we know ourselves in immediate self
consciousness, as personal intelligences perceiving, willing, and
acting, all we know of an outward world is the effects produced on
us by its forces. Certainly the powers of the universe can never
be lost from the universe. Therefore if our souls are, as
consciousness declares, causes, and not mere phenomena, they are
immortal. To ignore either factor in the problem of life, the
material substratum or the dynamic agent, is mere narrowness and
blindness.

But the unbelieving naturalist argues that the total man is a
product of organization, and therefore that with the dissolution
of the living combination of organs all is over. Matter is the
marriage bed and grave of soul. Priestley says, "The principle of
thought no more belongs to substance distinct from body than the
principle of sound belongs to substance distinct from bell." There
is no relevancy in the comparison, because the things are wholly
unlike. Thought is not, as Hartley's theory avowed it was, a
vibration of a cerebral nerve, as sound is a vibration of a
sonorous body; for how could these vibrations be accumulated in
memory as our mental experiences are? When a material vibration
ends, it has gone forever; but thoughts are stored up and
preserved. A hypothetical simile, like that just cited from
Priestley, is not a cogent argument. It is false science thus to
limit the modes of being to what lies within our present empirical
knowledge. Is it not pure presumptuousness to affirm that the
creative power of Almighty God is shut up so that intelligent
creatures can only exist in forms of flesh? When a recent
materialist makes the assertion, "The thinking man is the sum of
his senses," it is manifest that he goes beyond the data, assuming
what should be proved, and confounding the instruments and
material with the workman. It is as if one should say, "A working
cotton manufactory is the sum of its machines," excluding the
persons by whose guiding oversight all is done. Plainly, it may be
granted that all which man knows is brought in through the door of
the senses, without allowing the same of all that man is. We have
no warrant for pronouncing the identical coextensiveness of what
man learns to know and what he is created to be. The very
proposition, man knows something, presupposes three things, a
subject, an act, and an object. Whether the three exist and perish
together or not is matter for discussion, and not fairly to be
settled by forcibly lumping the heterogeneous three into
homogeneous unity.

In the present state of science it must be confessed that all
kinds of physical force  whether mechanical, chemical, vital, or
nervous are drawn more or less directly from the sun, the material
reservoir of power for our solar system. This must be admitted,
although some recent materialists have pushed the doctrine so far
that they may be called the Parsees of the West. Whenever the
proper conditions for an animate being are furnished, a force
derived from the sun lifts matter from its stable equilibrium to
the level of organic existence. In due season, from its wavering
life struggle there, it decays back to the deep rest of insensate
earth.17 This is a truth throughout the organic realm, from the
bulb of a sea weed to the brain of a Casar. So much cannot be
denied. Every organism constantly receives from the universe food
and force, and as constantly restores in other forms the material
and dynamical equivalents of what it receives, and finally itself
goes to the sources whence it came. But the affirmation of this
for all within the physical realm is not the admission of it for
what subsists in an immeasurably higher rank and totally different
realm. Entering the psychical sphere, where we deal with a new,
distinct order of realities, not impenetrability, weight,
extension, but thought, affection, will, why may not this province
contain eternities, even though the other holds only mortalities?
It is a question to be examined on its own grounds, not to be put
aside with a foregone conclusion. In nature the cause endures
under all evanescent changes, and survives all phenomenal
beginnings and endings: so in spirit the causal personality, if
there be one, may outlast all the shifting currents of the outward
phenomena in endless persistence. Of course, the manifestation of
the mind through the senses must cease when the senses no longer
remain. The essence of the controversy, then, is exactly this: Is
the mind an entity? or is it a collection of functions? If the
soul be a substantial force, it is immortal. If it be a phenomenal
resultant, it ceases at death.

A reductio ad absurdum immediately occurs. If the psychical
totality of man consists of states of feeling, modes of volition,
and powers of thought, not necessitating any spiritual entity in
which they inhere, then, by parity of reasoning, the physical
totality of man consists of states of nutrition, modes of
absorption, and powers of change, implying no body in which these
processes are effectuated! Qualities cannot exist without a
subject: and just as physical attributes involve a body, spiritual
attributes involve a mind. And, if a mental entity be admitted,
its death or cessation with that of its outer dress or case is not
a fair inference, but needs appropriate evidence.

The soul of a man has been defined as the sum of his ideas, an
idea being a state of the consciousness. But the essence of mind
must be the common ground and element of all

17 Moleschott, Licht and Leben.


different states of consciousness. What is that common ground and
element but the presence of a percipient volitional force, whether
manifested or unmanifested, still there? That is the germinal core
of our mental being, integrating and holding in continuous
identity all the phenomenal fluctuations of consciousness. It is
clear that any other representation seems inconsistent with the
most central and vivid facts of our knowledge. In illustration of
this, let us see how every materialistic exposition omits utterly,
or fails to account for, the most essential element, the solitary
and crowning peculiarity, of the case. For example, it is said
that thought or consciousness is a phenomenal process of changes
sustained in the brain by a correlation of forces, just as the
rainbow appears, but has no ontological subsistence of its own:
the continuous spectrum hangs steady on the ceaselessly renewed
substratum of the moving mist rack and the falling rain. But the
comparison is absolutely inapplicable, because the deepest ground
principle of the mind is wanting in the rainbow, namely, conscious
and continuous identity holding in each present moment all the
changes of the past moments. If the rainbow were gifted with
consciousness, it could not preserve its personal identity, but
merely its phenomenal identity, for any two successive moments,
since its whole being would consist of an untied succession of
states.

Traversing the body from its extreme tissues to the gray vesicular
substance composing the spinal cord and covering the surface and
convolutions of the brain, are two sets of white, fibrous nerves.
One set, the afferents, bring in sensation, all kinds of tidings,
from the out world of matter. The other set, the efferents, carry
out volition, all kinds of decrees, from the in world of mind.
Without an afferent nerve no influence of the world can reach the
mind; and without an efferent nerve no conclusion of the mind can
reach the world. As we are now constituted, this machinery is
necessary for the intercommunication of the mind and the material
universe. But if there be something in the case besides live
machinery and crossing telegrams, if there be a monarch mind
inaccessible to the vulgar crowd of things and only conversing
with them through the internuncial nerves, that spirit entity may
itself be capable of existing forever in an ideal universe and of
communing there face to face with its own kingly lineage and
brood. And we maintain that the account of the phenomena is
grossly defective, and that the phenomena themselves are palpably
inexplicable, except upon the supposition of such an entity, which
uses the organism but is not the organism itself nor a function of
it. "Ideas," one materialist teaches, "are transformed
sensations." Yes; but that does not supersede a transforming mind.
There must be a force to produce the transformations. "The
phenomena of mind," says another, "consist in a succession of
states of consciousness." Yes; but what is it that presides over,
takes up, and preserves this succession? The phenomena of the mind
are not the mind itself. "The actions of the mind are the
functions of the cerebrum," adds a third. Yes; but the inquiry is,
what is the mind itself? not, what are its acts? The admission of
the gray nerve cells of the brain, as the material substratum
through which sensations are received and volitions returned, does
not exclude the necessity of a dynamical cause for the
metamorphosing phenomenon. That cause must be free and
intelligent, because the products of its action, as well as its
accompanying consciousness, are marked by freedom and intelligence.
For example, when a cylindrical and

fibrous porter deposits his sensitive burden in the vesicular and
cineritious substance, something examines it, tests its import,
reflects on what shall be done, forms an intelligent resolution,
and commands another porter to bear the dynamic load forth. The
reflective and determining something that does this is the mind.
Thus, by the fact of an indissoluble dynamic will, is the broad
lineal experience of man grasped and kept from dissipating into
crumbled psychical states, as when the dead kings of ancient India
were burned their corpses were wrapped in asbestos shrouds to hold
the ashes together.

The flame of a burnt out candle twinkling in the socket is not
numerically the same with that which appeared when it was first
lighted; nor is a river at any two periods numerically the same.
Different particles constantly feed an ever renewed flame or
stream, just like the former but never the same. A totally new
element appears when we contemplate mind. Here, although the whole
molecular substance of the visible organism is in perpetual flux,
the same conscious personality persists through all, growing ever
richer in an accumulating possession of past experiences still
held in living command. The Arethusa of identity threads the
blending states of consciousness, and, passing the ocean bed of
death, may emerge in some morning fount of immortality. A
photographic image impressed on suitable paper and then
obliterated is restored by exposure to the fumes of mercury. But
if an indefinite number of impressions were superimposed on the
same paper, could the fumes of mercury restore any one called for
at random? Yet man's memory is a plate with a hundred millions of
impressions all cleanly preserved, and he can at will select and
evoke the one he wants. No conceivable relationship of
materialistic forces can account for the facts of this miraculous
daguerreotype plate of experience, and the power of the mind to
call out into solitary conspicuousness a desired picture which has
forty nine million nine hundred and ninety nine thousand nine
hundred and ninety nine latent pictures lying above it, and fifty
millions below it. It has been said that "the impressions on the
brain, whether perceptions or intellections, are fixed and
retained through the exactness of assimilation. As the mind took
cognizance of the change made by the first impression of an object
acting on the brain through the sense organs, so afterwards it
recognises the likeness of that change in the parts inserted by
the nutritive process.18 This passage implies that the mind is an
agent, not a phenomenon; and it describes some of the machinery
with which the mind works, not the essence of the mind itself. Its
doctrine does not destroy nor explain the presiding and elective
power which interprets these assimilated and preserved changes,
choosing out such of them as it pleases, that unavoided and
incomprehensible power, the hiding place of volition and eternity,
whose startling call has often been known, in some dread crisis,
to effect an instantaneous restoration of the entire bygone life,
making all past events troop through the memory, a swiftly awful
cavalcade marching along the fibrous pavement of the brain, while
each terrified thought rushes to its ashy window to behold. We
here leave the material realm behind and enter a spiritual
province where other predicates and laws hold, and where,
"delivered over to a night of pure light, in which no unpurged
sight is sharp enough to penetrate the mysterious essence that
sprouteth into different persons," we kneel in most pious awe, and
cry, with Sir

18 Paget. Surgical Pathology, Lecture II.


Thomas Browne, "There is surely a piece of divinity in us,
something that was before the elements and owes no homage unto the
sun!"

The fatal and invariable mistake of materialism is that it
confounds means and steps with causes, processes with sources,
organs with ends, predicates with subject.19 Alexander Bain denies
that there is any cerebral closet or receptacle of sensation and
imagery where impressions are stored to be reproduced at pleasure.
He says, the revival of a past impression, instead of being an
evocation of it from an inner chamber, is a setting on anew of the
current which originally produced it, now to produce it again.20
But this theory does not alter the fact that all past impressions
are remembered and can be revived at will by an internal
efficiency. The miracle, and the necessity of an unchanging
conscious entity to explain it, are implied just as they were on
the old theory. "The organs of sense," Sir Isaac Newton writes,
"are not for enabling the soul to perceive the species of things
in its sensorium, but for conveying them there." 21 Now, as we
cannot suppose that God has a brain or needs any material organs,
but rather that all infinitude is his Sensorium, so spirits may
perceive spiritual realities without any mediating organism. Our
physical experience in the present is no limit to the spiritual
possibilities of the future. The materialistic argument against
immortality fails, because it excludes essential facts. As
anterior to our experience in the present state there was a power
to organize experiences and to become what we are, so none of the
superficial reasonings of a mere earth science can show that there
is not now a power to organize experiences in a future state and
to become what our faith anticipates we shall be. And this
suggests to speculative curiosity the query, Shall we commence our
future life, a psychical cell, as we commenced our present life, a
physical cell?

It will be well, perhaps, to reply next to some of the aggressive
sophistries of disbelief. The following lines by Dr. Beddoes are
striking, but, considered as a symbol of life, seem almost
wilfully defective:

"The body is but an engine Which draws a mighty stream of
spiritual power Out of the world's own soul, and makes it play A
while in visible motion."

Man is that miraculous engine which includes not only all the
needful machinery, but also fuel, fire, steam, and speed, and
then, in climacteric addition to these, an engineer! Does the
engineer die when the fire goes out and the locomotive stops? When
the engine madly plunges off the embankment or bridge of life,
does the engineer perish in the ruin, or nimbly leap off and
immortally escape? The theory of despair has no greater
plausibility than that of faith.

Feuerbach teaches that the memento mori of reason meets us
everywhere in the spiritual God's acre of literature. A book is a
grave, which buries not the dead remains, but the quick

19 Frauenstadt, Per Materialismus, seine Wahrheit und sein
Irrthum, s. 169.

20 The Senses and the Intellect, p. 61.

21 Brodie, Psychological Inquiries, p. 41, 3d edition.


man, not his corpse, but his soul. And so we live on the psychical
deposits of our ancestry. Our souls consist of that material which
once constituted other souls, as our bodies consist of the
material which once constituted other bodies. A thought, it is to
be replied, is never excreted from the mind and left behind. Only
its existence is indicated by symbols, while itself is added to
the eternal stock of the deathless mind. A thought is a spiritual
product in the mind from an affection of the cerebral substance. A
sentence is a symbol of a thought adapted to create in the
contemplator just such a cerebral affection as that from which it
sprang, and to deposit in his mind just such a spiritual product
as that which it now denotes. Thus are we stimulated and
instructed by the transmitted symbols of our ancestors'
experiences, but not literally nourished by assimilation of their
very psychical substance, as this remorseless prophet of death's
ghastly idealism would have us believe. Still, in whatever aspect
we regard it, one cannot but shudder before that terrible
cineritious substance whose dynamic inhabitants are generated in
the meeting of matter's messages with mind's forces, and sent
forth in emblems to shake the souls of millions, revolutionize
empires, and refashion the world.

Strauss employs an ingenious argument against the belief in a
future life, an argument as harmless in reality as it is novel and
formidable in appearance. "Whether the nerve spirit be considered
as a dependent product, or as the producing principle of the
organism, it ends at death: for, in the former case, it can no
longer be produced when the organism perishes; in the latter case,
that it ceases to sustain the organism is a proof that it has
itself decayed."22 In this specious bit of special pleading,
unwarranted postulates are assumed and much confusion of thought
is displayed. It is covertly taken for granted that every thing
seen in a given phenomenon is either product or producer; but
something may be an accompanying part, involved in the conditions
of the phenomenon, yet not in any way essentially dependent on it,
and in fact surviving it. What does Strauss mean by "the nerve
spirit"? Is there no mind behind it and above it, making use of it
as a servant? Our present life is the result of an actual and
regulated harmony of forces. Surely that harmony may end without
implying the decay of any of its initial components, without
implying the destruction of the central constituent of its
intelligence. It is illegitimate logic, passing from pure
ignorance to positive affirmation; a saltation of sophistry from a
negative premise of blindness to all behind the organic life, to a
dogmatic conclusion of denial that there is any thing behind the
organic life.

A subtle and vigorous disbeliever has said, "The belief in
immortality is not a correct expression of human nature, but rests
solely on a misunderstanding of it. The real opinion of human
nature is expressed in the universal sorrow and wailing over
death." It is obvious to answer that both these expressions are
true utterances of human nature. It grieves over the sadness of
parting, the appalling change and decay, the close locked mystery
of the unseen state. It rejoices in the solace and cheer of a
sublime hope springing out of the manifold powerful promises
within and without. Instead of contemning the idea of a heavenly
futurity as an idle dream image of human longing, it were both
devouter and more reasonable, from

22 Charakteristiken und Kritiken, s. 394.


that very causal basis of it, to revere it and confide in it as
divinely pledged. All the thwarted powers and preparations and
affections, too grand, too fine, too sacred, to meet their fit
fulfilment here, are a claim for some holier and vaster sphere, a
prophecy of a more exalted and serene existence, elsewhere. The
unsatisfied and longing soul has created the doctrine of a future
life, has it? Very good. If the soul has builded a house in
heaven, flown up and made a nest in the breezy boughs of
immortality, that house must have tenants, that nest must be
occupied. The divinely implanted instincts do not provide and
build for naught.

Certain considerations based on the resemblances of men and
beasts, their asserted community of origin and fundamental unity
of nature, have had great influence in leading to the denial of
the immortality of the human soul. It is taken for granted that
animals are totally mortal; and then, from the apparent
correspondences of phenomena and fate between them and us, the
inference is drawn that the cases are parallel throughout, and
that our destiny, too, is annihilation. The course of thought on
this subject has been extremely curious, illustrating, on the one
hand, that "where our egotism begins, there the laws of logic
break," and, on the other hand, that often when fancy gets scent
of a theory the voice and lash of reason are futile to restrain it
until the theory is run into the ground. Des Cartes, and after him
Malebranche and a few other writers, gave no slight currency to
the notion that brutes are mere machines, moved by prearranged
influences and utterly destitute of intelligence, will, or
consciousness. This scheme gave rise to many controversies, but
has now passed into complete neglect.23 Of late years the tendency
has been to assimilate instead of separating man and beast.
Touching the outer sphere, we have Oken's homologies of the
cranial vertebra. In regard to the inner sphere, we have a score
of treatises, like Vogt's Pictures from Brute Life, affirming that
there is no qualitative, but merely a quantitative, distinction
between the human soul and the brute soul.24 Over this point the
conflict is still thick and hot. But, however much of truth there
may be in the doctrine of the ground identity of the soul of a man
and the soul of a dog, the conclusion that man therefore perishes
is a pure piece of sophistry. Such a monstrous assassination of
the souls of the human race with the jaw bone of an ass may be
legitimately avoided in either of two ways. It is as fair to argue
the immortality of animals from their likeness to us, as our
annihilation from our likeness to them. The psychological realm
has been as much deepened in them by the researches of modern
science as the physiological domain has been widened in us. As
Agassiz says, we must not lose sight of the mental individuality
of animals in an exclusive attention to the bodily side of their
nature.25 A multitude of able thinkers have held the faith that
animals have immaterial and deathless souls. Rightly considered,
there is nothing in such a

23 Darmanson, La bete transformee en machine. Ditton, Appendix to
Discourse on Resurrection of Christ, showing that brutes are not
mere machines, but have immortal souls. Orphal, Sind die Thiere
blos sinnliche Geschopfe? Thomasius, De Anima Brutorum, quo
asseritur, eam non esse Materialem, contra Cartesianam Opinionem.
Winkler, Philosophische Untersuchungen von dem Seyn and Wesen der
Seelen der Thiere, von einzelnen Liebhabern der Weltweisheit.

24 Buchner, Kraft und Stoff, kap. 19: Die Thierseele.

25 Essay on Classification, p. 64.


doctrine which a keen reasoner may not credit and a person of the
most refined feelings find pleasure in embracing. In their serene
catholicity and divine sympathy, science and religion exclude
pride and contempt.

But admitting that there is no surviving psychical entity in the
brute, that is in no way a clear postulate for proving that the
same fact holds of man. The lower endowments and provinces of
man's nature and experience may correspond ever so closely with
the being and life of brutes whose existence absolutely ceases at
death, and yet he may be immortal. The higher range of his
spiritual faculties may elevate him into a realm of universal and
eternal principles, extricating his soul from the meshes of decay.
He may come into contact with a sphere of truths, grasp and rise
into a region of realities, conferring the prerogative of
deathlessness, not to be reached by natures gifted in a much lower
degree, although of the same kind. Such a distinction is made
between men themselves by Spinoza.26 His doctrine of immortality
depicts the stupendous boon as contingent, to be acquired by
observance of conditions. If the ideas of the soul represent
perishable objects, it is itself mortal; if imperishable, it is
immortal. Now, brutes, it is probable, never rise to the
apprehension of pure and eternal truths; but men do. It was a mean
prejudice, founded on selfish ignorance and pride, which first
assumed the total destruction of brutes in death, and afterwards,
by the grovelling range of considerations in which it fastened and
the reaction it naturally provoked, involved man and all his
imperial hopes in the same fate. A firm logical discrimination
disentangles the human mind from this beastly snarl.27 The
difference in data warrants a difference in result. The argument
for the immortality of brutes and that for the immortality of men
are, in some respects, parallel lines, but they are not
coextensive. Beginning together, the latter far outreaches the
former. Man, like the animals, eats, drinks, sleeps, builds;
unlike them, he adorns an ideal world of the eternal future, lays
up treasures in its heavenly kingdom, and waits to migrate into
it.

There are two distinct methods of escaping the fatal inference of
disbelief usually drawn by materialists. First, by the denial of
their philosophical postulates, by the predication of immaterial
substance, affirming the soul to be a spaceless point, its life an
indivisible moment. The reasonings in behalf of this conception
have been manifold, and cogent enough to convince a multitude of
accomplished and vigorous thinkers.28 In Herbart's system the soul
is an immaterial monad, or real, capable of the permanent
formation of states in its interior. Its life consists of a
quenchless series of self preservations. These reals, with their
relations and aggregations, constitute at once the varying
phenomena and the causal substrata of the universe. Mamertius
Claudianus, a philosophical priest of Southern Gaul in the fifth
century, wrote a treatise "On the Nature of the Soul." He says,
"When the soul wills, it is all will; when it recollects or feels,
it is all recollection or feeling. Now, will, recollection, and
feeling, are not bodies. Therefore the soul is incorporeal." This
makes the conscious man an

26 Jouffroy, Introduction to Ethics: Channing's trans., vol. ii.
pp. 189-191.

27 Schaller, Leib und Seele, kap. 13: Der Psychische Unterschied
des Menschen vom Thiere.

28 Crombie, Natural Theology, vol. ii.: Essay on the Immortality
of the Soul. Brougham, Discourse of Nat. Theol., sect. 5.


imperishable substantial activity. An old English writer, with
quaint eloquence, declares, "There is a proportion between an atom
and the universe, because both are quantitative. All this excesse
vanisheth into nothing as soon as the lowest substance shineth out
of that orbe where they reside that scorn divisibility."

From this brief statement of the position of the immaterialists,
without arguing it, we pass to note, in the second place, that
nearly all the postulates ordinarily claimed by the materialist
may be granted without by any means proving the justice of their
disbelief of a future life.29 Admit that there can be no sensation
without a nerve, no thought without a brain, no phenomenal
manifestation without an organ. Such an admission legitimates the
conclusion, on empirical grounds, that our present mode of life
must cease with the dissolution of our organism. It does not even
empirically prove that we may not survive in some other mode of
being, passing perhaps to an inconceivably higher stage and more
blessed kind of life. After the entire disintegration of our
material organs, we may, by some now unknown means, possess in a
refined form the equivalents of what those organs gave us. There
may be, interfused throughout the gross mortal body, an immortal
body of exquisitely delicate structure invisibly extricating
itself from the carious ruins at death. Plattner develops and
defends this hypothesis with plausible skill and power.30 The
Hindus conceived the soul to be concealed within several
successive sheaths, the innermost of which accompanied it through
all its transmigrations.31 "The subtile person extends to a small
distance over the skull, like the flame of a lamp above its wick."
32 The later Pythagoreans and Platonists seem to have believed
that the same numerical ethereal body with which the soul was at
first created adhered to it inseparably during all its descents
into grosser bodies, a lucid and wingy vehicle, which, purged by
diet and catharms, ascends again, bearing the soul to its native
seat.33 The doctrine of Swedenborg asserts man to be interiorly an
organized form pervading the physical body, an eternal receptacle
of life from God. In his terminology, "constant influx of life"
supersedes the popular idea of a self contained spiritual
existence. But this influx is conditioned by its receiving organ,
the undecaying inner body.34 However boldly it may be assailed and
rejected as a baseless theory, no materialistic logic can disprove
the existence of an ethereal form contained in, animating, and
surviving, the visible organism. It is a possibility; although,
even if it be a fact, science, by the very conditions of the case,
can never unveil or demonstrate it.

When subjected to a certain mode of thought developed recently by
Faraday, Drossbach, and others, materialism itself brightens and
dissolves into a species of idealism, the universe becomes a
glittering congeries of indestructible points of power, and the
immortality of the soul is established as a mathematical
certainty.35 All bodies, all entities, are but forms of

This has been ably shown by Spiers in his treatise, Ueber das
korperliche Bedingtsein der Seelenthatigkeiten.

30 Spes immortalitatis animorum per rationes physiologicas
confirmata.

31 Dabistan, vol. ii. p. 177.

32 Colebrooke, Essays, vol. i. p. 246.

33 Cudworth, Int. Sys., vol. ii. pp. 218-230, Am. ed.

34 On the Intercourse between the Soul and the Body, sect. 9.

35 Lott, Herbarti de animi immortalitate doctrina.


force.36 Gravity, cohesion, bitterness, thought, love,
recollection, are manifestations of force peculiarly conditioned.
Our perceptions are a series of states of consciousness. An
attribute or property of a thing is an exercise of force or mode
of activity producing a certain state of consciousness in us. The
sum of its attributes or properties constitutes the totality of
the thing, and is not adventitiously laid upon the thing: you can
separate the parts of a thing; but you cannot take away its forces
from any part, because they are its essence. Matter is not a
limitation or neutralization, but a state and expression, of
force. Force itself is not multiplex, but one, all qualities and
directions of it lying potentially in each entity, the kinds and
amounts which shall be actually manifested depending in each case
on the conditions environing it. All matter, all being, therefore,
consists of ultimate atoms or monads, each one of which is an
inseparable solidarity of activities. The universe is an eternal
society of eternal force individuals, all of which are capable of
constant changes in groupings, aggregations, developments,
relations, but absolutely incapable of annihilation. Every atom
possesses potential reason, and comes to self apprehension
whenever the appropriate conditions meet. All differences
originate from conditions and exist not in essentialities.

According to this theory, the eternity of the soul is sure, but
that eternity must be an endless series of mutual transitions
between consciousness and unconsciousness, life and death.37 Since
all cannot be men at once, they must take their turns. Carus says,
a soul enclosing in itself an independent consciousness is
inconceivable. When the organism by which consciousness is
conditioned and revealed is destroyed in death, consciousness
disappears as certainly as the gleaming height of a dome falls in
when its foundation is removed. And Drossbach adds, death is the
shade side of life. Without shade, light would not be perceptible,
nor life without death; for only contrast leads to knowledge. The
consciousness of life is realized by interchange with the
unconsciousness of death. Mortality is the inevitable attribute of
a self conscious being. The immortality of such a being can be
nothing else than an everlasting mortality. In this restless
alternation between the opposite states of life and death, being
holds continuous endurance, but consciousness is successively
extinguished and revived, while memory is each time hopelessly
lost. Widenmann holds that the periods of death are momentary, the
soul being at once born again, retaining no vestiges of its
past.38 Drossbach, on the contrary, believes that memory is an
indefeasible quality of the soul atom, the reason why we do not
remember previous lives being that the present is our first
experiment. When all atoms destined to become men have once run
the human career, the earliest ones will begin to reappear with
full memory of their preceding course. It matters not how long it
requires for one circuit of the whole series of souls; for the
infinite future is before us, and, as we are unconscious in death,
the lapse of ages is nothing. We lie down to sleep, and instantly
rise up to a new life.

36 Hickok, Rational Cosmology, ch. ii. sect. 1: Matter is force.

37 Drossbach, Die personliche Unsterblichkeit als Folge der
atomistischen Verfaasung der Natur, abschn. iv. kap. ii. sect. 5,
6.

38 Gedanken uber die Unsterblichkeit als Wiederholung des
Erdenlebens.


"Death gives to life all its relish, as hunger is the true sauce
of food. Death first makes us precious and dear to ourselves.
Since it lies in the nature of change that no condition is
endless, but morning ever follows night, death cannot be endless.
Be unconcerned; thy being shall as little be lost as the grain of
dust at thy foot! Because in death thou dost not know that thou
art, therefore fearest thou that thou shalt be no more? O
pusillanimous! the great events of nature are too vast for thy
weak heart. A whole eternity thou hast not been conscious that
thou art, and yet thou hast become conscious of it. Every night
thou losest thy consciousness, yet art thou conscious again, and
shalt be. The loss of consciousness is not necessarily the loss of
self. The knowledge of my being is not my being itself, but a
peculiar force thereof, which, entering into reciprocal action
with other forces, is subject to change. It is its essence to act,
and thus to change, yet without surrendering its essence. Goethe's
words may be applied to the soul: 'It is; therefore eternally it
is.'

Not in cold motionlessness consists eternal life, but in eternal
movement, in eternal alteration, in incessant change. These are
warranties that no state endures forever, not even the
unconscious, death." 39

In this unfolding of the theory there are many arbitrary and
fanciful conceptions which may easily be dispensed with. The
interspersion of the bright life of the human monads with blank
epochs of oblivious darkness, and the confinement of their destiny
to an endless repetition of their life course on this globe, are
not necessary. In the will of God the free range of the boundless
universe may lie open to them and an incessant career in forever
novel circumstances await them. It is also conceivable that human
souls, leading still recurrent lives on earth with total
forgetfulness, may at last acquire sufficient power, in some happy
concurrence or sublime exigency, to summon back and retain all
their foregone states. But, leaving aside all such incidental
speculations, the chief interest of the dynamic atomistic or monad
theory, as affording a solid basis for immortality, is in relation
to the arrogance of a shallow and conceited materialism. Says the
materialist, "Show me a spirit, and I will believe in your
heaven." Replies the idealist, "Show me your matter, however small
a piece, and I will yield to your argument." Spirit is no
phenomenon to be shown, and matter is an inference from thought:
thus the counter statements of physical science and ideal
philosophy fairly offset each other, and throw their respective
advocates back upon the natural ground of unsophisticated faith
and observation. Standing there unperverted, man has an invincible
reliance on the veracity of his faculties and the normal reports
of nature. Through immediate apprehension of his own conscious
will and the posited experience of his senses, he has knowledge
both of causal forms of being, or free productive force, and of
resultant processes and phenomena. And surely sound logic teaches
that the latter may alter or disappear without implying the
annihilation of the former. If all material substance, so called,
were destroyed, not only would space remain as an infinite
indivisible unity, but the equivalents

39 Drossbach, Die individuelle Unsterblichkeit vom monadistisch
metaphysischen Standpunkte betrachtet.


of what had been destroyed must remain in some form or other. Who
shall say that these equivalents would not be intelligent points
of power, capable of organizing aggregate bodies and of
reconstituting the universe in the will of God, or of forming from
period to period, in endless succession, new kinds of universes,
each abounding in hitherto unimagined modes of life and degrees of
bliss? To our present faculties, with only our present
opportunities and data, the final problem of being is insoluble.
We resolve the properties of matter into methods of activity,
manifestations of force. But there, covered with alluring awe, a
wall of impenetrable mystery confronts us with its baffling "Thus
far, and no farther, shall thine explicating gaze read the secrets
of destiny." We cannot tell what force is. We can conceive neither
its genesis nor its extinction. Over that obscure environment,
into the immense empire of possibilities, we must bravely fling
the treasures of our love and the colors of our hope, and with a
divine impulse in the moment of death leap after, trusting not to
sink as nothing into the abyss of nowhere, but, landing safe in
some elysium better than we know, to find ourselves still in God.

In dealing with moral problems in the realm of the higher reason,
intuitions, mysterious hints, prophetic feelings, instinctive
apprehensions of fitness and harmony, may be of more convincing
validity than all the formal arguments logic can build.40
"Sentiment," Ancillon says, as quoted by Lewes, "goes further than
knowledge: beyond demonstrative proofs there is natural evidence;
beyond analysis, inspiration; beyond words, ideas; beyond ideas,
emotions; and the sense of the infinite is a primitive fact of the
soul." In transcendental mathematics, problems otherwise
unapproachable are solved by operating with emblems of the
relations of purely imaginary quantities to the facts of the
problems. The process is sound and the result valid, notwithstanding
the hypothetical and imaginary character of the aids in reaching it.

When for mastering the dim momentous problems of our destiny
the given quantities and relations of science are inadequate,
the helpful supposititious conditions furnished by faith may
equally lead over their airy ways to conclusions of eternal truth.

The disbelievers of a future life have in their investigations
applied methods not justly applicable to the subject, and
demanded a species of proof impossible for the subject to yield:
as if one should use his ear to listen to the symmetries of beauty,
and his eye to gaze upon the undulations of music.

It is therefore that the terribly logical onslaughts of
Feuerbach are harmless upon most persons. The glittering scimetar
of this Saracenic metaphysician flashes swift and sharp, but he
fights the air with weapons of air. No blood flows from the
severed emptiness of space; no clash of the blows is heard any
more than bell strokes would be heard in an exhausted receiver.
One may justifiably accept propositions which strict science
cannot establish and believe in the existence of a thing which
science cannot reveal, as Jacobi has abundantly shown41 and as
Wagner has with less ability tried to illustrate.42 The utmost
possible achievement of a negative criticism is to show the
invalidity of the physiological,

40 Abel, Disquisitio omnium tam pro immortalitate quam pro
mortalitate argumentandi generum.

41 Von den goutlichen Dingen and ibrer Offenbarung. Wissen und
Glauben mit besonderer Beziehung zur Zukunft der Seelen:
Fortsetzung der Betrachtungen uber Menschenschopfung und
Seelensubstanz.


analogical, and metaphysical arguments to furnish positive proof
of a future life for us. But this negation fully admitted is no
evidence of our total mortality. Science is impotent to give any
proof reaching to such a conclusion. However badly the archery of
the sharp eyed and strong armed critics of disbelief has riddled
the outer works of ordinary argument, it has not slain the
garrison. Scientific criticism therefore leaves us at this point:
there may be an immortal soul in us. Then the question whether
there actually is an immortal soul in us, rests entirely on moral
facts and considerations. Allowing their native force to these
moral facts and considerations, the healthy ethical thinker,
recognising in himself an innermost self conscious ego which knows
itself persistent and identical amidst the multiplex vicissitude
of transient conditions, lies down to die expecting immediately to
continue his being's journey elsewhere, in some other guise.
Leaving out of view these moral facts and considerations, the
materialistic naturalist thinker, recognising his consciousness as
only a phantom procession of states across the cerebral stage hung
in ashy livery and afloat on blood, lies down to expire expecting
immediately to be turned into nobody forever. Misinterpreting and
undervaluing these moral facts and considerations, the anchorless
speculative thinker, recognising his organism as an eye through
which the World Spirit beholds itself, or a momentary pulse in
which the All feels itself, his consciousness as a part of the
infinite Thought, lies down on his death couch expecting
immediately to be turned into everybody, eternity, instead of
greeting him with an individual kiss, wrapping him in a monistic
embrace. The broad drift of human conviction leads to the first
conclusion, a persistent personality. The greatest philosophers,
from Plato to Pascal, deny the second view, a blotting extinction
of the soul, declaring it false in science and incredible in
presentation. The third theory a pantheistic absorption  the
irresistible common sense of mankind repudiates as a morbid dream.
Man naturally believes himself immortal but not infinite. Monism
is a doctrine utterly foreign to undiseased thinking. Although it
be a Fichte, a Schelling, or a Hegel, who says that the soul is a
circumscribed yet omnipotent ego, which first radiates the
universe, and afterwards beholds it in the mirror of itself, and
at length breaks into dead universality, the conception is, to the
average apprehension of humanity, as overweening a piece of wild
fancy as ever rose in a madman's reveries.43

The ordinary contemplator of the phenomena of the world and the
sequel of human life from the materialistic point of view feels
disgust and terror at the prospect. The scene seems to him
degrading and the fate fearful. The loathing and dismay vulgarly
experienced thus, it is true, arise from an exaggerated
misapprehension of the basis and meaning of the facts: rightly
appreciated, all is rulingly alive, aspirant, beautiful, and
benignant. The ceaseless transformations filling the heights and
depths of the creation are pervaded with joy and

42 A full discussion of the pantheistic doctrine of immortality
will be found in the following works. Richmann, Gemsinfassl.
Darstellung und Wurdigung aller gehaltreichen Beweisarten fur Gott
und fur Unsterblichkeit der Seele. Unius, Unsterblichkeit.
Blanche, Philosophische Unsterblichkeitlehre.

43 Weisse, Die philosophische Geheimlehre von der Unsterblichkeit
des menschlichen Individuums. Goschel, Von den Beweisen fur die
Unsterblichkeit der menschlichen Seele im Lichte der speculativen
Philosophie. Morell, Historical and Critical View of the
Speculative Philosophy of Europe in the 19th Century, part ii. ch.
v. sect. 2: The German School of the 19th Century. Buchanan,
Modern Atheism.


clothed with a noble poetry. There is no real death: what seems so
is but a "return or falling home of the fundamental phenomenon to
the phenomenal foundation, a dissolution through which nature
seeks her ground and strives to renew herself in her principles."
Still, in spite of this more profound and genial interpretation of
the shifting metamorphoses of nature, the fear of there being no
conscious future life for man produces, when first entertained, a
horrid constriction around the heart, felt like the ice cold coils
of a serpent. The thought of tumbling hopelessly into "The blind
cave of eternal night" naturally oppresses the heart of man with
sadness and with alarm. To escape the unhappiness thus inflicted,
recourse has been had to expedients. Four artificial substitutes
for immortality have been devised. Fondly fixing attention upon
these, men have tried to find comfort and to absorb their thoughts
from the dreaded spectre and the long oblivion. The first is the
sentimental phantasm of posthumous fame. The Latin bard, ancient
Ennius, sings,

"Nemo me lacrymis decoret, nec funera fletu Faxit. Cur? volito
vivu' per ora virum." 44

Shakspeare likewise often expresses the same thought:

"When all the breathers of this world are dead, You still shall
live (such virtue hath my pen) Where breath most breathes, even in
the mouths of men."

And again in similar strain:

"My love looks fresh, and Death to me subscribes, Since, spite of
him, I'll live in this poor rhyme, While he insults o'er dull and
speechless tribes."

Napoleon is reported to have said, "My soul will pass into history
and the deathless memories of mankind; and thus in glory shall I
be immortal." This characteristically French notion forms the
essence of Comte's "positivist" doctrine of a future life. Those
deemed worthy after their death to be incorporated, by vote of the
people, in the Supreme Being, the Grand Etre, a fictitious product
of a poetic personification, through the perpetual fame and
influence thus secured have an immortal life in the thoughts and
feelings of a grateful posterity. Comte says, "Positivism greatly
improves immortality and places it on a firmer foundation, by
changing it from objective to subjective." Great and eternal
Humanity is God. The dead who are meritorious are alone
remembered, and, thus incorporated into the Divinity, they have a
"subjective immortality in the brains of the living." 45 It is a
poor shadow of the sublime truth which the soul craves. Leopardi,
in his Bruto Minore, expresses this "poor hope of being in the
future's breath:"

44 Cicero, Tusc. Quast., lib. i. cap. xv.

45 Catechism of Positive Religion, Conversation III.


"dell' atra morte ultima raggio Conscia future eta." That proud
and gifted natures should have seriously stooped to such a toy, to
solace themselves with it, is a fact strange and pathetic. With
reverential tenderness of sympathy must we yearn towards those
whose loving natures, baffled of any solid resource, turn
appealingly, ere they fade away, to clasp this substanceless image
of an image.

Another scheme is what may be called the "lampada tradunt" 46
theory of a future life. Generations succeed each other, and the
course is always full. Eternal life takes up new subjects as fast
as its exhausted receptacles perish. Men are the mortal cells of
immortal humanity. The individual must comfort himself with the
sympathetic reflection that his extinction destroys nothing, since
all the elements of his being will be manipulated into the forms
of his successors.

Life is a constant renovation, and its sum is forever full and
equal on the globe. The only genuine resurrection unto eternal
life is an unending re creation of organisms from the same
materials to repeat the same physiological and psychological
processes.47 There is a gleam of cheer and of nobleness in this
representation; but, upon the whole, it is perhaps as ineffectual
as the former. It is a vapid consolation, in view of our own
annihilation, to think that others will then live and also be
annihilated in their turn. It is pleasant to believe that the
earth will forever be peopled with throngs of men; but though such
a belief might help to reconcile us to our fate, it could not
alter the intrinsic sadness of that fate.

A third substitute for the common view of immortality is a
scientific perception of the fact that the peculiar force which
each man is, the sum of his character and life, is a cause
indestructibly mixed with the course of subsequent history, an
objective personal immortality, though not a conscious one. What
he was, remains and acts forever in the world.

The fourth substitute is an identification of self with the
integral scheme of things. I am an inseparable portion of the
totality of being, to move eternally in its eternal motion.

"If death seem hanging o'er thy separate soul, Discern thyself a
part of life's great whole."

Lose the thought of thy particular evanescence in the thought of
the universal permanence. The inverted torch denotes death to a
mere inhabitant of the earth: to a citizen of the universe,
downward and upward are the same. Perhaps one who rejects the
ordinary doctrine of a future life can be solaced and edified by
these substitutes in proportion to his fineness, greatness, and
nobleness. But to most persons no substitute can atone for the
withdrawn truth of immortality itself.

In regard to the eternal preservation of personal consciousness,
it were bigoted blindness to deny that there is room for doubts
and fears. While the monad soul so to call it lies here beneath
the weak glimmer of suns so far off that they are forceless to
develop it to a

46 Lucretius, De Nat. Rerum, lib. ii. 1. 78.

47 Schultz Schultzenstein, Die Bildung des menschlichen Geistes
durch Kultur der Verjungung seines Lebens, ss. 834-847: Die
Unsterblichkeitsbegriffe.


victorious assurance, we cannot but sometimes feel misgivings and
be depressed by skeptical surmises. Accordingly, while belief has
generally prevailed, disbelief has in every age had its
representatives. The ancients had their Dicaarchus, Protagoras,
Panatius, Lucan, Epicurus, Casar, Horace, and a long list besides.
The moderns have had their Gassendi, Diderot, Condillac, Hobbes,
Hume, Paine, Leopardi, Shelley, and now have their Feuerbach,
Vogt, Moleschott, and scores of others needless to be named. And
although in any argument from authority the company of the great
believers would incomparably outshine and a thousand times
outweigh the array of deniers, this does not alter the obvious
fact that there are certain phenomena which are natural
provocatives of doubt and whose troubling influence scarcely any
one can always escape. Homer, in giving expression to Hector's
confidence of victory over the Greeks, makes him wish that he were
but as sure of entering the state of the immortal gods.48 When
some one asked Dr. Johnson, "Have we not proof enough of the
immortality of the soul?" he replied, "I want more." Davenant of
whom Southey says, "I know no other author who has so often
expressed his doubts respecting a future state and how burdensome
he felt them" writes,  "But ask not bodies doom'd to die,
To what abode they go: Since knowledge is but sorrow's spy,
It is not safe to know."

Charles Lamb writes, "If men would honestly confess their
misgivings, (which few men will,) there are times when the
strongest Christian of us has reeled under questionings of such
staggering obscurity." Many a man, seeing nature hang her veil of
shifting glories above the silent tombs of vanished generations,
voiceless now forever, entertaining innumerable contradictory
queries amidst feelings of decay and sights of corruption, before
the darkness of unknown futurity might piteously exclaim, without
deserving blame,

"I run the gauntlet of a file of doubts, Each one of which down
hurls me to the ground."

Who that has reached maturity of reflection cannot appreciate and
sympathize somewhat with these lines of Byron, when he stands
before a lifeless form of humanity?

"I gazed, as oft I have gazed the same, To try if I could wrench
aught out of death Which should confirm, or shake, or make, a
faith; But it was all a mystery. Here we are, And there we go: but
where? Five bits of lead, Or three, or two, or one, send very far!
And is this blood, then, form'd but to be shed? Can every element
our elements mar? Can air, earth, water, fire, live and we dead?
We, whose minds comprehend all things? No more."

48 Iliad, lib, viii. Il. 538-540.


Doubt is not sin, but rather a misfortune; for it is to adopt a
suggestion from Schaller a cleft in the soul through which thought
steals away what the heart desires. The guilt or innocence of
doubting depends on the spirit in which it is done. There are two
attitudes of mind and moods of feeling before propositions and
evidence. One is, "I will not believe unless I see the prints of
the nails and lay my finger in the marks of the wounds." The other
is, "Lord, I believe: help thou mine unbelief." In abstract logic
or rigid science the former may be appropriate and right. The
latter alone can be justifiable in moral and religious things. If
a man sorrowfully and humbly doubts, because he cannot help it, he
shall not be condemned. When he is proud of his doubts,
complacently swells with fancied superiority, plays the fanfaron
with his pretentious arguments, and sets up as a propagandist of
disbelief, being all the while in reality "Most ignorant of what
he is most assured,  His glassy essence," his conduct is offensive
to every good man, and his spirit must receive the condemnation of
God. A missionary of atheism and death, horridly eager to destroy
those lofty thoughts which so much help to make us men, is a
shocking spectacle. Yet a few such there are, who seem delighted
as by their dismal theory they bury mankind in an iron tomb of
materialism and inscribe on the irrevocable door the solitary
words, Fate and Silence.

The more attentively one dwells on the perishable physical side of
life, the more prone he will be to believe in an absolute death;
the more prevailingly he ponders the incorruptible psychical side,
the more prepared he will be to credit immortality. The chemist
who confines his studies exclusively within his own province, when
he reflects on the probable sequence of life, will speculatively
see himself vanish in his blowpipes and retorts. Whoso devotedly
dabbles in organisms, nerves, and bloods may easily become
skeptical of spirit; for it everywhere balks his analysis and
eludes his search. The objects he deals with are things. They
belong to change and dissolution. Mind and its proper home belong
to a different category of being. Because no heaven appears at the
end of the telescope, and no soul is seen on the edge of the
dissecting knife, and no mind is found at the bottom of the
crucible, to infer that therefore there is neither heaven, nor
soul, nor mind, is as monstrous a non sequitur as it would be to
infer the non existence of gravity because it cannot be distilled
in any alembic nor discerned with any glass. The man who goes into
the dark crimson dripping halls of physiology seeking proofs of
immortality, and, failing to find them, abandons his faith in it,
is like that hapless traveller who, groping in the catacombs under
Rome, was buried by the caving in of the sepulchral roof, and thus
lost his life, while all the time, above, the great vault of
heaven was stretching, blue and breezy, filled with sunshine and
sentient joy!

When we contemplate men in a mass, like a swarm of bees or a hive
of ants, we find ourselves doubting their immortality. They melt
away, in swiftly confused heaps and generations, into the bosom of
nature. On the other hand, when we think of individuals, an almost
unavoidable thought of personal identity makes us spontaneously
conclude them immortal. It rather requires the effort then to
think them otherwise. But obviously the real problem is never of
the multitudinous throng, but always of the solitary person. In
reference

to this question it is sophistry to fix our thoughts on a Chinese
city as crowded with nameless and indistinguishable human
inhabitants as a decayed cheese is with vermin. Fairness requires
that our imaginations and reasonings upon the subject fasten upon
an individual, set apart and uplifted, like a king, in the
incommunicable distinctness and grandeur of selfhood and
responsibility.

From looking about this grave paved star, from painful and
degrading contemplations of dead bodies, "the snuff and loathed
part of nature which burns itself out," let a man turn away, and
send his interior kingly glance aloft into ideal realms, let him
summon up the glorious sentiments of freedom, duty, admiration,
the noble experiences of self sacrifice, love, and joy, and his
soul will extricate itself from the filthy net of material decay,
and feel the divine exemption of its own clean prerogatives,
dazzling types of eternity, and fragments of blessedness that
"Promise, on our Maker's truth, Long morrow to this mortal youth."
Martyrdom is demonstration of immortality; for self preservation
is the innermost, indestructible instinct of every conscious
being. When the soul, in a sacred cause, enthusiastically rushes
upon death, or in calm composure awaits death, it is irresistibly
convinced that it cannot be hurt, but will be blessed, by the
crisis. It knows that in an inexpressibly profound sense whosoever
would ignobly save his life loses it, but whosoever would nobly
lose his life saves it. Martyrdom demonstrates immortality.

"Life embark'd out at sea, 'mid the wave tumbling roar, The poor
ship of my body went down to the floor; But I broke, at the bottom
of death, through a door, And, from sinking, began forever to
soar."

The most lamentable and pertinacious doubts of immortality
sometimes arise from the survey of instances of gross wickedness,
sluggishness, and imbecility forced on our attention. But, as
these undeniably are palpable violations of the creative
intention, it is not just to reason from them. In fairness the
argument demands that we select the noblest, healthiest specimens
of completed humanity to reason from. Should we not take a case in
which God's will is so far plainly fulfilled, in order to trace
that will farther and even to its finality? And regarding on his
death bed a Newton, a Fenelon, a Washington, is it difficult to
conceive him surviving the climax and catastrophe of his somatic
cell basis and soaring to a more august range of existence?
Remembering that such as these have lived and died, ay, and even
the godlike Nazarene, can we believe that man is merely a white
interrogation point lifted on the black margin of matter to ask
the answerless secret of the universe and be erased?

Such a conclusion charges God with the transcendent crime of
infanticide perpetrated in the most deliberate manner and on the
most gigantic scale. Who can bear, by thus quenching the hope of
another life, to add death to death, and overcast, to every
thoughtful eye, the whole sunny field of life with the melancholy
shadow of a bier? There is a noble strength and confidence,
cheering to the reader, in these words of one of the wisest and
boldest of thinkers: "I should be the very last man to be willing
to dispense with the faith in a future life: nay, I would say,
with Lorenzo de'Medici, that all those are dead, even for the
present life, who do not hope for another. I have the firm
conviction that our soul is an existence of indestructible nature,
whose working is from eternity to eternity. It is like the sun,
that seems indeed to set, but really never sets, shining on in
unchangeable splendor." 49 Such a view of our destiny incomparably
inspires and ennobles us. Man, discovering under all the poor,
wretched accidents of earth and sense and hard fortune the
immortality of his soul, feels as that king's son who, lost in
infancy, and growing up under the care of a forest hind, supposed
himself to belong to the rude class among whom he lived; but one
day, learning his true parentage, he knew beneath his mean
disguise that he was a prince, and immediately claimed his
kingdom. These facts of experience show clearly how much it
behooves us to cultivate by every honest method this cardinal
tenet of religion, how much wiser faith is in listening to the
lucid echoes of the sky than despair in listening to the muffled
reverberations of the grave. All noble and sweet beliefs grow with
the growing nobleness and tenderness of characters sensitive to
those fine revealings which pachydermatous souls can never know.
In the upper hall of reason, before the high shrine of faith, burn
the base doubts begotten in the cellars of sense; and they may
serve as tapers to light your tentative way to conviction. If the
floating al Sirat between physiology and psychology, earth and
heaven, is too slippery and perilous for your footing, where heavy
limbed science cannot tread, nerve the wings of faith for a free
flight. Or, if every effort to fasten a definite theory on some
solid support on the other side of the gulf fails, venture forth
on the naked line of limitless desire, as the spider escapes from
an unwelcome position by flinging out an exceedingly long and fine
thread and going forth upon it sustained by the air.50 Whoever
preserves the full intensity of the affections is little likely to
lose his trust in God and a future life, even when exposed to
lowering and chilling influences from material science and
speculative philosophy: the glowing of the heart, as Jean Paul
says, relights the extinguished torch in the night of the
intellect, as a beast stunned by an electric shock in the head is
restored by an electric shock in the breast. Daniel Webster says,
in an expression of his faith in Christianity written shortly
before his death, "Philosophical argument, especially that drawn
from the vastness of the universe in comparison with the apparent
insignificance of this globe, has sometimes shaken my reason for
the faith which is in me; but my heart has always assured and
reassured me."51 Contemplating the stable permanence of nature as
it swallows our fleet generations, we may feel that we vanish like
sparks in the night; but when we think of the persistent identity
of the soul, and of its immeasurable superiority to the brute mass
of matter, the aspect of the case changes and the moral inference
is reversed. Does not the simple truth of love conquer and trample
the world's aggregated lie? The man who, with assiduous toil and
earnest faith, develops his forces, and disciplines his faculties,
and cherishes his aspirations, and accumulates virtue and wisdom,
is thus preparing the auspicious stores and conditions of another
existence. As he slowly journeys over the mountains of life, aware
that there can be

49 Eckermann's Conversations with Goethe.

50 Greenough, An Artist's Creed.

51 Memorial of Daniel Webster from the City of Boston, p. 16.


no returning, he gathers and carries with him materials to build a
ship when he reaches the strand of death. Upon the mist veiled
ocean launching then, he will sail where? Whither God orders. Must
not that be to the right port?

We remember an old Brahmanic poem brought from the East by Ruckert
and sweetly resung in the speech of the West full of encouragement
to those who shall die.52 A man wrapped in slumber calmly reclines
on the deck of a ship stranded and parting in the breakers. The
plank on which he sleeps is borne by a huge wave upon a bank of
roses, and he awakes amidst a jubilee of music and a chorus of
friendly voices bidding him welcome. So, perhaps, when the body is
shattered on the death ledge, the soul will be tossed into the
fragrant lap of eternal life on the self identified and dynamic
plank of personality.

52 Brahmanische Erzahlungen, s. 5.


CHAPTER IX.

MORALITY OF THE DOCTRINE OF A FUTURE LIFE. IN discussing the
ethics of the doctrine of a future life a subject here amazingly
neglected, there more amazingly maltreated, and nowhere, within
our knowledge, truly analyzed and exhibited1 it is important that
the theme be precisely defined and the debate kept strictly to the
lines. Let it be distinctly understood, therefore, that the
question to be handled is not, "Whether there ought to be a future
life or not," nor, "Whether there is a future life or not." The
question is, "What difference should it make to us whether we
admit or deny the fact of a future life?" If we believe that we
are to pass through death into an immortal existence, what
inferences pertaining to the present are right, fully to be drawn
from the supposition? If, on the other hand, we think there is
nothing for us after the present, what are the logical
consequences of that faith in regard to our aims and rules of
conduct in this world?

Suppose a man who has always imagined that death is utter
annihilation should in some way suddenly acquire knowledge that an
endless existence immediately succeeds the termination of this:
what would be the legitimate instructions of his new information?
Before we can fairly answer this inquiry, we need to know what
relations connect the two states of existence. A knowledge of the
law and method and means of man's destiny is more important for
his guidance than the mere ascertainment of its duration. With
reference to the query before us, four hypotheses are conceivable.
If, in the first place, there be no connection whatever except
that of temporal sequence between the present life and the future,
then, so far as duty is concerned, the expectation of a world to
come yields not the slightest practical application for the
experience that now is. It can only be a source of comfort or of
terror; and that will be accordingly as it is conceived under the
aspect of benignity or of vengeance. If, secondly, the character
of the future life depend on conditions to be fulfilled here, but
those conditions be not within our control, then, again, no
inferences of immediate duty can be drawn from the apprehended
hereafter. Being quasi actors in a scene prearranged and with a
plot predetermined, we can no more be capable of any obligation or
choice, in regard to the end, than puppets which some unseen
Harlequin moves by the terrible wires of primitive decree or
transmitted depravity towards the genial or the tragic crisis. If
the soul's fate there is to be heaven or hell according to the
part enacted here, it must have free will and a fair opportunity
to work the unmarred problem safely out. Otherwise the future life
is reduced, as far as it affects us here, to a mere source of
complacency or of horror as it respectively touches the elect and
the reprobate.

Thirdly, it may be conceived that the future life is a state of
everlasting reward and punishment unchangeably decided by the way
in which the probationary period allotted on

1 The only direct treatise on the subject known to us is
Tilemann's Kritik der Unsterblichkeitslehre in Ansehung des
Sittengesetzes, published in 1789. And this we have not seen.


earth is passed through. Here are men, for a brief time, free to
act thus or otherwise. Do thus, and the endless bliss of heaven is
won. Do otherwise, and the endless agony of hell is incurred. The
plain rule of action yielded by this doctrine is, Sacrifice all
other things to the one thing needful. The present life is in
itself a worthless instant. The future life is an inexhaustible
eternity. And yet this infinite wealth of glory or woe depends on
how you act during that poor moment. Therefore you have nothing to
do while on earth but to seek the salvation of your soul. To waste
a single pulse beat on any thing else is the very madness of
folly. To find out how to escape hell and secure heaven, and then
to improve the means, this should absolutely absorb every energy
and every thought and every desire of every moment. This world is
a bridge of straw over the roaring gulf of eternal fire. Is there
leisure for sport and business, or room for science and
literature, or mood for pleasures and amenities? No: to get
ourselves and our friends into the magic car of salvation, which
will waft us up from the ravenous crests of the brimstone lake
packed with visages of anguish, to bind around our souls the
floating cord of redemption, which will draw us up to heaven, this
should intensely engage every faculty. Nothing else can be
admitted save by oversight of the awful facts. For is it not one
flexible instant of opportunity, and then an adamantine
immortality of doom? That doctrine of a future life which makes
eternal unalterable happiness or misery depend on the fleeting
probation allowed here yields but one practical moral; and that it
pronounces with imminent urgency and perfect distinctness. The
only true duty, the only real use, of this life is to secure the
forensic salvation of the soul by improvement of the appointed
means. Suspended by such a hair of frailty, for one breathless
moment, on such a razor edged contingence, an entrancing sea of
blessedness above, a horrible abyss of torture beneath, such
should be the all concentrating anxiety to secure safety that
there would be neither time nor taste for any thing else. Every
object should seem an altar drenched with sacrificial blood, every
sound a knell laden with dolorous omen, every look a propitiatory
confession, every breath a pleading prayer. From so single and
preternatural a tension of the believer's faculties nothing could
allow an instant's cessation except a temporary forgetting or
blinking of the awful scene and the immeasurable hazard. Such
would be a logical application to life of the genuine morals of
the doctrine under consideration. But the doctrine itself is to be
rejected as false on many grounds. It is deduced from Scripture by
a technical and unsound interpretation. It is unjust and cruel,
irreconcilable with the righteousness or the goodness of God. It
is unreasonable, opposed to the analogies of nature and to the
experience of man. It is wholly impossible to carry it out
consistently in the practice of life. If it were thoroughly
credited and acted upon, all the business of the world would
cease, and the human race would soon die out.

There remains one other view of the relationship of a future life
with the present. And it seems to be the true view. The same
Creator presiding, the same laws prevailing, over infinitude and
eternity that now rule over time and earth, our immortality cannot
reasonably be imagined either a moment of free action and an
eternity of fixed consequences, or a series of separate fragments
patched into a parti colored experience with blanks of death
between the patterns of life. It must be conceived as one endless
existence in linear connection of cause and effect developing in
progressive phases under varying conditions of motive and scenery.
With what we are at death we live on into the next life. In every
epoch and world of our destiny our happiness depends on the
possession of a harmoniously working soul harmoniously related
with its environment. Each stage and state of our eternal
existence has its peculiarities of duty and privilege. In this one
our proper work is to improve the opportunities, discharge the
tasks, enjoy the blessings, belonging here. We are to do the same
in the next one when we arrive in that. All the wealth of wisdom,
virtue, strength, and harmony we acquire in our present life is
the vantage ground and capital wherewith we start in the
succeeding life. Therefore the true preparation for the future is
to fit ourselves to enter it under the most favorable auspices, by
accumulating in our souls all the spiritual treasures afforded by
the present. In other words, the truest aim we can set before
ourselves during our existence on earth is to make it yield the
greatest possible results of the noblest experience. The life
hereafter is the elevated and complementary continuation of the
life here; and certainly the directest way to ameliorate the
continuation is to improve the commencement.

But, it may be said, according to this representation, the fact of
a future life makes no difference in regard to our duty now; for
if the grave swallows all, still, it is our duty and our interest
to make the best and the most of our life in the world while it
lasts. True; and really that very consideration is a strong proof
of the correctness of the view in question. It corresponds with
the other arrangements of God. He makes every thing its own end,
complete in itself, at the same time that it subserves some
further end and enters into some higher unity. He is no mere
Teleologist, hobbling towards his conclusions on a pair of decayed
logic crutches,2 but an infinite Artist, whose means and ends are
consentaneous in the timeless and spaceless spontaneity and
perfection of his play. If the tomb is our total goal, our genuine
aim in this existence is to win during its course an experience
the largest in quantity and the best in quality. On the other
hand, if another life follows this, our wisdom is just the same;
because that experience alone, with the favor of God, can
constitute our fitness and stock to enter on the future. And yet
between the two cases there is this immense difference,  not
indeed in duty, but in endowment, that in the latter instance we
work out our allotted destiny here, in a broader illumination,
with grander incentives, and with vaster consolations. A future
life, then, really imposes no new duty upon the present, alters no
fundamental ingredient in the present, takes away none of the
charms and claims of the present, but merely sheds an additional
radiance upon the shaded lights already shining here, infuses an
additional motive into the stimulants already animating our
purposes, distills an additional balm into the comforts which
already assuage our sorrows amidst an evanescent scene. The belief
that we are to live hereafter in a compensating world explains to
us many a sad mystery, strengthens us for many an oppressive
burden, consoles us in many a sharp grief. Else we should oftener
go mad in the baffling whirl of problems, oftener obey the baser
voice, oftener yield to despair. These three are the moral uses,
in the present life, of the

2 "Seht, an der morschen Syllogismenkrucke Hinkt Gott in Seine
Welt."Lenau's Satire auf einen Professor philosophia.


doctrine of a future life. Outside of these three considerations
the doctrine has no ethical meaning for human observance here.

It will be seen, according to the foregoing representation, that
the expectation of a future life, instead of being harmful to the
interests and attractions of the present, simply casts a cheering
and magnifying light upon them. It does not depreciate the
realities or nullify the obligations now upon us, but emphasizes
them, flinging their lights and shades forward through a mightier
vista. Consequently there is no reason for assailing the idea of
another life in behalf of the interests of this. Such an
opposition between the two states is entirely sophistical,
resulting from a profound misinterpretation of the truemoral
relations connecting them.

The belief in immortality has been mistakenly attacked, not merely
as hostile to our welfare on earth, but likewise as immoral in
itself, springing from essential selfishness, and in turn
nourishing selfishness and fatally tainting every thing with that
central vice. To desire to live everlastingly as an identical
individual, it has been said, is the ecstasy and culmination of
avaricious conceitedness. Man, the vain egotist, dives out of
sight in God to fish up the pearl of his darling self. He makes
his poor individuality the measure of all things, his selfish
desire the law of endless being. Such a rampant proclamation of
self will and enthronement of pure egotism, flying in the face of
the solemn and all submerging order of the universe, is the very
essence and climax of immorality and irreligiousness. To this
assault on the morality of the belief in a future life, whether
made in the devout tones of magnanimous sincerity, as by the
sublime Schleiermacher, or with the dishonest trickiness of a
vulgar declaimer for the rehabilitation of the senses, as by some
who might be named, several fair replies may be made. In the first
place, the objection begs the question, by assuming that the
doctrine is a falsehood, and that its disciples wilfully set up
their private wishes against the public truth. Such tremendous
postulates cannot be granted. It is seizing the victory before the
battle, grasping the conclusion without establishing the premises.
For, if there be a future life provided by the Creator, it cannot
be sinful or selfish in us to trust in it, to accept it with
humble gratitude, and to prepare our souls for it. That, instead
of being rebellious arrogance or overweening selfishness, would
simply be conforming our thoughts and plans, our desires and
labors, to the Divine arrangements. That would be both morality
and piety. When one clings by will to a doctrine known to be a
falsehood, obstinately suppressing reason to affirm it as a truth,
and, in obedience to his personal whims, trying to force all
things into conformity with it, he does act as a selfish egotist
in full violation of the moral law and the spirit of religion. But
a future life we believe to be a fact; and therefore we are, in
every respect, justified in gladly expecting it and consecratedly
living with reference to it.

Furthermore, admitting it to be an open question, neither proved
nor disproved, but poised in equal uncertainty, still, it is not
immoral nor undevout deeply to desire and fondly to hope a
personal immortality. "The aim of religion," it has been said, "is
the annihilation of one's own individuality, the living in the
All, the becoming one with the universe." But in such a definition
altogether too much is assumed. The aim of religion is only the
annihilation of the self will of the individual as opposed to the
Will of the Whole, not the losing of one's self in the unconscious
wastes of the universe, but the harmonizing of one's self with the
Supreme Law of the universe.

An humble, loving, and joyous conformity to the truth constitutes
morality and religion. This is not necessarily inconsistent with a
personal immortality. Besides, the charge may be retorted. To be
identified with the universe is a prouder thought than to be
subordinated to it as an infinitesimal individual. It is a far
haughtier conceit to fancy one's self an integral part of God's
substance than to believe one's self a worshipping pensioner of
God's will. The conception, too, is less native to the mind, has
been more curiously sought out, and is incomparably more pampering
to speculative luxury. If accusations of selfishness and
wilfulness are to be hurled upon any modes of preferred faith as
to our destiny, this self styled disinterested surrender of our
personality to the pantheistic Soul is as obnoxious to them as the
common belief.

If a desire for personal immortality be a normal experience in the
development of our nature, it cannot be indictable as an offence,
but must be recognised as an indication of God's design. Whether
the desire is a cold and degraded piece of egotism deserving
rebuke and contempt, or a lofty and sympathetic affection worthy
of reverence and approval, depends on no intrinsic ingredient of
the desire itself, but on the character in which it has its being.
One person will be a heartless tyrant, another a loving saint, in
his hope of a future life. Shall our love of the dead, our prayers
to meet them again, our unfathomed yearnings to know that they
still live and are happy, be stigmatized as mean and evil? Regard
for others as much as for ourselves prompts the eternal sigh. Nor
will Divinity ever condemn the feeling himself has awakened. It is
said that Xerxes, gazing once upon his gorgeous army of a million
men spread out below hire, sheathed in golden armor, white plumes
nodding, purple standards waving, martial horns blowing, wept as
he thought that in thirty years the entire host composing that
magnificent spectacle would be dead. To have gazed thoughtfully
upon such a sight with unmoved sensibilities would imply a much
more selfish and hard hearted egotist. So when a lonely
philanthropist from some meditative eminence looks down on the
human race, if, as the contemplation of their pathetic fading and
decay wounds his saddened heart, he heals and cheers it with the
faith of a glorious immortality for them all, who shall call him
selfish and sinful? To rest contented with the speedy night and
the infinite oblivion, wiping off all the unsolved sums from the
slate of existence with annihilation's remorseless sponge, that
would be the selfishness and the cruelty.

When that sweet asp, death, fastens on our vein of earthly life,
we all feel, like the dying queen of Egypt, that we have "immortal
longings" in us. Since the soul thus holds by a pertinacious
instinct to the eternity of her own existence, it is more rational
to conclude that this is a pledge of her indestructible
personality, God's impregnable defence reared around the citadel
of her being, than to consider it the artificial rampart flung up
by an insurgent egotism. In like manner, it is a misrepresentation
of the facts to assert the culpable selfishness of the faith in a
future life as a demanded reward for fidelity and merit here. No
one demands immortality as pay for acquired desert. It is modestly
looked for as a free boon from the God who freely gave the present
and who has by a thousand symbolic prophecies promised it. Richter
says, with great insight, "We desire immortality not as the reward
of virtue, but as its continuance. Virtue can no more be rewarded
than joy can: it is its own reward." Kant says, "Immortality has
been left so uncertain in order that pure freedom of choice, and
no selfish views, shall prompt our aspirations." "But," Jean Paul
keenly replies, "as we have now discovered this intention, its
object is defeated. Besides, if the belief in immortality makes
virtue selfish, the experience of it in the next world would make
it more so." The anticipation of heaven can hardly make man a
selfish calculator of profit; because heaven is no reward for
crafty reckoning, but the home of pure and holy souls. Virtue
which resists temptation and perseveres in rectitude because it
has a sharp eye to an ulterior result is not virtue. No credible
doctrine of a future life offers a prize except to those who are
just and devout and strenuous in sacred service from free loyalty
to the right and the good, spontaneously obeying and loving the
higher and better call because it divinely commands their
obedience and love. The law of duty is the superior claim of truth
and goodness. Virtue, yielding itself filially to this, finds in
heaven not remuneration, but a sublimer theatre and an immortal
career. Egotistic greed, all mere prudential considerations as
determining conditions or forces in the award, are excluded as
unclean and inadmissible by the very terms; and the doctrine
stands justified on every ground as pure and wholesome before the
holiest tribunal of ethics. Surely it is right that goodness
should be blessed; but when it continues good only for the sake of
being blessed it ceases to be goodness. It is not the belief in
immortality, but only the belief in a corrupt doctrine of
immortality which can poison the springs of disinterested virtue.

The morality of the doctrine of a future life having thus been
defended from the attacks of those who have sought to destroy it
in the fancied interests either of the enjoyments of the earth or
of the purity of virtue and religion, it now remains to free it
from the still more fatal supports which false or superficial
religionists have sought to give it by wrenching out of it
meanings it never held, by various perverse abuses of it, by
monstrous exaggerations of its moral importance to the present. We
have seen that the supposition of another life, correctly
interpreted, lays no new duty upon man, takes away from him no old
duty or privilege, but simply gives to the previously existing
facts of the case the intensifying glory and strength of fresh
light, motive, and consolation. But many public teachers, not
content to treat the subject with this sobriety of reason, instead
of presenting the careful conclusions of a conscientious analysis,
have sought to strengthen their argument to the feelings by help
of prodigious assumptions, assumptions hastily adopted, highly
colored, and authoritatively urged. Upon the hypothesis that
annihilation is the fate of man, they are not satisfied merely to
take away from the present all the additional light, incentive,
and comfort imparted by the faith in a future existence, but they
arbitrarily remove all the alleviations and glories intrinsically
belonging to the scene, and paint it in the most horrible hues,
and set it in a frame of midnight. Thus, instead of calmly seeking
to elicit and recommend truth, they strive, by terrifying the
fancy and shocking the prejudices, to make people accept their
dogma because frightened at the seeming consequences of rejecting
it. It is necessary to expose the fearful fallacies which have
been employed in this way, and which are yet extensively used for
the same purpose.

Even a Christian writer usually so judicious as Andrews Norton has
said, "Without the belief in personal immortality there can be no
religion; for what can any truths of religion concern the feelings
and the conduct of beings whose existence is limited to a few
years in this world?" 3 Such a statement from such a quarter is
astonishing. Surely the sentiments natural to a person or
incumbent upon him do not depend on the duration of his being, but
on the character, endowments, and relations of his being. The
hypothetical fact that man perishes with his body does not destroy
God, does not destroy man's dependence on God for all his
privileges, does not annihilate the overwhelming magnificence of
the universe, does not alter the native sovereignty of holiness,
does not quench our living reason, imagination, or sensibility,
while they last. The soul's gratitude, wonder, love, and worship
are just as right and instinctive as before. If our experience on
earth, before the phenomena of the visible creation and in
conscious communion with the emblemed attributes of God, does not
cause us to kneel in humility and to adore in awe, then it may be
doubted if heaven or hell will ever persuade us to any sincerity
in such acts. The simple prolongation of our being does not add to
its qualitative contents, cannot increase the kinds of our
capacity or the number of our duties. Chalmers utters an injurious
error in saying, as he does, "If there be no future life, the
moral constitution of man is stripped of its significancy, and the
Author of that constitution is stripped of his wisdom and
authority and honor." 4 The creative Sovereign of fifty million
firmaments of worlds "stripped of his wisdom and authority and
honor" because a few insects on a little speck are not eternal!
Can egotistic folly any further go? The affirmation or denial of
immortality neither adds to nor diminishes the numerical relations
and ingredients of our nature and experience. If religion is
fitted for us on the former supposition, it is also on the latter.
To any dependent intelligence blessed with our human susceptibilities,
reverential love and submission are as obligatory, natural, and
becoming on the brink of annihilation as on the verge of immortality.

Rebellious egotism makes all the difference. Truth is truth,
whatever it be. Religion is the meek submission of self will to
God's will. That is a duty not to be escaped, no matter what the
future reserves or excludes for us.

Another sophism almost universally accepted needs to be shown.
Man, it is said, has no interest in a future life if not conscious
in it of the past. If, on exchange of worlds, man loses his
memory, he virtually ceases to exist, and might just as well be
annihilated. A future life with perfect oblivion of the present is
no life at all for us. Is not this style of thought the most
provincial egotism, the utter absence of all generous thought and
sympathy unselfishly grasping the absolute boons of being? It is a
shallow error, too, even on the grounds of selfishness itself. In
any point of view the difference is diametric and immense between
a happy being in an eternal present, unconscious of the past, and
no being at all. Suppose a man thirty years of age were offered
his choice to die this moment, or to live fifty years longer of
unalloyed success and happiness, only with a complete
forgetfulness of all that has happened up to this moment. He would
not hesitate to grasp the gift, however much he regretted the
condition.

3 Tracts concerning Christianity, p. 307.

4 Bridgewater Treatise, part ii. ch. 10, sect. 15.


It has often been argued that with the denial of a retributive
life beyond the grave all restraints are taken off from the
passions, free course given to every impulse. Chateaubriand says,
bluntly, "There can be no morality if there be no future state." 5
With displeasing coarseness, and with most reprehensible
recklessness of reasoning, Luther says, in contradiction to the
essential nobleness of his loving, heroic nature, "If you believe
in no future life, I would not give a mushroom for your God. Do,
then, as you like. For if no God, so no devil, no hell: as with a
fallen tree, all is over when you die. Then plunge into lechery,
rascality, robbery, and murder." What bible of Moloch had he been
studying to form, for the time, so horrid a theory of the happiest
life, and to put so degrading an estimate upon human nature? Is
man's will a starved wolf only held back by the triple chain of
fear of death, Satan, and hell, from tearing forth with ravenous
bounds to flesh the fangs of his desires in bleeding virtue and
innocence? Does the greatest satisfaction man is capable of here,
the highest blessedness he can attain to, consist in drunkenness,
gluttony, dishonesty, violence, and impiety? If he had the
appetite of a tiger or a vulture, then, thus to wallow in the
offal of vice, dive into the carrion of sensuality, abandon
himself to revelling in carnivorous crime, might be his instinct
and his happiness. But by virtue of his humanity man loves his
fellows, enjoys the scenery of nature, takes delight in thought
and art, dilates with grand presentiments of glory and eternity,
mysteriously yearns after the hidden God. To a reasonable man and
no other is to be reasoned with on matters of truth and interest
the assumption of this brief season as all, will be a double
motive not to hasten and embitter its brevity by folly, excess,
and sin. If you are to be dead to morrow, for that very reason, in
God's name, do not, by gormandizing and guzzling, anticipate death
to day! The true restraint from wrong and degradation is not a
crouching conscience of superstition and selfishness, fancying a
chasm of fire, but a high toned conscience of reason and honor,
perceiving that they are wrong and degradation, and spontaneously
loathing them.

Still worse, many esteemed authors have not hesitated to assert
that unless there be a future life there is not only no check on
passion within, but no moral law without; every man is free to do
what he pleases, without blame or fault. Sir Kenelm Digby says, in
his "Treatise on Man's Soule," that "to predicate mortality in the
soule taketh away all morality, and changeth men into beastes, by
removing the ground of all difference in those thinges which are
to governe our actions." 6 This style of teaching is a very
mischievous absurdity. Admit, for a moment, that Jocko in the
woods of Brazil, and Schiller in the brilliant circles of Weimar,
will at last meet the same fate in the dusty grasp of death; yet,
while they live, one is an ape, the other is a man. And the
differences of capacity and of duty are numberless and immense.
The statement is enough: argument would be ridiculous. The words
of an audacious French preacher are yet more shocking than those
of the English nobleman. It is hard to believe they could be
uttered in good faith. Says Massillon, in his famous declamation
on immortality, "If we wholly perish with the body, the maxims of
charity, patience, justice, honor, gratitude, and friendship, are
but empty words. Our own passions shall decide our duty.

5 Genie du Christianisme, partie ii. livre vi. chap. 3.

6 Ch. ix. sect. 10.


If retribution terminate with the grave, morality is a mere
chimera, a bugbear of human invention." 7 What debauched
unbeliever ever inculcated a viler or a more fatal doctrine? Its
utter barelessness, as a single illustration may show, is obvious
at a glance. As the sciences of algebra and geometry, the
relations of numbers and bodies, are true for the material world
although they may be lost sight of when time and space are
transcended in some higher state, so the science of ethics, the
relations of nobler and baser, of right and wrong, the manifold
grades and qualities of actions and motives, are true for human
nature and experience in this life even if men perish in the
grave. However soon certain facts are to end, while they endure
they are as they are. In a moment of carelessness, by some strange
slip of the mind, showing, perhaps, how tenaciously rooted are the
common prejudice and falsehood on this subject,  even so bold and
fresh a thinker as Theodore Parker has contradicted his own
philosophy by declaring, "If to morrow I perish utterly, then my
fathers will be to me only as the ground out of which my bread
corn is grown. I shall care nothing for the generations of
mankind. I shall know no higher law than passion. Morality will
vanish." 8 Ah, man reveres his fathers and loves to act nobly, not
because he is to live forever, but because he is a man. And,
though all the summer hopes of escaping the grave were taken from
human life, choicest and tenderest virtues might still flourish,
as it is said the German crossbill pairs and broods in the dead of
winter. The martyr's sacrifice and the voluptuary's indulgence are
very different things to day, if they do both cease to morrow. No
speed of advancing destruction can equalize Agamemnon and
Thersites, Mansfield and Jeffries, or hustle together justice and
fraud, cowardice and valor, purity and corruption, so that they
will interchange qualities. There is an eternal and immutable
morality, as whiteness is white, and blackness is black, and
triangularity is triangular. And no severance of temporal ties or
compression of spatial limits can ever cut the condign bonds of
duty and annihilate the essential distinctions of good and evil,
magnanimity and meanness, faithfulness and treachery.

Reducing our destiny from endless to definite cannot alter the
inherent rightfulness and superiority of the claims of virtue. The
most it can do is to lessen the strength of the motive, to give
the great motor nerve of our moral life a perceptible stroke of
palsy. In reference to the question, Can ephemera have a moral
law? Richter reasons as follows: "Suppose a statue besouled for
two days. If on the first day you should shatter it, and thus rob
it of one day's life, would you be guilty of murder? One can
injure only an immortal." 9 The sophistry appears when we rectify
the conclusion thus: one can inflict an immortal injury only on an
immortal being. In fact, it would appear to be a greater wrong and
injury, for the time, to destroy one day's life of a man whose
entire existence was confined to two days, than it would be to
take away the same period from the bodily existence of one who
immediately thereupon passes into a more exalted and eternal life.
To the sufferer, the former would seem an immitigable calamity,
the latter a benign furtherance; while, in the agent, the overt
act is the same. This general moral problem has been more
accurately answered by Isaac Taylor, whose lucid statement is as
follows: "The creatures of a summer's day might be imagined, when

7 OEuvres Completes, tome xiii.: Immortalite de l'Ame.

8 Sermons of Theism, Sermon VII.

9 Werke, band xxxiii. s. 240.


they stand upon the threshold of their term of existence, to make
inquiry concerning the attributes of the Creator and the rules of
his government; for these are to be the law of their season of
life and the measure of their enjoyments. The sons of immortality
would put the same questions with an intensity the greater from
the greater stake."

Practically, the acknowledged authority of the moral law in human
society cannot be destroyed. Its influence may be unlimitedly
weakened, its basis variously altered, but as a confessed
sovereign principle it cannot be expelled. The denial of the
freedom of the will theoretically explodes it; but social custom,
law, and opinion will enforce it still. Make man a mere dissoluble
mixture of carbon and magnetism, yet so long as he can distinguish
right and wrong, good and evil, love and hate, and, unsophisticated
by dialectics, can follow either of opposite courses of action,
the moral law exists and exerts its sway.

It has been asked, "If the incendiary be, like the fire he kindles,
a result of material combinations, shall he not be treated in the
same way?" 10 We should reply thus: No matter what man springs
from or consists of, if he has moral ideas, performs moral
actions, and is susceptible of moral motives, then he is morally
responsible: for all practical and disciplinary purposes he is
wholly removed from the categories of physical science.

Another pernicious misrepresentation of the fair consequences of
the denial of a life hereafter is shown in the frequent
declaration that then there would be no motive to any thing good
and great. The incentives which animate men to strenuous services,
perilous virtues, disinterested enterprises, spiritual culture,
would cease to operate. The essential life of all moral motives
would be killed. This view is to be met by a broad and indignant
denial based on an appeal to human consciousness and to the reason
of the thing. Every man knows by experience that there are a
multitude of powerful motives, entirely disconnected with future
reward or punishment, causing him to resist evil and to do good
even with self sacrificing toil and danger. When the fireman risks
his life to save a child from the flames of a tumbling house, is
the hope of heaven his motive? When the soldier spurns an offered
bribe and will not betray his comrades nor desert his post, is the
fear of hell all that animates him? A million such decisive
specifications might be made. The renowned sentence of Cicero,
"Nemo unquam sine magna spe immortalitatis se pro patria offerret
ad mortem," 11 is effective eloquence; but it is a baseless libel
against humanity and the truth. In every moment of supreme
nobleness and sacrifice personality vanishes. Thousands of
patriots, philosophers, saints, have been glad to die for the
freedom of native land, the cause of truth, the welfare of fellow
men, without a taint of selfish reward touching their wills. Are
there not souls "To whom dishonor's shadow is a substance More
terrible than death here and hereafter"?

He must be the basest of men who would decline to do any sublime
act of virtue because he did not expect to enjoy the consequences
of it eternally. Is there no motive for the

10 Some discussion of this general subject is to be found in
Schaller, Leib nod Seele. kap. 5: Die Consequentzen des
Materialismus. And in Schopenhauer, Die beiden Grundprobleme der
Ethik.

11 Tuscul. Quast. lib. i. cap. 15.


preservation of health because it cannot be an everlasting
possession? Since we cannot eat sweet and wholesome food forever,
shall we therefore at once saturate our stomachs with nauseating
poisons?

If all experienced good and evil wholly terminate for us when we
die, still, every intrinsic reason which, on the supposition of
immortality, makes wisdom better than folly, industry better than
sloth, righteousness better than iniquity, benevolence and purity
better than hatred and corruption, also makes them equally
preferable while they last. Even if the philosopher and the idiot,
the religious philanthropist and the brutal pirate, did die alike,
who would not rather live like the sage and the saint than like
the fool and the felon? Shall heaven be held before man simply as
a piece of meat before a hungry dog to make him jump well? It is a
shocking perversion of the grandest doctrine of faith. Let the
theory of annihilation assume its direst phase, still, our
perception of principles, our consciousness of sentiments, our
sense of moral loyalty, are not dissolved, but will hold us firmly
to every noble duty until we ourselves flow into the dissolving
abyss. But some one may say, "If I have fought with beasts at
Ephesus, what advantageth it me if the dead rise not?" It
advantageth you every thing until you are dead, although there be
nothing afterwards. As long as you live, is it not glory and
reward enough to have conquered the beasts at Ephesus? This is
sufficient reply to the unbelieving flouters at the moral law.
And, as an unanswerable refutation of the feeble whine of
sentimentality that without immortal endurance nothing is worth
our affection, let great Shakspeare advance, with his matchless
depth of bold insight reversing the conclusion, and pronouncing,
in tones of cordial solidity,

"This, thou perceivest, will make thy love more strong, To love
that well which thou must leave ere long."

What though Decay's shapeless hand extinguish us? Its foreflung
and enervating shadow shall neither transform us into devils nor
degrade us into beasts. That shadow indeed only falls in the
valleys of ignoble fear and selfishness, leaving all the clear
road lines of moral truth and practical virtue and heroic
consecration still high and bright on the table land of a worthy
life; and every honorable soul, calmly confronting its fate, will
cry, despite the worst, "The pathway of my duty lies in sunlight;
And I would tread it with as firm a step, Though it should
terminate in cold oblivion, As if Elysian pleasures at its
Close Gleam'd palpable to sight as things of earth."

If a captain knew that his ship would never reach her port, would
he therefore neglect his functions, be slovenly and careless,
permit insubordination and drunkenness among the crew, let the
broad pennon draggle in filthy rents, the cordage become tangled
and stiff, the planks be covered with dirt, and the guns be grimed
with rust? No: all generous hearts would condemn that. He would
keep every inch of the deck scoured, every piece of metal polished
like a mirror, the sails set full and clean, and, with shining
muzzles out, ropes hauled taut in their blocks, and every man at
his post, he would sweep towards the reef, and go down into the
sea firing a farewell salute of honor to the sun, his flag flying
above him as he sunk.

The dogmatic assertors of a future life, in a partisan spirit set
upon making out the most impressive case in its behalf, have been
guilty of painting frightful caricatures of the true nature and
significance of the opposite conclusion. Instead of saying, "If
such a thing be fated, why, then, it must be right, God's will be
done," they frantically rebel against any such admission, and
declare that it would make God a liar and a fiend, man a "magnetic
mockery," and life a hellish taunt. This, however unconscious it
may be to its authors, is blasphemous egotism. One of the
tenderest, devoutest, richest, writers of the century has
unflinchingly affirmed that if man who trusted that love was the
final law of creation, although nature, her claws and teeth red
with raven, shrieked against his creed be left to be blown about
the desert dust or sealed within the iron hills,

"No more! a monster, then, a dream,
A discord; dragons of the prime,
That tare each other in their slime,
Were mellow music match'd with Him!"

Epictetus says, "When death overtakes me, it is enough if I can
stretch out my hands to God, and say, 'The opportunities which
thou hast given me of comprehending and following thy government,
I have not neglected. I thank thee that thou hast brought me into
being. I am satisfied with the time I have enjoyed the things thou
hast given me. Receive them again, and assign them to whatever
place thou wilt.'" 12 Surely the pious heathen here speaks more
worthily than the presumptuous Christian! How much fitter would it
be, granting that death is the end all, to revise our interpretation,
look at the subject from the stand point of universal order,
not from this opinionative narrowness, and see if it be not
susceptible of a benignant meaning, worthy of grateful acceptance
by the humble mind of piety and the dispassionate spirit of science!
Yea, let God and his providence stand justified, though man prove
to have been egregiously mistaken.

"Though He smite me, yet will I praise Him; though He slay me, yet
will I trust in Him."

To return into the state we were in before we were created is not
to suffer any evil: it is to be absolutely free from all evil. It
is but the more perfect playing of that part, of which every sound
sleep is a rehearsal. The thought of it is mournful to the
enjoying soul, but not terrific; and even the mournfulness ceases
in the realization. He uttered a piece of cruel madness who said,
"Hell is more bearable than nothingness." Is it worse to have
nothing than it is to have infinite torture? Milton asks,

"For who would lose, Though full of pain, this intellectual
being?"

Every creature that exists, if full of pain, would snatch at the
boon of ceasing to be. To be blessed is a good; to be wretched is
an evil; not to be is neither a good nor an evil, but simply

12 Dissert., lib. iv. cap. x. sect. 2.


nothing. If such be our necessary fate, let us accept it with a
harmonized mind, not entertaining fear nor yielding to sadness.
Why should we shudder or grieve? Every time we slumber, we try on
the dress which, when we die, we shall wear easily forever.

Not satisfied to let the result rest in this somewhat sad but
peaceful aspect, it is quite customary to give it a turn and hue
of ghastly horribleness, by casting over it the dyspeptic dreams,
injecting it with the lurid lights and shades, of a morbid and
wilful fancy. The most loathsome and inexcusable instance in point
is the "Vision of Annihilation" depicted by the vermicular,
infested imagination of the great Teutonic phantasist while yet
writhing under the sanguinary fumes of some horrid attack of
nightmare. Stepping across the earth, which is but a broad
executioner's block for pale, stooping humanity, he enters the
larva world of blotted out men. The rotten chain of beings reaches
down into this slaughter field of souls. Here the dead are
pictured as eternally horripilating at death! "As annihilation,
the white shapelessness of revolting terror, passes by each
unsouled mask of a man, a tear gushes from the crumbled eye, as a
corpse bleeds when its murderer approaches." Pah! Out upon this
execrable retching of a nauseated fancy! What good is there in the
baseless conceit and gratuitous disgust of saying, "The next world
is in the grave, betwixt the teeth of the worm"? In the case
supposed, the truth is merely that there is no next world
anywhere; not that all the horrors of hell are scooped together
into the grave, and there multiplied by others direr yet and
unknown before. Man's blended duty and interest, in such a case,
are to try to see the interior beauty and essential kindness of
his fate, to adorn it and embrace it, fomenting his resignation
with the sweet lotions of faith and peace, not exasperating his
wounds with the angry pungents of suspicion, alarm, and complaint.
At the worst, amidst all our personal disappointments, losses, and
decay, "the view of the great universal whole of nature," as
Humboldt says, "is reassuring and consolatory." If the boon of a
future immortality be not ours, therefore to scorn the gift of the
present life, is to act not like a wise man, who with grateful
piety makes the best of what is given, but like a spoiled child,
who, if he cannot have both his orange and his gingerbread,
pettishly flings his gingerbread in the mud.

The future life, outside of the realm of faith, to an earnest and
independent inquirer, and considered as a scientific question,
lies in a painted mist of uncertainty. There is room for hope, and
there is room for doubt. The wavering evidences in some moods
preponderate on that side, in other moods on this side. Meanwhile
it is clear that, while he lives here, the best thing he can do is
to cherish a devout spirit, cultivate a noble character, lead a
pure and useful life in the service of wisdom, humanity, and God,
and finally, when the appointed time arrives, meet the issue with
reverential and affectionate conformity, without dictating terms.
Let the vanishing man say, like Ruckert's dying flower, "Thanks to
day for all the favors I have received from sun and stream and
earth and sky, for all the gifts from men and God which have made
my little life an ornament and a bliss. Heaven, stretch out thine
azure tent while my faded one is sinking here. Joyous spring tide,
roll on through ages yet to come, in which fresh generations shall
rise and be glad. Farewell all! Content to have had my turn, I now
fall asleep, without a murmur or a sigh." Surely the mournful
nobility of such a strain of sentiment is preferable by much to
the selfish terror of that unquestioning belief which in the
Middle Age depicted the chase of the soul by Satan, on the columns
and doors of the churches, under the symbol of a deer pursued by a
hunter and hounds; and which has in later times produced in
thousands the feeling thus terribly expressed by Bunyan, "I
blessed the condition of the dog and toad because they had no soul
to perish under the everlasting weight of hell!"

Sight of truth, with devout and loving submission to it, is an
achievement whose nobleness outweighs its sorrow, even if the
gazer foresee his own destruction.

It is not our intention in these words to cast doubt on the
immortality of the soul, or to depreciate the value of a belief in
it. We desire to vindicate morality and religion from the
unwitting attacks made on them by many self styled Christian
writers in their exaggeration of the practical importance of such
a faith. The qualitative contents of human nature have nothing to
do with its quantitative contents: our duties rest not on the
length, but on the faculties and relations, of our existence. Make
the life of a dog endless, he has only the capacity of a dog; make
the life of a man finite, still, within its limits, he has the
psychological functions of humanity. Faith in immortality may
enlarge and intensify the motives to prudent and noble conduct; it
does not create new ones. The denial of immortality may pale and
contract those motives; it does not take them away.

Knowing the burden and sorrow of earth, brooding in dim solicitude
over the far times and men yet to be, we cannot recklessly utter a
word calculated to lessen the hopes of man, pathetic creature, who
weeps into the world and faints out of it. It is our faith not
knowledge that the spirit is without terminus or rest. The
faithful truth hunter, in dying, finds not a covert, but a better
trail. Yet the saintliness of the intellect is to be purged from
prejudice and self will. With God we are not to prescribe
conditions. The thought that all high virtue and piety must die
with the abandonment of belief in immortality is as pernicious and
dangerous as it is shallow, vulgar, and unchristian. The view is
obviously gaining prevalence among scientific and philosophical
thinkers, that life is the specialization of the universal in the
individual, death the restoration of the individual to the whole.
This doubt as to a personal future life will unquestionably
increase. Let traditional teachers beware how they venture to
shift the moral law from its immutable basis in the will of God to
a precarious poise on the selfish hope and fear of man. The sole
safety, the ultimate desideratum, is perception of law with
disinterested conformity.

The influence of the doctrine of reward and punishment in a future
state, as a working motive for the observance of the moral law, is
enormously overestimated. The influence, as such a motive, of the
public opinion of mankind, with the legal and social sanctions, is
enormously underestimated. And the authority of a personal
perception of right is also most unbecomingly depreciated.
UNIVERSAL ORDER is the expression of the purposes of God, not as
arbitrarily chosen by his will and capriciously revealed in a
book, but as necessitated by his nature and embodied in his works.
The true basis of morality is universal order. The true end of
morality is life, the sum of moral laws being identical with the
sum of the conditions in accordance with which the fruition of the
functions of life can be secured with nearest approach to
perfectness, perpetuity, and universality. The true sanctions of
morality are the manifold forms in which consciousness of life is
heightened by harmony with universal order or lowered by discord
with it. The true law of moral sacrifice or resistance to
temptation is misrepresented by the common doctrine of heaven and
hell, which makes it consist in the renunciation of a present good
for the clutching of a future good, the voluntary suffering of a
small present evil to avoid the involuntary suffering of an
immense future evil. The true law of moral sacrifice is deeper,
purer, more comprehensive, than that. It expresses our duty, in
accordance with the requirements of universal order, to
subordinate the gratification of any part of our being to that of
the whole of our being, to forego the good of any portion of our
life in deference to that of all our life, to renounce any
happiness of the individual which conflicts with the welfare of
the race, to hold the spiritual atom in absolute abeyance to the
spiritual universe, to sink self in God. If a man believe in no
future life, is he thereby absolved from the moral law? The kind
and number of his duties remain as before: only the apparent
grandeur of their scale and motives is diminished. The two halves
of morality are the co ordination of separate interests in
universal order, and the loyalty of the parts to the wholes. The
desire to remove the obligations and sanctions of the moral law
from their intrinsic supports, and posit them on the fictitious
pedestals of a forensic heaven and hell, reveals incompetency of
thought and vulgarity of sentiment in him who does it, and is a
procedure not less perilous than unwarranted. If the creation be
conceived as a machine, it is a machine self regulating in all its
parts by the immanent presence of its Maker.

When we die, may the Spirit of Truth, the Comforter of Christ, be
our confessor; the last inhaled breath our cup of absolution; the
tears of some dear friend our extreme unction; no complaint for
past trials, but a grateful acknowledgment for all blessings, our
parting word. And then, resigning ourselves to the universal
Father, assured that whatever ought to be, and is best to be, will
be, either absolute oblivion shall be welcome, or we will go
forward to new destinies, whether with preserved identity or with
transformed consciousness and powers being indifferent to us,
since the will of God is done. In the mean time, until that
critical pass and all decisive hour, as Milnes says:

"We all must patient stand, Like statues on appointed pedestals:
Yet we may choose since choice is given to shun Servile
contentment or ignoble fear In the expression of our attitude; And
with far straining eyes, and hands upcast, And feet half raised,
declare our painful state, Yearning for wings to reach the fields
of truth, Mourning for wisdom, panting to be free."

PART SIXTH SUPPLEMENTARY.

[FIFTEEN YEARS LATER]

CHAPTER I.

THE END OF THE WORLD.

WE read in the New Testament that the heavens and the earth are
reserved unto fire against the day of judgment, when they shall be
burned up, and all be made new. It is said that the elements shall
melt with ferment heat, the stars fall, and the sky pass away like
a scroll that is rolled together. On these and similar passages is
based the belief of Christendom in the destined destruction of the
world by fire and in the scenic judgment of the dead and the
living gathered before the visible tribunal of Christ. This belief
was once general and intense. It is still common, though more
vague and feeble than formerly. In whatever degree it is held, it
is a doctrine of terror. We hope by tracing its origin, and
showing how mistaken it is, to help dispel its sway, free men from
the further oppression of its fearfulness, and put in its place
the just and wholesome authority of the truth. The true doctrine
of the divine government of the world, the correct explanation of
the course and sequel of history, must be more honorable to God,
more useful to men, of better working and omen in the life of
society, than any error can be. Let us then, as far as we are
able, displace by the truth the errors prevalent around us in
regard to the end of the world and the day of judgment.

It will help us in our proposed investigation, if we first notice
that the ecclesiastical doctrine as to an impending destruction of
the world is not solitary, but has prototypes and parallels in the
faiths of other nations and ages. Almost every people, every
tribe, has its cosmogony or theory of the creation, in which there
are accounts, more or less rude or refined, general or minute, of
the supposed beginning and of the imagined end of nature. All
early literatures from the philosophic treatises of the Hindus to
the oral traditions of the Polynesians are found to contain either
sublime dreams or obscure prophecies or awful pictures of the
final doom and destruction of earth and man. The Hebrew symbols
and the Christian beliefs in relation to this subject therefore
stand not alone, but in connection with a multitude of others,
each one plainly reflecting the degree of knowledge and stage of
development attained by the minds which originated it. Before
proceeding to examine the familiar doctrine so enveloped in our
prejudices, a brief examination of some kindred doctrines, less
familiar to us and quite detached from our prejudices, will be of
service.

The sacred books of the Hindus describe certain enormous periods
of time in which the universe successively begins and ends,
springs into being and sinks into nothing. These periods are
called kalpas, and each one covers a duration of thousands of
millions of years. Each kalpa of creation is called a day of
Brahma; each kalpa of destruction, a night of Brahma. The belief
is that Brahma, waking from the slumber of his self absorbed
solitude, feels his loneliness, and his thoughts and emotions go
forth in creative forms, composing the immense scheme of worlds
and creatures. These play their parts, and run their courses,
until the vast day of Brahma is completed; when he closes his
eyes, and falls to rest, while the whole system of finite things
returns to the silence and darkness of its aboriginal unity, and
remains there in invisible annihilation through the stupendous
night that precedes the reawaking of the slumbering Godhead and
the appearance of the creation once more.

A little reflection makes the origin of this imagery and belief
clear. Each night, as the darkness comes down, and the outer world
disappears, man falls asleep, and, so far as he is consciously
concerned, every thing is destroyed. In his unconsciousness,
everything ceases to be. The light dawns again, he awakes, and his
reopened senses create anew the busy frame and phenomena of
nature. Transfer this experience from man to God; consider it not
as abstract and apparent, but as concrete and real, and you have
the Hindu doctrine of the kalpa. When we sleep, to us all things
are destroyed; and when we awake, to us they reappear. When God
sleeps, all things in themselves really end; and when he wakes,
they begin anew to be. The visible and experimental phenomena of
day and night, sleeping and waking, are universalized, and
attributed to God, It is a poetic process of thought, natural
enough to a rich minded, simple people, but wholly illegitimate as
a logical ground of belief, But being stated in books supposed to
be infallibly inspired, and in the absence of critical tests for
the discrimination of sound from unsound thought, it was
implicitly accepted by multitudes.

Closely allied to the foregoing doctrine, yet in several
particulars strikingly different from it, and evidently quite
independent in its origin, was the Great Year of the Stoics, or
the alternative blotting out and restoration of all things. This
school of philosophers conceived of God as a pure artistic force
or seed of universal energy, which exhibits its history in the
evolution of the kosmos, and, on its completion, blossoms into
fire, and vanishes. The universal periodical conflagration
destroys all evil, and leaves the indestructible God alone in his
pure essence again. The artistic germ or seed force then begins,
under its laws of intrinsic necessity, to go once more through the
same process to the same end.

The rise of this imagery and belief is not so obvious as in the
last instance, but it is equally discoverable and intelligible.
Every animal, every flower, every plant, begins from its proper
specific germ or force, goes through a fixed series of growths and
changes, and relapses into its prime elements, and another and
another follow after it in the same order. The seasons come and
go, and come again and go again, Every planet repeats its
revolutions over and over. Wherever we look, this repetition of
identical processes greets our vision. Now, by imaginative
association universalize this repetition of the course of
phenomena as seen in the parts, and take it up and apply it to the
whole creation, and you have the doctrine in hand.

It is a poetic process of thought not scientific or philosophic,
and without claim to belief; yet, in the absence of scientific
data and standards, it might easily win acceptance on authority.

The Scandinavians, also, have transmitted to us, in their sacred
books, descriptions of their belief in the approaching end of the
world, descriptions rude, wild, terrible, not without elements of
appalling grandeur. They foretell a day called Ragnarok, or the
Twilight of the gods, when all the powers of good and evil shall
join in battle, and the whole present system of things perish in a
scene of unutterable strife and dismay. The Eddas were composed in
an ignorant but deeply poetic and fertile age, when all the
mythological elements of mind were in full action. Their authors
looking within, on their own passions, and without, on the natural
scenery around them, conscious of order and disorder, love and
hate, virtue and crime, beholding phenomena of beauty and horror,
sun and stars, night and tempest, winter and summer, icebergs and
volcanoes, placid moonlight and blinding mist, assisting friends
and battling foes, personified everything as a demon or a
divinity. Asgard, above the blue firmament, was the bright home of
the gods, the Asir. Helheim, beneath the rocky earth and the
frozen ocean, was the dark and foul abode of the bad spirits, the
Jotuns. Everywhere in nature, fog and fire, fertility and
barrenness, were in conflict; everywhere in society, law and crime
were contending. In the moon followed by a drifting cloud, they
saw a goddess chased by a wolf. The strife goes on waxing, and
must sooner or later reach a climax. Each side enlists its allies,
until all are ranged in opposition, from Jormungandur, the serpent
of the deep, to Heindall, the warder of the rainbow, gods and
brave men there, demons, traitors, and cowards here. Then sounds
the horn of battle, and the last day dawns in fire and splendor
from the sky, in fog and venom from the abyss. Flame devours the
earth. For the most part, the combatants mutually slay each other.
Only Gimli, the high, safe heaven of All Father, remains as a
refuge for the survivors and the beginning of a new and fairer
world.

The natural history of this mythological mess is clear enough. It
arises from the poetic embodiment and personification of
phenomena, the grouping together of all evil and of all good, then
imaginatively universalizing the conflict, and carrying it out in
idea to its inevitable ultimatum. The process of thought was
obviously natural in its ground, but fictitious in its result. Yet
in a period when no sharp distinction was drawn between fancy and
fact, song and science, but an indiscriminate faith was often
yielded to both, even such a picturesque medley as this might be
held as religious truth.

The Zarathustrian or Persian scheme of a general judgment of men
and of the world in some respects resembles the systems already
set forth, in other respects more closely approaches that
Christian doctrine partially borrowed from it, and which is
hereafter to be noticed. Ahura Mazda, the God of light and truth,
creates the world full of all sorts of blessings. His adversary,
Angra Mainyus, the author of darkness and falsehood, seeks to
counteract and destroy the works of Ahura Mazda by means of all
sorts of correspondent evils and woes. When Ahura Mazda creates
the race of men happy and immortal, Angra Mainyus, the old serpent,
full of corruption and destruction, steals in, seduces them from
their allegiance, and brings misery and death on them, and then
leads their souls to his dark abode. The whole creation is
supposed to be crowded with good spirits, the angels of Ahura
Mazda,

seeking to carry out his beneficent designs; and also with evil
spirits, the ministers of Angra Mainyus, plotting to make men
wicked, and to pervert and poison every blessing with an answering
curse. Light is the symbol of God, darkness the symbol of his
Antagonist. Under these hostile banners are ranged all living
creatures, all created objects. For long periods this dreadful
contention rages, involving everything below in its fluctuations.
But at last Ahura Mazda subdues Angra Mainyus, overturns all the
mischief he has done, by means of a great deliverer whom he has
sent among men to instruct and redeem them raises the dead,
purifies the world with fire, and, after properly punishing the
guilty, restores all nature to its original paradisal condition,
free from pain and death.

In the primitive state of mankind, when the germs of this religion
were conceived, when men dwelt in ignorance, exposure, and fear,
they naturally shuddered at darkness as a supernatural enemy, and
worshipped light as a supernatural friend. That became the emblem
or personification of the Devil, this the emblem or personification
of God. They grouped all evils with that, all goods with this.

Imaginatively associating all light and darkness, all blessing
and bale, respectively with Ahura Mazda and Angra Mainyus,
they universalized the fragmentary embodiments and oppositions
of these into one great battle; and under the impulse of
worshipping faith and hope, carried it to its crisis in the
final victory of the good. Plainly, it is mere poetry injected a
little with a later speculative element, and dealing in
mythological fashion chiefly with the phenomena of nature as
related to the experience of man. No one now can accept it
literally.

This survey of the various heathen myths of the end of the world
has prepared us, in some degree, to consider the corresponding
view held by the Jews, and more completely developed by the
Christian successors to the Jewish heritage of thought and
feeling.

The Hebrews believed themselves to be exclusively the chosen
people of God, who directly ruled over them himself by a
theocratic government represented in their patriarchs, law givers,
prophets, and kings. Jehovah was the only true God; they were his
only pure and accepted worshippers, sharply distinguished from the
whole idolatrous world. The heathen nations, uncircumcised
adorers of vain idols or of demons, were by consequence enemies
both of the true God and of his servants. This contrast and
hostility they even carried over into the unseen world, and
imagined that each nation had its own guardian angel in the Court
of Jehovah in heaven, who contended there for its interests; their
own national guardian, the angel Michael, being more powerful and
nearer to the throne than any other one. In the calamities that
fell on them, they recognized the vengeance of Jehovah for the
violation of his commands. In their victories, their deliverances,
their great blessings, especially in their rescue from Egypt, and
in the many miracles which they believed to have accompanied that
great passage, they saw the signal superiority of their God over
every other god, and the proofs of his particular providence over
them in distinct preference to all other peoples. He had, as they
piously believed, made a special covenant with Abraham, and set
apart his posterity as a sacred family, exclusively intrusted with
the divine law, and commissioned to subdue and govern all the
other families of the earth. When this proud and intensely
cherished faith was baffled of fulfillment, they never dreamed of
abandoning it.

They only supposed its triumphant execution postponed, as a
penalty for their sins, and looked forward with redoubled ardor to
a better time when their hopes should break into fruition, their
exile be ended, their captivity appear as a dream, Jerusalem be
the central gem of the world, and the anointed ruler wield his
sceptre over all mankind.

But misfortunes and woes were heaped on them. Their city was
sacked, their temple desecrated, their people dragged into foreign
slavery, forbidden to celebrate the rites of their religion,
slaughtered by wholesale. Many times, during the two centuries
before and the first century after Christ, did they suffer these
terrible sorrows. Their hatred and scorn of their heathen
persecutors; their faith in their own incomparable destiny; their
expectation of the speedy appearance of an anointed deliverer,
raised up by Jehovah to avenge them and vindicate their trust, all
became the more fervent and profound the longer the delay. Under
these circumstances grew up the Jewish doctrine of the Messiah, as
it is seen in that Apocalyptic literature represented by the Book
of Daniel, the Sibylline Oracles, the Book of Enoch, the
Assumption of Moses, the Fourth Book of Esdras, and similar
documents.

The Jews were remarkably free from that habit of mind which led
almost all the other nations to personify the most startling
phenomena of nature as living beings, which created fetiches of
stocks and stones and animals; saw a god in every wind, season,
star, and cloud. The Semitic mind and literature were more sober,
rational, and monotheistic. The place occupied in the thoughts of
other peoples by the phenomena of nature was held in the thoughts
of the Jews by political phenomena, by ritual, legal, and military
relations. And the poetic action of fancy, the mythological
creativeness and superstitious feeling which other people
exercised on the objects and changes of nature, the Jews exercised
on the phenomena of their own national history. The burning
central point of their polity and belief and imagination was the
conviction of their own national consecration as the exclusive
people of God, meant to conquer, teach, and rule all the infidel
nations; that Jehovah was literally their invisible King,
represented in their chief ruler; that every great triumph or
disaster was a signal Day of the Lord, a special Coming of Jehovah
to reward or punish his people. During their repeated bondages
under the Persians, Syrians, Greeks, Parthians, Romans, their
feeling of the antagonism between themselves and the other people
increased. From the time of the Babylonish captivity the Persian
doctrine of good and evil spirits had infiltrated into their
belief; and they adopted the notion of Angra Mainyus, and
developed it (with certain modifications) into their conception of
Satan. Then, in their faith, the war of Jews and Gentiles spread
into the invisible world, and took up on its opposite sides the
good and the fallen angels. And, finally, the idea of their
Messiah became the centre of a battle and a judgment in which all
the generations of the dead as well as of the living were to have
a part; and which should culminate in the overthrow of evil, the
subjection of the heathen, the assignment of the righteous to a
paradisal reign, and of the wicked to a doom typified by the
submersion of Sodom and Gomorrah in fiery brimstone.

How plainly this doctrine was the result of the same poetic
process of thought with the other schemes already depicted! Only
they were developed on the basis of natural phenomena; this, on
the basis of political phenomena. It is simply the imaginative
universalization of the struggle between Jew and Gentile, and the
carrying of it to its crisis and sequel. And when inexplicable
delays and the accumulation of obstacles made the realization of
the expected result amidst the conditions of the present world
seem ever more and more hopeless, the growing and assimilative
action of faith and fancy expanded the scene, and transferred it
to a transmundane state, involving the destruction of the heavens
and earth and their replacement with a new creation.

Is there any more real reason for believing this doctrine than
there is for believing the other kindred schemes? Not a whit. It
is a mistake of the same poetic nature, and resting on the same
grounds with them. Two thousand years have passed, and it has not
been fulfilled; and there is ever less and less sign of its
fulfillment. It never will be fulfilled, except in a spiritual
sense. The Jews will finally lose their pride of race and
covenant, abandon their special Messianic creed, and blend
themselves and their opinions in the mass of redeemed and
progressive humanity, and no more dream of a physical resurrection
of the dead amidst the dissolving elements of nature.

And now we must notice that besides all these poetic pictures of
the end of the world, there are prophecies of a similar result
which wear an apparently scientific garb. Many men of science
firmly believe that our world is destined to be destroyed, that a
close for the earthly fortunes of mankind can be plainly foreseen.
No little alarm was felt a century or more ago, when it was
discovered that there was a progressive diminution going on in the
orbit of the moon, which must cause it at length to impinge upon
the earth. But La Grange exhibited the fallaciousness of the
prophecy, by showing that the decrease was periodical and
succeeded by a corresponding increase. Intense and widely spread
terror has repeatedly been felt less a comet should come within
our planetary orbit, and shatter or melt our globe by its contact.
But the discovery of the nebulous nature of comets, of their great
numbers and regular movements, has quite dissipated that fear from
the popular mind in our day.

There are, however, other forms of scientific speculation which
put the prophesied destruction of the world on a more plausible
and formidable basis. It is supposed by many scientists that all
force is derived from the consumption of heat; and that the fuel
must at last be used up, and therefore no life or energy be left
for sustaining the present system of the creation. This theory is
met by the counter statement that the heat of the sun and other
similar centres may possibly not depend on any material
consumption; or, if it does, there may be a self replenishing
supply, loss and repair forming an endless circle.

It is foretold by some chemists, that the progressive interior
cooling and contraction of our orb will cause ever greater
interstices or vacant spaces among the solid substances below the
outer crust; and that into these pores, first all liquids, then
all gases and the whole atmosphere, will be absorbed: so that the
world will be left desolate, utterly uninhabitable by life.

Again: it is said that all force or energy tends at every
transformation to pass (at least partially) into heat; and
therefore that, finally, all force will be frittered down into the
one form of heat, all matter vanishing from its separate shapes
into the state of a homogeneous, nebulous fire. The portentous
sight, repeatedly descried by astronomers, of a nameless world,
away in remotest space, which has suddenly kindled, blazed,
smouldered, darkened, and vanished forever from its place, is
perhaps a solemn symbol of the fate of our own planet; hinting at
a time when the earth, too, shall make itself a funeral pyre,

And, awed in distant orbs, some race unknown Shall miss one star
whose smile had lit their own.

This same final crisis is also prophesied on the basis of a slight
retardation to which the planets are subjected in their passage
through the ethereal medium. No matter how slight the resistance
thus interposed, its consequence, it is thought, must accumulate
and ultimately compel all material bodies to approach each other;
and, as their successive collisions convert them into heat and
vapor, nothing will be left at last but one uniform nebula. The
process of evolution will then begin anew, and so the stupendous
history of the universe repeat itself eternally.

This is the sublimest of all the generalizations of science. It
may be true, and it may not be true. At any rate, it differs
immensely in the moral impression it makes from that made by the
current theological doctrine of the same catastrophe. We can
contemplate the scientific prophecy of the end of the world with a
peace of mind which the traditional prophecy does not permit.

In the first place, the ecclesiastical doctrine makes the
destruction of the world a result of wrath and vengeance. The
angry God looms above us with flaming features and avenging
weapons to tread down his enemies. We shrink in fright from the
wrath and power of the personal Judge, the inexorable Foe of the
wicked. But the scientific doctrine makes the end a result of
passionless laws, a steady evolution of effects from causes,
wholly free from everything vindictive.

Secondly. The ecclesiastical doctrine makes the dreadful
conclusion a sudden event, an inconceivable shock of horror,
falling in an instant, overwhelming all its victims with the
swiftness of lightning in the unutterable agony of their ruin. But
the scientific doctrine makes the climax a matter of slow and
gradual approach. Whether the worlds are to be frozen up by
increasing cold, or to evaporate in culminating heat, or to be
converted into gas as they meet in their career, the changes of
the chemical conditions will be so steady and moderate beforehand
as to cause all living creatures to have diminished in numbers by
insensible degrees, and to have utterly ceased long before the
final shock arrives.

Thirdly. The ecclesiastical doctrine makes the sequel imminent,
near, ready to fall at a moment's warning. At any hour the signal
may strike. Thus it is to the earnest believer a constant, urgent
alarm, close at hand. But the scientific doctrine depicts the
close as almost unimaginably remote. All the data in the hands of
our scientists lead their calculations as to the nearest probable
end to land them in an epoch so far off as to be stated only in
thousands of millions of years. Thus the picture is so distant as
to be virtually enfeebled into nothing. We cannot, even by the
most vivid imagination, bring it home closely enough to make it
real and effective on our plans.

And, finally, the theological dogma of the destruction of the
world professes to be an infallible certainty. The believer holds
that he absolutely knows it by a revelation of supernatural
authority. But with the scientist such a belief is held as merely
a probability. A billion of centuries hence the world may perhaps
come to an end; and, on the other hand, the phenomena which lead
to such a belief may yet be explained as implying no such result.
And these two issues, so far as our social or ideal experience is
concerned, are virtually the same.

A brilliant French writer has suggested that even if the natural
course of evolution does of itself necessitate the final
destruction of the world, yet our race, judging from the
magnificent achievements of science and art already reached, may,
within ten thousand centuries, which will be long before the
foreseen end approaches, obtain such a knowledge and control of
the forces of nature as to make collective humanity master of this
planet, able to shape and guide its destinies, ward off every
fatal crisis, and perfect and immortalize the system as now
sustained. It is an audacious fancy. But like many other
incredible conceptions which have forerun their own still more
incredible fulfillment, the very thought electrifies us with hope
and courage.

And thus the conclusion in which we rest at the close of our
investigation is the belief that the world is to last, and our
race to flourish on it virtually forever. This conclusion is
equally a relief from the frightful burdens of superstition, and a
consolation for our own personal evanescence. The stable harmony
of natural beauty and beneficence, amidst which we individually
play our brief part and vanish, shall stand fast, blooming with
fresh growths, and shining with fadeless light, and the successive
generations of our dear fellow men shall grow ever wiser and
happier, beyond the reach of our farthest vision into the future.
And if we recognize in the great catastrophic myths and previsions
of the poets and scientists the fundamental truth that the things
which are seen are temporal, while the things alone which are
unseen are eternal, the end being a regular and remote sequel in
the creative plan of God, free from anger, retributive
disappointment, or cruelty will not alarm us. For if souls are
substantial entities, and not mere phenomenal processes, they will
survive the universal crisis, and either at the lucid goals of
their perfected destiny rejoice forever in a reflected individual
fruition of the attributes of God, or else start refreshed on a
new career with that redistribution of the cosmic matter and
motion which in its gigantic and eternal rhythm of development and
dissolution the ancient Hindu mind figured as the respiration of
Brahm and which ambitious science now generalizes as the law of
evolution.

CHAPTER II.

THE DAY OF JUDGMENT.

JUDAISM so largely supplied the circumstantial and doctrinal germs
out of which dogmatic Christianity grew, that we cannot thoroughly
understand the Christian belief in a final day of judgment, unless
we first notice the historic and literary derivation of that
belief from Judaism, and then trace its development in the new
conditions through which it passed. The personal character,
teachings, life, and death of Jesus Christ, together with his
subsequent resurrection and career in the consciousness of
ecclesiastical Christendom, constituted the crystalizing centre
which, dipped in the inherited solution of ideal and social
materials furnished by the Church, has gathered around it the
accretion of faith and dogma composing the theoretic Christianity
of the present day. To follow this process with reference to the
particular tenet before us, analyze it, discriminate the
appropriate in it from the inappropriate, the true from the false,
maybe difficult; but it is necessary for a satisfactory
conclusion. To this task let us therefore now address ourselves,
putting away all bias and prejudice, invoking in equal degree
candor, fearlessness and charity.

The Jews believed themselves to be a people chosen out of all the
world as the exclusive favorites of God. By the covenant of
Abraham, and the code of Moses, Jehovah had entered, as they
thought, into a special contract with them to be their peculiar
God, Guardian, and Ruler. In contrast with the depraved habits and
idolatrous rites of the heathen nations, the Israelites were
strictly to keep the moral law, and, at the same time, to pay a
pure worship to Jehovah through the scrupulous observance of their
ceremonial law. The bond of race and family descent from Abraham,
the practice of circumcision, and the ceremonies of the Mosaic
ritual, sealed them as accepted members of this divine covenant.
So long as they were true to the duties involved in this relation,
Jehovah would watch over them, defend them from their enemies, set
them proudly above the alien Gentiles, and crown them with every
spiritual and temporal blessing. The noblest representatives of
the people believed this with unparalleled thoroughness and
intensity. They looked down on the uncircumcised nations as wicked
idolaters, destined to be their servants until they should be
adopted into the same covenant by becoming proselytes to their
faith. Jehovah was literally their direct, though invisible, King,
Law giver, and Judge, palpably rewarding their fidelity by overt
temporal blessings, punishing their dereliction by awful temporal
calamities and sufferings.

Every signal instance of his providential intervention in their
affairs they called a Day of the Lord, a Coming of Jehovah, a
Judgment from heaven. Thus the prophet Joel foretells the
vengeance which God would take on Tyre and Sidon and Philistia,
because they had assailed and scattered his people. "Behold the
day of Jehovah cometh, the great and terrible day. And I will show
wonders in the heavens and in the earth, blood and fire and
pillars of smoke. The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the
moon into blood. Then whosoever calleth on the name of Jehovah
shall be delivered: for upon Mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be
deliverance. I will contend with the Gentiles for my people, and
will bring back the captives.

The multitudes, the multitudes in the valley of judgment: for the
day of Jehovah is near in the valley of judgment." In a similar
strain Isaiah prophesies against Edom: "Draw near, O ye nations,
and hear! For the wrath of Jehovah is kindled against the nations,
and he hath given up their armies to slaughter. The stench of
their carcasses shall ascend, and the mountains shall melt with
their blood. And all the hosts of heaven shall melt away; and all
their host shall fall down, as the blighted fruit from the fig
tree. For my sword shall rush drunk from heaven: behold, upon Edom
shall it descend. For it is a day of vengeance from Jehovah. Her
streams shall be turned into pitch, and her dust into brimstone,
and her whole land shall become burning pitch. It shall lie waste
forever, and none shall pass through it. The pelican and the
hedgehog shall possess it; the heron and the raven shall dwell in
it."

Tremendous and appalling as this imagery is, it is obvious that
the whole meaning of it is earthly and temporal, a local judgment
of Jehovah in vindication of his people against the heathen. And
kindred judgments are threatened against his own people when they
lapse into wickedness and idolatry. "Thus saith the Lord, Behold,
I will wipe Jerusalem as a man wipeth a dish, wiping it and
turning it upside down." "Jehovah appeareth as a hostile witness,
the Lord from his holy place. Behold, Jehovah cometh forth from
his dwelling place, and advanceth on the high places of the earth.
The mountains melt under him, and the valleys cleave asunder like
wax before the fire. For the sin of the house of Israel is all
this."

Thus the earliest meaning of the phrase, Day of the Lord, or Day
of Judgment, according to Biblical usage, was the occurrence of
any severe calamity, either to the Jews, as a punishment for their
apostasy; or to the Gentiles, as a punishment for their
wickedness, or for their violent encroachment on the rights of the
chosen people. These visitations of military disaster or political
subjection, though purely local and temporal, are depicted in the
most terrific images, such as flaming brimstone, falling stars,
heaven and earth dissolving in darkness, blood, and fire. Ezekiel,
alluding to the barbarous invasion headed by Prince Gog,
represents Jehovah as declaring, "I will contend against him, and
will rain fire and brimstone upon him and his hosts. Thus will I
show myself in my greatness and glory before the eyes of many
nations, and they shall know that I am Jehovah." The highly
figurative character of this imagery must be apparent to every
candid critic.

For example, in the following passage from Zechariah, no one will
suppose for a moment that it is meant that Jehovah will appear
visibly in person and reign in Jerusalem, but only that his
promise shall be fulfilled, and his law shall prevail there in the
triumphant establishment of his chosen people: "Behold the day of
Jehovah cometh, when I will gather all nations to battle against
Jerusalem; and the city shall be taken. Then shall Jehovah go
forth, and fight against those nations. And his feet shall stand
in that day upon the Mount of Olives. And Jehovah shall be king
over all the earth. And it shall be that whoso of all the families
of the earth will not go up to Jerusalem to worship the King,
Jehovah of hosts, upon them shall be no rain."

When the prophets burst out in the lyric metaphors, "Jehovah will
roar from Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem;" "Egypt shall
be a waste and Edom a wilderness for their violence to the sons of
Judah; but Jerusalem shall be inhabited forever, and Jehovah shall
dwell upon Zion," the meaning is simply that "Jehovah will be a
refuge to his people, a stronghold to the sons of Israel, and all
people shall know that Jehovah is God." It would imply the
grossest ignorance in any critic if he imagined that the Jews ever
believed that Jehovah was visibly to come down and reign over them
in person. They did however, believe that an awful token or the
presence of Jehovah dwelt in the holy of holies of their temple.
They also believed that every anointed ruler who governed them in
justice and piety represented the authority of Jehovah. And as, in
the long times of their natural captivity and oppression, their
hopes sought refuge from the depressing present in bright visions
of a glorious future, when some inspired deliverer should justify
their faith by carrying the national power and happiness to the
highest pitch, they naturally believed that the spirit and signet
of the Lord would, in a special manner, rest on that Messianic
hero.

By the assimilative action of faith and imagination, this idea of
a divinely accredited Messiah developed, and grew ever richer and
more complete. It began simply with the expectation of a holy
leader and ruler who should subdue the heathen and establish the
favored people of Jehovah in peerless purity, power, and happiness
in the land of Judea. Little by little the rewards of the
righteous and the punishments of the wicked were extended beyond
those living on the earth, and took in the dead. The prophet
Ezekiel depicted the promised restoration of the Jews from their
captivity at Babylon to Jerusalem under the poetic image of a
revivification of a heap of dead bones. This metaphor slowly
assumed the form of a literal dogma, which grew from its beginning
as an exceptional belief in the resurrection of a chosen few,
stated in the book of Daniel and the second book of Maccabees, to
the belief in the universal resurrection of the dead, avowed by
Paul as the common Pharisaic belief. The belief, too, in regard to
the scene of the Messianic triumph, the penalties to be inflicted
on the enemies of Jehovah, and the kind and number of those
enemies, underwent the same process of development and growth. The
world was conceived as a sort of three story house connected with
passage ways; heaven above the firmament, the earth between, and a
penal region below. The imagery of fire and brimstone associated
in the Hebrew mind with Sodom and Gomorrah, and the fearful
imagery of idolatory, filth, and flames in the detested valley of
Hinnom where the refuse of Jerusalem was carried to be burned, had
been transferred by the popular imagination to the subterranean
place of departed souls. The story in the book of Genesis about
the sons of God forming an alliance with the daughters of men, and
begetting a wicked brood of giants, had been wrought into the
belief in a race of fallen angels, foes of God and men, whose
dwelling place was the upper air. Above these wicked spirits in
high places, but below the heaven of Jehovah, was the paradise
whither Enoch and Elijah were supposed to have been translated,
and whence they would come again in the last days. The Jewish
apocryphal book of Enoch which was written probably about a
century and a half before the birth of Christ, and is explicitly
quoted in the Epistle of Jude contains a minute account of the
final judgment, including in its scope this whole scenery and all
these agents, and closely anticipating both the doctrinal and
verbal details of the same subject as recorded in the New
Testament itself. There is not, with one exception, a single
essential feature of the now current Christian belief, in regard
to the day of judgment at the end of the world, which is not
distinctly brought out in the same form in the book of Enoch,
written certainly more than a hundred years before a line of the
Gospels was composed. The exception referred to relates to the
person of the Messiah. In the book of Enoch he is indeed called
the Son of man, but is wrapt in mysterious obscurity, undefined
and unnamed: in the Christian documents and faith he is, of
course, identified with Jesus of Nazareth, and, at a later period,
identified also with God.

The growth of the Messianic personality in distinctness,
prominence, importance, and completeness of associated grouping,
is not only historically traceable, but was also perfectly
natural. At first the prophecy of the triumphant re establishment
of the Jews was conceived as the result of the favoring power of
Jehovah, not in a personal manifestation, but providentially
displayed. Thus Joel represents Jehovah as saying, in his promise
to vindicate Jerusalem, "Let the heathen be wakened, and come up
to the valley of Jehoshaphat; for there will I sit to judge all
the heathen round about." It cannot be denied that this was purely
metaphorical. But in all imagery of a kingdom, of war, of
judgment, the idea of the king, the leader, the judge, would
naturally be the strongest point of imaginative action, the center
of crystalizing association around which congruous particulars
would be drawn until the picture was complete. So it actually
happened. Perhaps the most striking example of this is seen in the
growth of the notion of the great Adversary who precedes and
fights against the Messiah. The book of Daniel, written just after
Antiochus Epiphanes had oppressed the Jews with such frightful
cruelties and profaned their temple with such abominable
desecrations, impersonated in him the whole head and front of the
impious hostility which the promised deliverer would have to
subdue in vindicating the rights and hopes of the chosen people.
"The figure of Antiochus Epiphanes," Martineau has happily said,
"placed in immediate antecedence and antithesis to that of the
Messiah, as the predicted crisis moved forward, was carried with
it, and spread its portentous shadow over the expected close." The
writer of the book of Daniel looked for the immediate arising of
some inspired hero and servant of Jehovah to overthrow this wicked
despot, this persecuting monster, and avenge the oppressed Jews on
their Gentile tyrants. When subsequent events postponed this
expected sequel, the opposed parties in it, the Antichrist and the
Christ, were thrown forward together in ever dilating proportions
of gloom and brightness: the fierce countenanced king in Daniel
becomes the Man of Sin in Paul and the Beast drunk with the blood
of saints in the Apocalypse. And in the Rabbinical books of the
Jews the belief in Antichrist, under the name of Armillus, is
developed into a mass of mythological details, afterwards adopted
quite in the gross by the Mohammedans. Terrible signs will precede
the appearance of the Messiah, such as a dew of blood, the
darkening of the sun, the destruction of the holy city, with the
slaughter and dispersion of the Israelites, and the suffering of
awful woes. The Messiah shall gather his people and rebuild and
occupy Jerusalem. Armillus shall collect an army and besiege that
city. But God shall say to Messiah, "Sit thou on my right hand,"
and to the Israelites, "Stand still, and see what God will work
for you to day." Then God will pour down sulphur and fire from
heaven, and consume Armillus and his hosts. Then the trumpet will
sound, the tombs be opened, the ten tribes be led to Paradise to
celebrate the marriage supper of the Messiah, the aliens be
consigned to Gehenna, and the earth be renovated.

As the doctrine of the functions of the Messiah, in this finished
form, is not stated in the Old Testament, but was familiar in the
Christian Church, it is commonly supposed to be exclusively a
later Christian development from the Jewish germ. It did, however,
exist in the Jewish mind, before the birth of Christ, in the
mature form already set forth. It is found clearly laid down and
drawn out in Jewish apocryphal books dated earlier than the
Christian era. It is likewise explicitly and minutely detailed in
the Talmud, where its subsequent adoption from the Christians must
have been impossible to the bigoted scorn and hate of the Jews for
the Christians; while the historic affiliation of Christianity on
Judaism made the Christians avowedly adopt all the vital doctrines
of the older creed. The gradual growth of the Christian doctrine
of the connection of the Messiah with the final judgment, out of
the previous Jewish and Rabbinical notions, by the hardening of
metaphors into dogmas and the universalizing of local peculiarities,
is confessedly an obscure process, in many of its particulars
extremely difficult to trace. But that it did thus grow up,
no impartial scholar, who has mastered what is now known
on the subject, can doubt. A world of new knowledge and light has
been thrown on this whole field during the last thirty five years
by Gfrorer, Baur, Ewald, Hoffmann, Hilgenfeld, Dilmann, Ceriani,
Volkmar, and other students of kindred power and spirit.
Researches and discussions in this department are still pushed
with the greatest zeal; and it is confidently believed that in a
few years the views adopted in the present writing will be
established beyond all cavil from any fair minded critic. Then all
the steps will have been clearly defined in the development of
that doctrine of the great Day of the Lord, which, beginning with
a poetic picture of a Jewish overthrow of the Gentiles, through
the inspiring power of Jehovah, before the walls of Jerusalem,
ended with a literal belief in the setting up, by the Messiah, of
a tribunal in the Valley of Jehoshaphat, the assemblage there of
all the living and the dead for judgment, the installation of the
immortalized righteous in Paradise, and the submerging of the
wicked under the Vale of Hinnom in a rainstorm of blazing
brimstone.

And now what must we think in regard to the truth or falsehood of
the outward, forensic, military, and ritual part of the doctrine
of historic and literary development we have imperfectly followed.
Is it not perfectly clear, that the growth of the doctrine in
question has been but a natural action of the imagination on the
materials furnished it; adding congruous particulars, one after
another, until the view was complete, and therefore could extend
no further? And is it not equally obvious, that it can lay no sort
of claim to logical validity? The superstitious and arbitrary
character of its intrinsic constituents, its irreconcilableness
with science and philosophy, disprove, to all who dare honestly
face the facts, every plea set up for it as an inspired revelation
of truth. It is a mixture of poetry and speculation, credible
enough in an early and uncritical age, but a hopeless stumbling
block to the educated reason of the present day. Every one who
brings a free intelligence to the subject will find it impossible
not to recognize the same fanciful process of thought, the same
poetic ingredients, here as in the schemes of those heathen
religions whose principal portrayals we all regard as mythology.
To argue that because earthly rulers, in their anger and power,
send retributive armies against their rebellious subjects, to
bring them to judgment, destroy their homes and cities, and lay
waste their lands with fire and sword, therefore God, the supreme
King, will do so by the whole world, is not to reason logically,
but to poetize creatively. There can be no warrant for
transferring the political and military relations between men and
earthly sovereigns to the moral and spiritual relations between
the human race and God, since the two sets of relations are wholly
different. The relation of Creator and creature is immensely
higher and wider than that of king and subject. He whose laws are
everywhere incessantly self executing needs not to select and
group and reserve his friends or foes for any climateric
catastrophe. The common notion of a final judgment day the
fanciful association of all the good together, on one side, to be
saved; of all the bad together, on the other side, to be damned,
applies to the divine government an imperfection belonging only to
human governments. Surely every one must see, the moment the
thought is stated, that this imaginative universalizing of the
indignation of God, and carrying it to a climax, in the
destruction of the world, is a mythological procedure utterly
inapplicable to a Being who can know no anger, no caprice, no
change, a Being whose will is universal truth, whose throne is
immensity, whose robe is omnipresence.

Original Christianity, internally regarded in its divine truth,
was the pure moral law exemplified in the personal traits of Jesus
Christ, and universalized by his ascent out of the flesh into that
kingdom of heaven which knows not nationalities or ceremonies. But
original Christianity, externally and historically regarded, in
the belief of its first disciples, was simply Judaism, with the
addition of the faith that the Messiah had actually come in the
person of Jesus Christ. The first disciples vividly cherished the
prevalent Pharisaic doctrine that the Messiah would glorify his
people, vanquish the heathen, raise and judge the dead, change the
face of the earth, and inaugurate a holy reign of Israel in joy
and splendor. This the Messiah was to do. But they believed Jesus
to be the Messiah. Yet, before doing these things, he had been put
to death. Therefore, they argued, he must come again, to finish
his uncompleted mission. Such was the derivation of the apostolic
and ecclesiastical doctrine of the speedy second advent of Christ
to judge the dead and the living, and to wind up the present
scheme of things. The belief was inevitable under the circumstances.
To have believed otherwise, they must have reconstructed the current
idea of the Messiah, and have seen in him no political monarch
with an outward realm, but purely a king of truth.

For this they were not ready; though it seems as if, after
the experience of eighteen hundred years, we ought by this
time to be prepared to see that such was really the intention of
Providence.

It is a question of primary interest, whether Jesus himself, in
assuming the Messiahship, regarded it personally as an exclusively
spiritual office, or as a literally including these royal and
judicial functions in a visible form.

Jesus foretold, in the same imaginary used by the previous
prophets, and familiar to the minds of his contemporaries, the
speedy approach of frightful calamities, wars, rumor of wars,
famine and slaughter, Jerusalem compassed with armies and
destroyed. Then, he adds, the Son of man shall come in the clouds
of heaven, with all his holy angels, and take possession of the
scene, apportioning the destinies of the righteous and the wicked.
The question is, whether this pictured reappearance, in such
transcendent pomp and power, was meant by him as a literal
prophecy, to be physically fulfilled in his own person; or as a
moral horoscope of the destined fortunes of his religion, a
figurative representation of the establishment and reign of his
spiritual truth. The latter view seems to us to be the correct one.

In the first place, this is what has actually taken place. In the
growing recognition of his spirit and power, in the spread of his
teachings and name, in the revolutionizing advancement of his
kingdom among men, Jesus has come again and again. Jerusalem was
destroyed by the Romans, as he foretold, amidst unspeakable
tribulations, and the disciples of the new faith installed in
domination over the world. He said the time was then at hand, even
at the doors, that some of those standing by should not taste
death until all these things came to pass. If his prophecy bore a
moral sense, the sequel justified it; if it bore a physical sense,
the sequel refuted and falsified it. For that generation passed
away, fifty generations since have passed away, and yet there has
been no literal second advent of Jesus in person to judge the dead
and the living, and to destroy the world. The event proves that we
must either give the words of Jesus a metaphorical interpretation
or hold that he was in error.

But, secondly, such an error would be incompatible with soundness
of mind. For any man, even for him called by an apostle "the man
Christ Jesus," to believe that after his death he should reappear,
swooping down from heaven, convoyed by squadrons of angels, to
collect all men from their graves, and replace the old creation
with a new one, would imply a profound disturbance of reason, a
monomaniacal fanaticism if not an actual insanity. It is such a
pure piece of theatrics that no one deeply in unison with that
spirit of truth which expresses the mind of God through the order
of nature and providence could possibly believe it. Such a nature
was preeminently that of Jesus. All his most characteristic
utterances, such as: "blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God;" "who loves much shall be forgiven much;" reveal
unsurpassed saneness and truth of perception. It is by much the
most probable supposition, that Jesus employed in the deepest and
purest moral sense alone those Messianic images and catastrophic
prophecies which were indeed originally used as moral metaphors,
but had been afterwards degraded into material dogmas.

Still further, the literal belief commonly attributed to Jesus, in
his own physical reappearance and reign, is not only incompatible
with his supreme soundness of mind, it is also irreconcilable with
his other explicit teachings. "My kingdom is not of this world."
"Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice." He warns his
disciples against the many false Christs who will appear, and says
that "the kingdom of heaven cometh not with observation." "Say
not, lo here! or lo there! for the kingdom of heaven is within
you." "I am the truth, the way, and the life." "He that rejecteth
me, I judge him not; the word that I have spoken, that shall judge
him." "Whoever doeth the will of my Father in heaven, the same is
my brother." In view of these and kindred utterances of the
profoundest insight, irreconcilable with any gross mythological
beliefs, we must hold to the purely spiritual character of the
doctrine of Jesus concerning his personal offices, and think that
all the speeches, if any such there be, which cannot be fairly
explained in accordance with this view, have been refracted in
their transmission through incompetent reporters, or even perhaps
fictitiously ascribed to him from the faith of a later age. There
is a grateful satisfaction in thus discharging, as we feel we are
fairly entitled to do, from the authority of Jesus a burden too
great even for his peerless name any longer to support. For, say
what its advocates may, this gigantic melo drama of the second
advent, this world wide mixture and display of martial and
forensic elements before an audience of all mankind and amidst a
convulsed and closing universe, is inherently incredible by any
mind not grossly ignorant and undisciplined or drilled to the most
slavish servility of traditional thought. Every one really
educated in science and philosophy, and familiar with the
physiological conditions and literary history of mythology in the
other nations of the world, will plainly perceive the intrinsic
fancifulness and falsity of the belief, at the same time that he
easily accounts for its rise and prevalence.

The same picture of the siege of Jerusalem by a league of
idolatrous armies, and of the mighty coming of the Messiah, found
in the New Testament, is drawn in the third book of the Sibylline
Oracles, which was composed by a Jew two hundred years before one
word of Matthew or Luke was written. Jesus took up this current
and fitting imagery wherein to express the conflict of his
religion with the world, and to predict its ultimate triumph. He
identifies himself with the truths he has brought, with the
regenerating energies he has inaugurated to combat and overcome
the wickedness and despotism of the nations of men. Every advent
of his universal principles to a wider conflict or a higher seat
of authority, is a true coming of the Son of Man. The vices and
crimes of men, the selfishness and tyranny of governments,
accumulate impediments in the way of the free working of the will
of God in human society. Therefore from period to period
convulsive crises occur, shocks of progressive truth and liberty
against the obstacles gathered in their way. Thus, not only the
destruction of Jerusalem, but the destruction of Rome, the French
Revolution, and all the terrible social crises in the advancing
affairs of the world, write on the earth and the sky, in huge
characters of blood, smoke and fire, the true meaning of the
repeated coming of Christ. This is the only kind of judicial
second advent he will ever make, and this will occur over and over
in calamitous but helpful revolutions, until all removable evils
are done away, all the laws of men made just and all the hearts of
men pure. Then the spirit once manifested by Jesus in his lonely
mission will be a universal presence on earth, and the genuine
millennium prevail without end.

It is necessary now, as preliminary to a clear exposition of the
true Christian doctrine of judgment, to explain the cause and
process of the dark perversion which the teachings of Christ
himself have so unfortunately undergone in the Church. For this
purpose we must again, for a moment, refer to the original
connection of Christianity with Judaism.

Judaism was composed of two parts: one an accidental form; the
other, essential truth. The first was the ceremonial peculiarities
of the Jewish race and history; the second was the absolute and
eternal principles of morality and religion. These two parts the
ritual law and moral law were closely joined in all the best
representatives of the nation at all the best periods of its
history. Yet there was a constant tendency to separate these. One
party exalted the ritual element, another party the spiritual
element; the priestly class and the vulgar populace the former;
the prophets the men of poetic, fiery heart and genius the latter.

Such men as Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, always insisted on personal
and national righteousness, purity, and devotion, as the one
essential thing. But the natural tendency of the common multitude,
and of every professional class, to an external routine of
mechanised forms, manifested itself more and more in a party which
made an overt covenant and ritualistic conformity the all
important thing. This party reached its head in the sect of the
Pharisees, who, at the time of Jesus, possessed the offices, and
represented the dominant spirit and authority of the Jewish
nation. The character of this sect of bigoted formalists, as
indignantly described and denounced by Jesus, is too well known to
need illustration. They subordinated and trivialized the weightier
matters of justice, mercy, humility, and peace, but enthroned and
glorified the regime of mint, anise, and cummin.

What was the Jewish idea of salvation, or citizenship in the
kingdom of God? What was the condition of acceptance in the
Pharisaic church? It was heirship in the Jewish race, either by
descent or adoption, with ceremonial blamelessness in belief and
act. Do you belong to the chosen family of Abraham, and are you
undefiled in relation to all the requirements of our code? Then
you are one of the elect. Are you a Gentile, an idolatrous member
of the uncircumcision, or a scorner of the Levitic and Rabbinical
customs? Then you are unfit to enter beyond the outer precincts of
the Temple; you are a hopeless alien from the kingdom of heaven.
Thus the Jewish test of acceptance with God was national,
external, formal, a local and temporal peculiarity.

When Jesus arose and began to teach, his transcendent genius,
working under the unparalleled inspiration of God, an unprecedented
sensibility to divine truth in its utmost purity and freedom,
expanded beyond all these shallow material accidents and
bonds; and he propounded a perfectly moral and spiritual test of
acceptance before God; namely, the possession of an intrinsically
good character. He made nothing of the distinction between Jew and
Gentile, declaring, "My father is able of these stones to raise up
children unto Abraham." He affirmed the condition of admittance
into the kingdom of God to be simply the doing of the will of God.
When he saw the young lawyer who had kept the two commandments,
loving God with all his soul, and his neighbor as himself, his
heart yearned towards him in benediction. And, finally, in his
sublime picture of the last judgment, he, in the most explicit and
unmistakable manner, makes the one essential condition of
rejection to be inhumanity of life, cruel selfishness of
character; the one essential condition of acceptance, the spirit
of love, the practical doing of good. He utters not a solitary
syllable about immaculateness of ceremonial propriety or soundness
of dogmatic belief. He only says, Inasmuch as ye have or have not
visited the sick and the imprisoned, fed the hungry, and clothed
the naked, ye shall be justified or condemned at the divine
tribunal. This test of personal goodness or wickedness, benevolent
or malignant conduct, proclaimed by Jesus, is the true standard,
free from everything local and temporary, fitted for application
to all nations and all ages.

But no sooner had Christianity obtained a foothold on earth,
multiplied its converts, and gained some outward sway, than its
Judaizing disciples and promulgators, fastening on that which was
easiest to comprehend and practise, that which was most impressive
to the imagination, that which seemed most sharply to distinguish
them from the unbelieving and unconforming world around, thrust
far into the background this universal and eternal test of
judgment set up by Jesus himself, and in place of it installed an
exclusive test fashioned after a more developed and aggravated
pattern of the very narrowest and worst elements in the
Phariasaism which he expressly came to supersede. The Pharisaic
condition of salvation was inheritance, by blood or adoption, in
the Jewish race and Abrahamic covenant, together with exactitude
of ceremonial observance. Everybody else was an unclean alien, an
uncircumcised dog, an uncovenanted leper. In place of this test,
the orthodox ecclesiastical party made their test dogmatic belief
in the supernatural Messiahship of Jesus Christ, formal profession
of allegiance to the official person of Jesus Christ. It is summed
up in the formula, "Whoso believeth that Jesus is the Christ, is
of God; whoso denieth this, is of the Devil."

Exactly here is where Paul, the noble apostle to the Gentiles,
broke with the Judaizing apostles, and taught a doctrine more
fully developed in its historic sequence, but substantially in
perfect unison with the free teachings and spirit of Jesus
himself. With Paul the test of Christian salvation was the
possession of the mind of Christ. "If any man have not the spirit
of Christ, he is none of his;" "but as many as are led by the
spirit of God are sons of God." "Neither circumcision availeth
anything, nor uncircumcision; but a new creature," begotten in the
image of Christ, availeth everything before God. "God rewardeth
every man, the Jew and the Gentile, according to his works." With
Paul, descent from Abraham was nothing, observance of the legal
code was nothing: a just and pure character, full of self
sacrificing love, evoked by faith in Christ, was the all in all.
Jesus Christ was the head of a new race, the second Adam; and all
disciples, who, through moral faith in him, were regenerated into
his likeness and unto newness of living, were thereby adopted as
sons of God and joint heirs with him. The Pauline formula of
salvation, freely open to all the world, was, spiritual
assimilation and reproduction of Christ in the disciple.

But the Judaizing party bore a heavy preponderance in the early
Church, and has succeeded unto this day in imposing on
ecclesiastical Christendom its own test: namely, a sound dogmatic,
belief in the supreme personal rank and office of Christ, as the
only means of admission to the kingdom of heaven. The one
peculiarity which most sharply and broadly contrasted the early
Christians with the rest of the world was unquestionably their
belief in the miraculous mission of Jesus, a belief growing
deeper, higher, intenser, until it actually identified him with
the omnipotent God. There was an inevitable tendency, it was a
perfectly natural and necessary process, for them to make this
point of contrast the central condition on which depended the
possession of all the special privileges supposed to be promised
to its disciples by the new religion. The result is well expressed
by Polycarp in these words: "Whosoever confesses not that Christ
is come in the flesh, is an Antichrist; and whosoever acknowledges
not the martyrdom of the cross, is of the Devil; and whosoever
says that there is no resurrection nor judgment, is the first born
of Satan." This extract strikes the key note of the Orthodox
Church all through Christendom from the second century to the
present hour. In place of the true condition of salvation
announced by Jesus, personal and practical goodness, it
inaugurates the false ecclesiastic standard, soundness of dogmatic
belief in relation to Jesus himself! Those who hold this are the
elect, and shall stand in heaven with white robes and palms and a
new song, while all the rest of the world apostate and detested
enemies of God and his saints shall be trampled down in merciless
slaughter, and flung into the pit whence the smoking signal of
their torment shall ascend for ever and ever. It is a transformation
of the bigoted scorn and hate of the covenanted Jew for his
Gentile foes into the intensified horror of the Orthodox
believer for the reprobate infidel. And it finally culminated in
the following frightful picture which still lowers and blazes in
the imagination of ecclesiastical Christendom as a veritable
revelation of what is to take place at the end of the world:

While the stars are falling, the firmament dissolving, the dead
swarming from their graves, and the nations assembling, Christ
will come in the clouds of heaven with a host of angels and sit in
judgment on collected mankind. All who submissively believed in
his Divinity, and have the seal of his blood on their foreheads,
he will approve and accept; all others he will condemn and reject.
No matter for the natural goodness and integrity of the
unbeliever: his unbelief dooms him. No matter for the natural
depravity and iniquity of the believer: his faith in the atoning
sacrifice saves him. The Judge will say to the orthodox, on his
right, "You may have been impure and cruel, lied, cheated, hated
your neighbor, rolled in vice and crime, but you have believed in
me, in my divinity: therefore, come, ye blessed, inherit my
kingdom." To the heretical, on his left, he will say, "You may
have been pure and kind, sought the truth, self sacrificingly
served your fellow men, fulfilled every moral duty in your power,
but you have not believed in me, in my deity, and my blood:
therefore, depart, ye cursed, into everlasting fire." Such is a
fit verdict to be pronounced by the avenging Warrior depicted in
the Apocalypse, from whose mouth issues a two edged sword, to cut
his enemies asunder; who sits on a white charger, in a vesture
dipped in blood, with a bow and a crown, and goes forth conquering
and to conquer; whose eyes are flames of fire; who treads his
rejecters in the wine press of his wrath until their blood reaches
to the horse bridles. It was the natural reflection of an age
filled with the most murderous hatreds and persecutions, based on
political and dogmatic distinctions. But how contradictory it is
to the teachings of Jesus himself! How utterly irreconcilable it
is with the image and spirit of that meek and lowly Son of Man who
said that he "came not to destroy men's lives but to save them;"
who declared, "of mine own self I can do nothing;" who modestly
deprecated all personal homage, asking, "Why callest thou me
good?" who sat with the publican, and forgave the harlot, and
denounced bigotry in many an immortal breathing of charity; and
who, even in his final agony, pardoned and prayed for his
murderers! What reason is there for supposing that he who was so
infinitely gentle, unselfish, forgiving, when on earth, will
undergo such a fiendish metamorphosis in his exaltation and
return? It is the most monstrous, the most atrocious travesty of
the truth that ever was perpetrated by the superstitious ignorance
and audacity of the human mind. It is a direct transference into
the Godhead of the most egotistical and hateful feelings of a bad
man. No good man who had been ever so grossly misconceived,
vilified, and wronged, if he saw his enemies prostrate in
submissive terror at his feet, perfectly powerless before his
authority, could bear to trample on them and wreak vengeance on
them. He would say, "Unhappy ones, fear not; you have misunderstood
me; I will not injure you; if there be any favor which I can
bestow on you, freely take it." And is it not an incredible
blasphemy to deny to the deified Christ a magnanimity equal to
that which any good man would exhibit?

It is with pain and regret that the writer has penned the
foregoing sentences, which, he supposes, some persons will read
with the feeling that they are inexcusable misrepresentations,
others, with a shocked and resentful horror, relieving itself in
the cry, Infidelity! Blasphemy! The reply of the writer is simply
that, while reluctant to wound the sensibility of any, he feels
bound in conscience to make this exposition, because he believes
it to be a true statement; and loyalty to truth is the first duty
of every man. Truth is the will of God, obedience to which alone
is sound morality, reverential love of which alone is pure piety.
Frightful as is the picture drawn above of Christ in the judgment,
it is impossible to deny, without utter stultification, that every
lineament of it is logically implied in the formula. "There is no
salvation for the man who unbelievingly rejects, no damnation for
the man who believingly accepts, the official Christ and his
blood." And what teacher will have the presumption to deny that
just this has been, and still is, the central dogma in the faith
of ecclesiastical Christendom? The legitimate result of this view,
unflinchingly carried out, and applied to the precise point we now
have in hand, is seen in that horrible portrayal of the Last
Judgment wherewith Michael Angelo has covered the ceiling of the
Sistine Chapel, in Rome. The great anatomical artist consistently
depicts Christ as an almighty athlete, towering with vindictive
wrath, flinging thunderbolts on the writhing and helpless
wilderness of his victims. The popular conception of Christ in the
judgment has been borrowed from the type of a king, who, hurling
off the incognito in which he has been outraged, breaks out in his
proper insignia, to sentence and trample his scorners. The true
conception is to be fashioned after the type given in his own
example during his life. So far as Christ is the representative of
God, there must be no vanity or egotism in him. Every such quality
ascribed to the Godhead is anthropomorphizing sophistry. However
much more God may be, he is the General Mind of the Universe. He
includes, while he transcends, all other beings. Now, the General
Mind must represent the interests of all, the disinterested good
of the whole, and not any particular and selfish exactions, or
resentful caprices, fashioned on the pattern shown among human
egotists by a kingly despot.

The Church, in developing Christianity out of Judaism through the
person and life of Jesus, has given prominence and emphasis to the
wrong elements, seeking to universalize and perpetuate, in a
transformed guise, the local spirit and historic errors of that
Pharisaic sect against which he had himself launched all his
invective. That temper of bigotry and ceremonial technicality
which hates all outside of its own pale as reprobate, and which
ultimated itself in the virtual Pharisaic formula, "Keep the hands
and platter washed, and it is no matter how full of uncleanness
you are within," at a later period embodied itself through the
leaders of ecclesiastical Orthodoxy in the central dogma, "Nothing
but faith in Christ can avail man anything before God." Instead of
this the true doctrine is, Nothing but obedience, surrender, and
trust, personal penitence and aspiration, can avail man anything
before God.

The Christians, as the Jews did before them, have made a wrong
selection of the doctrine to be, on the one hand, particularized
and left behind; on the other hand, carried forward and
universalized. This immense error demands correction. Let us
notice a few specimens in exemplication of it. Jehovah is not the
only true God in distinction from odious idols; but Brahma, Ahura
Mazda, Osiris, Zeus, Jupiter, and the rest, are names given by
different nations to the Infinite Spirit whom each nation worships
according to its own light. The Jews and the Christians are not
the only chosen people of God; but all nations are his people,
chosen in the degree of their harmony with his will. The
providence of God is not an exceptional interference from without,
exclusively for the Jews and Christians; but it is for all, a
steady order of laws within, as much to be seen in the shining of
the sun, or the regular harvest, as in any shocks of political
calamity and glory. Not the Messiah alone reveals God; but, in his
degree, every ruler, prophet, priest, every man who stands for
wisdom, justice, purity, and devotion, represents him. It is not
doctrinal belief in the Messiah, but vital adoption of his spirit
and character, of the principles of real goodness, that
constitutes the salvation of the disciple. We are to look not for
the resurrection of the flesh from the grave, but for the
resurrection of the soul from all forms of sin, ignorance, and
misery. It is the universal prevalence of truth and virtue,
knowledge, love, and peace, in the hearts of men, not the physical
reign of the returning Messiah, which will make a millennium on
earth. The kingdom of God which Judaism localized exclusively in
Palestine, and the early church exclusively in heaven or on the
millennial earth, should be recognized in every place, whether
above the sky or on the globe, where duty is done, and pure
affection, trust, and joy experienced; for God is not excluded
from all other spaces by any enthronization in one. We ought not
to cling, as to permanent fixtures of revealed truth, to the rigid
outlines of that scheme of faith which was struck out when the
three story house of the Hebrew cosmogony showed the limits of
what men knew, before exact science was born, or criticism
conceived, or the telescope invented, or America and Australia and
the Germanic races heard of; but we should hold our speculative
theological beliefs freely and provisionally, ready to reconstruct
and read just them, from time to time, in accordance with the
demands of the growing body of human knowledge.

Reflecting, in the light of these general ideas of truth, on the
whole subject of the current doctrine of the end of the world and
the day of judgment, we shall see that that doctrine presents no
valid claim for our belief, but is a mythological growth out of
the historic and literary conditions amidst which Christianity
arose on the basis of Judaism. The doctrine was formed by the
unconscious transmutation of metaphors into dogmas. Poetic figures
came, by dint of familiarizing repetition, by dint of imaginative
collection and contemplation, to be taken as expressive of literal
truths. To any reader of the Apocalypse, with competent historical
and critical information for entering into the book from the point
of view occupied by its author, it is just as evident that its
imagery was meant to describe the immediate conflict of Hebrew
Christianity with pagan Rome, and not the literal blotting out of
the universe, as it is unquestionable that the book of Daniel
depicts, not the impending destruction of the world, but the
relations of the chosen nation with the hostile empires of
Persia, Media, Babylon, and Macedonia, from which they had
suffered so much, and which they then hoped speedily to put
beneath their feet. The slain Lamb, standing amidst the throne of
God, with seven eyes and seven horns; Death, on a pale horse, with
Hell following him; the woman, clothed with the sun, and the moon
under her feet; the great red dragon, whose tail casts to the
earth the third part of the stars of heaven; the worm wood star,
that falls as a blazing lamp, and turns a third of the waters of
the earth into bitterness; the seven thunders, seven seals, seven
vials, seven spirits before the throne, seven candlesticks, seven
angels, seven trumpets, seven epistles to the seven churches,
seven horns, seven headed beast, all these things must, perforce,
be taken as free poetic imagery; it would require a lunatic or an
utterly unthinking verbalist to interpret them literally. Why,
then, shall we select from the mass of metaphors a few of the most
violent, and insist on rendering these as veritable statements of
fact? If the rest is symbolism, so are the pictures of the
avenging armies of angels, the reeking gulf of sulphur, and the
golden streets of the city.

The entire scheme of thought, as it still stands in the mind of
the Orthodox believer, is to be rejected as spurious, because it
rests on a process of imaginative accumulation and transference
which is absolutely illegitimate; namely, the association and
universalizing of political and military images, which are then
hardened from emblems into facts, and cast over upon the mutual
relations of God and mankind. We ought to break open the
metaphors, extract their significance, and throw the shells aside.
But ignorant bibliolatary and ecclesiasticism insist on
worshipping the shells, with no insight of their contents.

There is one all important fact which should convince of their
error those who hold the current view of a general judgment at the
end of the world as having been revealed from God through Christ.
We refer to the fact that the system of ideas in which a final
resurrection and judgment of the dead are logical parts, existed
in the Zoroastrian theology five or six centuries before the birth
of Christ. It was adopted thence by the Jews, and afterwards
adopted from the Jews by the Christians. If, therefore, this
doctrine be a revelation from God, it was revealed by him to the
Persians in a dark and credulous antiquity. In that case it is
Zoroaster and not Christ to whom we are indebted for the central
dogmas of our religion! No, these things are imagery, not essence,
the human element of imaginative error with which the divine
element of truth has been overlaid, and from whose darkening and
corrupt company this is to be extricated.

There are, in the New Testament, in addition to the relevant
metaphors which we have already examined, several others of great
impressiveness and importance. We must now explain these, separate
the truths and errors popularly associated with them, and leave
the subject with an exposition of the real method of the divine
government and the true idea of the day of judgment, in contrast
with the prevalent ecclesiastical perversions of them.

The part played in theological speculation and popular religious
belief by imagery borrowed from the scenery and methods of
judicial tribunals, the procedures and enforcement of penal law,
has not been less prominent and profound than the influence
exerted by natural, political, and military metaphors. The power,
the pomp, the elaborate spectacle, the mysterious formalities, the
frightful penalties, the intense personal hopes and fears,
associated with the trial of culprits in courts or before the head
of a nation, must always have sunk so deeply into the minds of men
as to be vividly present in imagination to be affixed as typical
stamps on their theories concerning the judgments of God and the
future world. This process is perhaps nowhere more distinctly
shown than in the belief of the ancient Egyptians. Before the
sarcophagus containing the mummy was ferried over the holy lake to
be deposited in the tomb, the friends and relatives of the
departed, and his enemies and accusers, if he had any, together
with forty two assessors, each of whom had the oversight of a
particular sin, assembled on the shore and sat in judgment. The
deceased was put on his trial before them: and, if justified,
awarded an honorable burial; if condemned, disgraced by the
withholding of the funeral rites. Now the papyrus rolls found with
the mummies give a description of the judgment of the dead, a
picture of the fate of the disembodied soul in the Egyptian Hades,
minutely agreeing in many particulars with the foregoing ceremony.
Ma, the Goddess of Justice, leads the soul into the judgment hall,
before the throne of Osiris, where stands a great balance with a
symbol of truth in one scale, the symbol of a human heart in the
other. The accuser is heard, and the deceased defends himself
before forty two divine judges who preside over the forty two sins
from which he must be cleared. The gods Horus and Anubis attend to
the balance, and Thoth writes down the verdict and the sentence.
The soul then passes on through adventures of penance or bliss,
the details of which are obviously copied, with fanciful changes
and additions, from the connected scenery and experience known on
the earth.

Taking it for all in all, there perhaps never was any other scene
in human society so impressive as the periodical sitting in
judgment of the great Oriental kings. It was the custom of those
half deified rulers the King of Egypt, the Sultan of Persia, the
Emperor of India, the Great Father of China to set up, each in the
gate of his palace, a tribunal for the public and irreversible
administration of justice. Seated on his throne, blazing in
purple, gold, and gems, the members of the royal family nearest to
his person; his chief officers and chosen favorites coming next in
order; his body guards and various classes of servants, in
distinctive costumes, ranged in their several posts; vast masses
of troops, marshalled far and near. The whole assemblage must have
composed a sight of august splendor and dread. Then appeared the
accusers and the accused, criminals from their dungeons, captives
taken in war, representatives of tributary nations, all who had
complaints to offer, charges to repel, or offences to expiate. The
monarch listened, weighed, decided, sentenced; and his executioners
carried out his commands. Some were pardoned, some rewarded, some
sent to the quarries, some to prison, some to death. When the
tribunal was struck, and the king retired, and the scene ended,
there was relief with one, joy with another, blood here, darkness
there, weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth in many a place.

Dramatic scenes of judgment, public judicial procedures, in some
degree corresponding with the foregoing picture, are necessary in
human governments. The prison, the culprit, the witnesses, the
judge, the verdict, the penalty, are inevitable facts of the
social order. Offences needing to be punished by overt penalties,
wrongs demanding to be rectified by outward decrees, criminals
gathered in cells, appeals from lower courts to higher ones, may
go on accumulating until a grand audit or universal clearing up of
arrears becomes indispensable. Is it not obvious how natural it
would be for a mind profoundly impressed with these facts, and
vividly stamped with this imagery, to think of the relation
between mankind and God in a similar way, conceiving of the
Creator as the Infinite King and Judge, who will appoint a final
day to set everything right, issue a general act of jail delivery,
summon the living and the dead before him, and adjudicate their
doom according to his sovereign pleasure?

The tremendous language ascribed to Jesus, in the twenty fifth
chapter of Matthew, was evidently based on the historic picture of
an Eastern king in judgment. "When the Son of Man shall come in
his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit
upon the throne of his glory: and before him shall be gathered all
nations: and he shall separate them one from another, as a
shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats: and he shall set the
sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left." If Jesus
himself used these words, we suppose he meant figuratively to
indicate by them the triumphant installation, as a ruling and
judging power in human society, of the pure eternal principles of
morality, the true universal principles of religion, which he had
taught and exemplified. But unfortunately the image proved so
overpoweringly impressive to the imagination of subsequent times,
that its metaphorical import was lost in its physical setting.

This momentous error has arisen from the inevitable tendency of
the human mind to conceive of God after the type of an earthly
king, as an enthroned local Presence; from the rooted incapacity
of popular thought to grasp the idea that God is an equal and
undivided Everywhereness. In his great speech on Mar's Hill, the
apostle Paul told the Athenians that "God had appointed a day in
the which he would judge the world in righteousness by that man
whom he hath ordained." Is not this notion of the judgment being
delegated to Jesus plainly adopted from the political image of a
deputy? The king himself rarely sits on a judicial tribunal: he is
generally represented there by an inferior officer. But this
arrangement is totally inapplicable to God, who can never abdicate
his prerogatives, since they are not legal, but dynamic. The
essential nature of God is infinity. Certainly, there can be no
substitution of this. It cannot be put off, nor put on, nor
multiplied. There is one Infinite alone.

The Greeks located, in the future state, three judges of the dead,
Minos, who presided at the trial of souls arriving from Europe;
Rhadamanthus, who examined those coming from Asia; and Aacus, who
judged those from Africa. They had no fourth and fifth inspectors
for the souls from America and Australia, because those divisions
of the earth were, as yet, unknown! How suggestive is this mixture
of knowledge and ignorance! The heaven of the Esquimaux is a place
where they will have a plenty of fine boats and harpoons, and find
a summer climate, and a calm ocean abounding with fat seals and
walruses. The Greenlander's hell is a place of torment from cold;
the Arab's, a place of torment from heat. Every people and every
man unless they have learned by comparative criticism to correct
the tendency  conceive their destiny in the unknown future in
forms and lights copied, more or less closely, from their familiar
experiences here. Is there not just as much reason for holding to
the literal accuracy and validity of the result in one case as in
another? The popular picture, in the imagination of Christendom,
of Gabriel playing a trumpet solo at the end of the world, and a
huge squad of angelic police darting about the four quarters of
heaven, gathering the past and present inhabitants of the earth,
while the Judge and his officers take their places in the
Universal Assize, instead of being received as sound theology,
should be held as moral symbol. Taken in any other way, it sinks
into gross mythology. Can any one fail to see that this picture of
the Last Judgment is the result of an illogical process; namely,
the poetic association and universalizing of our fragmentary
judicial experiences, and the bodily transfer of them over upon
our relations with God? The procedure is clearly a fallacious one,
because the relations of men with God in the sphere of eternal
truths are wholly different from their relations with each other
in the sphere of political society. They are, in no sense, formal
or forensic, but substantial and moral; not of the nature of a
league or compact, but interior and organic; not acting by fits
and starts, or gathering through interruptions and delays to
convulsive catastrophes, but going on in unbreakable continuity.
God is a Spirit; and we too, in essence, are spirits. The rewards
and punishments imparted from God to us, then, are spiritual,
results of the regular action of the laws of our being as related
to all other being. Consequently, no figures borrowed from those
judicial and police arrangements inevitable in the broken and
hitching affairs of earthly rulers, can be directly applicable,
the circumstances are so completely different. The true
illustration of the divine government must be adopted from
physiology and psychology, where the perfect working of the
Creator is exemplified,  not from the forum and the court, where
the imperfect artifices of men are exhibited.

God forever sits in judgment on all souls, in the reactions of
their own acts. The divine retribution for every deed is the kick
of the gun, not an extra explosion arbitrarily thrown in. The
thief, the liar, the misanthrope, the drunkard, the poet, the
philosopher, the hero, the saint, all have their just and
intrinsic returns for what they are and for what they do, in the
fitness of their own characters and their harmonies or discords
with the will of God, with the public order of creation. Thus is
the daily experience of one man made a lake of peace threaded with
thrilling rivulets of bliss; that of another, a stream of
devouring fire and poison, or a heaving and smoking bed of
uncleanness and torment. The virtues represent the conditions of
universal good; the vices represent private opposition to those
conditions. Accordingly, the good man is in attracting and
cooperative connection with all good; the bad man, in antagonistic
and repulsive connection with it. In these facts a perfect
retribution resides. If any one does not see it, does not feel its
working, it is because he is too insensible to be conscious of the
secrets of his own being, too dull to read the lessons of his own
experience. And this self ignorant degradation, so far from
refuting, is itself the profoundest exemplification of the truth
of that wonderful word of Jesus: "Verily, I say unto you, they
have their reward." Those who consider themselves saints indulge
in an unspeakable vulgarity, when they feel, "Well, the sinners
have their turn in this world; we shall have ours in the next."
The law of retribution in the spiritual sphere is identical with
the first law of motion in the material sphere; action and
reaction are equal, and in opposite directions. This law being
instantaneous and incessant in its operation, there can be no
occasion for a final epoch to redress its accumulated disbalancements.
It has no disbalancements, save in our erroneous or defective vision.

The true conception of the relation of the all judging Creator to
his creatures is that of the Infinite Being who supplies all
finite receptacles in accordance with their special forms of
organization and character, and who causes exact retributions of
good and evil intrinsically to inhere in their indulged modes of
thought and feeling and will, their own virtues and vices,
fruitions and battlements. This internal, continuous, dynamic view
worthily represents the perfection of the Divine government. The
incomparably inferior view the external, intermittent,
constabulary theory rests, as it seems to us, merely on the
traditions of ignorance and fancy. It has, in every instance,
originated from the unwarrantable interpretation of a trope as a
truth.

For example, the picture of the Last Judgment, supposed to be
drawn by Jesus, in the Parable of the Tares, must be considered,
not as a rigid prophecy of the end of the earth, and the
transmundane destination of souls, but as a free emblem of the
approaching close of the Jewish dispensation, and the terrible
calamities which would then come on the proud, obstinate and
rebellious people. The reaping angels are the Roman and Jewish
armies, and other kindred agencies and collisions in the destined
evolution of the fortunes of Christianity and mankind in the
future. Taken literally, the symbols are incongruous with fact,
and absolutely incredible in doctrine. For they are based on the
image of a royal land owner, who draws his support from the income
of his fields and subjects, and who rewards the faithful bringer
of fruits, and punishes the slothful defaulter; who welcomes and
stores sheaves, because they are wealth: rejects and burns tares,
because they are an injury and a nuisance. But nothing can be
riches or a nuisance to the infinite God, who neither lives on
revenue nor judges by jerks. Men are not literally wheat, the
property of the good sower, Christ; nor tares, the property of the
bad sower, the Devil: they are souls, responsibly belonging to
themselves, under God. And the pay of the human agriculturists, in
the moral fields of the divine King, consists in the daily crops
of experience they raise, not in being advanced to a seat at the
right hand of their Lord, or in being flagellated and flung into a
flaming furnace.

Jesus himself, undoubtedly, used this physical imagery as the
vehicle of spiritual truths; it is lamentable that perfunctory
minds have so generally overlooked the substance in the dress. He
is represented, in Matthew, as having said to his apostles: "When
the Son of man shall sit on the throne of his glory, ye also shall
sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel."
Now, that he used this figure to convey an impersonal moral
meaning, and that his profound thought underwent a materializing
degradation in the minds of his hearers and reporters, appears
clearly from the incident related immediately afterward. The wife
of Zebedee asked that her two sons might sit, the one on his right
hand, and the other on the left, in his kingdom. And Jesus said,
"Ye shall drink indeed of my cup, and be baptized with the baptism
that I am baptized with: but to sit on my right hand, and on my
left, is not mine to give." The imagery meant that the missionary
assistants, in forwarding and spreading the kingdom of truth and
love he came to establish, would be represented in common with
himself in the power it would acquire and sway over the world.
When his hearers interpreted the imagery in a physical sense, as
indicating that he was hereafter to be a visible king, and that
his favorites might expect to share in his authority, honor, and
glory, he solemnly repudiated it.

There is yet another and a wholly different style of imagery
employed by Jesus to convey his instructions as to the judgment
which is to separate the justified from the condemned. The
consideration of this species of imagery would afford an
independent proof, of a cogent character, that they strangely
misapprehend the mind of Jesus who interpret the moral meaning of
his parable in an outward and dramatic sense. The metaphors to
which we now refer are of a domestic and convivial nature, based
on some of the most impressive social customs of the Oriental
nations. It was the habit of kings, governors, and other rich and
powerful men, to give, on certain occasions, great banquets, to
which the guests were invited by special favor. These feasts were
celebrated with the utmost pomp and splendor, by night, in
brilliantly illuminated apartments. The contrast of the blazing
lights, the richly costumed guests, the music and talk, the honor
and luxury within, set against the darkness, the silence, the
envious poverty and misery without, must have deeply struck all
who saw it, and would naturally secure rhetorical reflections in
speech and literature. The Jews illustrated their idea of the
Kingdom of God by the symbol of a table at which Abraham and Isaac
and Jacob were banqueting, and would be joined by all their
faithful countrymen. In his parable of the Supper, describing how
a king, on occasion of the marriage of his son, made a feast and
sent out generous invitations to it, Jesus works up this imagery
still more elaborately. What did he really mean to teach by it? Is
it not clearly apparent from the whole context that he intended it
as an illustration of the fact that the Jews, to whom he first
announced his gospel, and offered all its privileges, having
rejected it, its blessings would be freely thrown open to the
Gentiles, and that they would crowd in to occupy the place of joy
and honor, which the chosen people of Jehovah had refused to
accept? It is by a pure effect of fancy and doctrinal bias that
the parable has been perverted into a description of the Last
Judgment. The reference plainly indicates admission to or
exclusion from the privileges of the new dispensation, a matter of
personal experience in the heart of the disciple and in the
society of the church on this earth. The wedding garment, without
which no one can come to the royal table, is a holy, humble, and
loving character. In consequence of his destitution of this,
Judas, although seated at the table, with the most honored guests,
in the very presence of his Lord, was proved to have no right
there, and was thrust into the outer darkness. His bad spirit, his
inability to appreciate and enjoy the pure truths of the kingdom,
constituted his expulsion. That such was the idea in the mind of
Jesus, something to be experienced personally and spiritually in
the present, and not something to be shown collectively and
materially at the end of the world, appears from the great number
of different forms in which he reiterates his doctrine. Had he
meant to teach literally that he was to come in person at the last
day, and sit in judgment on all men, would he not have had a
distinct conception of the method, and have always drawn one and
the same consistent picture of it? But if he meant to teach that
all who were fitted by their spirit, character and conduct to
assimilate the living substance of his kingdom were thereby made
members of it, while all others were, by their own intrinsic
unfitness, excluded, then it was perfectly natural that his
fertile mind would on a hundred different occasions convey this
one truth in a hundred different figures of speech. That in which
the images all differ is unessential: that in which they all agree
must be the essential thought. Now the parables differ in the
forms of judgment they picture. Therefore these forms are
metaphoric dress. The parables agree in assigning a different fate
to the righteous and the wicked. Therefore this difference is the
vital truth. And Jesus nowhere makes righteousness consist in
anything national, dogmatic, or ceremonial, but everywhere is
something moral.

The doctrine of an unfailing tribunal in the soul, the belief that
we are all judged momentarily at the continuous bar of the truth
reflected in our own conscience, is too deep, delicate, and
elusive a view for the ignorance and hardness of some ages, and of
some persons in every age. They cannot understand that the mind of
man is itself a living table of the law and judgment seat of the
Creator, by its positive and negative polarities, in sympathetic
connection with the standards of good and evil, pronouncing the
verdicts and executing the sentences deserved. They need to
project the scheme of retribution into the startling shape of a
trial in a formal court, and then to universalize it into an
overwhelming world assize. The semi dramatic figment, no doubt,
was an inevitable stage of thought, and has wrought powerfully for
good in certain periods of history. But the pure truth must be as
much better for all who can appreciate it, as it is more real and
more pervasive.

Since God, the indefeasible Creator, is a resistless power of
justice and love in omnipresent relations with his creatures, the
genuine day of judgment to each being must be the entire career of
that being. In a lower degree, every day is a day of judgment;
because all acts, in the spirit from which they spring and the end
at which they aim, carry their own immediate retributions. If we
could survey the whole, at once, from the Divine point of view,
and comprehend the relation of the parts to the whole, undoubtedly
we should perceive that the deserts and the receipts of each
ephemeral existence are balanced between the rise and set of its
sun. But death may, with most solemn emphasis, be regarded as the
final day of judgment to each man, in this sense; that then the
sum of his earthly life and deeds is sealed up and closed from all
further alteration by him, passing into history as a collective
cause or total unit of influence. As long as the creation rolls in
space, and conscious beings live and die, that bequeathal will
tell its good or evil tale of him. What sensitive spirit will not
tremble at the thought of a judgment so unavoidable and so
tremendous as this! The votaries of superstition are mistaken in
supposing that the removal of their false beliefs will destroy or
weaken the sanctions of duty among men. The removal of imaginary
sanctions will but cause the true ones to appear more clearly and
to work more effectively.

The judgment of God then, we conclude, is no vengeful wreaking of
arbitrary royal volitions; but it is the return of the laws of
being on all deeds, actual or ideal. This is, in itself, perpetual
and infallible: but it sometimes forces itself on our recognition
in sudden shocks or crises caused by the gathering obstacles and
opposition made to it by our ignorance, vice, and crime. Every
other doctrine of the Divine judgment is either an error or a
figurative statement of this one. In the latter case, the physical
cover should be dissolved and thrown away, the moral nucleus laid
bare and appropriated. But the popular mind of Christendom has
unfortunately pursued the contrary course, first exaggerating and
consolidating the metaphors, then putting their forms literally in
the place of their meaning.

The awful panorama of the last things, as painted in the
Apocalypse, the sun becoming as sackcloth of hair, and the moon as
blood; the blighted stars dropping; the unveiling of the great
white throne, from before the face of whose occupant the
frightened heaven and earth flee away; the standing up of the
dead, both small and great, the opening of the books, and the
judging of the dead out of the things written therein, this scenic
array has, by its terrible vividness and power of fanciful
plausibility, sunk so deeply into the imagination, and taken such
a tenacious hold on the feelings of the Christian world, secured
for itself so constant a contemplation and encrusted itself with
such a mass of associations, that it has actually come to be
regarded as a veritable revelation of the reality, and to act as
such. And yet, surely, surely, no one who will stop to think on
the subject, with conscious clearness, can believe that books are
provided in heaven with the names of men in them and recording
angels appointed to keep their accounts by double or by single
entry, and that God will literally sit upon a vast white dais
raised on the earth, and go through an overt judicial ceremony. On
what principle is a part of the undivided apocalyptic portrayal
rendered as emblem, the rest accepted as absolute verity? If the
blood red warrior on his white horse followed by the shining
cavalry of heaven, the horrible vials of wrath, the chimerical
angels and beasts, the sky and globe converted into terror struck
fugitives, the bridal city descending from God with its incredible
walls and its impossible gates and its magic tree of life yielding
twelve kinds of fruit, are imagery; then the lake of burning
sulphur, and the resurrection trumpet, and the indictment of the
dead before the dazzling throne, are imagery too. The reader
smiles at the idea that the good Esquimau will sit in Leaven
amidst boiling pots of walrus meat, while in hell the fish lines
of the bad Esquimau will break, and his canoe be crushed by
falling ice. But what better reason can the civilized man give for
the reflecting over upon the judgments of the future his present
experience in the imagery of criminal courts? The same process of
thought is exemplified in both cases. Can any one literally credit
the following verses:

"There are two angels that attend, unseen Each one of us, and in
great books record Our good and evil deeds. He who writes down The
good ones after every action closes His volume and ascends to God.
The other keeps his dreadful day book open Till sunset, that we
may repent, which doing, The record of the action fades away, And
leaves a line of white across the page."

No more should we literally credit the kindred phraseology in the
New Testament. It is free metaphor. The sultan may keep in his
treasury a book with the names of all his favorites enrolled in
it. Is it not a peurility to suppose that God has such documents?

When the Gospels and the Epistles of the New Testament were
written, the reappearance of Christ for the last judgment was
almost universally supposed by the Church to be just at hand. At
any instant of day or night the signal blast might be blown, the
troops of the sky pour down the swarms of the dead surge up, and
the sheep and the goats for ever be parted to the right and left.
Each day when they saw "the sun write its irrevocable verdict in
the flame of the west," the believers felt that the supreme Dies
iroe was so much nearer to its dawn. But as generation after
generation died, without the sight, and the tokens of its approach
seemed no clearer, the belief itself subsided from its early
prominence into the background. But as it retreated, and became
more obscure and vague in its date and other details, it grew ever
more sombre, appalling, and stupendous in its general certainty
and preternatural accompaniments. When the tenth century drew nigh
its close, a literal acceptance of the scriptural text that "the
dragon, that old serpent, which is the Devil and Satan, after
being bound in the bottomless pit for a thousand years," should
"be loosed a little season," filled Christendom with the most
intense agitation and alarm. From all the literature and history
of that period the reverberations of the frightful effects of the
general expectation of the impending judgment and destruction of
the world have rolled down to the present time. The portentous
season passed, all things continuing as they were, and the immense
incubus rose and dissolvingly vanished. And the Mediaval Church,
like the Apostolic Church before, instead of logically saying: Our
expectation of the physical return of Christ was a delusion,
fancifully concluded: We were wrong as to the date; and still
continued to expect him.

The longer the crisis was delayed, and the more it was brooded
over, the more awful the suppositious picture became. The
Mohammedans held that the end would be announced by three blasts:
the blast of consternation, so terrible that mothers will neglect
the babes on their breasts, and the solid world will melt; the
blast of disembodiment, which will annihilate everything but
heaven and hell and their inhabitants; and the blast of
resurrection, which will call up brutes, men, genii, and angels,
in such numbers that their trial will occupy the space of
thousands of years.

But in the later imagination of Christendom the vision assumed a
shape even more fearful than this. The Protestant Reformation,
when one party identified the Pope, the other, Luther, with
Antichrist, gave a new impulse to the common expectation of the
avenging advent of the Lord. The horrible cruelties inflicted on
each other by the hostile divisions of the Church aggravated the
fears and animosities reflected in the sequel at the last day.
Probably nothing was ever seen in this world more execrable or
more dreadful than those great ceremonies celebrated in Spain and
Portugal, in the seventeenth century, at the execution of heretics
condemned to death by the Inquisition. The slow, dismal tolling of
bells; the masked and muffled familiars; the Dominicans carrying
their horrid flag, followed by the penitents behind a huge cross;
the condemned ones, barefoot, clad in painted caps and the
repulsive sanbenito; next the effigies of accused offenders who
had escaped by flight; then, the bones of dead culprits in black
coffins painted with flames and other hellish symbols; and,
finally, the train closing with a host of priests and monks. The
procession tediously winds to the great square in front of the
cathedral, where the accused stand before a crucifix with
extinguished torches in their hands. The king, with all his court
and the whole population of the city, exalt the solemnity by their
presence. The flames are kindled, and the poor victims perish in
long drawn agonies. Now can anything conceivable give one a more
vivid idea of the terrors embodied in the day of judgment than the
fact that it came to be thought of under the terrific image of an
Auto da Fe magnified to the scale of the human race and the earth,
Christ, the Grand Inquisitor, seated as judge; his familiars
standing by ready with their implements of torture to fulfil his
bidding; his fellow monks enthroned around him; his sign, the
crucifix, towering from hell to heaven in sight of the universe;
the whole heretical world, dressed in the sanbenito, helpless
before him, awaiting their doom? Who will not shudder at the
inexorable horrors of such a scheme of doctrine, and devoutly
thank God that he knows it to be a fiction as baseless as it is
cruel?

Since the cooling down of the great Anabaptist fanaticism, the
millennarian fever has raged less and less extensively. But if the
literature it has produced, in ignorant and declamatory books,
sermons, and tracts, were heaped together, they would make a pile
as big as one of the pyramids. The preaching of Miller, about a
quarter of a century ago, with his definite assignment of the time
for the appointed consummation, caused quite a violent panic in
the United States. Several prophets of a similar order in Germany
have also stirred transient commotions. In England, the celebrated
London preacher, Dr. Cumming, whose works entitled "The End," and
"The Great Tribulation," have been circulated in tens of thousands
of copies, is now the most prominent representative of this
catastrophic belief. He has, however, made himself so ridiculous
by his repeated postponements of the crisis, that he has become
more an object of laughter than of admiration. Mathematical
calculations, based on mystic numbers transmitted in apocalyptic
poetry, are at a heavy discount. And yet there is a considerable
sect, called the Second Adventists, composed of the most
illiterate believers, and swelled by clergymen wrought up to the
fanatic pitch by an exclusive dogmatic drill, who lead an
eleemosynary life on mouldy scraps of Scripture, and anxiously
wait for the sound of the archangelic trump. Every earthquake,
pestilence, revolution, violent thunderstorm, comet, meteoric
shower, or extraordinary gleaming of the aurora borealis, startles
them as a possible avant courier of the crack of doom. Some of
them are said to keep their white robes in their closets all ready
for ascension. What a dismal thing it must be to live in such a
lurid and lugubrious dream; their best hope for the world the hope
that its end is at hand,

"Impatient of the stars that keep their course And make no pathway
for the coming Judge!"

But this excited and uneasy anticipation is now a rare exception.
In the minds of most intelligent Christians, even of those who
still cling to the old Orthodox dogmas, the day of judgment has
been put forward as far as the day of creation has been put
backward. Less and less do religious believers shudder before the
theatric trials depicted in heathen and Christian mythology; more
and more do they reverently recognize the intrinsic jurisdiction
in the structure of the soul, and in the organism of society. The
time is not far remote, let us trust, when the ancient spirit of
national separation, political antipathy, and sectarian hatred,
whose subjects identify themselves with the party of God, all
others with the party of the Devil, and cry, "How long, O Lord,
dost thou not judge and avenge us on our enemies," will give way
to that better spirit of philanthropy and true piety, which sees
brethren in all men, and prays to the common Father for the equal
salvation and blessedness of all. Then the faith of the self
righteous, who plume themselves on their sound creed, and so
relentlessly consign the heretics to perdition, gloating over the
idea of the time "when the kings of the earth, and the chief
captains, and the rich men, and the mighty men, and every bondman,
and every freeman, shall hide themselves in dens and caves, saying
to the mountains and the rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the
face of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb; for the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be
able to stand?"  then the temper of this faith will be seen to be
as wicked as its doctrine is erroneous. It will be recognized as a
remnant of the barbaric past in steep contradiction with the whole
mind of the modest and loving Jesus, who, when the disciples
wished to call down fire from heaven to consume his opponents,
rebuked them in words still condemning all their imitators, "Ye
know not what spirit ye are of." Many a bigoted and complacent
dogmatist, wrapt in that same ignorance to day, fails to read his
own heart, and obstinately shuts his eyes to the truth, foolishly
fancying himself better and safer, on account of his blind
conservatism, than he who fearlessly seeks the guidance of
science. Yet are not the principles of science as much glimpses of
the mind of God as any sentences in the Bible are? The whole
ecclesiastical scheme of eschatology is a delusion. No such
gigantic melodrama, no such grotesque and horrible extravaganza,
will ever get itself enacted between heaven and earth. Forever, as
freshly as on the first morning, the Creator pours his will
through his works in irresistible vibrations of goodness and
justice; and forever may all his creatures come to him unimpeded,
and trust in him without limit.

Away, then, monstrous horrors, bred in the night of the past!
Dreadful incubi! too cruelly and too long ye have sat on the
breast of man. The cockcrow of reason has been heard, and it is
time ye were gone. Fade, terrible dream, painted by superstition
on the cope of the sky, picture of contending fiends and angels,
fiery rain, a frowning God, and shuddering millions of victims!
Away forever, and leave the blue space free for the benignant
mysteries of the unknown eternity to lure us blessedly forward to
our fate. Come, believers in the merciful God of truth, lend your
aid to the glorious work of spiritual emancipation. In this benign
battle for the deliverance of the world from error and fear, every
free mind should be a champion, every loving heart a volunteer.
Free leaders of the free, forward! out of the darkness into the
light. Lift your banner in the front of the field of opinions
where all may see it, and then follow it as far as truth itself
shall lead. On! Progress is the eternal rule. Man was made to
outgrow the old and struggle into the new, as every morning the
sun mounts afresh out of the dead day, and drives the night before
him. Ignorance and despotism have crushed us long. But now, now we
fling our fetters off, and, marching from good to better, hope to
escape from every falsehood, and to conquer every wrong, under the
inspiration of the omnipresent Judge who executes his decrees in
the very working itself of that Universal Order whose progressive
unfolding will be fulfilled at last, not in any magic resurrection
and assize, but in the simple lifting of the veil of ignorance
from all souls brought into full community, and the illumination
before their opened faculties of the whole contents of history.
For we believe that all history is by its own enactment
indestructibly registered in the theatre of space, and that every
consciousness is educating to read it and adore the perfect
justification of the ways of God. The eternal immensity of the
universe is the true Aula Regis in which God holds perpetual
session, overlooking no suppliant, omitting no case.

CHAPTER III.

THE MYTHOLOGICAL HELL AND THE TRUE ONE, OR THE LAW OF PERDITION.


THE doctrine that there is a material place of torment destined to
be the eternal abode of the wicked after death is based on the
language of the Bible, supported by the aggregate teachings of the
church, and commonly asserted, though with a stricken and failing
faith, throughout Christendom at this moment. When any one tries
to show the unreasonableness of the belief in this local prison
house of the damned, arrayed with the innumerable horrors of
physical anguish, he is at once met with the declaration that God
himself has declared the fact, and consequently that we are bound
to accept it without question, as a truth of revelation. For the
reasons which we will immediately proceed to give, this
representation must be rejected as a mistake.

The popular doctrine of hell is not a divine revelation, but is a
mythological growth. It is a fanciful mass of grotesque and
frightful errors enveloping a truth which needs to be separated
from them and exhibited in its purity. In the first place, the
substance of the doctrine affirmed, the notion of a bottomless
pit, or penal territory of fire and torment in which God will
confine all the unredeemed portions of the human race after their
bodily dissolution, is something wholly apart from morality and
religion, something belonging to the two departments of
descriptive geography and police history. The existence or
nonexistence of a place of material torment reserved for the
wicked, is a question not of theology, but of topography. In
earlier times it was avowedly included in geography; and numerous
caves, lakes, volcanos, as at Lebadeia, Derbyshire, Avernus,
Nafita, Etna, and elsewhere were believed to be literally
entrances to hell. So famous and eminent a man as Saint Gregory
the Great, when the great Sicilian volcano was seen to be
increasingly agitated, taught that it was owing to the press of
lost souls, rendering it necessary to enlarge the approach to
their prison. With the increase of knowledge, the localization of
hell was subsequently by many authors, made a part of cosmography,
and shifted about among the comets, the moon and the sun, although
most people still think that it is the interior of the earth. But,
the best theologians of all denominations, the most authoritative
thinkers of all schools, now hold that the supernatural
revelations of God are limited to the sphere of the spirit, and do
not include the data of geology, astronomy, chemistry and
mathematics.

God is not a local king, ruling his subjects by means of political
machinery and external interferences; he is the omnipresent
Creator, spiritually sustaining and governing his creatures from
within by means of the laws which determine their experience, the
action and reaction between their faculties and their surrounding
conditions. Accordingly, the sphere of direct revelations from the
spirit of God to the spirit of man is limited to the implications
in the divine logic of the soul and its life, that is, to moral
and religious truths. The facts of history and cosmology are left
for the processes of natural discovery. Whether there be or be not
a localized hell of material tortures lies not within the domain
of revelation, but is a problem of physical science. And science
demonstrates, from the weight of the globe, that it is solid; and
not, according to the current belief, a hollow shell containing a
sea of flame packed with the floating hosts of the lost.

Furthermore, the only mode in which the truth of such a doctrine
could be made known is wholly aside from the method of
supernatural revelation. God does not utter his thoughts to his
chosen messengers in words or other outward signs as a man does.
Men communicate information to one another by voice, gesture,
drawing, writing or other mechanical devices. It is the natural
mistake of a crude age to suppose that God does the same,
breathing verbal formularies into the of minds of his selected
servants. But this is not the case. Revelation is not to receive
an announcement; it is to perceive a truth. Since God is infinite,
we cannot stand out against him and talk with him. Souls in finer
and fuller harmony with the works and laws of God, thus fulfilling
the human conditions of inspiration, are met by the divine
conditions, and obtain new insight of the ways and designs of God.
They experience purer and richer ideas and emotions than others,
and may afterwards impart them to others, thus transmitting the
revelation to them. For this new enlightenment, sanctification, or
rise of life, is what alone constitutes a true revelation. Now if
there be a local and physical hell, it is not a moral truth which
the inspired soul can see, but a scientific fact which can be
perceived only by the senses or deduced by the logical intellect.
If a man could travel to every nook of the creation he might
discover whether there were such a hell or not. But you cannot
discover a spiritual truth by any amount of outward travel. When a
soul is so delivered from egotism, or the jar of self will against
universal law, and brought into such high harmony with the spirit
of the whole, as to perceive this divine law of life, "He who
dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him," then he is
inspired to see a religious truth. He has obtained a divine
revelation. But we cannot conceive of any degree of exaltation
into unison with God which would enable a man to see the fact that
the centre of the earth or the surface of the sun or any other
spot, is a place of fire set apart as the penal abode of the
damned, and that it is crowded with burning sulphur and
unimaginable forms of wickedness and agony. Such a doctrine is out
of the province, and its conveyance irreconcilable with the method
of revelation, which consists not in an exterior communication of
scientific facts to messengers selected to receive them, but in an
interior unveiling of religious truths to souls prepared to see
them.

In the next place, we maintain, that the doctrine of a local hell,
a guarded and smoking dungeon of the damned, ought not to be
regarded as a truth contained in a revelation from God, because it
is plainly proved by historic evidence to be a part of the
mythology of the world, a natural product of the poetic
imagination of ignorant and superstitious men. In all ages and
lands men have recognized the difference between the good and the
bad, merit and crime; have seen that innocence and virtue
represented the permanent conditions of human welfare, that guilt
and vice represented the insurrection of private or lower and
transient desire against public or higher and more lasting good;
and have felt that the former deserved to be praised and rewarded,
the latter to be blamed and punished. In all ages and all nations
society has teemed with devices for the distribution of these
returns, prizes to the meritorious, penalties to the derelict.
There is scarcely any evil discoverable in nature or inventable in
art which has not been used as a means for the punishment of
criminals. Enemies captured in battle, or seized by the minions of
despots, violators of the laws of the community, arraigned before
judicial tribunals, have been in every country subjected to every
species of penalty, such as slavery, imprisonment, banishment,
fine, stripes, dismemberment. They have been starved, frozen,
burned, hung, drowned, strangled by serpents, devoured by wild
beasts. The rebellious and hated offenders of the king, while he
banquets in his illuminated palace with his faithful servants and
favorites around him, are exiled into outer darkness, fettered in
dungeons, plied with every conceivable indignity and misery,
bastinadoed, bowstrung, or torn in pieces with lingering torture.
Here we have the germ of hell. To get the fully developed popular
doctrine of hell it is only necessary to concentrate and aggravate
the known evils of this world, the horrible sufferings inflicted
on criminals and enemies here, and transfer the vindictive and
pitiable mass of wretchedness over into the future state as a
representation of the doom God has there prepared for his foes.
Earthly rulers and their practice, the most impressive scenes and
acts experienced among men, have always hitherto furnished the
types of thought applied to illustrate the unknown details of the
hereafter. The judge orders the culprit to be disgraced, scourged,
put in the stocks, or cropped and transported. The sultan hurls
those he hates into the dungeon, upon the gibbet or into the
flame, with every accompaniment of mockery and pain. So, an
imaginative instinct concludes, God will deal with all who offend
him. They will be excluded from his presence, imprisoned and
tormented forever.

This whole process of comparison and inference, natural as it is,
is one prolonged fallacy exemplifying the very essence of all
mythological construction in contrast both with inspired
perception and logical reasoning. The revealing arrival of a truth
in consciousness is when an intuitive thrill announces the action
of our faculties in correspondence with some relation in the
reality of things. Mythology is the deceptive substitute for this,
employed when we arbitrarily project forms of our present
experience into the unknown futurity, and then hold the resultant
fancies as a rigid belief, or regard them as actual knowledge.
This is exactly what has happened in the case of the doctrine of
an eternal physical hell beyond the grave. The natural and
punitive horrors of the present state have been collected,
intensified, dilated, and thrown into the future as a world of
unmitigated sin and wrath and anguish, a consolidated image of the
vengeance of God on his insurgent subjects.

Now the true desideratum, the only result on which reason can
rest, whenever tests are applied to our beliefs, is this: that
what is known be scientifically set forth in distinct definitions;
that what is unknown be treated provisionally, with theoretic
approaches; and that what is absolutely unknowable be fixedly
recognized as such. This regulative principle of thought is
grossly violated in every particular by the popular belief in a
material hell.

Wherever we look at the prevalent doctrines of hell among
different peoples, from the rudest to the most refined, we see
them reflecting into the penal arrangements of the other world the
leading features of their earthly experience of natural, domestic,
judicial, and political evils. The hells of the inhabitants of the
frigid zones are icy and rocky; those of the inhabitants of the
torrid zones are fiery and sandy. Are not the poetic process and
its sophistry clear? Nastrond, the hell of the Northmen, is a
vast, hideous and grisly dwelling, its walls built of adders whose
heads, turned inward, continually spew poison which forms a lake
of venom wherein all thieves, cowards, traitors, perjurers and
murderers, eternally swim. Is this revelation, science, logic, or
is it mythology?

The Egyptian priests taught, and the people seemed to have
implicitly trusted the tale, that there was a long series of hells
awaiting the disembodied souls of all who had not scrupulously
observed the ritual prescribed for them, and secured the pass
words and magical formulas necessary for the safe completion of
the post mortal journey. The specifications and pictures of the
terrors and distresses provided in the various hells are vivid in
the extreme, including ingenious paraphrases of every sort of
penalty and pang known in Egypt. The same thing may be affirmed
with quadruple emphasis of the Hindu doctrine of future
punishment. In the Hindu hells, truly, the possibilities of horror
are exhausted. To enumerate their sufferings in anything like
their own detail would require a large volume. The Vishnu Parana
names twenty eight distinct hells, assigning each one to a
particular class of sinners; and it adds that there are hundreds
of others, in which the various classes of offenders undergo the
penalties of their misdeeds. There are separate hells for thieves,
for liars, for those who kill a cow, for those who drink wine, for
those who insult a priest, and so on. Some of the victims are
chained to posts of red hot steel and lashed with flexible flames:
others are forced to devour the most horrible filth. Some are
mangled and eaten by ravenous birds, others are squeezed into
chests of fire and locked up for millions of years. These examples
may serve as a small specimen of the infernal ingenuity displayed
in the descriptions of the Hindu hells, which are all of one
substantial pattern, however varied in the embroidery.

The Parsees hold that when a bad man dies his soul remains by the
body three days and nights, seeing all the sins it has ever
committed, and anxiously crying, "Whither shall I go? Who will
save me?" On the fourth day devils come and thrust the bad soul
into fetters and lead it to the bridge that reaches from earth to
heaven. The warder of the bridge weighs the deeds of the wicked
soul in his balance, and condemns it. The devils then fling the
soul down and beat it cruelly. It shrieks and groans, struggles,
and calls for help; but all in vain. It is forced on toward hell,
when it is suddenly met by a hideous and hateful maiden. It
demands, "Who art thou, O, maiden, uglier and more detestable than
I ever saw in the world?" She replies, "I am no maiden; I am thine
own wicked deeds, O, thou hateful unbeliever furnished with bad
thoughts and words." After further disagreeable adventures, the
soul is plunged into the abode of the devil, where the darkness
and foul odor are so thick that they can be grasped. Fed with
horrid viands, such as snakes, scorpions, poison, there the wicked
soul must remain until the day of resurrection.

Now, no enlightened Christian scholar or thinker will hesitate
with one stroke to brush away all the details of these pagan
descriptions of hell, as so much mythological rubbish, leaving
nothing of them but the bare truth that there is a retribution for
the guilty soul in the future as in the present. But, in the
ecclesiastical doctrine of hell, prevalent in Christendom, we see
the full equivalents of the baseless fancies and superstitions
incorporated in these other doctrines. If the mythological hells
of the heathen nations are not a revelation from God, neither is
that of the Christians; for they are fundamentally alike, all
illustrating the same fallacy of the imaginative association of
things known, and the transference of them to things unknown. Not
a single argument can the Christian urge in behalf of his local
hell which the Scandinavian, the Egyptian, the Hindu or the
Persian, would not urge in behalf of his.

We can actually trace the historic development of the orthodox
belief in a material hell from its simple beginning to its
subsequent monstrousness of detail. The Hebrew Sheol or
underworld, the common abode of the dead, is depicted in the Old
Testament as a vast, slumberous, shadowy, subterranean realm,
gloomy and silent. It grew out of the grave in this manner. The
dead man was buried in the ground. The imagination of the
survivors followed him there and brooded on the idea of him there.
The image of him survived in their minds, as a free presence
existing and moving wherever their conscious thought located him.
The grave expanded for him, and one grave opened into another
adjoining one, and shade was added to shade in the cavernous space
thus provided; just as the sepulchres were associated in the
burial place, and as the family of the dead were associated in the
recollection of the remaining members. Thus Sheol was an
imaginative dilatation of the grave.

But it was dark and still; an obscure region of painless rest and
peace. How came the notions of punishment, fire, brimstone, and
kindred imagery, to be connected with it? We might safely say in
general that these ideas were joined with the supposed world of
the dead, by the Hebrews, in the same way that a similar result
has been reached by almost every other civilized nation, that is,
by a reflection into the future state of the retributive terrors
experienced here. Since the sharpest torture known to us in this
world is that inflicted by fire, it is perfectly natural that men,
in imagining the punishments to be inflicted on his victims in the
next world by one who has at his command all possible modes of
pain, should think of the application of fire there. But happily,
we are not left to this possible conjecture.

Few influences sank more deeply into the Hebrew mind then the
legend how the earth opened her mouth and swallowed into Sheol,
Korah and Dathan and Abiram, the rebels against the authority of
Moses, at the same time that fire fell from Jehovah and consumed
two hundred and fifty of their confederates. In this story,
rebellion against a prophet of God, fire and submersion in Sheol,
are fused into one thought as a type of the future punishment of
the wicked.

But another narrative has been of far greater importance in this
direction, namely, the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah. The
Cities of the Plain were situated on a sulphur freighted and
volcanic soil. They were inhabited by a people specially abandoned
to vices, and specially odious to the chosen people of God. When a
terrible eruption took place, overwhelming those cities with all
their people, and swallowing them under a flood of bituminous
flame, ashes and gas, it was natural that the Hebrews in after
time should say that Jehovah had rained fire and brimstone from
heaven on his enemies, and then that the history should take form
in their proud and pious imaginations as a fixed type of the doom
of the wicked. So it did.

At a later period the scenes and events in Gehenna, or the Valley
of Hinnom in the outskirts of Jerusalem, confirmed this tendency
and completed the Jewish picture of hell. In this detested vale
the worship of Moloch was once celebrated by roasting children
alive in the brazen arms of the god, in whose hollow form a fierce
fire was kept up, and around whose shrine gongs were beaten and
hymns howled to drown the shrieks of the victims. Here all the
refuse and offal of the city was carried and consumed, in a
conflagration whose fire was never quenched, and amidst an
uncleanness whose worms never died. This imagery, too, was cast
over into the future state as a representation of the fate
awaiting the wicked.

Still further, it was the custom of some Oriental kings to have
criminals of an especially revolting character, or the objects of
their own particular hatred, flung into a furnace of fire, and
there burned alive before the eyes of their judges. The example of
this given in the Book of Daniel, where Nebuchadnezzar had the
furnace heated seven times hotter than was wont, and ordered
Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego cast into it, furnished both the
Jews and the Christians with another type of the punishment of
hell. So striking an image could hardly fail to take effect, and
to be often reproduced. It occurs repeatedly in the New Testament.
The old dragon, the devil, as the Apocalypse says, is to be
chained and cast into a furnace of fire. In the writings of the
Church fathers, and in the visions of the monks of the Middle Age,
this image constantly occupies a conspicuous place. And thus,
finally, the common notion of hell became an underground world of
burning brimstone, an enormous furnace or lake of fire, full of
fiends and shrieking souls.

Tundale, an Irish monk of the Twelfth century, describes the devil
in the midst of hell, fastened to a blazing gridiron by red hot
chains, The screams echo from the rafters, but with his hands he
seizes lost souls, crushes them like grapes between his teeth, and
with his breath draws them down the fiery caverns of his throat.
Some of the damned the chronicler describes as suspended by their
tongues, some sawn asunder, some alternately plunged into caldrons
of fire and baths of ice, some gnawed by serpents, some beaten on
an anvil and welded into one mass, some boiled and strained
through a cloth. The defenders of the orthodox doctrine of hell
will admit that this terrible picture is mere mythology; but they
will say it is the product of a benighted age, and long since
outgrown. Yet it is no more mythological than the declarations in
the Apocalypse which are still literally accredited by multitudes
of the believing. And what shall be said of the following extract
from a little book called "The Sight of Hell," recently published
with high ecclesiastical endorsement, for circulation among the
children of Great Britain and America? The writer, the Rev. J.
Furniss, describes the different dungeons of hell, and the passage
which we quote is but a fair specimen of the entire series of
tracts which he has collected in a volume, and which is having a
large sale at this very time. "In the middle of the fourth dungeon
there is a boy. His eyes are burning like two burning coals. Two
long flames come out of his ears. He opens his mouth, and blazing
fire rolls out. But listen! there is a sound like a kettle
boiling. The blood is boiling in the scalded veins of that boy.
The brain is boiling and bubbling in his head. The marrow is
boiling in his bones. There is a little child in a red hot oven.
Hear how it screams to come out. See how it turns and twists
itself about in the fire. It beats its head against the roof of
the oven. It stamps its little feet on the floor. Very likely God
saw that this child would get worse and worse, and never repent,
and thus would have to be punished much more in hell. So God in
his mercy called it out of the world in its early childhood." Of
these diabolical horrors, drawn out through hundreds of pages, the
orthodox Protestant may say, "Oh, this is only a piece of Popish
superstition. We all repudiate it as a most repulsive and absurd
fancy."

Well, what then will he say if representations, though perhaps not
quite so grossly graphic in circumstance, yet absolutely identical
in principle, are set before him from the fresh utterances of
hundreds of the most distinguished Baptist, Methodist,
Presbyterian, Episcopalian preachers and theologians? It would be
easy to present whole volumes of apposite citations. But two or
three will be enough. John Henry Newman in that one of his
parochial sermons, entitled, "On the Individuality of the Soul,"
gives us accounts of hell which for unshrinking detail of
materiality will compare with the most frightful passages of
Oriental mythology. George Bull, Lord Bishop of Saint Davids, in
his volume of sermons declares that all who die with any sin
unrepented of, "are immediately consigned to a place and state of
irreversible misery a place of horrid darkness where there shines
not the least glimmering of light or comfort." Mr. Spurgeon
asserts, "There is a real fire in hell a fire exactly like that
which we have on earth, except that it will torture without
consuming. When thou diest thy soul will be tormented alone in
hell: but at the day of judgment thy body shall join thy soul, and
then thou wilt have twin hells, body and soul together, each
brimfull of pain; thy soul sweating in its inmost pores drops of
blood, and thy body, from head to foot, suffused with agony; not
only conscience, judgment, memory, all tormented, but thy head
tormented with racking pain, thine eyes starting from their
sockets with sights of blood and woe; thine ears tormented with
horrid noises; thy heart beating high with fever; thy pulse
rattling at an enormous rate in agony; thy limbs cracking in the
fire, and yet unburned; thyself put in a vessel of hot oil,
pained, yet undestroyed. Ah! fine lady, who takest care of thy
goodly fashioned face, that fair face shall be scarred with the
claws of fiends. Ah! proud gentleman, dress thyself in goodly
apparel for the pit; come to hell with powdered hair. It ill
becomes you to waste time in pampering your bodies when you are
only feeding them to be devoured in the flame. If God be true, and
the Bible be true, what I have said is the truth, and you will
find it one day to be so." Is not this paragraph a disgusting
combination of ignorance and arrogance? It is to be swept aside
and forgotten along with the immense mass of similar trash,
loathsome mixture of superstition and conceit, with which
Christendom has for these many centuries been so cruelly deceived
and surfeited.

Tearing off and throwing away from the vulgar doctrine of hell all
the incrustation of material errors and poetic symbolism, the pure
truth remains that God will forever see that justice is done,
virtue rewarded, vice punished. Then the question arises, In what
way is this done? Not by the material apparatus of a local hell.
For the doctrine of such a penal abode is not only a natural
product of the mythological action of the human mind in its
development through the circumstances of history, but when
regarded in that light it is clearly a false representation. It is
a figment incredible to any vigorous, educated and free

mind at the present day. Such reception as it now has it retains
by force of an unthinking submission to tradition and authority.
In the primitive ages, when the soul was imagined to be a fac
simile of the body, only of a more refined substance, capable of
becoming visible as a ghost, of receiving wounds, of uttering
faint shrieks when hurt, of partaking of physical food and
pleasure, it was perfectly natural to believe it susceptible of
material imprisonment and material torments. Such was the common
belief when the doctrine of a physical hell was wrought out. The
doctrine yet lingers by sheer force of prescription and
unthinkingness, when the basis on which it originally rested has
been dissipated. We know great as our ignorance is, we know that
the soul is a pure immateriality. Its manifestations depend on
certain physical organs and accompaniments, but are not identical
with them. Thought, feeling, will, action, force, desire, these
are spirit, and not matter. A pure consciousness cannot be shut up
in a dungeon under lock and bolt. A wish cannot be lashed with a
whip. A volition cannot be fastened in chains of iron. You may
crush or blast the visible organism in connection with which the
soul now acts; but no hammer can injure an idea, no flame scorch a
sentiment. What the spiritual personality becomes, how it exists,
what it is susceptible of, when disembodied, no man knows. It is
idle for any man, or any set of men to pretend to know.
Unquestionably it is not capable of material confinement and
penalties. The gross popular doctrine of hell as the fiery prison
house of the devil and his angels, and the condemned majority of
mankind, therefore, fades into thin air and vanishes before the
truth of the absolute spirituality of mind.

In those early times, when military, political, judicial and
convivial phenomena furnished the most imposing and instructive
phenomena, before exact science and critical philosophy had given
us their fitter moulds and tests of thought, it was unavoidable
that men should think of God and Satan as two hostile monarchs,
each having his own empire and striving to secure his own
subjects, and looking on the subjects of his adversary as foes to
be thwarted at all points. But when, with the progress of thought
evil is discerned to be a negation, the devil vanishes as a verbal
phantom, and the bounds of his local realm are blotted out and
blent in the single dominion of the infinite God who regards none
as enemies, but is the steady friend and ruler of all creatures,
everywhere aiming, not to inflict vengeance on the wicked, but to
harmonize the discordant, bringing good out of bad and better out
of good in perpetual evolution. Sound theology will see that God
is the pervading Creator who governs all from within by the
continuous action and reaction between every life and its
environing conditions. But mythology puts in place of this the
incompetent conception of God as a political king, governing by
external edicts and agents, by overt decrees and constables. This
deludes us with the local and material hell of superstition, which
has no existence in reality. Disordered Function is the open
turnpike and metropolis of the real hell of experience. The great
king's highway, leading to heaven from every point in the universe
is the golden Mean of Virtue; but on the right and left of this
broad road two tributary rivers, namely, Defect and Excess, empty
into hell. The only true hell is the vindicating and remedial
return of resisted law on a being out of tune with some just
condition of his nature and destiny. The fearful cruelty and
tyranny of the mythological hell, supported by the constant
drilling of the people on the part of the priesthood whose vested
interests and prejudices are bound up in the doctrine, have held
the human race long enough in their bondage of pain and terror. In
a Buddhist scripture we read, "The people in hell who are immersed
in the Lohakumbha, a copper caldron a thousand miles in depth,
boiling and bubbling like rice grains in a cooking pot, once in
sixty thousand years descend to the bottom and return to the top.
As they reach the surface they utter one syllable of prayer, and
sink again on their terrific journey. Those who, during their life
on earth, reverence the three jewels, Buddha, the Law and the
Priesthood, will escape Lohakumbha!" The same essential doctrine
resting on the same inveterate basis, selfish love of power and
sensation, still prevails, though diminishingly, among us. When at
last in the light of reason and a pure faith it vanishes away what
a long breath of relief Christendom and humanity will draw!

If we thus dismiss as a vulgar error the belief in a hell which is
a bounded region of physical torture somewhere in outward space,
it becomes us to acquire in place of this rejected figment some
more just and adequate idea. For a doctrine which has played such
a tremendous part in the religious history of the world must be
based on a truth, however travestied and overlaid that truth may
be. This frightful envelop of superstitious fictions cannot be
without some important reality within. In distinction, then, from
the monstrous mass of mistakes denoted by it, what is the truth
carried in the awful word, hell?

Denying hell to be distinctively any particular locality in time
and space, we affirm it to be an experience resulting wherever the
spiritual conditions of it are furnished. Accordingly, we are not
to exclude it from the present state and confine it to the future,
as those seem to do who say that men go to hell after death. Being
a personal experience and not a material place, many are in it now
and here as much as they ever will be anywhere. Neither are we to
exclude it from the future and confine it to the present state, as
those do who say that all the hell there is terminates with the
emergence of the soul from the body. This might be so, if all sins
discords and retributions were bodily. But, plainly, they are not.
A mental chaos or inversion of order is as possible as a physical
one. Hell is anywhere or nowhere, at any time or at no time,
accordingly as the soul carries or does not carry its conditions.
We are not to say of the sinner that he goes to hell when he dies,
but that hell comes to him when he feels the returns of his evil
deeds. It is a state within rather than a place without.

The true meaning of hell is, a state of painful opposition to the
will of God, misadjustment of personal constitution with universal
order or the rightful conditions of being. This is not, as the
vulgar doctrine would make it, an experience of unvarying sameness
into which all its subjects are indiscriminately flung. It is a
thing of endless varieties and degrees, varying with the
individual fitnessess. Hell is pain in the senses, slavery in the
will, contradiction or confusion in the intellect, remorse or vain
aspiration in the conscience, disproportion or ugliness in the
imagination, doubt, fear, and hate in the heart. There is a hell
of remorse, forever retreading the path of ruined yesterdays.
There is a hell of loss, whose occupant stands gazing on the
melancholy might have been transmuted now into a relentless
nevermore. Every sinner has a hell as original and idiosyncratic
as his soul and its contents. As the ingredients of evil
experience are not mixed alike in any, hell cannot be one
monotonous fixture for all, but must be a process altering with
the different elements and degrees afforded, and softening or
ending its wretchedness in proportion as the heavenly elements and
degrees of freedom, pleasure, clearness, self approval, beauty,
faith and love, furnish the conditions of blessedness. Hell being
the consciousness of a soul in which private will is antagonistic
to some relation of universal law, its keenness and extent, in
every instance, must be measured by the variations of this
antagonism. But how does such an antagonism arise? What are the
results or penalties of it? How can it be remedied? No amount of
reflection will enable any man to penetrate to the bottom of all
the mysteries connected with these questions. But though we cannot
tell why the principles of our destiny should be as we find them,
we can see what the facts of the case actually are as revealed in
the history of human experience. And this is what chiefly concerns
us. Let us, then, try to penetrate a little more thoroughly into
the nature of hell.

The rude definition of heaven and hell, regardless of any special
place or time, is respectively the experience of good, and the
experience of evil. But what are good and evil? Good is the
conscious realization of universal order, the absolute fruition of
being, the fulfillment of individual function, in accordance with
the conditions for the most perfect and prolonged fulfillment of
the universal totality of functions. Supposing that there were
only one instance and form of conscious life, with no possibility
of conflicting claims within or without, then good would be to
that life simply the fulfillment of the functions of its nature.
But the moment a being is set in relation with other beings like
itself, and also made aware of various gradations of importance
among its own interior faculties, then the definition of good is
no longer the simple fulfillment of function, or the mere
gratification of desire; but it becomes the fulfillment of
function in such a manner as to secure the greatest total quality
and quantity of fulfilled function. Now evil is the opposite or
negation of this. It is whatever lessens the fruition of life,
prevents the fulfillment of function, contracts or mars the
realization of universal order in the consciousness of a living
being. Thus evil is not merely the keeping of an individual desire
from its own proper good. But every gratification of desire which
involves the winning of a less important good at the expense of a
more important one is evil; or, on the other hand, the evil of
sacrificing or denying a gratification in itself legitimate,
becomes good when it is the means for securing a more authoritative
gratification. Let us try to make these abstract statements
intelligible by illustration.

The appropriation of nutriment is a good, the indispensable method
for sustaining life. It is right that we should eat and drink; and
the pleasure which accompanies the proper performance of the
function is the reflex approval of the Creator. The refusal fitly
to take and relish our food brings debility, disease, pain, and
premature death. Whether this refusal results from absorption in
other employment or from some superstitious belief, it is a
violation of the will of our Maker, and the consequent suffering
and dissolution are the retributive hell or reflex signals,
painfully pointing out our duty. On the other hand, if the
pleasure of gratifying appetite becomes a motive for its own sake
and leads to excessive indulgence, the superior good of permanent
health and vigor is sacrificed to the far inferior transient good
of a tickled palate. Thus, the dyspeptic over loading his stomach
is plunged into the horrid hell of nightmare: the gourmand,
pampering himself with a diet of spiced meats and Burgundy,
shrieks from the twinging hell of gout. There is no divine malice
in this. It is simply the rectifying rebound of the distorted
arrangements of nature. The law of virtue prescribes in every
respect that course of action which, on the whole, permanently and
universally, will secure the greatest amount and the best quality
of life and experience. Vice is whatever inverts or interferes
with this, as when a man exalts a physical impulse above a moral
faculty, or incurs years of shame and misery in the future for the
sake of some passing gratification in the present. God commands
man to rule his passions by reason, not slavishly obey them; to
exercise a wisely proportioned self denial to day for the winning
of a safer and nobler morrow. The degree in which they do this
measures the civilization, wisdom, moral valor, and dignity of
men. The failure to do this is the condition on which every
infernal penalty or reaction of hellish experience hinges. A man
may feed an abnormal craving for opium, until all his once royal
powers of body and mind are sacrificed, imbecility and madness set
in, and his nervous system becomes a darting box of torments. How
much better, according to the aphorism of Jesus, to have cut off
this single desire, than for the whole man to be thus cast into
hell.

Hell is the retributive reflex or return of disarranged order
experienced when in the hieriarchy of man higher grades of faculty
and motive are subordinated to lower ones. The miser who gives
himself up to a base greed for money, separated from its uses, is
thereby degraded into a mechanized, self fed and self consuming
passion, having no pleasure, except that of accumulating, hoarding
and gloating over the idle emblem of a good never realized. His
time and life, his very brain and heart, are coined into an
obscene dream of money. He knows nothing of the grandest ranges of
the universe, nothing of the sweetest delights of humanity.
Contracted, stooping, poorly clad, ill fed, self neglected,
despised by everybody, dwelling alone in a bleak and squalid
chamber, despite his potential riches, his whole life is a
conglomerate of impure fears welded by one sordid lust fear of
robbery, fear of poverty, fear of men, fear of God, fear of death,
all fused together by a lust for money. Is he not in a competent
hell? Who would wish anything worse for him? His vice is the
elevation of the love of money above a thousand nobler claims. His
unclean and odious experience is the avenging hell which warns the
spectators, and would redeem its occupant, if he would open his
soul to its lessons. So, when a burglar breaks into a bank and
bears off the treasures deposited there, scattering dismay and
ruin amidst a hundred families, the essence of his crime is that
he makes the narrow principle of his selfish desire paramount over
the broad principle of the public welfare, setting the petty good
of his individual enrichment above the weighty good represented by
that respect for the right of property which is a condition
essential to the life of the community. The principle on which he
acts, if carried out, would cause the dissolution of society. The
evil which he seeks to avoid, his lack of the means of life, is
incomparably smaller than the evil he perpetrates, the means for
the death of society. The resulting sense of hostility between
himself and the community, alienation from his fellow men and from
God, fear of detection, actual condemnation by his own conscience,
and ideal condemnation by all the world, constitute a hell felt in
proportion to the delicacy of his sensibility. The spiritual
disturbance and pain thus suffered are the effort of Providence to
readjust the inverted relation of his low self interest to the
higher interest of the general public, and remove the threatened
ruinous consequences of his sin by remedying the order it has
disbalanced and broken.

These illustrations have prepared the way for a statement of the
true idea of hell in its final formula. The will of God is
expressed in that gradation of goods or scale of ranks which
indicates the fixed conditions of universal welfare and the
accordant forces of the motives which should impel our pursuit of
them. To seek these goods in their proper order of importance and
authority, every level of function beneath kept subservient to
every one above, is the law of salvation, or the pathway of heaven
through the universe. To substitute our will for the will of God,
the intensity of private desires in place of the dignity of public
motives, putting the lower and smaller over the higher and
greater, is the law of perdition, or the pathway of hell through
the universe.

The lowest function of man is a simple momentary gratification of
sense, as, for example, an act of nutrition. The highest function
of which his nature is capable is the surrender of himself to the
universal order, the sympathetic identification of himself with
the eternal law and weal of the whole. Between those vast extremes
there are hundreds of intermediate functions, rising in worth and
authority from the direct gratifications of appetite to the ideal
appropriations of transcendental good, from the titillation given
by a pinch of snuff to the thrill imparted by an imaginative
contemplation of the redeemed state of humanity a million years
ahead. But, throughout the entire range, all the sin and guilt
from which hell is produced consist in obeying a lower motive in
preference to a higher one, making some narrow or selfish good
paramount over a wider or disinterested one. A man, educated as a
physician, practiced his profession on scientific principles, and
nearly starved on an income of seven hundred dollars a year. He
then set up as a quack, compounded a worthless nostrum, and, by
dint of impudence, advertising, and other charlatanry, made
eighteen thousand dollars a year, and justified his conduct on the
ground of his success. By falsehood and cheating he preyed on the
credulity of the public. If all men were like him, society could
not exist. The meanness of his soul, shutting him out from the
most exquisite and exalted prerogatives of human nature, is the
revenge which the universe takes on such a man the hell in which
God envelops him. A manufacturer turns out certain products by
means of a chemical process which adds seven per cent. to his
profit, but shortens the average life of his workmen five years.
All mankind would indignantly denounce him with an instinctive
recognition of his wickedness in thus erecting the profane
standard of pecuniary gain above the sacredness of the lives of
his brothers. But when of two men in deadly peril from an
approaching explosion only one can escape, and the stronger,
instead of monopolizing the chance, as he might, stands back and
lays down his life in saving the weaker, it is a deed of heroic
virtue, applauded by all men, supported by the whole moral
creation which derives new beauty and sweetness from it. It
radiates a peaceful bliss of self approval through the breast
before it is mangled and cold, and fills the soul with a serene
joy as it flies to God. The essential merit of such an action is
the subjection of that selfishness which is the principle of all
sin, and whose recoil is the spring trap of hell, to that
disinterestedness which is the germ of redemption and the perfume
of heaven.

It is not an unfrequent occurrence for a mixture of heaven and
hell to be experienced. Here is an able and upright merchant who
is about to fail, in consequence of disasters which he could
neither foresee nor prevent, and for which he is in no sense
responsible. He shrinks from bankruptcy with inexpressible shame
and distress. He is mortified, cut to the quick, robbed of sleep,
can hardly look his creditors in the face. Now, he reflects, "This
is not my fault. I have been honest, prudent, economical,
unwearied in effort, I have done my duty to the best of my
ability. God approves me, and all good men would if they knew the
exact facts." If that assurance does not shed an element of heaven
into his hell, spread a soothing veil of light and oil over his
stormy trouble, then it is because his pride is greater than his
self respect, his vanity more keen than his conscience is strong,
his regard for appearances more influential than his knowledge of
the truth. And in that case the misery he suffers is the penalty
of his excessive self sensitiveness.

The elements of hell are pain, slavery, imprisonment, rebellion,
forced exertion, forced inaction, shame, fear, self condemnation,
social condemnation, universal condemnation, aimlessness, and
despair. He who seeks good only in the just order of its
successive standards, gratifying no lower function, except in
subservience to the higher ones, escapes these experiences, feels
that he fulfills his destiny, and is an approved freeman of God.
The service of truth and good alone makes free; all service of
evil is slavery and wretchedness. For freedom is spontaneous
obedience to that which has a right to command. The thirsty man
who quaffs a glass of cold water does an act of liberty; but he
who constantly intoxicates himself in satiation of a morbid and
despotic appetite, knows that he is a slave, and feels condemned,
and chafes in the hell of his bondage.

The dissipated sluggards and thieves who feed the vices and prey
on the interests of the community, writhe under the rebuke of the
higher laws they break in enthroning their selfish propensities
above the cardinal standards of the public good; and in the stale
monotony of their indulgences, they know nothing of the glorious
zest shed by the best prizes of existence into the breasts of the
virtuous and aspiring, whom every day finds farther advanced on
their way to perfection. Envy is the very blast that blows the
forge of hell. It sets its victim in painful antagonism with all
good not his own, actually turning it into evil; while a generous
sympathy appropriates as its own all the foreign good it
contemplates. The sight of his successful rival keeps an envious
man in a chronic hell, but adds a heavenly enjoyment to the
experience of a generous friend. Ignorance, pride, falsehood, and
hate are the four master keys to the gates of hell keys which
sinners are ever unwittingly using to let themselves in, and then
to lock the bolts behind.

A character whose spontaneous motions are upward and outward, from
the central and lowermost instincts of self toward the highest and
outer most apprehensions of good, exemplifies the law of
salvation, which guides the conscious soul in an ascending and
expanding spiral through the successively greater spheres of truth
and life. The character whose spontaneous tendencies are the
reverse of this, moving inward and downward, exemplifies the law
of perdition, which guides the soul in a descending and
contracting spiral, constantly enslaving it to lower and viler
attractions of self in preference to letting it freely serve the
superior ranks forever issuing their redemptive behests and
invitations above. When the members of a family erect their
separate wills as independent laws, instead of harmoniously
blending around a common authority of truth and love, when they
live in incessant collisions and stormy insubordination, a
poisonous fret of irritable vanity gnawing their heart strings, a
fiery sleet of hate and scorn hurtling through the domestic
atmosphere, the whole household are in perdition. Their home is a
concentrated hell. To be without love, without soothing attentions
and encouragements, without fresh aims, and a relishing
alternation of work and rest, without progress and hope, to be
deprived of the legitimate gratifications of the functions of our
being, and compelled to suffer their opposites what closer
definition of hell can there be than this? And this, while avoided
or neutralized by virtue, is, in its various degrees, obviously
the inevitable result and penalty of sin.

The great mistake in the popular view or mythological doctrine of
hell has arisen from conceiving of God under the image of a
political ruler, acting from without, by wilful methods, and
inflicting arbitrary judgments on his rebellious subjects. He
should be conceived as the dynamic Creator, acting from within,
through the intrinsic order and laws of things, for the
instruction and guidance of his creatures. His condemnation is the
inevitable culmination of a discordant state of being, rather than
the verdict of a vindictive judge or the sentence of a forensic
monarch. Every retribution is an impinge of the creature in the
creation, and, so far from expressing destructive wrath, is an act
of the self rectifying mechanism of the universe to readjust the
part with the whole. With what pernicious folly, what cruel
superstition, men have attributed their own miserable passions to
their imperturbable Maker, breaking his infinite perfection into
all sorts of frightful shapes, as seen through the blur and
effervescence of their own imperfections! So the sun seems to go
down with his garments rolled in blood, and to set angrily in a
stormy ocean of fire: but really the great lamp of the universe
shines serenely from the unalterable fixture of his central seat,
and all this spectral tempest of blaze and glare is but a
refraction of his beams through our vexed atmosphere.

God being infinitely perfect, does not change his dispositions and
modes of action like a fickle man. His intentions and deeds are
the same here and everywhere, now and always. If we wish to learn
in what manner God will prepare a hell and punish the impenitent
wicked after death, we must not, as men did in the barbaric and
mythological ages, make an induction from the treatment of
criminals by capricious and revengeful rulers in this world; we
must see how God himself now treats his disobedient children for
their demerits here, assured that his eternal temper and method
are identical with his temporal temper and method.

Well, then, how does God treat offenders now? Incapable of anger
or caprice, he retains his own steady procedures and absolute
serenity unaltered, but leaves the culprits to endure the effects
of their perverted bearing towards him and towards the order he
has established.

If a man lies or defiles himself, or blasphemes, or murders, God
does not dash him from a cliff or cast him into a furnace of fire.
There would be no connection of cause and effect in

that; and to suppose it, is a gross superstition. He leaves the
offender to the reactions of his own acts, the discordant vileness
of his own degradation, the devouring return of his own passions,
to punish him for his sin, and to purge him of his wrong. The true
retribution of every wicked deed is contained in the recalcitration
of its own motive. What fitter penalty can the soul suffer than
that of being embraced in the hellish atmosphere of its own bad spirit,
to teach it to reform itself and cultivate a better spirit?

What, then, is the meaning of the fear, suffering and horror,
which so often accompany or follow sin? They do not, as has been
commonly supposed, express the indignation and revengefulness of
God. No, at their very darkest, they must suggest the shadow of
his aggrieved will, not the lurid frown of his rage. A part of the
discord which sin is and introduces, they denote the remedial
struggles of nature and grace to restore the perverted being to
its normal condition. If you put your finger in the fire the
burning pain is the reaction of your act, and that pain is not
vengeance, but preservative education. When some frightful disease
seizes on a man, the inflammation and convulsions which succeed
are the violent spring of the constitution on the enemy, its
desperate attempt to shake off the fell grasp, and bring the
organism to health and peace again. These efforts either succeed,
or in the exhausting shocks the body is destroyed. It is the same
with the soul. Sin is the displacement of the hierarchy of
authorities in the soul, the misbalancing of its energies, the
disturbance of its health and peace. And all the varieties of
retribution are the recoil of the injured faculties, the struggles
of the insulted authorities, to vindicate and reestablish
themselves. Now, these efforts, if the soul is indestructible,
must always, at last, be successful. Health in the body is the
harmonious adjustment of its energies with its conditions; and a
sufficient modicum must be obtained or death ensues. Virtue in the
soul is the harmony of its powers with the laws of God; the
measure of this is the measure of spiritual life; and granting the
soul to be immortal, the tendency towards a complete measure of
virtue must ultimately become irresistible, and every hell at last
terminate in paradise. The persistent forces or laws of the divine
environment steadily tend to draw the unstable forces or passions
of all creatures into harmony with them, and that harmony is
redemption. Perdition is consequently never, as the ecclesiastical
doctrine makes it always, a state of fixed hopelessness. Though we
make our bed in the nethermost hell, God is there. And wherever
God is, penitence and grace, reformation and pardon, have a right
of eminent domain between him and the souls of his children.

According to the common doctrine of hell as a physical locality,
and the predestination of all men to it through the sin of Adam,
birth is a universal gateway of perdition, the whole world one
open course to damnation for all except the few elected to be
saved through the blood of Christ. The orthodox scheme depicts the
lineage of Adam as a dark river of perdition, choked with the
souls of the damned, steadily pouring into hell ever since our
human generations began. But in addition to the refutation of this
terrible belief by its monstrous moral iniquity, science is now
doubly refuting it by the proof of the existence of the human race
on the earth for unnumbered centuries before the Biblical date of
Adam. So this fictitious gate of a fictitious hell is shut and
abolished. With it vanishes the horrible picture of this world as
floored with omnipresent trap doors to the bottomless pit, and
closed fatally around by a dead wall of doom, through which, by
one bloody orifice alone, the believers in the vicarious atonement
could crawl up into heaven. In place of this, we see the whole
universe as one open House of God, traversed in all directions by
the free entries of laws of intrinsic justice and love.

And so of the remaining theoretic gates of hell, unbelief, ritual
neglect, and the other technicalities on which priests and deluded
zealots have always hinged the perdition of such as heed not their
authority; none of them shall much longer prevail. With the wiping
out of the mythological hell all these fanciful entrances to it
likewise disappear. But instead of these visionary ones we should
point out and warn men from the substantial gates of the true
hell. Whatever is a cause of insubordinate and discordant fruition
in body or soul, individual or community, is a real gate of hell.
All the moral and social evils, intemperance, war, ambition,
avarice, the extremes of poverty and wealth, ignorance, bad
example, despotism, disease, every form of vice or crime, all the
influences that destroy or mar human virtue, excellence, and
harmony, are so many open gates of hell, drawing their victims in.
In holding back those who are approaching these fatal gates, in
trying to contract them, to shut them up here is a vital work to
be done, infinitely more promising than the brandishing of the
terrors of that material hell in which sensible men can no longer
believe. For the only true hell is the remedial vibration of truth
in an uncoordinated soul, even when not remedial for the
individual still remedial for the race.

It is not our outward abode, but our inmost spirit, that makes our
experience infernal or heavenly: for, in the last result, it is
the occupying spirit that moulds the environment, not the
habitation that determines the tenant. This is the substance of
the whole matter. An accomplished chemist, who was a good man in
truth, but a heretic by the standard of orthodoxy, died. Being an
unbeliever, of course, he went to hell. Seeing a group of children
in torment there, he pitied them very deeply, and straightway
began to devise measures, by means of his skill in chemical
science, to shield them from the flame. Instantly the whole scene
changed. The beauty of heaven lay around him, and all its
blandness breathed through him. Forgetting his own sufferings in
sympathy for those of others, he had obeyed the law of virtue,
subjecting a selfish desire to a disinterested one; and the
omnipotent God enveloped him with the heaven of his own spirit.
Another man, who was hard and cruel in character, but perfectly
sound in the orthodox faith and observances, died. It is true he
was an avaricious and hard saint, but then he believed in the
atoning blood; and so, of course, he went to heaven. No sooner did
he find himself safely seated in bliss than he tried to peep over
the golden wall into the pit of perdition, in order to heighten
the relish of his favored lot by the contrast of the agonies of
the lost. Instantly the celestial scenery about him was changed
into infernal, and, by the radiation and return of his own bad
spirit, he found himself plunged into hell and writhing under its
retributive experience. His character exemplified the law of
perdition, enthroning selfishness over disinterestedness,
subverting the order of virtue; and the insulted will of God made
his imagined heaven a real hell.

Hell is revealed in the experience of the world as a diminishing
quantity through the successive periods since war, cannibalism and
slavery were universal. Will not the progressive process terminate
in the utter extinction of it, paradise everywhere steadily
encroaching on purgatory until at last the whole universe of matter
and spirit composes an unbroken heaven?

According to the nebular hypothesis, the entire creation was once
a measureless chaos  confusion, conflict, collisions, explosions,
making a universal hell of matter. But the discords and
perturbations grew ever less and less, regularity and order more
and more, as suns and planets and moons took form and wheeled in
their gleaming circles, till now the mazy web of worlds is weaving
throughout space the perfect harmony of the creative design. The
evolution of incarnate spiritual destinies began later, and is
more complex than the material, each mind being as complicated as
the whole galaxy. May we not trust that at last it shall be as
complete as the evolution of the astronomic motions already is,
and a divine empire of holy and happy men be the goal of history?
This hope carries the cross through hell, and leaves nothing
unredeemed.

CHAPTER IV.

THE GATES OF HEAVEN; OR, THE LAW OF SALVATION IN ALL WORLDS.

HEAVEN, in the crude fancy of mankind, has generally been
conceived as a definite, exclusive, material abode; either some
elysian clime on the surface of the earth; or some happy isle
beyond the setting sun; or this whole globe, renovated by fire and
peopled with a risen and ransomed race; or else some halcyon spot
in the sky, curtained with inaccessible splendor and crowded with
eternal blessings. It was natural that men should think thus of
heaven as a place whence all the evils which they knew were
excluded and where all the goods which they knew were carried to
the highest pitch, God himself visibly enthroned there in
entrancing glory amidst throngs of worshippers.

This was unavoidable, because, in an early age, before knowledge
and reflection had trained men to the critical examination and
correction of their instinctive conclusions, all the data which
they possessed would naturally lead them to imagine the unknown
God in the glorified form and circumstances of the most enviable
being their experience had yet revealed to them; and to paint the
unknown future state of perfected souls under the purest aspects
of the most desirable boons they had known in the present state.
It being a necessity of their uncritical minds to personify God by
a definite picture of imagination, and to portray heaven to
themselves as an external place, they could not do otherwise than
work out the results by means of the most intense experiences and
the most impressive imagery familiar to them. The highest idea
they had of man, purified and expanded to the utmost, would be
their idea of God; and the grandest and happiest conditions of
existence within their observation, enhanced by the removal of
every limiting ill, would form their notion of heaven. Both would
be outward, definite, local, and, as it were, tangible. Royal
courts with their pomp of power and luxury; priestly temples, with
their exclusive sanctity, their awe inspiring secrets, their
processions and anthems, would inevitably furnish the prevailing
casts and colors to the dogmas and the scenery of early religion.
For what were the most vivid of all the experiences men had among
their fellows on earth? Why, the exhibitions of the sultan with
his gorgeous ceremonial state, and of the high priest with the
dread sacrifice and homage he paid amidst clouds of incense and
rolling waves of song; the admission of the favored, in glittering
robes, to share the privileges; the exclusion of the profane and
vulgar in squalid misery and outer darkness. Consequently, except
by a miracle, these sights could not fail largely to constitute
the scenic elements for the popular belief concerning God and
heaven. What should men reflect over into the unknown to portray
their ideals there, if not the most coveted ingredients and the
most impressive forms of the known? The great thing, then,
inevitably, would be supposed to be to gain the personal favor of
the supreme Sovereign by some artifice, some flattery, some
fortunate compliance with his arbitrary caprice, and to get into
the charmed enclosure of his abode by some special grace some
authoritative passport or magic art.

But as soon as science and philosophy, and a spiritual experience
rectifying its own errors by reflective criticism, have created a
more competent theology it discredits all these raw schemes. It
teaches that God, being the eternal omnipresent power and mystery
which foreran, underlies, pervades and includes all things, cannot
justly be figured as a man, locally here or there, and not
elsewhere. He can be justly thought of only as the almighty
Creator of the universe, intelligible in the order of his works
and ways, but inscrutable in his essence, absent nowhere, present
everywhere in general, and specially revealed anywhere whenever a
fit experience in the soul awakens a special consciousness of him.
This conception of God the only one any longer defensible as the
Infinite Spirit, incapable, except in his various incarnations, of
particular local enthronement and uncovering to the outward gaze
of worshippers, necessitates a correspondent alteration in the
vulgar idea of heaven as an exclusive spot in space.

In every form of being, in any portion of the universe, the
central idea of a state of salvation, is the fulfillment of the
will of the Creator in the faculties of the creature, the fruition
of the ends of the whole in the consciousness of the part, the
congruity of the forces of the soul with the requirements of its
situation. If this definition be accepted, it is clear that no
mere place of residence, however excellent, can be heaven. That is
but one factor of heaven, and worthless without a corresponding
factor of a spiritual kind. Essentially, heaven is a divine
experience, not a divine location; yet constructively it is both
of these. Ever so serene and pure a space, perfectly free from
every perturbation of ill, and surrounded with all the outer
provisions of power and order, would be no heaven, until a
prepared soul entered it, furnishing the spiritual conditions for
the forces to run into fruition, for the melody of blissful being
to play. The material elements of the universe, so far as we know,
are unconscious dynamics. However perfectly marshalled, they can
by themselves compose no heaven. So the conscious soul, as far as
we know, is incapable of an independent and unrelated existence in
itself. All its experience, when ultimately analyzed, is the
resultant of the mutual relations between its own energies and
capacities and the forms and forces of things outside of itself.
When there is a right arrangement of right realities in the
residence, and a right development of faculties and affections
within the resident, and such an adjustment of the spiritual
states with the surrounding conditions, that, as these act and
react upon each other, the laws of the universe break into
conscious harmony, or the will of God is realized in a life of
blessedness; that harmony, that blessedness, is what we mean by
heaven; and the conditions of its realization constitute the law
of salvation.

Such being the true idea of heaven, obviously, it cannot be
limited to any particular locality. It may be here, elsewhere,
anywhere, everywhere, before death, in death, after death;
whenever and wherever the proper conditions meet inward state and
outward circumstances so adjusted as to produce an experience
which fulfills the will of God and realizes the end of the
creation. Hereafter this may be, as we know it now on earth, a
spiritual fruition in material conditions, or it may be something
altered in accordance with the varying exigences of worlds whose
details are as yet inconceivable by us, altogether hidden behind
the veil of futurity and our ignorance. But its one fundamental
condition, its eternal essence under all circumstances which can
possibly happen, must always be the same. Whatever changes await
the soul, embodied in a new form in the state after death, or
remaining in pure disembodiment; whatever be the relation of the
immaterial entity of mind to the circumference and contents of its
new home, it can be in paradise, it can command peace and bliss,
or any equivalent of these terms, only by the fulfillment of the
will of God in its being. Heaven is, therefore, the reconciliation
and unison of the soul with its divinely appointed lot, the
identification of the ideal and the real.

The will of God is expressed in the soul in the submissive
services and virtues of a pure and pious character it is expressed
in the outward creation by the unbreakable persistency of his laws
through all the aberrations and discords of accompaning evil or
limitation. Nowhere can it ever be an impossibility to conjoin
these and thus to make a heaven. The one thing which everywhere is
variable and evanescent, is evil, or the imperfect adjustment of
the creature with the works and designs of the Creator. The one
thing which forever stays, and steadily invites the intelligent
soul to its embrace, is good, that is, the opportunity to realize
the divinely intended correspondence of the relations in the part
with the relations in the whole, a serene movement of life through
the unison of the soul with its true fate. Now, the one predicate
which is essential in all things, without whose presence nothing
can be, is the will of God. Even could that will be violated or
withstood, still it would be there, upholding, forgiving, wooing
Salvation, or a life of conscious harmony, is capable of
realization, of course, wherever the means are offered for the
performance and enjoyment of the will of God; and the infinity of
his attributes necessarily makes that condition an omnipresent
possibility in the realm of free spirits. Therefore, heaven is not
outwardly limited to one place, or to one period, but may be
achieved at any time, and anywhere. This throws light on the
fallacy of the current, narrow doctrine of a limited probation.
The oriental belief that the action of the present is the fate of
the future unquestionably covers a profound truth. Yet, if there
is always a future there must likewise always be a present, and
the right action in this may forever redeem that. Probation is
limited by no decree, only by the duration of free being.

Although the essential element in the idea of heaven is forever
the same, it may be regarded in three different aspects, or on
three different scales as an individual experience, as a social
state, as a far off universal event. Heaven, as a private
experience, is the harmonized intercourse of the soul with the
divineness in its surrounding conditions. Heaven, as a public
society, is the blessed communion of blessed souls, a complete
adjustment of the lives of kindred natures. Heaven, as a final
consummation, is the publication of the vindicated will of God in
the total harmony of the universe, all individual wills so many
separate notes blent in the collective consonance of the whole.

But, for all practical purposes, we may overlook this triple
distinction and think of heaven simply as the correspondence of
the life of the soul with those outward conditions which represent
the will of God. And towards this conclusion everything, in its
profoundest and most persistent tendency, is bearing. In spite of
interruptions and seeming exceptions, it is towards this that the
entire confluence of forces and beings gravitates and slowly
advances. The universal law of evolution, in which a scientific
philosophy has generalized its most comprehensive induction, is
but a history and prophecy of the progress towards a moving
equilibrium of the totality of worlds and intelligences, which can
eventuate only in a universal heaven, or unimpeded completion of
the creative design.

Do we not see all creatures tending towards the perfection of
their respective types, every improvement selectively taken up and
carried on, every deteriorating deviation eliminated, all errors
and failures doomed to perish or change into new conditions for
more hopeful attempts? This confirms the faith first based on the
deeper argument. For, since the will of God is the one persistent
reality, the one all evolving and all inclusive power of which
evil is only the distorted and shadowy negation, that opposition
to the will of God which constitutes sin and misery, that discord
with him which generates hell, must prove an ever smaller
accompaniment of his plan, a transitory phenomenon ceasing in even
degree with the spreading conquests of his almighty purpose, as
race on race of creatures, and system on system of worlds, sweep
into the victorious harmony, until the boundless realm of being
shall be boundless heaven.

Heaven, then, in essence, is not merely a favored locality, not
merely a resigned soul, but the result of a combination of these
in a just relation. It is not a playing power in the material
environment nor an inherent attribute of the spiritual instrument;
but it is the music which flows from the instrument when it is
attuned to react in coordination with the acting environment.
Salvation, consequently, is not simply a divine place of abode,
not simply a divine state of soul; but it is these two conjoined.
It is the experimental deposit between the two poles of rightly
ordered conditions in the realm and rightly directed energies in
the inhabitant. Heaven, then, in the best and briefest definition
we can give, is the will of God in fulfillment, or the law of the
whole in uncrossed action.

Hell is the experience produced by the rebound of violated law.
Or, if we hold that, strictly speaking, a divine law is incapable
of violation; as every seeming resistance to gravitation is in
fact a deeper obedience to gravitation, then we may say, in more
accurate phrase, hell is the collision and friction of the
limitations of different laws. It is the discord of the part with
the whole. It is the antagonism of the soul with God. But the
perpetual preservation of a perfectly balanced antagonism with God
is inconceivable. It must vary, totter, grow either worse or
better. If it grows worse, it will finally destroy itself, the
aberrant individuality or malign insurgence vanishing in the
totality of force, as the filth of our sewers vanishes purely in
the purity of the ocean. If it grows better, its improvement will
finally transform the opposition into reconciliation, the evil
disappearing in good. Therefore, every being must at length be
saved from misery, if not by redemptive atonement then by
absolvent annihilation, and one absolute heaven finally absorb the
dwindling hells.

The question of chief importance to us in relation to heaven is,
How can we gain admission into it. The limitations of language
necessitate the use of imagery for the expression of religious
ideas: and there is no objection to it if it be recognized as
imagery, and be interpreted accordingly. Considering, then, that
beatific experience of which heaven consists, under the metaphor
of a city, what are its ways of entrance? How can we pass to its
citizenship?

The obstacles to our entrance exist not in the city itself. Its
gates are never closed. The supreme conditions of redemption are
spiritual, and not local or material. If there be within
no fatal impediments to the free course of the will of God, all
outer obstacles easily give way and cease. If we are ever to know
heaven, it is within ourselves that we must find it out. Whatever
abolishes that internal rebellion of the soul which makes its
experience a purgatory, whatever replaces this confusion with an
accord of the faculties, is a road to heaven. Whatever removes
vices and inserts virtues in their stead, attuning us to the
eternal laws of things, leads us through some gate into paradise.
And nothing else can no ceremonial artifice, no external
transference, no sacramental exorcism, no priestly dodge.

The same mistake generally committed in regard to the nature of
heaven, making it a mere local residence, has been as generally
committed in regard to the conditions of admission. They have been
made arbitrary, whereas they are intrinsic. They are inwrought
with the substantial laws of being. The idea of God being first
fashioned after the image of a sultan throned in his palace amidst
his courtiers, ruling an empire by his whims, it was but natural
that heaven, and the terms of entrance there, should be in a
similar manner conceived under the forms of court ceremonial with
its capricious favoritisms. Thus it has been supposed that by the
atoning sacrifice of an incarnate person of the Godhead
satisfaction has been made for the sins of the world, which was
hopelessly ruined by its original federal representative, and that
thus a pardon was offered to those alone who mentally accept the
formula of the correspondent belief.

According to this view, the only open gateway of heaven is faith
in the vicarious atonement, a baptismal passage through the blood
of Christ. Science explodes this narrow and repulsive doctrine by
demonstrating its irreconcilableness alike with physical fact and
with moral law, first tracing the affiliated lines of our race
back to many separate Adams in the shadows of an indeterminable
antiquity, and then showing that the divine method of salvation is
through substantial rejection of evil and appropriation of good in
personal character, and not through royal proclamation and
forensic conformity.

The plan of God for the salvation of men, as its culmination is
seen in Christ, is the exhibition of the true type of being, the
true style of motive and action, for their assimilation and
reproduction: but Calvinism, when fundamentally analyzed, reduces
it to a monarchical manifesto and spectacular drama working its
effects through verbal terms, acts of mental assent and gesticular
deeds. Every sound teaching of philosophy refutes this exclusive
and arbitrary creed. In fact, its fictitious and mythological
nature is obvious the moment we see that the will of God is
represented in those laws of nature which are the direct
articulations and embodiments of his eternal mind, and not in
those political regulations or priestly and judicial formalities
which express the perverted desires and artificial devices of men.
The wearing of a certain dress, the bending of the knee, the
muttering of a phrase, may flatter an earthly sovereign and gain a
seat at his banquets. But it is childish folly to fancy any such
thing of God. It is absurd to suppose that he has two schemes of
government, one for the present state, another for the future; one
for the elect, another for the reprobate; one for those who gaze
on the spectacle of the crucifixion and make a certain sign,
another for those who do not. His laws, identified with the
unchangeable nature and course of the creation, sweep in one
unbroken order throughout immensity and eternity, awarding perfect
justice, and perfect mercy to all alike, making the experience of
all souls a hell or a heaven to them accordingly as they strive
against or harmonize with the divine system of existence in
which they have their being. The mere acceptance of a technical
dogma, the mere performance of a ritual action, cannot adjust
a discordant character with the conditions of blessedness so
as to reinstate an exile of heaven. To imagine that God will,
in consideration of some technical device, place in heaven a
man whose character fits him for hell, or, in default of that
conventionality, place in hell a man whose character fits him
for heaven, is to represent him as acting on an eccentric whim.
And surely every one who has a worthy idea of God must find
it much easier to believe that men have mixed mythological
dreams with their religion, than to believe that the infinite
God is capable of despotic freaks or melo dramatic caprices.

The poor, odious figment that baptism with the blood of Christ
is the sole entrance to heaven, is rebuked by the sweet and awful
imperturbableness with which the laws of being act, distributing
the ingredients of hell or heaven to every one accordingly as his
vices disobey or his virtues obey the will of God.

In a universe of law where God with all his attributes is
omnipresent no trick can ever be the pathway into paradise. The
true method of salvation is by the production of a good character
through divine grace and the discipline of life. Thus, the real
law of salvation through Christ consists not in the technical
belief that he shed his blood for our redemption, but in the
personal derival from him of that spirit which will make us
willing to shed our own blood for the good of others.

There was, not long ago, called to her eternal home, a young
woman, who, by the sweet gentleness, the heroic generosity and the
unspotted fidelity of her whole life, deserves an exalted place on
the roll of feminine chivalry and saintliness. Not a brighter
name, or one associated with a more fearless and accomplished
spirit, is recorded on the list of those Christian women who
volunteered to serve as nurses in the great American war of
nationality. No soldier was braver, few were more under fire, than
she; still plying her holy work with unfaltering love and
fortitude, both in the horrid miasma of camps and before the
charge of cavalry and the blaze of cannon. Many a time, the
livelong night, under the solemn stars, equipped with assuaging
stores, she threaded her way alone through the debris of carnage,
seeking out the wounded among the dead, lifting her voice in song
as a signal for any lingering survivor who might be near. Many a
time she broke on the vision of mutilated and dying men, with the
light of love in her eyes, a hymn of cheer on her lips, and
unwearied ministrations in her hands, transfigured with courage
and devotion, gleaming on their sight through the sulphurous flame
of battle or the darkening mists of disease like an angel from
heaven. Receiving the seeds of fatal illness from her exposures,
she returned home to delight with her noble qualities all who knew
her, to make a husband happy, and then to die a contented martyr.
Meekly folding her hands, and saying: "Thanks, Father, for what
thou hast enabled me to do, and still more for the new home to
which thou art calling me now" she was gone. The cruel creed of
superstition says: "Since she was a Universalist, having no part,
by faith, in the mystic sacrifice of Christ, she is doomed to
hell." But every attribute of God, every promise written by his
own finger in the sacred instincts of our nature, as well as the
cardinal teachings of the New Testament, assure us that as the
victorious purity and devotedness of her soul bore her away from
the tabernacle of flesh, the welcoming Savior said: "Come, thou
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared from the
foundation of the world." And heaven swung wide its gate for her;
and excited fancy conceives that, as she passed in, there was a
gratulatory flutter of wings and waving of palms through the
angelic ranks.

In distinction from that hypothetical gate of blood, set up by a
crude theology in one narrow place alone, what, then, are the real
gates of heaven, which stand open throughout the realms of
responsible being? All the causes which bring the will of man into
consent with the will of God. Truth is the harmony of mind with
the divine order; beauty, the harmony of taste with the divine
symmetries; good, the harmony of volition with the divine ends.
Everything that secures these for us is an avenue into the
peaceful city of bliss. To be in heaven is to be a transparent
medium through which the qualities of objects, the reflections of
phenomena, the vibrations of aboriginal power, pass in blessed
freedom, without deflection or jar, and on which the mysterious
attraction of the Infinite exerts its supreme spell. To be there
in a superlative degree is to have a mind which is an
infinitesimal mirror of the All, and a heart responsive to that
mind, every perception of truth in the realm of the intellect
generating a correspondent emotion of good in the realm of
affection. Not any forensic act of faith in atoning blood, but
ingrained piety a modest renunciation before the reality of things
is the grand gateway of souls to the blessedness and repose of
God. Anselm, the great sainted Archbishop of Canterbury, said: "I
would rather be in hell without a fault than in heaven with one."
Can any defective technicality damn such a man? No; such a spirit
carries and radiates heaven is itself heaven. That spirit is God
himself in his creature, and can no more be imprisoned in hell
than God can be. On the other hand, any professing Orthodoxist
who, according to a horrible doctrine of the Calvinists in former
days, should hope in heaven to obtain a sharper relish for his own
joy by looking down on the tortures of the damned, and contrasting
his blissful safety with the hopeless agony of their perdition,
would find himself in hell. The infernal scenery, even there,
would burst on his gaze, its atmosphere of pain reek around him,
and the detestable turmoil of its experience rage in his breast.
The selfishness of his character, in steep contradiction to the
public disinterestedness belonging to the divine will, must invert
every proper experience of heaven. Could any conventional
arrangement, or accident of locality, save such a man, while his
character remained unchanged? No; such a spirit carries and
radiates hell, is itself hell.

A Mohammedan author says of the seventy three sects into which his
coreligionists are divided, that seventy two are wrong ways,
terminating in eternal damnation; the remaining one alone, in
which are the party of salvation, leads through the true faith
into the City of Allah. The same unwise bigotry, the same
unripeness of judgment, has been generally shown by Christians. It
is time they were ashamed of it, and allowed their souls to mature
and expand into a more liberal creed in fuller keeping with the
hospitable amplitude of the righteousness and goodness of God.
Everything that tends to bring the will of man into loving
submission to the infinite Father, to mould the structure of
character into correspondence with those established conditions of
rightful being represented by the moral and religious
virtues, is an open highway of salvation. And all the great
cardinal ordinations of life do legitimately tend to this result.
Therefore all these are gates of heaven. Some pass in through one
of them, others through another; and by means of them all, it is
decreed in the sovereign councils of the Divinity, as we believe,
that, sooner or later, every intelligence shall reach the goal.

First is the gate of innocence. Little children, spotless youths
and maidens who have known no malice or guile, the saintly few
among mature men and women who by the untempted elevation and
serenity of their temper have kept their integrity unmarred and
their robes unsullied, enter by this nearest and easiest gate.
Borne aloft by their own native gravitation, we see the white
procession of the innocent ones winding far up the cerulean height
and defiling in long melodious line into heaven.

The second gate is prosperity. Through this enter those to whom
good fortune has served as the guiding smile of God, not pampering
them with arrogance, nor hardening them with careless egotism, but
shaping them to thankful meekness and generosity. Exempt from
lacerating trials, every want benignly supplied, girt with
friends, they have grown up in goodness and gratitude, obeying the
will of God by the natural discharge of their duties, diffusing
benedictions and benefits around them. To such beautiful spirits,
saved from wrong and woe by the redemptive shelter of their lot,
happiness is a better purgatory than wretchedness. The crystal
stream of joy percolating throughout the soul cleanses it more
perfectly than any flames of pain can. And so the virtuous
children of a favored fortune, who have improved their privileges
with pious fidelity, move on into heaven.

Then the third gate is victory. This is more arduous of approach,
and yet a throng of heroic souls, the very chivalry of heaven,
press through it, wounded and bleeding from the struggle, but
triumphant. These are they who have endured hardship with
uncomplaining fortitude and fought their way through all enemies,
seductions and tribulations. These are they who, armed with the
native sacrament of righteousness, inspired with a loyal love,
would never stoop their crests to wrong nor make a league with
iniquity the conquering champions who tread down every vile
temptation, ever hearing their Leader say, "In the world ye shall
have trouble and sorrow; but be of good cheer, I have overcome the
world."

Penitence is another gate of heaven. By the instructions of
Providence, by the natural progress of experience, the evolution
of wisdom, a sinner may become aware of the ingratitude of his
disobedience, ashamed of the odiousness of his guilt; be smitten
with a regenerating love of truth, beauty, goodness, God; and,
without waiting for the lash of an external judgment to drive him
the way he should go, by voluntary preference may grieve over his
folly and sin, and turn to his duty and his Savior. Then the
blessed gate of a spontaneous repentance stands open before him;
and through this hospitable entrance multitudes find admission to
the divine home.

Death often gives an otherwise unattainable deliverance, and so
yields the poor victim of unhappy outer conditions a passage to
heaven. It is a thought no less false than it is frightful, which
represents death as the vindictive turnkey of the creation, at
whose approach probation ends, and the shuddering convict is
thrust into hell, the hopeless bolt dropping into its ward behind
him. It is rather the divine messenger of deliverance for those
who are borne down here under a fate too hard for them. Oh, what
myriads of afflicted ones orphan children crushed by brutal
treatment; poor seamstresses starving in garrets; men and women
ground and grimed almost out of the semblance of humanity, in the
drudgery and darkness of coal mines; hapless suicides, who have
rashly fled from this step dame world, and whose alabaster forms,
purpled with bruises, are laid on the dismal beds of brass in the
morgue, where a ghastly light strains through the grates, and the
crowd of gazers sweeps endlessly on; unsuccessful men of genius,
unappreciated, neglected, cruelly wronged, their extreme
sensitiveness making their lives a long martyrdom to these what a
blessed angel is death, freeing them, setting them in a new state,
starting them on a fresh career, amidst fairer circumstances, in
front of better opportunities! To be saved, and in paradise, what
is it but to be a pure instrument to echo the music of divine
things? When the corruptible parts of the instrument are
hopelessly discordant, or the circumstances of its place here are
jangled with evils which it cannot overcome, then the
disentanglement of the spiritual harp, and the translation of it
to some finer sphere; where its free chords may ring their proper
music clearly out, are a blessed redemption, making death itself a
triumphant gate of heaven.

Retribution is the remotest and most difficult of all the heavenly
gates; and yet it is one, and one that is indispensable for many a
neglectful, halting, and obstinate child of man. It is an extreme
error to think punishment a gate of hell. It is rather a result of
being already inside, and it legitimately serves as an outlet
thence. Whatever may be the case with imperfect human rulers, in
the government of God no punishment is ever inflicted for the sake
of vengeance, a gratuitous evil. It is blasphemy to deem God
vindictive. He always punishes for the sake of good, to awaken
attention, produce insight and sorrow, and cause a reattunement of
character and conduct with the laws of right, seen at last to be
supremely authoritative and benignant, indissolubly bound up with
the truest good of each and with the sole good of all. On every
gate of hell may be written. Wherever retribution is actual,
salvation is possible, equivalent to the great maxim of
jurisprudence: Ubi jus ibi remedium! So, even the dark door of
retribution, when men will advance by no other way, leads them to
thoughtfulness, regret, and a redemptive readjustment of their
passions and acts. Thus it becomes the ultimate gate of heaven.
And, alas! what a dismal crowd of sufferers, refusing all shorter
and happier ways, wait to be drawn through this torturing passage
of remedial mercy! May the number entering by the other gates ever
increase, and those entering this dwindle! And yet, may it forever
stand open for the unhappy culprits who must be lost unless saved
here!

Besides all these gates, and commanding them all, there is one
everywhere accessible, and never shut on any soul which has the
grace to try it the omnipresent gate of resignation. Remove the
conditions of resistance, or friction, by a total surrender of
self will and an absolute acceptance of the Divine Will, and, it
matters not where you are, the essence of perdition is destroyed
in your soul. The utter abandonment of pride, a pious submission
to the laws of things, a glad and grateful acquiescence in
whatever the Supreme Authority decrees this is the unrestricted
way into heaven which waits before the steps of all who will only
exhibit the requisite spirit, and enter. Yes, let any being but
banish from himself every vestige of personal dictation before God
and unexactingly identify his desires with universal good; and,
even though he stand on the bottom of hell, heaven will be directly
before him through the open gate of resignation. For the organic
attitude of a pure and loving submission tunes the discordant
creature to that eternal breath of God which blows everywhere
through the universe of souls, sighing until they conspire with
it to make the music of redemption.

CHAPTER V.

RESUME HOW THE QUESTION OF IMMORTALITY NOW STANDS.

IN THE leading nations of Christendom, the belief in the
immortality of the soul has for some time past obviously been
weakening. The number of those who assail the belief increases,
and their utterances become more frank and dogmatic. A multitude
of instances, clear to every careful observer, prove this.
Especially at the present moment do examples of painful doubt,
profound misgiving, bold and exultant denial, mocking flippancy
and ridicule, abound on all sides, in private conversation, in
public discussion, and in every form of literary activity. The
hearty thoroughness and fervor with which the faith of the Church
was once held have gone from whole classes. Subtle skepticism or
blank negation is a common characteristic. Whether this tendency
towards unbelief be sound or fallacious, temporary or permanent,
it is at least actual. And it is important that we examine the
causes of it, and test their logical validity while tracing their
historic spread. Why, then, we ask, is the faith in a future life
for man suffering such a marked decay in the present generation of
Christendom?

In the first place, the faith pales and dwindles, from the general
neglect of that strenuous and constant cultivation of it formerly
secured by the stern doctrinal drill and by the rigid supervision
of daily thought and habit in the interests of religion. Never
before were men so absorbed as now in material toil and care
during the serious portion of their existence; never before so
beset as now during the leisure portion by innumerable forms of
amusement and dissipation. The habit of lonely meditation and
prayer grows rarer. The exactions of the struggle of ambition grow
fiercer, the burdens of necessity press more heavily; the vices
and temptations of society thicken: and they withdraw the
attention of men from ideal and sacred aims. More and more men
seem to live for labor and pleasure, for time and sense; less and
less for truth and good, for God and eternity. Absorbed in the
materialistic game, or frittered and jaded in frivolous
diversions, all eternal aims go by default. In what precious age
was maddening rivalry so universal, giggling laughter so pestilent
an epidemic, triviality at such a premium and sublimity at such a
discount? But the things to which men really devote themselves
dilate to fill the whole field of their vision. They soon come to
disbelieve that for which they take no thought and make no
sacrifice or investment. The average men of our time, as well
those of the educated classes as those of the laboring classes, do
not live for immortality. Therefore their faith in it diminishes.
Our fathers, to a degree not common now, walked in mental
companionship with God, practiced solitary devotion, shaped their
daily feelings and deeds with reference to the effect on their
future life. Thus that hidden life became real to them. Now the
interests and provocations of the present world, concentrated and
intensified as never before the strife of aspirants, the giddy
enterprises of speculation and commerce and engineering, the chaos
of caucuses and newspapers and telegraphs  monopolize our
faculties and exhaust our energies, leaving us but faint
inclination to attend to the solemn themes of the soul and the
mystic lures of infinity. To those crazed with greed, battling
with rivals or sunk in debauchery, God naturally becomes a verbal
phantom and immortality a foolish dream. There is nothing in
mechanism and mammon worship, nothing in selfish sloth and
laughter, nothing in cruel oppression and drudgery, to inspire
belief in the deathless spirituality of man. Among a people
prevailingly given over to these earthlinesses, faith in the
transcendent verities of religion perforce dies out. In the long
run the supreme devotion of the soul irresistibly moulds its
faith. Christendom does not live in conscious sacrifices and
aspirations for God and eternal life, but it lives chiefly for
selfish power and knowledge, money, praise and luxury. Therefore
in Christendom faith in immortality is decaying. But we believe
this decay to be temporary, the necessary transition to a richer
and more harmonic insight. The passing eclipse of faith in a
future life is destined by concentrating attention on the present
to develop its resources, realize the divine possibilities of this
world, unveil all the elements of hell and heaven really existing
here, and fully attune mankind to the conditions of virtue and
blessedness now. When this shall have been done the tangential and
fractional character of our experience will be so obvious, the
inadequacy of the earthly state for the wants of our transcendent
and prophetic faculties will be so urgent, and the supplementing
adaptations of the entire unseen but clearly divined future to the
craving parts in the present will be so manifest, that a complete
revelation of immortality will break upon the prepared mind of the
race. Then history will take a new departure in breathing
communion with the whole creation.

But infidelity to duty and privilege does not destroy the truth of
duty and privilege. It only blinds the faithless eyes so that they
cannot see the truth. If the immortality of the soul be a truth,
the materialistic absorption of our life would blind us to it and
make us deny it. Exclusive attention to the present would hide the
future from us, although its dazzling prizes, scattered on the
dark back ground of eternity, were burning there in everlasting
invitation and hospitality. Thus, while the eager worldliness of
our age practically vacates the faith in a future life, it does
not logically disprove it; but leaves it for the ultimate test of
the genuine evidence.

The second reason for the apparent rapid crumbling away of the
belief in immortality in Christendom is the recent wide diffusion
of a critical knowledge of the comparative history of the opinions
of all nations on the subject of a future life, revealing the
mythological character common to them, and tracking them back to
their origin in primitive superstitions no longer is their literal
purport credible to any educated intelligence. In many works by
theological writers, and by scientific writers, of free habits of
thought, like Strauss and Spencer, collections have been made of
the fancies and theories of mankind respecting the survival of the
spirit and the conditions of its experience after the death of the
body. These beliefs, it has been agreed, even among the most
enlightened peoples, rest at last on the same basis with the
crudest notions of the barbarians of the prehistoric period,
namely, the spontaneous workings of raw instinct and imagination.
Tracing the views of Christians as to the nature of the soul, and
the life to come in heaven or hell, back to the rude conceptions
of the naked savages who fashioned their idea of the ghost from
the shadow or the reflection of the man, which was a picture or
representative of him, yet without matter, and from the phenomena
of dreams, in which they supposed the spirit of the man left him
and went through the adventures of the dream and returned ere he
awoke it has been asserted that every form of later faith, however
refined and improved in details, yet really resting on such
puerile fancies, such incompetent and absurd beginnings, is
thereby discredited and must be rejected.

Now, it is true that when we find among Christian believers,
connected with the doctrine of a future life, an incongruous
medley of physical imagery and gross imaginative pictures,
conceptions of just the same character as the grotesque dreamings
of the earliest savages and the elaborate mythology of subsequent
priesthoods, we are required to treat the whole suppositious mass
as mere poetry or superstition, and to dismiss it from our faith.
But we are by no means justified in doing so with the essential
fact itself of a future life. The essential fact, the assertion of
immortality, may be true, even if the mythological dress be all
fictitious. It does not follow that man has no surviving soul
because the local heaven or hell, described by savage or priest as
its residence, is unreal. It surely is no correct inference that
the soul perishes with the body, because the barbarian mind
generalized its idea of the soul from the phenomena of shadows,
reflections, echoes and dreams. The critical scholar, who judges
the case fairly, will correct the fallacies of the confused
reasoning instinct, and relegate the mythology to its proper
province, but reserve his judgment on the question itself of
spiritual survival to be settled on the only appropriate evidence.
Although the habit thus formed by the critical scholar, and by
those who follow his authority, of sweeping away as wholly
untenable so many varieties of speculation, and so many groups of
images connected with the belief in a future life, has
unquestionably contributed powerfully to foster complete disbelief
in the doctrine itself, yet it is equally unquestionable that this
process of negation is illogical. Many a true doctrine has been
cradled in superstitions and absurdities. A faith supported by
many classes of independent arguments is not overthrown by the
disproof of one of those classes. It is as wrongful a procedure to
deny the immortality of the soul because barbaric instinct
grounded it on erroneous notions and enveloped it with falsehoods,
as it would be to reject the established laws of gravitation and
light and sound, for the reason that the various provisional
theories, preceding the correct ones, were ridiculous mistakes.
The problem to be solved is, Does the man who is now a soul in a
body remain a soul when the body dissolves? The inadequacy or
folly of a hundred provisional answers does not affect the final
answer. Instead of denying immortality because the childish mind
of the early world feigned impossible things about it, we should
change the question by appeal to a more competent court, and
inquire what Pythagoras, Augustine, Dante, Leibnitz, Fichte,
Schelling, Swedenborg, Goethe, thought about it. It is a question
for the consensus of the most gifted and impartial minds, the very
Areopagus of Humanity, to decide. Furthermore, on a deeper
inquiry, it seems clear that the real belief in immortality did
not originate from the contemplation of the phenomena of dreams
and shadows and echoes, but arose rather from the inexpugnable
self assertion of consciousness, its inability to feel itself non
existent. This persistency of consciousness, following it in all
its imaginative flights of thought beyond the death of the body,
was the cause of the mythological creativeness of the barbaric
mind. And thus the elaboration of the imagery of ghosts and a
ghostly realm was not the precursor, but the result of a belief in
another life. The belief sprang directly out of the feeling of a
continuous being unconquerably connected with human self
consciousness, and is independent of the imagery in which it has
been clothed, may clothe itself in endless forms of imagery, and
survive their removal on the discovery of their incompetence.

Besides, the savage himself was, after all, not so far out of the
way. His mythology was not a mere fiction concreted into fact by
superstition. He was on that track of analogy which, when cleared,
will be, perhaps, the luminous highway to universal truth. The
savage was obscurely conscious that the objects which appeared
around him as solid material realities had their immaterial
correspondences within his spirit. The tree, the stone, the
flower, the star, the beast, the man, had within him correspondent
mental images or ideas just as real as they, but without sensible
qualities, and incapable of hurt. With creative wonder he
recognized a symbol or analogy of this inner world in the shadow
and the reflection. The shadow or the reflection is a representation
of its original, but without material substance.

See, it lies there, wavering, on the rock, or in the water. No
arrow can pierce it, no club bruise it, no pestle pulverize it, no
chemistry disintegrate it. It is an emblem of the immaterial and
indestructible spirit, revealed in the outer world of matter,
where everything changes and passes away except the noumena under
the phenomena. No wonder it stirred the brooding fancy of the
ignorant, but prophetic primitive man, and made it teem with poesy
and personification.

Freely, then, let us brush aside the mythological extravagance and
irrational errors in the entire cosmopolitan doctrine of a future
life, but beware of rejecting the fact itself of immortality until
we have better grounds than have yet been afforded by the
accumulating insight of literary history. As the world moves on,
and the human mind develops with it, the crude must give way to
the mature, and the false be replaced, not with vacancy, but with
the true. The problem of the nature and destiny of the soul will
not be solved by tearing away the fictitious drapery thrown around
it, but by piercing to the roots of the reality within the
drapery.

And now we come to the third reason for the increasing doubt and
decreasing faith in regard to a future life: that reason is that
the form of the belief in it prevalent in Christendom has become
incredible, and the rejection of the form has loosened the hold on
the substance. The philosophic mind, which has attained to the
idea of the infinite God, without body, or parts, or passions,
omnipresent in his total perfection, can reason to the belief in a
kindred immortality for its own finite being. But since our
experience is here limited to the life now known, we are utterly
without data or ability to image forth such a conception of
immortality in any form of picture or mental scenery. There seem
to be only three ways in which we can give imaginative
representation of a future life. The first is the method of the
universal barbarian mind, which paints the life to come as a
shadowy reflex or copy of the present world and life, an
unsubstantial, graspless, yet actual and conscious realm of
ghosts, carrying on a pale and noiseless mimicry of their former
adventures in the body. Holding fast to that clew of analogy which
is the nucleus of philosophy in this view, but rejecting the rest
as fantastic figment, we arrive at the next way in which those who
are unwilling to leave their thoughts of the future life in empty
rational abstraction, portray it in vivid concrete. This they do
by means of the doctrine of a general bodily resurrection of the
dead.

It is a striking fact that four of the great historic and literary
religions have taught the doctrine of immortality under the form
of a physical resurrection, namely: Zoroastrianism, Judaism,
Christianity, and Mohammedanism. It has been attributed, also, to
the ancient religion of Egypt, but erroneously. Its belief there
is a mere inference from facts which do not really imply it. The
Egyptians plainly believed in a series of individual reincarnations,
not in any general resurrection. But it is a sufficiently
interesting and impressive fact that over one third of the human
race have embodied their expectation of a future eternal life
in this concrete and astonishing form. It has not rested on a basis
of reason, but on one of asserted revelation and authority. It
originated in the fact that the only life of which we now have
any experience is a life in the body, and, therefore, this is the
life which we instinctively love and prefer; also in the fact
that this is the only mode of life which we are able to
represent to ourselves in any satisfactory, apprehensible image.
It then bolstered itself up by arbitrary theological theorizings,
and proclaimed itself with sanctions of a pretended supernatural
authority. Slowly the minds of its disciples were drilled to a
familiarity with it, and to a habit of implicitly believing it,
which grew strong enough to make them hold to it in spite of its
difficulty as a sheer and violent miracle having no connection
whatever with the natural order of things. Authority and passive
habit long maintained the belief in unbroken sway. They still so
support it in the Mohammedan world, where there is almost no
science, but little skeptical thought, and a common uniformity of
abject submission to the word of the Koran. But in Christendom it
fares differently. Here, the knowledge of modern science and
habits of free inquiry are almost universally diffused. The
consequence is, since the chief Christian belief in immortality
has been identified with the notion of a general physical
resurrection of the dead at the last day, and since all
philosophical and scientific thinking refutes that notion by
setting its arbitrariness and monstrous abnormality in high and
steep relief against the consensus of demonstrated knowledge and
moral probability, that the popular belief of Christendom in
immortality itself is depolarized and swiftly dropping into decay
with a large class of persons. But this spread of doubt and
denial, while a natural process, is yet an illogical and
unnecessary one. The competent thinker will extricate the question
of the immortality of the soul from its accidental entanglement
with the doctrine of the resurrection, and, rejecting the latter
as incredible, still affirm the former on its own independent
grounds. To prove and illustrate these statements we must here
give a little additional study, fresh and independent study, to
the subject.

The doctrine of the resurrection of the flesh is bound up with the
whole fabric of the Catholic and Orthodox dogmatic theology of
Christendom, and cannot be removed without logically shaking that
system of belief into pieces. And yet the doctrine, as has been
shown in a previous chapter, is unscriptural and of a purely pagan
origin, the New Testament foretelling a resurrection of spirits
from the underworld, not of bodies from the grave. It has no real
analogies in the world, but is a figment of fancy, unsupported by
reason on any authentic physical or moral grounds. It is,
furthermore, a doctrine whose realization is impossible, because
it is a self destroying absurdity.

All that we need for demonstrating its absolute incredibility, is
simply to ultimate its implications, carry it out in thought to
the necessary results which its ignorant originators never
foresaw. The doctrine of a physical resurrection presupposes that
our race was originally intended to be immortal on earth, and that
death was a penalty for sin. Fill out the theory. Adam and Eve,
made male and female, were commanded to multiply and replenish the
earth. Their descendants, doubling every twenty five years, would,
after sixty or seventy generations had accumulated, have covered
the whole earth so thickly that they would be packed in one
immovable mass, the whole planet carpeted with their forms and
paved with their upturned faces. Not an inch of room on the globe
for any harvest to grow or any creature to move; the world,
crowded and imbedded at every point with one continuous multitude
of immortal human beings, would have then rolled around the
zodiac, presenting this chronic and motionless picture, to all
eternity!

If it be maintained that had it not been for sin and its penalty,
the successive generations would neither have died nor have
remained forever on the earth, but would have been translated
bodily to some other world, the absurdity just exposed is escaped
only to introduce another one equally glaring. For in time, the
entire solid contents of the globe would thus be removed, and the
disappearance of our planet unhinge the solar system and produce a
general cataclysm. The solid contents of the earth have been
estimated at about thirty nine trillions of cubic feet. Seventy
five doublings of the primal pair would reach to over seventy
trillions of human beings, each containing more than a solid cubic
foot.

It is perfectly clear, therefore, in any view, that the only way
in which the human race, with their reproductive constitution,
could permanently inhabit the world is by the present system of
successive births and deaths; a system, furthermore, which science
shows to have been in working existence among the preceding races
of creatures for innumerable ages before the mythical sin of Adam
and Eve, with its mythical consequences.

The fabulous scheme of an intended bodily immortality on the earth
is a discordant and disagreeable one in every respect, asthetic,
rational, and moral. It jars incongruously with the great order of
nature and providence, which everywhere interpolates a night
between two days, a sleep between two wakings, to keep the edge of
consciousness fresh and the possibilities of pleasure alive.
Imprisoned in this carcass of flesh with its ignoble necessities
for endless ages, the contemplation of the fearful burden of
monotony would be insufferable to any one who had thought the case
out in all its details with vivid realization. And yet, so
unthinking are most persons in regard to the conventional beliefs
prevalent in society,  Parsees, Jews, Christians and Mohammedans,
professedly base their entire faith in immortality on this dogma
with the resurrection involved in it.

When carried out in its particulars by the imagination, the
doctrine is self evidently untenable, contradictory to the
essential facts of human nature under the given conditions of the
material creation. It had its theologic birth in the speculations
of the dualistic religion of Persia, whence it was first borrowed
by the Jews, then secondarily adopted into Christianity, and
thence finally impacted into the mongrel creed of Mohammed and his
followers. It is philosophically irreconcilable with a pure
monotheism; for, if God be infinite, no enemy could subvert his
original scheme and force Him to an arbitrary miracle to restore
it. It is a creaking and dissonant artifice, every way repugnant
to all whose reason and sentiment have learned to love the smooth
and continuous evolution of the order of the cosmos and the
connected destinies of conscious beings. It is absolutely refuted
by the double reductio ad absurdum shown above to be contained in
it.

Yet, while the grounds on which the common belief in a destined
general resurrection of the dead rests have really lost their
validity to the mind of the nineteenth century, the millions of
Islam and Christendom retain the article unchanged in their
creeds, and to question it is a heresy. No wonder skepticism
flourishes and genuine faith decays. This clinging to an outgrown
scheme is not only from the strong drift of a passive mental
conformity, as the train of cars keeps on for some time after the
dynamic locomotive has been taken off. Another reason is that the
tenet is so centrally imbedded in the dogmatic ecclesiasticism
that it cannot be extricated without involving all the associated
dogmas. Therefore, one portion of this knowing generation repeat
the formula and blink the difficulties, while another portion go
over to open disbelief of any future life. The doctrine of the
literal resurrection of the body from the grave is incredible to
the educated and free intelligence of the age. In continuing to
affirm it ecclesiastical Christendom brands itself with frivolity,
not earnest enough to carry its thought in loyalty to truth as far
as possible, or with hypocrisy, consciously dishonest to its
doubts.

It is a precious boon to be rid of such an unnatural and ominous
belief as that in the final disemboguing of the dead by sea and
land, the tumbling of the rocks, the falling of the stars, and the
everlasting torture of the condemned in a prison of fire. Far
better than any such doctrine is a calm confronting of the mystery
of the future in its confessed secrecy as it is, and a peaceful
resignation to the will of God in conscious ignorance and trust.
And yet the believer in this scheme of colossal and ghastly
necromancy, when confronted with the unanswerable arguments
against it, is sometimes found clinging to it with willful
tenacity, and bitterly complaining of those who refute it, that
they would rob him of his faith and give him nothing in exchange.
Suppose a man to believe that in the year nineteen hundred the
earth will be exploded, and that all men, except himself and the
little clique of his friends, will be strung for eternity on a red
hot iron wire in empty space. Suppose that this horrid notion is
clearly proved to him to be an error. Then, because he is not
taught exactly what will happen in the year nineteen hundred, he,
the unhappy man, assails his enlightener for having robbed him of
his faith and given him nothing in exchange! Is not the truth of
ignorance better than the falsity of superstition? Modest faith in
front of the shrouded unknown can well stand comparison with the
arrogant and incompetent exultation of fanaticism. In regard to
that belated relic of the belief in magic, the doctrine of the
literal resurrection of the dead in their fleshy bodies, let us
gratefully wipe it all out and draw a long breath of relief. Let
us rejoice to know that the will of God will be done in the
fulfilling order of the universe, although we may now be ignorant
of precisely what that will is. Believing the will of God to be
good, whether revealed or concealed, we can afford to wait in
peace, trying in the meantime to carry our individual character
and our social state and experience here steadily toward
perfection. Surely, that is the best way to prepare ourselves for
whatever lies beyond.

And yet we are not wholly shut up to mere blind faith. There is
always some ground of moral truth in every widely extended
dogmatic belief. In casting off the dogma we should carefully
extract its moral purport and try to give it a more authentic
setting. It will not be hard to do this with reference to the
doctrine now under consideration.

Obscure and complicated and baffling as the problem of our future
destiny is, we can already trace many a line of light, many a
prophetic signal and hint suggestive of what is ordained to happen
to the individual and the race.

Unquestionably, the genuine moral reason why the belief in the
fleshly resurrection has been so general and tenacious is the two
fold consideration: first; that we desire our future life to be an
incarnate life because our experience makes that form of being
realizable and precious to our imagination, while a disembodied
ghostliness is, perforce, repulsively vacant and abstract; and,
secondly because our affection and our imagination and our
conscience profoundly crave the complete fulfillment of the scheme
of the historic career of collective humanity in this world in
some such manner, that here, on this dear old earth, the
experience of our whole race may be brought to a clear epical
unity, and may close with an illuminating justification of
providence in the sight of all men, who shall then read the
interpretation of their entire past, and see together eye to eye.
Now we believe that the essence of this natural desire and this
sublime hope is a divine prophecy which shall be fulfilled. We
believe that in the very falsity of the doctrine of a carnal
resurrection and judgment there lurks a truth yet to break out in
overwhelming refulgence and perfectly satisfy every soul of man.
But it will be brought about by the gradual culmination of the
means and processes which God is now visibly carrying forward, and
not by any sudden convulsion of miracle.

The faculties of human consciousness in the individual and the
race are in process of development. Also the transmissible sum of
knowledge, on which those faculties employ themselves, is in
process of rapid increase. The faculties of knowledge possessed by
an accomplished master of literature and science now, contrasted
with those of a cannibal savage of the pre glacial epoch, reveal
an advance which hardly needs to be repeated in order to give us a
comprehension of the whole experience of our kind on earth, quite
ample to explain the facts of the case and solve the problem of
our destiny. The grasp of our intelligence and the richness of our
sensibility increase along the ages. The generalizations of our
philosophy grow wider, the gropings of our sympathetic faith
become vaster, the retrospection and the prevision of our science
keener and longer and more inclusive, every generation. It is very
significant that the further away we get from the prehistoric
times the more we learn about them. Archaology is one of the
latest and most swiftly enlarging branches of knowledge. Let the
processes thus indicated go on, as they have gone on and are with
accelerated pace going on, and the date is not beyond prophecy
when all earthly and human secrets will be solved, and their
mysteries be revealed, and the autobiographic book and volume of
the world be opened, and the universal tribunal be set in the
light of every life, and the irreversible judgment be declared, by
the simple revelation of the truth of history in the web of its
relations. For as every atom of matter is conjoined by all the
laws of nature with all other atoms of matter, and the history of
all their adventures is registered by their own indestructible
vibrations in the elemental spaces of the universe where they run
their career, so every identity of spirit is conjoined by all the
laws of spirit with all other spirits, and all their deeds and
sufferings are ineffaceably self registered in their reactions
upon the authors, in the pictures they shed upon space, and the
influences they set rolling through the eternity of successive
souls and lives. All, then, that is needed for a perfectly
vindicating judgment is the awakening of consciousness to the full
view of the facts. And the tendencies are powerfully moving in
that direction. What was the illumination of Swedenborg but the
taking possession by his consciousness of the unconscious lower
nervous system, with all its impacted ancestral experiences and
wondrous relations with the visible and invisible worlds? And this
may be repeated, by and by, and be perfected, and become common.
What may result is as yet almost inconceivable. Let us trace a
little, in this regard, the connections of the individual and the
face, and follow out some of their implications.

Suppose that in turn every child born begets or bears two
children. Then in the thirtieth generation the transmitted
qualities of spirit, nerve and blood, of the single original pair
of parents will be represented in upwards of one thousand millions
of descendants. It is clear from this law, allowing for all
deviations from its numerical progression on account of inter
marriages and of failures of offspring, how powerfully and swiftly
the ever multiplying streams of consanguinity are spreading in
every direction, affiliating and fraternizing the whole human race
literally into one family, the innumerable rills of separate
descent intermingling as they flow on, and finally diffusing over
the earth in that oceanic unity of humanity, which, when full,
will beat with the tidal pulse of a single sympathy. It is
believed by many that no experience of any living creature is ever
lost, but is by its own spontaneous and exact reflex vibrations
either registered in the conscious memory or deposited in the
unconscious organism in latent perfection of vestige and tendency.
Memory is a faithful treasurer of all the stores of events.
Suppose now that each parent bequeaths in the dynamic germ of his
progeny the possibility of reviving into consciousness, when the
proper conditions shall be furnished, the accumulated sum of all
that has happened throughout the entire line of his ancestry. And
again, imagine that all the souls composing the human race each of
which is a substantial and indestructible entity, living
incarnated over and over, and not a mere phenomenal process that
vanishes into nothing with the dissolution of the body are so
limited in number that they may be embodied on the earth in one
generation, whose members shall be so conjoined in knowledge and
fellowship that the life of the whole is concentrated in every
one, and the life of every one mirrored in the whole. Now,
finally, let it be conceived that this latest generation,
including all who have ever inhabited the world, at last attain a
development which enables them to grasp in distinct consciousness
the collective sum of the organic heritage of the race, each one
reading with perfect clearness in every particular the complete
history of humanity from the beginning to the end, understanding
all its causes, courses and consequences, and beholding with
unspeakable delight the justification of the ways of God, the
whole universe opening into free intercommunication, as if time
and space were either no more or else their measures were of
boundless subjective elasticity, every creature found in peace and
rapture at the goal of his destiny. That, indeed, would be a
realization of the day of judgment and the resurrection of the
dead, but without a shock or a jar in the course of things which
science reveals. The process of development now going on, if
carried far enough, will naturally result in this or in something
equivalent to it; while the notion of the vomiting forth of the
accumulated dead from land and sea, at the blast of a trumpet, is
a wild piece of imagery, borrowed from startling political
phenomena, and applied with absurd incongruity to the chronic
providence of God. The former view contains all the moral
significance of the latter, but without its violation of
probability. Nor is it all necessary that the climax shall be
brought about of a simultaneous universal judgment, or of the
appearance of our whole race on the earth at one time. The giving
of the vision to souls subjectively, one after another, in the
order of their attainment of the conditions, would meet every
requirement of the case. To each one in turn, wherever he was, as
the result broke on him in the ecstatic glory of all it means, the
essence of the so long cherished faith of Christendom would be
justified, and the providential theater and scenery of human
experience would appear under its illumination as a dazzling
vision of poetic justice perfect at every point.

Marvelous and almost incredible as this scheme of thought may
seem, it is not more mysterious in itself, or more staggering in
its demand on our faith, than many things successively were which
are now established beyond a doubt such as the telegraphic
conversation of men through the ocean and around the globe; the
seven hundred and thirty three thousand millions of ethereal
vibrations in a second, which cause the report of the violet ray
in consciousness; the transcendent disclosures of the spectrum
analysis; the conception of gravitation as a force which holds all
matter in unbroken union, and acts throughout the stellar universe
with timeless simultaneity. It is in entire keeping with
everything else in the workings of God, as demonstrated by
science, on every hand, both in nature and history. The atomic
theory and the nebular hypothesis, the chemical crucible and the
mathematical calculus, the microscope and the telescope discover
to our senses and our reason, wherever we look, facts as
mysterious to the understanding, and as baffling to the
imagination as any of the foregoing implications; showing us, in
every department of nature and experience, the bewildering
miracles of the infinitely little and the infinitely great exactly
balanced and perpetually passing into one another.

There is a third way, in addition to the ghost world of the
primitive faith of barbarians, and the resurrection climax of the
Christian and Parsee and Hebrew and Moslem creeds, in which the
imagination of man, moved by his instinct and reason, has
concreted the idea of a future life; namely, by the doctrine of
transmigration. A striking feature and no slight recommendation of
the foregoing view of the true meaning of the dogma of the
resurrection is that it reconciles these two chief forms of the
belief in immortal life. For resurrection and transmigration agree
in the central point of a restoration of the disembodied soul to a
new bodily existence, only the former represents this as a single
collective miracle wrought by an arbitrary stroke of God at the
close of the earthly drama, the latter depicts it as constantly
taking place in the regular fulfillment of the divine plan in the
creation. This difference is certainly, to a scientific and
philosophical thinker, who reasons on the data of nature and
experience and not on the dicta of theologians, strongly in favor
of the Oriental theory. We have no experience whatever of any
general resurrection, but all experience is full of the constant
appearances of souls in freshly created bodies throughout the
scale of sentient being. If our final future life is to be a
bodily one there surely is a world of presumptive evidence,
therefore, in behalf of transmigration as opposed to resurrection.
Besides the various distinctive arguments of its own, every reason
for the resurrection holds with at least equal force for
transmigration. The argument from analogy is especially strong. It
is natural to argue from the universal spectacle of incarnated
life that this is the eternal scheme everywhere, the variety of
souls finding in the variety of worlds an everlasting series of
adventures, in appropriate organisms; there being, as Paul said,
one kind of flesh of birds, another kind of flesh of beasts,
another of men, another of angels, and so on. Our present lack of
recollection of past lives is no disproof of their actuality.
Every night we lose all knowledge of the past, but every day we
reawaken to a memory of the whole series of days and nights. So in
one life we may forget or dream, and in another recover the whole
thread of experience from the beginning.

In every event, it must be confessed that of all the thoughtful
and refined forms of the belief in a future life none has had so
extensive and prolonged a prevalence as this. It has the vote of
the majority, having for ages on ages been held by half of the
human race with an intensity of conviction almost without a
parallel. Indeed the most striking fact, at first sight, about the
doctrine of the repeated existences of the soul incarnated in
different organisms, its form and experience in each successive
embodiment being determined by its merits and demerits in the
preceding ones, is the constant reappearance of the faith in it in
all parts of the world, and its permanent hold on certain great
nations. The ancient civilization of Egypt, whose contrasted
splendors and horrors awaken astonishment more and more with each
step in the progressive decipherment of its mysterious record,
seems largely to have grown out of this faith. The swarming
millions of India also, through the chief periods of their
history, have lain under its spell, suffered their lives, wrought
their great works of government, architecture, philosophy, and
poetry, and in its belief meditated, aspired, and exhaled their
souls. Ruder forms of it are reported among innumerable barbaric
tribes. It played an important part in the speculations of the
early Fathers of the Christian Church, and has often cropped out
in the works of later theologians. Men of the profoundest
metaphysical genius, like Scotus Erigena and Leibnitz, have
affirmed it, and sought to give it a logical or scientific basis.
And even amidst the predominance of skeptical and materialistic
influences in Europe and America, at the present time, we
constantly meet individuals with independent minds who earnestly
believe the alluring dogma. For, to a large and varied class of
minds, the doctrine holds a transcendent attraction as well as a
manifold plausibility.

Another striking fact connected with this doctrine is that it
seems to be a native and ineradicable growth of the Oriental
world; but appears in the Western world only in scattered
instances, and rather as an exotic form of thought. In the growing
freedom and liberality of thought, which no less than its doubt
and denial, now characterize Christendom, it seems as if the full
time had come for a greater mental and asthetic hospitality on the
part of Christians towards Hindus. The advocates of the
resurrection should not confine their attention to the repellent
or the ludicrous aspects of metempsychosis, but do justice to its
claim and its charm. The Pantheistic tendency which possessed and
overwhelmed the Brahminic mind, shaping and tinging its views
opened the whole range of sentient existences to an indiscriminate
sympathy, and made the idea of transmigration natural, and more
pleasing than repugnant. Furthermore, the Brahminic thinkers and
sages were a distinct class of men whose whole lives were absorbed
in introspective reveries and metaphysical broodings calculated to
stimulate the imagination and arouse to the keenest consciousness
all the latent marvels and possibilities of human experience, thus
furnishing the most favorable conditions for exactly such a belief
as that of transmigration, an endless series of ever varying
adventures for the imperishable soul. And the vast swarms of the
common people in the East are the passive followers of this high
caste of thinkers, abjectly accepting what they teach.
Accordingly, the mysterious doctrine of the metempsychosis has
held the entire mind, sentiment and civilization of the East,
through every period of its history, as with an irreversible
spell.

The persistent practice of various modes of profound and
rhythmical breathing by which the Brahmins perfect their
respiration, and the keen and sustained concentration of their
attention on their inner states, tend at the same time to heighten
the richness and intensity of the cerebral nerves, to unify the
connections of the lower nerve centres with them, and to fuse the
unconscious physiological processes with the conscious
psychological processes. Then the persevering disuse and
suppression of the action of their outer senses cause the objects
of the material world around them to seem more vague and dreamy
than the impressions of the ideal world within. And so the earth
with all its affairs seems an illusion, while their own unsought
trains of thought, feeling and imagery the rich mental panorama of
pictures and events, are taken for a series of substantial
revelations of the universe of being. An irresistible belief in
preexistence, immortality and transmigration, results.

On the contrary, in the Western world, the characteristic
tendencies are all different. Pantheistic theories are rarely
held, and the dreams and emotions which those theories are fitted
to feed are foreign and repulsive. An impassible barrier is
imagined separating humanity from every other form of being.
Speculative reason, imagination and affection, are chiefly
employed in scientific studies and social pursuits, or personal
schemes, external rather than internal. This absorption in
material things and evanescent affairs engenders in the spirit an
arid atmosphere of doubt and denial, in which no efflorescence of
poetic and mystic faiths can flourish. Thus, while the outward
utilities abound, hard negations spread abroad; and living,
personal apprehension of God, of an all pervasive Providence, and
of the immortality of the soul in any form, dies out either in
open infidelity or in a mere verbal acceptance of the established
creed of society. Consequently, to the average mind of the modern
Western world, the doctrine of transmigration remains a mere
fancy, although, as we shall immediately see, it has a strange
poetic charm, a deep metaphysical basis, and a high ethical and
religious quality.

The first ground on which the belief rests is the various strong
resemblances, both physical and psychical, connecting human beings
with the whole family of lower creatures. They have all the senses
in common with us, together with the rudiments of intelligence and
will. They all seem created after one plan, as if their varieties
were the gradulations of a single original type. We recognize
kindred forms of experience and modes of expression in ourselves
and in them. Now the man seems a travesty of the hog, the parrot,
the ape, the hawk, or the shark; now they seem travesties of him.
As we gaze at the ruminating ox, couched on the summer grass,
notice the slow rhythm of his jaw, and the wondering dreaminess of
his eyes, it is not difficult to fancy him some ancient Brahmin
transmigrated to this, and patiently awaiting his release. Nor is
it incongruous with our reason or moral feeling to suppose that
the cruel monsters of humanity may in a succeeding birth find the
fit penalty for their degradation and crime, in the horrid life of
a crocodile or a boa constrictor.

The conception of a series of connected lives also furnishes a
plausible explanation for many mysteries in our present
experience. Reference is made to all that class of phenomena
covered by the Platonic doctrine of reminiscence. Faces previously
unseen, and localities unvisited, awaken in us a vivid feeling of
a long familiarity with them. Thoughts and emotions, not hitherto
entertained, come to us as if we had welcomed and dismissed them a
thousand times in periods long gone by. Many an experience,
apparently novel and untried, makes us start as at the shadowy
reminder of something often known before. The supposition of
forgotten lives preceding the present, portions of whose
consciousness reverberate and gleam through the veils of thought
and sense, seems to throw satisfactory light on this strange
department of experience.

Much more weighty and penetrative, however, than the foregoing
considerations is the philosophical argument in behalf of
transmigration, drawn from the nature of the soul. Consciousness
being in its very essence the feeling of itself, the conscious
soul can never feel itself annihilated, even in thought it only
loses the knowledge of its being when it lapses into unconsciousness,
as in sleep or trance. The soul may indeed think of its own
annihilation but cannot realize the thought in feeling,
since the fainter emotional reflex upon the idea of its
destruction is instantly contradicted and over borne by the more
massive and vivid sense of its persistent being in immediate
consciousness. This incessant self assertion of consciousness at
once suggests the idea of its being independent of the changing
and vanishing body in which it is temporarily shrined. Then the
conception naturally follows that the soul, as it has once
appeared in human form, so it may reappear indefinitely in any of
the higher or lower forms of being which compose the hierarchy of
the universe. The eternity of the soul, past and future, once
accepted by the mind, leads directly to the construction of the
whole scheme of metempsychosis an everlasting succession of births
and deaths, disembodiments and reembodiments, with their laws of
personality and fortunes of time and space weaving the boundless
web of destiny and playing the endless drama of providence.

But the strongest support of the theory of transmigration is the
happy moral solution it seems to give to the problem of the dark
and distressing inequality and injustice which otherwise appear so
predominant in the experience of the world. To the superficial
observer of human life the whole scene of struggle, sin and
sorrow, nobleness and joy, triumph and defeat, is a tangled maze
of inconsistencies, a painful combination of violent discords. But
if we believe that every soul, from that of the lowest insect to
that of the greatest archangel, forms an affiliated member of the
infinite family of God, and is eternal in its conscious essence,
perishable only as to its evanescent disguises of unconscious
incarnation; that every act of every creature is followed by its
legitimate reactions; that these actions and reactions constitute
a law of retribution absolutely perfect; that these souls, with
all their doings and sufferings are interconnected with one
another, and with the whole, all whose relationships copenetrate
and cooperate with mutual influences whose reports are infallible
and with lines of sequence that never break, then the bewildering
maze becomes a vindicated plan, the horrible discord a divine
harmony. What an explication it gives of those mysteries of evil,
pain, sorrow and retribution, which often wrap the innocent and
the wicked in one sad fate, if we but see that no individual
stands alone, but trails along with him the unfinished sequels of
all ancestral experience, and, furthermore, is so bound up with
his simultaneous race that each is responsible for all and all for
each, and that no one can be wholly saved or safe until all are
redeemed and perfected! Then every suffering we endure for faults
not our own, the consequence of the deeds of others, assumes a
holy light and a sublime dignity, associating us with that great
sacrament of atoning pain whereof the crucified Christ is not the
exclusive instance but the representative head.

The above translation of the ecclesiastical doctrine of the
resurrection into a form scientifically credible, and reconciled
with the immemorial tenet of transmigration, may seem to some a
very fanciful speculation, a mere intellectual toy. Perhaps it is
so. It is not propounded with the slightest dogmatic animus. It is
advanced solely as an illustration of what may possibly be true,
as suggested by the general evidence of the phenomena of history
and the facts of experience. The thoughts embodied in it are so
wonderful, the method of it is so rational, the region of
contemplation into which it lifts the mind is so grand, the
prospects it opens are of such universal reach and import, that
the study of it brings us into full sympathy with the sublime
scope of the idea of immortality and of a cosmopolitan vindication
of providence uncovered to every eye. It takes us out of the
littleness of petty themes and selfish affairs, and makes it
easier for us to believe in the vastest hopes mankind have ever
known. It causes the most magnificent conceptions of human destiny
to seem simply proportional to the native magnitude and beauty of
the powers of the mind which can conceive such things. After
traversing the grounds here set forth we feel that if the view
based on them be not the truth, it must be because God has in
reserve for us a sequel greater and lovelier, not meaner than our
brightest dream hitherto. The worthiest theory of the fate of man
which the spirit of man can construct must either be a revelatory
divination of the truth, or an inadequate attempt to grasp the
design of the Creator in its true glory. It is impious and absurd
to hold that man can think out a scheme superior to the one God
has decreed. And it seems equally unreasonable to suppose that the
scheme of God for the future stages of our career is one which has
no hints in our present experience. Certainly it appears more
likely that the sequel will be discovered by the logical
completion of the inwrought order which has been slowly unfolding
from the first. And what do history and prophecy show more plainly
than the tendency to a convergence of all humanity in every man?
Spreading consanguinity in descent and growth of sympathetic
knowledge both point to this. Perfect this in each man, and
illuminate his whole organism and its relations with adequate
intelligence, and we have a true resurrection, not indeed of
decayed bodies from the grave, but of historic states of
consciousness from their latent embedment in the nervous system,
and their undulatory record in the dynamic medium of the creation.
Our senses now convert certain sets of undulations of the ethereal
medium into perceptions of light, heat, sound, and so interpret
their contents and extract their tidings. It is not impossible
that in a coming stage of development we may obtain additional
senses; our spirits may command the means of translating into
correspondent states of consciousness all the other modes of
vibration of the ethereal medium, and grasp the keys of unlimited
knowledge deciphering every secret wherever they go. The whole
universe may be a palimpsest preserving the inscriptions of all
deeds, and every soul may be a reagent gifted with the power to
recover and read its own.

As each generation is the inheritor of the preceding ones, all of
which from the first prolong their existence into the last in
unbroken continuity of historic conduct and responsibility,
justice may at the ripened period be naturally summed up without
any miracle. We all are projections of our ancestors. They
properly in us suffer and enjoy in accordance with what has flowed
from their lives. The whole of this, lighted up with consciousness
at last, may be the real meaning of the burden of the spirit given
to the apostle Paul, but misinterpreted by him into the mechanico
scenic scheme of the Judaized Christian Church. For when the
mighty influx struck the brain of the persecuting zealot,
revolutionizing his life, it came into connection with all the
inflamed theories and convictions so deeply drilled therein by his
Pharisaic education. These convictions, partly of a mere local and
transient character, associated with legends of Adam and Abraham
and the under world and Christ and the sky, mixed with the true
and universal import of the higher inspiration now given him,
caused his misconstrual of its message, and stamped the purely
human and providential meaning of the doctrine of the resurrection
with the rabbinical die of a politico mythological dogma. If this
were so, it is not the only instance in which the preexistent
discolorations in the mind of an inspired prophet have refracted
the truth of his burden into distorted error and bequeathed the
task of a future rectification when more light shall have come.

In the next place, we come to the fourth reason for the growing
doubts and disbelief of our day in immortality. It is the
remarkable diffusion of the habits of thought engendered by the
study of materialistic science. The authority of physical science
has been rapidly encroaching on and displacing the authority of
the church theology and sectarian creeds. Belief in invariable
laws has undermined belief in miracle and supernatural revelation.
Those who had been taught that the resurrection of Christ was the
only adequate proof of the immortality of the soul, learning to
deny the former, have naturally proceeded to question the latter.
For in such matters the real implications of logic are little
noticed. The religious skepticism nourished by physical science is
in all respects really as irrational and baseless as it is actual.
For example, the resurrection of Christ, admitting it to be a
fact, did not create the immortality it was considered to
illustrate. If he rose, it was because men are immortal, and men
are not immortal because he rose. If he did not rise, men are
immortal all the same, provided human immortality be a truth; if
it be not a truth, the resurrection of Christ would be an isolated
abnormal event without any logical validity on the question. The
truth or falsity of human immortality, therefore, is a question of
the creative plan of God and the essential nature of man, to be
decided on the intrinsic evidences, and cannot logically be
affected one way or the other by any individual historic
occurrence limited to a certain time and place. Yet it is a
practical necessity that any great popular faith, if it rests on
authority, will be shocked and weakened by everything which shocks
and weakens that authority, no matter how adventitious it is. If
one cannot believe in the preternatural resurrection of Christ,
that surely is no valid reason for denying the natural immortality
of the soul, but only a good reason for seeking to learn if there
be not adequate grounds for this faith quite independent of
scripture text and priestly assertion.

Precisely the same reasoning holds in relation to the doubts about
spiritual realities bred in the minds of those whose studies are
conversant exclusively with material realities. The professors of
physical science, thoroughly familiarized with things which
combine and dissolve, often come to fancy that everything is
phenomenal and evanescent, that there is no immaterial substance,
that spirit is not entity but process, that thought and feeling
and will are mere transient functions of transient matter. Thus
all faith in the individuality of mind is pulverized at the
fountain head. There can be no question but that such is the
common influence of a constant contemplation of the physical
aspects alone of physical things. Mentality, consciousness, is
regarded as the prismatic bow in the cloud, a spectral show that
appears and vanishes, with no permanent substance. At the present
time, in Christendom, the one conquering power in literature, the
one fascinating absorption of thought in society, is that
connected with the cultivation of physical science. Its prestige
is overwhelming. Its prevalent methods and results give a
materialistic turn of interpretation to the popular mind upon all
subjects. The direct consequence, among that class of minds who
put physical science above theology, is the spreading disavowal of
all belief in the immortality of the soul. The fallacy is obvious,
and the remedy is simple, if there be at hand but enough of modest
candor and patience fairly to weigh the facts of the case in the
scales of a sound logic.

In the first place, by the very structure of our being, by the
very necessity of our experience, the universe is divided into two
irreconcilable classes of realities, namely, spiritual subjects
and material objects. Sensations, perceptions, emotions, thoughts,
volitions, all qualities of mind, all states of consciousness, are
absolutely immaterial. They are more real to us, that is to say,
they more inexpugnably assert and maintain themselves, than
material things do: and it is only hopeless vulgarity and
incompetence of thinking which can ever confuse or merge them with
material things. Matter is that which proves itself to spirit by
the effects it produces on spirit. Spirit is that which is its own
evidence. The center of consciousness in us is its own proof of
its own being, and all that occurs within it is its own proof, and
is unsusceptible of any other or foreign demonstration. Hope,
fear, love, imagination, reason, are absolutely unthinkable as
forms of material substance, however exquisitely refined and
exalted. There is no conceivable community of being between a
sentiment and an atom, a gas and an aspiration, an idea of truth
in the soul and any mass of matter in space. Each of these facts,
conscious thought and material extension, has its own incommunicable
and incomparable sphere of being and laws of action, which can be
confused only by ignorance and sophistry.

So clear has this become to all profound reflection, that the ablest
supporters of the theory of evolution, with all their preponderant
bias in favor of physical science, declare, in the words of
Herbert Spencer, that if compelled to choose between thinking of
spirit in the terms of matter and thinking of matter in the terms
of spirit, they should take the latter alternative and give an
idealistic interpretation to nature rather than a materialistic
interpretation to the soul. It is logically clear, then, despite
the fallacious influences of habit to the contrary, that no
progress of the physical sciences, no conceivable amount of
induction and generalization as to the composition or decomposition
of material bodies, can throw any new light or darkness on the
nature and destiny of the immaterial soul.

The incessant flux of phenomena constructing and destroying apparent
things, though studied till the observing eye sees nothing but
mirage anywhere, has nothing to do with the steady persistence of
spiritual identity. To force it to discredit our claim to a divine
descent and an endless inheritance is a glaring sophism. The
question must be snatched back from the assumption of the retort
and crucible, the observational and numerical methods of the
physical realm, and relegated to the legitimate tests of the moral
and metaphysical realm.

Again, there is furnished in the results of the study of physical
science itself, as pursued by its most gifted masters, a glorious
overthrow and neutralization of the moral and religious doubts
called out in its shallower votaries by their absorption in its
more superficial phases. The scientific men of the most profound
intellectual power and the most brilliant original genius, the
supreme heads of chemistry, dynamics and mathematics, have applied
to the phenomena of the material creation modes of observation and
instruments of reasoning before whose compelling efficacy the
whole frowning vastitude of the outer universe melts into ideal
points of force and forms of law. Everything in time and space is
reduced to molecular vibrations, regulated by the mental
conceptions of number, weight and measure. The reasonings of such
men as Oersted and Faraday on electricity and magnetism; of Sir
William Thomson and Clerk Maxwell on thermodynamics; the theories
of the greatest mathematicians, grasping all things in heaven and
earth with their irresistible calculus, literally using infinites
as toys, creating imaginary quantities, and, going through certain
operations with them, actually discovering new truths in the solid
domain of reality yield conceptions of order, beauty and
sublimity, and emotions of wonder, awe and delight, nowhere else
surpassed. They exalt the spectacle of nature into a vision of
poetic intelligence, and show the theorizing mind of man to be
akin to the creating mind of God. Thus, if skepticism as to the
deathless royalty of soul is bred in the physicist who constantly
stoops with the scalpel and the microscope, it is offset in him
who, with as steady a judgment, soars to the contemplation of the
ethereal medium with its lines of force traversing immensity and
vibrating timelessly along their whole length, loaded, for those
who can interpret them, with tidings of all that happens. Instead
of spirit being materialized, matter is spiritualized and nature
transfigured into the ideal home of ideal entities. Dumas, years
ago, asserted that hydrogen gas is but an etherealized metal. Just
now, it is said, Pictet has succeeded, under a pressure of six
hundred and fifty atmospheres, in actually crystallizing oxygen
and hydrogen. One has only to read such papers as those of Stallo
on the fundamental concepts of science to learn that if matter or
mind is ever to be lost, it will not be mind.

But there remains a more direct and more important way of
correcting the dismal or defiant doubts of immortality caused by
the inferior phases of materialistic study; and that is, by
bringing up to a correspondent fullness and intensity the counter
activity of the ideal powers. Let justice be done to the subject
as well as to the object. Over against the watching of clouds and
waves, the sorting of herbs, the weighing of metals, the measuring
of quantities, bring up the exercise of the mind on the treasures
of qualitative substance in its own proper sphere of reason and
love and faith. Admire the beautiful, love the good, obey the
true, worship the right, aspire to the highest, subordinate or
sacrifice everything base or wrong in a generous service of duty,
and thus nourish a consciousness of those ontological relations by
which the soul is rooted in the Godhead, and stimulate that
intuitive efflorescence of faith which grows out of progressive
fulfillment and which prophecies perpetuity of fulfillment. To say
the least, the subject is as real as the object, the contemplating
faculty as valid as the phenomenon it confronts. The teachings of
the soul rightly construed are as authentic as the teachings of
nature. And, some day in the future, a complete system of truth
developed from the central principle of the one by the subjective
method will be found to correspond perfectly with the complete
system of truth developed by the objective method from the central
principle of the other. As the objective scientific principle is
the persistence of force, the subjective scientific principle is
the potential infinity of individual spirit, each one the
equivalent of the all. What else than this can be the ultimate
meaning of the primal, universal, indestructible antithesis or
dual classification of being, the ego and the non ego, self and
not self, the former including each individual in his own
apprehension, the latter including all besides?

There is a philosophical authority which, for those incompetent to
judge for themselves, should properly take the place vacated by
the ecclesiastical authority, which, in our day, is plainly on the
wane. Multitudes no longer believe in the immortality of their
souls on the ground of the resurrection of Christ, or the
assertion of Scripture or creed. Shall they, then, deny it
altogether because the materialistic band clamor that it is a
delusion, and they themselves see no sufficient evidence for it?
There is a more appropriate alternative. Many theories in natural
philosophy have been exploded by the proof of their absurdity, and
the correct explanations are accepted on trust by the multitudes
incompetent to master their logical and mathematical grounds. Very
few understand the proofs of the chief laws of nature, but the
vast majority of men implicitly trust the assertions of those who
do know them. In like manner there is a legitimate sphere for
authority in moral and religious beliefs; only it should be the
authority of the competent and disinterested. Now, it is a fact
that the very greatest philosophers who have ever lived, the
preeminently imperial thinkers, such as Plato, Aristotle, Aquinas,
Anselm, Hegel, and the resplendent group of their peers, have
asserted as a necessary principle the real being and eternal
substantiality of the soul. Besides all the combinations of matter
that dissolve, all the phenomena that pass, they affirm the
existence of enduring entities, individual spirits, thinkers
conscious of their thoughts. In central calm, far within the
struggle and vex of the rolling elements, throned in its own
serene realm of law, lives the free, conscious soul, and will live
eternally, actualizing its potentialities. Nothing can
disintegrate it, because it is not an aggregate but a unity, not a
quantitative mass of matter, but a spaceless monad of power. It is
a closed circuit of thinking activity, impenetrable to everything
else. Spirits are the only solids, matter being endlessly
penetrable and transmutable.

We are all obliged to think of ourselves as entities, and not as
mere phenomenal series of states. There must be a substratum for
the affections of consciousness. All changes are changes of
something. It is true there is a mystery involved here which no
words can make clear; yet the more deeply one thinks and feels the
more intense will be his assurance that there is something in him
which thinks and feels, or rather that he himself is a something
which thinks and feels. The best conception we can get of the soul
is that it is a subject which is its own object and a mirror for
the inner reflection of all other objects. God is not an object,
because He is the actualized infinite Subject. His thoughts are
concrete creations, the objective realities of the universe
phenomenal and substantial. We are actually finite subjects, but
with a potential infinity, patterned in free correspondence with
Him. Our thoughts are subjective reflections of His, modified by
the contents of our facultative constitution and the peculiarities
of our historic experience. What constitutes my soul is the
potentiality of all states of consciousness, actual and latent,
past, present and future. It reveals itself to me, so to speak, in
my actual thoughts and feelings. So far as these are true and
good, they correspond with and represent the will of God, and must
share the fortunes of the Divine Reality with which they are
implicitly joined. Then my soul cannot be annihilated unless the
will of God is so far annihilated. But God is infinite being, and
there is nothing outside of or counter to infinite being to
destroy it. All evil is but defect or negation. I am only in so
far as I am positive reality. Nothing of me, therefore, can ever
perish, except my imperfections; and the thought of the perishing
of imperfections is a thought of joy. Welcome, then, be the
approach of death which shall cleanse and dislimit me into
unimprisonable divineness of being, the crystalline sphere of pure
intelligence and immortality!

The only real proof of immortality in the sight of the intellect,
is the perception of the necessity of self determining entities as
the causes and grounds of the facts of experience. A series of
states implies something of which they are states. There seems to
be no possible explanation or understanding of the phenomena which
confront our experience without the conception of ultimate
individualities, indestructible subject objects, centers of
spiritual activity, monistic selfhoods, conscious egos, each of
which distinguishes itself from every other, and contrasts itself
with the All. Now it is claimed that every thinker who reaches the
maturest stage of thought attains to this insight. It is the
imperial mark of a certain stage of knowledge. Here the supreme
thinkers, sceptered with final perception of the truth of their
own eternity, sit at ease, enthroned in the serene and lucid realm
of law, beyond the reach of the dark tempest of cavils and doubts.
And there is a larger company who on easier terms have attained
the same result. For, without this wearisome metaphysical hewing
of conclusions from the quarries of ontology, the good and pure,
who, in their loving obedience and aspiration, keep the harmonic
quickness and innocence of their intuitions uninjured, also have
an unshaken assurance that they live in God and shall share his
life forevermore. The mystics of every period seem in feeling to
have an immediate grasp of all that the greatest philosophers have
painfully conquered by speculation. These two classes may claim to
possess direct certitude of eternal life. All others must either
attain to the stage of development and mount of vision of these,
or receive the faith on their authority, or else be subject to
doubt and unbelief.

To accept the doctrine of the immortality of the soul on the
authority of the wisest philosophers and the purest saints, is a
legitimate procedure perfectly in keeping with what the human race
does in all other provinces of thought where it is incapable of
proving what its teachers have demonstrated, but can easily
appreciate and make practical application of the truths they have
affirmed. The great laws of science in all its domains are
scientifically mastered by very few, but their empirical rules are
implicitly followed by the common multitude. One form or
receptacle of authority after another may be superseded; but
authority itself always remains. And the true course for those to
pursue who have come to repudiate the authority of scripture, or
church creed, or the resurrection of Christ, as a proof of the
future life of man, is not at once to abandon all belief in a
future state, but to accept the guidance of the most competent
independent thinkers in place of that of the most arbitrary
dogmatists. For unto all who do not arrogate to themselves a
transcendent competency to judge, the general consensus of the
thought and feeling of the world, clarified and interpreted by the
fittest few, will always be a grateful ground of reliance and
trust. And the verdict thus revealed is unequivocally in favor of
the doctrine of immortality.

There can be no changes independently of something which is
changed. Amidst all the changeable in us which passes and is
forgotten, there is something which stays and is inexpugnable. It
is our identity. That which appears in consciousness first, which
recurs oftenest, and which persists longest, is the most valid
object of belief. And what is that but the very consciousness, or
the subject as its own object? Surely, the one invariable
accompaniment of all the shifting states of consciousness is the
bare essential consciousness itself: this is, so to speak, the
unitary vessel containing all their varieties. This unquestionably
exists now. The burden of proof, then, as Bishop Butler long ago
showed, is on those who affirm its destruction in the article of
death. Consciousness is purely immaterial, as every one who has
passed beyond the most ignorant and childish stages of thought
must see. Merely because it is, in our present experience,
associated in time and space with a material organism, therefore
to declare that it is a dependent production of matter, or a
transient concomitant of the transient body, is a gratuitous
assertion with not one scintilla of evidence.

Even, for the moment, admitting it to be true that no argument of
irresistible cogency has yet been advanced to prove the
immortality of the soul, it is certain that no proof has ever
been given of its mortality. The very utmost that can be claimed
by any skeptic who fairly understands the whole case, is that the
different arguments, for and against, offset one another, and
leave the question in a neutral balance of suspense, just where it
was before the debate began. Many persons hold that the counter
reasonings do thus balance and annul one another. For them the
problem remains to be decided on other grounds than those of the
logical disputation which has proved inadequate to its settlement.
These other grounds are considerations of congruity, probability,
the prophetic preparations and demands of present experience. What
sort of a figure would the segments which we now see, compose, if
they were completed? What in the hidden future portions of our
destiny would be harmonic and complementary as related with the
parts here experienced? When the other modes of inquiry are
abandoned this mode remains. Its teachings are rich and impressive
in proportion to the greatness of the faculties and the wealth of
knowledge and love brought to its consideration. And thus we come
face to face with the fifth and last cause of the failing faith in
immortality confessed to characterize the present day.

That cause is the common inability to realize in the thoughts of
the mind, and to hold in the faith of the feelings, a conception
so vast, so mysterious, so remote from the usual routine of the
selfish trifles and petty notions which monopolize the powers and
fritter down the faculties of the average people of the nineteenth
century. The battle of sensualism, the scramble over material
interests, the wearing absorption in the small and evanescent
struggles of social rivalry, the irritated attention given to the
ever thickening claims of external things, the pulverizing
discussions of all sorts of opinions by hostile schools, are fatal
to that concentrated calmness of mood, that unity of passion, that
serene amplitude of intellectual and imaginative scope, that
docile religious receptiveness of soul, requisite for the fit
contemplation of a doctrine so solemn and sublime as that of
immortality. The grade of thought and scale of emotion ordinarily
characteristic of ordinary men are utterly out of keeping with the
inexpressible grandeur of themes like that of the divine kinship
and eternity of the soul. The reason and fancy, before they can be
competent to appreciate such truths, must be trained in the study
and worshipful meditation of subjects of commensurate mystery and
sublimity. It is no wonder that when minds and hearts familiar
only with houses and clothes and food, the trivial gossip and
vanity of the hour, are summoned to grasp the idea of spiritual
survival and an everlasting destiny of conscious adventures, they
are overwhelmed and helplessly fail to represent to themselves the
possibility of any such truth. This cause of doubt is very
prevalent and effective; for ever more and more in our age
conscious attention is turned away from states within and fixed
upon things without. The natural consequence is that the objective
world is arrogating the first place in consciousness, and the
subjective world is sinking into the secondary rank. Whatever
exalts the object at the expense of the subject tends to
materialism, unbelief in the separate being of the spirit. On the
other hand whatever gives the panoramic passage of subjective
states in the soul greater apparent vividness and tenacity than
belong to outer phenomena, tends to produce faith in the
independence and immortality of the spirit. Hence it is quite to
be expected that until our modern concentration on objective toil
and study and amusement reaches its destined climax and begins the
return career to subjective reason and feeling, the skepticism of
the age will increase.

Meanwhile the remedy for the evil is, first, to perceive it, and
then, to cultivate the kinds of experience calculated to
neutralize it. For the logical invalidity and fallaciousness of
the doubts concerning immortality, arising from the immense
disparity of such a belief with the mental habits of ignorant
earthlings and social parasites, appear from the fact that there
are others with whose experience and thought the doctrine has no
such disparity, but for whose spiritual range and haunt it is as
natural to believe it as to breathe. And, in explaining the
destiny of man, it is legitimate to take the most finished and
furnished specimens, not the abortive ones. There are grounds of
knowledge, domains of imagination, heights of nobility, familiar
to the most exalted characters, perfectly cognate and harmonious
with the conception of eternal life, and making the faith in it
fully as credible as the transcendent truths of science and
philosophy which have been actually demonstrated. Those who are
familiar only with the little affairs of sense, in narrow bounds
of time and space, may well gasp in despair and denial when the
bewildering contents of the doctrine of immortality are held
before them; but for all who have mastered what science reveals of
the objective world of nature, and what literature records of the
subjective world of soul, both these spheres furnish ample
illustrative examples and data to make the faith in every way
congruous with what else they know, and as easy as it is pleasing
to receive. Assuredly the belief resulting in this latter class
from their positive perception and correspondent desire and
persuasion, are, on every ground of reason or moral fitness, more
than a counterbalance for the unbelief resulting in the former
class from their negative experience and incompetency. If we
sought to estimate the possibility and destined fulfillment of
human nature when all its conditions shall have been perfected,
should we choose for the basis of our judgment the incapacity of
the lower specimens of man? or the capacity of the higher? After
considering the chief achievements of human genius, the mysterious
powers of the human soul now, the doctrine of immortality does not
seem too great and wonderful for belief; but, on the contrary, it
appears the coherent complement of the facts of the present.

Nothing can be more marvelous or imply greater glory for the
destiny of the individual being than the fact that each
consciousness is to itself the antithetical equivalent or balance
of the totality of being beside; since the whole universe, all
other beings, God himself, are known to the individual
consciousness only as revealed in itself through its personal
faculties. The slightest change in the subject is reported by a
correspondent change in objects. Heighten the internal activities
of the soul to a certain pitch, and the convictions they engender
will be so intense, and the experience so absorbing, as
irresistibly to sweep away all opposing doubts and fill every
craving with the triumphant flood of life. What overwhelming
revelations of the providence of God and eternal life, crowding
the cosmos at every point with the workings of poetic justice, may
thus be made to prepared spirits, only those who receive them
know. Paul said he was caught up into the third heaven and heard
unspeakable words. It is to be believed that such visions, while
often illusory, are sometimes genuine. A test to discriminate the
spurious and the authentic will one day be secured. Meanwhile it
is either a faithless faintheartedness or a vulgar arrogance to
omit from the data of our expected fate those thoughts, which,
though beyond the reaches of our souls, nevertheless irresistibly
allure our attention and enchain our affection; ideas belonging to
our nature, though transcending our experience, and, while
surpassing our faculties, still attracting us to our destiny. What
are presentiments but divine wings of the spirit fluttering toward
our unseen goal?

Again, the great metaphysicians, who have elaborated the
idealistic philosophy in so many forms, exhibit the mind of man to
us as superior to the cosmic spectacle it contemplates projected
in immensity. They portray the material creation as a phantasmal
show of mind, a phenomenal process and aspect of spirit,
indissoluble centers of consciousness alone having solid verity
and stay, while matter and force and times and places whirl and
pass, combine and dissolve.

Likewise the mathematicians, with their mighty calculus, translate
all quantities and qualities, all objects and operations, into
numerical symbols, and with these intellectual toys play the same
miraculous tricks that the Creator himself plays with the
originals. They symbolize purely imaginary quantities, bring them
into relations and pass them through certain operations, and
thereby discover truths which are found to have permanent
objective validity. It demonstrates, as said before, that the
filial mind which thus wanders in thought through the house of the
Father, and, everywhere making itself familiarly at home, disports
among His treasures, is of the same type with the parental Mind.

And now, still farther, that the cultivators of physical science
are pushing their discoveries and their theories to ultimates, we
begin to see the adamantine structure of material nature melting
into a system of ideal equivalents, vaporizing into an undulatory
ether, vanishing before our microscopes in immaterial bases of
thought, reason, law and will. The gases have just been first
liquified and then actually solidified, confirming the speculative
announcement long before made that oxygen and hydrogen are metals
volatilized. Many valuable and strange discoveries have been
reached in physical science by following prophetic declarations
made a priori on grounds of pure reason. The same proofs of
intellectual design and purpose are discerned in the order of
atomic combination, in the beauty of crystals and dewdrops and
snowflakes, in the perfect geometrical symmetry of minerals and
flowers, and in the same spiral adjustment of the leaves on a tree
and of the orbits of the planets in the sky, as in the artistic
works of man. Intellect and will are as much shown in the
production of a palm tree as they are in the production of a poem
And so, before the gaze of the accomplished and devout scientist,
matter is translated into terms of mind, rather than the reverse,
and the whole cosmos is transmuted into a divine laboratory of
ideal powers, a divine gallery of ideal pictures, a divine theater
for the eternal adventures of conscious spirits.

In mental conception man deals with mathematical infinites as
easily as with the pettiest objects, dilates a point to the
universe and shrinks the universe to a point, condenses eternity
into a moment or stretches a moment to eternity. It has been shown
that if correspondent diminution or enlargement in the faculties
of sense and intelligence and in all the forces concerned were
made, the whole stellar system and its contents might be dwarfed
into the bulk of a grain of sand, or so magnified that each grain
would fill the space now occupied by the whole, and no one would
perceive any change whatever in the scale. In reply to the
statement that nothing can act where it is not, it has been proved
that every atom is virtually omnipresent. It takes the entire
universe to constitute an atom, since the forces centered in each
atom are connected with the whole by the insunderable continuity
of all the laws of being. The science of molecular physics as
expounded by its latest masters is not less astounding than the
wildest soarings of transcendental metaphysics. For instance, it
is proved that if there be ultimate atoms their size must be so
small that it would require at least five hundred millions of them
to an inch in length. In a cubic inch of hydrogen gas, then, for
example, there are 125,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 one hundred
and twenty five septillions of atoms, moving with the inconceivable
velocity that is implied by their making thousands of millions
of changes of direction every second. The view of the dynamic s
tructure of the universe opened in this direction is as
appalling as that unveiled in the opposite direction by the
largest extension of the nebular hypothesis. He who can gaze here
with steady reason need not be staggered by the sublimest doctrine
of religion. Amazed at the spectacle of creative power and wisdom,
equally amazed at the discovering faculty of man, we feel it to be
incredible that he should have been made capable of such thoughts
only to be annihilated after a brief tantalization. Confronting
the immeasurable wilderness of divine glory, strewn all through
with prizes before which his soul burns with the unconsumable fire
of a god like ambition, man lifts his eye to worship and reaches
out his hand to receive. Is he merely taunted with the starry sky,
and mocked with an infinite illusion of progress, suddenly barred
with endless night and oblivion? Behold him emerging out of
nothingness, mastering his self conscious identity, climbing over
the rounds of symbolic experience and language through the heights
of knowledge and love. Strange, helpless, sublime prince of the
universe, beggar of God, when he has attained the summit of
illimitable perception, holding immortal joys in full prospect,
shall he be dashed back into nonentity? Is it not fitter that he
be welcomed by triumphant initiation into the family of the
deathless Father?

Think of the advancement man has made since the time when he was a
cannibal cave dweller, shivering out of the glacial epoch, and
contending with wild beasts for a foothold on the earth, till now
that he enjoys the idealism of Berkeley, wields the quaternions of
Hamilton, uses the lightnings for his red sandaled messengers,
holds his spectroscope to a star and tells what elements compose
it, or to an outskirting nebula and declares it a mass of
incandescent hydrogen. From such a background of accomplished fact
he seems really to have a right to peer forth into the unbounded
future and promise himself an unbounded destiny. The repetition of
such a progress, nay much less, it may not unreasonably be
imagined would raise the curtains from unsuspected secrets, bring
the family of intelligences scattered over all worlds into
conscious communication, and accomplish the deliverance of the
whole creation travailing and groaning together unto this day for
the redemption of the creature. What a splendid, almost incredible
task man has already achieved in disentangling the apparent
astronomic motions and converting them into the real ones. How
immensely sublimer and more complex is the position of man on this
planet than it seemed to the primitive savage, who knew only what
his crude senses taught him, although, all the while, the moon was
circling about him twenty five hundred miles an hour, and he was
whirling with the revolving earth a thousand miles an hour, and
spinning around the sun over thirty thousand miles an hour, and
swooping with the whole solar system through the blue void with a
still swifter gyre in a yet vaster cycle! This is demonstrated
physical fact. Its harmonic correlate in the spiritual sphere
would be nothing less than a lease of eternal existence for the
soul which sees endless invitations ahead, and exults at the
prospect of an eternal pursuit of them, its reason and affection
affiliated with those of the whole divine household of immortals.
Two or three generations ago it would have been more inconceivable
that men a hundred miles apart could audibly converse together, as
they now do by means of the telephone, than it is at this day to
believe that communication may at some future time be opened
between the inhabitants of the earth and the inhabitants of Sirius
through the vibrations of the ethereal medium.

Futhermore, the idea of the infinite God, in possession of which
man finds himself, is a warrant for his immortality. There cannot
be more in an effect than was in its cause, though there may be
less. We perceive intelligence, orderly purpose, as well as power,
in nature. We find in ourselves all the explicit attributes and
treasures of consciousness. Reasoning back by indubitable steps we
come to an uncaused, unlimited, infinite Being, the underived and
eternal source of all that is. This idea in our minds of a Being
of absolute perfection, whose boundless consciousness as being
necessarily indivisible must be totally present at every point of
infinitude, is the charter of our own divine nature and heirship.
For we can become, even here, friends and companions of this
omnipresent One, of whose essence and attributes everything below
is but a defective transcript or dimmed revelation. This idea of
Himself is the gift of God to us. To suppose that we are capable
of originating it implies a greater miracle than the one it seeks
to account for, and really puts ourselves in the place of God. Can
we imagine that we are the creators of God? If the absolute
noumenal Power beyond all phenomena be unknowable, it cannot
contain less, but must contain more than all the attributes of the
material and spiritual creation which has proceeded thence. The
noblest and best spirits of all lands and ages have walked in full
fellowship with this Being, seeking supremely to serve and love
Him in the subjection of self will and in the doing of good. Many
a nameless saint, in a pure consecration, has heroically thought
and suffered and aspired, worn out life in slow toils or offered
it up in sharp sacrifice, for the good of fellow creatures, as a
tribute to God, and exhaled the last breath in a prayer of love
and trust. Such faithful servants and comrades must be dear to the
Infinite Spirit, and it is natural to believe that He will keep
them with him forever. When Christ, in self sacrificing love,
submitted to death on the cross, saying, "Father, into Thy hands I
commit my spirit," he who can believe that the magnanimous
sufferer was disappointed, blotted out and extinguished, thus
reveals the grade of his own insight, but does not refute the
greater hope of nobler seers. It seems as if the idea of God, with
loving faith and obedience to its requirements, planted in a soul
which had not inherited immortality would straightway begin to
develop it there. The atmosphere of eternity alone befits a nature
which feels itself living in the companionship of God. Everything
subject to decay cowers into oblivion from before the idea of that
august, incorruptible presence. The fear of death is but the
recoil of the immortal from mortality. When man voluntarily faces
death without fear, even courting martyrdom with a radiant joy, it
is because there is in him, deeper than consciousness, a mystic
knowledge that he is essentially eternal and cannot perish. He who
freely sacrifices anything thereby proves himself superior to that
which he sacrifices. Man freely sacrifices his life. Therefore he
is immortal.

The ancient Semitic philosopher and poet who wrote the book of
Job, brooding on the strange problem of life and death, murmured,
"Man giveth up the ghost, and where is he?" With each successive
generation, for many ages, countless millions have dissolved and
vanished into the vast, dumb mystery. Now, the spectator,
remembering all this, stands beneath the dome of midnight,
imploringly breathes the mystic sigh, "Man giveth up the ghost,
and where is he?" The only responses is the same dread silence
still maintained as of old. And, in a moment more, he who breathed
the wondering inquiry is himself gone. Whither? Into the vacant
dark of nothingness? Into the transparent sphere of perfect
intelligence? The sublimity of the demand seems to ally the finite
questioner with the infinite Creator; and, with a presentiment of
marvelous joy, we look beyond the ignorant veil at the close of
earth, and hold that eternity itself will not exhaust the
possibilities of the soul, whose career shall be kept from
stagnation by constant interspersals of death and birth,
refreshing disembodiments from worn out forms and reincarnations
in new.

If this life on the earth, where man feels himself a stranger, be
his all, how superfluously he is equipped with foresights and
longings that outrun every conceivable limit! Why is he gifted
with powers of reason and demands of love so far beyond his
conditions? If there be no future for him, why is he tortured with
the inspiring idea of the eternal pursuit of the still flying goal
of perfection? Is it possible that the hero and the martyr and the
saint, whose experience is laden with painful sacrifices for
humanity, are mistaken? and that the slattern and the voluptuary
and the sluggard, whose course is one of base self indulgence, are
correct? Is it credible that, with no justifying explanation
hereafter, it should be ordained that the more gifted and
disinterested a man is the more he shall uselessly suffer, from
his sympathetic carriage of the greater share in the sin and
sorrow of all his race? No, far back in the past there has been
some dark mystery which yet flings its dense shadows over our
history here; and in the obscurity we cannot read its solution.
But there is a solution. And when in some blessed age to come
mankind shall outgrow their discords and be reconciled, so that
their divinest living member can become the focalizing center of
their collective inspiration, through him the truth will be
revealed. The most inspired individual can only in a degree
anticipate his age. At a certain distance he is tethered by his
connections with the race. They must be near the goal before he
can deliver the final message. Inspiration and revelation are as
real as the sensuous method of outer knowledge. Spirit or
consciousness, as that which is its own evidence, has a more than
mathematic validity. When men purely love one another, and, with
supreme loyalty, seek truth, ignorance and delusion will melt away
before the encroaching illumination from God, and the dominion of
death will be abolished.

That the human mind shall be the victim of death is incongruous
with its rank. The atheistic scientist who imagines that the
energy of the stellar creation is gradually dissipating, so that
the whole scheme must at last perish; and who sees the soul, then,
like a belated butterfly, fall frozen on the boundary of a dead
universe, refutes his own dismal creed by the grandeur of the
power shown in thinking it. The might of love, the faculty of
thought, the instinct of curiosity, are insatiable; and that which
remains wooing them to grasp it, is infinite. And, after all is
said, it seems certain that we are either discerpted emanations
and avatars of God suffering transient incarnations for a purpose,
and then to be resumed, immortal in his immortality; or else we
are separate and inherent entities, immortal in ourselves. The
former faith ought to satisfy the proudest ambition. The latter
faith yields every motive for contentment and aspiring obedience.
Man, forever feeding on the unknown, is the mysterious guest of
God in the universe. We cannot believe that, the hospitality of
the infinite Housekeeper becoming exhausted, He will ever blow out
the lights and quench the guests.

CHAPTER VI.

THE TRANSIENT AND THE PERMANENT IN THE DESTINY OF MAN.

A COMPANION of Solomon once said to him, "Give me, O king of
wisdom, a maxim equally applicable on all occasions, that I may
fortify myself with it against the caprices of fortune." Solomon
reflected a moment, then gave him, in these words, the maxim he
sought: "This, too, shall pass away." The courtier at first felt
disappointed, but, meditating awhile, perceived the pertinent and
profound meaning hidden in the transparent simplicity of the
words. Are you afflicted? Be not despondent or rash, This, too,
shall pass away. Are you blessed? Be not elated or careless, This
too shall pass away. Are you in danger? in temptation? in glory?
Still, for your proper guidance, in relation to each one,
remember; This too shall pass away. And so on, under every
diversity of situation in which man can be placed. Whatever
restraint, whatever encouragement, whatever consolation he needs,
it is all contained in the profound thought, This too shall pass
away.

This maxim for all times needs to be supplemented by a
corresponding maxim for all persons. There is a truth constantly
suited for the variety of immortal souls, as the foregoing one is
for the variety of temporal changes. Let us see what that truth is
and set it in a fitting aphorism.

The desires of the human soul are boundless. Nothing can satisfy
its wishes by fulfilling them and circumscribing there a fixed
limit. It would devour the whole creation, and hungrily cry for
more. Whatever extension of power or fruition it can conceive, it
wants for its own, and frets if deprived of it. Now, if the spirit
of the Creator is in the creature, this illimitable passion of
acquisition cannot be a mere mockery. It must be a hint of the
will of God and of the destiny of his child in whom He has
implanted it. It is prophetic of something awaiting fulfillment.
But what is the prophecy, and how is it to be fulfilled? The
answer to this question will give us that maxim of eternal
humanity which accords with the maxim of transient fortune. And
thus it reads: Over all the things for which men struggle with
each other, there is one thing, out of the sphere of struggle,
which indivisibly belongs to every man, and that one thing is the
whole universe! Be not baffled by the appearance of transcendental
mysticism in this maxim, as the ancient inquirer was by the
appearance of commonplace in his, but seek its significance.

A son is an heir of his father. All men are sons of God, though
only a few, and that in varying degree, are distinctly conscious
as yet of their sonship. But, despite their ignorance, all are
tending, more or less swiftly, toward the goal of their nature and
inheritance.

There are exclusive prizes which men can monopolize: and they
fight with one another for these, because the more some have the
less others can obtain. There are also inclusive prizes, or modes
of holding and enjoying property which do not interfere with
universal participation, with universal, undivided ownership. In
these no one need have any the less because every one has all.
This is the region of reason, imagination, affection, the empire
of the soul. The more one knows of mathematical truth, poetic
beauty or moral good, the easier it is, not the harder, for others
to know and enjoy as much or more. In this divine domain no
monopoly or conflict is possible, because the outward moving fence
of each consciousness, retreating and vanishing before its
conquests of experience, is a vacuum with respect to that of every
other. They overlap and penetrate one another as if they were
mutually nonexistent. For example, the pleasure any one takes in a
picture, or in a play, does not lessen the pleasure which remains
for the other spectators; but, on the contrary, adds to it if they
have sympathy.

Now, the all inclusive prize of desire, the very secret of the
Godhead namely, the power of taking a full pure joy in every form
of being, in every substance and phenomenon of the creation is
forever wooing every soul; and every soul, in proportion to its
advancement, is forever embracing it just as freely as if no other
soul existed, yet has the zest of its enjoyments endlessly varied
and heightened by mutual contemplations and reflections of those
of all the rest. Such is the superiority of the disinterested
spirit over the selfish flesh, of the inner world over the outer
world, of good over evil.

Mental ownership is sympathetic and universal, physical
appropriation antagonistic and individual. We hate and oppose our
fellows that with hand and foot we may monopolize some wretched
grains of good, while God is inviting every one of us with our
mind and heart to accept as fast as we can his whole undivided
infinitude of good. The universe is the house of the Father; the
true spirit of the family is disinterested, and consequently every
child is heir of the whole even as the apostle Paul said, joint
heir with Christ. Register, then, deeply in memory, side by side
with the historic maxim for all times, This too shall pass away!
the religious maxim for all souls. Over those things for which men
struggle with each other, there is one thing, out of the sphere of
struggle, which belongs indivisibly to every man, and that one
thing is the whole universe! Then, should you ever feel vexed or
disheartened by the irritations and failures you meet in your
journey through the evanescent masquerade of this world, pause and
say to yourself, Is it worthy of me, while the entire realm of
existence asks me to appropriate it in ever expansive possession,
to be angry or sad because some infinitesimal speck of it does not
grant me as much of itself as I crave?

The more things we love the richer we are. The fewer things we
care for the freer we are. O blessed wealth and wretched freedom,
how shall we perfect and reconcile them? This is the secret: If we
love the divine and eternal in everything, and care not for the
limiting and perishable evil connected with it, then we shall at
once be both rich and free. The former practice educates our
powers; the latter emancipates them. The true use of renunciation
is as a means for larger fulfillment. Detach from lower and lesser
objects in order to attach to higher and greater ones. Be always
ready to renounce the meaner at the invitation of the nobler. The
soul, like a grand frigate, may be loosely tied by a thousand
separate strings, but should be held firm by one cable. Our
relations to fellow creatures are those threads; our supreme
relation to God, that cable. Those are the gossamer of time; this
the adamant of eternity.

The lame man cries, O, that I could walk! He who can walk says, O,
that I could fly! If he could soar, he would sigh, O, that I were
omnipresent, and therefore had no need to move! The end of one
wish is but the beginning of another; and the craving of every
human soul, let loose in sincere expression, is absolutely
illimitable. It always comes, in the last analysis, to this; every
one really longs to be God. Therefore, unless the rational
creation is mendacious, to be deified, is, in some mystical but
true sense, the final destiny of all souls. Every one, in its
consciousness fully developed and harmonized, shall become a focus
of universal being, a finite reflex of God, the infinite God
himself remaining eternally the same unescapable and incomprehensible
mystery as ever.

There are, therefore, two supreme maxims for souls conditioned in
time and space but destined for eternity and infinity a maxim of
comfort for those who suffer, and a maxim of impulse for those who
aspire. The one, to be used in view of every fear, every evil or
limit. This, too, shall pass away! The other, to be used in view
of every insatiable desire, Over all those things for which men
struggle with each other, there is one thing, out of the sphere of
struggle, which indivisibly belongs to every man, and that one
thing is the whole universe!

Nothing but the Absolute Good is everlasting: and that must belong
to all who, being essential personalities, are superior to death.
Blessed, blessed, then, are they who hunger and thirst after God;
for, by a real transubstantiation assimilating Him, they shall as
divinely live forevermore. They shall cease to say any more of
anything, This, too, shall pass away! because the infinite God
shall have said to each of them, Son, thou art ever with me, and
all that I have is thine!

If the view above marked out, a view in many respects so sublime
and satisfactory, a view which goes so far to explain the
mysteries, reconcile the contradictions, and transfigure the evils
of our transient life and lot below be not true, it must either be
because some other higher and better view is the truth in which
case we certainly ought to be contented or else the creative and
providential plan of God is inferior to the thought of one of his
creatures. It is not possible for me to suppose that a speculative
theory of my brain can transcend in harmony and beneficence the
design of the infinite God. Could it do so, then, in reality, I
should be a higher being than He. I should veritably have
dethroned Him and vaulted into his place. Is not that a pitch of
impiety and absurdity too great even for the pride of man,
insurgent atom of criticising assumption, set, baffled at every
point, amidst the awful immensity of existence? Here, then, is
rest. Either our highest view is the truth, or the truth is higher
and better than that. For to think that his thought is superior to
the purpose of God, thus making himself the real God, is too much
for the extremist human egotist within the limits of sanity.

Therefore, until a better theory is propounded, we hold that the
destiny of the soul is to become, through the progressive
actualization of its potential consciousness, a free thinking
center of the universe, an infinitesimal mirror of God. The
adventures of the different souls, full of inexhaustible curiosity
and relish in the mutually revealing contacts of their degrees of
development and originalities of personal character and treasure,
constitute the endless drama of spiritual existence within the
phenomenal theater of the material creation. And still the
infinite One serenely smiles on the troubled play of the eternal
Many; because the psychological kaleidoscope of their experience
is a continuous improvisation of justice, weaving the fate of Each
with the fates of All, and transfusing the monotonous unity of the
Same with the zestful variety of the Other.