II. THE CULT OF THE DEAD AND THE FAMILY HEARTH.

Round the winter festival cluster certain customs apparently connected
with distinctively domestic religion, rather than with such public and
communal cults as we have considered under the heading of Sacrifice and
Sacrament. A festival of the family--that is, perhaps, what Christmas
most prominently is to-day: it is the great season for gatherings "round
the old fireside"; it is a joyous time for the children of the house, and
the memory of the departed is vivid then, if unexpressed. Further, by the
Yule log customs and certain other ceremonies still practised in the
remoter corners of Europe, we are carried back to a stage of thought at
which the dead were conceived as hovering about or |181| visiting the
abodes of the living. Ancestral spirits, it seems, were once believed to
be immanent in the fire that burned on the hearth, and had to be
propitiated with libations, while elsewhere the souls of the dead were
thought to return to their old homes at the New Year, and meat and drink
had to be set out for them. The Church's establishment of All Souls' Day
did much to keep practices of tendance of the departed to early November,
but sometimes these have wandered to later dates and especially to
Christmas. In folk-practices directed towards the dead two tendencies are
to be found: on the one hand affection or at all events consideration for
the departed persists, and efforts are made to make them comfortable; on
the other, they are regarded with dread, and the sight of them is avoided
by the living.

In the passage quoted from Caesarius of Arles there was mention of the
laying of tables with abundance of food at the Kalends. The same practice
is condemned by St. Jerome in the fifth century, and is by him specially
connected with Egypt.{48} He, like Caesarius and others, regards it as a
kind of charm to ensure abundance during the coming year, but it is very
possible that its real purpose was different, that the food was an
offering to supernatural beings, the guardians and representatives of the
dead.{49} Burchardus of Worms in the early eleventh century says
definitely that in his time tables were laid with food and drink and
three knives for "those three Sisters whom the ancients in their folly
called _Parcae_."{50} The _Parcae_ were apparently identified with the
three "weird" Sisters known in England and in other Teutonic regions, and
seem to have some connection with the fairies. As we shall see later on,
it is still in some places the custom to lay out tables for supernatural
beings, whether, as at All Souls' tide, explicitly for the dead, or for
Frau Perchta, or for the Virgin or some other Christian figure. Possibly
the name _Modranicht_ (night of mothers), which Bede gives to Christmas
Eve,{51} may be connected with this practice.

Not remote, probably, in origin from a belief in "ghosts" is the driving
away of spirits that sometimes takes place about |182| Christmas-time.
Many peoples, as Dr. Frazer has shown, have an annual expulsion of
goblins, ghosts, devils, witches, and evil influences, commonly at the
end of the Old or beginning of the New Year. Sometimes the beings so
driven away are definitely the spirits of the departed. An appalling
racket and a great flare of torches are common features of these
expulsions, and we shall meet with similar customs during the Christmas
season. Such purifications, according to Dr. Frazer, are often preceded
or followed by periods of licence, for when the burden of evil is about
to be, or has just been, removed, it is felt that a little temporary
freedom from moral restraints may be allowed with impunity.{52} Hence
possibly, in part, the licence which has often attended the Christmas
season.


III. OMENS AND CHARMS FOR THE NEW YEAR.

Customs of augury are to be met with at various dates, which may mark the
gradual shifting of the New Year festival from early November to January
1, while actual charms to secure prosperity are commonest at Christmas
itself or at the modern New Year. Magical rather than religious in
character, they are attempts to discover or influence the future by a
sort of crude scientific method based on supposed analogies. Beneath the
charms lie the primitive ideas that like produces like and that things
which have once been in contact continue to act upon one another after
they are separated in space.{53} The same ideas obviously underlie many
of the sacramental practices alluded to a few pages back, and these are
often of the nature of charms. Probably, too, among New Year charms
should be included such institutions as the bonfires on Hallowe'en in
Celtic countries, on Guy Fawkes Day in England, and at Martinmas in
Germany, for it would seem that they are intended to secure by imitation
a due supply of sunshine.{54} The principle that "well begun is well
ended"--or, as the Germans have it, "_Anfang gut, alles gut_"--is
fundamental in New Year practices: hence the custom of giving presents as
auguries of wealth during the coming year; hence perhaps partly the heavy
eating and drinking--a kind of charm to ensure abundance.

|183| Enough has already been said about the attitude of the early
Church towards traditional folk-customs. Of the position taken up by the
later mediaeval clergy we get an interesting glimpse in the "Largum Sero"
of a certain monk Alsso of Brevnov, an account of Christmas practices in
Bohemia written about the year 1400. It supplies a link between modern
customs and the Kalends prohibitions of the Dark Ages. Alsso tells of a
number of laudable Christmas Eve practices, gives elaborate Christian
interpretations of them, and contrasts them with things done by bad
Catholics with ungodly intention. Here are some of his complaints:--

    Presents, instead of being given, as they should be, in memory of
    God's great Gift to man, are sent because he who does not give freely
    will be unlucky in the coming year. Money, instead of being given to
    the poor, as is seemly, is laid on the table to augur wealth, and
    people open their purses that luck may enter. Instead of using fruit
    as a symbol of Christ the Precious Fruit, men cut it open to predict
    the future [probably from the pips]. It is a laudable custom to make
    great white loaves at Christmas as symbols of the True Bread, but
    evil men set out such loaves that the gods may eat of them.

Alsso's assumption is that the bad Catholics are diabolically perverting
venerable Christmas customs, but there can be little doubt that precisely
the opposite was really the case--the Christian symbolism was merely a
gloss upon pagan practices. In one instance Alsso admits that the Church
had adopted and transformed a heathen usage: the old _calendisationes_ or
processions with an idol Bel had been changed into processions of clergy
and choir-boys with the crucifix. Round the villages on the Eve and
during the Octave of Christmas went these messengers of God, robed in
white raiment as befitted the servants of the Lord of purity; they would
chant joyful anthems of the Nativity, and receive in return some money
from the people--they were, in fact, carol-singers. Moreover with their
incense they would drive out the Devil from every corner.{55}

Alsso's attitude is one of compromise, or at least many of the old
heathen customs are allowed by him, when reinterpreted in a |184|
Christian sense. Such seems to have been the general tendency of the
later Catholic Church, and also of Anglicanism in so far as it continued
the Catholic tradition. It will be seen, however, from what has already
been said, that the English Puritans were but following early Christian
precedents when they attacked the paganism that manifested itself at
Christmas.

A strong Puritan onslaught is to be found in the "Anatomie of Abuses" by
the Calvinist, Philip Stubbes, first published in 1583. "Especially," he
says, "in Christmas tyme there is nothing els vsed but cardes, dice,
tables, maskyng, mumming, bowling, and suche like fooleries; and the
reason is, that they think they haue a commission and prerogatiue that
tyme to doe what they list, and to followe what vanitie they will. But
(alas!) doe they thinke that they are preuiledged at that time to doe
euill? The holier the time is (if one time were holier than an other, as
it is not), the holier ought their exercises to bee. Can any tyme
dispence with them, or giue them libertie to sinne? No, no; the soule
which sinneth shall dye, at what tyme soeuer it offendeth....
Notwithstandyng, who knoweth not that more mischeef is that tyme
committed than in all the yere besides?"{56}

When the Puritans had gained the upper hand they proceeded to the
suppression not only of abuses, but of the festival itself. An excellent
opportunity for turning the feast into a fast--as the early Church had
done, it will be remembered, with the Kalends festival--came in 1644. In
that year Christmas Day happened to fall upon the last Wednesday of the
month, a day appointed by the Lords and Commons for a Fast and
Humiliation. In its zeal against carnal pleasures Parliament published
the following "Ordinance for the better observation of the Feast of the
Nativity of Christ":--

    "Whereas some doubts have been raised whether the next Fast shall be
    celebrated, because it falleth on the day which, heretofore, was
    usually called the Feast of the Nativity of our Saviour; the lords
    and commons do order and ordain that public notice be given, that the
    Fast appointed to be kept on the last Wednesday in every month, ought
    to be observed until it be otherwise ordered by both houses; |185|
    and that this day particularly is to be kept with the more solemn
    humiliation because it may call to remembrance our sins and the sins
    of our forefathers, who have turned this Feast, pretending the memory
    of Christ, into an extreme forgetfulness of him, by giving liberty to
    carnal and sensual delights; being contrary to the life which Christ
    himself led here upon earth, and to the spiritual life of Christ in
    our souls; for the sanctifying and saving whereof Christ was pleased
    both to take a human life, and to lay it down again."{57}

But the English people's love of Christmas could not be destroyed. "These
poor simple creatures are made after superstitious festivals, after
unholy holidays," said a speaker in the House of Commons. "I have known
some that have preferred Christmas Day before the Lord's Day," said
Calamy in a sermon to the Lords in Westminster Abbey, "I have known those
that would be sure to receive the Sacrament on Christmas Day though they
did not receive it all the year after. This was the superstition of this
day, and the profaneness was as great. There were some that did not play
cards all the year long, yet they must play at Christmas." Various
protests were made against the suppression of the festival. Though
Parliament sat every Christmas Day from 1644 to 1656, the shops in London
in 1644 were all shut, and in 1646 the people who opened their shops were
so roughly used that next year they petitioned Parliament to protect them
in future. In 1647 the shops were indeed all closed, but evergreen
decorations were put up in the City, and the Lord Mayor and City Marshal
had to ride about setting fire to them. There were even riots in country
places, notably at Canterbury. With the Restoration Christmas naturally
came back to full recognition, though it may be doubted whether it has
ever been quite the same thing since the Puritan Revolution.{58}

Protestantism, in proportion to its thoroughness and the strength of its
Puritan elements, has everywhere tended to destroy old pagan traditions
and the festivals to which they cling. Calvinism has naturally been more
destructive than Lutheranism, which in the Scandinavian countries has
left standing many of the externals of Catholicism and also many
Christmas customs that are purely pagan, while in Germany it has
tolerated and even hallowed the |186| ritual of the Christmas-tree. But
more powerful than religious influences, in rooting out the old customs,
have been modern education and the growth of modern industry, breaking up
the old traditional country life, and putting in its place the mobile,
restless life of the great town. Many of the customs we shall have to
consider belong essentially to the country, and have no relation to the
life of the modern city. When communal in their character, a man could
not perform them in separation from his rustic neighbours. Practices
domestic in their purpose may indeed be transferred to the modern city,
but it is the experience of folk-lorists that they seldom descend to the
second generation.

It is in regions like Bavaria, Tyrol, Styria, or the Slav parts of the
Austrian Empire, or Roumania and Servia, that the richest store of
festival customs is to be found nowadays. Here the old agricultural life
has been less interfered with, and at the same time the Church, whether
Roman or Greek, has succeeded in keeping modern ideas away from the
people and in maintaining a popular piety that is largely polytheistic in
its worship of the saints, and embodies a great amount of traditional
paganism. In our half-suburbanized England but little now remains of
these vestiges of primitive religion and magic whose interest and
importance were only realized by students in the later nineteenth
century, when the wave of "progress" was fast sweeping them away.

Old traditions have a way of turning up unexpectedly in remote corners,
and it is hard to say for certain that any custom is altogether extinct;
every year, however, does its work of destruction, and it may well be
that some of the practices here described in the present tense have
passed into the Limbo of discarded things.

|187| |188| |189|




CHAPTER VII

ALL HALLOW TIDE TO MARTINMAS


    All Saints' and All Souls' Days, their Relation to a New Year
    Festival--All Souls' Eve and Tendance of the Departed--Soul Cakes in
    England and on the Continent--Pagan Parallels of All
    Souls'--Hallowe'en Charms and Omens--Hallowe'en Fires--Guy Fawkes
    Day--"Old Hob," the _Schimmelreiter_, and other Animal
    Masks--Martinmas and its Slaughter--Martinmas Drinking--St. Martin's
    Fires in Germany--Winter Visitors in the Low Countries and
    Germany--St. Martin as Gift-bringer--St. Martin's Rod.


ALL SAINTS' AND ALL SOULS' DAYS.

In the reign of Charles I. the young gentlemen of the Middle Temple were
accustomed to reckon All Hallow Tide (November 1) the beginning of
Christmas.{1} We may here do likewise and start our survey of winter
festivals with November, in the earlier half of which, apparently, fell
the Celtic and Teutonic New Year's Days. It is impossible to fix precise
dates, but there is reason for thinking that the Celtic year began about
November 1,[86]{2} and the Teutonic about November 11.{3}

On November 1 falls one of the greater festivals of the western Church,
All Saints'--or, to give it its old English name, All Hallows'--and on
the morrow is the solemn commemoration of the departed--All Souls'. In
these two anniversaries the Church has |190| preserved at or near the
original date one part of the old beginning-of-winter festival--the part
concerned with the cult of the dead. Some of the practices belonging to
this side of the feast have been transferred to the season of Christmas
and the Twelve Days, but these have often lost their original meaning,
and it is to All Souls' Day that we must look for the most conscious
survivals of that care for the departed which is so marked a feature of
primitive religion. Early November, when the leaves are falling, and all
around speaks of mortality, is a fitting time for the commemoration of
the dead.

The first clear testimony to All Souls' Day is found at the end of the
tenth century, and in France. All Saints' Day, however, was certainly
observed in England, France, and Germany in the eighth century,{5} and
probably represents an attempt on the part of the Church to turn the
minds of the faithful away from the pagan belief in and tendance of
"ghosts" to the contemplation of the saints in the glory of Paradise. It
would seem that this attempt failed, that the people needed a way of
actually doing something for their own dead, and that All Souls' Day with
its solemn Mass and prayers for the departed was intended to supply this
need and replace the traditional practices.{6} Here again the attempt
was only partly successful, for side by side with the Church's rites
there survived a number of usages related not to any Christian doctrine
of the after-life, but to the pagan idea, widespread among many peoples,
that on one day or night of the year the souls of the dead return to
their old homes and must be entertained.

All Souls' Day then appeals to instincts older than Christianity. How
strong is the hold of ancient custom even upon the sceptical and
irreligious is shown very strikingly in Roman Catholic countries: even
those who never go to church visit the graves of their relations on All
Souls' Eve to deck them with flowers.

The special liturgical features of the Church's celebration are the
Vespers, Matins, and Lauds of the Dead on the evening of November 1, and
the solemn Requiem Mass on November 2, with the majestic "Dies irae" and
the oft-recurrent versicle, "Requiem aeternam dona eis, Domine, et lux
perpetua luceat |191| eis," that most beautiful of prayers. The priest
and altar are vested in black, and a catafalque with burning tapers round
it stands in the body of the church. For the popular customs on the Eve
we may quote Dr. Tylor's general description:--

    "In Italy the day is given to feasting and drinking in honour of the
    dead, while skulls and skeletons in sugar and paste form appropriate
    children's toys. In Tyrol, the poor souls released from purgatory
    fire for the night may come and smear their burns with the melted fat
    of the 'soul light' on the hearth, or cakes are left for them on the
    table, and the room is kept warm for their comfort. Even in Paris the
    souls of the departed come to partake of the food of the living. In
    Brittany the crowd pours into the churchyard at evening, to kneel
    barefoot at the grave of dead kinsfolk, to fill the hollow of the
    tombstone with holy water, or to pour libations of milk upon it. All
    night the church bells clang, and sometimes a solemn procession of
    the clergy goes round to bless the graves. In no household that night
    is the cloth removed, for the supper must be left for the souls to
    come and take their part, nor must the fire be put out, where they
    will come to warm themselves. And at last, as the inmates retire to
    rest, there is heard at the door a doleful chant--it is the souls,
    who, borrowing the voices of the parish poor, have come to ask the
    prayers of the living."{7}

To this may be added some further accounts of All Souls' Eve as the one
night in the year when the spirits of the departed are thought to revisit
their old homes.

In the Vosges mountains while the bells are ringing in All Souls' Eve it
is a custom to uncover the beds and open the windows in order that the
poor souls may enter and rest. Prayer is made for the dead until late in
the night, and when the last "De profundis" has been said "the head of
the family gently covers up the beds, sprinkles them with holy water, and
shuts the windows."{8}

The Esthonians on All Souls' Day provide a meal for the dead and invite
them by name. The souls arrive at the first cock-crow and depart at the
second, being lighted out of the house by the head of the family, who
waves a white cloth after them and bids them come again next year.{9}

In Brittany, as we have seen, the dead are thought to return at |192|
this season. It is believed that on the night between All Saints' and All
Souls' the church is lighted up and the departed attend a nocturnal Mass
celebrated by a phantom priest. All through the week, in one district,
people are afraid to go out after nightfall lest they should see some
dead person.{10} In Tyrol it is believed that the "poor souls" are
present in the howling winds that often blow at this time.{11}

In the Abruzzi on All Souls' Eve "before people go to sleep they place on
the table a lighted lamp or candle and a frugal meal of bread and water.
The dead issue from their graves and stalk in procession through every
street of the village.... First pass the souls of the good, and then the
souls of the murdered and the damned."{12}

In Sicily a strange belief is connected with All Souls' Day (_jornu di li
morti_): the family dead are supposed, like Santa Klaus in the North, to
bring presents to children; the dead relations have become the good
fairies of the little ones. On the night between November 1 and 2 little
Sicilians believe that the departed leave their dread abode and come to
town to steal from rich shopkeepers sweets and toys and new clothes.
These they give to their child relations who have been "good" and have
prayed on their behalf. Often they are clothed in white and wear silken
shoes, to elude the vigilance of the shopkeepers. They do not always
enter the houses; sometimes the presents are left in the children's shoes
put outside doors and windows. In the morning the pretty gifts are
attributed by the children to the _morti_ in whose coming their parents
have taught them to believe.{13}

A very widespread custom at this season is to burn candles, perhaps in
order to lighten the darkness for the poor souls. In Catholic Ireland
candles shine in the windows on the Vigil of All Souls',{14} in Belgium
a holy candle is burnt all night, or people walk in procession with
lighted tapers, while in many Roman Catholic countries, and even in the
Protestant villages of Baden, the graves are decked with lights as well
as flowers.{15}

Another practice on All Saints' and All Souls' Days, curiously |193|
common formerly in Protestant England, is that of making and giving
"soul-cakes." These and the quest of them by children were customary in
various English counties and in Scotland.{16} The youngsters would beg
not only for the cakes but also sometimes for such things as "apples and
strong beer," presumably to make a "wassail-bowl" of "lambswool," hot
spiced ale with roast apples in it.{17} Here is a curious rhyme which
they sang in Shropshire as they went round to their neighbours,
collecting contributions:--

   "Soul! soul! for a soul-cake!
    I pray, good missis, a soul-cake!
    An apple or pear, a plum or a cherry,
    Any good thing to make us merry.
    One for Peter, two for Paul,
    Three for Him who made us all.
    Up with the kettle, and down with the pan,
    Give us good alms, and we'll be gone."{18}

Shropshire is a county peculiarly rich in "souling" traditions, and one
old lady had cakes made to give away to the souling-children up to the
time of her death in 1884. At that period the custom of "souling" had
greatly declined in the county, and where it still existed the rewards
were usually apples or money. Grown men, as well as children, sometimes
went round, and the ditties sung often contained verses of good-wishes
for the household practically identical with those sung by wassailers at
Christmas.{19}

The name "soul-cake" of course suggests that the cakes were in some way
associated with the departed, whether given as a reward for prayers for
souls in Purgatory, or as a charity for the benefit of the "poor souls,"
or baked that the dead might feast upon them.[87] It seems most probable
that they were relics of a feast once laid out for the souls. On the
other hand it is just possible that they were originally a sacrament of
the corn-spirit. |194| A North Welsh tradition recorded by Pennant may
conceivably have preserved a vague memory of some agricultural
connection: he tells us that on receiving soul-cakes the poor people used
to pray to God to bless the next crop of wheat.{20}

Not in Great Britain alone are soul-cakes found; they are met with in
Belgium, southern Germany, and Austria. In western Flanders children set
up on All Souls' Eve little street altars, putting a crucifix or Madonna
with candles on a chair or stool, and begging passers-by for money "for
cakes for the souls in Purgatory." On All Souls' morning it is customary,
all over the Flemish part of Belgium, to bake little cakes of finest
white flour, called "soul-bread." They are eaten hot, and a prayer is
said at the same time for the souls in Purgatory. It is believed that a
soul is delivered for every cake eaten. At Antwerp the cakes are coloured
yellow with saffron to suggest the Purgatorial flames. In southern
Germany and Austria little white loaves of a special kind are baked; they
are generally oval in form, and are usually called by some name into
which the word "soul" enters. In Tyrol they are given to children by
their godparents; those for the boys have the shape of horses or hares,
those for the girls, of hens. In Tyrol the cakes left over at supper
remain on the table and are said to "belong to the poor souls."{21}

In Friuli in the north-east of Italy there is a custom closely
corresponding to our "soul-cakes." On All Souls' Day every family gives
away a quantity of bread. This is not regarded as a charity; all the
people of the village come to receive it and before eating it pray for
the departed of the donor's family. The most prosperous people are not
ashamed to knock at the door and ask for this _pane dei morti_.{22}

In Tyrol All Souls' is a day of licensed begging, which has become a
serious abuse. A noisy rabble of ragged and disorderly folk, with bags
and baskets to receive gifts, wanders from village to village, claiming
as a right the presents of provisions that were originally a freewill
offering for the benefit of the departed, and angrily abusing those who
refuse to give.{23}

The New Year is the time for a festival of the dead in many parts of the
world.{24} I may quote Dr. Frazer's account of what |195| goes on in
Tonquin; it shows a remarkable likeness to some European customs[88]:--

    "In Tonquin, as in Sumba, the dead revisit their kinsfolk and their
    old homes at the New Year. From the hour of midnight, when the New
    Year begins, no one dares to shut the door of his house for fear of
    excluding the ghosts, who begin to arrive at that time. Preparations
    have been made to welcome and refresh them after their long journey.
    Beds and mats are ready for their weary bodies to repose upon, water
    to wash their dusty feet, slippers to comfort them, and canes to
    support their feeble steps."{25}

In Lithuania, the last country in Europe to be converted to Christianity,
heathen traditions lingered long, and sixteenth- and seventeenth-century
travellers give accounts of a pagan New Year's feast which has great
interest. In October, according to one account, on November 2, according
to another, the whole family met together, strewed the tables with straw
and put sacks on the straw. Bread and two jugs of beer were then placed
on the table, and one of every kind of domestic animal was roasted before
the fire after a prayer to the god Zimiennik (possibly an ancestral
spirit), asking for protection through the year and offering the animals.
Portions were thrown to the corners of the room with the words "Accept
our burnt sacrifice, O Zimiennik, and kindly partake thereof." Then
followed a great feast. Further, the spirits of the dead were invited to
leave their graves and visit the bath-house, where platters of food were
spread out and left for three days. At the end of this time the remains
of the repast were set out over the graves and libations poured.{26}



The beginning of November is not solely a time of memory of the dead;
customs of other sorts linger, or until lately used to linger, about it,
especially in Scotland, northern England, Ireland, Cornwall, Wales, and
the West Midlands. One may conjecture that these are survivals from the
Celtic New Year's Day, for most of them are of the nature of omens or
charms. Apples and nuts are prominent on Hallowe'en, the Eve of All
|196| Saints;[89] they may be regarded either as a kind of sacrament of
the vegetation-spirit, or as simply intended by homoeopathic magic to
bring fulness and fruitfulness to their recipients. A custom once common
in the north of England{27} and in Wales{28} was to catch at apples
with the mouth, the fruit being suspended on a string, or on one end of a
large transverse beam with a lighted candle at the other end. In the
north apples and nuts were the feature of the evening feast, hence the
name "Nutcrack night."{29}

Again, at St. Ives in Cornwall every child is given a big apple on
Allhallows' Eve--"Allan Day" as it is called.{30} Nuts and apples were
also used as means of forecasting the future. In Scotland for instance
nuts were put into the fire and named after particular lads and lasses.
"As they burn quietly together or start from beside one another, the
course and issue of the courtship will be."{31} On Hallowe'en in
Nottinghamshire if a girl had two lovers and wanted to know which would
be the more constant, she took two apple-pips, stuck one on each cheek
(naming them after her lovers) and waited for one to fall off. The poet
Gay alludes to this custom:--

   "See from the core two kernels now I take,
    This on my cheek for Lubberkin is worn,
    And Booby Clod on t'other side is borne;
    But Booby Clod soon falls upon the ground,
    A certain token that his love's unsound;
    While Lubberkin sticks firmly to the last;
    Oh! were his lips to mine but joined so fast."{32}

In Nottinghamshire apples are roasted and the parings thrown over the
left shoulder. "Notice is taken of the shapes which the parings assume
when they fall to the ground. Whatever letter a paring resembles will be
the initial letter of the Christian name of the man or woman whom you
will marry."{33}

|197| Hallowe'en is indeed in the British Isles the favourite time for
forecasting the future, and various methods are employed for this
purpose.

A girl may cross her shoes upon her bedroom floor in the shape of a T and
say these lines:--

   "I cross my shoes in the shape of a T,
    Hoping this night my true love to see,
    Not in his best or worst array,
    But in the clothes of every day."

Then let her get into bed backwards without speaking any more that night,
and she will see her future husband in her dreams.{34}

"On All Hallowe'en or New Year's Eve," says Mr. W. Henderson, "a Border
maiden may wash her sark, and hang it over a chair to dry, taking care to
tell no one what she is about. If she lie awake long enough, she will see
the form of her future spouse enter the room and turn the sark. We are
told of one young girl who, after fulfilling this rite, looked out of bed
and saw a coffin behind the sark; it remained visible for some time and
then disappeared. The girl rose up in agony and told her family what had
occurred, and the next morning she heard of her lover's death."{35}

In Scotland{36} and Ireland{37} other methods of foreseeing the future
are practised on Hallowe'en; we need not consider them here, for we shall
have quite enough of such auguries later on. (Some Scottish customs are
introduced by Burns into his poem "Hallowe'en.") I may, however, allude
to the custom formerly prevalent in Wales for women to congregate in the
church on this "Night of the Winter Kalends," in order to discover who of
the parishioners would die during the year.{38} East of the Welsh
border, at Dorstone in Herefordshire, there was a belief that on All
Hallows' Eve at midnight those who were bold enough to look through the
windows would see the church lighted with an unearthly glow, and Satan in
monk's habit fulminating anathemas from the pulpit and calling out the
names of those who were to render up their souls.{39}

|198| Again, there are numerous Hallowe'en fire customs, probably
sun-charms for the New Year, a kind of homoeopathic magic intended to
assist the sun in his struggle with the powers of darkness. To this day
great bonfires are kindled in the Highlands, and formerly brands were
carried about and the new fire was lit in each house.{40} It would seem
that the Yule log customs (see Chapter X.) are connected with this new
lighting of the house-fire, transferred to Christmas.

In Ireland fire was lighted at this time at a place called Tlachtga, from
which all the hearths in Ireland are said to have been annually
supplied.{41} In Wales the habit of lighting bonfires on the hills is
perhaps not yet extinct.{42} Within living memory when the flames were
out somebody would raise the cry, "May the tailless black sow seize the
hindmost," and everyone present would run for his life.{43} This may
point to a former human sacrifice, possibly of a victim laden with the
accumulated evils of the past year.{44}

In North Wales, according to another account, each family used to make a
great bonfire in a conspicuous place near the house. Every person threw
into the ashes a white stone, marked; the stones were searched for in the
morning, and if any one were missing the person who had thrown it in
would die, it was believed, during the year.{45} The same belief and
practice were found at Callander in Perthshire.{46}

Though, probably, the Hallowe'en fire rites had originally some
connection with the sun, the conscious intention of those who practised
them in modern times was often to ward off witchcraft. With this object
in one place the master of the family used to carry a bunch of burning
straw about the corn, in Scotland the red end of a fiery stick was waved
in the air, in Lancashire a lighted candle was borne about the fells, and
in the Isle of Man fires were kindled.{47}


GUY FAWKES DAY.

Probably the burning of Guy Fawkes on November 5 is a survival of a New
Year bonfire. There is every reason to think that the commemoration of
the deliverance from "gunpowder |199| treason and plot" is but a modern
meaning attached to an ancient traditional practice, for the burning of
the effigy has many parallels in folk-custom. Dr. Frazer{48} regards
such effigies as representatives of the spirit of vegetation--by burning
them in a fire that represented the sun men thought they secured sunshine
for trees and crops. Later, when the ideas on which the custom was based
had faded away, people came to identify these images with persons whom
they regarded with aversion, such as Judas Iscariot, Luther (in Catholic
Tyrol), and, apparently, Guy Fawkes in England. At Ludlow in Shropshire,
it is interesting to note, if any well-known local man had aroused the
enmity of the populace his effigy was substituted for, or added to, that
of Guy Fawkes. Bonfire Day at Ludlow is marked by a torchlight procession
and a huge conflagration.{49} At Hampstead the Guy Fawkes fire and
procession are still in great force. The thing has become a regular
carnival, and on a foggy November night the procession along the steep
curving Heath Street, with the glare of the torches lighting up the faces
of dense crowds, is a strangely picturesque spectacle.[90]


ANIMAL MASKS.

On All Souls' Day in Cheshire there began to be carried about a curious
construction called "Old Hob," a horse's head enveloped in a sheet; it
was taken from door to door, and accompanied by the singing of begging
rhymes.{50} Old Hob, who continued to appear until Christmas, is an
English parallel to the German _Schimmel_ or white horse. We have here to
do with one of those strange animal forms which are apparently relics of
sacrificial customs. They come on various days in the winter festival
season, and also at other times, and may as well be considered at this
point. In some cases they are definitely imitations of animals, and may
have replaced real sacrificial beasts taken about in procession, in
others they are simply men wearing the head, horn, hide, or tail of a
beast, like the worshippers at many |200| a heathen sacrifice to-day.
(Of the _rationale_ of masking something has already been said in Chapter
VI.)

The mingling of Roman and non-Roman customs makes it very hard to
separate the different elements in the winter festivals. In regard
particularly to animal masks it is difficult to pronounce in favour of
one racial origin rather than another; we may, however, infer with some
probability that when a custom is attached not to Christmas or the
January Kalends but to one of the November or early December feasts, it
is not of Roman origin. For, as the centuries have passed, Christmas and
the Kalends--the Roman festivals ecclesiastical and secular--have
increasingly tended to supplant the old northern festal times, and a
transference of, for instance, a Teutonic custom from Martinmas to
Christmas or January 1, is far more conceivable than the attraction of a
Roman practice to one of the earlier and waning festivals.

Let us take first the horse-forms, seemingly connected with that
sacrificial use of the horse among the Teutons to which Tacitus and other
writers testify.{51} "Old Hob" is doubtless one form of the hobby horse,
so familiar in old English festival customs. His German parallel, the
_Schimmel_, is mostly formed thus in the north: a sieve with a long pole
to whose end a horse's head is fastened, is tied beneath the chest of a
young man, who goes on all fours, and some white cloths are thrown over
the whole. In Silesia the _Schimmel_ is formed by three or four youths.
The rider is generally veiled, and often wears on his head a pot with
glowing coals shining forth through openings that represent eyes and a
mouth.{52} In Pomerania the thing is called simply _Schimmel_,{53} in
other parts emphasis is laid upon the rider, and the name
_Schimmelreiter_ is given. Some mythologists have seen in this rider on a
white horse an impersonation of Woden on his great charger; but it is
more likely that the practice simply originated in the taking round of a
real sacrificial horse.{54} The _Schimmelreiter_ is often accompanied by
a "bear," a youth dressed in straw who plays the part of a bear tied to a
pole.{55} He may be connected with some such veneration of the animal as
is suggested by the custom still surviving at Berne, of keeping bears at
the public expense.

To return to Great Britain, here is an account of a so-called |201|
"hodening" ceremony once performed at Christmas-time at Ramsgate: "A
party of young people procure the head of a dead horse, which is affixed
to a pole about four feet in length, a string is tied to the lower jaw, a
horse-cloth is then attached to the whole, under which one of the party
gets, and by frequently pulling the string keeps up a loud snapping noise
and is accompanied by the rest of the party grotesquely habited and
ringing hand-bells. They thus proceed from house to house, sounding their
bells and singing carols and songs."{56}

Again, in Wales a creature called "the Mari Llwyd" was known at
Christmas. A horse's skull is "dressed up with ribbons, and supported on
a pole by a man who is concealed under a large white cloth. There is a
contrivance for opening and shutting the jaws, and the figure pursues and
bites everybody it can lay hold of, and does not release them except on
payment of a fine."{57} The movable jaws here give the thing a likeness
to certain Continental figures representing other kinds of animals and
probably witnessing to their former sacrificial use. On the island of
Usedom appears the _Klapperbock_, a youth who carries a pole with the
hide of a buck thrown over it and a wooden head at the end. The lower jaw
moves up and down and clatters, and he charges at children who do not
know their prayers by heart.{58} In Upper Styria we meet the
_Habergaiss_. Four men hold on to one another and are covered with white
blankets. The foremost one holds up a wooden goat's head with a movable
lower jaw that rattles, and he butts children.{59} At Ilsenburg in the
Harz is found the _Habersack_, formed by a person taking a pole ending in
a fork, and putting a broom between the prongs so that the appearance of
a head with horns is obtained. The carrier is concealed by a sheet.{60}

In connection with horns we must not forget the "horn-dance" at Abbots
Bromley in Staffordshire, held now in September, but formerly at
Christmas. Six of the performers wear sets of horns kept from year to
year in the church.{61} Plot, in his "Natural History of Staffordshire"
(1686, p. 434) calls it a "_Hobby-horse Dance_ from a person who carried
the image of a horse between his legs, made of thin boards."{62}

|202| In Denmark, Sweden, and Norway creatures resembling both the
_Schimmelreiter_ and the _Klapperbock_ are or were to be met with at
Christmas. The name _Julebuk_ (yule buck) is used for various objects:
sometimes for a person dressed up in hide and horns, or with a buck's
head, who "goes for" little boys and girls; sometimes for a straw puppet
set up or tossed about from hand to hand; sometimes for a cake in the
form of a buck. People seem to have had a bad conscience about these
things, for there are stories connecting them with the Devil. A girl, for
instance, who danced at midnight with a straw _Julebuk_, found that her
partner was no puppet but the Evil One himself. Again, a fellow who had
dressed himself in black and put horns on his head, claws on his hands,
and fiery tow in his mouth, was carried off by the Prince of Darkness
whose form he had mimicked.{63} The association of animal maskings with
the infernal powers is doubtless the work of the Church. To the zealous
missionary the old heathen ritual was no mere foolish superstition but a
service of intensely real and awful beings, the very devils of hell, and
one may even conjecture that the traditional Christian devil-type, half
animal half human, was indirectly derived from skin-clad worshippers at
pagan festivals.


MARTINMAS.

Between All Souls' Day and Martinmas (November 11) there are no
folk-festivals of great importance, though on St. Hubert's Day, November
3, in Flemish Belgium special little cakes are made, adorned with the
horn of the saint, the patron of hunting, and are eaten not only by human
beings but by dogs, cats, and other domestic animals.{64} The English
Guy Fawkes Day has already been considered, while November 9, Lord
Mayor's Day, the beginning of the municipal year, may remind us of the
old Teutonic New Year.

Round Martinmas popular customs cluster thickly, as might be expected,
since it marks as nearly as possible the date of the old
beginning-of-winter festival, the feast perhaps at which Germanicus
surprised the Marsi in A.D. 14.{65}

The most obvious feature of Martinmas is its physical feasting. |203|
Economic causes, as we saw in Chapter VI., must have made the middle of
November a great killing season among the old Germans, for the snow which
then began rendered it impossible longer to pasture the beasts, and there
was not fodder enough to keep the whole herd through the winter. Thus it
was a time of feasting on flesh, and of animal sacrifices, as is
suggested by the Anglo-Saxon name given to November by Bede,
_Blot-monath_, sacrifice-month.{66}

Christmas does not seem to have quickly superseded the middle of November
as a popular feast in Teutonic countries; rather one finds an outcome of
the conciliatory policy pursued by Gregory the Great (see Chapter VI.) in
the development of Martinmas. Founded in the fifth century, it was made a
great Church festival by Pope Martin I. (649-654),{67} and it may well
have been intended to absorb and Christianize the New Year festivities of
the Teutonic peoples. The veneration of St. Martin spread rapidly in the
churches of northern Europe, and he came to be regarded as one of the
very chief of the saints.{68} His day is no longer a Church feast of
high rank, but its importance as a folk festival is great.

The tradition of slaughter is preserved in the British custom of killing
cattle on St. Martin's Day--"Martlemas beef"{69}--and in the German
eating of St. Martin's geese and swine.{70} The St. Martin's goose,
indeed, is in Germany as much a feature of the festival as the English
Michaelmas goose is of the September feast of the angels.

In Denmark too a goose is eaten at Martinmas, and from its breast-bone
the character of the coming winter can be foreseen. The white in it is a
sign of snow, the brown of very great cold. Similar ideas can be traced
in Germany, though there is not always agreement as to what the white and
the brown betoken.{71}

At St. Peter's, Athlone, Ireland, a very obviously sacrificial custom
lasted on into the nineteenth century. Every household would kill an
animal of some kind, and sprinkle the threshold with its blood. A cow or
sheep, a goose or turkey, or merely a cock or hen, was used according to
the means of the family.{72} It seems that the animal was actually
offered to St. Martin, apparently as |204| the successor of some god,
and bad luck came if the custom were not observed. Probably these rites
were transferred to Martinmas from the old Celtic festival of _Samhain_.
Again, in a strange Irish legend the saint himself is said to have been
cut up and eaten in the form of an ox.{73}

In the wine-producing regions of Germany Martinmas was the day for the
first drinking of the new wine, and the feasting in general on his day
gave the saint the reputation of a guzzler and a glutton; it even became
customary to speak of a person who had squandered his substance in
riotous living as a _Martinsmann_.{74} As we have seen survivals of
sacrifice in the Martinmas slaughter, so we may regard the _Martinsminne_
or toast as originating in a sacrifice of liquor.{75} In the Böhmerwald
it is believed that wine taken at Martinmas brings strength and beauty,
and the lads and girls gather in the inns to drink, while a common German
proverb runs:--

   "Heb an Martini,
    Trink Wein per circulum anni."[91]{76}

Here, by the way, is a faint suggestion that Martinmas is regarded as the
beginning of the year; as such it certainly appears in a number of legal
customs, English, French, and German, which existed in the Middle Ages
and in some cases in quite recent times. It was often at Martinmas that
leases ended, rents had to be paid, and farm-servants changed their
places.{77}

There is a survival, perhaps, of a cereal sacrifice or sacrament in the
so-called "Martin's horns," horseshoe pastries given at Martinmas in many
parts of Germany.{78} Another kind of sacrifice is suggested by a Dutch
custom of throwing baskets of fruit into Martinmas bonfires, and by a
German custom of casting in empty fruit-baskets.{79} In Venetia the
peasants keep over from the vintage a few grapes to form part of their
Martinmas supper, and as far south as Sicily it is considered essential
to taste the new wine at this festival.{80}

Bonfires appear at Martinmas in Germany, as at All Hallows tide in the
British Isles. On St. Martin's Eve in the Rhine |205| Valley between
Cologne and Coblentz, numbers of little fires burn on the heights and by
the river-bank,{81} the young people leap through the flames and dance
about them, and the ashes are strewn on the fields to make them
fertile.{82} Survivals of fire-customs are found also in other regions.
In Belgium, Holland, and north-west Germany processions of children with
paper or turnip lanterns take place on St. Martin's Eve. In the Eichsfeld
district the little river Geislede glows with the light of candles placed
in floating nutshells. Even the practice of leaping through the fire
survives in a modified form, for in northern Germany it is not uncommon
for people on St. Martin's Day or Eve to jump over lighted candles set on
the parlour floor.{83} In the fifteenth century the Martinmas fires were
so many that the festival actually got the name of _Funkentag_ (Spark
Day).{84}



On St. Martin's Eve in Germany and the Low Countries we begin to meet
those winter visitors, bright saints and angels on the one hand,
mock-terrible bogeys and monsters on the other, who add so much to the
romance and mystery of the children's Christmas. Such visitors are to be
found in many countries, but it is in the lands of German speech that
they take on the most vivid and picturesque forms. St. Martin, St.
Nicholas, Christkind, Knecht Ruprecht, and the rest are very real and
personal beings to the children, and are awaited with pleasant
expectation or mild dread. Often they are beheld not merely with the
imagination but with the bodily eye, when father or friend is wondrously
transformed into a supernatural figure.

What are the origins of these holy or monstrous beings? It is hard to say
with certainty, for many elements, pagan and Christian, seem here to be
closely blended. It is pretty clear, however, that the grotesque
half-animal shapes are direct relics of heathendom, and it is highly
probable that the forms of saints or angels--even, perhaps, of the Christ
Child Himself--represent attempts of the Church to transform and sanctify
alien things which she could not suppress. What some of these may have
been we shall tentatively guess as we go along. Though no grown-up person
would take the mimic Martin or Nicholas |206| seriously nowadays, there
seem to be at the root of them things once regarded as of vital moment.
Just as fairy-tales, originally serious attempts to explain natural
facts, have now become reading for children, so ritual practices which
our ancestors deemed of vast importance for human welfare have become
mere games to amuse the young.

On St. Martin's Eve, to come back from speculation to the facts of
popular custom, the saint appears in the nurseries of Antwerp and other
Flemish towns. He is a man dressed up as a bishop, with a pastoral staff
in his hand. His business is to ask if the children have been "good," and
if the result of his inquiries is satisfactory he throws down apples,
nuts, and cakes. If not, it is rods that he leaves behind. At Ypres he
does not visibly appear, but children hang up stockings filled with hay,
and next morning find presents in them, left by the saint in gratitude
for the fodder provided for his horse. He is there imagined as a rider on
a white horse, and the same conception prevails in Austrian Silesia,
where he brings the "Martin's horns" already mentioned.{85} In Silesia
when it snows at Martinmas people say that the saint is coming on his
white horse, and there, it may be noted, the _Schimmelreiter_ appears at
the same season.{86} In certain respects, it has been suggested, St.
Martin may have taken the place of Woden.{87} It is perhaps not without
significance that, like the god, he is a military hero, and conceived as
a rider on horseback. At Düsseldorf he used to be represented in his
festival procession by a man riding on another fellow's back.{88}

At Mechlin and other places children go round from house to house,
singing and collecting gifts. Often four boys with paper caps on their
heads, dressed as Turks, carry a sort of litter whereon St. Martin sits.
He has a long white beard of flax and a paper mitre and stole, and holds
a large wooden spoon to receive apples and other eatables that are given
to the children, as well as a leather purse for offerings of money.{89}

In the Ansbach region a different type of being used to
appear--Pelzmärten (Skin Martin) by name; he ran about and frightened the
children, before he threw them their apples and nuts. In several places
in Swabia, too, Pelzmärte was known; |207| he had a black face, a
cow-bell hung on his person, and he distributed blows as well as nuts and
apples.{90} In him there is obviously more of the pagan mummer than the
Christian bishop.

In Belgium St. Martin is chiefly known as the bringer of apples and nuts
for children; in Bavaria and Austria he has a different aspect: a _gerte_
or rod, supposed to promote fruitfulness among cattle and prosperity in
general, is connected with his day. The rods are taken round by the
neatherds to the farmers, and one is given to each--two to rich
proprietors; they are to be used, when spring comes, to drive out the
cattle for the first time. In Bavaria they are formed by a birch-bough
with all the leaves and twigs stripped off--except at the top, to which
oak-leaves and juniper-twigs are fastened. At Etzendorf a curious old
rhyme shows that the herdsman with the rod is regarded as the
representative of St. Martin.{91}

Can we connect this custom with the saint who brings presents to
youngsters?[92] There seems to be a point of contact when we note that at
Antwerp St. Martin throws down rods for naughty children as well as nuts
and apples for good ones, and that Pelzmärte in Swabia has blows to
bestow as well as gifts. St. Martin's main functions--and, as we shall
see, St. Nicholas has the same--are to beat the bad children and reward
the good with apples, nuts, and cakes. Can it be that the ethical
distinction is of comparatively recent origin, an invention perhaps for
children when the customs came to be performed solely for their benefit,
and that the beating and the gifts were originally shared by all alike
and were of a sacramental character? We shall meet with more whipping
customs later on, they are common enough in folk-ritual, and are not
punishments, but kindly services; their purpose is to drive away evil
influences, and to bring to the flogged one the life-giving virtues of
the tree from which the twigs or boughs are taken.{92} Both the flogging
and the eating of fruit may, indeed, be means of contact with the
vegetation-spirit, the one in |208| an external, the other in a more
internal way. Or possibly the rod and the fruit may once have been
conjoined, the beating being performed with fruit-laden boughs in order
to produce prosperity. It is noteworthy that at Etzendorf so many head of
cattle and loads of hay are augured for the farmer as there are
juniper-_berries_ and twigs on St. Martin's _gerte_.{94}

Attempts to account for the figures of SS. Martin and Nicholas in
northern folk-customs have been made along various lines. Some scholars
regard them as Christianizations of the pagan god Woden; but they might
also be taken as akin to the "first-foots" whom we shall meet on January
1--visitors who bring good luck--or as maskers connected with animal
sacrifices (Pelzmärte suggests this), or again as related to the Boy
Bishop, the Lord of Misrule and the Twelfth Night King. May I suggest
that some at least of their aspects could be explained on the supposition
that they represent administrants of primitive vegetation sacraments, and
that these administrants, once ordinary human beings, have taken on the
name and attributes of the saint who under the Christian dispensation
presides over the festival? In any case it is a strange irony of history
that around the festival of Martin of Tours, the zealous soldier of
Christ and deadly foe of heathenism, should have gathered so much that is
unmistakably pagan.

|209| |210| |211|




CHAPTER VIII

ST. CLEMENT TO ST. THOMAS


    St. Clement's Day Quests and Processions--St. Catherine's Day as
    Spinsters' Festival--St. Andrew's Eve Auguries--The
    _Klöpfelnächte_--St. Nicholas's Day, the Saint as Gift-bringer, and
    his Attendants--Election of the Boy Bishop--St. Nicholas's Day at
    Bari--St. Lucia's Day in Sweden, Sicily, and Central Europe--St.
    Thomas's Day as School Festival--Its Uncanny Eve--"Going
    a-Thomassin'."


ST. CLEMENT'S DAY.

The next folk-feast after Martinmas is St. Clement's Day, November 23,
once reckoned the first day of winter in England.{1} It marks apparently
one of the stages in the progress of the winter feast towards its present
solstitial date. In England some interesting popular customs existed on
this day. In Staffordshire children used to go round to the village
houses begging for gifts, with rhymes resembling in many ways the
"souling" verses I have already quoted. Here is one of the Staffordshire
"clemencing" songs:--

   "Clemany! Clemany! Clemany mine!
    A good red apple and a pint of wine,
    Some of your mutton and some of your veal,
    If it is good, pray give me a deal;
    If it is not, pray give me some salt.
    Butler, butler, fill your bowl;
    If thou fill'st it of the best,
    The Lord'll send your soul to rest;
    If thou fill'st it of the small,
    Down goes butler, bowl and all. |212|

    Pray, good mistress, send to me
    One for Peter, one for Paul,
    One for Him who made us all;
    Apple, pear, plum, or cherry,
    Any good thing to make us merry;
    A bouncing buck and a velvet chair,
    Clement comes but once a year;
    Off with the pot and on with the pan,
    A good red apple and I'll be gone."{2}

In Worcestershire on St. Clement's Day the boys chanted similar rhymes,
and at the close of their collection they would roast the apples received
and throw them into ale or cider.{3} In the north of England men used to
go about begging drink, and at Ripon Minster the choristers went round
the church offering everyone a rosy apple with a sprig of box on it.{4}
The Cambridge bakers held their annual supper on this day,{5} at Tenby
the fishermen were given a supper,{6} while the blacksmiths' apprentices
at Woolwich had a remarkable ceremony, akin perhaps to the Boy Bishop
customs. One of their number was chosen to play the part of "Old Clem,"
was attired in a great coat, and wore a mask, a long white beard, and an
oakum wig. Seated in a large wooden chair, and surrounded by attendants
bearing banners, torches, and weapons, he was borne about the town on the
shoulders of six men, visiting numerous public-houses and the blacksmiths
and officers of the dockyard. Before him he had a wooden anvil, and in
his hands a pair of tongs and a wooden hammer, the insignia of the
blacksmith's trade.{7}


ST. CATHERINE'S DAY.

November 25 is St. Catherine's Day, and at Woolwich Arsenal a similar
ceremony was then performed: a man was dressed in female attire, with a
large wheel by his side to represent the saint, and was taken round the
town{8} in a wooden chair. At Chatham there was a torchlight procession
on St. Catherine's Day, and a woman in white muslin with a gilt crown was
carried about in a chair. She was said to represent not the saint, but
Queen Catherine.{9}

|213| St. Catherine's Day was formerly a festival for the lacemakers of
Northamptonshire, Buckinghamshire, and Bedfordshire. She was the
patroness of spinsters in the literal as well as the modern sense of the
word, and at Peterborough the workhouse girls used to go in procession
round the city on her day, dressed in white with coloured ribbons; the
tallest was chosen as Queen and bore a crown and sceptre. As they went to
beg money of the chief inhabitants they sang a quaint ballad which begins
thus:--

   "Here comes Queen Catherine, as fine as any queen,
    With a coach and six horses a-coming to be seen,
        And a-spinning we will go, will go, will go,
        And a-spinning we will go."{10}

We may perhaps see in this Saint or Queen Catherine a female counterpart
of the Boy Bishop, who began his career on St. Nicholas's Day. Catherine,
it must be remembered, is the patron saint of girls as Nicholas is of
boys. In Belgium her day is still a festival for the "young person" both
in schools and in families.{11} Even in modern Paris the
dressmaker-girls celebrate it, and in a very charming way, too.

"At midday the girls of every workroom present little mob-caps trimmed
with yellow ribbons to those of their number who are over twenty-five and
still unmarried. Then they themselves put on becoming little caps with
yellow flowers and yellow ribbons and a sprig of orange blossom on them,
and out they go arm-in-arm to parade the streets and collect a tribute of
flowers from every man they meet.... Instead of working all the
afternoon, the midinettes entertain all their friends (no men admitted,
though, for it is the day of St. Catherine) to concerts and even to
dramatic performances in the workrooms, where the work-tables are turned
into stages, and the employers provide supper."{12}


ST. ANDREW'S DAY.

The last day of November is the feast of St. Andrew. Of English customs
on this day the most interesting perhaps are those connected with the
"Tander" or "Tandrew" merrymakings |214| of the Northamptonshire
lacemakers. A day of general licence used to end in masquerading. Women
went about in male attire and men and boys in female dress.{13} In Kent
and Sussex squirrel-hunting was practised on this day{14}--a survival
apparently of some old sacrificial custom comparable with the hunting of
the wren at Christmas (see Chapter XII.).

In Germany St. Andrew's Eve is a great occasion for prognostications of
the future. Indeed, like Hallowe'en in Great Britain, _Andreasabend_ in
Germany seems to have preserved the customs of augury connected with the
old November New Year festival.{15} To a large extent the practices are
performed by girls anxious to know what sort of husband they will get.
Many and various are the methods.

Sometimes it suffices to repeat some such rhyme as the following before
going to sleep, and the future husband will appear in a dream:--

   "St. Andrew's Eve is to-day,
    Sleep all people,
    Sleep all children of men,
    Who are between heaven and earth,
    Except this only man,
    Who may be mine in marriage."{16}

Again, at nightfall let a girl shut herself up naked in her bedroom, take
two beakers, and into one pour clear water, into the other wine. These
let her place on the table, which is to be covered with white, and let
the following words be said:--

   "My dear St. Andrew!
    Let now appear before me
    My heart's most dearly beloved.
    If he shall be rich,
    He will pour a cup of wine;
    If he is to be poor,
    Let him pour a cup of water."

This done, the form of the future husband will enter and drink |215| of
one of the cups. If he is poor, he will take the water; if rich, the
wine.{17}

One of the most common practices is to pour molten lead or tin through a
key into cold water, and to discover the calling of the future husband by
the form it takes, which will represent the tools of his trade. The white
of an egg is sometimes used for the same purpose.{18} Another very
widespread custom is to put nutshells to float on water with little
candles burning in them. There are twice as many shells as there are
girls present; each girl has her shell, and to the others the names of
possible suitors are given. The man and the girl whose shells come
together will marry one another. Sometimes the same method is practised
with little cups of silver foil.{19}

On the border of Saxony and Bohemia, a maiden who wishes to know the
bodily build of her future husband goes in the darkness to a stack of
wood and draws out a piece. If the wood is smooth and straight the man
will be slim and well built; if it is crooked, or knotted, he will be
ill-developed or even a hunchback.{20}

These are but a few of the many ways in which girls seek to peer into the
future and learn something about the most important event in their lives.
Far less numerous, but not altogether absent on this night, are other
kinds of prognostication. A person, for instance, who wishes to know
whether he will die in the coming year, must on St. Andrew's Eve before
going to bed make on the table a little pointed heap of flour. If by the
morning it has fallen asunder, the maker will die.{21}

The association of St. Andrew's Eve with the foreseeing of the future is
not confined to the German race; it is found also on Slavonic and
Roumanian ground. In Croatia he who fasts then will behold his future
wife in a dream,{22} and among the Roumanians mothers anxious about
their children's luck break small sprays from fruit-trees, bind them
together in bunches, one for each child, and put them in a glass of
water. The branch of the lucky one will blossom.{23}

In Roumania St. Andrew's Eve is a creepy time, for on it vampires are
supposed to rise from their graves, and with coffins |216| on their
heads walk about the houses in which they once lived. Before nightfall
every woman takes some garlic and anoints with it the door locks and
window casements; this will keep away the vampires. At the cross-roads
there is a great fight of these loathsome beings until the first cock
crows; and not only the dead take part in this, but also some living men
who are vampires from their birth. Sometimes it is only the souls of
these living vampires that join in the fight; the soul comes out through
the mouth in the form of a bluish flame, takes the shape of an animal,
and runs to the crossway. If the body meanwhile is moved from its place
the person dies, for the soul cannot find its way back.{24}

St. Andrew's Day is sometimes the last, sometimes the first important
festival of the western Church's year. It is regarded in parts of Germany
as the beginning of winter, as witness the saying:--

   "Sünten-Dres-Misse,
    es de Winter gewisse."[93]{25}

The nights are now almost at their longest, and as November passes away,
giving place to the last month of the year, Christmas is felt to be near
at hand.

In northern Bohemia it is customary for peasant girls to keep for
themselves all the yarn they spin on St. Andrew's Eve, and the _Hausfrau_
gives them also some flax and a little money. With this they buy coffee
and other refreshments for the lads who come to visit the parlours where
in the long winter evenings the women sit spinning. These evenings, when
many gather together in a brightly lighted room and sing songs and tell
stories while they spin, are cheerful enough, and spice is added by the
visits of the village lads, who in some places come to see the girls
home.{26}


THE KLÖPFELNÄCHTE.

On the Thursday nights in Advent it is customary in southern Germany for
children or grown-up people to go from house |217| to house, singing
hymns and knocking on the doors with rods or little hammers, or throwing
peas, lentils, and the like against the windows. Hence these evenings
have gained the name of _Klöpfel_ or _Knöpflinsnächte_ (Knocking
Nights).{27} The practice is described by Naogeorgus in the sixteenth
century:--

   "Three weekes before the day whereon was borne the Lord of Grace,
    And on the Thursdaye Boyes and Girles do runne in every place,
    And bounce and beate at every doore, with blowes and lustie snaps,
    And crie, the Advent of the Lorde not borne as yet perhaps.
    And wishing to the neighbours all, that in the houses dwell,
    A happie yeare, and every thing to spring and prosper well:
    Here have they peares, and plumbs, and pence, ech man gives willinglee,
    For these three nightes are alwayes thought, unfortunate to bee;
    Wherein they are afrayde of sprites and cankred witches' spight,
    And dreadfull devils blacke and grim, that then have chiefest
          might."{28}

With it may be compared the Macedonian custom for village boys to go in
parties at nightfall on Christmas Eve, knocking at the cottage doors with
sticks, shouting _Kolianda! Kolianda!_ and receiving presents,{29} and
also one in vogue in Holland between Christmas and the Epiphany. There
"the children go out in couples, each boy carrying an earthenware pot,
over which a bladder is stretched, with a piece of stick tied in the
middle. When this stick is twirled about, a not very melodious grumbling
sound proceeds from the contrivance, which is known by the name of
'Rommelpot.' By going about in this manner the children are able to
collect some few pence."{30}

Can such practices have originated in attempts to drive out evil spirits
from the houses by noise? Similar methods are used for that purpose by
various European and other peoples.{31} Anyhow something mysterious
hangs about the _Klöpfelnächte_. They are occasions for girls to learn
about their future husbands, and upon them in Swabia goes about
Pelzmärte, whom we already know.{32}

|218| In Tyrol curious mummeries are then performed. At Pillersee in
the Lower Innthal two youths combine to form a mimic ass, upon which a
third rides, and they are followed by a motley train. The ass falls sick
and has to be cured by a "vet," and all kinds of satirical jokes are made
about things that have happened in the parish during the year. Elsewhere
two men dress up in straw as husband and wife, and go out with a masked
company. The pair wrangle with one another and carry on a play of wits
with the peasants whose house they are visiting. Sometimes the satire is
so cutting that permanent enmities ensue, and for this reason the
practice is gradually being dropped.{33}


ST. NICHOLAS'S DAY.

On December 6 we reach the most distinctive children's festival of the
whole year, St. Nicholas's Day. In England it has gone out of mind, and
in the flat north of Germany Protestantism has largely rooted it out, as
savouring too much of saint-worship, and transferred its festivities to
the more Evangelical season of Christmas.{34} In western and southern
Germany, however, and in Austria, Switzerland, and the Low Countries, it
is still a day of joy for children, though in some regions even there its
radiance tends to pale before the greater glory of the Christmas-tree.

It is not easy either to get at the historic facts about St. Nicholas,
the fourth-century bishop of Myra in Asia Minor, or to ascertain why he
became the patron saint of boys. The legends of his infant piety and his
later wondrous works for the benefit of young people may either have
given rise, or be themselves due to, his connection with children.{35}
In eastern Europe and southern Italy he is above all things the saint of
seafaring men, and among the Greeks his cult has perhaps replaced that of
Artemis as a sea divinity.{36} This aspect of him does not, however,
appear in the German festival customs with which we are here chiefly
concerned.

It has already been hinted that in some respects St. Nicholas is a
duplicate of St. Martin. His feast, indeed, is probably a later
beginning-of-winter festival, dating from the period when |219|
improved methods of agriculture and other causes made early December,
rather than mid-November, the time for the great annual slaughter and its
attendant rejoicings. Like St. Martin he brings sweet things for the good
children and rods for the bad.

St. Nicholas's Eve is a time of festive stir in Holland and Belgium; the
shops are full of pleasant little gifts: many-shaped biscuits, gilt
gingerbreads, sometimes representing the saint, sugar images, toys, and
other trifles. In many places, when evening comes on, people dress up as
St. Nicholas, with mitre and pastoral staff, enquire about the behaviour
of the children, and if it has been good pronounce a benediction and
promise them a reward next morning. Before they go to bed the children
put out their shoes, with hay, straw, or a carrot in them for the saint's
white horse or ass. When they wake in the morning, if they have been
"good" the fodder is gone and sweet things or toys are in its place; if
they have misbehaved themselves the provender is untouched and no gift
but a rod is there.{37}

In various parts of Germany, Switzerland, and Austria St. Nicholas is
mimed by a man dressed up as a bishop.{38} In Tyrol children pray to the
saint on his Eve and leave out hay for his white horse and a glass of
_schnaps_ for his servant. And he comes in all the splendour of a
church-image, a reverend grey-haired figure with flowing beard,
gold-broidered cope, glittering mitre, and pastoral staff. Children who
know their catechism are rewarded with sweet things out of the basket
carried by his servant; those who cannot answer are reproved, and St.
Nicholas points to a terrible form that stands behind him with a rod--the
hideous Klaubauf, a shaggy monster with horns, black face, fiery eyes,
long red tongue, and chains that clank as he moves.{39}

In Lower Austria the saint is followed by a similar figure called Krampus
or Grampus;{40} in Styria this horrible attendant is named Bartel;{41}
all are no doubt related to such monsters as the _Klapperbock_ (see
Chapter VII.). Their heathen origin is evident though it is difficult to
trace their exact pedigree. Sometimes St. Nicholas himself appears in a
non-churchly form like Pelzmärte, with a bell,{42} or with a sack of
ashes which gains him the name of Aschenklas.{43}

|220| Not only by hideous figures is St. Nicholas attended. Sometimes,
as at Warnsdorf near Rumburg, there come with him the forms of Christ
Himself, St. Peter, an angel, and the famous Knecht Ruprecht, whom we
shall meet again on Christmas Eve. They are represented by children, and
a little drama is performed, one personage coming in after the other and
calling for the next in the manner of the English mummers' play. St.
Nicholas, St. Peter, and Ruprecht accuse the children of all kinds of
naughtiness, the "Heiliger Christ" intercedes and at last throws nuts
down and receives money from the parents.{44} In Tyrol there are St.
Nicholas plays of a more comic nature, performed publicly by large
companies of players and introducing a number of humorous characters and
much rude popular wit.{45}

Sometimes a female bogey used to appear: Budelfrau in Lower Austria,
Berchtel in Swabia, Buzebergt in the neighbourhood of Augsburg.{46} The
last two are plainly variants of Berchte, who is specially connected with
the Epiphany. Berchtel used to punish the naughty children with a rod,
and reward the good with nuts and apples; Buzebergt wore black rags, had
her face blackened and her hair hanging unkempt, and carried a pot of
starch which she smeared upon people's faces.{47}

As Santa Klaus St. Nicholas is of course known to every English child,
but rather as a sort of incarnation of Christmas than as a saint with a
day of his own. Santa Klaus, probably, has come to us _viâ_ the United
States, whither the Dutch took him, and where he has still immense
popularity.

In the Middle Ages in England as elsewhere the Eve of St. Nicholas was a
day of great excitement for boys. It was then that the small choristers
and servers in cathedral and other churches generally elected their "Boy
Bishop" or "Nicholas."{48} He had in some places to officiate at First
Vespers and at the services on the festival itself. As a rule, however,
the feast of the Holy Innocents, December 28, was probably the most
important day in the Boy Bishop's career, and we may therefore postpone
our consideration of him. We will here only note his connection with the
festival of the patron saint of boys, a connection perhaps implying a
common origin for him and |221| for the St. Nicholases who in bishops'
vestments make their present-giving rounds.

The festival of St. Nicholas is naturally celebrated with most splendour
at the place where his body lies, the seaport of Bari in south-eastern
Italy. The holy bones are preserved in a sepulchre beneath a crypt of
rich Saracenic architecture, above which rises a magnificent church.
Legend relates that in the eleventh century they were stolen by certain
merchants of Bari from the saint's own cathedral at Myra in Asia Minor.
The tomb of St. Nicholas is a famous centre for pilgrimages, and on the
6th of December many thousands of the faithful, bearing staves bound with
olive and pine, visit it. An interesting ceremony on the festival is the
taking of the saint's image out to sea by the sailors of the port. They
return with it at nightfall, and a great procession escorts it back to
the cathedral with torches and fireworks and chanting.{49} Here may be
seen the other, the seafaring, aspect of St. Nicholas; by this mariners'
cult we are taken far away from the present-giving saint who delights the
small children of the North.


ST. LUCIA'S DAY.

The only folk-festivals of note between St. Nicholas's Day and Christmas
are those of St. Lucia (December 13) and St. Thomas the Apostle (December
21).

In Sweden St. Lucia's Day was formerly marked by some interesting
practices. It was, so to speak, the entrance to the Christmas festival,
and was called "little Yule."{50} At the first cock-crow, between 1 and
4 a.m., the prettiest girl in the house used to go among the sleeping
folk, dressed in a white robe, a red sash, and a wire crown covered with
whortleberry-twigs and having nine lighted candles fastened in it. She
awakened the sleepers and regaled them with a sweet drink or with
coffee,[94] sang a special song, and was named "Lussi" or "Lussibruden"
(Lucy bride). When everyone was dressed, breakfast was taken, the room
being lighted by many candles. The domestic animals |222| were not
forgotten on this day, but were given special portions. A peculiar
feature of the Swedish custom is the presence of lights on Lussi's crown.
Lights indeed are the special mark of the festival; it was customary to
shoot and fish on St. Lucy's Day by torchlight, the parlours, as has been
said, were brilliantly illuminated in the early morning, in West Gothland
Lussi went round the village preceded by torchbearers, and in one parish
she was represented by a cow with a crown of lights on her head. In
schools the day was celebrated with illuminations.{51}

What is the explanation of this feast of lights? There is nothing in the
legend of the saint to account for it; her name, however, at once
suggests _lux_--light. It is possible, as Dr. Feilberg supposes, that the
name gave rise to the special use of lights among the Latin-learned monks
who brought Christianity to Sweden, and that the custom spread from them
to the common people. A peculiar fitness would be found in it because St.
Lucia's Day according to the Old Style was the shortest day of the year,
the turning-point of the sun's light.{52}

In Sicily also St. Lucia's festival is a feast of lights. After sunset on
the Eve a long procession of men, lads, and children, each flourishing a
thick bunch of long straws all afire, rushes wildly down the streets of
the mountain village of Montedoro, as if fleeing from some danger, and
shouting hoarsely. "The darkness of the night," says an eye-witness, "was
lighted up by this savage procession of dancing, flaming torches, whilst
bonfires in all the side streets gave the illusion that the whole village
was burning." At the end of the procession came the image of Santa Lucia,
holding a dish which contained her eyes.[95] In the midst of the _piazza_
a great mountain of straw had been prepared; on this everyone threw his
own burning torch, and the saint was placed in a spot from which she
could survey the vast bonfire.{53}

In central Europe we see St. Lucia in other aspects. In the Böhmerwald
she goes round the village in the form of a nanny-goat with horns, gives
fruit to the good children, and threatens to rip open the belly of the
naughty. Here she is evidently related |223| to the pagan monsters
already described. In Tyrol she plays a more graceful part: she brings
presents for girls, an office which St. Nicholas is there supposed to
perform for boys only.{55}

In Lower Austria St. Lucia's Eve is a time when special danger from
witchcraft is feared and must be averted by prayer and incense. A
procession is made through each house to cense every room. On this
evening, too, girls are afraid to spin lest in the morning they should
find their distaffs twisted, the threads broken, and the yarn in
confusion. (We shall meet with like superstitions during the Twelve
Nights.) At midnight the girls practise a strange ceremony: they go to a
willow-bordered brook, cut the bark of a tree partly away, without
detaching it, make with a knife a cross on the inner side of the cut
bark, moisten it with water, and carefully close up the opening. On New
Year's Day the cutting is opened, and the future is augured from the
markings found. The lads, on the other hand, look out at midnight for a
mysterious light, the _Luzieschein_, the forms of which indicate coming
events.{56}

In Denmark, too, St. Lucia's Eve is a time for seeing the future. Here is
a prayer of Danish maids: "Sweet St. Lucy let me know: whose cloth
I shall lay, whose bed I shall make, whose child I shall bear, whose
darling I shall be, whose arms I shall sleep in."{57}


ST. THOMAS'S DAY.

Many and various are the customs and beliefs associated with the feast of
St. Thomas (December 21). In Denmark it was formerly a great children's
day, unique in the year, and rather resembling the mediaeval Boy Bishop
festival. It was the breaking-up day for schools; the children used to
bring their master an offering of candles and money, and in return he
gave them a feast. In some places it had an even more delightful side:
for this one day in the year the children were allowed the mastery in the
school. Testimonials to their scholarship and industry were made out, and
elaborate titles were added to their names, as exalted sometimes as
"Pope," "Emperor," or "Empress." Poor children used to go about showing
these |224| documents and collecting money. Games and larks of all
sorts went on in the schools without a word of reproof, and the children
were wont to burn their master's rod.{58}

In the neighbourhood of Antwerp children go early to school on St.
Thomas's Day, and lock the master out, until he promises to treat them
with ale or other drink. After this they buy a cock and hen, which are
allowed to escape and have to be caught by the boys or the girls
respectively. The girl who catches the hen is called "queen," the boy who
gets the cock, "king." Elsewhere in Belgium children lock out their
parents, and servants their masters, while schoolboys bind their teacher
to his chair and carry him over to the inn. There he has to buy back his
liberty by treating his scholars with punch and cakes. Instead of the
chase for the fowls, it was up to 1850 the custom in the Ardennes for the
teacher to give the children hens and let them chop the heads off.{59}
Some pagan sacrifice no doubt lies at the root of this barbarous
practice, which has many parallels in the folk-lore of western and
southern Europe.{60}

As for schoolboys' larks with their teachers, the custom of "barring out
the master" existed in England, and was practised before Christmas{61}
as well as at other times of the year, notably Shrove Tuesday. At
Bromfield in Cumberland on Shrove Tuesday there was a regular siege, the
school doors were strongly barricaded within, and the boy-defenders were
armed with pop-guns. If the master won, heavy tasks were imposed, but if,
as more often happened, he was defeated in his efforts to regain his
authority, he had to make terms with the boys as to the hours of work and
play.{62}

St. Thomas's Eve is in certain regions one of the uncanniest nights in
the year. In some Bohemian villages the saint is believed to drive about
at midnight in a chariot of fire. In the churchyard there await him all
the dead men whose name is Thomas; they help him to alight and accompany
him to the churchyard cross, which glows red with supernatural radiance.
There St. Thomas kneels and prays, and then rises to bless his namesakes.
This done, he vanishes beneath the cross, and each Thomas returns to his
grave. The saint here seems to have taken over |225| the character of
some pagan god, who, like the Teutonic Odin or Woden, ruled the souls of
the departed. In the houses the people listen with awe for the sound of
his chariot, and when it is heard make anxious prayer to him for
protection from all ill. Before retiring to rest the house-father goes to
the cowhouse with holy water and consecrated salt, asperges it from
without, and then entering, sprinkles every cow. Salt is also thrown on
the head of each animal with the words, "St. Thomas preserve thee from
all sickness." In the Böhmerwald the cattle are fed on this night with
consecrated bayberries, bread, and salt, in order to avert disease.{63}

In Upper and Lower Austria St. Thomas's Eve is reckoned as one of the
so-called _Rauchnächte_ (smoke-nights) when houses and farm-buildings
must be sanctified with incense and holy water, the other nights being
the Eves of Christmas, the New Year, and the Epiphany.{64}

In Germany St. Thomas's, like St. Andrew's Eve, is a time for forecasting
the future, and the methods already described are sometimes employed by
girls who wish to behold their future husbands. A widely diffused custom
is that of throwing shoes backwards over the shoulders. If the points are
found turned towards the door the thrower is destined to leave the house
during the year; if they are turned away from it another year will be
spent there. In Westphalia a belief prevails that you must eat and drink
heartily on this night in order to avert scarcity.{65}

In Lower Austria it is supposed that sluggards can cure themselves of
oversleeping by saying a special prayer before they go to bed on St.
Thomas's Eve, and in Westphalia in the mid-nineteenth century the same
association of the day with slumber was shown by the schoolchildren's
custom of calling the child who arrived last at school _Domesesel_
(Thomas ass). In Holland, again, the person who lies longest in bed on
St. Thomas's Day is greeted with shouts of "lazybones." Probably the fact
that December 21 is the shortest day is enough to account for this.{66}

In England there was divination by means of "St. Thomas's onion." Girls
used to peel an onion, wrap it in a handkerchief and put it under their
heads at night, with a prayer to the satin |226| to show them their
true love in a dream.{67} The most notable English custom on this day,
however, was the peregrinations of poor people begging for money or
provisions for Christmas. Going "a-gooding," or "a-Thomassin'," or
"a-mumping," this was called. Sometimes in return for the charity
bestowed a sprig of holly or mistletoe was given.{68} Possibly the sprig
was originally a sacrament of the healthful spirit of growth: it may be
compared with the olive- or cornel-branches carried about on New Year's
Eve by Macedonian boys,{69} and also with the St. Martin's rod (see last
chapter).

One more English custom on December 21 must be mentioned--it points to a
sometime sacrifice--the bull-baiting practised until 1821 at Wokingham in
Berkshire. Its abolition in 1822 caused great resentment among the
populace, although the flesh continued to be duly distributed.{70}



We are now four days from the feast of the Nativity, and many things
commonly regarded as distinctive of Christmas have already come under
notice. We have met, for instance, with several kinds of present-giving,
with auguries for the New Year, with processions of carol-singers and
well-wishers, with ceremonial feasting that anticipates the Christmas
eating and drinking, and with various figures, saintly or monstrous,
mimed or merely imagined, which we shall find reappearing at the greatest
of winter festivals. These things would seem to have been attracted from
earlier dates to the feast of the Nativity, and the probability that
Christmas has borrowed much from an old November festival gradually
shifted into December, is our justification for having dwelt so long upon
the feasts that precede the Twelve Days.

|227| |228| |229|




CHAPTER IX

CHRISTMAS EVE AND THE TWELVE DAYS


    Christkind, Santa Klaus, and Knecht Ruprecht--Talking Animals and
    other Wonders of Christmas Eve--Scandinavian Beliefs about Trolls and
    the Return of the Dead--Traditional Christmas Songs in Eastern
    Europe--The Twelve Days, their Christian Origin and Pagan
    Superstitions--The Raging Host--Hints of Supernatural Visitors in
    England--The German _Frauen_--The Greek _Kallikantzaroi_.

[Illustration: CHRISTMAS EVE IN DEVONSHIRE--THE MUMMERS COMING IN]


CHRISTMAS EVE.

Christmas in the narrowest sense must be reckoned as beginning on the
evening of December 24. Though Christmas Eve is not much observed in
modern England, throughout the rest of Europe its importance so far as
popular customs are concerned is far greater than that of the Day itself.
Then in Germany the Christmas-tree is manifested in its glory; then, as
in the England of the past, the Yule log is solemnly lighted in many
lands; then often the most distinctive Christmas meal takes place.

We shall consider these and other institutions later; though they appear
first on Christmas Eve, they belong more or less to the Twelve Days as a
whole. Let us look first at the supernatural visitors, mimed by human
beings, who delight the minds of children, especially in Germany, on the
evening of December 24, and at the beliefs that hang around this most
solemn night of the year.



First of all, the activities of St. Nicholas are not confined to his own
festival; he often appears on Christmas Eve. We have already seen how he
is attended by various companions, including |230| Christ Himself, and
how he comes now vested as a bishop, now as a masked and shaggy figure.
The names and attributes of the Christmas and Advent visitors are rather
confused, but on the whole it may be said that in Protestant north
Germany the episcopal St. Nicholas and his Eve have been replaced by
Christmas Eve and the Christ Child, while the name Klas has become
attached to various unsaintly forms appearing at or shortly before
Christmas.

We can trace a deliberate substitution of the Christ Child for St.
Nicholas as the bringer of gifts. In the early seventeenth century a
Protestant pastor is found complaining that parents put presents in their
children's beds and tell them that St. Nicholas has brought them. "This,"
he says, "is a bad custom, because it points children to the saint, while
yet we know that not St. Nicholas but the holy Christ Child gives us all
good things for body and soul, and He alone it is whom we ought to call
upon."{1}

The ways in which the figure, or at all events the name, of Christ
Himself, is introduced into German Christmas customs, are often
surprising. The Christ Child, "Christkind," so familiar to German
children, has now become a sort of mythical figure, a product of
sentiment and imagination working so freely as almost to forget the
sacred character of the original. Christkind bears little resemblance to
the Infant of Bethlehem; he is quite a tall child, and is often
represented by a girl dressed in white, with long fair hair. He hovers,
indeed, between the character of the Divine Infant and that of an angel,
and is regarded more as a kind of good fairy than as anything else.

In Alsace the girl who represents Christkind has her face "made up" with
flour, wears a crown of gold paper with lighted candles in it--a parallel
to the headgear of the Swedish Lussi; in one hand she holds a silver
bell, in the other, a basket of sweetmeats. She is followed by the
terrible Hans Trapp, dressed in a bearskin, with blackened face, long
beard, and threatening rod. He "goes for" the naughty children, who are
only saved by the intercession of Christkind.{2}

In the Mittelmark the name of _de hêle_ (holy) _Christ_ is strangely
|231| given to a skin- or straw-clad man, elsewhere called Knecht
Ruprecht, Klas, or Joseph.{3} In the Ruppin district a man dresses up in
white with ribbons, carries a large pouch, and is called _Christmann_ or
_Christpuppe_. He is accompanied by a _Schimmelreiter_ and by other
fellows who are attired as women, have blackened faces, and are named
_Feien_ (we may see in them a likeness to the Kalends maskers condemned
by the early Church). The procession goes round from house to house. The
_Schimmelreiter_ as he enters has to jump over a chair; this done, the
_Christpuppe_ is admitted. The girls present begin to sing, and the
_Schimmelreiter_ dances with one of them. Meanwhile the _Christpuppe_
makes the children repeat some verse of Scripture or a hymn; if they know
it well, he rewards them with gingerbreads from his wallet; if not, he
beats them with a bundle filled with ashes. Then both he and the
_Schimmelreiter_ dance and pass on. Only when they are gone are the
_Feien_ allowed to enter; they jump wildly about and frighten the
children.{4}

Knecht Ruprecht, to whom allusion has already been made, is a prominent
figure in the German Christmas. On Christmas Eve in the north he goes
about clad in skins or straw and examines children; if they can say their
prayers perfectly he rewards them with apples, nuts and gingerbreads; if
not, he punishes them. In the Mittelmark, as we have seen, a personage
corresponding to him is sometimes called "the holy Christ"; in
Mecklenburg he is "rû Klas" (rough Nicholas--note his identification with
the saint); in Brunswick, Hanover, and Holstein "Klas," "Klawes," "Klas
Bûr" and "Bullerklas"; and in Silesia "Joseph." Sometimes he wears bells
and carries a long staff with a bag of ashes at the end--hence the name
"Aschenklas" occasionally given to him.{5} An ingenious theory connects
this aspect of him with the _polaznik_ of the Slavs, who on Christmas Day
in Crivoscian farms goes to the hearth, takes up the ashes of the Yule
log and dashes them against the cauldron-hook above so that sparks fly
(see Chapter X.).{6} As for the name "Ruprecht" the older mythologists
interpreted it as meaning "shining with glory," _hruodperaht_, and
identified its owner with the god Woden.{7} Dr. Tille, however, regards
him |232| as dating only from the seventeenth century.{8} It can
hardly be said that any satisfactory account has as yet been given of the
origins of this personage, or of his relation to St. Nicholas, Pelzmärte,
and monstrous creatures like the _Klapperbock_.

In the south-western part of Lower Austria, both St. Nicholas--a proper
bishop with mitre, staff, and ring--and Ruprecht appear on Christmas Eve,
and there is quite an elaborate ceremonial. The children welcome the
saint with a hymn; then he goes to a table and makes each child repeat a
prayer and show his lesson-books. Meanwhile Ruprecht in a hide, with
glowing eyes and a long red tongue, stands at the door to overawe the
young people. Each child next kneels before the saint and kisses his
ring, whereupon Nicholas bids him put his shoes out-of-doors and look in
them when the clock strikes ten. After this the saint lays on the table a
rod dipped in lime, solemnly blesses the children, sprinkling them with
holy water, and noiselessly departs. The children steal out into the
garden, clear a space in the snow, and set out their shoes; when the last
stroke of ten has sounded they find them filled with nuts and apples and
all kinds of sweet things.{9}

In the Troppau district of Austrian Silesia, three figures go round on
Christmas Eve--Christkindel, the archangel Gabriel, and St. Peter--and
perform a little play before the presents they bring are given.
Christkindel announces that he has gifts for the good children, but the
bad shall feel the rod. St. Peter complains of the naughtiness of the
youngsters: they play about in the streets instead of going straight to
school; they tear up their lesson-books and do many other wicked things.
However, the children's mother pleads for them, and St. Peter relents and
gives out the presents.{10}

In the Erzgebirge appear St. Peter and Ruprecht, who is clad in skin and
straw, has a mask over his face, a rod, a chain round his body, and a
sack with apples, nuts, and other gifts; and a somewhat similar
performance is gone through.{11}

If we go as far east as Russia we find a parallel to the girl Christkind
in Kolyáda, a white-robed maiden driven about in a sledge from house to
house on Christmas Eve. The young people who attended her sang carols,
and presents were given |233| them in return. _Kolyáda_ is the name for
Christmas and appears to be derived from _Kalendae_, which probably
entered the Slavonic languages by way of Byzantium. The maiden is one of
those beings who, like the Italian Befana, have taken their names from
the festival at which they appear.{12}



No time in all the Twelve Nights and Days is so charged with the
supernatural as Christmas Eve. Doubtless this is due to the fact that the
Church has hallowed the night of December 24-5 above all others in the
year. It was to the shepherds keeping watch over their flocks _by night_
that, according to the Third Evangelist, came the angelic message of the
Birth, and in harmony with this is the unique Midnight Mass of the Roman
Church, lending a peculiar sanctity to the hour of its celebration. And
yet many of the beliefs associated with this night show a large admixture
of paganism.

First, there is the idea that at midnight on Christmas Eve animals have
the power of speech. This superstition exists in various parts of Europe,
and no one can hear the beasts talk with impunity. The idea has given
rise to some curious and rather grim tales. Here is one from Brittany:--

"Once upon a time there was a woman who starved her cat and dog. At
midnight on Christmas Eve she heard the dog say to the cat, 'It is quite
time we lost our mistress; she is a regular miser. To-night burglars are
coming to steal her money; and if she cries out they will break her
head.' ''Twill be a good deed,' the cat replied. The woman in terror got
up to go to a neighbour's house; as she went out the burglars opened the
door, and when she shouted for help they broke her head."{13}

Again a story is told of a farm servant in the German Alps who did not
believe that the beasts could speak, and hid in a stable on Christmas Eve
to learn what went on. At midnight he heard surprising things. "We shall
have hard work to do this day week," said one horse. "Yes, the farmer's
servant is heavy," answered the other. "And the way to the churchyard is
long and steep," said the first. The servant was buried that day
week.{14}

|234| It may well have been the traditional association of the ox and
ass with the Nativity that fixed this superstition to Christmas Eve, but
the conception of the talking animals is probably pagan.

Related to this idea, but more Christian in form, is the belief that at
midnight all cattle rise in their stalls or kneel and adore the new-born
King. Readers of Mr. Hardy's "Tess" will remember how this is brought
into a delightful story told by a Wessex peasant. The idea is widespread
in England and on the Continent,{15} and has reached even the North
American Indians. Howison, in his "Sketches of Upper Canada," relates
that an Indian told him that "on Christmas night all deer kneel and look
up to Great Spirit."{16} A somewhat similar belief about bees was held
in the north of England: they were said to assemble on Christmas Eve and
hum a Christmas hymn.{17} Bees seem in folk-lore in general to be
specially near to humanity in their feelings.

It is a widespread idea that at midnight on Christmas Eve all water turns
to wine. A Guernsey woman once determined to test this; at midnight she
drew a bucket from the well. Then came a voice:--

   "Toute l'eau se tourne en vin,
    Et tu es proche de ta fin."

She fell down with a mortal disease, and died before the end of the year.
In Sark the superstition is that the water in streams and wells turns
into blood, and if you go to look you will die within the year.{18}

There is also a French belief that on Christmas Eve, while the genealogy
of Christ is being chanted at the Midnight Mass, hidden treasures are
revealed.{19} In Russia all sorts of buried treasures are supposed to be
revealed on the evenings between Christmas and the Epiphany, and on the
eves of these festivals the heavens are opened, and the waters of springs
and rivers turn into wine.{20}

Another instance of the supernatural character of the night is found in a
Breton story of a blacksmith who went on working after the sacring bell
had rung at the Midnight Mass. To him |235| came a tall, stooping man
with a scythe, who begged him to put in a nail. He did so; and the
visitor in return bade him send for a priest, for this work would be his
last. The figure disappeared, the blacksmith felt his limbs fail him, and
at cock-crow he died. He had mended the scythe of the _Ankou_--Death the
reaper.{21}

In the Scandinavian countries simple folk have a vivid sense of the
nearness of the supernatural on Christmas Eve. On Yule night no one
should go out, for he may meet uncanny beings of all kinds. In Sweden the
Trolls are believed to celebrate Christmas Eve with dancing and revelry.
"On the heaths witches and little Trolls ride, one on a wolf, another on
a broom or a shovel, to their assemblies, where they dance under their
stones.... In the mount are then to be heard mirth and music, dancing and
drinking. On Christmas morn, during the time between cock-crowing and
daybreak, it is highly dangerous to be abroad."{22}

Christmas Eve is also in Scandinavian folk-belief the time when the dead
revisit their old homes, as on All Souls' Eve in Roman Catholic lands.
The living prepare for their coming with mingled dread and desire to make
them welcome. When the Christmas Eve festivities are over, and everyone
has gone to rest, the parlour is left tidy and adorned, with a great fire
burning, candles lighted, the table covered with a festive cloth and
plentifully spread with food, and a jug of Yule ale ready. Sometimes
before going to bed people wipe the chairs with a clean white towel; in
the morning they are wiped again, and, if earth is found, some kinsman,
fresh from the grave, has sat there. Consideration for the dead even
leads people to prepare a warm bath in the belief that, like living
folks, the kinsmen will want a wash before their festal meal.[96] Or
again beds were made ready for them while the living slept on straw. Not
always is it consciously the dead for whom these preparations are made,
sometimes they are said to be for the Trolls and sometimes even for
|236| the Saviour and His angels.{24} (We may compare with this
Christian idea the Tyrolese custom of leaving some milk for the Christ
Child and His Mother{25} at the hour of Midnight Mass, and a Breton
practice of leaving food all through Christmas night in case the Virgin
should come.{26})

It is difficult to say how far the other supernatural beings--their name
is legion--who in Norway, Sweden, Denmark, and Iceland are believed to
come out of their underground hiding-places during the long dark
Christmas nights, were originally ghosts of the dead. Twenty years ago
many students would have accounted for them all in this way, but the
tendency now is strongly against the derivation of all supernatural
beings from ancestor-worship. Elves, trolls, dwarfs, witches, and other
uncanny folk--the beliefs about their Christmas doings are too many to be
treated here; readers of Danish will find a long and very interesting
chapter on this subject in Dr. Feilberg's "Jul."{27} I may mention just
one familiar figure of the Scandinavian Yule, Tomte Gubbe, a sort of
genius of the house corresponding very much to the "drudging goblin" of
Milton's "L'Allegro," for whom the cream-bowl must be duly set. He may
perhaps be the spirit of the founder of the family. At all events on
Christmas Eve Yule porridge and new milk are set out for him, sometimes
with other things, such as a suit of small clothes, spirits, or even
tobacco. Thus must his goodwill be won for the coming year.{28}

In one part of Norway it used to be believed that on Christmas Eve, at
rare intervals, the old Norse gods made war on Christians, coming down
from the mountains with great blasts of wind and wild shouts, and
carrying off any human being who might be about. In one place the memory
of such a visitation was preserved in the nineteenth century. The people
were preparing for their festivities, when suddenly from the mountains
came the warning sounds. "In a second the air became black, peals of
thunder echoed among the hills, lightning danced about the buildings, and
the inhabitants in the darkened rooms heard the clatter of hoofs and the
weird shrieks of the hosts of the gods."{29}

|237| The Scandinavian countries, Protestant though they are, have
retained many of the outward forms of Catholicism, and the sign of the
cross is often used as a protection against uncanny visitors. The
cross--perhaps the symbol was originally Thor's hammer--is marked with
chalk or tar or fire upon doors and gates, is formed of straw or other
material and put in stables and cowhouses, or is smeared with the remains
of the Yule candle on the udders of the beasts--it is in fact displayed
at every point open to attack by a spirit of darkness.{30}



Christmas Eve is in Germany a time for auguries. Some of the methods
already noted on other days are practised upon it--for instance the
pouring of molten lead into water, the flinging of shoes, the pulling out
of pieces of wood, and the floating of nutshells--and there are various
others which it might be tedious to describe.{31}

Among the southern Slavs if a girl wants to know what sort of husband she
will get, she covers the table on Christmas Eve, puts on it a white loaf,
a plate, and a knife, spoon, and fork, and goes to bed. At midnight the
spirit of her future husband will appear and fling the knife at her. If
it falls without injuring her she will get a good husband and be happy,
but if she is hurt she will die early. There is a similar mode of
divination for a young fellow. On Christmas Eve, when everybody else has
gone to church, he must, naked and in darkness, sift ashes through a
sieve. His future bride will then appear, pull him thrice by the nose,
and go away.{32}

In eastern Europe Christmas, and especially Christmas Eve, is the time
for the singing of carols called in Russian _Kolyádki_, and in other Slav
countries by similar names derived from _Kalendae_.{33} More often than
not these are without connection with the Nativity; sometimes they have a
Christian form and tell of the doings of God, the Virgin and the saints,
but frequently they are of an entirely secular or even pagan character.
Into some the sun, moon, and stars and other natural objects are
introduced, and they seem to be based on myths to which a Christian
appearance has been given by a sprinkling of names of holy persons of the
|238| Church. Here for instance is a fragment from a Carpathian song:--

   "A golden plough goes ploughing,
    And behind that plough is the Lord Himself.
    The holy Peter helps Him to drive,
    And the Mother of God carries the seed corn,
    Carries the seed corn, prays to the Lord God,
    'Make, O Lord, the strong wheat to grow,
    The strong wheat and the vigorous corn!
    The stalks then shall be like reeds!'"{34}

Often they contain wishes for the prosperity of the household and end
with the words, "for many years, for many years." The Roumanian songs are
frequently very long, and a typical, oft-recurring refrain is:--

   "This evening is a great evening,
        White flowers;
    Great evening of Christmas,
        White flowers."{35}

Sometimes they are ballads of the national life.

In Russia a carol beginning "Glory be to God in heaven, Glory!" and
calling down blessings on the Tsar and his people, is one of the most
prominent among the _Kolyádki_, and opens the singing of the songs called
_Podblyudnuiya_. "At the Christmas festival a table is covered with a
cloth, and on it is set a dish or bowl (_blyudo_) containing water. The
young people drop rings or other trinkets into the dish, which is
afterwards covered with a cloth, and then the _Podblyudnuiya_ Songs
commence. At the end of each song one of the trinkets is drawn at random,
and its owner deduces an omen from the nature of the words which have
just been sung."{36}


THE TWELVE DAYS.

Whatever the limits fixed for the beginning and end of the Christmas
festival, its core is always the period between Christmas |239| Eve and
the Epiphany--the "Twelve Days."[97] A cycle of feasts falls within this
time, and the customs peculiar to each day will be treated in calendarial
order. First, however, it will be well to glance at the character of the
Twelve Days as a whole, and at the superstitions which hang about the
season. So many are these superstitions, so "bewitched" is the time, that
the older mythologists not unnaturally saw in it a Teutonic festal
season, dating from pre-Christian days. In point of fact it appears to be
simply a creation of the Church, a natural linking together of Christmas
and Epiphany. It is first mentioned as a festal tide by the eastern
Father, Ephraem Syrus, at the end of the fourth century, and was declared
to be such by the western Council of Tours in 567.{37}

While Christmas Eve is the night _par excellence_ of the supernatural,
the whole season of the Twelve Days is charged with it. It is hard to see
whence Shakespeare could have got the idea which he puts into the mouth
of Marcellus in "Hamlet":--

   "Some say that ever 'gainst that season comes
    Wherein our Saviour's birth is celebrated,
    The bird of dawning singeth all night long;
    And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad;
    The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike,
    No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
    So hallow'd and so gracious is the time."{38}

Against this is the fact that in folk-lore Christmas is a quite
peculiarly uncanny time. Not unnatural is it that at this midwinter
season of darkness, howling winds, and raging storms, men should have
thought to see and hear the mysterious shapes and voices of dread beings
whom the living shun.

Throughout the Teutonic world one finds the belief in a "raging |240|
host" or "wild hunt" or spirits, rushing howling through the air on
stormy nights. In North Devon its name is "Yeth (heathen) hounds";{40}
elsewhere in the west of England it is called the "Wish hounds."{41} It
is the train of the unhappy souls of those who died unbaptized, or by
violent hands, or under a curse, and often Woden is their leader.{42} At
least since the seventeenth century this "raging host" (_das wüthende
Heer_) has been particularly associated with Christmas in German
folk-lore,{43} and in Iceland it goes by the name of the "Yule
host."{44}

In Guernsey the powers of darkness are supposed to be more than usually
active between St. Thomas's Day and New Year's Eve, and it is dangerous
to be out after nightfall. People are led astray then by Will o' the
Wisp, or are preceded or followed by large black dogs, or find their path
beset by white rabbits that go hopping along just under their feet.{45}

In England there are signs that supernatural visitors were formerly
looked for during the Twelve Days. First there was a custom of cleansing
the house and its implements with peculiar care. In Shropshire, for
instance, "the pewter and brazen vessels had to be made so bright that
the maids could see to put their caps on in them--otherwise the fairies
would pinch them, but if all was perfect, the worker would find a coin in
her shoe." Again in Shropshire special care was taken to put away any
suds or "back-lee" for washing purposes, and no spinning might be done
during the Twelve Days.{46} It was said elsewhere that if any flax were
left on the distaff, the Devil would come and cut it.{47}

The prohibition of spinning may be due to the Church's hallowing of the
season and the idea that all work then was wrong. This churchly hallowing
may lie also at the root of the Danish tradition that from Christmas till
New Year's Day nothing that runs round should be set in motion,{48} and
of the German idea that no thrashing must be done during the Twelve Days,
or all the corn within hearing will spoil. The expectation of uncanny
visitors in the English traditions calls, however, for special attention;
it is perhaps because of their coming that the house must be left
spotlessly clean and with as little as possible about on which they can
work mischief.{49} Though I know of no distinct English belief in the
|241| return of the family dead at Christmas, it may be that the fairies
expected in Shropshire were originally ancestral ghosts. Such a
derivation of the elves and brownies that haunt the hearth is very
probable.{50}



The belief about the Devil cutting flax left on the distaff links the
English superstitions to the mysterious _Frau_ with various names, who in
Germany is supposed to go her rounds during the Twelve Nights. She has a
special relation to spinning, often punishing girls who leave their flax
unspun. In central Germany and in parts of Austria she is called Frau
Holle or Holda, in southern Germany and Tyrol Frau Berchta or Perchta, in
the north down to the Harz Mountains Frau Freen or Frick, or Fru Gode or
Fru Harke, and there are other names too.{51} Attempts have been made to
dispute her claim to the rank of an old Teutonic goddess and to prove her
a creation of the Middle Ages, a representative of the crowd of ghosts
supposed to be specially near to the living at Christmastide.{52} It is
questionable whether she can be thus explained away, and at the back of
the varying names, and much overlaid no doubt with later superstitions,
there may be a traditional goddess corresponding to that old divinity
Frigg to whom we owe the name of Friday. The connection of Frick with
Frigg is very probable, and Frick shares characteristics with the other
_Frauen_.{53}

All are connected with spinning and spinsters (in the literal sense). Fru
Frick or Freen in the Uckermark and the northern Harz permits no spinning
during the time when she goes her rounds, and if there are lazy spinsters
she soils the unspun flax on their distaff. In like manner do Holda,
Harke, Berchta, and Gode punish lazy girls.{54}

The characters of the _Frauen_ can best be shown by the things told of
them in different regions. They are more dreaded than loved, but if
severe in their chastisements they are also generous in rewarding those
who do them service.

Frau Gaude (also called Gode, Gaue, or Wode) is said in Mecklenburg to
love to drive through the village streets on the Twelve Nights with a
train of dogs. Wherever she finds a street-door open she sends a little
dog in. Next morning he wags his |242| tail at the inmates and whines,
and will not be driven away. If killed, he turns into a stone by day;
this, though it may be thrown away, always returns and is a dog again by
night. All through the year he whines and brings ill luck upon the house;
so people are careful to keep their street-doors shut during the Twelve
Nights.{55}

Good luck, however, befalls those who do Frau Gaude a service. A man who
put a new pole to her carriage was brilliantly repaid--the chips that
fell from the pole turned to glittering gold. Similar stories of golden
chips are told about Holda and Berchta.{56}

A train of dogs belongs not only to Frau Gaude but also to Frau Harke;
with these howling beasts they go raging through the air by night.{57}
The _Frauen_ in certain aspects are, indeed, the leaders of the "Wild
Host."

Holda and Perchta, as some strange stories show, are the guides and
guardians of the _heimchen_ or souls of children who have died
unbaptized. In the valley of the Saale, so runs a tale, Perchta, queen of
the _heimchen_, had her dwelling of old, and at her command the children
watered the fields, while she worked with her plough. But the people of
the place were ungrateful, and she resolved to leave their land. One
night a ferryman beheld on the bank of the Saale a tall, stately lady
with a crowd of weeping children. She demanded to be ferried across, and
the children dragged a plough into the boat, crying bitterly. As a reward
for the ferrying, Perchta, mending her plough, pointed to the chips. The
man grumblingly took three, and in the morning they had turned to
gold-pieces.{58}

Holda, whose name means "the kindly one," is the most friendly of the
_Frauen_. In Saxony she brings rewards for diligent spinsters, and on
every New Year's Eve, between nine and ten o'clock, she drives in a
carriage full of presents through villages where respect has been shown
to her. At the crack of her whip the people come out to receive her
gifts. In Hesse and Thuringia she is imagined as a beautiful woman clad
in white with long golden hair, and, when it snows hard, people say,
"Frau Holle is shaking her featherbed."{59}

|243| More of a bugbear on the whole is Berchte or Perchte (the name is
variously spelt). She is particularly connected with the Eve of the
Epiphany, and it is possible that her name comes from the old German
_giper(c)hta Na(c)ht_, the bright or shining night, referring to the
manifestation of Christ's glory.{60} In Carinthia the Epiphany is still
called _Berchtentag_.{61}

Berchte is sometimes a bogey to frighten children. In the mountains round
Traunstein children are told on Epiphany Eve that if they are naughty she
will come and cut their stomachs open.{62} In Upper Austria the girls
must finish their spinning by Christmas; if Frau Berch finds flax still
on their distaffs she will be angered and send them bad luck.{63}

In the Orlagau (between the Saale and the Orle) on the night before
Twelfth Day, Perchta examines the spinning-rooms and brings the spinners
empty reels with directions to spin them full within a very brief time;
if this is not done she punishes them by tangling and befouling the flax.
She also cuts open the body of any one who has not eaten _zemmede_
(fasting fare made of flour and milk and water) that day, takes out any
other food he has had, fills the empty space with straw and bricks, and
sews him up again.{64} And yet, as we have seen, she has a kindly
side--at any rate she rewards those who serve her--and in Styria at
Christmas she even plays the part of Santa Klaus, hearing children repeat
their prayers and rewarding them with nuts and apples.{65}

There is a charming Tyrolese story about her. At midnight on Epiphany Eve
a peasant--not too sober--suddenly heard behind him "a sound of many
voices, which came on nearer and nearer, and then the Berchtl, in her
white clothing, her broken ploughshare in her hand, and all her train of
little people, swept clattering and chattering close past him. The least
was the last, and it wore a long shirt which got in the way of its little
bare feet, and kept tripping it up. The peasant had sense enough left to
feel compassion, so he took his garter off and bound it for a girdle
round the infant, and then set it again on its way. When the Berchtl saw
what he had done, she turned back and thanked him, and told him that in
return for his compassion his children should never come to want."{66}

|244| In Tyrol, by the way, it is often said that the Perchtl is
Pontius Pilate's wife, Procula.{67} In the Italian dialects of south
Tyrol the German Frau Berchta has been turned into _la donna Berta_.{68}
If one goes further south, into Italy itself, one meets with a similar
being, the Befana, whose name is plainly nothing but a corruption of
_Epiphania_. She is so distinctly a part of the Epiphany festival that we
may leave her to be considered later.



Of all supernatural Christmas visitors, the most vividly realized and
believed in at the present day are probably the Greek _Kallikantzaroi_ or
_Karkantzaroi_.{69} They are the terror of the Greek peasant during the
Twelve Days; in the soil of his imagination they flourish luxuriantly,
and to him they are a very real and living nuisance.

Traditions about the _Kallikantzaroi_ vary from region to region, but in
general they are half-animal, half-human monsters, black, hairy, with
huge heads, glaring red eyes, goats' or asses' ears, blood-red tongues
hanging out, ferocious tusks, monkeys' arms, and long curved nails, and
commonly they have the foot of some beast. "From dawn till sunset they
hide themselves in dark and dank places ... but at night they issue forth
and run wildly to and fro, rending and crushing those who cross their
path. Destruction and waste, greed and lust mark their course." When a
house is not prepared against their coming, "by chimney and door alike
they swarm in, and make havoc of the home; in sheer wanton mischief they
overturn and break all the furniture, devour the Christmas pork, befoul
all the water and wine and food which remains, and leave the occupants
half dead with fright or violence." Many like or far worse pranks do they
play, until at the crowing of the third cock they get them away to their
dens. The signal for their final departure does not come until the
Epiphany, when, as we saw in Chapter IV., the "Blessing of the Waters"
takes place. Some of the hallowed water is put into vessels, and with
these and with incense the priests sometimes make a round of the village,
sprinkling the people and their houses. The fear of the |245|
_Kallikantzaroi_ at this purification is expressed in the following
lines:--

   "Quick, begone! we must begone,
    Here comes the pot-bellied priest,
    With his censer in his hand
    And his sprinkling-vessel too;
    He has purified the streams
    And he has polluted us."

Besides this ecclesiastical purification there are various Christian
precautions against the _Kallikantzaroi_--_e.g._, to mark the house-door
with a black cross on Christmas Eve, the burning of incense and the
invocation of the Trinity--and a number of other means of aversion: the
lighting of the Yule log, the burning of something that smells strong,
and--perhaps as a peace-offering--the hanging of pork-bones, sweetmeats,
or sausages in the chimney.

Just as men are sometimes believed to become vampires temporarily during
their lifetime, so, according to one stream of tradition, do living men
become _Kallikantzaroi_. In Greece children born at Christmas are thought
likely to have this objectionable characteristic as a punishment for
their mothers' sin in bearing them at a time sacred to the Mother of God.
In Macedonia{70} people who have a "light" guardian angel undergo the
hideous transformation.

Many attempts have been made to account for the _Kallikantzaroi_. Perhaps
the most plausible explanation of the outward form, at least, of the
uncanny creatures, is the theory connecting them with the masquerades
that formed part of the winter festival of Dionysus and are still to be
found in Greece at Christmastide. The hideous bestial shapes, the noise
and riot, may well have seemed demoniacal to simple people slightly
"elevated," perhaps, by Christmas feasting, while the human nature of the
maskers was not altogether forgotten.{71} Another theory of an even more
prosaic character has been propounded--"that the Kallikantzaroi are
nothing more than established nightmares, limited like indigestion to the
twelve days of feasting. This view is |246| taken by Allatius, who says
that a Kallikantzaros has all the characteristics of nightmare, rampaging
abroad and jumping on men's shoulders, then leaving them half senseless
on the ground."{72}

Such theories are ingenious and suggestive, and may be true to a certain
degree, but they hardly cover all the facts. It is possible that the
_Kallikantzaroi_ may have some connection with the departed; they
certainly appear akin to the modern Greek and Slavonic vampire, "a corpse
imbued with a kind of half-life," and with eyes gleaming like live
coals.{73} They are, however, even more closely related to the werewolf,
a man who is supposed to change into a wolf and go about ravening. It is
to be noted that "man-wolves" ([Greek: lykanthrôpoi]) is the very name
given to the _Kallikantzaroi_ in southern Greece, and that the word
_Kallikantzaros_ itself has been conjecturally derived by Bernhard
Schmidt from two Turkish words meaning "black" and "werewolf."{74} The
connection between Christmas and werewolves is not confined to Greece.
According to a belief not yet extinct in the north and east of Germany,
even where the real animals have long ago been extirpated, children born
during the Twelve Nights become werewolves, while in Livonia and Poland
that period is the special season for the werewolf's ravenings.{75}

Perhaps on no question connected with primitive religion is there more
uncertainty than on the ideas of early man about the nature of animals
and their relation to himself and the world. When we meet with
half-animal, half-human beings we must be prepared to find much that is
obscure.

With the _Kallikantzaroi_ may be compared some goblins of the Celtic
imagination; especially like is the Manx _Fynnodderee_ (lit. "the
hairy-dun one"), "something between a man and a beast, being covered with
black shaggy hair and having fiery eyes," and prodigiously strong.{76}
The Russian _Domovy_ or house-spirit is also a hirsute creature,{77} and
the Russian _Ljeschi_, goat-footed woodland sprites, are, like the
_Kallikantzaroi_, supposed to be got rid of by the "Blessing of the
Waters" at the Epiphany.{78} Some of the monstrous German figures
already dealt with here |247| bear strong resemblances to the Greek
demons. And, of course, on Greek ground one cannot help thinking of Pan
and the Satyrs and Centaurs.[98]

|248| |249| |250| |251|




CHAPTER X

THE YULE LOG


    The Log as Centre of the Domestic Christmas--Customs of the Southern
    Slavs--The _Polaznik_--Origin of the Yule Log--Probable Connection
    with Vegetation-cults or Ancestor-worship--The _Souche de Noël_ in
    France--Italian and German Christmas Logs--English Customs--The Yule
    Candle in England and Scandinavia.

The peoples of Europe have various centres for their Christmas rejoicing.
In Spain and Italy the crib is often the focus of the festival in the
home as well as the church. In England--after the old tradition--, in
rural France, and among the southern Slavs, the centre is the great log
solemnly brought in and kindled on the hearth, while in Germany, one need
hardly say, the light-laden tree is the supreme symbol of Christmas. The
crib has already been treated in our First Part, the Yule log and the
Christmas-tree will be considered in this chapter and the next.

The log placed on the fire on the Vigil of the Nativity no longer forms
an important part of the English Christmas. Yet within the memory of many
it was a very essential element in the celebration of the festival, not
merely as giving out welcome warmth in the midwinter cold, but as
possessing occult, magical properties. In some remote corners of England
it probably lingers yet. We shall return to the traditional English Yule
log after a study of some Continental customs of the same kind.

First, we may travel to a part of eastern Europe where the log ceremonies
are found in their most elaborate form. Among the Serbs and Croats on
Christmas Eve two or three young oaks are felled for every house, and, as
twilight comes on, are brought in and laid on the fire. (Sometimes there
is one for each male |252| member of the family, but one large log is
the centre of the ritual.) The felling takes place in some districts
before sunrise, corn being thrown upon the trees with the words, "Good
morning, Christmas!" At Risano and other places in Lower Dalmatia the
women and girls wind red silk and gold wire round the oak trunks, and
adorn them with leaves and flowers. While they are being carried into the
house lighted tapers are held on either side of the door. As the
house-father crosses the threshold in the twilight with the first log,
corn--or in some places wine--is thrown over him by one of the family.
The log or _badnjak_ is then placed on the fire. At Ragusa the
house-father sprinkles corn and wine upon the _badnjak_, saying, as the
flame shoots up, "Goodly be thy birth!" In the mountains above Risano he
not only pours corn and wine but afterwards takes a bowl of corn, an
orange, and a ploughshare, and places them on the upper end of the log in
order that the corn may grow well and the beasts be healthy during the
year. In Montenegro, instead of throwing corn, he more usually breaks a
piece of unleavened bread, places it upon the log, and pours over it a
libation of wine.{1}

The first visit on Christmas Day is considered important--we may compare
this with "first-footing" in the British Isles on January 1--and in order
that the right sort of person may come, some one is specially chosen to
be the so-called _polaznik_. No outsider but this _polaznik_ may enter a
house on Christmas Day, where the rites are strictly observed. He appears
in the early morning, carries corn in his glove and shakes it out before
the threshold with the words, "Christ is born," whereupon some member of
the household sprinkles him with corn in return, answering, "He is born
indeed." Afterwards the _polaznik_ goes to the fire and makes sparks fly
from the remains of the _badnjak_, at the same time uttering a wish for
the good luck of the house-father and his household and farm. Money and
sometimes an orange are then placed on the _badnjak_. It is not allowed
to burn quite away; the last remains of the fire are extinguished and the
embers are laid between the branches of young fruit-trees to promote
their growth.{2}

How shall we interpret these practices? Mannhardt regards the log as an
embodiment of the vegetation-spirit, and its burning |253| as an
efficacious symbol of sunshine, meant to secure the genial vitalizing
influence of the sun during the coming year.{3} It is, however, possible
to connect it with a different circle of ideas and to see in its burning
the solemn annual rekindling of the sacred hearth-fire, the centre of the
family life and the dwelling-place of the ancestors. Primitive peoples in
many parts of the world are accustomed to associate fire with human
generation,{4} and it is a general belief among Aryan and other peoples
that ancestral spirits have their seat in the hearth. In Russia, for
instance, "in the Nijegorod Government it is still forbidden to break up
the smouldering faggots in a stove, because to do so might cause the
ancestors to fall through into hell. And when a Russian family moves from
one house to another, the fire is conveyed to the new one, where it is
received with the words, 'Welcome, grandfather, to the new home!'"{5}

Sir Arthur Evans in three articles in _Macmillan's Magazine_ for 1881{6}
gave a minute account of the Christmas customs of the Serbian highlanders
above Risano, who practise the log-rites with elaborate ceremonial, and
explained them as connected in one way or other with ancestor-worship,
though the people themselves attach a Christian meaning to many of them.
He pointed to the following facts as showing that the Serbian Christmas
is at bottom a feast of the dead:--(1) It is said on Christmas Eve,
"To-night Earth is blended with Paradise" [_Raj_, the abode of the dead
among the heathen Slavs]. (2) There is talk of unchristened folk beneath
the threshold wailing "for a wax-light and offerings to be brought them;
when that is done they lie still enough"--here there may be a modified
survival of the idea that ancestral spirits dwell beneath the doorway.
(3) The food must on no account be cleared away after the Christmas meal,
but is left for three days, apparently for the house-spirits. (4)
Blessings are invoked upon the "Absent Ones," which seems to mean the
departed, and (5) a toast is drunk and a bread-cake broken in memory of
"the Patron Namegiver of all house-fathers," ostensibly Christ but
perhaps originally the founder of the family. Some of these customs
resemble those we have noted on All Souls' Eve and--in Scandinavia--on
Christmas Eve; other parallels we shall meet |254| with later. Among
the Slav races the old organization of the family under an elective
house-elder and holding things in common has been faithfully preserved,
and we might expect to find among the remote Serbian highlanders
specially clear traces of the old religion of the hearth. One remarkable
point noted by Sir Arthur Evans was that in the Crivoscian cottage where
he stayed the fire-irons, the table, and the stools were removed to an
obscure corner before the logs were brought in and the Christmas rites
began--an indication apparently of the extreme antiquity of the
celebration, as dating from a time when such implements were unknown.{7}

If we take the view that ancestral spirits are the centre of the
_badnjak_ observances, we may regard the libations upon the fire as
intended for their benefit. On the sun and vegetation hypothesis,
however, the libations would be meant to secure, by homoeopathic magic,
that sunshine should alternate with the rain necessary for the welfare of
plants.[99]{8} The fertilizing powers possessed by the sparks and ashes
of the Christmas log appear frequently in folk-lore, and may be explained
either by the connection of fire with human generation already noted, or,
on the other theory, by the burning log being a sort of sacrament of
sunshine. It is not perhaps necessary to exclude the idea of the log's
connection with the vegetation-spirit even on the ancestral cult
hypothesis, for the tree which furnished the fuel may have been regarded
as the source of the life of the race.{9} The Serbian rites certainly
suggest very strongly some sort of veneration for the log itself as well
as for the fire that it feeds.



We may now return to western Europe. In France the Christmas log or
_souche de Noël_ is common in the less modernized places, particularly in
the south. In Dauphiné it is called _chalendal_, |255| in Provence
_calignaou_ (from _Kalendae_, of course) or _tréfoir_, in Orne
_tréfouet_. On Christmas Eve in Provence the whole family goes solemnly
out to bring in the log. A carol meanwhile is sung praying for blessings
on the house, that the women may bear children, the nanny-goats kids, and
the ewes lambs, that corn and flour may abound, and the cask be full of
wine. Then the youngest child in the family pours wine on the log in the
name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. The log is then thrown upon the
fire, and the charcoal is kept all the year and used as a remedy for
various ills.{11}

Another account is given in his Memoirs by Frédéric Mistral, the
Provençal poet. On Christmas Eve everyone, he says, speaking of his
boyhood, sallied forth to fetch the Yule log, which had to be cut from a
fruit-tree:--

    "Walking in line we bore it home, headed by the oldest at one end,
    and I, the last born, bringing up the rear. Three times we made the
    tour of the kitchen, then, arrived at the flagstones of the hearth,
    my father solemnly poured over the log a glass of wine, with the
    dedicatory words:

    'Joy, joy. May God shower joy upon us, my dear children. Christmas
    brings us all good things. God give us grace to see the New Year, and
    if we do not increase in numbers may we at all events not decrease.'

    In chorus we responded:

    'Joy, joy, joy!' and lifted the log on the fire dogs. Then as the
    first flame leapt up my father would cross himself, saying, 'Burn the
    log, O fire,' and with that we all sat down to the table."{12}

In some places the _tréfoir_ or _tison de Noël_ is burnt every evening
during the Thirteen Nights. If put under the bed its charcoal protects
the house all the year round from lightning; contact with it preserves
people from chilblains and animals from various diseases; mixed with
fodder it makes cows calve; its brands thrown into the soil keep the corn
healthy. In Périgord the portion which has not been burnt is used to form
part of a plough, and is believed to make the seed prosper; women also
keep some fragments until Epiphany that their poultry may thrive.{13} In
|256| Brittany the _tison_ is a protection against lightning and its
ashes are put in wells to keep the water good.{14}

In northern Italy also the _ceppo_ or log is (or was) known--the
Piedmontese call it _suc_--and in Tuscany Christmas is called after it
_Festa di Ceppo_. In the Val di Chiana on Christmas Eve the family
gathers, a great log is set on the fire, the children are blindfolded and
have to beat it with tongs, and an _Ave Maria del Ceppo_ is sung.{15}
Under the name in Lombardy of _zocco_, in Tuscany of _ciocco_, _di
Natale_, the Yule log was in olden times common in Italian cities; the
custom can there be traced back to the eleventh century. A little book
probably printed in Milan at the end of the fifteenth century gives
minute particulars of the ritual observed, and we learn that on Christmas
Eve the father, or the head of the household, used to call all the family
together and with great devotion, in the name of the Holy Trinity, take
the log and place it on the fire. Juniper was put under it, and on the
top money was placed, afterwards to be given to the servants. Wine in
abundance was poured three times on the fire when the head of the house
had drunk and given drink to all present. It was an old Italian custom to
preserve the ashes of the _zocco_ as a protection against hail. A modern
superstition is to keep some splinters of the wood and burn them in the
fires made for the benefit of silkworms; so burnt, they are supposed to
keep ills away from the creatures.{16}

In many parts of Germany Yule log customs can be traced. In Hesse and
Westphalia, for instance, it was the custom on Christmas Eve or Day to
lay a large block of wood on the fire and, as soon as it was charred a
little, to take it off and preserve it. When a storm threatened, it was
kindled again as a protection against lightning. It was called the
_Christbrand_.{17} In Thuringia a _Christklotz_ (Christ log) is put on
the fire before people go to bed, so that it may burn all through the
night. Its remains are kept to protect the house from fire and ill-luck.
In parts of Thuringia and in Mecklenburg, Pomerania, East Prussia,
Saxony, and Bohemia, the fire is kept up all night on Christmas or New
Year's Eve, and the ashes are used to rid cattle of vermin and protect
plants and fruit-trees from insects, while in the country between the
Sieg |257| and Lahn the powdered ashes of an oaken log are strewn
during the Thirteen Nights on the fields, to increase their
fertility.{18} In Sweden, too, some form of Yule log was known,{19} and
in Greece, as we have seen, the burning of a log is still supposed to be
a protection against _Kallikantzaroi_.

As for the English customs, they can hardly be better introduced than in
Herrick's words:--

     "Come, bring, with a noise,
      My merry, merry boys,
    The Christmas Log to the firing:
      While my good Dame she
      Bids ye all be free,
    And drink to your hearts' desiring.

      With the last year's Brand
      Light the new Block, and
    For good success in his spending,
      On your psaltries play,
      That sweet luck may
    Come while the log is a-teending."[100]{20}

We may note especially that the block must be kindled with last year's
brand; here there is a distinct suggestion that the lighting of the log
at Christmas is a shrunken remnant of the keeping up of a perpetual fire,
the continuity being to some extent preserved by the use of a brand from
last year's blaze.

Another tradition and its origin are thus described by Sir Laurence
Gomme:--

    "From there being an ever-burning fire, it has come to be that the
    fire must not be allowed to be extinguished on the last day of the
    old year, so that the old year's fire may last into the new year. In
    Lanarkshire it is considered unlucky to give out a light to any one
    on the morning of the new year, and therefore if the house-fire has
    been allowed to become extinguished recourse must be had to the
    embers of |258| the village pile [for on New Year's Eve a great
    public bonfire is made]. In some places the self-extinction of the
    yule-log at Christmas is portentous of evil."{21}

In the north of England in the days of tinder-boxes, if any one could not
get a light it was useless to ask a neighbour for one, so frightfully
unlucky was it to allow any light to leave the house between Christmas
Eve and New Year's Day.{22} The idea of the unluckiness of giving out
fire at the Kalends of January can be traced back to the eighth century
when, as we saw in Chapter VI., St. Boniface alluded to this superstition
among the people or Rome.

In Shropshire the idea is extended even to ashes, which must not be
thrown out of the house on Christmas Day, "for fear of throwing them in
Our Saviour's face." Perhaps such superstitions may originally have had
to do with dread that the "luck" of the family, the household spirit,
might be carried away with the gift of fire from the hearth.{23}

When Miss Burne wrote in the eighties there were still many West
Shropshire people who could remember seeing the "Christmas Brand" drawn
by horses to the farmhouse door, and placed at the back of the wide open
hearth, where the flame was made up in front of it. "The embers," says
one informant, "were raked up to it every night, and it was carefully
tended that it might not go out during the whole season, during which
time no light might either be struck, given, or borrowed." At Cleobury
Mortimer in the south-east of the county the silence of the curfew bell
during "the Christmas" points to a time when fires might not be
extinguished during that season.{24}

The place of the Yule log in Devonshire is taken by the "ashen [sometimes
"ashton"] faggot," still burnt in many a farm on Christmas Eve. The
sticks of ash are fastened together by ashen bands, and the traditional
custom is for a quart of cider to be called for and served to the
merrymaking company, as each band bursts in the flames.{25}

In England the Yule log was often supplemented or replaced |259| by a
great candle. At Ripon in the eighteenth century the chandlers sent their
customers large candles on Christmas Eve, and the coopers, logs of
wood.{26} Hampson, writing in 1841, says:--

    "In some places candles are made of a particular kind, because the
    candle that is lighted on Christmas Day must be so large as to burn
    from the time of its ignition to the close of the day, otherwise it
    will portend evil to the family for the ensuing year. The poor were
    wont to present the rich with wax tapers, and yule candles are still
    in the north of Scotland given by merchants to their customers. At
    one time children at the village schools in Lancashire were required
    to bring each a mould candle before the _parting_ or separation for
    the Christmas holidays."[101]{27}

In the Scandinavian countries the Yule candle is, or was, very prominent
indeed. In West Jutland (Denmark) two great tallow candles stood on the
festive board. No one dared to touch or extinguish them, and if by any
mischance one went out it was a portent of death. They stood for the
husband and wife, and that one of the wedded pair whose candle burnt the
longer would outlive the other.{28}

In Norway also two lights were placed on the table.{29} All over the
Scandinavian lands the Yule candle had to burn throughout the night; it
was not to be extinguished till the sun rose or--as was said
elsewhere--till the beginning of service on Christmas Day. Sometimes the
putting-out had to be done by the oldest member of the family or the
father of the household. In Norway the candle was lighted every evening
until New Year's Day. While it foreshadowed death if it went out, so long
as it duly burned it shed a blessing with its light, and, in order to
secure abundance of good things, money, clothes, food, and drink were
spread out that its rays might fall upon them. The remains of the candle
were used in various ways to benefit man and beast. Sometimes a cross was
branded with them upon the animals on Christmas morning; in Sweden the
plough was smeared with |260| the tallow, when used for the first time
in spring. Or again the tallow was given to the fowls; and, lastly, in
Denmark the ends were preserved and burnt in thundery weather to protect
the house from lightning.{30} There is an analogy here with the use of
the Christmas log, and also of the candles of the Purification (see
Chapter XVI.).

|261| |262| |263|




CHAPTER XI

THE CHRISTMAS-TREE, DECORATIONS, AND GIFTS


    The Christmas-tree a German Creation--Charm of the German
    Christmas--Early Christmas-trees--The Christmas Pyramid--Spread of
    the Tree in Modern Germany and other Countries--Origin of the
    Christmas-tree--Beliefs about Flowering Trees at
    Christmas--Evergreens at the Kalends--Non-German Parallels to the
    Christmas-tree--Christmas Decorations connected with Ancient Kalends
    Customs--Sacredness of Holly and Mistletoe--Floors strewn with
    Straw--Christmas and New Year Gifts, their Connection with the Roman
    _Strenae_ and St. Nicholas--Present-giving in Various
    Countries--Christmas Cards.

[Illustration:

THE GERMAN CHRISTMAS-TREE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

From an engraving by Joseph Kellner.]


THE CHRISTMAS-TREE.

The most widespread, and to children the most delightful, of all festal
institutions is the Christmas-tree. Its picturesqueness and gay charm
have made it spread rapidly all over Europe without roots in national
tradition, for, as most people know, it is a German creation, and even in
Germany it attained its present immense popularity only in the nineteenth
century. To Germany, of course, one should go to see the tree in all its
glory. Many people, indeed, maintain that no other Christmas can compare
with the German _Weihnacht_. "It is," writes Miss I. A. R. Wylie, "that
childish, open-hearted simplicity which, so it seems to me, makes
Christmas essentially German, or at any rate explains why it is that
nowhere else in the world does it find so pure an expression. The German
is himself simple, warm-hearted, unpretentious, with something at the
bottom of him which is childlike in the best sense. He is the last
'Naturmensch' in civilization." Christmas suits him "as well as a play
suits an actor for whose character and temperament it has been especially
written."{1}

|264| In Germany the Christmas-tree is not a luxury for well-to-do
people as in England, but a necessity, the very centre of the festival;
no one is too poor or too lonely to have one. There is something about a
German _Weihnachtsbaum_--a romance and a wonder--that English
Christmas-trees do not possess. For one thing, perhaps, in a land of
forests the tree seems more in place; it is a kind of sacrament linking
mankind to the mysteries of the woodland. Again the German tree is simply
a thing of beauty and radiance; no utilitarian presents hang from its
boughs--they are laid apart on a table--and the tree is purely splendour
for splendour's sake. However tawdry it may look by day, at night it is a
true thing of wonder, shining with countless lights and glittering
ornaments, with fruit of gold and shimmering festoons of silver. Then
there is the solemnity with which it is surrounded; the long secret
preparations behind the closed doors, and, when Christmas Eve arrives,
the sudden revelation of hidden glory. The Germans have quite a religious
feeling for their _Weihnachtsbaum_, coming down, one may fancy, from some
dim ancestral worship of the trees of the wood.

As Christmas draws near the market-place in a German town is filled with
a miniature forest of firs; the trees are sold by old women in quaint
costumes, and the shop-windows are full of candles and ornaments to deck
them. Mrs. Alfred Sidgwick in her "Home Life in Germany" gives a
delightful picture of such a Christmas market in "one of the old German
cities in the hill country, when the streets and the open places are
covered with crisp clean snow, and the mountains are white with it....
The air is cold and still, and heavy with the scent of the
Christmas-trees brought from the forest for the pleasure of the children.
Day by day you see the rows of them growing thinner, and if you go to the
market on Christmas Eve itself you will find only a few trees left out in
the cold. The market is empty, the peasants are harnessing their horses
or their oxen, the women are packing up their unsold goods. In every home
in the city one of the trees that scented the open air a week ago is
shining now with lights and little gilded nuts and apples, and is helping
to make that Christmas smell, all compact of the pine forest, wax |265|
candles, cakes and painted toys, you must associate so long as you live
with Christmas in Germany."{2}

Even in London one may get a glimpse of the Teutonic Christmas in the
half-German streets round Fitzroy Square. They are bald and drab enough,
but at Christmas here and there a window shines with a lighted tree, and
the very prosaic Lutheran church in Cleveland Street has an unwonted
sight to show--two great fir-trees decked with white candles, standing
one on each side of the pulpit. The church of the German Catholics, too,
St. Boniface's, Whitechapel, has in its sanctuary two Christmas-trees
strangely gay with coloured glistening balls and long strands of gold and
silver _engelshaar_. The candles are lit at Benediction during the
festival, and between the shining trees the solemn ritual is performed by
the priest and a crowd of serving boys in scarlet and white with tapers
and incense.



There is a pretty story about the institution of the _Weihnachtsbaum_ by
Martin Luther: how, after wandering one Christmas Eve under the clear
winter sky lit by a thousand stars, he set up for his children a tree
with countless candles, an image of the starry heaven whence Christ came
down. This, however, belongs to the region of legend; the first
historical mention of the Christmas-tree is found in the notes of a
certain Strasburg citizen of unknown name, written in the year 1605. "At
Christmas," he writes, "they set up fir-trees in the parlours at
Strasburg and hang thereon roses cut out of many-coloured paper, apples,
wafers, gold-foil, sweets, &c."{3}

We next meet with the tree in a hostile allusion by a distinguished
Strasburg theologian, Dr. Johann Konrad Dannhauer, Professor and Preacher
at the Cathedral. In his book, "The Milk of the Catechism," published
about the middle of the seventeenth century, he speaks of "the
Christmas- or fir-tree, which people set up in their houses, hang with
dolls and sweets, and afterwards shake and deflower." "Whence comes the
custom," he says, "I know not; it is child's play.... Far better were it
to point the children to the spiritual cedar-tree, Jesus Christ."{4}

In neither of these references is there any mention of candles--the
|266| most fascinating feature of the modern tree. These appear,
however, in a Latin work on Christmas presents by Karl Gottfried Kissling
of the University of Wittenberg, written in 1737. He tells how a certain
country lady of his acquaintance set up a little tree for each of her
sons and daughters, lit candles on or around the trees, laid out presents
beneath them, and called her children one by one into the room to take
the trees and gifts intended for them.{5}

With the advance of the eighteenth-century notices of the
_Weihnachtsbaum_ become more frequent: Jung Stilling, Goethe, Schiller,
and others mention it, and about the end of the century its use seems to
have been fairly general in Germany.{6} In many places, however, it was
not common till well on in the eighteen hundreds: it was a Protestant
rather than a Catholic institution, and it made its way but slowly in
regions where the older faith was held.{7} Well-to-do townspeople
welcomed it first, and the peasantry were slow to adopt it. In Old
Bavaria, for instance, in 1855 it was quite unknown in country places,
and even to-day it is not very common there, except in the towns.{8} "It
is more in vogue on the whole," wrote Dr. Tille in 1893, "in the
Protestant north than in the Catholic south,"{9} but its popularity was
rapidly growing at that time.

A common substitute for the Christmas-tree in Saxony during the
nineteenth century, and one still found in country places, was the
so-called "pyramid," a wooden erection adorned with many-coloured paper
and with lights. These pyramids were very popular among the smaller
_bourgeoisie_ and artisans, and were kept from one Christmas to
another.{10} In Berlin, too, the pyramid was once very common. It was
there adorned with green twigs as well as with candles and coloured
paper, and had more resemblance to the Christmas-tree.{11} Tieck refers
to it in his story, "Weihnacht-Abend" (1805).{12}

Pyramids, without lights apparently, were known in England before 1840.
In Hertfordshire they were formed of gilt evergreens, apples, and nuts,
and were carried about just before Christmas for presents. In
Herefordshire they were known at the New Year.{13}

|267| The Christmas-tree was introduced into France in 1840, when
Princess Helene of Mecklenburg brought it to Paris. In 1890 between
thirty and thirty-five thousand of the trees are said to have been sold
in Paris.{14}

In England it is alluded to in 1789,{15} but its use did not become at
all general until about the eighteen-forties. In 1840 Queen Victoria and
Prince Albert had a Christmas-tree, and the fashion spread until it
became completely naturalized.{16} In Denmark and Norway it was known in
1830, and in Sweden in 1863 (among the Swedish population on the coast of
Finland it seems to have been in use in 1800).{17} In Bohemia it is
mentioned in 1862.{18} It is also found in Russia, the United States,
Spain, Italy, and Holland,{19} and of course in Switzerland and Austria,
so largely German in language and customs. In non-German countries it is
rather a thing for the well-to-do classes than for the masses of the
people.

The Christmas-tree is essentially a domestic institution. It has,
however, found its way into Protestant churches in Germany and from them
into Catholic churches. Even the Swiss Zwinglians, with all their
Puritanism, do not exclude it from their bare, white-washed fanes. In the
Münsterthal, for instance, a valley of Romonsch speech, off the Lower
Engadine, a tree decked with candles, festoons, presents, and
serpent-squibs, stands in church at Christmas, and it is difficult for
the minister to conduct service, for all the time, except during the
prayers, the people are letting off fireworks. On one day between
Christmas Eve and New Year there is a great present-giving in
church.{20}

In Munich, and doubtless elsewhere, the tree appears not only in the
church and in the home, but in the cemetery. The graves of the dead are
decked on Christmas Eve with holly and mistletoe and a little
Christmas-tree with gleaming lights, a touching token of remembrance, an
attempt, perhaps, to give the departed a share in the brightness of the
festival.{21}



The question of the origin of Christmas-trees is of great interest.
Though their affinity to other sacraments of the |268| vegetation-spirit
is evident, it is difficult to be certain of their exact ancestry. Dr.
Tille regards them as coming from a union of two elements: the old Roman
custom of decking houses with laurels and green trees at the Kalends of
January, and the popular belief that every Christmas Eve apple and other
trees blossomed and bore fruit.{22}

Before the advent of the Christmas-tree proper--a fir with lights and
ornaments often imitating and always suggesting flowers and fruit--it
was customary to put trees like cherry or hawthorn into water or into
pots indoors, so that they might bud and blossom at New Year or
Christmas.{23} Even to-day the practice of picking boughs in order that
they may blossom at Christmas is to be found in some parts of Austria.
In Carinthia girls on St. Lucia's Day (December 13) stick a
cherry-branch into wet sand; if it blooms at Christmas their wishes will
be fulfilled. In other parts the branches--pear as well as cherry--are
picked on St. Barbara's Day (December 4), and in South Tyrol
cherry-trees are manured with lime on the first Thursday in Advent so
that they may blossom at Christmas.{24} The custom may have had to do
with legendary lore about the marvellous transformation of Nature on the
night of Christ's birth, when the rivers ran wine instead of water and
trees stood in full blossom in spite of ice and snow.{25}

In England there was an old belief in trees blossoming at Christmas,
connected with the well-known legend of St. Joseph of Arimathea. When the
saint settled at Glastonbury he planted his staff in the earth and it put
forth leaves; moreover it blossomed every Christmas Eve. Not only the
original thorn at Glastonbury but trees of the same species in other
parts of England had this characteristic. When in 1752 the New Style was
substituted for the Old, making Christmas fall twelve days earlier, folks
were curious to see what the thorns would do. At Quainton in
Buckinghamshire two thousand people, it is said, went out on the new
Christmas Eve to view a blackthorn which had the Christmas blossoming
habit. As no sign of buds was visible they agreed that the new Christmas
could not be right, and refused to keep it. At Glastonbury itself nothing
|269| happened on December 24, but on January 5, the right day according
to the Old Style, the thorn blossomed as usual.[102]{26}

Let us turn to the customs of the Roman Empire which may be in part
responsible for the German Christmas-tree. The practice of adorning
houses with evergreens at the January Kalends was common throughout the
Empire, as we learn from Libanius, Tertullian, and Chrysostom. A grim
denunciation of such decorations and the lights which accompanied them
may be quoted from Tertullian; it makes a pregnant contrast of pagan and
Christian. "Let them," he says of the heathen, "kindle lamps, they who
have no light; let them fix on the doorposts laurels which shall
afterwards be burnt, they for whom fire is close at hand; meet for them
are testimonies of darkness and auguries of punishment. But thou," he
says to the Christian, "art a light of the world and a tree that is ever
green; if thou hast renounced temples, make not a temple of thy own
house-door."{27}

That these New Year practices of the Empire had to do with the
_Weihnachtsbaum_ is very possible, but on the other hand it has closer
parallels in certain folk-customs that in no way suggest Roman or Greek
influence. Not only at Christmas are ceremonial "trees" to be found in
Germany. In the Erzgebirge there is dancing at the summer solstice round
"St. John's tree," a pyramid decked with garlands and flowers, and lit up
at night by candles.{28} At midsummer "in the towns of the Upper Harz
Mountains tall fir-trees, with the bark peeled off their lower trunks,
were set up in open places and decked with flowers and eggs, which were
painted yellow and red. Round these trees the young folk danced by day
and the old folk in the evening";{29} while on Dutch ground in
Gelderland and Limburg at the beginning of May trees were adorned with
lights.{30}

Nearer to Christmas is a New Year's custom found in some |270| Alsatian
villages: the adorning of the fountain with a "May." The girls who visit
the fountain procure a small fir-tree or holly-bush, and deck it with
ribbons, egg-shells, and little figures representing a shepherd or a man
beating his wife. This is set up above the fountain on New Year's Eve. On
the evening of the next day the snow is carefully cleared away and the
girls dance and sing around the fountain. The lads may only take part in
the dance by permission of the girls. The tree is kept all through the
year as a protection to those who have set it up.{31}

In Sweden, before the advent of the German type of tree, it was customary
to place young pines, divested of bark and branches, outside the houses
at Christmastide.{32} An English parallel which does not suggest any
borrowing from Germany, was formerly to be found at Brough in
Westmoreland on Twelfth Night. A holly-tree with torches attached to its
branches was carried through the town in procession. It was finally
thrown among the populace, who divided into two parties, one of which
endeavoured to take the tree to one inn, and the other, to a rival
hostelry.{33} We have here pretty plainly a struggle of two
factions--perhaps of two quarters of a town that were once separate
villages--for the possession of a sacred object.[103]

We may find parallels, lastly, in two remote corners of Europe. In the
island of Chios--here we are on Greek ground--tenants are wont to offer
to their landlords on Christmas morning a _rhamna_, a pole with wreaths
of myrtle, olive, and orange leaves bound around it; "to these are fixed
any flowers that may be found--geraniums, anemones, and the like, and, by
way of further decoration, oranges, lemons, and strips of gold and
coloured paper."[104]{34} Secondly, among the Circassians in the early
half of the nineteenth century, a young pear-tree used to be carried into
each house at an autumn festival, to the sound of music and joyous cries.
It was covered with candles, and a cheese was fastened to its top. Round
about it they ate, drank, and sang. Afterwards it was |271| removed to
the courtyard, where it remained for the rest of the year.{36}

Though there is no recorded instance of the use of a tree at Christmas in
Germany before the seventeenth century, the _Weihnachtsbaum_ may well be
a descendant of some sacred tree carried about or set up at the
beginning-of-winter festival. All things considered, it seems to belong
to a class of primitive sacraments of which the example most familiar to
English peoples is the May-pole. This is, of course, an early summer
institution, but in France and Germany a Harvest May is also known--a
large branch or a whole tree, which is decked with ears of corn, brought
home on the last waggon from the harvest field, and fastened to the roof
of farmhouse or barn, where it remains for a year.{37} Mannhardt has
shown that such sacraments embody the tree-spirit conceived as the spirit
of vegetation in general, and are believed to convey its life-giving,
fructifying influences. Probably the idea of contact with the spirit of
growth lay also beneath the Roman evergreen decorations, so that whether
or not we connect the Christmas-tree with these, the principle at the
bottom is the same.

Certain Christian ideas, finally, besides that of trees blossoming on the
night of the Nativity, may have affected the fortunes of the
Christmas-tree. December 24 was in old Church calendars the day of Adam
and Eve, the idea being that Christ the second Adam had repaired by His
Incarnation the loss caused by the sin of the first. A legend grew up
that Adam when he left Paradise took with him an apple or sprout from the
Tree of Knowledge, and that from this sprang the tree from which the
Cross was made. Or it was said that on Adam's grave grew a sprig from the
Tree of Life, and that from it Christ plucked the fruit of redemption.
The Cross in early Christian poetry was conceived as the Tree of Life
planted anew, bearing the glorious fruit of Christ's body, and repairing
the mischief wrought by the misuse of the first tree. We may recall a
verse from the "Pange, lingua" of Passiontide:--

   "Faithful Cross! above all other,
      One and only noble tree! |272|
    None in foliage, none in blossom,
      None in fruit thy peer may be:
    Sweetest wood and sweetest iron!
      Sweetest weight is hung on thee."

In the religious Christmas plays the tree of Paradise was sometimes shown
to the people. At Oberufer, for instance, it was a fine juniper-tree,
adorned with apples and ribbons. Sometimes Christ Himself was regarded as
the tree of Paradise.{38} The thought of Him as both the Light of the
World and the Tree of Life may at least have given a Christian meaning to
the light-bearing tree, and helped to establish its popularity among
pious folk.


CHRISTMAS DECORATIONS.

We have seen that the Christmas-tree may be a development, partly at
least, from the custom of decorating buildings with evergreens at the New
Year, and that such decorations were common throughout the Roman
Empire.[105] Some further consideration may now be given to the subject
of Christmas decorations in various lands. In winter, when all is brown
and dead, the evergreens are manifestations of the abiding life within
the plant-world, and they may well have been used as sacramental means of
contact with the spirit of growth and fertility, threatened by the powers
of blight. Particularly precious would be plants like the holly, the ivy,
and the mistletoe, which actually bore fruit in the winter-time.{39}

In spite of ecclesiastical condemnations of Kalends decorations--as late
as the sixth century the _capitula_ of Bishop Martin of Braga forbid the
adorning of houses with laurels and green trees{40}--the custom has
found its way even into churches, and nowhere more than in England. At
least as far back as the fifteenth century, according to Stow's "Survay
of London," it was the custom at Christmas for "every man's house, as
also the parish churches," to be "decked with holm, ivy, bays, and
whatsoever the season of the year afforded to be green. The conduits and
|273| standards in the streets were likewise garnished."{41} Many
people of the last generation will remember the old English mode of
decoration--how sprigs of holly and yew, stuck into holes in the high
pews, used to make the churches into miniature forests. Only upon the
mistletoe does a trace of the ecclesiastical taboo remain, and even that
is not universal, for at York Minster, for instance, some was laid upon
the altar.{42}

English popular custom has connected particular plants with the winter
festival in a peculiarly delightful way; at the mere mention of holly or
mistletoe the picture of Christmas with its country charm rises to the
mind--we think of snowy fields and distant bells, of warm hearths and
kindly merrymaking.

It is no wonder that the mistletoe has a special place in Christmas
decorations, for it is associated with both Teutonic myth and Celtic
ritual. It was with mistletoe that the beloved Balder was shot, and the
plant played an important part in a Druidic ceremony described by Pliny.
A white-robed Druid climbed a sacred oak and cut the mistletoe with a
golden sickle. As it fell it was caught in a white cloth, and two white
bulls were then sacrificed, with prayer. The mistletoe was called
"all-healer" and was believed to be a remedy against poison and to make
barren animals fruitful.{43} The significance of the ritual is not easy
to find. Pliny's account, Dr. MacCulloch has suggested, may be
incomplete, and the cutting of the mistletoe may have been a preliminary
to some other ceremony--perhaps the felling of the tree on which it grew,
whose soul was supposed to be in it, or perhaps the slaying of a
representative of the tree-spirit; while the white oxen of Pliny's time
may have replaced a human victim.{44}

It is interesting to find that the name "all-healer" is still given to
the mistletoe in Celtic speech,[106]{45} and that in various European
countries it is believed to possess marvellous powers of healing sickness
or averting misfortune.{46}

|274| It is hard to say exactly what is the origin of the English
"kissing under the mistletoe," but the practice would appear to be due to
an imagined relation between the love of the sexes and the spirit of
fertility embodied in the sacred bough, and it may be a vestige of the
licence often permitted at folk-festivals. According to one form of the
English custom the young men plucked, each time they kissed a girl, a
berry from the bough. When the berries were all picked, the privilege
ceased.{48}

Sometimes a curious form, reminding one both of the German Christmas-tree
and of the _Krippe_, is taken by the "kissing bunch." Here is an account
from Derbyshire:--

    "The 'kissing bunch' is always an elaborate affair. The size depends
    upon the couple of hoops--one thrust through the other--which form
    its skeleton. Each of the ribs is garlanded with holly, ivy, and
    sprigs of other greens, with bits of coloured ribbons and paper
    roses, rosy-cheeked apples, specially reserved for this occasion, and
    oranges. Three small dolls are also prepared, often with much taste,
    and these represent our Saviour, the mother of Jesus, and Joseph.
    These dolls generally hang within the kissing bunch by strings from
    the top, and are surrounded by apples, oranges tied to strings, and
    various brightly coloured ornaments. Occasionally, however, the dolls
    are arranged in the kissing bunch to represent a manger-scene....
    Mistletoe is not very plentiful in Derbyshire; but, generally, a bit
    is obtainable, and this is carefully tied to the bottom of the
    kissing bunch, which is then hung in the middle of the house-place,
    the centre of attention during Christmastide."{49}

Kissing under the mistletoe seems to be distinctively English. There is,
however, a New Year's Eve custom in Lower Austria and the Rhaetian Alps
that somewhat resembles our mistletoe bough practices. People linger late
in the inns, the walls and windows of which are decorated with green
pine-twigs. In the centre of the inn-parlour hangs from a roof-beam a
wreath of the same greenery, and in a dark corner hides a masked figure
known as "Sylvester," old and ugly, with a flaxen beard and _a wreath of
mistletoe_. If a youth or maiden happens to pass under the pine wreath
Sylvester springs out and imprints a rough kiss. When midnight comes he
is driven out as the representative of the old year.{50}

|275| There are traces in Britain of the sacredness of holly as well as
mistletoe. In Northumberland it is used for divination: nine leaves are
taken and tied with nine knots into a handkerchief, and put under the
pillow by a person who desires prophetic dreams.{51} For this purpose
smooth leaves (without prickles) must be employed, and it is to be noted
that at Burford in Shropshire smooth holly only was used for the
Christmas decorations.{52} Holly is hated by witches,{53} but perhaps
this may be due not to any pre-Christian sanctity attached to it but to
the association of its thorns and blood-red berries with the Passion--an
association to which it owes its Danish name, _Kristdorn_.

In some old English Christmas carols holly and ivy are put into a curious
antagonism, apparently connected with a contest of the sexes. Holly is
the men's plant, ivy the women's, and the carols are debates as to the
respective merits of each. Possibly some sort of rude drama may once have
been performed.{54} Here is a fifteenth-century example of these
carols:--

   "Holly and Ivy made a great party,
    Who should have the mastery,
      In landës where they go.

    Then spoke Holly, 'I am free and jolly,
    I will have the mastery,
      In landës where we go.'

    Then spake Ivy, 'I am lov'd and prov'd,
    And I will have the mastery,
      In landës where we go.'

    Then spake Holly, and set him down on his knee,
    'I pray thee, gentle Ivy,
    Say me no villainy,
      In landës where we go.'"{55}

The sanctity of Christmas house-decorations in England is shown by the
care taken in disposing of them when removed from the walls. In
Shropshire old-fashioned people never threw them away, for fear of
misfortune, but either burnt them or gave them to the cows; it was very
unlucky to let a piece |276| fall to the ground. The Shropshire custom
was to leave the holly and ivy up until Candlemas, while the
mistletoe-bough was carefully preserved until the time came for a new one
next year. West Shropshire tradition, by the way, connects the mistletoe
with the New Year rather than with Christmas; the bough ought not to be
put up until New Year's Eve.{56}

In Sweden green boughs, apparently, are not used for decoration, but the
floor of the parlour is strewn with sprigs of fragrant juniper or
spruce-pine, or with rye-straw.{57} The straw was probably intended
originally to bring to the house, by means of sacramental contact, the
wholesome influences of the corn-spirit, though the common people connect
it with the stable at Bethlehem. The practice of laying straw and the
same Christian explanation are found also in Poland{58} and in
Crivoscia.{59} In Poland before the cloth is laid on Christmas Eve, the
table is covered with a layer of hay or straw, and a sheaf stands in the
corner. Years ago straw was also spread on the floor. Sometimes it is
given to the cattle as a charm and sometimes it is used to tie up
fruit-trees.{60}

Dr. Frazer conjectures that the Swedish Yule straw comes in part at least
from the last sheaf at harvest, to which, as embodying the corn-spirit, a
peculiar significance is attached. The Swedish, like the Polish, Yule
straw has sundry virtues; scattered on the ground it will make a barren
field productive; and it is used to bind trees and make them
fruitful.{61} Again the peasant at Christmas will sit on a log and throw
up Yule straws one by one to the roof; as many as lodge in the rafters,
so many will be the sheaves of rye at harvest.{62}


CHRISTMAS AND NEW YEAR GIFTS.

We have come across presents of various kinds at the pre-Christmas
festivals; now that we have reached Christmastide itself we may dwell a
little upon the festival as the great present-giving season of the year,
and try to get at the origins of the custom.

The Roman _strenae_ offered to the Emperor or exchanged between private
citizens at the January Kalends have already |277| been noted.
According to tradition they were originally merely branches plucked from
the grove of the goddess Strenia, and the purpose of these may well have
been akin to that of the greenery used for decorations, viz., to secure
contact with a vegetation-spirit. In the time of the Empire, however, the
_strenae_ were of a more attractive character, "men gave honeyed things,
that the year of the recipient might be full of sweetness, lamps that it
might be full of light, copper and silver and gold that wealth might flow
in amain."{63} Such presents were obviously a kind of charm for the New
Year, based on the principle that as the beginning was, so would the rest
of the year be.

With the adoption of the Roman New Year's Day its present-giving customs
appear to have spread far and wide. In France, where the Latin spirit is
still strong, January 1 is even now the great day for presents, and they
are actually called _étrennes_, a name obviously derived from _strenae_.
In Paris boxes of sweets are then given by bachelors to friends who have
entertained them at their houses during the year--a survival perhaps of
the "honeyed things" given in Roman times.

In many countries, however, present-giving is attached to the
ecclesiastical festival of Christmas. This is doubtless largely due to
attraction from the Roman New Year's Day to the feast hallowed by the
Church, but readers of the foregoing pages will have seen that Christmas
has also drawn to itself many practices of a November festival, and it is
probable that German Christmas presents, at least, are connected as much
with the apples and nuts of St. Martin and St. Nicholas[107] as with the
Roman _strenae_. It has already been pointed out that the German St.
Nicholas as present-giver appears to be a duplicate of St. Martin, and
that St. Nicholas himself has often wandered from his own day to
Christmas, or has been replaced by the Christ Child. We have also noted
the rod associated with the two saints, and seen reason for thinking that
its original purpose was not disciplinary but health-giving.

|278| It is interesting to find that while, if we may trust tradition,
the Roman _strenae_ were originally twigs, Christmas gifts in
sixteenth-century Germany showed a connection with the twigs or rods of
St. Martin and St. Nicholas. The presents were tied together in a bundle,
and a twig was added to them.{65} This was regarded by the pedagogic
mind of the period not as a lucky twig but as a rod in the sinister
sense. In some Protestant sermons of the latter half of the century there
are curious detailed references to Christmas presents. These are supposed
to be brought to children by the Saviour Himself, strangely called the
_Haus-Christ_. Among the gifts mentioned as contained in the
"Christ-bundles" are pleasant things like money, sugar-plums, cakes,
apples, nuts, dolls; useful things like clothes; and also things "that
belong to teaching, obedience, chastisement, and discipline, as A.B.C.
tablets, Bibles and handsome books, writing materials, paper, &c., _and
the_ '_Christ-rod_.'"{66}

A common gift to German children at Christmas or the New Year was an
apple with a coin in it; the coin may conceivably be a Roman
survival,{67} while the apple may be connected with those brought by St.
Nicholas.

The Christ Child is still supposed to bring presents in Germany; in
France, too, it is sometimes _le petit Jésus_ who bears the welcome
gifts.{68} In Italy we shall find that the great time for children's
presents is Epiphany Eve, when the Befana comes, though in the northern
provinces Santa Lucia is sometimes a gift-bringer.{69} In Sicily the
days for gifts and the supposed bringers vary; sometimes, as we have
already seen, it is the dead who bring them, on All Souls' Eve; sometimes
it is _la Vecchia di Natali_--the Christmas old woman--who comes with
them on Christmas Eve; sometimes they are brought by the old woman
Strina--note the derivation from _strenae_--at the New Year; sometimes by
the Befana at the Epiphany.{70}

A curious mode of giving presents on Christmas Eve belongs particularly
to Sweden, though it is also found--perhaps borrowed--in Mecklenburg,
Pomerania, and other parts of Germany. The so-called _Julklapp_ is a gift
wrapped up in innumerable coverings. The person who brings it raps
noisily at |279| the door, and throws or pushes the _Julklapp_ into the
room. It is essential that he should arrive quite unexpectedly, and come
and go like lightning without revealing his identity. Great efforts are
made to conceal the gift so that the recipient after much trouble in
undoing the covering may have to search and search again to find it.
Sometimes in Sweden a thin gold ring is hidden away in a great heavy box,
or a little gold heart is put in a Christmas cake. Occasionally a man
contrives to hide in the _Julklapp_ and thus offer himself as a Christmas
present to the lady whom he loves. The gift is often accompanied by some
satirical rhyme, or takes a form intended to tease the recipient.{71}

Another custom, sometimes found in "better-class" Swedish households, is
for the Christmas presents to be given by two masked figures, an old man
and an old woman. The old man holds a bell in his hand and rings it, the
old woman carries a basket full of sealed packets, which she delivers to
the addressees.{72}

There is nothing specially interesting in modern English modes of
present-giving. We may, however, perhaps see in the custom of Christmas
boxes, inexorably demanded and not always willingly bestowed, a
degeneration of what was once friendly entertainment given in return for
the good wishes and the luck brought by wassailers. Instances of gifts to
calling neighbours have already come before our notice at several
pre-Christmas festivals, notably All Souls', St. Clement's, and St.
Thomas's. As for the name "Christmas box," it would seem to have come
from the receptacles used for the gifts. According to one account
apprentices, journeymen, and servants used to carry about earthen boxes
with a slit in them, and when the time for collecting was over, broke
them to obtain the contents.{73}

The Christmas card, a sort of attenuated present, seems to be of quite
modern origin. It is apparently a descendant of the "school pieces" or
"Christmas pieces" popular in England in the first half of the nineteenth
century--sheets of writing-paper with designs in pen and ink or
copper-plate headings. The first Christmas card proper appears to have
been issued in 1846, but it was not till about 1862 that the custom of
card-sending obtained any foothold.{74}

|280|

[Illustration:

CHRISTMAS MORNING IN LOWER AUSTRIA.

_By Ferdinand Waldmûller (b. 1793)._]

|281| |282| |283|




CHAPTER XII

CHRISTMAS FEASTING AND SACRIFICIAL SURVIVALS


    Prominence of Eating in the English Christmas--The Boar's Head, the
    Goose, and other Christmas Fare--Frumenty, Sowens, Yule Cakes, and
    the Wassail Bowl--Continental Christmas Dishes, their Possible
    Origins--French and German Cakes--The Animals' Christmas Feast--Cakes
    in Eastern Europe--Relics of Animal Sacrifice--Hunting the
    Wren--Various Games of Sacrificial Origin.


FEASTING CUSTOMS.

In the mind of the average sensual Englishman perhaps the most vivid
images called up by the word Christmas are those connected with eating
and drinking. "Ha più da fare che i forni di Natale in Inghilterra,"[108]
an Italian proverb used of a very busy person, sufficiently suggests the
character of our Christmas.[109] It may be that the Christmas dinner
looms larger among the English than among most other peoples, but in
every country a distinctive meal of some kind is associated with the
season. We have already seen how this illustrates the immemorial
connection between material feasting and religious rejoicing.

Let us note some forms of "Christmas fare" and try to get an idea of
their origin. First we may look at English feasting customs, though, as
they have been pretty fully described by |284| previous writers, no
very elaborate account of them need be given.

The gross eating and drinking in former days at Christmas, of which our
present mild gluttony is but a pale reflection, would seem to be
connected with the old November feast, though transferred to the season
hallowed by Christ's birth. The show of slaughtered beasts, adorned with
green garlands, in an English town just before Christmas, reminds one
strongly of the old November killing. In displays of this kind the pig's
head is specially conspicuous, and points to the time when the swine was
a favourite sacrificial animal.{1} We may recall here the traditional
carol sung at Queen's College, Oxford, as the boar's head is solemnly
brought in at Christmas, and found elsewhere in other forms:--

   "The boar's head in hand bear I,
    Bedeck'd with bays and rosemary;
    And I pray you, my masters, be merry,
      _Quot estis in convivio._
      _Caput apri defero,_
      _Reddens laudes Domino._"{2}

The Christmas bird provided by the familiar "goose club" may be compared
with the German Martinmas goose. The more luxurious turkey must be
relatively an innovation, for that bird seems not to have been introduced
into England until the sixteenth century.{3}

Cakes and pies, partly or wholly of vegetable origin, are, of course, as
conspicuous at the English Christmas as animal food. The peculiar
"luckiness" attached to some of them (as when mince-pies, eaten in
different houses during the Twelve Days, bring a happy month each) makes
one suspect some more serious original purpose than mere gratification of
the appetite. A sacrificial or sacramental origin is probable, at least
in certain cases; a cake made of flour, for instance, may well have been
regarded as embodying the spirit immanent in the corn.{4} Whether any
mystic significance ever belonged to the plum-pudding it is hard to say,
though the sprig of holly stuck into its |285| top recalls the lucky
green boughs we have so often come across, and a resemblance to the
libations upon the Christmas log might be seen in the burning brandy.

A dish once prominent at Christmas was "frumenty" or "furmety" (variously
spelt, and derived from the Latin _frumentum_, corn). It was made of
hulled wheat boiled in milk and seasoned with cinnamon, sugar, &c.{5}
This too may have been a cereal sacrament. In Yorkshire it was the first
thing eaten on Christmas morning, just as ale posset was the last thing
drunk on Christmas Eve. Ale posset was a mixture of beer and milk, and
each member of the family in turn had to take a "sup," as also a piece of
a large apple-pie.{6}

In the Highlands of Scotland, among those who observed Christmas, a
characteristic dish was new sowens (the husks and siftings of oatmeal),
given to the family early on Christmas Day in their beds. They were
boiled into the consistence of molasses and were poured into as many
bickers as there were people to partake of them. Everyone on despatching
his bicker jumped out of bed.{7} Here, as in the case of the Yorkshire
frumenty, the eating has a distinctly ceremonial character.

In the East Riding of Yorkshire a special Yule cake was eaten on
Christmas Eve, "made of flour, barm, large cooking raisins, currants,
lemon-peel, and nutmeg," and about as large as a dinner-plate.{8} In
Shropshire "wigs" or caraway buns dipped in ale were eaten on Christmas
Eve.{9} Again elsewhere there were Yule Doughs or Dows, little images of
paste, presented by bakers to their customers.{10} We shall see plenty
of parallels to these on the Continent. When they are in animal or even
human form they may in some cases have taken the place of actual
sacrificial victims.{11}

In Nottinghamshire the Christmas cake was associated with the
wassail-bowl in a manner which may be compared with the Macedonian custom
described later; it was broken up and put into the bowl, hot ale was
poured over it, and so it was eaten.{12}

The wassail-bowl--one cannot leave the subject of English Yuletide
feasting without a few words upon this beloved beaker of hot spiced ale
and toasted apples ("lambswool"). _Wassail_ is |286| derived from the
Anglo-Saxon _wes hál_ = be whole, and wassailing is in its essence the
wishing of a person's very good health. The origin of drinking healths is
not obvious; perhaps it may be sacramental: the draught may have been at
first a means of communion with some divinity, and then its consumption
may have come to be regarded not only as benefiting the partaker, but as
a rite that could be performed for the welfare of another person. Apart
from such speculations, we may note the frequent mention of wassailing in
old English carols of the less ecclesiastical type; the singers carried
with them a bowl or cup which they expected their wealthier neighbours to
fill with drink.{13} Sometimes the bowl was adorned with ribbons and had
a golden apple at the top,{14} and it is a noteworthy fact that the box
with the Christmas images, mentioned in Chapter IV. (p. 118), is
sometimes called "the Vessel [Wassail] Cup."{15}

The various Christmas dishes of Europe would form an interesting subject
for exhaustive study. To suggest a religious origin for each would be
going too far, for merely economic considerations must have had much to
do with the matter, but it is very probable that in some cases they are
relics of sacrifices or sacraments.

The pig is a favourite food animal at Christmas in other countries than
our own, a fact probably connected with sacrificial customs. In Denmark
and Sweden a pig's head was one of the principal articles of the great
Christmas Eve repast.{16} In Germany it is a fairly widespread custom to
kill a pig shortly before Christmas and partake of it on Christmas Day;
its entrails and bones and the straw which has been in contact with it
are supposed to have fertilizing powers.{17} In Roumania a pig is the
Christmas animal _par excellence_,{18} in Russia pigs' trotters are a
favourite dish at the New Year,{19} and in every Servian house roast pig
is the principal Christmas dish.{20}

In Upper Bavaria there is a custom which almost certainly has at its root
a sacrifice: a number of poor people club together at Christmas-time and
buy a cow to be killed and eaten at a common feast.{21}

More doubtful is the sacrificial origin of the dishes of certain |287|
special kinds of fish on Christmas Eve. In Saxony and Thuringia herring
salad is eaten--he who bakes it will have money all the year--and in many
parts of Germany and also in Styria carp is then consumed.{22} Round
Ercé in Brittany the family dish is cod.{23} In Italy the _cenone_ or
great supper held on Christmas Eve has fish for its animal basis, and
stewed eels are particularly popular. It is to be remembered that in
Catholic countries the Vigil of the Nativity is a fast, and meat is not
allowed upon it; this alone would account for the prominence of fish on
Christmas Eve.

We have already come across peculiar cakes eaten at various pre-Christmas
festivals; at Christmas itself special kinds of bread, pastry, and cakes
abound on the Continent, and in some cases at least may have a religious
origin.

In France various sorts of cakes and loaves are known at the season of
_Noël_. In Berry on Christmas morning loaves called _cornaboeux_, made in
the shape of horns or a crescent, are distributed to the poor. In
Lorraine people give one another _cognés_ or _cogneux_, a kind of pastry
in the shape of two crescents back to back, or else long and narrow in
form and with a crescent at either end. In some parts of France the
_cornaboeux_ are known as _hôlais_, and ploughmen give to the poor as many
of these loaves as they possess oxen and horses.{24} These horns may be
substitutes for a sacrifice of oxen.

Sometimes the French Christmas cakes have the form of complete oxen or
horses--such were the thin unleavened cakes sold in the early nineteenth
century at La Châtre (Indre). In the neighbourhood of Chartres there are
_cochenilles_ and _coquelins_ in animal and human shapes. Little cakes
called _naulets_ are sold by French bakers, and actually represent the
Holy Child. With them may be compared the _coignoles_ of French Flanders,
cakes of oblong form adorned with the figure of the infant Jesus in
sugar.{25} Sometimes the Christmas loaf or cake in France has healing
properties; a certain kind of cake in Berry and Limousin is kept all
through the year, and a piece eaten in sickness has marvellous
powers.{26}

Cortet gives an extraordinary account of a French custom |288|
connected with eating and drinking. At Mouthe (Doubs) there used to be
brought to the church at Christmas pies, cakes, and other eatables, and
wine of the best. They were called the "De fructu," and when at Vespers
the verse "De fructu ventris tui ponam super sedem tuam" was reached, all
the congregation made a rush for these refreshments, contended for them,
and carried them off with singing and shouting.{27}

The most remarkable of Christmas cakes or loaves is the Swedish and
Danish "Yule Boar," a loaf in the form of a boar-pig, which stands on the
table throughout the festal season. It is often made from the corn of the
last sheaf of the harvest, and in it Dr. Frazer finds a clear expression
of the idea of the corn-spirit as embodied in pig form. "Often it is kept
till sowing-time in spring, when part of it is mixed with the seed corn
and part given to the ploughman and plough-horses or plough-oxen to eat,
in the expectation of a good harvest." In some parts of the Esthonian
island of Oesel the cake has not the form of a boar, but bears the same
name, and on New Year's Day is given to the cattle. In other parts of the
island the "Yule Boar" is actually a little pig, roasted on Christmas Eve
and set up on the table.{28}

In Germany, besides _stollen_--a sort of plum-loaf--biscuits, often of
animal or human shape, are very conspicuous on Christmas Eve. Any one who
has witnessed a German Christmas will remember the extraordinary variety
of them, _lebkuchen_, _pfeffernüsse_, _printen_, _spekulatius_ biscuits,
&c. In Berlin a great pile of biscuits heaped up on your plate is an
important part of the Christmas Eve supper. These of course are nowadays
mere luxuries, but they may well have had some sort of sacrificial
origin. An admirable and exhaustive study of Teutonic Christmas cakes and
biscuits has been made, with infinite pains, by an Austrian professor,
Dr. Höfler, who reproduces some curious old biscuits, stamped with highly
artistic patterns, preserved in museums.{29}

Among unsophisticated German peasants there is a belief in magical powers
possessed by bread baked at Christmas, particularly when moistened by
Christmas dew. (This dew is held to be peculiarly sacred, perhaps on
account of the words "Rorate, coeli, |289| desuper" used at the Advent
Masses.) In Franconia such bread, thrown into a dangerous fire, stills
the flames; in the north of Germany, if put during the Twelve Days into
the fodder of the cattle, it makes them prolific and healthy throughout
the year.{30}

It is pleasant to note that animals are often specially cared for at
Christmas. Up till the early nineteenth century the cattle in Shropshire
were always better fed at Christmas than at other times, and Miss Burne
tells of an old gentleman in Cheshire who used then to give his poultry a
double portion of grain, for, he said, "all creation should rejoice at
Christmas, and the dumb creatures had no other manner of doing so."{31}
The saying reminds one of that lover of Christmas and the animals, St.
Francis of Assisi. It will be remembered how he wished that oxen and
asses should have extra corn and hay at Christmas, "for reverence of the
Son of God, whom on such a night the most Blessed Virgin Mary did lay
down in the stall betwixt the ox and the ass."{32} It was a gracious
thought, and no doubt with St. Francis, as with the old Cheshireman, it
was a purely Christian one; very possibly, however, the original object
of such attention to the dumb creatures was to bring to the animals, by
means of the corn, the influence of the spirit of fertility.

In Silesia on Christmas night all the beasts are given wheat to make them
thrive, and it is believed that if wheat be kept in the pocket during the
Christmas service and then given to fowls, it will make them grow fat and
lay many eggs.{33} In Sweden on Christmas Eve the cattle are given the
best forage the house can afford, and afterwards a mess of all the viands
of which their masters have partaken; the horses are given the choicest
hay and, later on, ale; and the other animals are treated to good
things.{34}

At Loblang in Hungary the last sheaf at harvest is kept, and given on New
Year's morning to the wild birds.{35} In southern Germany corn is put on
the roof for them on Christmas Eve, or,{36} as also in Sweden,{37} an
unthreshed sheaf is set on a pole. In these cases it is possible that the
food was originally an offering to ancestral or other spirits.

_Revenons à nos gâteaux._ In Rome and elsewhere in Italy an important
article of Christmas food is the _panettone_, a currant loaf. |290|
Such loaves are sent as presents to friends. In eastern Europe, too,
Christmas loaves or cakes are very conspicuous. The _chesnitza_ and
_kolatch_ cakes among the southern Slavs are flat and wheel-like, with a
circular hole in the middle and a number of lines radiating from it. In
the central hole is sometimes placed a lighted taper or a small
Christmas-tree hung with ribbons, tinsel, and sweetmeats. These cakes,
made with elaborate ceremonial early in the morning, are solemnly broken
by the house-father on Christmas Day, and a small piece is eaten by each
member of the family. In some places one is fixed on the horn of the
"eldest ox," and if he throws it off it is a good sign.{38} The last
practice may be compared with a Herefordshire custom which we shall meet
with on Twelfth Night (p. 346).

In southern Greece a special kind of flat loaves with a cross on the top
is made on Christmas Eve. The name given is "Christ's Loaves." "The cloth
is not removed from the table; but everything is left as it is in the
belief that 'Christ will come and eat' during the night."{39} Probably
Christ has here taken the place of ancestral spirits.

In Tyrol peasants eat at Christmastide the so-called _zelten_, a kind of
pie filled with dried pear-slices, nuts, figs, raisins, and the like. It
is baked on the Eve of St. Thomas, and its filling is as important an
event for the whole family as was the plum-pudding and mincemeat making
in old-fashioned English households. When the _zelten_ is filled the sign
of the cross is made upon it and it is sprinkled with holy water and put
in the oven. When baked and cooled, it is laid in the family stock of rye
and is not eaten until St. Stephen's Day or Epiphany. Its cutting by the
father of the family is a matter of considerable solemnity. Smaller pies
are made at the same time for the maid-servants, and a curious custom is
connected with them. It is usual for the maids to visit their relations
during the Christmas holidays and share with them their _zelten_. A young
man who wishes to be engaged to a maid should offer to carry her pie for
her. This is his declaration of love, and if she accepts the offer she
signifies her approval of him. To him falls the duty or privilege of
cutting the _zelten_.{40}

|291| Other cake customs are associated with the Epiphany, and will be
considered in connection with that festival. We may here in conclusion
notice a few further articles of Christmas good cheer.

In Italy and Spain{41} a sort of nougat known as _torrone_ or _turron_
is eaten at Christmas. You may buy it even in London in the Italian
quarter; in Eyre Street Hill it is sold on Christmas Eve on little
gaily-decked street stalls. Its use may well be a survival of the Roman
custom of giving sweet things at the Kalends in order that the year might
be full of sweetness.

Some Little Russian feasting customs are probably pagan in origin, but
have received a curious Christian interpretation. All Little Russians sit
down to honey and porridge on Christmas Eve. They call it _koutia_, and
cherish the custom as something that distinguishes them from Great and
White Russians. Each dish is said to represent the Holy Crib. First
porridge is put in, which is like putting straw in the manger; then each
person helps himself to honey and fruit, and that symbolizes the Babe. A
place is made in the porridge, and then the honey and fruit are poured
in; the fruit stands for the body, the honey for the spirit or the
blood.{42}

Something like this is the special dish eaten in every Roumanian peasant
household on Christmas Eve--the _turte_. It is made up of a pile of thin
dry leaves of dough, with melted sugar or honey, or powdered walnut, or
the juice of the hemp-seed. The _turte_ are traditionally said to
represent the swaddling clothes of the Holy Child.{43}

In Poland a few weeks before Christmas monks bring round small packages
of wafers made of flour and water, blessed by a priest, and with figures
stamped upon them. No Polish family is without these _oplatki_; they are
sent in letters to relations and friends, as we send Christmas cards.
When the first star appears on Christmas Eve the whole family, beginning
with the eldest member, break one of these wafers between themselves, at
the same time exchanging good wishes. Afterwards the master and mistress
go to the servants' quarters to divide the wafer there.{44}

|292|


RELICS OF SACRIFICE.

We have noted a connection, partial at least, between Christmas good
cheer and sacrifice; let us now glance at a few customs of a different
character but seemingly of sacrificial origin.

Traces of sacrifices of cats and dogs are to be found in Germany and
Bohemia. In Lauenburg and Mecklenburg on Christmas morning, before the
cattle are watered, a dog is thrown into their drinking water, in order
that they may not suffer from the mange. In the Uckermark a cat may be
substituted for the dog. In Bohemia a black cat is caught, boiled, and
buried by night under a tree, to keep evil spirits from injuring the
fields.{45}

A strange Christmas custom is the "hunting of the wren," once widespread
in England and France and still practised in Ireland. In the Isle of Man
very early on Christmas morning, when the church bells had rung out
midnight, servants went out to hunt the wren. They killed the bird,
fastened it to the top of a long pole, and carried it in procession to
every house, chanting these words:--

   "We hunted the wren for Robin the Bobbin,
      We hunted the wren for Jack of the Can,
    We hunted the wren for Robin the Bobbin,
      We hunted the wren for every one."

At each house they sought to collect money. At last, when all had been
visited, they laid the wren on a bier, carried it to the churchyard, and
buried it with the utmost solemnity, singing Manx dirges. Another
account, from the mid-nineteenth century, describes how on St. Stephen's
Day Manx boys went from door to door with a wren suspended by the legs in
the centre of two hoops crossing one another at right angles and
decorated with evergreens and ribbons. In exchange for a small coin they
would give a feather of the wren, which was carefully kept as a
preservative against shipwreck during the year.[110]{46} |293| There
are also traces of a Manx custom of boiling and eating the bird.{48}

The wren is popularly called "the king of birds," and it is supposed to
be highly unlucky to kill one at ordinary times. Probably it was once
regarded as sacred, and the Christmas "hunting" is the survival of an
annual custom of slaying the divine animal, such as is found among
primitive peoples.{49} The carrying of its body from door to door is
apparently intended to convey to each house a portion of its virtues,
while the actual eating of the bird would be a sort of communion feast.
Perhaps the custom, in a Cornish village, of eating blackbird pie on
Twelfth Day should be explained in the same way.{50}

I can here hardly do more than allude to the many games{51} that were
traditional in England at Christmas--hoodman-blind, shoe the wild mare,
hot cockles, steal the white loaf, snap-dragon, and the rest. To attempt
to describe and explain them would lead me too far, but it is highly
probable that some at least might be traced to an origin in sacrificial
ritual. The degeneration of religious rites into mere play is, indeed, as
we have seen, a process illustrated by the whole history of Christmas.

Only two British Christmas games can be discussed in this book:
blindman's buff and football. An account of a remarkable Christmas
football match will be found in the chapter on Epiphany customs, where it
is brought into connection with that closely related game, the "Haxey
hood."

As for blindman's buff, it is distinctly a Christmas sport, and it is
known nearly all over Europe by names derived from animals, _e.g._,
"blind cow" and "blind mouse." Mr. N. W. Thomas has suggested that "the
explanation of these names is that the players originally wore masks; the
game is known in some cases as the 'blinde Mumm,' or blind mask.... The
player who is 'it' seems to be the sacrificer; he bears the same name as
the victim, just as in agricultural customs the reaper of the last corn
bears the same name as the last sheaf."{52}

The Scandinavian countries are very rich in Christmas games and
dances,{53} of which it would be interesting to attempt explanations if
space allowed. One Swedish song and dance game--it |294| may be related
to the sword-dance (see Chapter XIII.)--is obviously sacrificial. Several
youths, with blackened faces and persons disguised, are the performers.
One of them is put to death with a knife by a woman in hideous attire.
Afterwards, with gross gestures, she dances with the victim.{54}
According to another account, from Gothland, the victim sits clad in a
skin, holding in his mouth a wisp of straw cut sharp at the ends and
standing out. It has been conjectured that this is meant to resemble a
swine's bristles, and that the man represents a hog sacrificed to
Frey.{55}

Lastly a Russian game may be mentioned, though it has no sacrificial
suggestion. During the Christmas season girls play at what is called "the
Burial of the Gold." They form a circle, with one girl standing in the
centre, and pass from hand to hand a gold ring, which the maiden inside
tries to detect. Meanwhile a song is sung, "Gold I bury, gold I bury."
Some imaginative mythologists interpret the ring as representing the sun,
buried by the clouds of winter.{56}

|295| |296| |297|




CHAPTER XIII

MASKING, THE MUMMERS' PLAY, THE FEAST OF FOOLS, AND THE BOY BISHOP


    English Court Masking--"The Lord of Misrule"--The Mummers' Play, the
    Sword-Dance, and the Morris Dance--Origin of St. George and other
    Characters--Mumming in Eastern Europe--The Feast of Fools, its
    History and Suppression--The Boy Bishop, his Functions and
    Sermons--Modern Survivals of the Boy Bishop.

[Illustration:

YORKSHIRE SWORD-ACTORS: ST. GEORGE IN COMBAT WITH ST. PETER.

From an article by Mr. T. M. Fallow in _The Antiquary_, May, 1895.

(By permission of Messrs. Elliot Stock.)]

We have already seen a good deal of masking in connection with St.
Nicholas, Knecht Ruprecht, and other figures of the German Christmas; we
may next give some attention to English customs of the same sort during
the Twelve Days, and then pass on to the strange burlesque ceremonies of
the Feast of Fools and the Boy Bishop, ceremonies which show an intrusion
of pagan mummery into the sanctuary itself.


CHRISTMAS MASKING.

The custom of Christmas masking, "mumming," or "disguising" can be traced
at the English court as early as the reign of Edward III. It is in all
probability connected with that wearing of beasts' heads and skins of
which we have already noted various examples--its origin in folk-custom
seems to have been the coming of a band of worshippers clad in this
uncouth but auspicious garb to bring good luck to a house.{1} The most
direct English survival is found in the village mummers who still call
themselves "guisers" or "geese-dancers" and claim the right to enter
every house. These will be dealt with shortly, after a consideration of
more courtly customs of the same kind.

|298| In the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries the English
court masque reached its greatest developments; the fundamental idea was
then generally overlaid with splendid trappings, the dresses and the
arrangements were often extremely elaborate, and the introduction of
dialogued speech made these "disguises" regular dramatic performances. A
notable example is Ben Jonson's "Masque of Christmas."{2} Shakespeare,
however, gives us in "Henry VIII."{3} an example of a simpler impromptu
form: the king and a party dressed up as shepherds break in upon a
banquet of Wolsey's.

In this volume we are more concerned with the popular Christmas than with
the festivities of kings and courts and grandees. Mention must, however,
be made of a personage who played an important part in the Christmas of
the Tudor court and appeared also in colleges, Inns of Court, and the
houses of the nobility--the "Lord of Misrule."{4} He was annually
elected to preside over the revels, had a retinue of courtiers, and was
surrounded by elaborate ceremonial. He seems to be the equivalent and was
probably the direct descendant of the "Abbot" or "Bishop" of the Feast of
Fools, who will be noticed later in this chapter. Sometimes indeed he is
actually called "Abbot of Misrule." A parallel to him is the Twelfth
Night "king," and he appears to be a courtly example of the temporary
monarch of folk-custom, though his name is sometimes extended to "kings"
of quite vulgar origin elected not by court or gentry but by the common
people. The "Lord of Misrule" was among the relics of paganism most
violently attacked by Puritan writers like Stubbes and Prynne, and the
Great Rebellion seems to have been the death of him.


MUMMERS' PLAYS AND MORRIS DANCES.

Let us turn now to the rustic Christmas mummers, to-day fast
disappearing, but common enough in the mid-nineteenth century. Their
goings-on are really far more interesting, because more traditional, than
the elaborate shows and dressings-up of the court. Their names vary:
"mummers" and "guisers" are the commonest; in Sussex they are
"tipteerers," perhaps because of |299| the perquisites they collect, in
Cornwall "geese-dancers" ("geese" no doubt comes from "disguise"), in
Shropshire "morris"--or "merry"--"dancers."{5} It is to be noted that
they are unbidden guests, and enter your house as of right.{6} Sometimes
they merely dance, sing, and feast, but commonly they perform a rude
drama.{7}

The plays acted by the mummers{8} vary so much that it is difficult to
describe them in general terms. There is no reason to suppose that the
words are of great antiquity--the earliest form may perhaps date from the
seventeenth century; they appear to be the result of a crude dramatic and
literary instinct working upon the remains of traditional ritual, and
manipulating it for purposes of entertainment. The central figure is St.
George (occasionally he is called Sir, King, or Prince George), and the
main dramatic substance, after a prologue and introduction of the
characters, is a fight and the arrival of a doctor to bring back the
slain to life. At the close comes a _quête_ for money. The name George is
found in all the Christmas plays, but the other characters have a
bewildering variety of names ranging from Hector and Alexander to
Bonaparte and Nelson.

Mr. Chambers in two very interesting and elaborately documented chapters
has traced a connection between these St. George players and the
sword-dancers found at Christmas or other festivals in Germany, Spain,
France, Italy, Sweden, and Great Britain. The sword-dance in its simplest
form is described by Tacitus in his "Germania": "they have," he says of
the Germans, "but one kind of public show: in every gathering it is the
same. Naked youths, who profess this sport, fling themselves in dance
among swords and levelled lances."{9} In certain forms of the dance
there are figures in which the swords are brought together on the heads
of performers, or a pretence is made to cut at heads and feet, or the
swords are put in a ring round a person's neck. This strongly suggests
that an execution, probably a sacrifice, lies at the bottom of the
dances. In several cases, moreover, they are accompanied by sets of
verses containing the incident of a quarrel and the violent death of one
of the performers. The likeness to the central feature of the |300|
St. George play--the slaying--will be noticed. In one of the dances, too,
there is even a doctor who revives the victim.

In England the sword-dance is found chiefly in the north, but with it
appear to be identical the morris-dances--characterized by the wearing of
jingling bells--which are commoner in the southern counties. Blackened
faces are common in both, and both have the same grotesque figures, a man
and a woman, often called Tommy and Bessy in the sword-dance and "the
fool" and Maid Marian in the morris. Moreover the morris-dancers in
England sometimes use swords, and in one case the performers of an
undoubted sword-dance were called "morrice" dancers in the eighteenth
century. Bells too, so characteristic of the morris, are mentioned in
some Continental accounts of the sword-dance.[111]

Intermediate between these dances and the fully developed St. George
dramas are the plays performed on Plough Monday in Lincolnshire and the
East Midlands. They all contain a good deal of dancing, a violent death
and a revival, and grotesques found both in the dances and in the
Christmas plays.

The sword-dance thus passes by a gradual transition, the dancing
diminishing, the dramatic elements increasing, into the mummers' plays of
St. George. The central motive, death and revival, Mr. Chambers regards
as a symbol of the resurrection of the year or the spirit of
vegetation,[112] like the Thuringian custom of executing a "wild man"
covered with leaves, whom a doctor brings to life again by bleeding. This
piece of ritual has apparently been attracted to Christmas from an early
feast of spring, and Plough Monday, when the East Midland plays take
place, is just such an early spring feast. Again, in some places the
|301| St. George play is performed at Easter, a date alluded to in the
title, "Pace-eggers'" or "Pasque-eggers'" play.{13}

Two grotesque figures appear with varying degrees of clearness and with
various names in the dances and in the plays--the "fool" (Tommy) who
wears the skin and tail of a fox or other animal, and a man dressed in
woman's clothes (Bessy). In these we may recognize the skin-clad mummer
and the man aping a woman whom we meet in the old Kalends denunciations.
Sometimes the two are combined, while a hobby-horse also not unfrequently
appears.{14}

How exactly St. George came to be the central figure of the Christmas
plays is uncertain; possibly they may be a development of a dance in
which appeared the "Seven Champions," the English national heroes--of
whom Richard Johnson wrote a history in 1596--with St. George at their
head. It is more probable, however, that the saint came in from the
mediaeval pageants held on his day in many English towns.{15}



Can it be that the German St. Nicholas plays are more Christianized and
sophisticated forms of folk-dramas like in origin to those we have been
discussing? They certainly resemble the English plays in the manner in
which one actor calls in another by name; while the grotesque figures
introduced have some likeness to the "fool" of the morris.

Christmas mumming, it may be added, is found in eastern as well as
western Europe. In Greece, where ecclesiastical condemnations of such
things can be traced with remarkable clearness from early times to the
twelfth century, it takes sundry forms. "At Pharsala," writes Mr. J. C.
Lawson, "there is a sort of play at the Epiphany, in which the mummers
represent bride, bridegroom, and 'Arab'; the Arab tries to carry off the
bride, and the bridegroom defends her.... Formerly also at 'Kozane and in
many other parts of Greece,' according to a Greek writer in the early
part of the nineteenth century, throughout the Twelve Days boys carrying
bells used to go round the houses, singing songs and having 'one or more
of their company dressed up with masks and bells and foxes' brushes and
other such things to give them a weird and monstrous look.'"{16}

|302| In Russia, too, mummers used to go about at Christmastide,
visiting houses, dancing, and performing all kinds of antics. "Prominent
parts were always played by human representatives of a goat and a bear.
Some of the party would be disguised as 'Lazaruses,' that is, as blind
beggars." A certain number of the mummers were generally supposed to play
the part of thieves anxious to break in.{17} Readers of Tolstoy's "War
and Peace" may remember a description of some such maskings in the year
1810.


THE FEAST OF FOOLS.

So far, in this Second Part, we have been considering customs practised
chiefly in houses, streets, and fields. We must now turn to certain
festivities following hard upon Christmas Day, which, though pagan in
origin and sometimes even blasphemous, found their way in the Middle Ages
within the walls of the church.

Shortly after Christmas a group of _tripudia_ or revels was held by the
various inferior clergy and ministrants of cathedrals and other churches.
These festivals, of which the best known are the Feast of Fools and the
Boy Bishop ceremonies, have been so fully described by other writers, and
my space here is so limited, that I need but treat them in outline, and
for detail refer the reader to such admirable accounts as are to be found
in Chapters XIII., XIV., and XV. of Mr. Chamber's "The Mediaeval
Stage."{18}

Johannes Belethus, Rector of Theology at Paris towards the end of the
twelfth century, speaks of four _tripudia_ held after Christmas:--those
of the deacons on St. Stephen's Day, the priests on St. John's, the
choir-boys on Holy Innocents', and the subdeacons on the Circumcision,
the Epiphany, or the Octave of the Epiphany. The feast of subdeacons,
says Belethus, "we call that of fools." It is this feast which, though
not apparently the earliest in origin of the four, was the most riotous
and disorderly, and shows most clearly its pagan character. Belethus'
mention of it is the first clear notice, though disorderly revels of the
same kind seem to have existed at Constantinople as early as the ninth
century. At first confined to the subdeacons, the Feast of Fools became
in its later developments a festival not only of that order but of the
|303| inferior clergy in general, of the vicars choral, the chaplains,
and the choir-clerks, as distinguished from the canons. For this rabble
of poor and low-class clergy it was no doubt a welcome relaxation, and
one can hardly wonder that they let themselves go in burlesquing the
sacred but often wearisome rites at which it was their business to be
present through many long hours, or that they delighted to usurp for once
in a way the functions ordinarily performed by their superiors. The
putting down of the mighty from their seat and the exalting of them of
low degree was the keynote of the festival. While "Deposuit potentes de
sede: et exaltavit humiles" was being sung at the "Magnificat," it would
appear that the precentor's _baculus_ or staff was handed over to the
clerk who was to be "lord of the feast" for the year, and throughout the
services of the day the inferior clergy predominated, under the
leadership of this chosen "lord." He was usually given some title of
ecclesiastical dignity, "bishop," "prelate," "archbishop," "cardinal," or
even "pope," was vested in full pontificals, and in some cases sat on the
real bishop's throne, gave benedictions, and issued indulgences.

These lower clergy, it must be remembered, belonged to the peasant or
small _bourgeois_ class and were probably for the most part but
ill-educated. They were likely to bring with them into the Church the
superstitions floating about among the people, and the Feast of Fools may
be regarded as a recoil of paganism upon Christianity in its very
sanctuary. "An ebullition of the natural lout beneath the cassock" it has
been called by Mr. Chambers, and many of its usages may be explained by
the reaction of coarse natures freed for once from restraint. It brought
to light, however, not merely personal vulgarity, but a whole range of
traditional customs, derived probably from a fusion of the Roman feast of
the Kalends of January with Teutonic or Celtic heathen festivities.

A general account of its usages is given in a letter addressed in 1445 by
the Paris Faculty of Theology to the bishops and chapters of France:--

    "Priests and clerks may be seen wearing masks and monstrous visages
    at the hours of office. They dance in the choir dressed as |304|
    women, panders or minstrels. They sing wanton songs. They eat black
    puddings at the horn of the altar while the celebrant is saying Mass.
    They play at dice there. They cense with stinking smoke from the
    soles of old shoes. They run and leap through the church, without a
    blush at their own shame. Finally they drive about the town and its
    theatres in shabby traps and carts, and rouse the laughter of their
    fellows and the bystanders in infamous performances, with indecent
    gesture and verses scurrilous and unchaste."{19}

The letter also speaks of "bishops" or "archbishops" of Fools, who wore
mitres and held pastoral staffs. We here see clearly, besides mere
irreverence, an outcrop of pagan practices. Topsy-turvydom, the temporary
exaltation of inferiors, was itself a characteristic of the Kalends
celebrations, and a still more remarkable feature of them was, as we have
seen, the wearing of beast-masks and the dressing up of men in women's
clothes. And what is the "bishop" or "archbishop" but a parallel to, and,
we may well believe, an example of, the mock king whom Dr. Frazer has
traced in so many a folk-festival, and who is found at the _Saturnalia_?

One more feature of the Feast of Fools must be considered, the Ass who
gave to it the not uncommon title of _asinaria festa_. At Bourges, Sens,
and Beauvais, a curious half-comic hymn was sung in church, the so-called
"Prose of the Ass." It begins as follows:--

   "Orientis partibus
     Adventavit Asinus,
     Pulcher et fortissimus,
     Sarcinis aptissimus.
     Hez, Sir Asnes, car chantez,
     Belle bouche rechignez,
     Vous aurez du foin assez
     Et de l'avoine a plantez."

And after eight verses in praise of the beast, with some mention of his
connection with Bethlehem and the Wise Men, it closes thus:--

   "Amen dicas, Asine,
    Iam satur de gramine, |305|
    Amen, Amen, itera,
    Aspernare vetera.
    Hez va, hez va! hez va, hez!
    Bialx Sire Asnes, car allez:
    Belle bouche, car chantez."{20}

An ass, it would seem, was actually brought into church, at Beauvais at
all events, during the singing of this song on the feast of the
Circumcision. On January 14 an extraordinary ceremony took place there. A
girl with a child in her arms rode upon an ass into St. Stephen's church,
to represent the Flight into Egypt. The Introit, "Kyrie," "Gloria," and
"Credo" at Mass ended in a bray, and at the close of the service the
priest instead of saying "Ite, missa est," had to bray three times, and
the people to respond in like manner. Mr. Chambers's theory is that the
ass was a descendant of the _cervulus_ or hobby-buck who figures so
largely in ecclesiastical condemnations of Kalends customs.

The country _par excellence_ of the Feast of the Fools was France. It can
also be traced in Germany and Bohemia, while in England too there are
notices of it, though far fewer than in France. Its abuses were the
subject of frequent denunciations by Church reformers from the twelfth to
the fifteenth century. The feast was prohibited at various times, and
notably by the Council of Basle in 1435, but it was too popular to be
quickly suppressed, and it took a century and a half to die out after
this condemnation by a general council of the Church. In one cathedral,
Amiens, it even lingered until 1721.

When in the fifteenth century and later the Feast of Fools was expelled
from the churches of France, associations of laymen sprang up to carry on
its traditions outside. It was indeed a form of entertainment which the
townsfolk as well as the lower clergy thoroughly appreciated, and they
were by no means willing to let it die. A _Prince des Sots_ took the
place of the "bishop," and was chosen by _sociétés joyeuses_ organized by
the youth of the cities for New Year merrymaking. Gradually their
activities grew, and their celebrations came to take place at other
festive times beside the Christmas season. The _sots_ had a distinctive
dress, its |306| most characteristic feature being a hood with asses'
ears, probably a relic of the primitive days when the heads of sacrificed
animals were worn by festal worshippers.{21}


THE BOY BISHOP.

Of older standing than the Feast of Fools were the Christmas revels of
the deacons, the priests, and the choir-boys. They can be traced back to
the early tenth century, and may have originated at the great song-school
of St. Gall near Constance. The most important of the three feasts was
that of the boys on Holy Innocents' Day, a theoretically appropriate
date. Corresponding to the "lord" of the Feast of Fools was the famous
"Boy Bishop," a choir-boy chosen by the lads themselves, who was vested
in cope and mitre, held a pastoral staff, and gave the benediction. Other
boys too usurped the dignities of their elders, and were attired as dean,
archdeacons, and canons. Offices for the festival, in which the Boy
Bishop figures largely, are to be found in English, French, and German
service-books, the best known in this country being those in the Sarum
Processional and Breviary. In England these ceremonies were far more
popular and lasting than the Feast of Fools, and, unlike it, they were
recognized and approved by authority, probably because boys were more
amenable to discipline than men, and objectionable features could be
pruned away with comparative ease. The festivities must have formed a
delightful break in the year of the mediaeval schoolboy, for whom
holidays, as distinguished from holy-days for church-going, scarcely
existed. The feast, as we shall see, was by no means confined within the
church walls; there was plenty of merrymaking and money-making outside.

Minute details have been preserved of the Boy Bishop customs at St.
Paul's Cathedral in the thirteenth century. It had apparently been usual
for the "bishop" to make the cathedral dignitaries act as taper- and
incense-bearers, thus reversing matters so that the great performed the
functions of the lowly. In 1263 this was forbidden, and only clerks of
lower rank might be chosen for these offices. But the "bishop" had the
right to demand |307| after Compline on the Eve of the Innocents a
supper for himself and his train from the Dean or one of his canons. The
number of his following must, however, be limited; if he went to the
Dean's he might take with him a train of fifteen: two chaplains, two
taper-bearers, five clerks, two vergers, and four residentiary canons; if
to a lesser dignitary his attendants were to be fewer.

On Innocents' Day he was given a dinner, after which came a cavalcade
through the city, that the "bishop" might bless the people. He had also
to preach a sermon--no doubt written for him.

Examples of such discourses are still extant,{22} and are not without
quaint touches. For instance the bidding prayer before one of them
alludes to "the ryghte reverende fader and worshypfull lorde my broder
Bysshopp of London, your dyoceasan," and "my worshypfull broder [the]
Deane of this cathedrall chirche,"{23} while in another the preacher
remarks, speaking of the choristers and children of the song-school, "Yt
is not so long sens I was one of them myself."{24}

In some places it appears, though this is by no means certain, that the
boy actually sang Mass. The "bishop's" office was a very desirable one
not merely because of the feasting, but because he had usually the right
to levy contributions on the faithful, and the amounts collected were
often very large. At York, for instance, in 1396 the "bishop" pocketed
about £77, all expenses paid.

The general parallelism of the Boy Bishop customs and the Feast of Fools
is obvious, and no doubt they had much the same folk-origin. One point,
already mentioned, should specially be noticed: the election of the Boy
Bishop generally took place on December 5, the Eve of St. Nicholas,
patron of children; he was often called "Nicholas bishop"; and sometimes,
as at Eton and Mayence, he exercised episcopal functions at divine
service on the eve and the feast itself. It is possible, as Mr. Chambers
suggests, that St. Nicholas's Day was an older date for the boys'
festival than Holy Innocents', and that from the connection with St.
Nicholas, the bishop saint _par excellence_ (he was said to have been
consecrated by divine command when still a mere layman), sprang |308|
the custom of giving the title "bishop" to the "lord" first of the boys'
feast and later of the Feast of Fools.

In the late Middle Ages the Boy Bishop was found not merely in cathedral,
monastic, and collegiate churches but in many parish churches throughout
England and Scotland. Various inventories of the vestments and ornaments
provided for him still exist. With the beginnings of the Reformation came
his suppression: a proclamation of Henry VIII., dated July 22, 1541,
commands "that from henceforth all suche superstitions be loste and
clyerlye extinguisshed throughowte all this his realmes and dominions,
forasmoche as the same doo resemble rather the unlawfull superstition of
gentilitie [paganism], than the pure and sincere religion of
Christe."{25} In Mary's reign the Boy Bishop reappeared, along with
other "Popish" usages, but after Elizabeth's accession he naturally fell
into oblivion. A few traces of him lingered in the seventeenth century.
"The Schoole-boies in the west," says Aubrey, "still religiously observe
St. Nicholas day (Decemb. 6th), he was the Patron of the Schoole-boies.
At Curry-Yeovill in Somersetshire, where there is a Howschole (or schole)
in the Church, they have annually at that time a Barrell of good Ale
brought into the church; and that night they have the priviledge to
breake open their Masters Cellar-dore."{26}

In France he seems to have gradually vanished, as, after the Reformation,
the Catholic Church grew more and more "respectable," but traces of him
are to be found in the eighteenth century at Lyons and Rheims; and at
Sens, even in the nineteenth, the choir-boys used to play at being
bishops on Innocents' Day and call their "archbishop" _âne_--a memory
this of the old _asinaria festa_.{27} In Denmark a vague trace of him
was retained in the nineteenth century in a children's game. A boy was
dressed up in a white shirt, and seated on a chair, and the children sang
a verse beginning, "Here we consecrate a Yule-bishop," and offered him
nuts and apples.{28}

|309| |310| |311|




CHAPTER XIV

ST. STEPHEN'S, ST. JOHN'S, AND HOLY INNOCENTS' DAYS


    Horse Customs of St. Stephen's Day--The Swedish St. Stephen--St.
    John's Wine--Childermas and its Beatings.

The three saints' days immediately following Christmas--St. Stephen's
(December 26), St. John the Evangelist's (December 27), and the Holy
Innocents' (December 28)--have still various folk-customs associated with
them, in some cases purely secular, in others hallowed by the Church.


ST. STEPHEN'S DAY.

In Tyrolese churches early in the morning of St. Stephen's Day there
takes place a consecration of water and of salt brought by the people.
The water is used by the peasants to sprinkle food, barns, and fields in
order to avert the influence of witches and evil spirits, and bread
soaked in it is given to the cattle when they are driven out to pasture
on Whit Monday. The salt, too, is given to the beasts, and the peasants
themselves partake of it before any important journey like a pilgrimage.
Moreover when a storm is threatening some is thrown into the fire as a
protection against hail.{1}

The most striking thing about St. Stephen's Day, however, is its
connection with horses. St. Stephen is their patron; in England in former
times they were bled on his festival in the belief that it would benefit
them,{2} and the custom is still continued in some parts of Austria.{3}
In Tyrol it is the custom not only to |312| bleed horses on St.
Stephen's Day, but also to give them consecrated salt and bread or oats
and barley.{4}

In some of the Carinthian valleys where horse-breeding is specially
carried on, the young men ride into the village on their unsaddled
steeds, and a race is run four or five times round the church, while the
priest blesses the animals, sprinkling them with holy water and
exorcizing them.{5}

Similar customs are or were found in various parts of Germany. In Munich,
formerly, during the services on St. Stephen's Day more than two hundred
men on horseback used to ride three times round the interior of a church.
The horses were decorated with many-coloured ribbons, and the practice
was not abolished till 1876.{6} At Backnang in Swabia horses were ridden
out, as fast as possible, to protect them from the influence of witches,
and in the Hohenlohe region men-servants were permitted by their masters
to ride in companies to neighbouring places, where much drinking went
on.{7} In Holstein the lads on Stephen's Eve used to visit their
neighbours in a company, groom the horses, and ride about in the
farmyards, making a great noise until the people woke up and treated them
to beer and spirits.{8} At the village of Wallsbüll near Flensburg the
peasant youths in the early morning held a race, and the winner was
called Steffen and entertained at the inn. At Viöl near Bredstadt the
child who got up last on December 26 received the name of Steffen and had
to ride to a neighbour's house on a hay-fork. In other German districts
the festival was called "the great horse-day," consecrated food was given
to the animals, they were driven round and round the fields until they
sweated violently, and at last were ridden to the blacksmith's and bled,
to keep them healthy through the year. The blood was preserved as a
remedy for various illnesses.{9}

It is, however, in Sweden that the "horsy" aspect of the festival is most
obvious.{10} Formerly there was a custom, at one o'clock on St.
Stephen's morning, for horses to be ridden to water that flowed
northward; they would then drink "the cream of the water" and flourish
during the year. There was a violent race to the water, and the servant
who got there first was rewarded by a drink of something stronger. Again,
early that morning one |313| peasant would clean out another's stable,
often at some distance from his home, feed, water, and rub down the
horses, and then be entertained to breakfast. In olden times after
service on St. Stephen's Day there was a race home on horseback, and it
was supposed that he who arrived first would be the first to get his
harvest in. But the most remarkable custom is the early morning jaunt of
the so-called "Stephen's men," companies of peasant youths, who long
before daybreak ride in a kind of race from village to village and awaken
the inhabitants with a folk-song called _Staffansvisa_, expecting to be
treated to ale or spirits in return.

The cavalcade is supposed to represent St. Stephen and his followers, yet
the saint is not, as might be expected, the first martyr of the New
Testament, but a dauntless missionary who, according to old legends, was
one of the first preachers of the Gospel in Sweden, and was murdered by
the heathen in a dark forest. A special trait, his love of horses,
connects him with the customs just described. He had, the legends tell,
five steeds: two red, two white, one dappled; when one was weary he
mounted another, making every week a great round to preach the Word.
After his death his body was fastened to the back of an unbroken colt,
which halted not till it came near Norrala, his home. There he was
buried, and a church built over his grave became a place of pilgrimage to
which sick animals, especially horses, were brought for healing.

Mannhardt and Feilberg hold that this Swedish St. Stephen is not a
historical personage but a mythical figure, like many other saints, and
that his legend, so bound up with horses, was an attempt to account for
the folk-customs practised on the day dedicated to St. Stephen the first
martyr. It is interesting to note that legendary tradition has played
about a good deal with the New Testament Stephen; for instance an old
English carol makes him a servant in King Herod's hall at the time of
Christ's birth:--

   "Stephen out of kitchen came,
        With boarës head on hand,
     He saw a star was fair and bright
        Over Bethlehem stand."

|314| Thereupon he forsook King Herod for the Child Jesus, and was
stoned to death.{11}

To return, however, to the horse customs of the day after Christmas, it
is pretty plain that they are of non-Christian origin. Mannhardt has
suggested that the race which is their most prominent feature once formed
the prelude to a ceremony of lustration of houses and fields with a
sacred tree. Somewhat similar "ridings" are found in various parts of
Europe in spring, and are connected with a procession that appears to be
an ecclesiastical adaptation of a pre-Christian lustration-rite.{12} The
great name of Mannhardt lends weight to this theory, but it seems a
somewhat roundabout way of accounting for the facts. Perhaps an
explanation of the "horsiness" of the day might be sought in some
pre-Christian sacrifice of steeds.



We have already noted that St. Stephen's Day is often the date for the
"hunting of the wren" in the British Isles; it was also in England
generally devoted to hunting and shooting, it being held that the game
laws were not in force on that day.{13} This may be only an instance of
Christmas licence, but it is just possible that there is here a survival
of some tradition of sacrificial slaughter.


ST. JOHN'S DAY.

An ecclesiastical adaptation of a pagan practice may be seen in the
_Johannissegen_ customary on St. John's Day in many parts of Catholic
Germany and Austria. A quantity of wine is brought to church to be
blessed by the priest after Mass, and is taken away by the people to be
drunk at home. There are many popular beliefs about the magical powers of
this wine, beliefs which can be traced back through at least four
centuries. In Tyrol and Bavaria it is supposed to protect its drinker
from being struck by lightning, in the Rhenish Palatinate it is drunk in
order that the other wine a man possesses may be kept from injury, or
that next year's harvest may be good. In Nassau, Carinthia, and other
regions some is poured into the wine-casks to preserve the precious drink
from harm, while in Bavaria some is kept for use as medicine in sickness.
|315| In Syria St. John's wine is said to keep the body sound and
healthy, and on his day even babes in the cradle are made to join in the
family drinking.{14}

It appears that in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries there was a
great drinking on St. John's Day of ordinary, as well as consecrated,
wine, often to excess, and scholars of that time seriously believed that
_Weihnacht_, the German name for Christmas, should properly be spelt
_Weinnacht_.{15} The _Johannissegen_, or _Johannisminne_ as it was
sometimes called, seems, all things considered, to be a survival of an
old wine sacrifice like the _Martinsminne_. That it does not owe its
origin to the legend about the cup of poison drunk by St. John is shown
by the fact that a similar custom was in old times practised in Germany
and Sweden on St. Stephen's Day.{16}


HOLY INNOCENTS' DAY.

Holy Innocents' Day or Childermas, whether or not because of Herod's
massacre, was formerly peculiarly unlucky; it was a day upon which no
one, if he could possibly avoid it, should begin any piece of work. It is
said of that superstitious monarch, Louis XI. of France, that he would
never do any business on that day, and of our own Edward IV. that his
coronation was postponed, because the date originally fixed was
Childermas. In Cornwall no housewife would scour or scrub on Childermas,
and in Northamptonshire it was considered very unlucky to begin any
undertaking or even to do washing throughout the year on the day of the
week on which the feast fell. Childermas was there called Dyzemas and a
saying ran: "What is begun on Dyzemas Day will never be finished." In
Ireland it was called "the cross day of the year," and it was said that
anything then begun must have an unlucky ending.{17}

In folk-ritual the day is remarkable for its association with whipping
customs. The seventeenth-century writer Gregorie mentions a custom of
whipping up children on Innocents' Day in the morning, and explains its
purpose as being that the memory of Herod's "murther might stick the
closer; and, in a moderate proportion, to act over the crueltie again in
kind."{18}

|316| This explanation will hardly hold water; the many and various
examples of the practice of whipping at Christmas collected by
Mannhardt{19} show that it is not confined either to Innocents' Day or
to children. Moreover it is often regarded not as a cruel infliction, but
as a service for which return must be made in good things to eat.

In central and southern Germany the custom is called "peppering"
(_pfeffern_) and also by other names. In the Orlagau the girls on St.
Stephen's, and the boys on St. John's Day beat their parents and
godparents with green fir-branches, while the menservants beat their
masters with rosemary sticks, saying:

   "Fresh green! Long life!
     Give me a bright _thaler_ [or nuts, &c.]."

They are entertained with plum-loaf or gingerbreads and brandy. In the
Saxon Erzgebirge the young fellows whip the women and girls on St.
Stephen's Day, if possible while they are still in bed, with birch-rods,
singing the while:

   "Fresh green, fair and fine,
     Gingerbread and brandy-wine";

and on St. John's Day the women pay the men back. At several places in
the Thuringian Forest children on Innocents' Day beat passers-by with
birch-boughs, and get in return apples, nuts, and other dainties. Various
other German examples of the same class of practice are given by
Mannhardt.{20}

In France children who let themselves be caught in bed on the morning of
Holy Innocents' came in for a whipping from their parents; while in one
province, Normandy, the early risers among the young people themselves
gave the sluggards a beating. The practice even gave birth to a
verb--_innocenter_.{21}

There can be little doubt that the Innocents' Day beating is a survival
of a pre-Christian custom. Similar ritual scourging is found in many
countries at various seasons of the year, and is by no means confined to
Europe.{22} As now practised, it has |317| often a harsh appearance,
or has become a kind of teasing, as when in Bohemia at Easter young men
whip girls until they give them something. Its original purpose, however,
as we have seen in connection with St. Martin's rod, seems to have been
altogether kindly. The whipping was not meant as a punishment or
expiation or to harden people to pain, but either to expel harmful
influences and drive out evil spirits or to convey by contact the virtues
of some sacred tree.

|318| |319| |320| |321|




CHAPTER XV

NEW YEAR'S DAY


    Principle of New Year Customs--The New Year in France, Germany, the
    United States, and Eastern Europe--"First-footing" in Great
    Britain--Scottish New Year Practices--Highland Fumigation and
    "Breast-strip" Customs--Hogmanay and Aguillanneuf--New Year
    Processions in Macedonia, Roumania, Greece, and Rome--Methods of
    Augury--Sundry New Year Charms.

Coming to January 1, the modern and the Roman New Year's Day, we shall
find that most of its customs have been anticipated at earlier festivals;
the Roman Kalends practices have often been shifted to Christmas, while
old Celtic and Teutonic New Year practices have frequently been
transferred to the Roman date.[113]

The observances of New Year's Day mainly rest, as was said in Chapter
VI., on the principle that "a good beginning makes a good ending," that
as the first day is so will the rest be. If you would have plenty to eat
during the year, dine lavishly on New Year's Day, if you would be rich
see that your pockets are not empty at this critical season, if you would
be lucky avoid like poison at this of all times everything of ill omen.

"On the Borders," says Mr. W. Henderson, "care is taken that no one
enters a house empty-handed on New Year's Day. A visitor must bring in
his hand some eatable; he will be doubly welcome if he carries in a hot
stoup or 'plotie.' Everybody |322| should wear a new dress on New
Year's Day, and if its pockets contain money of every description they
will be certain not to be empty throughout the year."{2}

The laying of stress on what happens on New Year's Day is by no means
peculiarly European. Hindus, for instance, as Mr. Edgar Thurston tells
us, "are very particular about catching sight of some auspicious object
on the morning of New Year's Day, as the effects of omens seen on that
occasion are believed to last throughout the year." It is thought that a
man's whole prosperity depends upon the things that he then happens to
fix his eyes upon.{3}

Charms, omens, and good wishes are naturally the most prominent customs
of January 1 and its Eve. The New Year in England can hardly be called a
popular festival; there is no public holiday and the occasion is more
associated with penitential Watch Night services and good resolutions
than with rejoicing. But let the reader, if he be in London, pay a visit
to Soho at this time, and he will get some idea of what the New Year
means to the foreigner. The little restaurants are decorated with gay
festoons of all colours and thronged with merrymakers, the shop-windows
are crowded with all manner of _recherché_ delicacies; it is the gala
season of the year.

In France January 1 is a far more festal day than Christmas; it is then
that presents are given, family gatherings held, and calls paid. In the
morning children find their stockings filled with gifts, and then rush
off to offer good wishes to their parents. In the afternoon the younger
people call upon their older relations, and in the evening all meet for
dinner at the home of the head of the family.{4}

In Germany the New Year is a time of great importance. Cards are far more
numerous than at Christmas, and "New Year boxes" are given to the
tradespeople, while on the Eve (_Sylvesterabend_) there are dances or
parties, the custom of forecasting the future by lead-pouring is
practised, and at the stroke of midnight there is a general cry of
"Prosit Neu Jahr!", a drinking of healths, and a shaking of hands.{5}

New Year wishes and "compliments of the season" are |323| familiar to
us all, but in England we have not that custom of paying formal calls
which in France is so characteristic of January 1, when not only
relations and personal friends, but people whose connection is purely
official are expected to visit one another. In devout Brittany the wish
exchanged takes a beautiful religious form--"I wish you a good year and
Paradise at the end of your days."{6}

New Year calling is by no means confined to France. In the United States
it is one of the few traces left by the early Dutch settlers on American
manners. The custom is now rapidly falling into disuse,{7} but in New
York up to the middle of the nineteenth century "New Year's Day was
devoted to the universal interchange of visits. Every door was thrown
wide open. It was a breach of etiquette to omit any acquaintance in these
annual calls, when old friendships were renewed and family differences
amicably settled. A hearty welcome was extended even to strangers of
presentable appearance." At that time the day was marked by tremendous
eating and drinking, and its visiting customs sometimes developed into
wild riot. Young men in barouches would rattle from one house to another
all day long. "The ceremony of calling was a burlesque. There was a noisy
and hilarious greeting, a glass of wine was swallowed hurriedly,
everybody shook hands all round, and the callers dashed out and rushed
into the carriage and were driven rapidly to the next house."{8}

The New Year calling to offer good wishes resembles in some respects the
widespread custom of "first-footing," based on the belief that the
character of the first visitor on New Year's Day affects the welfare of
the household during the year. We have already met with a "first-foot" in
the _polaznik_ of the southern Slavs on Christmas Day. It is to be borne
in mind that for them, or at all events for the Crivoscian highlanders
whose customs are described by Sir Arthur Evans, Christmas is essentially
the festival of the New Year: New Year's Day is not spoken of at all, its
name and ceremonies being completely absorbed by the feasts of "Great"
and "Little" Christmas.{9}

The "first-foot" superstition is found in countries as far apart as
|324| Scotland and Macedonia. Let us begin with some English examples of
it. In Shropshire the most important principle is that if luck is to rest
on a house the "first-foot" must not be a woman. To provide against such
an unlucky accident as that a woman should call first, people often
engage a friendly man or boy to pay them an early visit. It is
particularly interesting to find a Shropshire parallel to the
_polaznik's_ action in going straight to the hearth and striking sparks
from the Christmas log,[114] when Miss Burne tells us that one old man
who used to "let the New Year in" "always entered without knocking or
speaking, and silently stirred the fire before he offered any greeting to
the family."{10}

In the villages of the Teme valley, Worcestershire and Herefordshire, "in
the old climbing-boy days, chimneys used to be swept on New Year's
morning, that one of the right sex should be the first to enter; and the
young urchins of the neighbourhood went the round of the houses before
daylight singing songs, when one of their number would be admitted into
the kitchen 'for good luck all the year.'" In 1875 this custom was still
practised; and at some of the farmhouses, if washing-day chanced to fall
on the first day of the year, it was either put off, or to make sure,
before the women could come, the waggoner's lad was called up early that
he might be let out and let in again.{11}

The idea of the unluckiness of a woman's being the "first-foot" is
extraordinarily widespread; the present writer has met with it in an
ordinary London restaurant, where great stress was laid upon a man's
opening the place on New Year's morning before the waitresses arrived. A
similar belief is found even in far-away China: it is there unlucky on
New Year's Day to meet a woman on first going out.{12} Can the belief be
connected with such ideas about dangerous influences proceeding from
women as have been described by Dr. Frazer in Vol. III. of "The Golden
Bough,"{13} or does it rest merely on a view of woman as the inferior
sex? The unluckiness of first meeting a woman is, we may note, not
confined to, but merely intensified on New Year's Day; in Shropshire{14}
and in Germany{15} it belongs to any ordinary day.

|325| As to the general attitude towards woman suggested by these
superstitions I may quote a striking passage from Miss Jane Harrison's
"Themis." "Woman to primitive man is a thing at once weak and magical, to
be oppressed, yet feared. She is charged with powers of child-bearing
denied to man, powers only half understood, forces of attraction, but
also of danger and repulsion, forces that all over the world seem to fill
him with dim terror. The attitude of man to woman, and, though perhaps in
a less degree, of woman to man, is still to-day essentially
magical."{16}

"First-foot" superstitions flourish in the north of England and in
Scotland. In the northern counties a man is often specially retained as
"first-foot" or "lucky bird"; in some parts he must be a bachelor, and he
is often expected to bring a present with him--a shovelful of coals, or
some eatable, or whisky.{17} In the East Riding of Yorkshire a boy
called the "lucky bird" used to come at dawn on Christmas morning as well
as on New Year's Day, and bring a sprig of evergreens{18}--an offering
by now thoroughly familiar to us. In Scotland, especially in Edinburgh,
it is customary for domestic servants to invite their sweethearts to be
their "first-foots." The old Scotch families who preserve ancient customs
encourage their servants to "first-foot" them, and grandparents like
their grandchildren to perform for them the same service.{19} In
Aberdeenshire it is considered most important that the "first-foot"
should not come empty-handed. Formerly he carried spiced ale; now he
brings a whisky-bottle. Shortbread, oat-cakes, "sweeties," or sowens,
were also sometimes brought by the "first-foot," and occasionally the
sowens were sprinkled on the doors and windows of the houses visited--a
custom strongly suggesting a sacramental significance of some sort.{20}

Before we leave the subject of British "first-footing" we may notice one
or two things that have possibly a racial significance. Not only must the
"first-foot" be a man or boy, he is often required to be dark-haired; it
is unlucky for a fair- or red-haired person to "let in" the New
Year.{21} It has been suggested by Sir John Rhys that this idea rested
in the first instance upon |326| racial antipathy--the natural
antagonism of an indigenous dark-haired people to a race of blonde
invaders.{22} Another curious requirement--in the Isle of Man and
Northumberland--is that the "first-foot" shall not be flat-footed: he
should be a person with a high-arched instep, a foot that "water runs
under." Sir John Rhys is inclined to connect this also with some racial
contrast. He remarks, by way of illustration, that English shoes do not
as a rule fit Welsh feet, being made too low in the instep.{23}

Some reference has already been made to Scottish New Year customs. In
Scotland, the most Protestant region of Europe, the country in which
Puritanism abolished altogether the celebration of Christmas, New Year's
Day is a great occasion, and is marked by various interesting usages, its
importance being no doubt largely due to the fact that it has not to
compete with the Church feast of the Nativity. Nowadays, indeed, the
example of Anglicanism is affecting the country to a considerable extent,
and Christmas Day is becoming observed in the churches. The New Year,
however, is still the national holiday, and January 1 a great day for
visiting and feasting, the chief, in fact, of all festivals.{24} New
Year's Day and its Eve are often called the "Daft Days"; cakes and pastry
of all kinds are eaten, healths are drunk, and calls are paid.{25}

In Edinburgh there are striking scenes on New Year's Eve. "Towards
evening," writes an observer, "the thoroughfares become thronged with the
youth of the city.... As the midnight hour approaches, drinking of
healths becomes frequent, and some are already intoxicated.... The eyes
of the immense crowd are ever being turned towards the lighted clock-face
of 'Auld and Faithful'' Tron [Church], the hour approaches, the hands
seem to stand still, but in one second more the hurrahing, the cheering,
the hand-shaking, the health-drinking, is all kept up as long as the
clock continues to ring out the much-longed-for midnight hour.... The
crowds slowly disperse, the much-intoxicated and helpless ones being
hustled about a good deal, the police urging them on out of harm's way.
The first-footers are off and away, flying in every direction through the
city, singing, cheering, and shaking hands with all and sundry."{26}

|327| One need hardly allude to the gathering of London Scots around
St. Paul's to hear the midnight chime and welcome the New Year with the
strains of "Auld Lang Syne," except to say that times have changed and
Scotsmen are now lost in the swelling multitude of roysterers of all
nationalities.

Drinking is and was a great feature of the Scottish New Year's Eve. "On
the approach of twelve o'clock, a _hot pint_ was prepared--that is, a
kettle or flagon full of warm, spiced, and sweetened ale, with an
infusion of spirits. When the clock had struck the knell of the departed
year, each member of the family drank of this mixture 'A good health and
a happy New Year and many of them' to all the rest, with a general
hand-shaking." The elders of the family would then sally out to visit
their neighbours, and exchange greetings.{27}

At Biggar in Lanarkshire it was customary to "burn out the old year" with
bonfires, while at Burghead in Morayshire a tar-barrel called the
"Clavie" was set on fire and carried about the village and the fishing
boats. Its embers were scrambled for by the people and carefully kept as
charms against witchcraft.{28} These fire-customs may be compared with
those on Hallowe'en, which, as we have seen, is probably an old New
Year's Eve.

Stewart in his "Popular Superstitions of the Highlands of Scotland" tells
how on the last night of the year the Strathdown Highlanders used to
bring home great loads of juniper, which on New Year's Day was kindled in
the different rooms, all apertures being closed so that the smoke might
produce a thorough fumigation. Not only human beings had to stand this,
but horses and other animals were treated in the same way to preserve
them from harm throughout the year. Moreover, first thing on New Year's
morning, everybody, while still in bed, was asperged with a large
brush.{29} There is a great resemblance here to the Catholic use of
incense and holy water in southern Germany and Austria on the
_Rauchnächte_ (see also Chapter VIII.). In Tyrol these nights are
Christmas, New Year's, and Epiphany Eves. When night falls the Tyrolese
peasant goes with all his household through each room and outhouse, his
wife bearing the holy water vessel and the censer. Every corner of the
buildings, every animal, |328| every human being is purified with the
sacred smoke and the holy sprinkling, and even the Christmas pie must be
hallowed in this way. In Orthodox Greek countries something of the same
kind takes place, as we shall see, at the Epiphany. To drive away evil
spirits is no doubt the object of all these rites.{30}

The most interesting of Scottish New Year customs, considered as
religious survivals, is a practice found in the Highlands on New Year's
Eve, and evidently of sacrificial origin. It has been described by
several writers, and has various forms. According to one account the hide
of the mart or winter cow was wrapped round the head of one of a company
of men, who all made off belabouring the hide with switches. The
disorderly procession went three times _deiseal_ (according to the course
of the sun) round each house in the village, striking the walls and
shouting on coming to a door a rhyme demanding admission. On entering,
each member of the party was offered refreshments, and their leader gave
to the goodman of the house the "breast-stripe" of a sheep, deer, or
goat, wrapped round the point of a shinty stick.{31}

We have here another survival of that oft-noted custom of skin-wearing,
which, as has been seen, originated apparently in a desire for contact
with the sanctity of the sacrificed victim. Further, the "breast-stripe"
given to the goodman of each house is evidently meant to convey the
hallowed influences to each family. It is an oval strip, and no knife may
be used in removing it from the flesh. The head of the house sets fire to
it, and it is given to each person in turn to smell. The inhaling of its
fumes is a talisman against fairies, witches, and demons. In the island
of South Uist, according to a quite recent account, each person seizes
hold of it as it burns, making the sign of the cross, if he be a
Catholic, in the name of the Trinity, and it is put thrice sun-wise about
the heads of those present. If it should be extinguished it is a bad omen
for the New Year.{32}

The writer of the last account speaks of the "breast-strip" as the
"Hogmanay," and it is just possible that the well-known Hogmanay
processions of children on New Year's Eve (in Scotland and elsewhere) may
have some connection with the ritual above described. It is customary for
the poorer children to |329| swaddle themselves in a great sheet,
doubled up in front so as to form a vast pocket, and then go along the
streets in little bands, calling out "Hogmanay" at the doors of the
wealthier classes, and expecting a dole of oaten bread. Each child gets a
quadrant of oat-cake (sometimes with cheese), and this is called the
"Hogmanay." Here is one of the rhymes they sing:--

   "Get up, goodwife, and shake your feathers,
    And dinna think that we are beggars;
    For we are bairns come out to play,
    Get up and gie's our hogmanay!"{33}

The word _Hogmanay_--it is found in various forms in the northern English
counties as well as in Scotland--has been a puzzle to etymologists. It is
used both for the last day of the year and for the gift of the oaten cake
or the like; and, as we have seen, it is shouted by the children in their
quest. Exactly corresponding to it in sense and use is the French word
_aguillanneuf_, from which it appears to be derived. Although the
phonetic difference between this and the Scottish word is great, the
Norman form _hoguinané_ is much closer. There is, moreover, a Spanish
word _aguinaldo_ (formerly _aguilando_) = Christmas-box. The popular
explanation of the French term as _au-guy-l'an-neuf_ (to the mistletoe
the New Year) is now rejected by scholars, and it seems likely that the
word is a corruption of the Latin _Kalendae_.{34}

A few instances of _aguillanneuf_ customs may be given. Here are
specimens of rhymes sung by the New Year _quêteurs_:--

   "Si vous veniez à la dépense,
    À la dépense de chez nous,
    Vous mangeriez de bons choux,
    On vous servirait du rost.
            Hoguinano.

    Donnez-moi mes hoguignettes
    Dans un panier que voicy.
    Je l'achetai samedy
    D'un bon homme de dehors;
    Mais il est encore à payer.
            Hoguinano."{35}

|330| Formerly at Matignon and Ploubalay in Brittany on Christmas Eve
the boys used to get together, carry big sticks and wallets, and knock at
farmhouse doors. When the inmates called out, "Who's there?" they would
answer, "The _hoguihanneu_," and after singing something they were given
a piece of lard. This was put on a pointed stick carried by one of the
boys, and was kept for a feast called the _bouriho_.{36} Elsewhere in
Brittany poor children went round crying "_au guyané_," and were given
pieces of lard or salt beef, which they stuck on a long spit.{37} In
Guernsey the children's quest at the New Year was called _oguinane_. They
chanted the following rhyme:--

   "Oguinâni! Oguinâno!
     Ouvre ta pouque, et pis la recclios."[115]{38}

Similar processions are common in eastern Europe at the New Year. In some
parts of Macedonia on New Year's Eve men or boys go about making a noise
with bells. In other districts, early on New Year's morning, lads run
about with sticks or clubs, knock people up, cry out good wishes, and
expect to be rewarded with something to eat. Elsewhere again they carry
green olive- or cornel-boughs, and touch with them everyone they
meet.{39} We have already considered various similar customs, the noise
and knocking being apparently intended to drive away evil spirits, and
the green boughs to bring folks into contact with the spirit of growth
therein immanent.

In Roumania on New Year's Eve there is a custom known as the "little
plough." Boys and men go about after dark from house to house, with long
greetings, ringing of bells, and cracking of whips. On New Year's morning
Roumanians throw handfuls of corn at one another with some appropriate
greeting, such as:--

   "May you live,
    May you flourish
    Like apple-trees, |331|
    Like pear-trees
    In springtime,
    Like wealthy autumn,
    Of all things plentiful."

Generally this greeting is from the young to the old or from the poor to
the rich, and a present in return is expected.{40}

In Athens models of war-ships are carried round by waits, who make a
collection of money in them. "St. Basil's ships" they are called, and
they are supposed to represent the vessel on which St. Basil, whose feast
is kept on January 1, sailed from Caesarea.{41} It is probable that this
is but a Christian gloss on a pagan custom. Possibly there may be here a
survival of an old Greek practice of bearing a ship in procession in
honour of Dionysus,{42} but it is to be noted that similar observances
are found at various seasons in countries like Germany and Belgium where
no Greek influence can be traced. The custom is widespread, and it has
been suggested by Mannhardt that it was originally intended either to
promote the success of navigation or to carry evil spirits out to
sea.{43}

It is interesting, lastly, to read a mediaeval account of a New Year
_quête_ in Rome. "The following," says the writer, "are common Roman
sports at the Kalends of January. On the Eve of the Kalends at a late
hour boys arise and carry a shield. One of them wears a mask; they
whistle and beat a drum, they go round to the houses, they surround the
shield, the drum sounds, and the masked figure whistles. This playing
ended, they receive a present from the master of the house, whatever he
thinks fit to give. So they do at every house. On that day they eat all
kinds of vegetables. And in the morning two of the boys arise, take
olive-branches and salt, enter into the houses, and salute the master
with the words, 'Joy and gladness be in the house, so many sons, so many
little pigs, so many lambs,' and they wish him all good things. And
before the sun rises they eat either a piece of honeycomb or something
sweet, that the whole year may pass sweetly, without strife and great
trouble."{44}



Various methods of peering into the future, more or less like |332|
those described at earlier festivals, are practised at the New Year.
Especially popular at German New Year's Eve parties is the custom of
_bleigiessen_. "This ceremony consists of boiling specially prepared
pieces of lead in a spoon over a candle; each guest takes his spoonful
and throws it quickly into the basin of water which is held ready.
According to the form which the lead takes so will his future be in the
coming year ... ships (which indicate a journey), or hearts (which have,
of course, only one meaning), or some other equally significant shape is
usually discerned."{45}

In Macedonia St. Basil's Eve (December 31) is a common time for
divination: a favourite method is to lay on the hot cinders a pair of
wild-olive-leaves to represent a youth and a maid. If the leaves crumple
up and draw near each other, it is concluded that the young people love
one another dearly, but if they recoil apart the opposite is the case. If
they flare up and burn, it is a sign of excessive passion.{46}

In Lithuania on New Year's Eve nine sorts of things--money, cradle,
bread, ring, death's head, old man, old woman, ladder, and key--are baked
of dough, and laid under nine plates, and every one has three grabs at
them. What he gets will fall to his lot during the year.{47}

Lastly, in Brittany it is supposed that the wind which prevails on the
first twelve days of the year will blow during each of the twelve months,
the first day corresponding to January, the second to February, and so
on.{48} Similar ideas of the prophetic character of Christmastide
weather are common in our own and other countries.



Practically all the customs discussed in this chapter have been of the
nature of charms; one or two more, practised on New Year's Day or Eve,
may be mentioned in conclusion.

There are curious superstitions about New Year water. At Bromyard in
Herefordshire it was the custom, at midnight on New Year's Eve, to rush
to the nearest spring to snatch the "cream of the well"--the first
pitcherful of water--and with it the prospect of the best luck.{49} A
Highland practice was to send |333| some one on the last night of the
year to draw a pitcherful of water in silence, and without the vessel
touching the ground. The water was drunk on New Year's morning as a charm
against witchcraft and the evil eye.{50} A similar belief about the
luckiness of "new water" exists at Canzano Peligno in the Abruzzi. "On
New Year's Eve, the fountain is decked with leaves and bits of coloured
stuff, and fires are kindled round it. As soon as it is light, the girls
come as usual with their copper pots on their head; but the youths are on
this morning guardians of the well, and sell the 'new water' for nuts and
fruits--and other sweet things."{51}

In some of the Aegean islands when the family return from church on New
Year's Day, the father picks up a stone and leaves it in the yard, with
the wish that the New Year may bring with it "as much gold as is the
weight of the stone."{52} Finally, in Little Russia "corn sheaves are
piled upon a table, and in the midst of them is set a large pie. The
father of the family takes his seat behind them, and asks his children if
they can see him. 'We cannot see you,' they reply. On which he proceeds
to express what seems to be a hope that the corn will grow so high in his
fields that he may be invisible to his children when he walks there at
harvest-time."{53}

With a curious and beautiful old carol from South Wales I must bring this
chapter to a close. It was formerly sung before dawn on New Year's Day by
poor children who carried about a jug of water drawn that morning from
the well. With a sprig of box or other evergreen they would sprinkle
those they met, wishing them the compliments of the season. To pay their
respects to those not abroad at so early an hour, they would serenade
them with the following lines, which, while connected with the "new
water" tradition, contain much that is of doubtful interpretation, and
are a fascinating puzzle for folk-lorists:--

   "Here we bring new water
      From the well so clear,
    For to worship God with,
      This happy New Year. |334|
    Sing levy-dew, sing levy-dew,
      The water and the wine;
    The seven bright gold wires
      And the bugles they do shine.

    Sing reign of Fair Maid,
      With gold upon her toe,--
    Open you the West Door,
      And turn the Old Year go:
    Sing reign of Fair Maid,
      With gold upon her chin,--
    Open you the East Door,
      And let the New Year in."{54}

|335| |336| |337|




CHAPTER XVI

EPIPHANY TO CANDLEMAS


    The Twelfth Cake and the "King of the Bean"--French Twelfth Night
    Customs--St. Basil's Cake in Macedonia--Epiphany and the Expulsion of
    Evils--The Befana in Italy--The Magi as Present-bringers--Greek
    Epiphany Customs--Wassailing Fruit-trees--Herefordshire and Irish
    Twelfth Night Practices--The "Haxey Hood" and Christmas Football--St.
    Knut's Day in Sweden--Rock Day--Plough Monday--Candlemas, its
    Ecclesiastical and Folk Ceremonies--Farewells to Christmas.

[Illustration: THE EPIPHANY IN FLORENCE.]


THE EPIPHANY.

Though the Epiphany has ceased to be a popular festival in England, it
was once a very high day indeed, and in many parts of Europe it is still
attended by folk-customs of great interest.[116] For the peasant of
Tyrol, indeed, it is New Year's Day, the first of January being kept only
by the townsfolk and modernized people.{1}

To Englishmen perhaps the best known feature of the secular festival is
the Twelfth Cake. Some words of Leigh Hunt's will show what an important
place this held in the mid-nineteenth century:--

    "Christmas goes out in fine style,--with Twelfth Night. It is a
    finish worthy of the time. Christmas Day was the morning of the
    season; New Year's Day the middle of it, or noon; Twelfth Night is
    the night, brilliant with innumerable planets of Twelfth-cakes. The
    whole island keeps court; nay, all Christendom. All the world are
    |338| kings and queens. Everybody is somebody else, and learns at
    once to laugh at, and to tolerate, characters different from his own,
    by enacting them. Cakes, characters, forfeits, lights, theatres,
    merry rooms, little holiday-faces, and, last not least, the painted
    sugar on the cakes, so bad to eat but so fine to look at, useful
    because it is perfectly useless except for a sight and a moral--all
    conspire to throw a giddy splendour over the last night of the
    season, and to send it to bed in pomp and colours, like a
    Prince."{2}



For seventeenth-century banqueting customs and the connection of the cake
with the "King of the Bean" Herrick may be quoted:--

     "Now, now the mirth comes
      With the cake full of plums,
    Where bean's the king of the sport here;
      Besides we must know,
      The pea also
    Must revel as queen in the court here.

      Begin then to choose
      This night as ye use,
    Who shall for the present delight here
      Be a king by the lot,
      And who shall not
    Be Twelfth-day queen for the night here

      Which known, let us make
      Joy-sops with the cake;
    And let not a man then be seen here,
      Who unurg'd will not drink,
      To the base from the brink,
    A health to the king and the queen here."{3}

There are many English references to the custom of electing a Twelfth Day
monarch by means of a bean or pea, and this "king" is mentioned in royal
accounts as early as the reign of Edward II.{4} He appears, however, to
have been even more popular in France than in England.

|339| The method of choosing the Epiphany king is thus described by the
sixteenth-century writer, Étienne Pasquier:--

    "When the cake has been cut into as many portions as there are
    guests, a small child is put under the table, and is interrogated by
    the master under the name of Phebé [Phoebus], as if he were a child
    who in the innocence of his age represented a kind of Apollo's
    oracle. To this questioning the child answers with a Latin word:
    _Domine_. Thereupon the master calls on him to say to whom he shall
    give the piece of cake which he has in his hand: the child names
    whoever comes into his head, without respect of persons, until the
    portion where the bean is given out. He who gets it is reckoned king
    of the company, although he may be a person of the least importance.
    This done, everyone eats, drinks, and dances heartily."{5}

In Berry at the end of the festive repast a cake is brought before the
head of the household, and divided into as many portions as there are
guests, plus one. The youngest member of the family distributes them. The
portion remaining is called _la part du bon Dieu_ and is given to the
first person who asks for it. A band of children generally come to claim
it, with a leader who sings a little song.{6} There was formerly a
custom of dressing up a king in full robes. He had a fool to amuse him
during the feast, and shots were fired when he drank.{7}

Here is a nineteenth-century account from Lorraine:--

    "On the Vigil of the Epiphany all the family and the guests assemble
    round the table, which is illuminated by a lamp hanging above its
    centre. Lots are cast for the king of the feast, and if the head of
    anyone present casts no shadow on the wall it is a sign that he will
    die during the year. Then the king chooses freely his queen: they
    have the place of honour, and each time they raise their glasses to
    their mouths cries of 'The king drinks, the queen drinks!' burst
    forth on all sides.... The next day an enormous cake, divided into
    equal portions, is distributed to the company by the youngest boy.
    The first portion is always for _le bon Dieu_, the second for the
    Blessed Virgin (these two portions are always given to the first poor
    person who presents himself); then come those of relations, servants,
    and visitors. He who finds a bean in his portion is proclaimed king;
    if it is a lady she chooses her |340| king, and he invites the
    company to a banquet on the Sunday following, at which black kings
    are made by rubbing the face with a burnt cork."{8}

The use of the _gâteau des Rois_ goes pretty far back. At the monastery
of Mont-St.-Michel in the thirteenth century the Epiphany king was chosen
from among the monks by means of a number of cakes in one of which a bean
was placed. At Matins, High Mass, and Vespers he sat upon a special
throne.{9}

It may be added that there is a quaint old story of a curate "who having
taken his preparations over evening, when all men cry (as the manner is)
_the king drinketh_, chanting his Masse the next morning, fell asleep in
his Memento: and, when he awoke, added with a loud voice, _The king
drinketh_."{10}

One more French "king" custom may be mentioned, though it relates to
Christmas Day, not Epiphany. At Salers in the centre of France there were
formerly a king and queen whose function was to preside over the
festival, sit in a place of honour in church, and go first in the
procession. The kingship was not elective, but was sold by auction at the
church door, and it is said to have been so much coveted that worthy
citizens would sell their heritage in order to purchase it.{11}

It may be remarked that Epiphany kings and cakes similar to the French
can be traced in Holland and Germany,{12} and that the "King of the
Bean" is known in modern Italy, though there he may be an importation
from the north.{13}

How is this merry monarch to be accounted for? His resemblance to the
king of the _Saturnalia_, who presided over the fun of the feast in the
days of imperial Rome, is certainly striking, but it is impossible to say
whether he derives directly from that personage. No doubt his association
with the feast of the Three Kings has helped to maintain his rule. As for
the bean, it appears to have been a sacred vegetable in ancient times.
There is a story about the philosopher Pythagoras, how, when flying
before a host of rebels, he came upon a field of beans and refused to
pass through it for fear of crushing the plants, thus enabling his
pursuers to overtake him. Moreover, the _flamen dialis_ in Rome was
forbidden to eat or even name the vegetable, and the |341| name of the
Fabii, a Roman _gens_, suggests a totem tribe of the bean.{14}

In eastern Europe, though I know of no election of a king, there are New
Year customs with cakes, closely resembling some of the French practices
described a page or two back. "St. Basil's Cake" on New Year's Eve in
Macedonia is a kind of shortbread with a silver coin and a cross of green
twigs in it. When all are seated round the table the father and mother
take the cake, "and break it into two pieces, which are again subdivided
by the head of the family into shares. The first portion is destined for
St. Basil, the Holy Virgin, or the patron saint whose icon is in the
house. The second stands for the house itself. The third for the cattle
and domestic animals belonging thereto. The fourth for the inanimate
property, and the rest for each member of the household according to age.
Each portion is successively dipped in a cup of wine." He who finds the
cross or the coin in his share of the cake will prosper during the year.
The money is considered sacred and is used to buy a votive taper.{15}

In Macedonia when the New Year's supper is over, the table, with the
remnants of the feast upon it, is removed to a corner of the room in
order that St. Basil may come and partake of the food.{16} He appears to
have been substituted by the Church for the spirits of the departed, for
whom, as we have seen, food is left in the West on All Souls' and
Christmas Eves. Probably the Macedonian practice of setting aside a
portion of the cake for a saint, and the pieces cut in France for _le bon
Dieu_ and the Virgin or the three Magi, have a like origin. One may
compare them with the Serbian breaking of the _kolatch_ cake in honour of
Christ "the Patron Namegiver." Is it irrelevant, also, to mention here
the Greek Church custom, at the preparation of the elements for the
Eucharist, of breaking portions of the bread in memory of the Virgin and
other saints?



In many countries the Epiphany is a special time for the expulsion of
evils. At Brunnen in Switzerland boys go about in procession on Twelfth
Night, with torches and lanterns, and make a great noise with horns,
bells, whips, &c., in order to |342| frighten away two wood-spirits. In
Labruguière in southern France on the Eve of Twelfth Day the inhabitants
rush through the streets, making discordant noises and a huge uproar,
with the object of scaring away ghosts and devils.{17}

In parts of the eastern Alps there takes place what is called
_Berchtenlaufen_. Lads, formerly to the number of two or three hundred,
rush about in the strangest masks, with cowbells, whips, and all sorts of
weapons, and shout wildly.{18} In Nuremberg up to the year 1616 on
_Bergnacht_ or Epiphany Eve boys and girls used to run about the streets
and knock loudly at the doors.{19} Such knocking, as we have seen, may
well have been intended to drive away spirits from the houses.

At Eschenloh near Partenkirchen in Upper Bavaria three women used to
_berchten_ on that evening. They all had linen bags over their heads,
with holes for the mouth and eyes. One carried a chain, another a rake,
and the third a broom. Going round to the houses, they knocked on the
door with the chain, scraped the ground with the rake, and made a noise
of sweeping with the broom.{20} The suggestion of a clearing away of
evils is here very strong.

In connection with the _Kallikantzaroi_ mention has already been made of
the purification of houses with holy water, performed by Greek priests on
the Epiphany. In Roumania, where a similar sprinkling is performed, a
curious piece of imitative magic is added--the priest is invited to sit
upon the bed, in order that the brooding hen may sit upon her eggs.
Moreover there should be maize grains under the mattress; then the hen
will lay eggs in abundance.{21}



We noted in an earlier chapter the name _Berchtentag_ applied in southern
Germany and in Austria to the Epiphany, and we saw also how the
mysterious Frau Berchta was specially connected with the day. On the
Epiphany and its Eve in the Möllthal in Carinthia a female figure, "the
Berchtel," goes the round of the houses. She is generally dressed in a
hide, wears a hideous wooden mask, and hops wildly about, inquiring as to
the behaviour of children, and demanding gifts.{22}

|343| Something of the terrible, as well as the beneficent, belongs to
the "Befana," the Epiphany visitor who to Italian children is the great
gift-bringer of the year, the Santa Klaus of the South. "Delightful," say
Countess Martinengo, "as are the treasures she puts in their shoes when
satisfied with their behaviour, she is credited with an unpleasantly
sharp eye for youthful transgressions."{23} Mothers will sometimes warn
their children that if they are naughty the Befana will fetch and eat
them. To Italian youngsters she is a very real being, and her coming on
Epiphany Eve is looked forward to with the greatest anxiety. Though she
puts playthings and sweets in the stockings of good children, she has
nothing but a birch and coal for those who misbehave themselves.{24}

Formerly at Florence images of the Befana were put up in the windows of
houses, and there were processions through the streets, guys being borne
about, with a great blowing of trumpets.{25} Toy trumpets are still the
delight of little boys at the Epiphany in Italy.

The Befana's name is obviously derived from _Epiphania_. In Naples the
little old woman who fills children's stockings is called "Pasqua
Epiphania,"[117] the northern contraction not having been acclimatized
there.{26}

In Spain as well as Italy the Epiphany is associated with presents for
children, but the gift-bringers for little Spaniards are the Three Holy
Kings themselves. There is an old Spanish tradition that the Magi go
every year to Bethlehem to adore the infant Jesus, and on their way visit
children, leaving sweets and toys for them if they have behaved well. On
Epiphany Eve the youngsters go early to bed, put out their shoes on the
window-sill or balcony to be filled with presents by the Wise Men, and
provide a little straw for their horses.{27}

It is, or was, a custom in Madrid to look out for the Kings on Epiphany
Eve. Companies of men go out with bells and pots and pans, and make a
great noise. There is loud shouting, and torches cast a fantastic light
upon the scene. One of the men carries a large ladder, and mounts it to
see if the Kings are |344| coming. Here, perhaps, some devil-scaring
rite, resembling those described above, has been half-Christianized.{28}

In Provence, too, there was a custom of going to meet the Magi. In a
charming chapter of his Memoirs Mistral tells us how on Epiphany Eve all
the children of his countryside used to go out to meet the Kings, bearing
cakes for the Magi, dried figs for their pages, and handfuls of hay for
their horses. In the glory and colour of the sunset young Mistral thought
he saw the splendid train; but soon the gorgeous vision died away, and
the children stood gaping alone on the darkening highway--the Kings had
passed behind the mountain. After supper the little ones hurried to
church, and there in the Chapel of the Nativity beheld the Kings in
adoration before the Crib.{29}

At Trest not only did the young people carry baskets or dried fruit, but
there were three men dressed as Magi to receive the offerings and accept
compliments addressed to them by an orator. In return they presented him
with a purse full of counters, upon which he rushed off with the treasure
and was pursued by the others in a sort of dance.{30} Here again the
Magi are evidently mixed up with something that has no relation to
Christianity.



We noted in Chapter IV. the elaborate ceremonies connected in Greece with
the Blessing of the Waters at the Epiphany, and the custom of diving for
a cross. It would seem, as was pointed out, that the latter is an
ecclesiastically sanctioned form of a folk-ceremony. This is found in a
purer state in Macedonia, where, after Matins on the Epiphany, it is the
custom to thrust some one into water, be it sea or river, pond or well.
On emerging he has to sprinkle the bystanders.{31} The rite may be
compared with the drenchings of human beings in order to produce rain
described by Dr. Frazer in "The Magic Art."{32}

Another Greek custom combines the purifying powers of Epiphany water with
the fertilizing influences of the Christmas log--round Mount Olympos
ashes are taken from the hearth where a cedar log has been burning since
Christmas, and are baptized in the blessed water of the river. They are
then borne |345| to the vineyards, and thrown at their four corners,
and also at the foot of apple- and fig-trees.{33}

This may remind us that in England fruit-trees used to come in for
special treatment on the Vigil of the Epiphany. In Devonshire the farmer
and his men would go to the orchard with a large jug of cider, and drink
the following toast at the foot of one of the best-bearing apple-trees,
firing guns in conclusion:--

           "Here's to thee, old apple-tree,
    Whence thou may'st bud, and whence thou may'st blow!
    And whence thou may'st bear apples enow!
            Hats full! caps full!
            Bushel!--bushel--sacks full,
            And my pockets full too! Huzza!"{34}

In seventeenth-century Somersetshire, according to Aubrey, a piece of
toast was put upon the roots.{35} According to another account each
person in the company used to take a cupful of cider, with roasted apples
pressed into it, drink part of the contents, and throw the rest at the
tree.{36} The custom is described by Herrick as a Christmas Eve
ceremony:--

   "Wassail the trees, that they may bear
    You many a plum and many a pear;
    For more or less fruits they will bring,
    As you do give them wassailing."{37}

In Sussex the wassailing (or "worsling") of fruit-trees took place on
Christmas Eve, and was accompanied by a trumpeter blowing on a cow's
horn.{38}

The wassailing of the trees may be regarded as either originally an
offering to their spirits or--and this seems more probable--as a
sacramental act intended to bring fertilizing influences to bear upon
them. Customs of a similar character are found in Continental countries
during the Christmas season. In Tyrol, for instance, when the Christmas
pies are a-making on St. Thomas's Eve, the maids are told to go
out-of-doors and put their arms, sticky with paste, round the
fruit-trees, in order that they |346| may bear well next year.{39} The
uses of the ashes of the Christmas log have already been noticed.

Sometimes, as in the Thurgau, Mecklenburg, Oldenburg, and Tyrol, the
trees are beaten to make them bear. On New Year's Eve at Hildesheim
people dance and sing around them,{40} while the Tyrolese peasant on
Christmas Eve will go out to his trees, and, knocking with bent fingers
upon them, will bid them wake up and bear.{41} There is a Slavonic
custom, on the same night, of threatening apple-trees with a hatchet if
they do not produce fruit during the year.{42}

Another remarkable agricultural rite was practised on Epiphany Eve in
Herefordshire and Gloucestershire. The farmer and his servants would meet
in a field sown with wheat, and there light thirteen fires, with one
larger than the rest. Round this a circle was formed by the company, and
all would drink a glass of cider to the success of the harvest.[118] This
done, they returned to the farm, to feast--in Gloucestershire--on cakes
made with caraways, and soaked in cider. The Herefordshire accounts give
particulars of a further ceremony. A large cake was provided, with a hole
in the middle, and after supper everyone went to the wain-house. The
master filled a cup with strong ale, and standing opposite the finest ox,
pledged him in a curious toast; the company followed his example with the
other oxen, addressing each by name. Afterwards the large cake was put on
the horn of the first ox.{43}

It is extremely remarkable, and can scarcely be a mere coincidence, that
far away among the southern Slavs, as we saw in Chapter XII., a Christmas
cake with a hole in its centre is likewise put upon the horn of the chief
ox. The wassailing of the animals is found there also. On Christmas Day,
Sir Arthur |347| Evans relates, the house-mother "entered the stall set
apart for the goats, and having first sprinkled them with corn, took the
wine-cup in her hand and said, 'Good morning, little mother! The Peace of
God be on thee! Christ is born; of a truth He is born. May'st thou be
healthy. I drink to thee in wine; I give thee a pomegranate; may'st thou
meet with all good luck!' She then lifted the cup to her lips, took a
sup, tossed the pomegranate among the herd, and throwing her arms round
the she-goat, whose health she had already drunk, gave it the 'Peace of
God'--kissed it, that is, over and over again." The same ceremony was
then performed for the benefit of the sheep and cows, and all the animals
were beaten with a leafy olive-branch.{44}

As for the fires, an Irish custom to some extent supplies a parallel. On
Epiphany Eve a sieve of oats was set up, "and in it a dozen of candles
set round, and in the centre one larger, all lighted." This was said to
be in memory of the Saviour and His apostles, lights of the world.{45}
Here is an account of a similar custom practised in Co. Leitrim:--

    "A piece of board is covered with cow-dung, and twelve rushlights are
    stuck therein. These are sprinkled with ash at the top, to make them
    light easily, and then set alight, each being named by some one
    present, and as each dies so will the life of its owner. A ball is
    then made of the dung, and it is placed over the door of the cowhouse
    for an increase of cattle. Sometimes mud is used, and the ball placed
    over the door of the dwelling-house."{46}

There remains to be considered under Epiphany usages an ancient and very
remarkable game played annually on January 6 at Haxey in Lincolnshire. It
is known traditionally as "Haxey Hood," and its centre is a struggle
between the men of two villages for the possession of a roll of sacking
or leather called the "hood." Over it preside the "boggans" or "bullocks"
of Plough Monday (see p. 352), headed by a figure known as "My Lord," who
is attended by a fool. The proceedings are opened on the village green by
a mysterious speech from the fool:--

"Now, good folks, this is Haxa' Hood. We've killed two |348| bullocks
and a half, but the other half we had to leave running about field: we
can fetch it if it's wanted. Remember it's--

   'Hoose agin hoose, toon agin toon,
    And if you meet a man knock him doon.'"

Then, in an open field, the hoods--there are six of them, one apparently
for each of the chief hamlets round--are thrown up and struggled for.
"The object is to carry them off the field away from the boggans. If any
of these can get hold of them, or even touch them, they have to be given
up, and carried back to My Lord. For every one carried off the field the
boggans forfeit half-a-crown, which is spent in beer, doubtless by the
men of the particular hamlet who have carried off the hood." The great
event of the day is the struggle for the last hood--made of
leather--between the men of Haxey and the men of Westwoodside--"that is
to say really between the customers of the public-houses there--each
party trying to get it to his favourite 'house.' The publican at the
successful house stands beer."{47}

Mr. Chambers regards the fool's strange speech as preserving the
tradition that the hood is the half of a bullock--the head of a
sacrificial victim, and he explains both the Haxey game and also the
familiar games of hockey and football as originating in a struggle
between the people of two villages to get such a head, with all its
fertilizing properties, over their own boundary.{48} At Hornchurch in
Essex, if we may trust a note given by Hone, an actual boar's head was
wrestled for on Christmas Day, and afterwards feasted upon at one of the
public-houses by the victor and his friends.{49}

One more feature of the Haxey celebration must be mentioned (it points
apparently to a human sacrifice): the fool, the morning after the game,
used to be "smoked" over a straw fire. "He was suspended above the fire
and swung backwards and forwards over it until almost suffocated; then
allowed to drop into the smouldering straw, which was well wetted, and to
scramble out as he could."{50}

Returning to the subject of football, I may here condense an |349|
account of a Welsh Christmas custom quoted by Sir Laurence Gomme, in his
book "The Village Community," from the _Oswestry Observer_ of March 2,
1887:--"In South Cardiganshire it seems that about eighty years ago the
population, rich and poor, male and female, of opposing parishes, turned
out on Christmas Day and indulged in the game of football with such
vigour that it became little short of a serious fight." Both in north and
south Wales the custom was found. At one place, Llanwenog near Lampeter,
there was a struggle between two parties with different traditions of
race. The Bros, supposed to be descendants from Irish people, occupied
the high ground of the parish; the Blaenaus, presumably pure-bred
Brythons, occupied the lowlands. After morning service on Christmas Day,
"the whole of the Bros and Blaenaus, rich and poor, male and female,
assembled on the turnpike road which divided the highlands from the
lowlands." The ball was thrown high in the air, "and when it fell Bros
and Blaenaus scrambled for its possession.... If the Bros, by hook or by
crook, could succeed in taking the ball up the mountain to their hamlet
of Rhyddlan they won the day, while the Blaenaus were successful if they
got the ball to their end of the parish at New Court." Many severe kicks
were given, and the whole thing was taken so keenly "that a Bro or a
Blaenau would as soon lose a cow from his cowhouse as the football from
his portion of the parish." There is plainly more than a mere pastime
here; the thing appears to have been originally a struggle between two
clans.{51}



Anciently the Carnival, with its merrymaking before the austerities of
Lent, was held to begin at the Epiphany. This was the case in Tyrol even
in the nineteenth century.{52} As a rule, however, the Carnival in Roman
Catholic countries is restricted to the last three days before Ash
Wednesday. The pagan origin of its mummeries and licence is evident, but
it is a spring rather than a winter festival, and hardly calls for
treatment here.

The Epiphany is in many places the end of Christmas. In Calvados,
Normandy, it is marked by bonfires; red flames mount |350| skywards,
and the peasants join hands, dance, and leap through blinding smoke and
cinders, shouting these rude lines:--

   "Àdieu les Rois
    Jusqu'à douze mois,
    Douze mois passés
    Les bougelées."{53}

Another French Epiphany _chanson_, translated by the Rev. R. L. Gales, is
a charming farewell to Christmas:--

   "Noël is leaving us,
    Sad 'tis to tell,
    But he will come again,
    Adieu, Noël.

    His wife and his children
    Weep as they go:
    On a grey horse
    They ride thro' the snow.



    The Kings ride away
    In the snow and the rain,
    After twelve months
    We shall see them again."{54}


POST-EPIPHANY FESTIVALS.

Though with Twelfth Day the high festival of Christmas generally ends,
later dates have sometimes been assigned as the close of the season. At
the old English court, for instance, the merrymaking was sometimes
carried on until Candlemas, while in some English country places it was
customary, even in the late nineteenth century, to leave Christmas
decorations up, in houses and churches, till that day.{55} The whole
time between Christmas and the Presentation in the Temple was thus
treated as sacred to the Babyhood of Christ; the withered evergreens
would keep alive memories of Christmas joys, even, sometimes, after
Septuagesima had struck the note of penitence.

Before we pass on to a short notice of Candlemas, we may |351| glance
at a few last sparks, so to speak, of the Christmas blaze, and then at
the English festivals which marked the resumption of work after the
holidays.

In Sweden Yule is considered to close with the Octave of the Epiphany,
January 13, "St. Knut's Day," the twentieth after Christmas.

   "Twentieth day Knut
    Driveth Yule out"

sing the old folks as the young people dance in a ring round the festive
Yule board, which is afterwards robbed of the viands that remain on it,
including the Yule boar. On this day a sort of mimic fight used to take
place, the master and servants of the house pretending to drive away the
guests with axe, broom, knife, spoon, and other implements.{56} The
name, "St. Knut's Day," is apparently due to the fact that in the laws of
Canute the Great (1017-36) it is commanded that there is to be no fasting
from Christmas to the Octave of the Epiphany.{57}

In England the day after the Epiphany was called St. Distaff's or Rock
Day (the word Rock is evidently the same as the German _Rocken_ =
distaff). It was the day when the women resumed their spinning after the
rest and gaiety of Christmas. From a poem of Herrick's it appears that
the men in jest tried to burn the women's flax, and the women in return
poured water on the men:--

   "Partly work, and partly play
    You must on St. Distaff's day:
    From the plough soon free your team,
    Then come home and fother them;
    If the maids a-spinning go,
    Burn the flax and fire the tow.



    Bring in pails of water then,
    Let the maids bewash the men;
    Give St. Distaff all the right,
    Then bid Christmas sport good night;
    And next morrow, every one
    To his own vocation."{58}

|352| A more notable occasion was Plough Monday, the first after
Twelfth Day. Men's labour then began again after the holidays.{59} We
have already seen that it is sometimes associated with the mummers'
plays. Often, however, its ritual is not developed into actual drama, and
the following account from Derbyshire gives a fairly typical description
of its customs:--

    "On Plough Monday the 'Plough bullocks' are occasionally seen; they
    consist of a number of young men from various farmhouses, who are
    dressed up in ribbons.... These young men yoke themselves to a
    plough, which they draw about, preceded by a band of music, from
    house to house, collecting money. They are accompanied by the Fool
    and Bessy; the fool being dressed in the skin of a calf, with the
    tail hanging down behind, and Bessy generally a young man in female
    attire. The fool carries an inflated bladder tied to the end of a
    long stick, by way of whip, which he does not fail to apply pretty
    soundly to the heads and shoulders of his team. When anything is
    given a cry of 'Largess!' is raised, and a dance performed round the
    plough. If a refusal to their application for money is made they not
    unfrequently plough up the pathway, door-stone, or any other portion
    of the premises they happen to be near."{60}

By Plough Monday we have passed, it seems probable, from New Year
festivals to one that originally celebrated the beginning of spring. Such
a feast, apparently, was kept in mid-February when ploughing began at
that season; later the advance of agriculture made it possible to shift
it forward to early January.{61}


CANDLEMAS.

Nearer to the original date of the spring feast is Candlemas, February 2;
though connected with Christmas by its ecclesiastical meaning, it is
something of a vernal festival.{62}

The feast of the Purification of the Virgin or Presentation of Christ in
the Temple was probably instituted by Pope Liberius at Rome in the fourth
century. The ceremonial to which it owes its popular name, Candlemas, is
the blessing of candles in church and the procession of the faithful,
carrying them lighted in their hands. During the blessing the "Nunc
dimittis" is chanted, |353| with the antiphon "Lumen ad revelationem
gentium et gloriam plebis tuae Israel," the ceremony being thus brought
into connection with the "light to lighten the Gentiles" hymned by
Symeon. Usener has however shown reason for thinking that the Candlemas
procession was not of spontaneous Christian growth, but was inspired by a
desire to Christianize a Roman rite, the _Amburbale_, which took place at
the same season and consisted of a procession round the city with lighted
candles.{63}

The Candlemas customs of the sixteenth century are thus described by
Naogeorgus:

   "Then numbers great of Tapers large, both men and women beare
    To Church, being halowed there with pomp, and dreadful words to heare.
    This done, eche man his Candell lightes, where chiefest seemeth hee,
    Whose taper greatest may be seene, and fortunate to bee,
    Whose Candell burneth cleare and brighte; a wondrous force and might
    Doth in these Candells lie, which if at any time they light,
    They sure beleve that neyther storme or tempest dare abide,
    Nor thunder in the skies be heard, nor any devils spide,
    Nor fearefull sprites that walke by night, nor hurts of frost or
          haile."{64}

Still, in many Roman Catholic regions, the candles blessed in church at
the Purification are believed to have marvellous powers. In Brittany,
Franche-Comté, and elsewhere, they are preserved and lighted in time of
storm or sickness.{65} In Tyrol they are lighted on important family
occasions such as christenings and funerals, as well as on the approach
of a storm{66}; in Sicily in time of earthquake or when somebody is
dying.{67}

In England some use of candles on this festival continued long after the
Reformation. In 1628 the Bishop of Durham gave serious offence by
sticking up wax candles in his cathedral at the Purification; "the number
of all the candles burnt that evening was two hundred and twenty, besides
sixteen torches; sixty of |354| those burning tapers and torches
standing upon and near the high Altar."{68} Ripon Cathedral, as late as
the eighteenth century, was brilliantly illuminated with candles on the
Sunday before the festival.{69} And, to come to domestic customs, at
Lyme Regis in Dorsetshire the person who bought the wood-ashes of a
family used to send a present of a large candle at Candlemas. It was
lighted at night, and round it there was festive drinking until its going
out gave the signal for retirement to rest.{70}

There are other British Candlemas customs connected with fire. In the
western isles of Scotland, says an early eighteenth-century writer, "as
Candlemas Day comes round, the mistress and servants of each family
taking a sheaf of oats, dress it up in woman's apparel, and after putting
it in a large basket, beside which a wooden club is placed, they cry
three times, 'Briid is come! Briid is welcome!' This they do just before
going to bed, and as soon as they rise in the morning, they look among
the ashes, expecting to see the impression of Briid's club there, which
if they do, they reckon it a true presage of a good crop and prosperous
year, and the contrary they take as an ill-omen."{71} Sir Laurence Gomme
regards this as an illustration of belief in a house-spirit whose
residence is the hearth and whose element is the ever-burning sacred
flame. He also considers the Lyme Regis custom mentioned above to be a
modernized relic of the sacred hearth-fire.{72}

Again, the feast of the Purification was the time to kindle a "brand"
preserved from the Christmas log. Herrick's Candlemas lines may be
recalled:--

   "Kindle the Christmas brand, and then
      Till sunne-set let it burne;
    Which quencht, then lay it up agen,
      Till Christmas next returne.

    Part must be kept wherewith to teend
      The Christmas Log next yeare;
    And where 'tis safely kept, the Fiend
      Can do no mischiefe there."{73}

|355| Candlemas Eve was the moment for the last farewells to Christmas;
Herrick sings:--

   "End now the White Loafe and the Pye,
     And let all sports with Christmas dye,"

and

   "Down with the Rosemary and Bayes,
       Down with the Misleto;
     Instead of Holly, now up-raise
       The greener Box for show.

     The Holly hitherto did sway;
       Let Box now domineere
     Until the dancing Easter Day,
       Or Easter's Eve appeare."{74}

An old Shropshire servant, Miss Burne tells us, was wont, when she took
down the holly and ivy on Candlemas Eve, to put snow-drops in their
place.{75} We may see in this replacing of the winter evergreens by the
delicate white flowers a hint that by Candlemas the worst of the winter
is over and gone; Earth has begun to deck herself with blossoms, and
spring, however feebly, has begun. With Candlemas we, like the older
English countryfolk, may take our leave of Christmas.

|356| |357|




CONCLUSION


The reader who has had patience to persevere will by now have gained some
idea of the manner in which Christmas is, and has been, kept throughout
Europe. We have traced the evolution of the festival, seen it take its
rise soon after the victory of the Catholic doctrine of Christ's person
at Nicea, and spread from Rome to every quarter of the Empire, not as a
folk-festival but as an ecclesiastical holy-day. We have seen the Church
condemn with horror the relics of pagan feasts which clung round the same
season of the year; then, as time went on, we have found the two
elements, pagan and Christian, mingling in some degree, the pagan losing
most of its serious meaning, and continuing mainly as ritual performed
for the sake of use and wont or as a jovial tradition, the Christian
becoming humanized, the skeleton of dogma clothed with warm flesh and
blood.

We have considered, as represented in poetry and liturgy, the strictly
ecclesiastical festival, the commemoration of the Nativity as the
beginning of man's redemption. We have seen how in the carols, the cult
of the _presepio_, and the religious drama, the Birth of the King of
Glory in the stable at midwinter has presented itself in concrete form to
the popular mind, calling up a host of human emotions, a crowd of quaint
and beautiful fancies. Lastly we have noted the survival, in the most
varied degrees of transformation, of things which are alien to
Christianity and in some cases seem to go back to very primitive stages
of thought and feeling. An antique reverence for the plant-world may lie,
as we have seen, beneath the familiar institution of the Christmas-tree,
some sort of animal-worship may be at the bottom of the |358|
beast-masks common at winter festivals, survivals of sacrifice may linger
in Christmas feasting, and in the family gatherings round the hearth may
be preserved a dim memory of ancient domestic rites.

Christmas, indeed, regarded in all its aspects, is a microcosm of
European religion. It reflects almost every phase of thought and feeling
from crude magic and superstition to the speculative mysticism of
Eckhart, from mere delight in physical indulgence to the exquisite
spirituality and tenderness of St. Francis. Ascetic and _bon-vivant_,
mystic and materialist, learned and simple, noble and peasant, all have
found something in it of which to lay hold. It is a river into which have
flowed tributaries from every side, from Oriental religion, from Greek
and Roman civilization, from Celtic, Teutonic, Slav, and probably
pre-Aryan, society, mingling their waters so that it is often hard to
discover the far-away springs.

We have seen how the Reformation broke up the great mediaeval synthesis
of paganism and Christianity, how the extremer forms of Protestantism
aimed at completely destroying Christmas, and how the general tendency of
modern civilization, with its scientific spirit, its popular education,
its railways, its concentration of the people in great cities, has been
to root out traditional beliefs and customs both Christian and pagan, so
that if we would seek for relics of the old things we must go to the
regions of Europe that are least industrially and intellectually
"advanced." Yet amongst the most sceptical and "enlightened" of moderns
there is generally a large residuum of tradition. "Emotionally," it has
been said, "we are hundreds of thousands of years old; rationally we are
embryos"{1}; and many people who deem themselves "emancipated" are
willing for once in the year to plunge into the stream of tradition,
merge themselves in inherited social custom, and give way to sentiments
and impressions which in their more reflective moments they spurn. Most
men are ready at Christmas to put themselves into an instinctive rather
than a rational attitude, to drink of the springs of wonder, and return
in some degree to earlier, less intellectual stages of human
development--to become in fact children again.

|359| Many elements enter into the modern Christmas. There is the
delight of its warmth and brightness and comfort against the bleak
midwinter. A peculiar charm of the northern Christmas lies in the thought
of the cold barred out, the home made a warm, gay place in contrast with
the cheerless world outside. There is the physical pleasure of "good
cheer," of plentiful eating and drinking, joined to, and partly resulting
in, a sense of goodwill and expansive kindliness towards the world at
large, a temporary feeling of the brotherhood of man, a desire that the
poor may for once in the year "have a good time." Here perhaps we may
trace the influence of the _Saturnalia_, with its dreams of the age of
gold, its exaltation of them of low degree. Mixed with a little
sentimental Christianity this is the Christmas of Dickens--the Christmas
which he largely helped to perpetuate in England.

Each nation, naturally, has fashioned its own Christmas. The English have
made it a season of solid material comfort, of good-fellowship and
"charity," with a slight flavour of soothing religion. The modern French,
sceptical and pagan, make little of Christmas, and concentrate upon the
secular celebration of the _jour de l'an_. For the Scandinavians
Christmas is above all a time of sport, recreation, good living, and
social gaiety in the midst of a season when little outdoor work can be
done and night almost swallows up day. The Germans, sentimental and
childlike, have produced a Christmas that is a very Paradise for children
and at which the old delight to play at being young again around the
Tree. For the Italians Christmas is centred upon the cult of the
_Bambino_, so fitted to their dramatic instincts, their love of display,
their strong parental affection. (How much of the sentiment that
surrounds the _presepio_ is, though religiously heightened, akin to the
delight of a child in its doll!) If the Germans may be called the good,
industrious, sentimental children of Europe, making the most of simple
things, the Italians are the lively, passionate, impulsive children,
loving gay clothes and finery; and the contrast shows in their keeping of
Christmas.

The modern Christmas is above all things a children's feast, and the
elders who join in it put themselves upon their children's |360| level.
We have noted how ritual acts, once performed with serious purpose, tend
to become games for youngsters, and have seen many an example of this
process in the sports and mummeries kept up by the elder folk for the
benefit of the children. We have seen too how the radiant figure of the
Christ Child has become a gift-bringer for the little ones. At no time in
the world's history has so much been made of children as to-day, and
because Christmas is their feast its lustre continues unabated in an age
upon which dogmatic Christianity has largely lost its hold, which laughs
at the pagan superstitions of its forefathers. Christmas is the feast of
beginnings, of instinctive, happy childhood; the Christian idea of the
Immortal Babe renewing weary, stained humanity, blends with the thought
of the New Year, with its hope and promise, laid in the cradle of Time.

|361| |362| |363|




NOTES AND BIBLIOGRAPHY


CHAPTER I.--INTRODUCTION

1.  #G. K. Chesterton# in #"The Daily News,"# Dec. 26, 1903.

2.  _Ibid._ Dec. 23, 1911.

3.  Cf. #J. E. Harrison, "Themis: a Study of the Social Origins of Greek
    Religion"# (Cambridge, 1912), 139, 184.

4.  Or plural _Weihnachten_. The name _Weihnachten_ was applied in five
    different ways in mediaeval Germany: (1) to Dec. 25, (2) to Dec.
    25-8, (3) to the whole Christmas week, (4) to Dec. 25 to Jan. 6, (5)
    to the whole time from Christmas to the Octave of the Epiphany. #G.
    Bilfinger, "Das germanische Julfest"# (Stuttgart, 1901), 39.

5.  #A. Tille, "Die Geschichte der deutschen Weihnacht"# (Leipsic, 1893),
    22. [Referred to as "D. W."]

6.  #H. Usener, "Das Weihnachtsfest"# (Kap. i., bis. iii. 2nd Edition,
    Bonn, 1911), 273 f.

7.  #L. Duchesne, "Christian Worship: its Origin and Evolution"# (Eng.
    Trans., Revised Edition, London, 1912), 257 f.

8.  #J. Hastings, "Encyclopædia of Religion and Ethics"# (Edinburgh,
    1910), iii. 601 f.

9.  #E. K. Chambers, "The Mediaeval Stage"# (Oxford, 1903), i. 244.
    [Referred to as "M. S."]

10. #A. Tille, "Yule and Christmas: their Place in the Germanic Year"#
    (London, 1899), 122. [Referred to as "Y. & C."]

11. _Ibid._ 164.

12. Tille, "D. W.," 21.

13. Tille, "Y. & C.," 203.

14. #K. Lake# in Hastings's "Encyclopædia" and in #"The Guardian,"# Dec.
    29, 1911; #F. C. Conybeare#, Preface to #"The Key of Truth, a Manual
    of the Paulician Church of Armenia"# (Oxford, 1898), clii. f.;
    Usener, 18 f.

15. Usener, 27 f.

16. _Ibid._ 31; #J. E. Harrison, "Prolegomena to the Study of Greek
    Religion"# (Cambridge, 1903), 550.

17. Harrison, "Prolegomena," 402 f., 524 f., 550. |364|

18. #Lake#, and #G. Rietschel, "Weihnachten in Kirche, Kunst and
    Volksleben"# (Bielefeld and Leipsic, 1902), 10.

19. Conybeare, lxxviii.

20. #A. Lupi, "Dissertazioni, lettere ed altre operette"# (Faenza, 1785),
    i. 219 f., mentioned in article "Nativity" in #T. K. Cheyne's
    "Encyclopædia Biblica"# (London, 1902), iii. 3346.

21. Chambers, "M. S.," i. 234.

22. _Ibid._ i. 235; #F. Cumont, "The Monuments of Mithra"# (Eng. Trans.,
    London, 1903), 190.

23. #G. Negri, "Julian the Apostate"# (Eng. Trans., London, 1905),
    i. 240 f.

24. Chambers, "M. S.," i. 235.

25. Duchesne, "Christian Worship," 265.

26. Tille, "Y. & C.," 146.


PART I.--THE CHRISTIAN FEAST


CHAPTER II.--CHRISTMAS POETRY (I)

1.  See especially for Latin, German, and English hymnody #J. Julian, "A
    Dictionary of Hymnology"# (New Edition, London, 1907), and the
    #Historical Edition of "Hymns Ancient and Modern"# (London, 1909).

2.  #H. C. Beeching, "A Book of Christmas Verse"# (London, 1895), 3.

3.  Beeching, 8.

4.  #A. Gastoué, "Noël"# (Paris, 1907), 38.

5.  #R. W. Church, "St. Anselm"# (London, 1870), 6.

6.  _Ibid._ 3 f.

7.  #W. R. W. Stephens, "The English Church from the Norman Conquest to
    the Accession of Edward I."# (London, 1901), 309.

8.  #W. Sandys, "Christmastide: its History, Festivities, and Carols"#
    (London, n.d.), 216; #E. Rickert, "Ancient English Carols.
    MCCCC-MDCC"# (London, 1910), 133.

9.  For the Franciscan influence on poetry and art see: #Vernon Lee,
    "Renaissance Fancies and Studies"# (London, 1895); #H. Thode, "Franz
    von Assisi und die Anfänge der Kunst der Renaissance in Italien"#
    (Berlin, 1885); #A. Macdonell, "Sons of Francis"# (London, 1902); #J.
    A. Symonds, "The Renaissance in Italy. Italian Literature,"# Part I.
    (New Edition, London, 1898).

10. #Thomas of Celano, "Lives of St. Francis"# (Eng. Trans. by A. G.
    Ferrers Howell, London, 1908), 84.

11. #P. Robinson, "Writings of St. Francis"# (London, 1906), 175.

12. #"Le poesie spirituali del B. Jacopone da Todi,"# con annotationi di
    Fra Francesco Tresatti (Venice, 1617), 266.

13. _Ibid._ 275.

14. _Ibid._ 867.

15. #"Stabat Mater speciosa,"# trans. and ed. by J. M. Neale (London,
    1866). |365|

16. For German Christmas poetry see, besides Julian: #Hoffmann von
    Fallersleben, "Geschichte des deutschen Kirchenliedes bis auf Luthers
    Zeit"# (2nd Edition, Hanover, 1854); #P. Wackernagel, "Das deutsche
    Kirchenlied"# (Leipsic, 1867); and #C. Winkworth, "Christian Singers
    of Germany"# (London, n.d.).

17. #R. M. Jones, "Studies in Mystical Religion"# (London, 1909), 235,
    237.

18. #"Meister Eckharts Schriften und Predigten,"# edited by H. Buttner
    (Leipsic, 1903), i. 44.

19. Translation by C. Winkworth, "Christian Singers," 84. German text in
    Wackernagel, ii. 302 f.

20. #"Deutsches Weihnachtsbuch"# (Hamburg-Grossborstel, 1907), 125.

21. #"A Compendious Book of Godly and Spiritual Songs,"# reprinted from
    the Edition of 1567 by A. F. Mitchell (Edinburgh and London, 1897),
    53. This translation is abridged and Protestantized. The mediaeval
    German text, which is partly addressed to the Virgin, is given in
    #Hoffmann von Fallersleben, "In Dulci Jubilo"# (Hanover, 1854), 46.
    For the music see #G. R. Woodward, "The Cowley Carol Book"# (New
    Edition, London, 1909), 20 f. [a work peculiarly rich in old German
    airs].

22. #K. Weinhold, "Weihnacht-Spiele und Lieder aus Süddeutschland und
    Schlesien"# (2nd Edition, Vienna, 1875), 385.

23. _Ibid._ 396. [For help in the translation of German dialect I am
    indebted to Dr. M. A. Mügge.]

24. _Ibid._ 400.

25. _Ibid._ 417.

26. E. K. Chambers, essay on "Some Aspects of Mediæval Lyric" in #"Early
    English Lyrics,"# chosen by #E. K. Chambers and F. Sidgwick# (London,
    1907), 290. [Twenty-five of Awdlay's carols were printed by Messrs.
    #Chambers and Sidgwick# in #"The Modern Language Review"#
    (Cambridge), Oct., 1910, and Jan., 1911.]

27. _Ibid._ 293.

28. Quoted by #J. J. Jusserand, "A Literary History of the English
    People"# (2nd Edition, London, 1907), i. 218.

29. Rickert, 6; Beeching, 13.

30. No. lv. in Chambers and Sidgwick, "Early English Lyrics."

31. No. lix., _ibid._

32. No. lxi., _ibid._

33. No. lxx., _ibid._

34. No. lxvii., _ibid._

35. No. lxiii., _ibid._

36. Rickert, 67.


CHAPTER III.--CHRISTMAS POETRY (II)

1.  #Noël Hervé, "Les Noëls français"# (Niort, 1905), Gastoué, 57 f.; #G.
    Gregory Smith, "The Transition Period"# (Edinburgh and London, 1900),
    217.

2.  Gregory Smith, 217.

3.  #H. Lemeignen, "Vieux Noëls composés en l'honneur de la Naissance de
    Notre-Seigneur Jésus-Christ"# (Nantes, 1876), iii. 2 f.

4.  _Ibid._ i. 10, 11.

5.  _Ibid._ ii. 93, 95.

6.  Hervé, 46.

7.  Lemeignen, i. 55. |366|

8.  Lemeignen, i. 29.

9.  #"Les Vieux Noëls,"# in #"Nouvelle Bibliothèque Populaire"#
    (published by Henri Gautier, 55 Quai des Grands Augustins, Paris).

10. Lemeignen, i. 93.

11. #H. J. L. J. Massé, "A Book Of Old Carols"# (London, 1910), i. 21.

12. Hervé, 86.

13. Lemeignen, i. 71.

14. "Hymns Ancient and Modern" (Historical Edition), 79. Translation is
    No. 58 in Ordinary Edition.

15. Hervé, 132.

16. A great number of these _villancicos_ and _romances_ may be found in
    #Justo de Sancha, "Romancero y Cancionero Sagrados"# (Madrid,
    1855, vol. 35 of Rivadeneyra's Library of Spanish Authors), and there
    are some good examples in #J. N. Böhl de Faber, "Rimas Antiguas
    Castellanas"# (Hamburg, 1823).

17. Böhl de Faber, ii. 36.

18. #F. Caballero, "Elia y La Noche de Navidad"# (Leipsic, 1864), 210.

19. #A. de Gubernatis, "Storia Comparata degli Usi Natalizi"# (Milan,
    1878), 90.

20. These three verses are taken from #Countess Martinengo-Cesaresco's#
    charming translation of the poem, in her #"Essays in the Study of
    Folk-Songs"# (London, 1886), 304 f.

21. Martinengo, "Folk-Songs," 302 f.

22. Latin text in Tille, "D. W.," 311; Italian game in De Gubernatis, 93.

23. Hervé, 115 f.

24. #W. Hone, "The Ancient Mysteries Described"# (London, 1823), 103.

25. _Ibid._ 103.

26. See Note 11.

27. #D. Hyde, "Religious Songs of Connacht"# (London, 1906), ii. 225 f.

28. #"The Vineyard"# (London), Dec., 1910, 144.

29. "Deutsches Weihnachtsbuch," 120 f.

30. "A Compendious Book of Godly and Spiritual Songs," 49 f. (spelling
    here modernized); Rickert, 82 f.

31. "Deutsches Weihnachtsbuch," 123, and most German Protestant
    hymnbooks.

32. Translation by Miles Coverdale, in Rickert, 192 f.

33. No. 5 in #Paulus Gerhardt, "Geistliche Lieder,"# ed. by P.
    Wackernagel and W. Tümpel (9th Edition, Gütersloh, 1907).

34. Translation by #C. Winkworth# in #"Lyra Germanica"# (New Edition,
    London, 1869), ii. 13 f.

35. "Deutsches Weihnachtsbuch," 128 f.

36. Translation (last verse altered) in #"The British Herald"# (London),
    Sept., 1866, 329.

37. #"Christmas Carols New and Old,"# the words edited by #H. R.
    Bramley#, the music edited by #Sir John Stainer# (London, n.d.).

38. Beeching, 27 f.

39. _Ibid._ 67.

40. _Ibid._ 49.

41. _Ibid._ 76.

42. _Ibid._ 48.

43. _Ibid._ 45.

44. _Ibid._ 42 f. |367|

45. Beeching, 85 f.

46. #Selwyn Image, "Poems and Carols"# (London, 1894), 25.

47. #G. K. Chesterton# in #"The Commonwealth"# (London), Dec., 1902, 353.


CHAPTER IV.--CHRISTMAS IN LITURGY AND POPULAR DEVOTION

1.  Translation, "Creator of the starry height," in "Hymns A. and M."
    (Ordinary Edition), No. 45.

2.  #J. Dowden, "The Church Year and Kalendar"# (Cambridge, 1910), 76 f.

3.  #"Rational ou Manuel des divins Offices de Guillaume Durand, Évèque
    de Mende au treizième siècle,"# traduit par #M. C. Barthélemy#
    (Paris, 1854), iii. 155 f.

4.  See translation of the Great O's in "The English Hymnal," No. 734.

5.  Barthélemy, iii. 220 f.

6.  #D. Rock, "The Church of Our Fathers"# (London, 1853), vol. iii. pt.
    ii. 214.

7.  #J. K. Huysmans, "L'Oblat"# (Paris, 1903), 194.

8.  Gastoué, 44 f.

9.  #E. G. C. F. Atchley, "Ordo Romanus Primus"# (London, 1905), 71.

10. #"The Pilgrimage of S. Silvia of Aquitaine"# (Eng. Trans. by J. H.
    Bernard, London, 1891), 50 f.

11. #S. D. Ferriman# in #"The Daily News,"# Dec. 25, 1911.

12. #G. Bonaccorsi, "Il Natale: appunti d'esegesi e di storia"# (Rome,
    1903), 73.

13. Gastoué, 41 f.

14. Bonaccorsi, 75.

15. #H. Malleson and M. A. R. Tuker, "Handbook to Christian and
    Ecclesiastical Rome"# (London, 1897), pt. ii. 211.

16. #Th. Bentzon, "Christmas In France"# in #"The Century Magazine"# (New
    York), Dec., 1901, 170 f.

17. #L. von Hörmann, "Tiroler Volksleben"# (Stuttgart, 1909), 232.

18. #M. J. Quin, "A Visit to Spain"# (2nd Edition, London, 1824), 126 f.

19. #"Madrid in 1835,"# by a #Resident Officer# (London, 1836), i. 395 f.

20. #W. S. Walsh, "Curiosities of Popular Customs"# (London, 1898), 237.

21. #G. Pitrè, "Spettacoli e feste popolari siciliane"# (Palermo, 1880),
    444.

22. Tille, "D. W.," 70 f.

23. #F. H. Woods, "Sweden and Norway"# (London, 1882), 209; #L. Lloyd,
    "Peasant Life in Sweden"# (London, 1870), 201 f.

24. #J. E. Vaux, "Church Folklore"# (London, 1894), 222 f.

25. #M. Trevelyan, "Folk-Lore and Folk-Stories of Wales"# (London, 1909),
    28.

26. Vaux, 262 f.

27. #R. F. Littledale, "Offices from the Service-Books of the Holy
    Eastern Church"# (London, 1863), 174 f.

28. #[Sir] A. J. Evans, "Christmas and Ancestor Worship in the Black
    Mountain,"# in #"Macmillan's Magazine"# (London), vol. xliii., 1881,
    228.

29. Duchesne, 273.

30. Chambers, "M. S.," i. 245.

31. #"The Roman Breviary,"# translated by #John, Marquess of Bute# (New
    Edition Edinburgh and London, 1908), 186.

32. See announcement in #"The Roman Mail"# in Jan., 1912. |368|

33. #Mary Hamilton, "Greek Saints and their Festivals"# (London, 1910),
    113 f.

34. #H. Holloway, "An Eastern Epiphany Service"# in #"Pax"# (the Magazine
    of the Caldey Island Benedictines), Dec., 1910.

35. Hamilton, 119 f.

36. Holloway, as above.

37. #F. H. E. Palmer, "Russian Life in Town and Country"# (London, 1901),
    176 f.

38. Thomas of Celano, trans. by Howell, 82 f.

39. #Countess Martinengo-Cesaresco, "Puer Parvulus"# in #"The Outdoor
    Life in the Greek and Roman Poets"# (London, 1911), 248.

40. Chambers, "M. S.," ii. 41.

41. Bonaccorsi, 85; Usener, 298.

42. Usener, 290.

43. _Ibid._ 295, 299.

44. Rietschel, 55.

45. _Ibid._ 56 f.

46. _Ibid._ 60.

47. _Ibid._ 69 f.; Tille, "D. W.," 59 f.

48. Music from #Trier "Gesangbuch"# (1911), No. 18, where a very much
    weakened text is given. Text from Weinhold, 114. Another form of the
    air is given in "The Cowley Carol Book," No. 36.

49. Text and music in Massé, i. 6.

50. Tille, "D. W.," 60.

51. _Ibid._ 61 f.

52. _Ibid._ 63.

53. #Thomas Naogeorgus, "The Popish Kingdome,"# Englyshed by Barnabe
    Googe, 1570 (ed. by R. C. Hope, London, 1880), 45.

54. Tille, "D. W.," 68.

55. _Ibid._ 68.

56. Hörmann, "Tiroler Volksleben," 235.

57. _Ibid._ 235.

58. Tille, "D. W.," 64.

59. Rietschel, 75.

60. Martinengo, "Outdoor Life," 249.

61. #Lady Morgan, "Italy"# (New Edition, London, 1821), iii. 72.

62. #Matilde Serao, "La Madonna e i Santi"# (Naples, 1902), 223 f.

63. #L. Caico, "Sicilian Ways and Days"# (London, 1910), 192 f.

64. Information kindly given to the author by Mrs. C. G. Crump.

65. Information derived by the author from a resident in Messina.

66. Serao, _see_ Note 62.

67. #W. H. D. Rouse, "Religious Tableaux in Italian Churches,"# in
    #"Folk-Lore"# (London), vol. v., 1894, 6 f.

68. Morgan, iii. 76 f.

69. Bonaccorsi, 45 f.

70. #A. J. C. Hare, "Walks in Rome"# (11th Edition, London, 1883), 157.

71. Martinengo, "Outdoor Life," 253; Bonaccorsi, 110 f.; #R. Ellis
    Roberts, "A Roman Pilgrimage"# (London, 1911), 185 f.

72. #H. J. Rose, "Untrodden Spain"# (London, 1875), 276.

73. See Note 18 to Chapter III. |369|

74. #T. F. Thiselton Dyer, "British Popular Customs"# (London, 1876),
    464.

75. Vaux, 216.

76. Dyer, 464.

77. Cf. Chambers, "M. S.," i. 120.


CHAPTER V.--CHRISTMAS DRAMA

1.  This account of the mediaeval Christmas drama owes much to Chambers,
    "The Mediaeval Stage," especially chaps. xviii. to xx., and to #W.
    Creizenach, "Geschichte des neueren Dramas"# (Halle a/S.,
    1893), vol. i., bks. ii.-iv. See also: #Karl Pearson#, essay on #"The
    German Passion Play"# in #"The Chances of Death, and other Studies in
    Evolution"# (London, 1897), ii. 246 f.; #E. Du Méril, "Origines
    latines du théâtre moderne"# (Paris, 1849); #L. Petit de Julleville,
    "Histoire du théâtre en France au moyen âge. I. Les Mystères"#
    (Paris, 1880); and other works cited later.

2.  Chambers, "M. S.," ii. 8 f.

3.  _Ibid._ ii. 11.

4.  Du Méril, 147.

5.  Chambers, "M. S.," ii. 52.

6.  Text in Du Méril, 153 f.

7.  Chambers, "M. S.," ii. 44.

8.  _Ibid._ ii. 52 f.

9.  On the English plays see: Chambers, "M. S.," chaps. xx. and xxi.; #A.
    W. Ward, "A History of English Dramatic Literature"# (London,
    1875), vol. i. chap. i.; Creizenach, vol. i.; #K. L. Bates, "The
    English Religious Drama"# (London, 1893).

10. Chambers, "M. S.," ii. 129, 131, 139.

11. #"Ludus Coventriae,"# ed. by J. O. Halliwell (London, 1841), 146 f.

12. #"York Plays,"# ed. by L. Toulmin Smith (Oxford, 1885), 114 f.

13. #"The Chester Plays,"# ed. by T. Wright (London, 1843), 137.

14. _Ibid._ 138.

15. _Ibid._ 143.

16. #"The Towneley Plays,"# ed. by George England, with Introduction by
    A. W. Pollard (London, 1897). The first Shepherds' Play is on p.
    100 f., the second on p. 116 f.

17. Text from Chambers and Sidgwick, "Early English Lyrics," 124 f.

18. Text in #T. Sharp, "A Dissertation on the Pageants or Dramatic
    Mysteries anciently performed at Coventry"# (Coventry, 1825).

19. Petit de Julleville, ii. 36 f and 431 f.

20. _Ibid._ ii. 620 f.; #"Les marguerites de la Marguerite des
    princesses,"# ed. from the edition of 1547 by F. Frank (Paris, 1873),
    ii. 1 f.

21. Petit de Julleville, i. 441.

22. _Ibid._ i. 455. Text in Lemeignen, ii. 1 f.

23. Petit de Julleville, i. 79 f.

24. #P. Sébillot, "Coutumes populaires de la Haute-Bretagne"# (Paris,
    1886), 177.

25. Martinengo, "Folk-Songs," xxxiii. f. In her essay, "Puer Parvulus,"
    in "The Outdoor Life," 260 f., the Countess gives a charming
    description of a somewhat similar Piedmontese play.

26. Barthélemy, iii. 411 f. |370|

27. Rietschel, 88 f.; #O. von Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, "Das festliche
    Jahr"# (2nd Edition, Leipsic, 1898), 439 f.

28. Rietschel, 92 f.

29. An interesting book on popular Christmas plays is #F. Vogt, "Die
    schlesischen Weihnachtspiele"# (Leipsic, 1901).

30. Weinhold, 94.

31. _Ibid._ 95 f.

32. _Ibid._ 100 f.

33. _Ibid._ 96 f.

34. See Chambers, "M. S.," ii. 91 f.; Symonds, "Renaissance," iv. 242,
    272 f.; #A. d'Ancona, "Origini del Teatro italiano"# (Florence,
    1877), i. 87 f.

35. D'Ancona, "Origini," i. 126 f.

36. #A. d'Ancona, "Sacre Rappresentazioni dei secoli xiv, xv e xvi"#
    (Florence, 1872), i. 191 f.

37. _Ibid._ i. 192.

38. Latin original quoted by D'Ancona, "Origini," i. 91, and Chambers,
    "M. S.," ii. 93.

39. Creizenach, i. 347.

40. #J. Fitzmaurice-Kelly, "A History of Spanish Literature"# (London,
    1898), 113.

41. #Juan del Encina, "Teatro Completo"# (Madrid, 1893), 3 f., 137 f.

42. See #G. Ticknor, "History of Spanish Literature"# (6th American
    Edition, Boston, 1888), ii. 283 f.

43. _Ibid._ ii. 208.

44. #"Archivio per lo studio delle tradizioni popolari"# (Palermo and
    Turin), vol. xxi., 1902, 381.

45. Pitrè, 448.

46. Fernan Caballero, "Elia y La Noche de Navidad," 222 f.

47. Lloyd, 213 f.

48. #H. F. Feilberg, "Jul"# (Copenhagen, 1904), ii. 242 f.

49. #E. Cortet, "Essai sur les fêtes religieuses"# (Paris, 1867), 38.

50. Sébillot, 215.

51. Feilberg, ii. 250; Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 31 f.; #T. Stratilesco,
    "From Carpathian to Pindus: Pictures of Roumanian Country Life"#
    (London, 1906), 195 f.; #E. van Norman, "Poland: the Knight among
    Nations"# (London and New York, 3rd Edition, n.d.), 302; #S. Graham,
    "A Vagabond in the Caucasus. With some Notes of his Experiences among
    the Russians"# (London, 1910), 28.

52. Translation in #Karl Hase, "Miracle Plays and Sacred Dramas"# (Eng.
    Trans., London, 1880), 9; German text in Weinhold, 132.

53. Hörmann, "Tiroler Volksleben," 247 f.

54. Graham, 28.

55. Stratilesco, 195 f.

56. _Ibid._ 355 f.

57. Van Norman, 302.

58. Cortet, 42.

59. Barthélemy, iii. 411 f.

60. #Madame Calderon de la Barca, "Life in Mexico"# (London, 1843),
    237 f.


POSTSCRIPT

1.  #E. Underhill, "Mysticism: A Study in the Nature and Development of
    Man's Spiritual Consciousness"# (London, 1911), 305. |371|


PART II.--PAGAN SURVIVALS


CHAPTER VI.--PRE-CHRISTIAN WINTER FESTIVALS

1.  #Karl Pearson#, essay on #"Woman as Witch"# in #"The Chances of Death
    and other Studies in Evolution"# (London, 1897), ii. 16.

2.  Cf. #J. G. Frazer, "The Dying God"# (London, 1911), 269.

3.  #J. A. MacCulloch, "The Religion of the Ancient Celts"# (Edinburgh,
    1911), 278.

4.  Frazer, "Dying God," 266.

5.  #E. Anwyl, "Celtic Religion in Pre-Christian Times"# (London, 1906),
    1 f.

6.  _Ibid._ 20; cf. #E. K. Chambers, "The Mediaeval Stage"# (Oxford,
    1903), i. 100 f. [Referred to as "M. S."]

7.  #W. Robertson Smith, "Lectures on the Religion of the Semites"# (New
    Edition, London, 1894), 16.

8.  Chambers, "M. S.," i. 236; #W. W. Fowler, "The Roman Festivals of the
    Period of the Republic"# (London, 1899), 272.

9.  #"The Works of Lucian of Samosata"# (Eng. Trans. by H. W. and F. G.
    Fowler, Oxford, 1905), iv. 108 f.

10. #John Brand, "Observations on Popular Antiquities"# (New Edition,
    with the Additions of Sir Henry Ellis, London, Chatto & Windus,
    1900), 283.

11. "Works of Lucian," iv. 114 f.

12. _Ibid._ iv. 109.

13. #J. G. Frazer, "The Golden Bough"# (2nd Edition, London, 1900), iii.
    138 f., and #"The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kingship"# (London,
    1911), ii. 310 f.

14. #W. W. Fowler, "The Religious Experience of the Roman People"#
    (London, 1911), 107, 112.

15. Fowler, "Roman Festivals," 268, and "Religious Experience," 107; #C.
    Bailey, "The Religion of Ancient Rome"# (London, 1907), 70.

16. Chambers, "M. S.," i. 237 f.; Fowler, "Roman Festivals," 278.

17. Quoted from #"Libanii Opera,"# ed. by Reiske, i. 256 f., by #G.
    Bilfinger, "Das germanische Julfest"# (vol. ii. of "Untersuchungen
    über die Zeitrechnung der alten Germanen," Stuttgart, 1901), 41 f.

18. "Libanii Opera," iv. 1053 f., quoted by Bilfinger, 43 f.

19. Chambers, "M. S.," i. 237 f., 258.

20. #A. Tille, "Yule and Christmas"# (London, 1899), 96. [Referred to as
    "Y. & C."]

21. #J. C. Lawson, "Modern Greek Folklore and Ancient Greek Religion"#
    (Cambridge, 1910), 221 f. Cf. #M. Hamilton, "Greek Saints and their
    Festivals"# (London, 1910), 98.

22. Chambers, "M. S.," ii. 290 f.

23. Latin text in Chambers, "M. S.," ii. 297 f.

24. _Ibid._ i. 245.

25. Tille, "Y. & C.," 88 f.; Chambers, "M. S.," ii. 303 f. |372|

26. Tille, "Y. & C.," throughout; Chambers, "M. S.," i. 288 f.;
    #Chantepie de la Saussaye, "The Religion of the Ancient Teutons"#
    (Boston, 1902), 382. Cf. #O. Schrader#, in #Hastings's "Encyclopædia
    of Religion and Ethics"# (Edinburgh, 1909), ii. 47 f.

27. MacCulloch, "Religion of the Ancient Celts," 258 f. Cf. Chambers, "M.
    S.," i. 228, 234.

28. Tille, "Y. & C.," 203.

29. #[Sir] A. J. Evans, "Christmas and Ancestor Worship in the Black
    Mountain,"# in #"Macmillan's Magazine"# (London), vol. xliii., 1881,
    363.

30. Chambers, "M. S.," i. 247.

31. Tille, "Y. & C.," 64.

32. Chambers, "M. S.," i. 232.

33. _Ibid._ i. 130; W. Robertson Smith, 213 f.

34. Frazer, "Dying God," 129 f.

35. See #N. W. Thomas# in #"Folk-Lore"# (London), vol. xi., 1900, 227 f.

36. Chambers, "M. S.," i. 132 f.

37. W. Robertson Smith, 437 f.

38. #J. E. Harrison, "Themis: A Study of the Social Origins of Greek
    Religion"# (Cambridge, 1912), 67. Cf. #E. F. Ames, "The Psychology of
    Religious Experience"# (London and Boston, 1910), 95 f.

39. Harrison, "Themis," 137.

40. _Ibid._ 110.

41. #S. Reinach, "Cultes, mythes, et religions"# (Paris, 1905), i. 93.
    For the theory that totems were originally food-objects, see Ames,
    118 f.

42. Chambers, "M. S.," i. 133.

43. _Ibid._ i. 105 f., 144.

44. Harrison, "Themis," 507.

45. W. Robertson Smith, 255.

46. #Bede, "Historia Ecclesiastica,"# lib. i. cap. 30. Latin text in
    Bede's Works, edited by J. A. Giles (London, 1843), vol. ii. p. 142.

47. Frazer, "Golden Bough," iii. 143.

48. #Jerome, "Comm. in Isaiam,"# lxv. 11. Latin text in Chambers, "M. S.,"
    ii. 294.

49. Chambers, "M. S.," i. 266.

50. Latin text in Chambers, "M. S.," ii. 306.

51. #Bede, "De Temporum Ratione,"# cap. 15, quoted by Chambers, i. 231.
    See also Tille, "Y. & C.," 152 f., and Bilfinger, 131, for other
    views.

52. Frazer, "Golden Bough," iii. 70 f.

53. See Frazer, "Magic Art," i. 52.

54. Cf. Frazer, "Golden Bough," iii. 300 f.

55. Latin text in #H. Usener, "Religionsgeschichtliche Untersuchungen,"#
    part ii. (Bonn, 1889), 43 f. See also #A. Tille, "Die Geschichte der
    deutschen Weihnacht"# (Leipsic, 1893), 44 f. [Referred to as "D. W."]

56. #Philip Stubbs, "Anatomie Of Abuses"# (Reprint of 3rd Edition of
    1585, edited by W. B. Turnbull, London, 1836), 205.

57. Quoted by #J. Ashton, "A righte Merrie Christmasse!!"#
    (London, n.d.), 26 f.

58. _Ibid._ 27 f. |373|


CHAPTER VII.--ALL HALLOW TIDE TO MARTINMAS

1.  #R. Chambers, "The Book Of Days"# (London, n.d.), ii. 538 [referred
    to as "B. D."]; #T. F. Thiselton Dyer, "British Popular Customs"#
    (London, 1876), 396 f.

2.  #[Sir] J. Rhys, "Lectures on the Origin and Growth of Religion as
    illustrated by Celtic Heathendom"# (London, 1888), 514, #"Celtic
    Folklore: Welsh and Manx"# (Oxford, 1901), i. 321.

3.  Tille, "Y. & C.," 57 f.

4.  Rhys, "Celtic Folklore," i. 315 f.

5.  #J. Dowden, "The Church Year and Kalendar"# (Cambridge, 1910), 23 f.

6.  Cf. #J. G. Frazer, "Adonis, Attis, Osiris"# (2nd Edition, London,
    1907), 315 f.

7.  #E. B. Tylor, "Primitive Culture"# (3rd Edition, London, 1891),
    ii. 38.

8.  Frazer, "Adonis," 310.

9.  _Ibid._ 312 f.

10. #P. Sébillot, "Coutumes populaires de la Haute-Bretagne"# (Paris,
    1886), 206.

11. #L. von Hörmann, "Tiroler Volksleben"# (Stuttgart, 1909), 193.

12. Frazer, "Adonis," 315.

13. #G. Pitrè, "Spettacoli e feste popolari siciliane"# (Palermo, 1880),
    393 f. Cf. #H. F. Feilberg, "Jul"# (Copenhagen, 1904), i. 67.

14. #"Notes and Queries"# (London), 3rd Series, vol. i. 446; Dyer, 408.

15. Frazer, "Adonis," 250.

16. Dyer, 405 f.

17. _Notes and Queries_, 1st Series, vol. iv. 381; Dyer, 407.

18. #C. S. Burne and G. F. Jackson, "Shropshire Folk-Lore"# (London,
    1883), 383.

19. _Ibid._ 381 f.

20. Quoted by Dyer, 410.

21. #O. von Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, "Das festliche Jahr der germanischen
    Völker"# (2nd Edition, Leipsic, 1898), 390.

22. #"Archivio per lo studio delle tradizioni popolari"#
    (Palermo), vol. viii. 574.

23. Hörmann, "Tiroler Volksleben," 189 f.

24. Frazer, "Adonis," 303 f.

25. _Ibid._ 306 f.

26. Evans, 363 f.

27. Dyer, 394.

28. _Ibid._ 398.

29. _Ibid._ 394. Cf. Chambers, "B. D.," ii. 519 f.

30. Dyer, 395.

31. _Ibid._ 399.

32. _Ibid._ 397 f.

33. #S. O. Addy, "Household Tales, with other Traditional Remains.
    Collected in the Counties of Lincoln, Derby, and Nottingham"# (London
    and Sheffield, 1895), 82.

34. _Ibid._ 85.

35. #W. Henderson, "Folk Lore of the Northern Counties of England and the
    Borders"# (2nd Edition, London, 1879), 101.

36. Dyer, 399.

37. _Ibid._ 403. |374|

38. Rhys, "Celtic Folklore," i. 321, "Celtic Heathendom," 514.

39. Rhys, "Celtic Folklore," i. 328.

40. MacCulloch, "Religion of the Ancient Celts," 259, 261.

41. Rhys, "Celtic Heathendom," 515.

42. _Ibid._ 515.

43. _Ibid._ 515, "Celtic Folklore," i. 225.

44. MacCulloch, "Religion of the Ancient Celts," 262.

45. Brand, 211.

46. Dyer, 402.

47. _Ibid._ 394 f.

48. Frazer, "Golden Bough," iii. 299 f.

49. Burne and Jackson, 389.

50. Dyer, 409.

51. #J. Grimm, "Teutonic Mythology"# (Eng. Trans. by J. S. Stallybrass,
    London, 1880-8), i. 47.

52. #K. Weinhold, "Weihnacht-Spiele und Lieder aus Süddeutschland und
    Schlesien"# (Vienna, 1875), 6.

53. #U. Jahn, "Die deutschen Opfergebräuche bei Ackerbau und Viehzucht"#
    (Breslau, 1884), 262.

54. _Ibid._ 262.

55. Weinhold, 6.

56. Dyer, 472.

57. _Notes and Queries_, 1st Series, vol. i. 173; Dyer, 486.

58. Weinhold, 7.

59. _Ibid._ 10.

60. Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 449.

61. Chambers, "M. S.," i. 166.

62. Dyer, 480.

63. Feilberg, ii. 228 f.

64. Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 393.

65. #Tacitus, "Annales,"# lib. i. cap. 50, quoted by Tille, "Y. & C.,"
    25.

66. Tille, "Y. & C.," 26.

67. _Ibid._ 52.

68. _Ibid._ 27.

69. Brand, 216 f.

70. Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 401 f. For German Martinmas feasting, see also
    Jahn, 229 f.

71. Grimm, iv. 1838, for Danish custom; Jahn, 235 f., for German.

72. #"The Folk-Lore Record"# (London), vol. iv., 1881, 107; Dyer, 420.

73. MacCulloch, "Religion of the Ancient Celts," 260.

74. Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 403.

75. Jahn, 246 f.

76. _Ibid._ 246; Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 403.

77. Tille, "Y. & C.," 34 f.

78. Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 404; Jahn, 250.

79. Jahn, 247.

80. Angela Nardo-Cibele in _Archivio trad. pop._, vol. v. 238 f., for
    Venetia; Pitrè, 411 f., for Sicily.

81. Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 405. |375|

82. Jahn, 240.

83. _Ibid._ 241 f.

84. _Ibid._ 241.

85. Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 404.

86. Weinhold, 7.

87. Chambers, "M. S.," i. 268; Weinhold, 7; Tille, "D. W.," 25.

88. Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, illustration facing p. 406.

89. _Ibid._ 405.

90. _Ibid._ 404.

91. _Ibid._ 410; Tille, "D. W.," 26 f.; #W. Mannhardt, "Der Baumkultus
    der Germanen und ihrer Nachbarstämme"# (Berlin, 1875. Vol. i. of
    "Wald- und Feldkulte"), 273.

92. Cf. Mannhardt, "Baumkultus," 303, and Reinach, i. 180.

93. _Archivio trad. pop._, vol. v. 238 f., 358 f.

94. Mannhardt, "Baumkultus," 274.


CHAPTER VIII.--ST. CLEMENT TO ST. THOMAS

1.  Dyer, 423.

2.  _Notes and Queries_, 1st Series, vol. viii. 618; Dyer, 425.

3.  Brand, 222 f.

4.  Henderson, "Folk Lore of the Northern Counties," 97.

5.  _Notes and Queries_, 3rd Series, vol. iv. 492; Dyer, 423.

6.  Dyer, 425.

7.  Brand, 222.

8.  _Ibid._ 223.

9.  _Notes and Queries_, 2nd Series, vol. v. 47; Dyer, 427.

10. Dyer, 426 f.

11. Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 415.

12. #J. N. Raphael# in #"The Daily Express,"# Nov. 28, 1911.

13. Dyer, 430.

14. _Ibid._ 429.

15. Tille, "D. W.," 148.

16. #B. Thorpe, "Northern Mythology"# (London, 1852), iii. 143.

17. _Ibid._ iii. 144.

18. Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 416 f. Cf. Grimm, iv. 1800.

19. Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 417. Cf. Thorpe, iii. 145.

20. Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 418.

21. Thorpe, iii. 145.

22. #F. S. Krauss, "Sitte und Brauch der Südslaven"# (Vienna, 1885), 179.

23. #T. Stratilesco, "From Carpathian to Pindus: Pictures of Roumanian
    Country Life"# (London, 1906), 189.

24. _Ibid._ 188 f.

25. Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 416.

26. _Ibid._ 420 f.

27. _Ibid._ 425. |376|

28. #Thomas Naogeorgus, "The Popish Kingdome,"# Englyshed by Barnabe
    Googe, 1570 (ed. by R. C. Hope, London, 1880), 44.

29. #G. F. Abbott, "Macedonian Folklore"# (Cambridge, 1903), 76.

30. #P. M. Hough, "Dutch Life in Town and Country"# (London, 1901), 96.

31. Cf. Frazer, "Golden Bough," iii. 90, and also the Epiphany
    noise-makings described in the present volume.

32. Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 426.

33. Hörmann, "Tiroler Volksleben," 218 f.

34. Tille, "D. W.," 30.

35. Chambers, "M. S.," i. 370.

36. Hamilton, 30. Cf. article on St. Nicholas by Professor Anichkof in
    _Folk-Lore_, vol. v., 1894, 108 f.

37. Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 428 f.

38. Tille, "D. W.," 35 f.; Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 430.

39. Hörmann, "Tiroler Volksleben," 209 f.

40. Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 430.

41. Weinhold, 9.

42. Mannhardt, "Baumkultus," 326.

43. Weinhold, 9.

44. Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 431 f.

45. Hörmann, "Tiroler Volksleben," 212 f.

46. Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 433.

47. _Ibid._ 433.

48. Chambers, "M. S.," i. 369.

49. #W. S. Walsh, "Curiosities of Popular Customs"# (London, 1898),
    753 f. Cf. Chambers, "B. D.," ii. 664.

50. Feilberg, i. 165, 170.

51. _Ibid._ i. 169 f.

52. _Ibid._ i. 171.

53. #L. Caico, "Sicilian Ways and Days"# (London, 1910), 188 f.

54. Feilberg, i. 168.

55. Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 434.

56. _Ibid._ 434 f.

57. Grimm, iv. 1867.

58. Feilberg, i. 108 f.

59. _Ibid._ i. 111.

60. N. W. Thomas in _Folk-Lore_, vol. xi., 1900, 252.

61. Ashton, 52.

62. Dyer, 72 f.

63. Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 436 f.

64. _Ibid._ 437.

65. _Ibid._ 438.

66. _Ibid._ 439.

67. Dyer, 439.

68. _Ibid._ 438 f.; Chambers, "B. D.," ii. 724.

69. Abbott, 81.

70. _Notes and Queries_, 2nd Series, vol. v. 35; Dyer, 439. |377|


CHAPTER IX.--CHRISTMAS EVE AND THE TWELVE DAYS

1.  Tille, "D. W.," 32 f.

2.  Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 446.

3.  _Ibid._ 448.

4.  _Ibid._ 449.

5.  _Ibid._ 448; Weinhold, 8 f.

6.  Evans, 229.

7.  Weinhold, 8.

8.  Tille, "Y. & C.," 116.

9.  Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 444 f.

10. _Ibid._ 442 f.

11. _Ibid._ 444.

12. #W. R. S. Ralston, "Songs of the Russian People"# (1st Edition,
    London, 1872), 186 f.

13. Sébillot, 216.

14. Walsh, 232.

15. Burne and Jackson, 406; Henderson, "Folk Lore of the Northern
    Counties," 311; #Sir Edgar MacCulloch, "Guernsey Folk Lore"# (London,
    1903), 34; Thorpe, ii. 272.

16. Walsh, 232.

17. Henderson, "Folk Lore of the Northern Counties," 311.

18. MacCulloch, "Guernsey Folk Lore," 34 f. Cf. for Germany, Grimm,
    iv. 1779, 1809.

19. Grimm, iv. 1840.

20. Ralston, 201.

21. #A. Le Braz, "La Légende de la Mort chez les Bretons armoricains"#
    (Paris, 1902), i. 114 f.

22. Thorpe, ii. 89.

23. Lloyd, 171.

24. Feilberg, ii. 7 f.

25. _Ibid._ ii. 14.

26. Bilfinger, 52.

27. Feilberg, ii. 3 f.

28. _Ibid._ ii. 20 f.

29. #A. F. M. Ferryman, "In the Northman's Land"# (London, 1896), 112.

30. Feilberg, ii. 64.

31. Grimm, iv. 1781, 1783, 1793, 1818.

32. Krauss, 181.

33. Accounts of the carols used in Little Russia are given by Mr.
    Ralston, 186 f., while those sung by the Roumanians are described by
    Mlle. Stratilesco, 192 f., and those customary in Dalmatia by Sir A.
    J. Evans, 224 f.

34. Ralston, 193.

35. Stratilesco, 192.

36. Ralston, 197.

37. Chambers, "M. S.," i. 244.

38. #Shakespeare, "Hamlet," Act I. Sc. 1.#

39. Bilfinger, 37 f.

40. Henderson, "Folk Lore of the Northern Counties," 132. |378|

41. Tylor, i. 362.

42. #W. Golther, "Handbuch der germanischen Mythologie"# (Leipsic, 1895),
    283 f.

43. Tille, "D. W.," 173.

44. Henderson, "Folk Lore of the Northern Counties," 132.

45. MacCulloch, "Guernsey Folk Lore," 33 f.

46. Burne and Jackson, 396 f., 403.

47. #R. T. Hampson, "Medii Aevi Kalendarium"# (London, 1841), i. 90.

48. Grimm, iv. 1836; Thorpe, ii. 272.

49. Burne and Jackson, 405.

50. _Ibid._ 405; MacCulloch, "Religion of the Ancient Celts," 166.

51. #E. H. Meyer, "Mythologie der Germanen"# (Strassburg, 1903), 424;
    Golther, 491; Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 22 f.

52. Golther, 493.

53. Meyer, 425 f.

54. _Ibid._ 425 f.

55. Grimm, iii. 925 f.

56. _Ibid._ i. 268, 275 f.

57. Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 22.

58. Grimm, i. 275; Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 23.

59. _Ibid._ 23.

60. Meyer, 425; Grimm, i. 281.

61. Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 21.

62. Golther, 493.

63. Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 24.

64. Grimm, i. 274.

65. Meyer, 428.

66. #R. H. Busk, "The Valleys of Tirol"# (London, 1874), 116.

67. _Ibid._ 118.

68. _Ibid._ 417.

69. The details given about the _Kallikantzaroi_ are taken, unless
    otherwise stated, from Lawson, 190 f.

70. Abbott, 74.

71. Hamilton, 108 f.

72. _Ibid._ 109.

73. Abbott, 218.

74. _Ibid._ 73 f.

75. Meyer, 85 f.

76. #G. Henderson, "Survivals of Belief among the Celts"# (Glasgow, 1911),
    178.

77. _Ibid._ 177.

78. #F. H. E. Palmer, "Russian Life In Town and Country"# (London, 1901),
    178.


CHAPTER X.--THE YULE LOG

1.  Evans, 221 f.; Mannhardt, "Baumkultus," 224 f. Cf. the account of the
    Servian Christmas in #Chedo Mijatovitch, "Servia and the Servians"#
    (London, 1908), 98 f.

2.  Same sources. |379|

3.  Mannhardt, "Baumkultus," 236.

4.  Frazer, "Magic Art," ii. 208.

5.  _Ibid._ ii. 232.

6.  Evans, 219, 295, and 357.

7.  _Ibid._ 222.

8.  Mannhardt, "Baumkultus," 237.

9.  Cf. Frazer, "Magic Art," ii. 233.

10. _Ibid._ ii. 365 f.

11. Mannhardt, "Baumkultus," 226 f.

12. #"Memoirs of Mistral"# (Eng. Trans. by C. E. Maud, London, 1907),
    29 f.

13. Mannhardt, "Baumkultus," 226 f.

14. Sébillot, 218.

15. #A. de Gubernatis, "Storia Comparata degli Usi Natalizi"# (Milan,
    1878), 112.

16. C. Casati in _Archivio trad. pop._, vol. vi. 168 f.

17. Jahn, 253.

18. _Ibid._ 254.

19. _Ibid._ 257.

20. Brand, 245; Dyer, 466.

21. #[Sir] G. L. Gomme, "Folk Lore Relics of Early Village Life"# (London
    1883), 99.

22. Ashton, 111.

23. Burne and Jackson, 402.

24. _Ibid._ 398 f.

25. _Notes and Queries_, 1st Series, vol. iv. 309; Dyer, 446 f.

26. #"The Gentleman's Magazine,"# 1790, 719.

27. Hampson, i. 109.

28. Feilberg, i. 118 f.

29. _Ibid._ i. 146.

30. _Ibid._ ii. 66 f.


CHAPTER XI.--THE CHRISTMAS-TREE, DECORATIONS, AND GIFTS

1.  #I. A. R. Wylie, "My German Year"# (London, 1910), 68.

2.  #Mrs. A. Sidgwick, "Home Life in Germany"# (London, 1908), 176.

3.  Tille, "D. W.," 258. For the history and associations of the
    Christmas-tree see also #E. M. Kronfeld, "Der Weihnachtsbaum"#
    (Oldenburg, 1906).

4.  Tille, "D. W.," 259.

5.  _Ibid._ 261.

6.  _Ibid._ 261 f.

7.  #G. Rietschel, "Weihnachten in Kirche, Kunst und Volksleben"#
    (Bielefeld and Leipsic, 1902), 153.

8.  _Ibid._, 153.

9.  Tille, "D. W.," 270.

10. Rietschel, 151.

11. _Ibid._ 151.

12. Tille, "D. W.," 267. |380|

13. Dyer, 442; E. M. Leather, #"The Folk-Lore of Herefordshire"# (London,
    1912), 90.

14. Rietschel, 154.

15. Ashton, 189.

16. _Ibid._ 190.

17. Tille, "D. W.," 271.

18. _Ibid._ 272.

19. _Ibid._ 277; Rietschel, 254.

20. Information supplied by the Rev. E. W. Lummis, who a few years ago
    was a pastor in the Münsterthal.

21. #L. Macdonald# in #"The Pall Mall Gazette"# (London), Dec. 28, 1911.

22. Tille, "Y. & C.," 174.

23. _Ibid._ 175 f.

24. Rietschel, 141.

25. Tille, "Y. & C.," 175.

26. _Ibid._ 172 f.; Chambers, "B. D.," ii. 759.

27. Latin text in Chambers, "M. S.," ii. 290.

28. Mannhardt, "Baumkultus," 244.

29. Frazer, "Magic Art," ii. 65.

30. Mannhardt, "Baumkultus," 244.

31. _Ibid._ 241; Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 18.

32. Lloyd, 168.

33. Dyer, 35.

34. #W. F. Dawson, "Christmas: its Origin and Associations"# (London,
    1902), 325.

35. Harrison, "Themis," 321.

36. Frazer, "Magic Art," ii. 55 f.

37. Frazer, "Magic Art," ii. 48.

38. Mannhardt, "Baumkultus," 242 f.

39. Chambers, "M. S.," i. 251.

40. Latin text, _ibid._ ii. 300.

41. #J. Stow, "A Survay of London,"# edited by Henry Morley (London,
    1893), 123.

42. Chambers, "M. S.," i. 251.

43. Grimm, iii. 1206; Frazer, "Golden Bough," iii. 327; MacCulloch,
    "Religion of the Ancient Celts," 162, 205.

44. MacCulloch, "Religion of the Ancient Celts," 162 f.

45. Grimm, iii. 1206.

46. Burne and Jackson, 246; #Laisnel de la Salle, "Croyances et légendes
    du centre de la France"# (Paris, 1875), i. 58.

47. Frazer, "Golden Bough," iii. 451 f.

48. #Washington Irving, "The Sketch-Book"# (Revised Edition, New York,
    1860), 245.

49. _Notes and Queries_, 5th Series, vol. viii. 481.

50. Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 472.

51. Henderson, "Folk Lore of the Northern Counties," 100.

52. Burne and Jackson, 245.

53. Henderson, "Folk Lore of the Northern Counties," 226.

54. #E. K. Chambers and F. Sidgwick, "Early English Lyrics"# (London,
    1907), 293; #E. Rickert, "Ancient English Carols"# (London, 1910),
    262. |381|

55. Rickert, 262.

56. Burne and Jackson, 245 f., 397, 411.

57. Lloyd, 169.

58. Van Norman, 300.

59. Evans, 222.

60. Van Norman, 300 f.

61. Frazer, "Golden Bough," ii. 286 f.

62. Grimm, iv. 1831.

63. Chambers, "M. S.," i. 238. Cf. Tille, "Y. & C.," 104.

64. Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 420.

65. Tille, "D. W.," 195.

66. _Ibid._ 197.

67. Bilfinger, 48.

68. #Th. Bentzon, "Christmas in France"# in #"The Century Magazine"# (New
    York), Dec., 1901, 173.

69. Feilberg, ii. 179 f.

70. Pitrè, 167, 404.

71. Feilberg, i. 196; Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 453 f.; Wylie, 77 f.

72. Lloyd, 172.

73. #W. Sandys, "Christmas Carols, Ancient and Modern"# (London, 1833),
    xcv.

74. Walsh, 240 f.; Ashton, 194 f.


CHAPTER XII.--CHRISTMAS FEASTING AND SACRIFICIAL SURVIVALS

1.  Chambers, "M. S.," i. 257.

2.  Rickert, 259.

3.  #W. Sandys, "Christmastide: its History, Festivities, and Carols"#
    (London, n.d.), 112.

4.  Chambers, "M. S.," i. 133.

5.  #J. A. H. Murray, "A New English Dictionary"# (Oxford, 1888, &c.)
    iv. (1) 577.

6.  Addy, 103.

7.  Dawson, 254.

8.  Addy, 104.

9.  Burne and Jackson, 407.

10. Brand, 283.

11. Cf. _Folk-Lore_, vol. xi., 1900, 260.

12. Addy, 103.

13. Cf. carols in Brand, 3, and Rickert, 243 f.

14. Brand, 3.

15. Dyer, 464.

16. Feilberg, i. 119, 184; Lloyd, 173.

17. Jahn, 265.

18. Stratilesco, 190.

19. Ralston, 193, 203.

20. Mijatovich, 98.

21. Jahn, 261.

22. Rietschel, 106. Cf. Weinhold, 25, and Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 463.

23. Sébillot, 217. |382|

24. Laisnel, i. 7 f.

25. _Ibid._ i. 12 f.

26. _Ibid._ i. 11.

27. #E. Cortet, "Essai sur les Fêtes religieuses"# (Paris, 1867), 265.

28. Frazer, "Golden Bough," ii. 286 f.

29. #M. Höfler, "Weihnachtsgebäcke. Eine vergleichende Studie der
    germanischen Gebildbrote zur Weihnachtszeit"# in #"Zeitschrift für
    österreichische Volkskunde,"# Jahrg. 11, Supplement-Heft 3 (Vienna,
    1905).

30. Jahn, 280 f.

31. Burne and Jackson, 406 f.

32. #"The Mirror of Perfection,"# trans. by Sebastian Evans (London,
    1898), 206.

33. Mannhardt, "Baumkultus," 233 f.

34. Lloyd, 170 f.

35. Jahn, 276.

36. _Ibid._ 276.

37. Lloyd, 168.

38. Evans, 231 f.; for the ox-custom, see Evans, 233.

39. Abbott, 76.

40. Hörmann, "Tiroler Volksleben," 244 f., 238, 245.

41. Dawson, 339.

42. #S. Graham, "A Vagabond in the Caucasus. With some Notes of his
    Experiences among the Russians"# (London, 1910), 25 f.

43. Stratilesco, 190.

44. Van Norman, 299 f.

45. Jahn, 267.

46. Frazer, "Golden Bough," ii. 442 f., where other examples, British and
    Continental, of the wren-hunt are given. Cf. Dyer, 494 f.

47. _Folk-Lore_, vol. xviii., 1907, 439 f.

48. MacCulloch, "Religion of the Ancient Celts," 221.

49. See Frazer, "Golden Bough," ii. 380, 441, for examples of similar
    practices with sacred animals.

50. _Folk-Lore_, vol. xi., 1900, 259.

51. Brand, 272.

52. _Folk-Lore_, vol. xi., 1900, 262.

53. Lloyd, 181 f.

54. _Ibid._ 181.

55. Thorpe, ii. 49 f.

56. Ralston, 200.


CHAPTER XIII.--MASKING, THE MUMMERS' PLAY, THE FEAST OF FOOLS, AND THE
                 BOY BISHOP

1.  Chambers, "M. S.," i. 390 f.

2.  #The Works Of Ben Jonson#, ed. by Barry Cornwall (London, 1838), 600.

3.  #Shakespeare, "Henry VIII.,"# Act I. Sc. IV.

4.  Chambers, "M. S.," i. 403 f.

5.  _Ibid._ i. 227, 402.

6.  _Ibid._ i. 402. Cf. Burne and Jackson, 410.

7.  For a bibliography of texts of the mummers' plays see Chambers,
    "M. S.," i. 205 f. |383|

8.  This account of the plays and dances is based upon Chambers, "M. S.,"
    i. 182 f. (chapters ix. and x.).

9.  #Tacitus, "Germania,"# cap. xxiv. (Eng. Trans. by W. Hamilton Fyfe,
    Oxford, 1908).

10. Cf. Harrison, "Themis," 43 f.

11. Professor Gilbert Murray in "Themis," 341 f.

12. Harrison, "Themis," 232.

13. Chambers, "M. S.," i. 226.

14. Chambers, "M. S.," i. 192, 213 f.

15. _Ibid._ i. 220 f.

16. Lawson, 223 f.

17. _Notes and Queries_, 5th Series, vol. x. 482.

18. This account of the Feast of Fools and the Boy Bishop is mainly
    derived from Chambers, "M. S.," i. 274-371, and from #Mr. A. F.
    Leach's# article, #"The Schoolboys' Feast,"# in #"The Fortnightly
    Review"# (London), vol. lix., 1896, 128 f.

19. Chambers, "M. S.," i. 294.

20. Full text in Chambers, "M. S.," ii. 280 f.

21. Chambers, "M. S.," i. 372 f.

22. #"Two Sermons preached by the Boy Bishop at St. Paul's,"# ed. by J.
    G. Nichols, with an Introduction by E. F. Rimbault (London, printed
    for the Camden Society, 1875).

23. _Ibid._ 3.

24. Quoted by #F. J. Snell, "The Customs Of Old England"# (London, 1911),
    44.

25. Chambers, "M. S.," i. 366.

26. #J. Aubrey, "Remaines of Gentilisme and Judaisme"# (1686-7), ed. by
    J. Britten (London, 1881), 40 f.

27. Chambers, "M. S.," i. 350.

28. Feilberg, ii. 254.


CHAPTER XIV.--ST. STEPHEN'S, ST. JOHN'S, AND HOLY INNOCENTS' DAYS

1.  Hörmann, "Tiroler Volksleben," 237 f.

2.  Dyer, 492.

3.  #L. von Hörmann, "Das Tiroler Bauernjahr"# (Innsbruck, 1899), 204.

4.  _Ibid._ 204.

5.  _Ibid._ 204 f.

6.  Feilberg, i. 212.

7.  Mannhardt, "Baumkultus," 402.

8.  Feilberg, i. 211.

9.  Mannhardt, "Baumkultus," 402 f.

10. _Ibid._ 402 f.; Feilberg, i. 204 f.; Lloyd, 203 f.

11. #H. C. Beeching, "A Book of Christmas Verse"# (London, 1895), 21 f.

12. Mannhardt, "Baumkultus," 406.

13. Henderson, "Folk Lore of the Northern Counties," 67.

14. Jahn, 269 f.

15. _Ibid._ 270 f.

16. _Ibid._ 273. |384|

17. Dyer, 497 f.

18. _Ibid._ 498; Brand, 290.

19. Mannhardt, "Baumkultus," 264 f.

20. _Ibid._ 265 f.

21. _Ibid._ 268.

22. Frazer, "Golden Bough," iii. 129 f.


CHAPTER XV.--NEW YEAR'S DAY

1.  Rhys, "Celtic Folklore," i. 320 f.

2.  Henderson, "Folk Lore of the Northern Counties," 72.

3.  #E. Thurston, "Omens and Superstitions of Southern India"# (London,
    1912), 17 f.

4.  Walsh, 742.

5.  Wylie, 81.

6.  Sébillot, 176.

7.  #A. Maurice Low, "The American People"# (London, 1911), ii. 6.

8.  Walsh, 739 f.

9.  Evans, 229.

10. Burne and Jackson, 315 f.

11. _Notes and Queries_, 5th Series, vol. iii. 6.

12. Information given by the Rev. E. J. Hardy, formerly Chaplain to the
    Forces at Hongkong.

13. Frazer, "Golden Bough," iii. 204 f.

14. Burne and Jackson, 265.

15. Grimm, iv. 1784.

16. Harrison, "Themis," 36.

17. Henderson, "Folk Lore of the Northern Counties," 72 f.

18. Addy, 205.

19. G. Hastie in _Folk-Lore_, vol. iv., 1893, 309 f.

20. J. E. Crombie in same volume, 316 f.

21. Addy, 106; Burne and Jackson, 314; Rhys, "Celtic Folklore," i. 337.

22. Rhys, "Celtic Folklore," i. 339.

23. _Ibid._ 339 f.; W. Henderson, 74. Cf. _Folk-Lore_, vol. iii., 1892,
    253 f.; vol. iv., 1893, 309 f.

24. Hastie (see Note 19), 311.

25. Walsh, 738.

26. Hastie, 312.

27. Chambers, "B. D.," i. 28.

28. _Ibid._ ii. 789 f.; _Notes and Queries_, 2nd Series, vol. ix., 322;
    Dyer, 506.

29. Ashton, 228.

30. Hörmann, "Tiroler Volksleben," 230 f.

31. #J. G. Campbell, "Witchcraft and Second Sight in the Highlands and
    Islands of Scotland"# (Glasgow, 1902), 232. Cf. the account given by
    Dr. Johnson, in Brand, 278.

32. Henderson, "Survivals of Belief among the Celts," 263 f.

33. #R. Chambers, "Popular Rhymes of Scotland"# (Edinburgh, 1847), 296,
    and "B. D.," ii. 788. |385|

34. "New English Dictionary," v. (1) 327.

35. Cortet, 18.

36. Sébillot, 213.

37. _Ibid._ 213.

38. MacCulloch, "Guernsey Folk Lore," 37.

39. Abbott, 80 f.

40. Stratilesco, 197 f.

41. Hamilton, 103.

42. _Ibid._ 104.

43. Mannhardt, "Baumkultus," 593 f.

44. Latin text from Ducange in Chambers, "M. S.," i. 254.

45. Wylie, 81.

46. Abbott, 78.

47. Grimm, iv. 1847.

48. Sébillot, 171.

49. Dyer, 7.

50. Ashton, 228.

51. #A. Macdonell, "In the Abruzzi"# (London, 1908), 102.

52. Abbott, 77.

53. Ralston, 205.

54. #"The Athenæum"# (London), Feb. 5, 1848; _Notes and Queries_, 1st
    Series, vol. v., 5.


CHAPTER XVI.--EPIPHANY TO CANDLEMAS

1.  Hörmann, "Tiroler Volksleben," 240 f.

2.  #Leigh Hunt, "The Seer; or, Common-Places Refreshed"# (London, 1850),
    part ii. 31.

3.  Beeching, 148 f.

4.  Chambers, "M. S.," i. 261.

5.  #E. Pasquier, "Les Recherches de la France"# (Paris, 1621), livre
    iv., chap. ix. p. 375.

6.  Cortet, 33.

7.  _Ibid._ 34.

8.  _Ibid._ 43.

9.  #E. Du Méril, "Origines latines du théâtre moderne"# (Paris, 1849),
    26 f.

10. Brand, 13.

11. #A. de Nore, "Coutumes, mythes et traditions des provinces de
    France"# (Paris, 1846), 173.

12. Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 29 f.; Brand, 13.

13. #Matilde Serao, "La Madonna e i Santi"# (Naples, 1902), 128.

14. Reinach, i. 45 f.

15. Abbott, 77.

16. _Ibid._ 78.

17. Frazer, "Golden Bough," iii. 93.

18. Hörmann, "Tiroler Volksleben," 246; Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 21.

19. Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 21.

20. _Ibid._ 21 f. |386|

21. Stratilesco, 198.

22. Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, 21.

23. #Countess Martinengo-Cesaresco, "Essays in the Study of Folk-Songs"#
    (London, 1886), 334.

24. #D. N. Lees, "Tuscan Feasts and Tuscan Friends"# (London, 1907), 87.

25. _Ibid._ 83.

26. Serao, 127 f.

27. #E. de Olavarría y Huarte, "El Folk-Lore de Madrid,"# 90. [Vol. ii.
    of "Biblioteca de las Tradiciones Populares Españolas" (Seville,
    1884).]

28. _Ibid._ 92.

29. "Memoirs of Mistral," 32 f.

30. Nore, 17.

31. Abbott, 87.

32. Frazer, "Magic Art," i. 275 f.

33. Hamilton, 118.

34. Brand, 16; Chambers, "B. D.," i. 56; Dyer, 21.

35. Aubrey, 40.

36. Brand, 16.

37. Beeching, 147.

38. Ashton, 87 f.

39. Hörmann, "Tiroler Volksleben," 225.

40. Tille, "D. W.," 254.

41. Hörmann, "Tiroler Volksleben," 230.

42. #W. S. Lach-Szyrma# in #"The Folk-Lore Record"# (London), vol. iv.,
    1881, 53.

43. Brand, 17; Chambers, "B. D.," i. 55 f.; Dyer, 22 f. Several accounts
    have been collected by Mrs. Leather, "Folk-Lore of Herefordshire,"
    93 f.

44. Evans, 228.

45. Dyer, 24.

46. _Folk-Lore_, vol. v., 1894, 192.

47. _Ibid._ vol. vii., 1896, 340 f.

48. Chambers, "M. S.," i. 149 f.

49. W. Hone, "Every Day Book" (London, 1838), ii. 1649.

50. _Folk-Lore_, vol. vii., 1896, 342.

51. #[Sir] G. L. Gomme, "The Village Community"# (London, 1890), 242 f.

52. Busk, 99.

53. Dawson, 320.

54. #"The Nation"# (London), Dec. 10, 1910.

55. Burne and Jackson, 411.

56. Lloyd, 217.

57. Bilfinger, 24.

58. Brand, 18 f.

59. Dyer, 37.

60. Quoted from #"Journal of the Archæological Association,"# vol. vii.,
    1852, 202, by Dyer, 39.

61. Chambers, "M. S.," i. 113.

62. _Ibid._ i. 114.

63. Usener, 310 f.

64. Naogeorgus, 48.

65. Sébillot, 179 f. |387|

66. Hörmann, "Tiroler Volksleben," 7.

67. Usener, 321.

68. Brand, 25. Cf. #G. W. Kitchin, "Seven Sages Of Durham"# (London,
    1911), 113.

69. _The Gentleman's Magazine_, 1790, 719.

70. Dyer, 55 f.

71. Quoted by Dyer, 57, from #Martin's "Description of the Western Isles
    of Scotland"# (1703), 119.

72. Gomme, "Folk-Lore Relics," 95.

73. Brand, 26.

74. _Ibid._ 26.

75. Burne and Jackson, 411.


CONCLUSION

1.  E. Clodd in Presidential Address to the Folk-Lore Society, 1894. See
    _Folk-Lore_, vol. vi., 1895, 77.

|388| |389| |390| |391|




INDEX


Abbots Bromley, horn-dance at, 201

Abruzzi, All Souls' Eve in, 192;
    "new water" in, 333

"Adam," drama, 127-8

Adam and Eve, their Day, 271

Adam of St. Victor, 33-4

"Adeste, fideles," 63-4

Advent, 90-2;
    "Advent images," 118;
    _Klöpfelnächte_, 216-8

Alexandria, pagan rites at, 20

All Saints' Day, and the cult of the dead, 173, 189-90

All Souls' Day, and the cult of the dead, 173, 181, 189-95

Alsace, Christkind in, 230;
    New Year's "May" in, 269-70

Alsso of Brevnov, 183

Ambrose, St., 31-2

_Amburbale_, 353

Amiens, Feast of Fools at, 305

Anatolius, St., hymn of, 100

Ancestor-worship, 181, 253-4, 290, 341

Andrew, St., his Day, 173, 213-6, 277

Animals, carol of, 69;
    ox and ass at the Nativity, 155;
    cult of, 174-8;
    masks of, 175-6, 199-202;
    on Christmas Eve, 233-4;
    specially fed at Christmas, 289;
    wassailing, 346-7

Ansbach, Martinmas in, 206

Antwerp, soul-cakes at, 194;
    St. Martin at, 206-7;
    St. Thomas's Day at, 224

Apples, customs with, 195-6, 207, 278

Ara Coeli, Rome, 115-6

Ardennes, St. Thomas's Day in, 224

Armenian Church, Epiphany in, 22

Artemis and St. Nicholas, 218

Aryan and pre-Aryan customs, 163-4

Aschenklas, 219, 231

Ashes, superstition about, 258

Ass, Prose of the, 304-5

Athens, New Year in, 331

Aubrey, J., 308

Augury, 182, 195-8, 214-5, 225, 237, 321-33

Augustine, St. (of Canterbury), 21, 179

Aurelian, 23

Austria, Christmas poetry in, 45-46;
    Christmas drama in, 143-6;
    soul-cakes in, 194;
    St. Nicholas in, 218-20;
    St. Lucia's Eve in, 223;
    St. Thomas's Eve in, 225;
    Frau Perchta, etc., in, 241-4, 342;
    Sylvester in, 274.
    _See also_ Bohemia, Carinthia, Styria, Tyrol

Awdlay, John, 47-8


Bach, J. S., 73-4

Baden, All Souls' Eve in, 192

Balder, 273

Baptism of Christ, celebrated at Epiphany, 20-2, 101-4

Barbara, St., her festival, 268

Bari, festival of St. Nicholas at, 221

Barring out the master, 224

Bartel, 219

Basil, St., his festival, 331

Basilidians, 21

Basle, Council of, 305

Bavaria, St. Martin's rod in, 207;
    Christmas-trees in, 266-7;
    sacrificial feast in, 286;
    St. John's wine in, 314

Beauvais, Feast of the Ass at, 305

Bede, Venerable, 181, 203 |392|

Bees on Christmas Eve, 234

Befana, 244, 278, 343

Belethus, Johannes, 302

Belgium, All Souls' Eve in, 192, 194;
    St. Hubert's Day in, 202;
    Martinmas in, 204-7;
    St. Catherine's Day in, 213;
    St. Nicholas in, 219;
    St. Thomas's Day in, 224

Bentzon, Madame Th., 96-7

Berchta. _See_ Perchta

Berlin, pyramids in, 266;
    biscuits in, 288

Bernard, St., of Clairvaux, 33

Berry, cake customs in, 287, 339

Bethlehem, Christmas at, 94-5, 107

Biggar, bonfires at, 327

Bilfinger, Dr. G., 172

Birds fed at Christmas, 289

Blindman's buff, 293

Boar's head, 284, 348

Bohemia, the "star" in, 152;
    fifteenth-century Christmas customs in, 183;
    St. Andrew's Eve in, 215-6;
    St. Thomas's Eve in, 224-5

Boniface, St., 171

Boy Bishop, 212-3, 306-8;
    connection with St. Nicholas, 220-1, 307-8

"Breast-strip" rites, 328

Breviary, the Roman, 90

Briid, 354

Brimo, 21

Brittany, Herod play in, 141;
    Magi actors in, 151;
    All Souls' Eve in, 191-2;
    Christmas Eve superstitions in, 233-5, 236;
    Christmas log in, 256;
    New Year in, 323;
    _aguillanneuf_ in, 330;
    weather superstition in, 332

Brixen, cradle-rocking at, 111

Brixlegg, Christmas play at, 143 f.

Bromfield, Cumberland, barring out the master at, 224

Brough, Westmoreland, Twelfth Night tree at, 270

Brunnen, Epiphany at, 341

Budelfrau, 220

Burchardus of Worms, 181

Burford, Christmas holly at, 275

Burghead, "Clavie" at, 327

Burns, Robert, 197

"Bush, burning the," 346

Buzebergt, 220

Byrom, John, 84


Caballero, Fernan, 66-7, 117, 151

Caesarius of Arles, 170-1, 181

Cakes, "feasten," 177;
    soul, 192-4;
    St. Hubert's, 202;
    Martin's horns, 204;
    Christmas, 287-8, 289-90;
    Twelfth Night, 337-40, 346;
    St. Basil's, 341

Calabrian minstrels, 112

Calamy, 185

Caligula, 168

Callander, Hallowe'en at, 198

Cambridge, St. Clement's Day at, 212

Canada, Christmas Eve superstition in, 234

Candlemas, 350, 352-5

Candles, on St. Lucia's Day, 212-2;
    Yule, 258-60

Cards, Christmas, 279

Carinthia, St. Stephen's Day in, 312

Carnival, 300, 349

Carols, meaning of the word, 47-8;
    English sacred, 47-51, 76-8, 84-5;
    Welsh, 69;
    Irish, 69-70;
    Highland, 70

Catholicism and Christmas, 27, 186

Celtic New Year, 172, 189, 195, 203-4, 321

Centaurs, 247

Cereal sacraments, 177-8.
    _See also_ Cakes

Chambers, Mr. E. K., 5, 125, 299-300, 302-7, 348

Charlemagne, coronation of, 96

Charms, New Year, 182, 195-8, 321-34

Cheshire, Old Hob in, 199;
    poultry specially fed at Christmas, 289

Chester plays, 128, 133-4

Chesterton, Mr. G. K., 85-6

Childermas, 315

Children's festivals, 205-7, 218-20, 223-4, 359-60

China, New Year in, 324

Chios, Christmas _rhamna_ in, 270

Christkind as gift-bringer, 205, 230, 277-8

Christmas, pagan and Christian elements in, 18-28, 161-86, 357-60;
    names of, 20-5;
    establishment of, 20-2; |393|
    its connection with earlier festivals, 20-8;
    becomes humanized, 25-7, 34-8;
    in poetry, 31-86;
    liturgical aspects of, 89-101;
    in popular devotion, 104-18;
    in drama, 121-54;
    its human appeal, 155-7, 357-60;
    attracts customs from other festivals, 173, 226, 277-8, 284;
    decorations, 178, 272-6;
    feasting, 178-80, 283-91;
    presents, 276-9;
    masking customs, 297-308;
    log, _see_ Yule Log

Christmas Eve, 229-38;
    superstitions about the supernatural, 233-7;
    log customs, 251-8;
    fish supper on, 286-7

Christmas-tree, 168, 178, 263-72;
    its origin, 267-72

Christpuppe, 231

Chrysostom, 269

Church, Dean, 34

Circumcision, Feast of, 101, 302.
    _See also_ New Year's Day

Clement, St., his Day, 211-2

Cleobury Mortimer, curfew at, 258

Clermont, shepherd play at, 141

Coffin, Charles, 64

Communion, sacrificial, 174-8

"Comte d'Alsinoys," 56, 58-9

Cornwall, Hallowe'en custom in, 196;
    blackbird pie in, 293;
    Childermas in, 315

Coventry plays, 128, 130-1, 138

Cradle-rocking, 108-11

Crashaw, 79-81

Crib, Christmas, 105-8, 113-8;
    possible survivals in England, 118, 274

Crimmitschau, 112

Crivoscian customs, 231, 253-4, 276, 346-7

Croatia, St. Andrew's Eve in, 215;
    Christmas log customs in, 251

_Cronia_, 166


Dalmatia, Yule log customs in, 252

Dancing, 47-8, 293-4, 298-300, 302

Daniel, Jean, 56, 58

Dannhauer, J. K., 265

Dasius, St., 167

Dead, feasts of the, 173, 180-1, 189-95, 235-6, 240, 253-4, 341

Decorations, evergreen, 168, 178, 350, 355

Denisot, Nicholas, 56, 58-9

Denmark, "star-singing" in, 151;
    animal masks in, 202;
    Martinmas goose in, 203;
    St. Lucia's Eve in, 223;
    St. Thomas's Day in, 223-4;
    Christmas Eve superstitions in, 235-6;
    Yule candles in, 259-60;
    Christmas-tree in, 267;
    pig's head eaten in, 286;
    Yule-bishop in, 308

Derbyshire, "kissing-bunch" in, 274;
    Plough Monday in, 352

Devil, and beast masks, 202;
    and flax, 240

Devon, "Yeth hounds" in, 240;
    "ashton faggot" in, 258;
    wassailing fruit-trees in, 345

Dew, Christmas, 288-9

Dickens, Charles, 359

Dinan, Herod play at, 141

Dionysus, as child-god, 21;
    winter festivals of, 169, 331

Dorstone, Hallowe'en at, 197

Drama, Christmas, in Latin, 121-7;
    in English, 128-38;
    in French, 128, 138-43;
    in Spanish, 128, 148-50;
    in German, 143-6;
    in Italian, 147-8, 150;
    survivals of, 150-4;
    St. Nicholas plays, 220, 232;
    pagan folk-drama, 298-302

Drinking customs, 36, 204, 285-6, 314-5, 327

Druids and mistletoe, 273

Duchesne, Monsignor, 20, 24

Durham, Candlemas at, 353-4

Düsseldorf, Martinmas at, 206

Dyzemas, 315


Eckhart, 42-3, 157

Edinburgh, New Year in, 325-6

_Eiresione_, 270

Encina, Juan del, 149

England, Christmas poetry in, 47-51, 76-86;
    Midnight Mass in, 99;
    possible survivals of the Christmas crib in, 118, 274;
    the Nativity in the miracle cycles, 128-38;
    "souling" in, 192-4;
    Hallowe'en in, 195-8;
    Guy Fawkes Day in, 198-9;
    animal masks in, 199-201; |394|
    Martinmas in, 203;
    St. Clement's Day in, 211-2;
    St. Catherine's Day in, 212-3;
    St. Andrew's Day in, 213-4;
    St. Thomas's Day in, 225-6;
    Christmas Eve superstitions in, 234;
    Yule log in, 257-8;
    Yule candle in, 259;
    pyramids and Christmas-trees in, 266-7, 270;
    the Holy Thorn in, 268-9;
    evergreen decorations in, 272-6;
    Christmas boxes in, 279;
    Christmas fare in, 283-6;
    sacrificial survivals and Christmas games in, 292-3;
    mummers and sword-dancers in, 297-301;
    Feast of Fools in, 305;
    Boy Bishop in, 220, 306-8;
    St. Stephen's Day in, 292, 311-4;
    Holy Innocents' Day in, 315;
    New Year's Day in, 321-9, 332;
    Epiphany customs in, 337-8, 345-8;
    Candlemas in, 350, 353-5;
    Rock Day in, 351;
    Plough Monday in, 352

Ephraem Syrus, 31, 239

Epiphanius, 21

Epiphany, early history of the festival, 20-2;
    in the Roman Church, 101-2;
    in the Greek Church, 102-4;
    Blessing of the Waters at, 102-4, 244, 246, 344;
    Italian religious ceremonies at, 116-7;
    in drama, 125-8;
    old German name for, 243;
    folk customs on, 293;
    Twelfth Night cakes and kings, 337-41;
    expulsion of evils, 341-2;
    the Befana and the Magi, 343-4;
    wassailing, 345-7;
    "Haxey Hood," 347-8;
    farewells to Christmas, 349-50

Erzgebirge, Christmas plays in, 144, 232;
    St. John's tree in, 269;
    _pfeffern_ in, 316

Eschenloh, _berchten_ at, 342

Esthonians, All Souls' Day among, 191

Ethelred, laws of, 21

Etzendorf, St. Martin's rod at, 207-8

Evans, Sir Arthur, 253-4

Eves, importance of for festival customs, 196

Expulsion rites, 104, 181-2, 217, 327-8, 341-2, 344


Fabriano, Gentile da, 148

Fare, Christmas, 283-91

Feasting, connected with sacrifice, 178-9, 284;
    at Martinmas, 202-4;
    at Christmas, 283-91;
    at New Year, 321-3;
    at Epiphany, 337-41

_Feien_, 231

Feilberg, Dr. H. F., 6, 236, 313-4

Festivals, origin and purpose of, 17-8;
    relation of pagan and Christian, 19-27, 169-74

Fire, not given out at Christmas or New Year, 170-1, 257-8;
    bonfires, 182, 198-9, 204-5, 327, 346-50;
    new fire lit, 198;
    Christmas log and ancestor-worship, 251-4;
    the Yule log and candle in western Europe, 254-60;
    Candlemas fires and lights, 352-4

"First-foots," 208, 252, 323-6

Fish eaten on Christmas Eve, 287

Flagellants, 146

Flamma, Galvano, 147-8

Fletcher, Giles, 82-3

Florence, Nativity plays at, 147;
    Befana at, 343

Fools, Feast of, 180, 302-6

Football, 349

Fowler, Dr. W. Warde, 167

France, Christmas poetry in, 55-65;
    Midnight Mass in, 96-8;
    Christmas drama in, 124-7, 138-43;
    All Souls' Eve in, 191-2;
    Christmas Eve superstitions in, 234-5;
    Christmas log in, 254-6;
    Christmas-tree in, 267;
    Harvest May in, 271;
    presents brought by _le petit Jésus_, 278;
    Christmas cakes in, 287-8;
    Feast of Fools in, 302-6;
    Boy Bishop in, 308;
    Innocents' Day in, 316;
    New Year in, 322-3;
    _aguillanneuf_ in, 329-30;
    Epiphany in, 339-42, 344, 349-50;
    Candlemas candles in, 353

Francis, St. (of Assisi), and Christmas, 36-8, 105-6, 157, 289

Frazer, Dr. J. G., 6, 167, 180, 182, 199, 276, 288, 324

Frick, Frau, 241

Frigg, 241

Friuli, All Souls' Day in, 194

Frumenty, 285


Games, Christmas, 293-4 |395|

Gaude, Frau, 241-2

Gautier, Théophile, 64

Gay, 196

Geese-dancers, 299

Genealogy, chanting of the, 93

George, St., in mummers' plays, 299-301

Gerhardt, Paul, 73-4

Germanicus, 202

Germany, Christmas established in, 21;
    Christmas poetry in Catholic, 42-7;
    Protestant hymns in, 70-6;
    Christmas services in, 98-9;
    the crib and _Kindelwiegen_ in, 107-12;
    Christmas drama in, 143-6;
    "star-singing" in, 152;
    Roman customs in, 171;
    pre-Christian New Year in, 171-4;
    soul-cakes in, 194;
    the _Schimmel_ and other animal masks in, 199-201;
    Martinmas customs in, 202-8;
    St. Andrew's Eve in, 214-6;
    St. Nicholas in, 218-9, 229-32;
    St. Thomas's Eve in, 225;
    Christmas Eve in, 229, 237;
    Twelve Days superstitions in, 240-3;
    Frau Berchta, etc., in, 241-3;
    werewolves in, 246;
    Christmas log in, 256;
    Christmas-tree in, 263-7, 359;
    Harvest May in, 271;
    Christmas presents in, 277-9;
    Christmas fare in, 286-9;
    sacrificial relics in, 292;
    St. Stephen's Day in, 312, 315-6;
    St. John's Day in, 314-6;
    Holy Innocents' Day in, 316;
    New Year in, 322, 332

Gilmorton, "Christmas Vase" at, 118

Glastonbury thorns, 268-9

"Gloria in excelsis," 91, 94

Goethe, 266

_Goliards_, 49, 128

Gomme, Sir Laurence, 257-8, 354

Goose, Martinmas, 203;
    Christmas, 284

Gozzoli, Benozzo, 148

Grampus, 219

Greece, Epiphany ceremonies in, 102-3, 244-5, 344;
    winter festivals of Dionysus in, 169, 245;
    _Kallikantzaroi_ in, 244-7, 257;
    Christmas log in, 257, 344;
    _rhamna_ in Chios, 270;
    "Christ's Loaves" in, 290;
    folk-plays in, 300-1;
    New Year in, 331, 333

Greek Church, Epiphany in, 22, 102-4;
    Christmas in, 22, 99-101;
    Advent in, 90

Gregorie, 315

Gregory III., 107

Gregory the Great, letter to Mellitus, 179, 203

Guernsey, Christmas superstitions in, 234, 240;
    _oguinane_ in, 330

Guisers, 297-8

Guy Fawkes Day, 182, 198-9


_Habergaiss_, 201

_Habersack_, 201

Hakon the Good, 21, 172

Hallowe'en, 182, 195-8

Hampstead, Guy Fawkes Day at, 199

Hans Trapp, 230

Hardy, Mr. Thomas, 48, 234

Harke, Frau, 241

Harrison, Miss Jane, 21, 176-7, 325

"Haxey Hood," 347-8

Herbert, George, 81

Herefordshire, Hallowe'en in, 197;
    pyramids in, 266;
    Holy Thorn in, 269;
    New Year water in, 332;
    Epiphany and New Year ceremonies in, 346

Herod plays, 126-7, 129, 141, 153

Herrick, 81-2, 257, 338, 345, 354-5

Hertfordshire, pyramids in, 266

Hindu New Year, 322

Höfler, Dr., 288

Hogmanay, 328-30

Holda, Frau, 241-2

Holland, the "star" in, 152;
    Martinmas in, 204-5;
    _Rommelpot_ in, 217;
    St. Nicholas in, 219;
    St. Thomas's Day in, 225

Holly, 272, 275-6

Holy Innocents' Day, 127, 302, 306-8, 315-7

Horn-cakes, 202, 204

Hornchurch, boar's head at, 348

Horn-dance, 201

Horse, as a sacrificial animal, 200;
    hobby-horse, hodening, and the _Schimmel_, 199-201;
    customs on St. Stephen's Day, 311-4 |396|

Howison, 234

Hubert, St., his Day, 202

Hunt, Leigh, 337-8

Huysmans, J. K., 93

Hymns, Latin, 31-4, 42


Iceland, "Yule host" in, 240

Image, Prof. Selwyn, 85

"In dulci jubilo," 44-5

Incense used for purification, 183, 225, 244-5, 327-8

Ireland, Christmas carols in, 69-70;
    All Souls' Eve in, 192;
    Hallowe'en customs in, 197-8;
    Martinmas slaughter in, 203-4;
    "hunting of the wren" in, 292;
    Holy Innocents' Day in, 315;
    Epiphany in, 350

Italy, Christmas poetry in, 36-42, 67;
    _presepio_ in, 105-7, 112-6, 359;
    Christmas drama in, 146-8, 152;
    All Souls' in, 192, 194;
    Martinmas in, 204;
    Christmas log in, 256;
    Santa Lucia in, 278;
    Christmas fare in, 287, 289-91;
    Epiphany in, 343

Ivy, 272, 275-6


Jacopone da Todi, 36, 39-42, 146

James, St., Gospel of, 124

Jerome, St., 181

Jerusalem, Christmas at, 22, 94-5

John, St., Evangelist, his Day, 302, 314-5

Johnson, Lionel, 85

Johnson, Richard, 301

Jonson, Ben, 298

_Julebuk_, 202

Julian the Apostate, 23

_Julklapp_, 278-9


Kalends of January, the Roman festival, 24, 165, 167-71, 200, 269;
    made a fast, 101, 170-1.
    _See also_ New Year's Day

_Kallikantzaroi_, 244-7

_Kindelwiegen_, 108-11

King of the Bean, 180, 338-41

"Kissing-bunch," 274

Kissling, K. G., 266

_Klapperbock_, 201

Klaubauf, 219

_Klöpfelnächte_, 216-7

Knecht Ruprecht, 220, 231-2

Kore, 21

Krampus, 219


Labruguière, Epiphany in, 342

Lake, Prof. K., 20, 24

La Monnoye, 62-3

Lancashire, Hallowe'en in, 198

Latin Christmas poetry, 31-4, 42, 63-4, 68-9

Lawson, Mr. J. C., 247, 301

Lead-pouring, 215, 237, 332

Leather, Mrs., 269, 346

Le Moigne, Lucas, 56-8

Libanius, 168-9, 269

Liberius, Pope, 107, 352-3

Lima, Christmas Eve at, 98

Lithuania, feast of the dead in, 195;
    New Year's Eve in, 332

Log customs. _See_ Yule log

Lombardy, Christmas log in, 256

London, Greek Epiphany ceremonies in, 103;
    Italian Christmas in, 116-7, 291;
    Christmas in, under Puritans, 185;
    German Christmas in, 265;
    Boy Bishop in, 306-7;
    New Year in, 322, 327

Lord Mayor's day, 202

Lord of Misrule, 298

Lorraine, cake customs in, 287, 339-40

Lucia, St., her festival, 221-3, 268

Lucian, 166-7

Ludlow, Guy Fawkes Day at, 199

Lullabies, 51, 67-9, 83-4, 109-10

Luther, Martin, 70-3, 265

Lyme Regis, Candlemas at, 354


Macedonia, Christmas Eve in, 217;
    New Year's Eve in, 226, 330, 332;
    _Kallikantzaroi_ in, 245;
    folk-play in, 300;
    Epiphany in, 344

Macée, Claude, 141

Madrid, 97-8, 153, 343

Magi in drama, 125-6, 128-9, 151-3;
    as present-bringers, 343

Magic, 163

Man, Isle of, carol-singing in, 99;
    _Hollantide_ in, 189, 198, 321; |397|
    _Fynnodderee_ in, 246;
    "hunting of the wren" in, 292-3

_Mana_, 176-7

Mannhardt, W., 252-3, 313-4

Marguerite of Navarre, 141

Marseilles, "pastorals" at, 141

Martin of Braga, 272

Martin I., Pope, 203

Martinengo-Cesaresco, Countess, 106, 112, 142

Martinmas, an old winter festival, 173, 182, 200, 202-3;
    its feasting customs, 202-4;
    its bonfires, 204-5;
    St. Martin as gift-bringer, and his relation to St. Nicholas, 205-8,
      218-9, 277-8

Masking customs, 169-71, 175-6, 199-202, 206, 219, 230-2, 245, 297-302,
    304-305, 352

Mass, Midnight, 94-9;
    the three Christmas Masses, 94-6

Mechlin, Martinmas at, 206

Mellitus, Abbot, 179

Mexico, Christmas drama in, 154

Michaelmas, 173

Milan, Epiphany play at, 147-8

Milton, 82

Mince-pies, 284

Minnesingers, 36

"Misterio de los Reyes Magos," 128

Mistletoe, 272-4, 276

Mistral, Frédéric, 255

Mithra, 23

_Modranicht_, 181

Monasticism and Christmas, 34-5

Mont-St.-Michel, Epiphany king at, 340

Montenegro, Christmas log customs in, 252

Morgan, Lady, 114-5

Morris, William, 85

Morris-dancers, 299-301

Mouthe, "De fructu" at, 288

Mummers' plays, 297-302

Munich, Bavarian National Museum at, 107-8;
    Christmas-tree at, 267;
    St. Stephen's Day at, 312

Murillo, 65

Mythology, in relation to ritual, 164-5, 176


Naogeorgus, 111, 217, 353

Naples, _zampognari_ at, 112;
    _presepio_ at, 113-4;
    Christmas plays at, 150;
    Epiphany at, 343

_Natalis Invicti_, 23-4, 165

New Year's Day, in Roman Empire, 24, 167-71, 276-7;
    opposed in character to Christmas, 25-6;
    Teutonic and Celtic, 25, 171-3, 189, 202-4;
    Slav, 173;
    January 1 made a fast, 101, 170-1;
    customs attracted to January 1, 173, 189, 200, 321;
    fire not given out, 170-1, 257-8;
    charms, omens, and other customs, 182, 321-34;
    presents, 168-71, 276-7;
    mistletoe connected with, 276

Nicea, Council of, 22

Nicholas, St., his Day related to Martinmas, 173, 207-8, 277-8;
    as patron of boys, 218, 220,
    of sailors, 218, 221;
    his festival, 218-21;
    on Christmas Eve, 229-32

_Noël_, origin of the name, 22;
    the French carol, 55-65

Normandy, "star-singing" in, 151;
    Innocents' Day in, 316;
    Epiphany in, 349-50

Northamptonshire, St. Catherine's and St. Andrew's Days in, 213-4;
    Dyzemas in, 315

Northumberland, holly in, 275

Norway, Christmas established in, 21;
    "star-singing" in, 151;
    pre-Christian Yule festival in, 172;
    animal masks in, 202;
    Christmas Eve superstitions in, 235-6;
    Yule candles in, 259-60

Notker, 32

Nottinghamshire, Hallowe'en customs in, 196;
    Christmas cake and wassail-bowl in, 285

Nuremberg, Epiphany at, 342

Nuts, customs with, 195-6, 207


"O's," Great, 92

Oak as a sacred tree, 254

Oberufer, Christmas play at, 143, 272

Ocaña, F. de, 65-6

Oesel, "Yule Boar" in, 288

Old Hob, 199-200 |398|

Otfrid of Weissenburg, 42

Oxford, boars head at, 284


Palmer, Mr. F. H. E., 104

_Parcae_, 181

Paris, Christmas in, 98;
    All Souls' Eve in, 191;
    St. Catherine's Day in, 213;
    Christmas-tree in, 267;
    New Year in, 277;
    Feast of Fools in, 302-3

Paschal, Françoise, 61-2

Pasquier, Étienne, 339

Pearson, Dr. Karl, 161-2

Pellegrin, Abbé, 63

Pelzmärte, 206-8, 217

Perchta, 181, 241-4, 342

Perun, 254

Peterborough, St. Catherine's Day at, 213

Philocalian Calendar, 20

_Pifferari_, 112

Pillersee, Advent mummeries at, 218

Pliny, 273

Plough Monday, 300

Plum-pudding, 284-5

_Plygain_, 99

Poland, the "star" in, 152;
    puppet-shows in, 153;
    werewolves in, 246;
    Christmas straw in, 276;
    Christmas wafers in, 291

_Polaznik_, 231, 252, 323-4

Presents, at the Roman Kalends, 168-71, 276-7;
    on All Souls' Eve, 192;
    at Martinmas, 205-8;
    on St. Nicholas's Day, 218-20;
    at Christmas, 183, 230, 277-9;
    at New Year and other seasons, 277-8;
    at Epiphany, 343

_Presepio._ _See_ Crib

"Prophetae," 127

Protestantism, effects of, on Christmas, 27, 70-8, 111, 138, 141, 185-6,
    229-30

Provence, remains of Christmas drama in, 141, 154;
    Christmas log in, 255;
    Magi in, 344

Prudentius, 32

Puppet-plays, 153 f.

Purification, feast of the. _See_ Candlemas

Puritans, their attitude towards Christmas, 77, 180, 184-5, 298

Pyramids, 266


Quainton, blossoming thorn at, 268


"Raging host," 240, 242

Ragusa, Christmas log customs at, 252

Ramsgate, hodening at, 200-1

_Rauchnächte_, 225, 327-8

Rhys, Sir John, 189, 321, 325-6

Ripon, St. Clement's Day at, 212;
    Yule candles at, 259;
    Candlemas at, 354

Risano, Christmas log customs at, 252

Rolle, Richard, 48

Rome, Christmas established in, 20-1;
    pagan winter festivals in, 23-4, 165-71;
    Christmas services and customs in, 95-6, 112-6, 289-90;
    mediaeval New Year _quête_ in, 331

Rossetti, Christina, 85

Rouen, religious plays at, 124-5, 138-40

Roumania, the "star" in, 152;
    Christmas drama in, 153;
    St. Andrew's Eve in, 215-6;
    Christmas songs in, 238;
    Christmas fare in, 287, 291;
    New Year in, 330-1;
    Epiphany in, 342

Russia, Epiphany ceremonies in, 104, 246;
    the "star" in, 152;
    Christmas Eve in, 232-3, 237;
    fire superstitions in, 253;
    Christmas fare in, 287, 291;
    Christmas games in, 294;
    mummers in, 302;
    New Year in, 333


Saboly, 62

Sacrifice, theories of, 174-8;
    connected with festivals, 178-9;
    survivals of, 199, 283-7, 292-4, 328, 347-9

Salers, Christmas king at, 340

_Samhain_, 172, 204

Sant' Andrea della Valle, Rome, 102

Santa Klaus, 220

Santa Maria Maggiore, Rome, 95-6, 107, 114-5

_Saturnalia_, 24, 113, 165-7, 180, 359

Schiller, 266

_Schimmel_ and _Schimmelreiter_, 199-200, 206, 231

Schoolboys' festival, 223-4.
    _See also_ Boy Bishop

Scotland, Christmas carols in, 70;
    Hallowe'en customs in, 197-8;
    sowens eaten in, 285;
    "first-foot" in, 325-6;
    other New Year customs in, 326-9, 332-3;
    Candlemas in, 354 |399|

Sedulius, Coelius, 32

Sequences, 32-3

Serao, Matilde, 113

Serbs, Christmas customs of, 251-4, 341

Shakespeare, 239, 298

Shepherds in Christmas drama, 123-4, 132-7, 139-43

Shropshire, soul-cakes in, 192-3;
    Guy Fawkes Day at Ludlow, 199;
    Twelve Days superstitions in, 240-1, 258;
    Christmas Brand in, 258;
    Christmas decorations in, 275-6, 355;
    "wigs" in, 285;
    cattle specially fed at Christmas, 289;
    morris-dancers in, 299;
    New Year in, 324;
    Candlemas in, 355

Sicily, Midnight Mass in, 98;
    Christmas _novena_ in, 112-3;
    Christmas procession at Messina, 113;
    Christmas plays in, 150;
    All Souls' Eve in, 192;
    Martinmas in, 204;
    St. Lucia's Eve in, 222;
    presents in, 278;
    Candlemas candles in, 353

Sidgwick, Mr. F., 6, 77-8

Sidgwick, Mrs. Alfred, 264

Silesia, _Schimmel_ in, 200;
    Martinmas in, 206;
    Christmas Eve in, 232;
    animals specially fed at Christmas, 289

Slav New Year, 172-3;
    Christmas songs and customs, 237-8, 251-4, 290, 341.
    _See also_ Bohemia, Crivoscia, Poland, Russia

Smith, W. Robertson, 164-5, 175-6, 178-9

Somersetshire wassailing, 345

Soul cakes, 192-4

South America, Christmas in, 98

Southwell, 79-80

Sowens eaten, 285, 325

Spain, Christmas poetry in, 65-7;
    Midnight Mass in, 97-8, 117;
    the crib in, 117;
    Christmas drama in, 128, 148-51, 153;
    _turron_ in, 291;
    Epiphany in, 343-4

Spervogel, 42

Spinning, during Twelve Days, 240-3

Staffordshire, St. Clement's Day in, 211-2

"Star-singing," 151-2

"Stella," 125-7, 129

Stephen, St., his festival, 292, 302, 311-6

Stephens, Dean, 35

Stow's "Survay," 272

Strasburg, early Christmas-trees at, 265-6

_Strenae_, 168, 277-8

Stubbes, Philip, 184, 298

Styles, Old and New, 268-9

Styria, _Habergaiss_ in, 201;
    Perchta in, 243;
    St. John's wine in, 315

Sun, the, December 25 as festival of, 23;
    Yule not connected with, 171-2;
    sun-charms, 182, 198, 252, 254

Suso, 44

Sussex, squirrel-hunting in, 214;
    tipteerers in, 298;
    wassailing fruit-trees in, 345

Swabia, Pelzmärte in, 206-7, 217

Sweden, Christmas service in, 99;
    "star-singing" in, 151;
    animal masks in, 202;
    St. Lucia's Day in, 221-4;
    Christmas Eve superstitions in, 235-6;
    Yule log in, 257;
    Yule candles in, 259-60;
    Christmas-trees in, 267, 270;
    Yule straw in, 276;
    Christmas presents in, 278-9;
    pig's head eaten in, 286;
    dances in, 293-4;
    St. Stephen's Day in, 312-3, 315;
    "St. Knut's Day" in, 351

Swinburne, 84-5

Swine as sacrificial animal, 284, 286

Switzerland, St. Nicholas in, 218-9;
    Christmas-tree in, 267;
    birds fed at Christmas, 289

Sword-dance, 294, 299-301

_Sylvesterabend_, 274, 322


Tacitus, 200, 299

Tate, Nahum, 84

Tauler, 43

Teme valley, "first-footing" in, 324

Tenby, _Plygain_ at, 99;
    St. Clement's Day at, 212

Tersteegen, Gerhard, 75-6

Tertullian, 269

Teutonic New Year, 171-3, 189, 202-4

Thomas of Celano, 38

Thomas, Mr. N. W., 293

Thomas, St., his festival, 223-6

"Thomassin'," 226

Thurston, Mr. Edgar, 322

Tieck, 266 |400|

Tille, Dr. A., 5, 110, 169, 172-3, 231-2, 268

Tipteerers, 298

Tolstoy's "War and Peace," 302

Tomte Gubbe, 236

Tonquin, feast of the dead in, 195

Totemism, 175-8

Tours, Council of, 21, 101, 239

Towneley plays, 128, 134-7

Trees, sacred, 177-8, 254, 269-71;
    flowering at Christmas, 268-9;
    Christian symbols, 271-2

Trest, Epiphany at, 344

Trolls on Christmas Eve, 235-6

Troppau, Christmas Eve at, 232

Troubadours, 36

Tübingen, cradle-rocking at, 111

Tuscany, Christmas log in, 256

Tutilo of St. Gall, 123

Twelfth Night. _See_ Epiphany

Twelve Days, declared a festal tide, 21, 239;
    variously reckoned, 239;
    supernatural visitors on, 239-47

Tylor, Dr. E. B., 191

Tynan, Katharine, 85

Tyrol, Midnight Mass in, 97;
    the crib in, 107-8;
    cradle-rocking in, 111;
    Christmas drama in, 143;
    "star-singing" in, 152;
    All Souls in, 191-2, 194;
    _Klöpfelnächte_ in, 218;
    St. Nicholas in, 220;
    St. Lucia in, 223;
    Christmas Eve in, 236, 346;
    Berchta in, 243-4;
    customs with fruit-trees in, 268;
    Christmas pie in, 290, 345-6;
    St. Stephen's Day in, 311-2;
    St. John's Day in, 314;
    Epiphany in, 337;
    Carnival in, 349;
    Purification candles in, 353


Ubeda, J. L. de, 65

Uist, South, "breast-strip" in, 328

United States, Santa Klaus in, 220;
    New Year in, 323

Usedom, 201

Usener, H., 20, 107


Valdivielso, J. de, 65

Vampires, 215-6, 245-6

Vaughan, Henry, 81

Vega, Lope de, 149-50

Vegetation-cults, 177-8

Venetia, Martinmas in, 204, 207

Vessel-cup, 118

Villazopeque, 148-9

Vosges mountains, All Souls' Eve in, 191


Wales, Christmas carols in, 69;
    _Plygain_ in, 99;
    soul-cakes in, 193-4;
    Hallowe'en in, 189, 196-8;
    the "Mari Llwyd" in, 201;
    "new water" carol in, 333-4;
    Christmas football in, 349

Warnsdorf, St. Nicholas play at, 220

Wassail-bowl, 193, 285-6

Water, New Year, 332-4

Watts, Isaac, 83-4

Weather, ideas about, 203, 332

_Weihnacht_, origin of the name, 20

Werewolves, 246

Wesley, Charles, 84

Westermarck, Dr. E., 176

Westphalia, St. Thomas's Day in, 225

Whipping customs, 207-8, 315-7, 330

"Wild hunt," 239-40

Wine, Martinmas, 204;
    St. John's and St. Stephen's, 314-5

"Wish hounds," 240

Wither, George, 83

Woden, 200, 206, 208, 231, 240

Women, their clothes worn by men at folk-festivals, 178, 301, 304;
    unlucky at New Year, 324-5

Woolwich, St. Clement's and St. Catherine's Days at, 212

Worcestershire. St. Clement's Day in, 212;
    New Year in, 324

Wormesley, Holy Thorn at, 269

Wren, hunting of, 292-3

Wylie, Miss I. A. R., 263


"Yeth hounds," 240

York Minster, mistletoe at, 273;
    Boy Bishop at, 307

York plays, 128, 131-3

Yorkshire, possible survival of the crib in, 118;
    frumenty, ale posset, and Yule cakes in, 285;
    "lucky bird" in, 325

Ypres, St. Martin at, 206

Yule, origin of the name, 25, 171-2

"Yule Boar," 288

Yule log, 180, 245, 251-8, 344, 354


Zacharias, Pope, 171




FOOTNOTES

[1]   For an explanation of the small numerals in the text see Preface.