"Oh, Mr. Steell," cried Helen, "don't forget our next waltz."

His face all smiles, the lawyer forced his way through the press of
people.

"Have you seen Dick?" asked Ray.  "I sent him to get me an ice."

Mr. Steell laughed outright.

"Oh, it was you who sent him.  If I had known----"

"Why?" demanded Ray, opening wide her eyes.  "Where is he?  I want my
ice."

"I'll get you an ice, dear," said Helen.

"No, let me go," exclaimed Mr. Parker.

"No--no one will get the ice but myself," said Mr. Steell.  "It's my
fault that the ice is not already forthcoming.  It is only just that I
suffer accordingly."

Mr. Parker laughed.

"The ice episode threatens to become a diplomatic incident."

"Why--whatever is the matter?" smiled Helen.

The lawyer was so much amused that he could hardly keep his face
straight.  With an effort he controlled himself, and said:

"Just now I was talking with a pretty girl and Dick suddenly forced his
way through the crowd, going in the direction of the buffet.  I had no
idea on what a serious mission he was bound, of course, and so I called
him to introduce him to the pretty girl, who had with her an aunt, a
veritable witch, as hideous as a Medusa, and who, in addition, is
afflicted with a wooden leg.  Dick gave the aunt only a glance.  That
was enough, but he was all smiles for her pretty niece, who, I must
admit, is somewhat of a flirt.  Anyhow she rolled her eyes so
eloquently at him that he forgot all about the important errand on
which he was bound.  Just at that moment the musicians struck up a
_schottische_, and, on the spur of the moment, he asked the pretty girl
to dance.  She declined, with an arch smile, but, pointing to the old
witch, said her aunt would be delighted.  Poor Dick!  There was no help
for it.  The Medusa got up, seized him in her claws, and, the last
thing I saw of the poor youth, they were doing a sort of Bunny Hug, the
wooden leg of his lady partner marking time on the waxed floor."

"Please stop!  If you go on--I shall expire."

Ray was nearly in convulsions of laughter in which all joined.  When
Helen had somewhat regained her composure, she said:

"I think it's unkind to make fun of the poor woman.  Who is she?"

"I haven't the least idea.  Perhaps Dick will tell us."

At that moment the youth emerged from the throng and came towards them,
his linen mussed, his hair dishevelled.  But in one hand he held grimly
a plate of ice cream.  Looking shamelessly at Ray, he smiled:

"I've got it--at last."

"Where have you been all this time?" she demanded innocently.

"Oh, I've been having no end of a good time!"

Steell burst out laughing.

"Did she ask you to call, Dick?"

"If she had I'd have killed her."

"How did the artificial leg work?"

"She jammed it on my foot once.  How it did hurt!"

Ray, by this time, was almost in hysterics, and Helen and the others,
catching the contagion, the whole group were soon shaken by
uncontrollable laughter.

The orchestra struck up a quadrille.  A man came rushing up to Ray.

"My dance, I believe."

With a comical expression of resignation, the young girl allowed
herself to be led away, while Helen and Mrs. Brewster-Curtis took seats
to watch the figures.

"Come, Dick," said Steell in an undertone.  "Let's go and smoke a
cigar."

Leading the way he went into the smoking-room, where cigars and liquors
were laid out.  Turning to the youth, he inquired eagerly:

"Well--what about the Signor?  What have you found out?"

Dick lit a cigarette and then calmly he said:

"Everything."

"What--to be specific."

"He's all and more than we expected."

"In other words--a crook?"

"Yes, and a dangerous one."

"What's his game?"

"Confidence man, bank robber, blackmailer."

"How did you find out?"

"Very easily.  I found his record.  The police haven't disturbed him
because his clever disguise has deceived them.  They have not
recognized in the polished, suave Signor Keralio, the popular fencing
master, the man they have been hunting for years.  His real name is
Richard Barton.  His pals call him Baron Rapp.  Five years ago he was
convicted of robbing a bank out West and was sent up for ten years.  He
served a year in Joliet and then broke jail and he has been at liberty
ever since."

"Good!" exclaimed the lawyer, rubbing his hands with satisfaction.
"We've got him where we want him.  What else?"

"He has managed to elude the police so far owing to the fact that he
has not been operating of late, but from what I've been able to ferret
out, he is preparing some big haul.  Everything points that way.  I
don't know what it is, but it's the biggest thing in which he has yet
been mixed up.  He's affiliated with crooks who operate all over the
country.  Some of his men are disguised as servants and valets in rich
houses.  They spy on their masters and tell him if there is anything
worth robbing.  He is the master-mind that schemes the operations that
others carry out.  He tells his men what banks and homes to break into
and instructs them how to do it.  He receives all the stolen property.
At this very moment his flat in the Bronx is full of stolen loot.  I
also suspect him of being engaged in counterfeiting."

The lawyer was lost in admiration.

"Dick, you're a wonder!"

The young man grinned with pride.

"Well--what's it to be--shall we tip off the police?"

"Not by a long shot.  We'll have the gun loaded--all ready for use.  If
the Signor gets ugly we'll shoot--that's all.  Not a word, do you hear.
Leave everything to me.  Come, let's go back or they'll think
something's wrong."

In the ballroom, they were still dancing the quadrille, the pretty
gowns of the girls and black coats of the men making a picturesque
sight as they blended in the ever changing figures.

The gayety was at its height when the maid entered and whispered in her
ear:

"There's a gentleman downstairs."

Helen looked at the girl in surprise.

"A gentleman?  What's his name?"

"I don't know, m'm.  He wouldn't say."

"Very well, I'll go down."

Slipping away unobserved, Helen made her way downstairs and throwing
back the heavy tapestry portières entered the drawing room which was
almost in complete darkness.  The maid had forgotten to switch on the
electrolier and as the only light came from the distant dining-room,
the big parlor was practically all in gloom.  Before her eyes had
become quite accustomed to the dark, a man advanced out of the shadow.
It was Signor Keralio.

She recognized him instantly and instinctively she shrank back,
alarmed.  How had he dared come again to her house after what had
occurred?  He noticed the movement and asked:

"I see that I'm unwelcome.  Do I frighten you so much?"

Coldly she answered:

"You do not frighten me.  You surprise me.  I did not expect this
pleasure after what passed between us the last time you were here."
Making a half turn, as if about to leave the room, she added quickly:
"I have company upstairs.  You must excuse me."

She walked away and had almost reached the door, when, with a quick
stride, he intercepted her.

"Please don't go.  I am here in your own interest.  I want to talk to
you--just a moment, about----"

She hesitated.

"About what?" she demanded haughtily.

"About your husband."

"My husband?" she echoed, turning and facing him.

"Yes--your husband.  He is in danger.  I want to help you and--him."

"Kenneth in danger?" she faltered.  "What do you mean?"

He pointed to a chair.

"Won't you sit down.  I won't keep you a moment.  I will tell you
everything----"

She sat down like one in a dream.  Taking a seat near her, he began in
his low, musical tones.

"Peril threatens your husband.  It is known that he has gone to South
Africa to bring home diamonds of almost inestimable value.  A number of
desperate men, who stop at nothing to accomplish their ends, have taken
steps to secure the diamonds at any cost--even at the price of a human
life."

A chill ran through her, but her voice was firm as she demanded
scornfully:

"You know these men--these murderers?"

"Yes--I know them."

Instantly came the bitter retort:

"Maybe you are one of them!"

His eyes flashed in the darkness and his voice vibrated with passion as
he answered:

"I know you think ill of me.  You do me an injustice.  I have no share
in these men's operations, but I have great power over them.  They must
obey my command.  They know that and so respect my orders.  A word from
me and your husband will be unmolested."

Like the drowning man who in his agony will grasp eagerly at a floating
straw, Helen seized at the hope his words held out.  That Kenneth was
in peril she readily believed.  It was a dangerous mission.  She had
scented danger from the outset.  This man might be lying, and yet he
might have the influence he boasted.

"You can avert the danger?"

He nodded.

"I can."

"How?"

"I will give orders that he be unmolested."

"And they will obey you?"

"They will."

Her face brightened.  More amiably she said:

"You'll do this, won't you?"

"Yes--for a price."

"What price?"

"That you recall what you said the other day and restore me to a place
in your friendship."

There was no mistaking his true meaning.  It was a price no
self-respecting woman could pay.  She rose indignantly, and haughtily
she said:

"You have never had a place in my friendship, Signor Keralio, and you
never will.  I see through your motive and I despise you now all the
more.  My husband, who is an honorable man, would be the first to have
done with me forever if I entered into any such bargain.  He has
mistaken your character.  When he returns I will enlighten him, and he
will tell you himself that his wife has no dealings with a scoundrel.
As for your threats, and tale of mysterious danger, I don't believe a
word you say.  But I may think it worth while to cable my husband in
order to put him on his guard and to inform the police.  Good night!"

Before he could stop her, she had touched an electric bell and left the
room.  The next instant Roberts, the butler, appeared and threw open
the front door.  There was nothing to do but go.

She had defied him.




CHAPTER X

Eagerly, breathlessly, Helen tore open the cablegram.

It was late Saturday afternoon and she had been with Ray and Mr. Steell
to see some paintings--a private view of a remarkable collection of old
masters.  After having tea at the Plaza they had taken a brisk walk
through the Park, the lawyer insisting that the exercise would do them
good.

"It's just come, m'm," said the maid, holding out the thin envelope.

"Oh, it's from Kenneth!" exclaimed Ray excitedly, throwing down her
muff and running to look over her sister's shoulder.

For long, dreary weeks Helen had expected, and waited for, this
message, and now it had come, she was almost afraid to read it.  There
were only a few words, cold and formal, the usual matter-of-fact,
businesslike phraseology of the so-much-a-word telegram:


CAPE TOWN, Thursday (delay in transmission).  Sail to-day on the
_Abyssinia_.  All's well.  KEN.


"Is that all?" exclaimed Ray, disappointed.

Mr. Steell laughed.

"How much more do you expect at $2 a word?"

"Well, he might be a little more explicit," pouted Ray.  "If I were his
wife, that wouldn't satisfy me."

Helen laughed lightly.  Her eyes sparkling, her usually pale cheeks
filled with a ruddy color from her walk in the park, the lawyer thought
he had never seen her looking so pretty.

"It satisfies me," she said, her face all lit up with joyous
excitement.  "All I want to know is that he is safe and on his way
home.  The cablegram is dated Thursday.  Then he's already on the water
three days!  I wonder why we didn't hear before?"

Mr. Steell glanced over her shoulder.

"The dispatch has been delayed.  Don't you see?  It says, 'delayed in
transmission.'"

Helen turned round, her face radiant.

"When ought he to get here?"

The lawyer was silent for a moment as if calculating.  Then, looking
up, he said:

"The _Abyssinia_ is not a very fast boat.  I suppose she is the best he
could get.  She's due at Southampton two weeks from to-day.  A week
after that, he ought to be in New York--providing nothing happens."

Helen, who was still reading and re-reading the cablegram, looked up
quickly.  With a note of alarm in her voice, she exclaimed:

"Providing nothing happens!  What could happen?"

"Oh, nothing serious, of course.  In these days of the wireless nothing
ever happens to steamers.  One is safer traveling on the sea than on
land.  I didn't mean anything serious, but merely that sometimes boats
are delayed by bad weather or by fog.  That prevents them arriving on
schedule time."

Almost three months had slipped by since Kenneth's departure from New
York.  To Helen it had seemed so many years.  She had tried to be
contented and happy for Ray's sake.  She entertained a good deal,
giving dinner and theater parties, keeping open house, playing
graciously the rôle of chatelaine in the absence of her lord, to all
outward appearances as gay and light-hearted as ever.  Only Ray and her
immediate friends knew that the gayety was forced.

The poison had done its deadly work.  The few words uttered by Signor
Keralio that afternoon shortly after her husband's departure had burnt
deep into her mind like letters of fire.  Well she guessed the object
of the wily Italian in speaking as he did.  It availed him nothing, and
she only despised him the more.  It was cowardly, contemptible, and,
from such a source, absolutely unworthy of belief.  Yet secretly it
worried her just the same.  She had always considered Kenneth's life an
open book.  She thought she knew his every action, his every thought.
The mere suggestion that her husband might have other interests, other
attachments of which she knew nothing took her so by surprise that she
was disarmed, powerless to answer.  The innuendo that he might be
unfaithful had gone through her heart like a knife.  Of course it was
quite ridiculous.  He was not that kind of man.  It was true he had
often gone away on trips that seemed unnecessary, and now she came to
think of it Kenneth's absences had of late been both frequent and
mysterious.  Then, too, she had no idea of the extent of his operations
in Wall Street.  She knew he bought and sold stocks sometimes.  That is
only what every investor does.  But it was incredible that he was
involved to the extent Keralio said he was.  She knew he was ambitious
to acquire wealth, but that he would take such fearful risks and
jeopardize funds which, after all, belonged, not to him, but to the
stockholders--that was impossible.  It was a horrible libel.

Still another cause for worry was the health of her little daughter,
Dorothy.  Nothing ailed the child particularly, but she was not well.
The doctor said nothing was the matter, but a slight temperature
persisted, together with a cough which, naturally, alarmed the young
mother out of all proportion to the seriousness of the case.  The
doctor also advised a change of air, so Helen at once made arrangements
to send her little daughter to Philadelphia, where, in Aunt Carrie's
beautiful house, she would have the best air and attention in the
world.  Aunt Carrie came to New York to fetch the child, and, as she
stayed a couple of weeks sight-seeing and visiting friends that also
helped to keep Helen busy.

"I do wish that I didn't have such a worrying disposition"--she laughed
nervously after the lawyer had been at some pains to assure her about
the sea-worthiness of the _Abyssinia_.  "Really, it makes me so
unhappy, but I simply can't help it.  The other day it was baby who
made me terribly anxious; now it is Kenneth's home-coming.  I must seem
very foolish to you all."

Ray quickly protested.

"You sweet thing--how could you look foolish?  What an idea!  Only
please don't worry, dear.  I never do."

Mr. Steell nodded sympathetically.

"It's nothing to be ashamed of, Mrs. Traynor.  It shows you have a
fine, sensitive nature.  It is only the grosser natures that are
callous and unaffected by the anxieties of life."

Taking the remarks to herself, Ray threw up her head indignantly.

"I deny the imputation that I'm gross."

The lawyer laughed.

"You are far too healthy to worry.  Moreover, you have nothing to worry
about.  If a man you loved were six thousand miles away----"

"Yes," interrupted Helen; "that's it.  Only those who care for each
other can understand----"

"Oh, of course!" retorted her sister, flaring up.  "We spinsters,
belonging, as we do, to the sisterhood of the Great Unloved, are quite
incompetent to express an intelligent opinion on that or on any other
matter.  I grant that, but is Mr. Steell, a confirmed old bachelor, any
more competent than I?"

"Hardly an old bachelor!" interrupted Helen reprovingly.

"No--middle-aged bachelor!" corrected Ray saucily.  "He never cared for
a woman in his life.  He----"

"Who told you so?" inquired the lawyer quickly, with an amused twinkle
in his eye.

Ray colored visibly.

"Oh, I judge so," she stammered.  "You never speak of that sort of
thing.  One can only draw conclusions."

"The conclusions may be wrong," he replied gravely.  "My life is a very
busy one.  I have had no time to think of anything outside my immediate
work.  Yet I am human.  I sometimes yearn for the companionship of a
good woman.  A pretty face attracts me, as it does other men, but, in
my opinion, any such attachment is too serious a matter to be treated
lightly.  When a man feels deeply he keeps his own confidence until the
moment comes when he can unburden himself and say what is in his heart."

"I like that," said Helen, nodding her head approvingly.

Ray jumped up to conceal her embarrassment.

"Oh, how terribly serious you two are to-day!" she exclaimed.  "I
declare I'll run away unless you cheer up a bit.  Suppose I get some
tea?"

"Excellent idea!" laughed the lawyer.

Ray touched a bell, and went to clear a small side table, which she
drew up near where they were sitting.

"There!" she exclaimed, smiling roguishly at the lawyer.  "Don't you
think I'm smart?"

"Of course we do."  Lowering his voice he added significantly: "At
least I do."

Apparently the compliment fell on deaf ears, for, turning her head
away, she said quickly:

"Please don't be sarcastic."

More seriously, and in the same tone, that even Helen, who was only a
short distance away, could not hear, he said:

"I'm never sarcastic.  I think you are all a woman should be."

"Do you mean that?"

"I do.  I have thought it for a long time."

"Really?"

"Really."

The young girl colored with pleasure.  For all her sophisticated and
independent manner she was still a child at heart.  She had no thoughts
of marriage, but it flattered her to think that she had the power to
attract and interest this serious, brilliant man of the world.  She
said nothing more, relapsing into a meditative silence as she busied
herself helping the maid to set out the tea table.

To Helen it was a source of keen satisfaction to notice the attention
which the brilliant young lawyer was paying her sister.  She had long
recognized his sterling qualities.  He was a man of whom any woman
might well be proud.  He could not but make a good husband.  Next to
Kenneth and her baby no one was dearer to her than Ray and, since their
mother died, she had felt a certain sense of responsibility.  To see
her well and happily married was the one secret wish of her life.

But overshadowing these preoccupations at present were those other new
anxieties which preyed upon her sensitive mind with all the force of an
obsession.  Was there any part of her husband's life that he had hidden
from her?  Was he really as loyal as she had always fondly and blindly
believed; had his ambition led him to take grave financial risks that
might one day jeopardize their comfort and happiness, the very future
of their child?

Ray rose to put away the tea table, and she found herself sitting alone
with the lawyer.  There was a moment's silence, and then, as if
thinking out aloud what was on her mind, she said:

"Thank God, he's safe; I had the most fearful premonitions----"

The lawyer laughed.

"Don't put your trust in premonitions--things happen or they don't
happen.  It's absurd to believe that misfortunes are all prepared
beforehand."

"Then you are not a fatalist?"

"Decidedly not.  I hope I have too much intelligence to believe in
anything so foolish."

"Do you believe in a Supreme Being who has the same power to suddenly
snuff us out of existence as he had to create us?"

"I neither believe nor disbelieve.  Frankly, I do not know.  What
people call God, Jehovah, Nature, according to my reasoning, is an
astounding energy, a marvellous chemical process, created and
controlled by some unknown, stupendous first cause, the origin of which
man may never understand.  How should he?  He has not time.  We are
rushed into the world without preparation.  We are ignorant, helpless,
blind.  Gradually, by dint of much physical labor and mental toil, we
succeed in ferreting out a few facts regarding ourselves and the
physical laws that govern us.  We are just on the verge of discovering
more--we are just beginning to understand and enjoy life--when suddenly
we find ourselves growing old and decrepit.  Our physical and mental
powers fail us, and the same force that benevolently created us now
mercilessly destroys us, and we are hurled, willy-nilly, back into
eternity whence we came.  Rather absurd, isn't it?"

Intensely interested Helen looked up.  Eagerly she exclaimed:

"You have a whole system of philosophy in a mere handful of words,
haven't you?"

He smiled.

"It's all one needs, and perhaps as good as those more complicated and
more verbose."

More seriously and lowering her voice so Ray, who was still busy at the
other end of the room, might not overhear, she said:

"Mr. Steell--you are so clever--you know all about everything.  Tell
me, do you know anything about Wall Street?"

The ingenuousness of the question amused him.  With a laugh he answered:

"A little--to my sorrow."

"It's a dangerous place, isn't it?"

"Very; it has a graveyard at one end, the East River at the other, two
places highly convenient at times to those who play the game."

"If luck goes against him, a man could lose his all, then?"

"Not only his all but the all of others, too--if he's that kind of a
man."

She was silent for a moment.  Then she continued:

"And sometimes even fine, honest men are tempted, are they not, to
gamble with money which is not theirs?"

"Many have done so.  The prisons are full of them.  There is nothing so
dangerous as the get-rich-quick fever.  All the men who gamble in
stocks have it.  It becomes a mania, an obsession.  Their judgment
becomes warped; they lose all sense of right and wrong."

"There's something else I want to ask you.  What do you think of Signor
Keralio?"

He hesitated a moment before he answered.  Then, with some warmth, he
said:

"As I told you before, I think he's a crook, only we can't prove it.
I've been looking up his record.  It's a bad one.  The fellow has
behaved himself so far in New York, but out West he is known under
various names as one of the slickest rogues that ever escaped hanging.
At one time he was the chief of a band of international crooks and
blackmailers that operated in London, Paris, Buenos Ayres, and the City
of Mexico.  The scheme they usually worked was to get some prominent
man so badly compromised that he would pay any amount to save himself
from exposure, and they played so successfully on the fears of their
victims that they were usually successful."

A worried look came into the young wife's face.  Perhaps there was more
in Signor Keralio's relations with her husband than she had suspected.
Quickly she asked:

"Why do they permit a man of that character to be at large?"

The lawyer shrugged his shoulders.

"You can't proceed against a man unless there is some specific charge
made.  The police have nothing now against him.  He may have reformed
for all I know.  But that was his record some years ago."

"I don't think he'll dare come here again," went on Helen.  "He's
exceedingly offensive, and yet he has about him a certain magnetism
that compels your attention, even while his manner and look repels and
irritates.  Only the other day he----"

Before she could complete the sentence, there was a loud ring at the
front door bell.  Helen hastily rose, but Ray had already gone forward.

"It's Mr. Parker," she cried.  "I saw him coming from the window."

The next instant the door of the drawing-room was flung open and Mr.
Parker appeared.

"Hallo, ladies!  Howdy, Steell!"

The president of the Americo-African Mining Company was not looking his
usual debonair self that evening.  His manner was nervous and
flustered, his face pale and drawn with anxious lines.  His coat lacked
the customary boutonnière, and his crumpled linen and unshaved chin
suggested that he had come direct from his office after a strenuous day
without stopping to go through the formality of making a change of
attire.

Helen was quick to note the alteration in his appearance, and her first
instinct, naturally, was to associate it with her husband.  Something
was amiss.

"There's nothing wrong, is there?" she asked in alarm.

"No, no, my dear woman!"

But his tone was not convincing.  He always called her "my dear woman"
when nervous or excited, and "my dear lady" in his calmer moods.  She
at once remarked it, and it did not tend to reassure her.  Now greatly
alarmed she laid a trembling hand on his arm.

"Tell me, please!  Don't hide anything from me.  Has anything happened
to Kenneth?"

"No--no; of course not."  Quickly changing the subject he asked: "You
got a message."

"Yes--a cablegram.  It came just now."

"Have you got it?  Let me see it."

"Yes, certainly," said Helen, looking around for the dispatch.  Unable
to find it, she called to her sister.

"Ray, dear, what did you do with Kenneth's cablegram?"

Her sister came up to assist in the search, in which even Mr. Steell
joined.  But the search was fruitless.  The cablegram had disappeared.

"Oh, I know!" suddenly exclaimed Ray.  "It must have been carried away
with the tea things."

"That's right!  I never thought of that!" said Helen.

The next instant the two women hurried out of the room in the direction
of the kitchen.

The instant they had disappeared Mr. Parker turned to the lawyer.  In a
whisper he said:

"There is terrible news!  I don't know how to break it to the poor
woman----"

Steell sprang forward.  Anxiously he exclaimed:

"Terrible news?  Surely not----"

The president nodded.

"Yes--all lost, and the diamonds, too.  A dispatch just received in
London says that, according to a wireless relayed from Cape Town, the
_Abyssinia_ caught fire twelve hours after sailing from that port and
all on board perished.  It is shocking, and the pecuniary loss to us
disastrous.  The stones were not insured.  Hush!  Here they come.  Not
a word!"

"My God!" muttered the lawyer, as he fell back and turned away, so they
might not see the effect which the shocking news had made on him.  With
an effort he managed to control himself.

The two women entered the room joyfully.

"Here it is!" cried Helen exultantly, as she brandished the missing
telegram.  "You see, he's just sailed, and all's well."

The president said nothing, but, taking the dispatch from her hands,
slowly read it.  Nodding his head, he said slowly:

"Yes--he's just sailed, and--all's well."

"When do you think he'll be here?" questioned the young hostess,
looking anxiously up into his face.

The president shook his head.

"That is hard to tell," he answered evasively.

Mr. Steell had gone to the window, where he stood looking out, idly
drumming his fingers on the pane.  How was it possible to break such
fearful tidings as that?  What a horrible calamity!  He wished himself
a hundred miles away, yet some one must tell her.  At that moment
shrill cries arose in the street outside--the familiar, distressing,
almost exultant cries of news-venders, glad of any calamity that puts a
few nickels into their pockets.

"_Ex-tra!  Ex-tra!  Special ex-tra!_"

"What's that?" exclaimed Helen apprehensively.  The sound of special
editions always filled her with anxiety, especially since Kenneth's
departure.

"_Ex-tra!  Ex-tra!  Special edition!  Ex-tra!  Big steamer gone down.
Great loss of life.  Extra!_"

Her face was pale, as she turned and looked at the others, who also
stood in silence, listening to the hoarse accents of distress.

"A steamer gone down!" she faltered.  "Isn't that terrible?  I wonder
what steamer it was."

Ray ran to the door.

"I'll get a paper," she said.

Before Mr. Parker or Mr. Steell could prevent her the young girl had
opened the front door.  Now there was no way of preventing Helen
knowing.  The best thing was to prepare her gently.

"My dear Mrs. Traynor--I didn't tell you the trouble just now.  There
has been a little trouble.  The _Abyssinia_----"

Helen gave a cry of anguish.

"I knew it!  I knew it!  Kenneth is dead!"

"No, no, my dear lady.  These newspaper reports are always grossly
exaggerated.  The _Abyssinia_ has met with a little trouble--nothing
very serious, I assure you.  Everything is all right, no doubt.  Your
husband is well able to take care of himself.  We may hear from him any
moment, reassuring us as to his safety."

His words of comfort went unheeded.  Her face white as death Helen
tottered rather than walked to the door, reaching it just as Ray,
almost as pale, entered, reading the paper she had just purchased.  On
seeing her sister she instinctively made an effort to hide the sheet,
but Helen quickly snatched it out of her hand.  Her hand trembling so
violently that she could scarcely make out the letters she glanced at
the big scare-head, printed in red ink, to imitate blood, a merciful
custom sensational newspapers have of making the most of the agony of
others.

  S. S. ABYSSINIA GONE DOWN!
    ALL PERISH!


For a moment she stood still, looking at the big type with open,
staring eyes.  Then, with a low cry, like a wounded animal, she let the
paper slip from her nerveless fingers.  There was a furious throbbing
at her temples: her heart seemed to stop.  The room spun round, and she
fainted just as Steell rushed forward to catch her in his arms.

"Brandy!  Brandy!"  he shouted.  "She's fainted!"

While Ray ran for the smelling salts and Mr. Parker was bringing the
brandy there came another vigorous pull at the bell.  An instant later
the maid entered with a cablegram, which Mr. Parker seized and tore
open.  As he read the contents, a look of the greatest surprise and joy
lit up his face.

"Look at this!" he cried.

"What is it?" demanded Steell, still on his knees trying to revive the
unconscious woman.

"This will do her more good than all your brandy."

"What is it?" cried Ray impatiently.

"He's safe!" cried Mr. Parker exultantly.

"Safe!" they all cried.

"Yes--safe."  Handing the dispatch to the lawyer, he added: "Here--read
this."

Steell took the dispatch and read:


CAPE TOWN, Saturday: Miraculously saved.  Sail to-morrow on the
_Zanzibar_.  KENNETH.




CHAPTER XI

The house of mourning had suddenly become transformed into a house of
joy.

From the deepest abyss of hopeless despair Helen, during the next few
days, was raised to the highest pinnacle of human felicity.  Kenneth
was safe, that was all she wanted to know.  Whether he had succeeded or
not in saving the diamonds she did not know or care.

Nothing more had been heard from him.  Cable dispatches reported the
_Zanzibar_ to be making good time on her way to Southampton, but, until
the steamer arrived there, no further details were to be expected.
Much, however, had been gleaned as to the fate of the _Abyssinia_, and,
as the accounts of disaster began to come in, she could only thank God
that he had succeeded in escaping such a fearful fate.  The ship had
mysteriously caught fire the first day out from Cape Town, and, in the
excitement, the crew, as well as the passengers, lost their heads.
Only one boat could be lowered, and in this Kenneth got away, together
with François, his valet, and some other passengers.  A news item in
connection with the affair, which was of particular interest to Helen,
ran as follows:


"The loss of the _Abyssinia_ brought to a tragic ending a remarkable
romance in which Mr. Kenneth Traynor, one of the rescued passengers and
a prominent New York broker, is one of the principal figures.  Mr.
Traynor is one of two twins so identical in appearance that no one, not
even their own mother, knew them apart.  One of the children
mysteriously disappeared when a mere child and was believed to be dead.
Mr. Kenneth Traynor went recently to South Africa on business, and on
the diamond fields found in starving condition an unlucky miner who was
a perfect counterpart of himself.  It was his lost brother.  Mutual
explanations followed and the identity was established.  Overjoyed at
the reunion the two brothers sailed for home on the _Abyssinia_.
Suddenly came the alarm of fire.  While the panic on board was at its
worst, the broker lost sight of his brother, whom he never saw again
and whom it is only too certain went down with the ship."


"It's almost unbelievable, isn't it?" exclaimed Helen, as she read the
paragraph for the hundredth time and handed it to Wilbur Steell, who
had dropped in to hear if there was any news.

Ray, who loved a mystery better than anything else in the world,
clapped her hands.

"Isn't it perfectly stunning?"

"Not for Kenneth's brother--poor fellow," said Helen reprovingly.  "He
did not live long to enjoy his bettered condition."

"That's right.  How thoughtless of me!" said Ray contritely.

As he finished reading Mr. Steell looked puzzled.  Looking toward Helen
he asked:

"Did you know that your husband had a twin brother?"

"I only knew it recently--just before he sailed.  He did not know it
himself."

"How did he find it out?"

"His old nurse told him.  I was present."

"Did the nurse know the brother was in South Africa?"

"No--she had no idea of it.  I'm sure of that.  It's one of those
wonderful coincidences one some-times hears of."

The lawyer shook his head.  Thoughtfully he said:

"It's certainly strange--one of the strangest things I ever heard of."

"Kenneth will be able to tell us more about it when he comes," said Ray.

"Yes--no doubt," asserted her sister quickly.

The lawyer remained thoughtful for a moment.  Then, lightly he said:

"We ought to give Kenneth a rousing welcome home.  After such
experiences as he has had he richly deserves it."

Eagerly Helen caught at the suggestion.

"By all means!" she cried.  "Suppose we give a dinner, followed by a
dance."

"Oh, lovely!" said Ray.

"The night following his arrival," went on Helen enthusiastically.
"We'll make it quite an affair and invite everyone we know--the
Parkers, the Galloways, the Fentons, everybody----"

"Don't forget me!" interrupted Steell.

"Oh, you, of course!"  Roguishly she added: "Aren't you one of the
family?"

He looked at her and smiled.  In an undertone which Ray, too busy
looking at the paper, did not hear, he added:

"Not yet, but I hope to be."

"The sooner the better, Wilbur," she said earnestly.  With a
significant glance at her sister she added, "Don't let her keep you
waiting too long."

Every hour brought nearer the happy day when they would see Kenneth
again.  A cablegram from England reported that the _Zanzibar_ had
reached Southampton.  Closely following this came a brief message from
Kenneth himself, stating that he was on the point of sailing for New
York on the _Adriatic_.  In five more days he would be in New York.

Expectation now reached fever heat, the excitement being communicated
to everyone in the house.  Every time the front door bell rang there
was a rush downstairs in the hope that it might be another message.

Ray, bubbling over with excitement, was almost as eager as her sister.

"Won't it be jolly to go down to the dock and meet him?"

Helen shook her head.

"I won't go to meet him.  I prefer to be here when he arrives."
Anxiously she added: "I hope everything is all right."

"Why shouldn't it be all right?"

Her sister was silent.  It seemed absurd, when everything seemed to
point to her happiness, that she should still feel depressed and
nervous, but, somehow, she could not shake off the feeling that
something was wrong.  It was certainly strange that no letter had been
received from Kenneth since the accident.  Yet perhaps it was wicked of
her to expect more.  She ought to be grateful that he had been spared.
Almost unconsciously she remarked:

"Isn't it strange that Ken hasn't written for so long?  I haven't had a
line from him since he left Cape Town."

"Yes--you have," protested her sister.  "You had a cablegram telling
you of his safety."

"A cablegram--yes, but no letter.  I have had no letter since he left
Cape Town."

"That's true.  But how could he write?  He has been traveling faster
than the mails."

"I hope he's not hurt."

"Of course not.  You would have heard it before this.  Bad news travels
fast."

Every moment from now on was devoted to getting the house ready for the
arrival of its lord and master.  Ray had skilfully fashioned out of red
letters on white paper, a big "Welcome" sign, which was to be suspended
in the hall on the complacent horns of two gigantic moose heads,
souvenirs of a month's vacation in the Adirondacks.  While this was
being done downstairs Helen busied herself in the library and bedroom,
getting ready the things for his comfort--his dressing-gown, his
slippers, his pipe.  She detested pipes, as do most women, but she
could not refrain from giving this pipe a furtive kiss, as she laid it
lovingly on the table within easy reach of the arm-chair.  The maids,
changed since he went away, were laboriously instructed in what they
should and should not do, what towels should be put in the luxurious
bathroom, what pajamas should be laid on the bed.

Well Helen remembered the first time she had entered this bedroom.
Just married, in the full flush of her new-found happiness, it had all
seemed so beautiful, so ideal.  The dull pink color scheme, so chaste
and delicate, the gracefully carved furniture, so luxurious and
elegant, the cupids flying above the massive beautifully carved bed, a
veritable bower of love--all this seemed only a realization of her
girlhood dreams of what married life should be.  And now Kenneth was
coming back, after his long absence in South Africa, it would be like
getting married all over again.

The next four days seemed longer than any Helen had ever spent in all
her life.  The delay was interminable.  The minutes appeared to be like
hours, the hours like days.  Having to wait patiently for what one
desired so ardently was simply intolerable.  She tried to divert her
mind by busying herself about the library, dusting his favorite books,
tidying his papers, but constantly came back the thoughts that filled
her with uneasiness, a vague, undefinable alarm.  Was he all right?

At last the great day arrived.  A Western Union telegram announced that
the _Adriatic_ would dock at 2 o'clock.  Long before that time, Ray,
unable to restrain her impatience, was on her way down town,
accompanied by Mr. Steell, while Helen, her face a little paler than
usual, her heart beating a little faster, sat in the great recessed
window of the library, and waited for the arrival of the loved one.

Anxiously, impatiently, she watched the hands of the clock move round.
How exasperatingly slow it was: how indifferent it seemed to her
happiness!  If the ship docked at two they could hardly arrive at the
house until four.  It would take at least two hours to get through the
customs.  Oh, would the moment never come when she would see his dear
face and clasp him in her arms?

It was nearly half past two when suddenly the front door bell rang.
Her heart leaping to her mouth, she rushed to the top of the stairs.
It was only Mr. Parker, who had dropped in on the chance of finding his
associate already arrived.

To-day the president of the Americo-African Mining Company was in the
highest spirits.  Everything had gone according to his expectations.
Kenneth was home with the big diamonds safe in his possession.  The
directors could not fail to give him (Parker) credit for his sagacity
and enterprise.  The stocks of the company would soar above par.
Fortune was smiling on them in no uncertain way.  Was it a wonder he
was feeling in the best of humors?

"How do you know the diamonds are safe?" questioned Helen anxiously.
"In such a terrible panic as there must have been on that ship a man
thinks only of saving himself."

"Pshaw!" replied the president confidently.  "I'm as sure of it as that
I'm here.  It was understood that he was never to part with the stones
under any circumstances.  They are in a belt he wears round his waist
next to his skin.  If the diamonds were not here, Kenneth would not be
here.  Knowing he is safe I am convinced that they are safe."

"Will you wait here until he comes?"

"No, I can't.  There's a meeting of the directors this afternoon.  I
must attend.  I'll call him up on the telephone----"

"But you are coming to dinner this evening----"

"Yes, yes, of course."  With a smile he added: "Now, don't get too
spoony when he comes, or else Ken will have no head for business."

"No fear," laughed Helen.  "We are too long married for that."

"Well, good-bye.  I'll see you later."

The president took his hat and turned to go.  As he reached the door he
turned round.

"By the bye, have you seen Signor Keralio lately?"

Helen's face grew more serious.

"No--Signor Keralio does not call here any more-at my request."

The president gave a low, expressive whistle.  Holding out his hand he
said:

"Got his walking papers, eh?  Well, I guess if you don't like him he
isn't much good.  I never did care for the look of him."

"Why did you ask?" she inquired.

"I was just curious--that's all.  He's a persistent, uncomfortable kind
of man.  I don't like his face.  It's a face I wouldn't trust----"

"That's why he's not coming here any more," she replied calmly.  "He
forgot himself and that was the end----"

The president turned to go.

"Well, good-bye.  Ken will be here soon."

"Good-bye."

He went away, and once more Helen resumed her lonely vigil at the
library window, straining her ears to catch the direction of every
passing car, catching her breath with suspense as each pedestrian came
into view.  They could not be much longer.  She wondered if he had
missed her as much as she had him.  No, men do not feel these things in
the way women do.  They are too busy--their minds too much preoccupied
with their work.  The turmoil of affairs absorbed their attention.

The clock struck the three-quarters, and the reverberations of the
chimes had not entirely died away, when through the partly opened
window came the sound of a taxicab suddenly stopping in front of the
door.

At last he had come!  It was surely Kenneth.  Her bosom heaving with
suppressed excitement she ran to the stairs and was already in the
lower hall before the maid had answered the bell.  Quickly she threw
open the door, eager to throw herself in the traveler's arms.  A tall
shadow darkened the doorway.  It was François, the French valet.

Helen fell back in dismay.

"Oh, it's you!" she exclaimed, looking over his shoulder to see if
Kenneth were following.  "Where is your master?"

A curious expression, half-defiant, half-cunning, came over the
servant's face, as he replied:

"Monsieur coming.  He sent me ahead with light baggage.  He detained at
customs."

"Oh!" she exclaimed, disappointed.  "When will he be here?"

"He come presently--perhaps quarter of an hour."

"How is your master?"

"He very well, except his eyes--they bother him a leetle."

Helen stared at him in alarm.

"His eyes," she exclaimed.  "What is the matter with his eyes?"

The valet avoided her direct gaze, and, shifting uneasily on his feet,
began to fuss with the leather bags he was carrying.  Awkwardly he said:

"Didn't madame hear?"

"Hear what?" she gasped, now thoroughly alarmed.

The man put out his hand deprecatingly.

"Oh, it's nothing to make madame afraid.  It will soon be all right.  I
assure madame----"

"But tell me what it is, will you?" she interrupted impatiently.
"Don't have so much to say--tell me what it is----"

"It was when the ship caught fire, madame.  We were running to ze
life-boat, monsieur and me, when suddenly----"

"Well--what?" she almost shouted, in agony of suspense.

"Monsieur tripped over a coil of rope and fell----"

Almost unconscious in her excitement of what she was doing Helen laid
her hand on the man's arm.  Terror-stricken she cried:

"He didn't hurt himself seriously, did he?"

The valet shook his head.

"No, madame--not seriously.  He struck his head against a chair and
just graze ze eye.  It is nothing serious, I assure madame.  The doctor
says that if he wears blue spectacles for few months he will be all
right."

"Oh, he wears blue spectacles, does he?"

"Yes, madame, he must.  Ze eye is inflamed and cannot stand ze strong
light."

"Poor Kenneth!" she murmured, half-aloud.  "I shall hardly know him in
blue spectacles."

The valet, who had been watching her like a hawk out of his
half-closed, sleepy-looking eyes, overheard the remark.  Quickly he
said:

"Of course, madame must expect to find monsieur a little changed.  What
we went through was _épouvantable_, something awful.  We just escaped
with our lives.  For days monsieur was so nervous he was hardly able to
speak a word.  Even now he stops at times----"

Helen looked at him in wonder.

"'He stops!'  What do you mean?"

The valet turned away, and for a moment was silent.  Then, as if making
a great effort, he turned and said:

"Madame will pardon me, but she must be brave and not show monsieur she
notices any change.  Ze doctor said it was a terrible shock to his
nervous system--that fire.  Monsieur has not been ze same since, _pas
du tout_ ze same.  Ze doctor he says that these symptoms will all
disappear once he gets home and has a good rest.  It is only ze shock,
I assure madame."

Helen listened appalled, her face growing whiter each moment, her lips
trembling.  He had met with an accident, then, after all!  Her instinct
had spoken truly.  Her darling was ill.  That explained his long
silence.  He had been too ill to write.  He had gone through a terrible
shock and he had come home ill, very ill, quite changed.  Her voice
faltering she said:

"What are the symptoms?"

"Monsieur's memory is so bad, madame.  He forgets.  Only to-day, as ze
ship came up ze harbor, I ask monsieur if he expect madame to meet us
at ze dock.  _C'est vraiment incroyable_!  He turned to me, with a look
of ze greatest surprise, and asked: 'Who ze devil is madame?'"

"What!  Didn't he seem to remember me, even?"  A look of distress came
over her face.

The valet shook his head.

"Non, madame."  Quickly he added: "But it is nothing.  It is only
temporary."

"Didn't he know my sister and Mr. Steell?  Didn't they greet him at the
dock?"

"Yes, madame.  They spoke to him and he spoke to them.  But he was not
himself.  They seemed surprised.  They will tell madame."

Helen fell back, sick and faint.  Why had she not known this before?
She would have gone down to meet him, thrown herself weeping into his
arms.  He would have known her then--who better than he would recognize
that perfume he loved so well?  He would have taken her in his strong
arms and kissed her passionately.  If he was not himself it was because
he was ill.  The shock had affected his memory!  Poor darling husband,
he must be well nursed.  A few days of her devoted care and he would be
all right again.  Of course, it was nothing serious.  Kenneth had led
too clean and wholesome a life for anything grave to be the matter.  If
only he would come!  God grant that he return to her as he went away!

As the unspoken prayer died away on her lips, there was the chugging of
an automobile stopping suddenly at the curb.

"_Les voici_!" cried François, dropping into his native tongue in his
excitement.

He threw open the wide doors and the next instant Ray ran up the steps.
Helen, weak and dizzy from nervous tension, feeling as if she were
about to faint, met her on the threshold.

"Kenneth!" she gasped.  "Is he all right?"

"Certainly--he's fine.  He's a little tired and nervous after the long
journey, and the blue spectacles he wears make him look different, but
he's all right."

The wife looked searchingly, eagerly at the young girl's face, as if
seeking to read there what she dreaded to ask, and it seemed to her
that the customary ring of sincerity was lacking in her sister's voice.

"Where is he--why isn't he with you?'

"Here he is now--don't you see him?"

Helen looked out.  There came the tall, familiar figure she knew so
well, the square shoulders, the thick bushy hair, with its single white
lock so strangely isolated among the brown.  Her heart fell as she saw
the blue glasses.  They veiled from her view those dear blue eyes, so
kind and true.  They made him look different.  But what did she care as
long as he had come home to her?  Even with the horrid glasses, that
dear form she would know in a thousand!

Slowly he came up the long flight of stone steps, weighted down by
traveling rugs and handbag, both of which he refused to surrender to
the obsequious François.  Eagerly she rushed down the steps to meet
him, her eyes half-closed, ready to swoon from excitement and joy.
Nothing was said.  He opened his arms.  She put up her mouth, tenderly,
submissively.  For a moment he seemed to hesitate.  He held her tight
in his embrace, and just looked down at her.  Then, as he felt the
warmth of her soft, yielding body next to his, and saw the partly
opened mouth, ready to receive his kiss, he bent down and fastened his
lips on hers.




CHAPTER XII

For one blissful, ecstatic moment Helen lay tight in his embrace,
nestling against the breast of the one being she loved better than
anyone else in the world, responding with involuntary vibrations of her
own body to the gust of fiery passion that swept his.  But only for a
moment.  The next instant she had torn herself violently free, and was
gazing, wonderingly, fearfully, up into his face, trying to penetrate
those glasses which veiled, as it were, the windows of his soul.  Why
she broke away so abruptly from his embrace she could not herself have
explained.  Something within her, some instinct to which her reason was
unable to give a name, made her body revolt against the unusual ardor
of the caress.  Strange!  Never before had she felt so embarrassed at
Kenneth's demonstrations of affection.

"How are you, dear?" she murmured, when at last she could find words.

She had not yet heard the sound of his beloved voice, and when at last
he answered her it seemed to her ears only like an echo of its former
self, so exhausted and wearied was he by what he had gone through.

"Very tired, sweetheart," he replied huskily.  "I shall need a long
rest."

She led the way into the house and up the stairs, where everything had
been so elaborately prepared for his welcome.  In the bedroom she
pointed with pride to the real Valenciennes lace coverlet put on in his
honor, and showed him the dressing-gown and slippers so lovingly laid
out.  He looked at everything, but made no comment.  She half expected
a few words of praise, but none were forthcoming.  While affectionately
demonstrative he was unusually reticent.  She wondered what worry he
could have on his mind to make him act so strangely and suddenly
Keralio's words of warning came to her mind.  Was there a side to his
life of which she knew nothing?  Were his thoughts elsewhere, even
while he was with her?  Quickly there came a look of dismay and
anxiety, which he was not slow to notice.  Instantly on his guard, he
murmured in a low tone:

"Forgive me, dear, I can't talk now.  I'm so tired I can hardly keep my
eyes open."

Instantly her apprehension was forgotten in her desire to make him
comfortable.

"That's right, dear.  You must be dead with fatigue.  You'll take a
nice nap and when you wake up it will be time for dinner.  I've planned
a nice little party to celebrate your return--only a few intimates--Mr.
Parker is coming, and Wilbur Steell, and a young man named Dick
Reynolds, an acquaintance of Wilbur's.  You won't mind such old
friends, will you?"

He shook his head.

"No, indeed.  I'm very tired, now, but I'll be all right in a few
minutes."

"Of course you will," she smiled, as she removed the handsome lace
coverlet from the bed.  "No one will disturb you.  My darling hubbie
can sleep as sound as a top, and, when he wakes, we'll talk a terrible
lot, won't we?"  Looking up roguishly, as she smoothed his pillow for
him, she added shyly: "There are two pillows here now.  There has been
only one while you were away----"

For the first time he seemed to evince interest in what she was saying.
His eyes flashed behind the blue spectacles, and his hands trembled, as
he quickly made a step forward and put his arm round her waist.

"There'll always be two in the future, won't there?" he asked hoarsely.

"Yes, of course there will," she laughed,

"To-night?" he insisted.

"Yes, of course," she said, her color heightening slightly under the
persistency of his gaze.  What a foolish question!  Changing the topic
she added, with a laugh: "Now, take your coat off, like a good boy, and
go to sleep.  I'll go down and keep the house quiet.  When it's time to
get up, I'll come back."

"Don't go yet," he murmured, looking at her ardently.  Taking her hand
caressingly he tried to lead her to the sofa.  "Sit down here.  I won't
sleep yet.  Let us talk.  I have so much to say."

Firmly Helen withdrew from his embrace.

"No, no; I won't stay a moment," she said decisively.  "Not now.  You
must behave yourself.  We'll talk all you want to to-night.  But not
now.  You are very tired.  The sleep will do you good.  Now be a good
boy--go to bed."

He tried to intercept her before she reached the door, but she was too
quick for him.  She went out and was about to close the door behind her
when he called out:

"Please send François to me."

She nodded.

"Yes, dear, I will.  Of course you need him.  Why didn't I think of it
before?"

She closed the door and went downstairs.  It was hard to believe that
he was back home.  How long she had waited for this day, and, even now
it had come, the void did not seem filled.  There still seemed
something wanting.  What it was, she did not know, yet it was there.

In the dining-room she ran into Ray, who had her arms filled with
magnificent American beauty roses.

"Oh, how beautiful!" cried Helen enthusiastically.  "Where did you get
those flowers?"

The young girl laughed.  "They're a present from me and Wilbur--in
honor of Kenneth's arrival.  Where is he?"

"Upstairs--he's going to lie down until dinner is ready.  Poor
soul--he's almost dead with fatigue."

"Has he got the diamonds?"

Helen gasped.  She hadn't thought of that.  In all the excitement the
real object of her husband's trip to South Africa had quite escaped her
mind.

"I don't know," she said quickly.  "I haven't asked him.  We've hardly
exchanged a dozen words.  He'll tell us later.  Was nothing said about
them at the Customs?  Didn't he declare them?"

"No--I thought it was strange.  That's why I asked you if he had them.
Possibly he left them to be cut in Amsterdam."

Helen grew thoughtful.

"I don't know.  He'll tell us later."

Ray filled the vases with the flowers, while Helen busied herself at
the buffet, getting out all the pretty silverware with which the dinner
table was to be decorated.  The young girl hummed lightly as she
decorated the room with the fragrant blossoms.

"Isn't it lovely that Kenneth is back?" she exclaimed.

"Yes, indeed."

"I hardly knew him at first in those spectacles."

"I'm not surprised at that."

"If it hadn't been for that white patch of hair I don't think we could
have picked him out of the crowd.  There was an awful crush there."

There was a pause, and then Helen asked:

"How do you think he looks?"

"About the same," replied the girl carelessly.  "He doesn't seem in as
good spirits as when he went away.  He is very quiet.  He hardly spoke
a word to us on the way home.  Possibly he has some business anxiety on
his mind."

"Did he ask about me?"

"Yes--you were his first question."

"Did you tell him about Dorothy?"

"That she was not so well?  Yes."

"What did he say?  Was he worried?"

"Not particularly.  I think men are more sensible in those matters than
we women.  He knows baby is well taken care of."  Changing the subject,
the young girl went on: "I hope everybody will be jolly to-night.  I've
made up my mind to have a good time."

Helen sighed.

"I'm feeling a little uneasy about Dorothy.  I got a letter this
morning from Aunt Carrie, saying she was not feeling so well.  The
doctor was going to see her to-day, and, if she got worse, they said
they'd telegraph."

Ray looked at her sister in consternation.

"What would you do then?"

"I would have to go at once to Philadelphia."

"And Kenneth just come home--oh, Helen!"

"I couldn't help it.  Kenneth couldn't go.  Somebody must go.  The
child could not be left alone.  Who should go better than its mother?"

Ray made a gesture of protest.

"Well, don't let's imagine the worst.  Dorothy won't get worse.
To-morrow you'll get a reassuring letter, and your worries will be
over."

"I hope so," smiled Helen.

Leaving the task of sorting the knives and forks Ray came over to where
Helen was standing.  The young girl pointed to all the vases filled
with the crimson roses.

"How do you like that?" she exclaimed.

"Beautiful!"

There was a brief silence, both women being preoccupied by their
thoughts, when Ray, in her usual vivacious, impulsive way, burst out:

"Sis, I have something to tell you."

Helen looked up quickly.

"Something to tell me--something good?"

"I'm so happy!  I'm engaged at last."

"To Wilbur, of course?"

"Yes."

Helen gave an exclamation of joy.

"Oh, I'm so glad.  When did it happen?  Tell me all about it--quick."

"He proposed to-day, and I said yes.  We're to be married in two
months."

The next moment the two women were in each other's arms.

"I'm so glad--so glad," murmured Helen.  "I hope you'll both be very,
very happy."

"We certainly shall if we are like you and Kenneth.  Wilbur says that
your example is the one thing that decided him to make the plunge."

Helen smiled.

"You'll have one advantage I don't enjoy.  Your husband, being a
lawyer, won't be taking trips to South Africa all the time."

"Oh, I don't know," laughed the girl; "it's sometimes nice to lose
sight of each other for a time.  The lovemaking is all the more furious
when your husband gets back."

"Yes--unless he happens to meet some other charmer on his travels."

"Oh, nonsense, Helen--men don't really have such adventures.  That only
happens in novels."

"I hope so," murmured her sister.

"Oh, by the bye," exclaimed Ray, "who do you suppose we saw on the
dock?"

"Who?"

"That horrid creature--Signor Keralio."

Helen looked up in surprise.

"Keralio?  What was he doing there?  Did he speak to you?"

"No--he seemed to avoid us.  Once I got lost for a moment in the crush,
and, as I turned, I thought I saw him talking earnestly to Kenneth and
François.  Of course I must have been mistaken, for, when I finally
rejoined them, both denied having seen him!"

"Keralio!" murmured Helen.  "How strange!  That man seems to pursue us
like some evil genius.  No matter where we go, he follows like a
shadow.  Oh, I forgot all about François.  Where is he?"

"Downstairs."

Helen touched a bell.

"Why do you need him?"

"Kenneth wants him.  I forgot all about it.  All his things need
putting away.  The litter upstairs is simply terrible."

"There won't be much time for unpacking," objected Ray.  "It's
half-past five already.  We'll soon have to think of dressing for
dinner."

Suddenly the door opened and François appeared.  He entered quietly,
stealthily, and, advancing to where his mistress was, stood in silence,
awaiting her orders.

"Your master wants you upstairs, François."

The man bowed.

"_Bien_, madame!"

"Tell Mr. Traynor not to keep you too long, because there's a lot of
work to be done downstairs before dinner."

"_Bien_, madame."

The man lingered in the room, arranging the chairs, and fussing about
the table, until he began to make Helen nervous.  Peremptorily she said:

"You had better go, François; monsieur is waiting for you."

The valet bowed obsequiously, and left the room, shutting the door
carefully.  Instead of proceeding immediately upstairs, he stopped for
a moment behind the closed door and listened intently.  But, unable to
overhear the two women, who were conversing in an undertone, he hurried
upstairs toward his employer's bedroom.  Arrived on the landing, he
went straight to the room, and, without stopping for the formality of
knocking, he turned the handle and went in.




CHAPTER XIII

Instead of finding his master resting from his fatigue, as Mrs. Traynor
had said, François discovered the new arrival very much awake.  He was
sitting in front of Helen's bureau, eagerly perusing a bundle of
private letters tied with blue ribbon, which he had taken from a
drawer.  As the door opened, he jumped up quickly, as if detected
committing a dishonorable action; but, when he saw who it was, his face
relaxed and he gave a grim nod of recognition.

"Lock the door!" he said in a whisper.  "It won't do to have anyone
come in here now."

The valet turned the key, and, dropping entirely the obsequious manner
of the paid menial, threw himself carelessly into a chair.  Taking from
his pocket a richly chased silver cigarette box, loot from former
houses where he had been employed, he struck a match on the highly
polished Circassian walnut chair, and proceeded to enjoy a smoke.

His companion looked at him anxiously.

"Well?" he demanded hoarsely.  "Is it all right?  What do they say?
Does anyone suspect?"

The Frenchman gracefully emitted from between his thin lips a thick
cloud of blue smoke, and broke into a laugh that, under the
circumstances, sounded strangely hollow and sinister.

"Suspect?" he chuckled.  "Why should they suspect?  Are you not ze same
man who went away--ze same build, ze same face, ze same voice, ze same
in every particular--except one.  Zat you have not--_non_--you have not
ze education, ze fine manners, ze _savoir faire_ of monsieur."  With
that expressive shrug of the shoulder, so characteristic of his nation,
he added: "_Mais que voulez vous_?  We must do ze best we can."

His listener struck the brass bed-post savagely with his heavy fist.
With a burst of profanity he broke out:

"Yes, damn him!  He had all the advantages.  I had none.  But it's my
turn now.  I want all that's coming to me."

"Hush!" exclaimed the valet, raising his finger warningly.  "Zey may
hear.  Everything will be all right.  We must be very careful.  You
must not talk.  You must avoid people.  Let them think you sick, or
strange, or crazy, anything you like.  But keep away from zem, or else
they soon discover that 'Handsome Jack,' ze penniless adventurer, is
quite a different person from ze accomplished and wealthy Monsieur
Kenneth Traynor."

"We can't expect to keep the game up long," interrupted the big fellow
moodily.

"We won't have to," replied his companion calmly.  "Just enough time to
squeeze ze orange dry--that's all----"

Handsome looked up quickly.  Savagely he retorted:

"Of which juice you and Keralio want a goodly share, don't you?"

The valet's greenish eyes flashed.

"Of course I do, and, what's more, I mean to get it."  Changing his
free, careless tone to one tense with significance and menace he went
on: "Don't be a fool, Monsieur Handsome.  Who put you up to this snap,
but me?  Who knows what you did to monsieur out there on ze _veldt_,
better than me?  Dead men tell no tales, but live ones do.  Don't
forget that!  If you want to keep clear of ze electric chair, you'll
keep your mouth shut, and play fair."

The gambler listened, his mouth twitching nervously, his eyes glowing
with sullen hatred.

"What do you and Keralio want?  I gave you the diamonds--what more do
you expect?"

The valet laughed scoffingly.

"You gave him ze diamonds.  Why?  You were d----d glad to be rid of
zem.  We can't do anything with zem now.  We may have to wait months or
years before we can venture to cut zem up and dispose of zem.  _Non_,
monsieur!  If zey appeared on ze market now, ze news would be flashed
_immédiatement_ to every corner of ze globe, and your career and mine
would come to a quick end.  _Voila_!"

"Don't forget Keralio!" said Handsome, with a sneer.

"_Eh, bien_?  Has he not earned it, Signor Keralio?  Is it not because
of his courage and daring that you are here--ze master in this house?
Who but Keralio would have had ze nerve to carry ze thing through?"

Handsome shrugged his shoulders.  Cynically he said:

"Oh, I don't know.  It seems to me that Keralio is safe under cover,
while here I am, disporting myself in the limelight, with every eye
turned on me.  I guess I prefer Keralio's job to mine----"

The valet's eyes flashed vindictively as he retorted:

"Could your puny brain have conceived this scheme which will make us
all rich?  Keralio outlined ze whole plan to me directly he heard of
your existence.  On our reaching Cape Town, after finding you starving
on ze _veldt_, I cabled him ze news.  A few hours later he told me
exactly what to do.  He knew you would do it.  How, I do not know.  He
is no ordinary man, Keralio.  When I first saw you out zere, unkempt,
in rags, starving, I could have dropped dead from surprise.  It never
occurred to me that you might be useful.  But Keralio knew.  He knows
everything.  He also knew that you would accept his leadership, that
you would quickly get rid of monsieur, and secure ze diamonds.  Was it
not his idea that you set fire to ze ship?  And who set fire to ze
ship, _s'il vous plait_, when you refused?  Who but your very humble
servant.  And a hard, dangerous job, it was, too--catch me ever wanting
to do it again!"

"Not half so bad as mine.  He put up a terrible fight before I threw
him overboard."

"Who--monsieur?"

"Yes--he fought like a wildcat, and he was fast getting the best of me,
when I managed to give him a rap on the head.  That quieted him, and
over he went."  With an exclamation of disgust, he added: "It was a
d----d nasty job.  I'm sorry I ever went into it----"

"Sorry--you fool?  _Sapristi_!  Just think of this wonderful
opportunity.  You have ze keys to his vaults, you have control of his
bank accounts."  Lowering his voice, and, with a significant leer on
his face, he added "and you have--his wife!"

Handsome grinned, and the valet went on:

"_Précisément_!  Madame is cold and haughty, like all zese American
women.  It's not exactly my taste, but she's pretty and dainty, and----"

"Who are all these other people," interrupted the miner, "that man
Steell----"

"Yes, that is so.  You must know everyone.  You must make a study of
each, so as to avoid making bad breaks.  Monsieur Steell is a lawyer.
He's in love with madame's sister, Miss Ray.  You've known him all your
life, went to school with him, and all that sort of thing.  Say 'yes'
to everything he says.  That's your cue at present.  Talk as little as
you can, and agree with everybody.  The man you must talk with most is
Monsieur Parker.  He is president of the mining company.  Happily he's
rather shortsighted, so he won't notice anything.  He's the man to whom
you'll have to explain ze loss of ze diamonds.  He'll be here to-night
for dinner, so you'd better get your story ready."

"What can I say?"

"Say that in ze panic your belt worked loose, you had to dive into ze
water.  When you were dragged into ze lifeboat the belt was gone, do
you understand?"

"Yes--but will they believe it?"

"They must believe it.  There'll be an awful fuss, of course, but
they'll get over it.  No suspicion can attach to you."

"He's coming to-night--this man Parker?"

"Yes, to-night.  He'll be here for dinner.  He----"

Before the valet could complete the sentence there was a knock on the
door and Helen outside called out:

"May I come in?"

Instantly the valet jumped up and assumed once more his deferential
demeanor.  The gambler hurriedly shut the bureau drawers and put on the
blue spectacles.

The door opened and Helen entered.

Alert as the Frenchman was, he was not quick enough to quite conceal
from the wife that his present obsequious manner had been suddenly
assumed for her benefit directly she had entered the room.  She had
overheard voices, as she reached the landing, and the abrupt manner in
which these sounds had ceased was not entirely natural.  It had also
seemed to her that the valet's tone had had a ring of familiarity about
it which she had never known it to have before.  Could it be possible
that they were discussing matters which were to be kept from her?  If
so, her husband already had secrets in which not she but his valet
shared.  She recalled Keralio's cynical smile, as he had whispered:
"Husbands only tell their wives half."  Perhaps he had spoken the
truth.  Perhaps at this very moment she was degraded, insulted in her
womanhood by a man who was secretly unloyal to her.  The very thought
went through her like a knife-thrust.  All her life, every hour she had
devoted to her husband.  Even now she did not like to even harbor a
shade of distrust, but his strange behavior since his return, this
earnest conversation behind closed doors with a menial she despised and
distrusted--all this could not but add to her anxiety.  Calmly, she
asked:

"Have you finished with François, dear?  We need him downstairs."

The valet himself answered the question:

"_Oui_, madame.  I was just coming."

Bowing politely, he turned on his heel, and, with a significant glance
at Handsome, which his mistress did not notice, he left the room.
Helen glanced at the bed, which was undisturbed.  Surprised, she
exclaimed:

"Why, I thought you were going to lie down!"

He shook his head.  Shifting uneasily on his feet, and, without looking
up, he answered:

"No--I can't sleep.  I'm too nervous.  I'll sleep to-night."

Advancing farther into the room she went up him and put her arm
affectionately round him.  Sympathetically she said:

"You'll feel better in a few days, dear.  Just rest and take things
easy.  I won't hear of your going to the office for a week at least.
All the business you and Mr. Parker have you can transact here.  By the
way, dear, you haven't even mentioned the most important thing of
all--have you brought back the diamonds?"

Instead of replying at once to her question, he turned quickly and
pulled down the blind.

"You don't mind, do you?" he said.  "The light hurts my eyes."

"Of course not," she replied.  Sitting down near him she went on: "Tell
me--have you got the diamonds?  How beautiful they must be!  How I
should love to see them!"

When finally he turned and confronted her she could see his face only
indistinctly, as the drawing of the blind had left the room almost in
darkness.  His voice was strained and tense as he replied huskily:

"I have not got the diamonds!"

Helen almost started from her seat.

"You have not got them!" she exclaimed.  "Where are they, Ken?"

"They are lost!"

"Lost?" she echoed, stupefied.

"Yes--lost."

"Oh, how terrible!" she faltered.

This, then, was the secret of his strange manner, his depression and
nervousness.  He had lost the diamonds.  He had returned home to
announce to the eagerly awaiting stockholders that over a million
dollars' worth of property had suddenly been swept away.  His feeling
of personal responsibility must have been awful.  No wonder he was not
himself.  It was enough to unnerve any man.  Of course he was not to
blame, but the world is so merciless.  He would have to bear the
censure, even when he was perfectly innocent.  How she regretted that
he had ever undertaken so heavy a responsibility.  Timidly, not wishing
to embarrass or annoy him, she said:

"How did it happen, dear?"

For a moment he made no answer, but just sat and stared at her.  What
little light entered between the shade and the window frame fell full
on her face, lighting up the fine profile, the delicately chiseled
mouth, throwing off golden glints from her artistically arranged hair.
From her face his eyes wandered greedily down to her snow-white neck,
her slender, graceful figure, her beautifully molded arms.  Certainly,
he mused to himself, his brother was an epicure in love.  This woman
was dainty enough to tempt a saint.

"How did it happen?" she asked again.

"It was in the first rush from the burning ship," he said hoarsely.  "I
was asleep when the fire broke out.  It happened at two o'clock in the
morning.  The diamonds were in the belt which each night I unfastened
and put under my pillow.  It was more comfortable to do that than to
wear it.  When the first alarm came I forgot everything--except my own
safety.  I rushed pell-mell on deck.  It was a nasty night.  We didn't
know where we were, or how grave the situation was.  Outside the wind
was howling furiously, the siren was blowing dismally, the
panic-stricken passengers and sailors were fighting like wildcats.  I
lost my head along with the rest.  I had reached the lifeboat when
suddenly I remembered the belt.  I felt at my waist.  It was not there.
I remembered I had left it under the pillow.  I was horror-stricken.
Great beads of perspiration broke from every pore.  The people were
fighting to get into the boat; I fought to get out and back to my
stateroom.  Suddenly someone knocked me on the head.  I lost
consciousness.  When I came to we were miles away from the wreck,
drifting on the ocean in an open boat, and the _Abyssinia_ was nowhere
to be seen."

Helen made an exclamation of sympathy.

"Poor soul--how terrible you must have felt!  Thank God, you escaped
with your life!  We ought to feel grateful for that.  Suppose I had
been compelled to tell Mary that you were drowned.  It would have
killed her--you know that.  Do you remember what you told her when you
went away?"

He stared at her, not understanding.

"Told who?" he said cautiously.

"Mary."

"Oh, yes--Mary--of course--you mean your sister----"

Helen looked at him in amazement, then in alarm.  Could the wreck have
affected his mind?  Laughingly she retorted:

"Ray?  Of course not.  How foolish you are, Kenneth.  Don't you
remember that your old nurse came to see you before you sailed?"

He nodded and coughed uneasily, moving restlessly about in his chair,
as if to hide his embarrassment.  These questions were decidedly
unpleasant.  Inwardly he wished François was present to help him out.

"Mary?  Oh, yes, I remember--of course--of course----"

The look of anxiety in the young woman's face deepened.  His memory
failed him completely.  Changing the subject she said quickly:

"There's something else I wish to mention to you, dear.  It is about
Signor Keralio----"

He started quickly to his feet.  How came his brother's wife to know
the name of the arch-plotter, the man who had sentenced her own husband
to death?  Was it possible that she knew more?  Was she aware of his
real identity?  Was her present amiability of manner merely simulated?
Was she waiting her time before calling in the police and exposing him
as an impostor?

"Keralio?" he echoed hoarsely.  "What about Keralio?"  Making a step
forward he exclaimed savagely: "Has he squealed?  Is the game up?  He's
to blame, not I!"

Impulsively, instinctively, Helen sprang from her chair and fell back
with a startled exclamation.  Now thoroughly alarmed, more than ever
convinced that the shipwreck had affected his brain, her one solicitude
was to keep him quiet until she could get a doctor.  Soothingly she
said:

"Of course, dear; of course.  We won't speak of Signor Keralio now.
He's not worth discussing anyhow."

He watched her closely for a moment, as if trying to see if she were
deceiving him, but her face was frank and serene.  Suddenly, taking
hold of her hand, which she abandoned willingly enough in his, he
murmured:

"You mustn't mind what I say.  I'll soon be all right.  I'm a bit mixed
up.  My mind's been queer ever since that awful night."

"Perhaps you would prefer if we had no one to dinner.  I could easily
give some excuse and put them all off."

His first impulse was to promptly accept this suggestion, yet what was
the good?  If he did not meet them to-day he must do so to-morrow.  It
was best to get it over with.  The quicker he got to know the people
the easier it would be for him.  If he seemed to avoid meeting them, it
might only arouse suspicion.  Shaking his head, he said:

"No, dear.  That's all right.  I'm glad they're coming.  It will liven
things up."

Helen's face brightened.  It was the first cheerful remark he had made.

"That's what I think.  You must forget what you have gone through.
After all it's not so bad, but it might be a lot worse.  Mr. Parker
will feel badly about the stones, of course, because he had counted on
making capital out of the advertising they would receive.  But who
knows?  Perhaps it's all for the best.  They may find other stones even
more valuable."

A sudden knock at the door interrupted them.

"Come in," called out Helen.

The maid appeared.

"Mr. Parker is downstairs, m'm."

"Good gracious!  Here already for dinner.  What time is it?"

"Seven o'clock, m'm."

"All right.  I'll be down immediately."

The girl went away and Helen turned to her companion.

"Now, hurry, dear, won't you?  Dinner is ready.  The guests are
arriving.  Dress quickly and come down."

He still held her hand.

"You're not angry with me?" he whispered.

"Why should I be angry?"

"Because of the diamonds."

"No, indeed--it was you I wanted, not the diamonds."

Drawing her to him, he kissed her.  But her lips were cold.  There was
no response to his ardor.  She could not herself have explained why.
She felt no inclination to respond to his caresses, which at any other
time she would have returned with warmth.  With a slight shade of
impatience she broke away.

"We have no time for that now, Kenneth.  Our guests are waiting."

"That's right," he replied, with a smile that did not escape her.
"We've no time now.  But the night is still before us."

"Will you come soon?"

"Yes--I'll be right down."




CHAPTER XIV

Once more the Traynor residence was filled with the sounds of mirth and
revelry.

From cellar to attic the old mansion was ablaze with light.  The large
dining-room, decorated with flowers and plants, wore a festive air, and
the long table in the center literally groaned under its burden of fine
linen, crystal, and silver.

The dinner, now drawing to a close, had been a huge success in every
way, and, with the serving of the _demi-tasse_, the guests sat back in
their chairs, feeling that sense of gluttony satisfied which only a
perfect dinner can impart.  The rarest wines, the richest foods--Helen
had spared no expense to make the affair worthy the occasion.

As Mr. Parker sat back and with deliberation lit the big black Corona,
which his host had given him, he felt as much at ease as can a man who
has dined well and knows that his affairs are prospering beyond all
expectations, and, as his eyes half closed, he listened dreamily while
his host, for the hundredth time, told yarns of the diamond fields, he
silently congratulated himself on his astuteness in having employed so
successful a messenger.  He had not yet had an opportunity to ask any
questions about the diamonds.  He had his own reasons for not wanting
those present to learn too much of his plans.  There would be plenty of
time when he could get the vice-president alone.  So he just sat back
and puffed his cigar, while around him went on the hum of conversation,
punctuated here and there with bursts of laughter.

Considering his short stay at the diamond mines it was astonishing how
well stocked their host was with stories.  To hear him talk one might
have thought he had been a miner all his life.  Stimulated by copious
draughts of champagne, which he contrived to make flow like water, he
was highly interesting, and his listeners, greatly interested, hung on
to every word.

"It must be a terrible life!" said Steell, as he lit another cigar.

The host emptied his glass and again refilled it before he answered:

"It's a life of a dog--not of a human being.  The toil is incessant,
the profit doubtful.  You starve to death: good food is unprocurable
save at prohibitive prices.  One sleeps practically in the open, save
for such rude shelter as each man can make for himself.  The flies are
a pest and constant source of danger.  The water is abominable."

"You like champagne better, eh?" laughed Ray.

The gambler had already drunk more than was good for him, and, raising
his glass in a mock toast, began to hum the first lines of a familiar
camp ditty:

 "_La femme qui sait me plaire
  C'est la petite veuve Clicquot._"


"Is there much stealing of diamonds by the miners?" demanded Mr. Parker.

Handsome nodded.

"Lots of it.  They have to watch 'em all the time.  They resort to all
kinds of tricks to conceal stones they find.  They used to swallow
them, but when they were forced to take powerful emetics and other
drugs, they soon got tired of that game.  They also try to smuggle them
across the border line.  One detective, who had been for months on the
trail of a well-to-do smuggler, was badly stung.  The man invited him
to go shooting, and kindly furnished guns and cartridges.  The
unsuspecting policeman carried the cartridges across the border, never
dreaming that each one was filled with diamonds."

Ray clapped her hands.

"Oh, what a clever idea!"

The host nodded approvingly.

"That's what I thought.  Any man as smart as that deserved to get away
with it."

Mr. Parker protested.

"Rogues are always smart!" he exclaimed.

"Until they're caught," laughed Dick Reynolds.  "Then they don't think
they're so smart."

Mr. Steell nodded approval.

"I know something about that," said the lawyer.  "A crook is never
really clever.  He always leaves some loophole which leads to
detection.  He thinks he is secure, that his disguise is impenetrable,
but there is always someone watching him, closely observing his every
move.  And, the first thing he knows, he has walked into a trap, the
handcuffs are snapped, and the electric chair looms grimly before
him----"

_Crash_!

All looked up to the end of the table, where their host had broken a
glass.  In the act of raising the champagne to his lips the glass had
slipped and broken into a thousand pieces.  Helen, frightened, started
from her seat.

"Are you hurt, dear?" she asked.  "There is blood on your hand."

"No--no, it's nothing.  I cut myself with a bit of glass.  It's
nothing."

Ray was eager for more anecdotes.

"Do tell us more, Kenneth," she exclaimed, interrupting her chat with
her left-hand neighbor.

"Give him a breathing spell," laughed Dick.  "We've kept him at it ever
since the dinner began."

Handsome, his face pale, his hand trembling, filled another glass with
the foaming golden wine, and drained it at a draught.  What the lawyer
just said had been somewhat of a shock.  Was there more meaning in it
than appeared in the chance words?  He eyed Steell narrowly, when he
was not looking, but the lawyer's face was inscrutable.  Again he
filled his glass and again emptied it.

That her husband had been drinking heavily all evening had not escaped
Helen's attention, and it worried her.  Nudging her sister she
whispered:

"Ken's drinking more than is good for him.  He never used to drink like
that."

At that moment, the host looked up and caught Helen's eye.  Raising his
glass he offered a toast:

"Here's to the prettiest, the sweetest, the most desirable little woman
in the world!  Gentlemen and ladies--my wife!"

They all drank except Helen who, confused and annoyed, tried to turn it
off with a laugh.

Noticing her embarrassment, Ray made a signal to Mr. Steell and they
both rose from the table.  Helen and Dick quickly followed their
example and the hostess led the way into the drawing-room, leaving
Handsome and Mr. Parker alone to their cigars.

The president of the Americo-African Mining Company was not sorry of
the opportunity which this tête-à-tête afforded for a quiet business
talk.

"By the way, old man," he began, "we haven't had a chance to talk
business yet.  You've got the diamonds, of course."

His host was silent.  Mr. Parker thought he had not heard.  A little
louder he repeated:

"You've got the diamonds?"

Still no answer.  The president began to get uneasy.  Could anything be
wrong or was his friend drunk?  He had noticed that he had been
drinking heavily--something he had never known Kenneth Traynor do.
With some impatience he said sharply: "What's the matter, Kenneth?
Wake up, old man.  I asked you a question.  Can't you answer?"

Handsome brought his fist down on the table with a bang that made the
glasses dance.

"D---- it!" he exclaimed angrily.  "Can't a man be left alone in his
own house for a few minutes without bothering him with business?"

This outburst was so utterly unexpected that Mr. Parker, taken entirely
by surprise, fell back in his chair and stared at his host in
amazement.  Never before had he known his old friend and partner to act
in this strange way.  Could anything be amiss?  Now he came to think of
it, he had noticed a great change in his associate directly he saw him.
He had seemed to lack his customary cordiality and frankness.  He
appeared moody and morose, as if he had on his mind some weighty
responsibility he was unwilling to share.  Evidently there was nothing
to be gained by displaying impatience, so, in more conciliatory tones,
he asked:

"That's all right, my boy.  If you don't care to talk shop to-night, we
won't.  I didn't want to hurry you.  I was curious, that's all.  I have
scarcely been able to curb my impatience.  You understand what it means
to us.  Why, the very announcement that we have the diamonds safe here
in New York, will be enough to send the company's stock up twenty
points."  Lowering his voice and bending over he added confidentially:
"I don't mind telling you that I've been buying for my own account all
the cheap stock I could put my hands on.  As to the stockholders,
they're simply wild with impatience to see the big stones.  But we
won't talk any more about it to-night.  We'll wait till to-morrow."

Handsome, his face almost livid, leaned over the table.  Hoarsely, he
replied:

"It's no use waiting till to-morrow.  All that's to be told can be told
now.  I haven't got the diamonds!"

For a moment Mr. Parker did not realize what the other man was saying.
Thinking he had not heard right he asked:

"What did you say?"

"I have not got the diamonds!"

The president started from his seat.  His face pale as death, his hand
shaking as stricken with palsy, he almost shouted:

"You have not got the diamonds!  Then where in God's name are they?"

"At the bottom of the ocean!"

The senior partner dropped back in his chair, white as death.  Then
this was the outcome of all his hopes, all his planning.  Faintly he
gasped:

"Why didn't you tell me so before?"

"I had no opportunity.  I didn't want to cable such news.  It might
have caused a slump in the shares.  I could not let you know before.
This is the first time I've seen you alone."

The president said no more.  The lines about his mouth tightened and
the expression of his face underwent a change.  He uttered not a word,
but just sat there, his eyes fixed steadily on his companion, who
continued to fill his glass with champagne.  Cornelius Winthrop Parker
was not a man to be easily deceived.  He had too much experience of the
world for that.  All his life he had been reading men and what he heard
now in the tone of his host's voice convinced him that he was lying.
That, in itself, was sufficient of a shock.  To find Kenneth
Traynor--the soul of integrity and honor--deliberately betraying a
trust of such importance hurt him almost as much as the loss of the
gems.  That they had gone down with the _Abyssinia_ he did not for a
moment believe.  It was more likely that they had been sold--possibly
to make good Wall Street losses.  Talk of big stock deals in which
Traynor had been mixed up had reached his ear before today, and more
recently this gossip had become more insistent.  Kenneth was
interested, said rumor, in pool operations involving millions.  The
recent sudden slump had found him unprepared.  Ruin threatened him and
to save himself he had succumbed to temptation.  This, at least, was
the theory which the President's alert brain rapidly evolved as he sat
watching the man in front of him.  Perhaps all was not yet lost.  If
the stones had not yet been disposed of, an effort might still be made
to recover them and at the same time save Traynor and his young wife
from the disgrace that such a grave scandal would entail.  The first
thing necessary was to keep cool, show no concern and disarm suspicion
by pretending to accept the loss as irreparable.  Then, at the first
opportunity, he would take Wilbur Steell into his confidence.  That
wide awake lawyer would know exactly how to handle the case.  Dick
Reynolds would have an opportunity to show his talent as a detective.
Breaking the long silence he said calmly:

"Of course, I understand your silence.  I think you acted wisely.  We
had better keep the loss to ourselves as long as we can.  No one can
attach any blame to you.  It is a terrible loss, but we must face it
like men."

The gambler looked up quickly, and eyed his guest narrowly.  Seeing
nothing on the latter's face to arouse his suspicions, he grew more
cheerful.  Less sullen and defiant, he extended his hand.

"Thanks, old man!" he exclaimed heartily.  "I expected no less from
you.  I can't tell you how badly I feel about the loss.  No doubt my
manner has seemed strange since my return.  I have been irritable with
everybody--even my dear wife has noticed it.  It was only because I did
not know how to make a clear breast of it.  Since you take it so
sensibly, I'll cheer up.  I declare I feel like a new man already."

Mr. Parker lit another cigar.  Calmly, he said:

"That's right, Kenneth my boy.  Keep a stiff upper lip.  All's for the
best.  We'll have better luck next time."

As he spoke, Wilbur Steell passed on his way to join the ladies in the
drawing-room.  The president called out to him:

"Hello, Steell.  What are you so busy about?  Entertaining the women,
eh?  Always thought you were a lady killer.  Suppose you come and smoke
a cigar with me and let our friend here go and have a chat with his
wife.  You've no right to monopolize the fair sex in that fashion, even
if you are a trust lawyer.  Anyhow, I want to talk to you--just a
little matter of business--that's all!"

Steell laughed, and, dropping into a chair, took the cigar which Mr.
Parker held out.  Turning to his host, and clapping him genially on the
back the president exclaimed:

"Go and talk to your wife, old man.  You've left her alone long enough."

"All right--I will," replied the gambler, not sorry of any excuse to
get away.

Mr. Parker waited till he was out of hearing, then, leaning quickly
over to his companion, he exclaimed in a tense whisper:

"Steell, I need your help."

The lawyer looked at him in surprise.  Removing his cigar from his
mouth he said:

"My help?  By all means.  What can I do for you?"

Mr. Parker gave a quick glance behind him to see if they were observed,
and then he said:

"My God, Steell, something terrible has happened!  At any cost, we
mustn't let the wife know----"

The lawyer stared at his companion in amazement.

"What is it, for Heaven's sake?" he demanded, looking anxiously at his
_vis-à-vis_.

"The diamonds are lost!" replied Parker hoarsely.

"The diamonds lost!"

"Yes--lost--he has returned without them.  They went down in the
_Abyssinia_.  At least, that's what he says----"

The lawyer started.

"You think----"

"I think nothing," replied the president cautiously.  "I want to know.
That's why I want you to help me--to find out--you understand?"

The lawyer nodded:

"Some detective work, eh?"

"Precisely.  The stones may have gone down to the bottom of the ocean,
or they may not.  For all we know the ship may have been set on fire
purposely, in order to create such a panic----"

The lawyer protested.

"Surely you don't think Kenneth----"

The president shook his head.

"I accuse nobody.  I want to find out."

He was silent for a moment, and then after a pause he went on:

"I suppose you've heard, as well as everybody else, how Traynor has
been plunging in Wall Street recently."

The lawyer nodded.  Hesitatingly he replied:

"Yes--I have.  Unfortunately, the reports are true.  Investigations I
have conducted privately on my own account have convinced me that
Kenneth has been a big plunger for some time.  But as far as I know, he
has operated only within his means.  I have often remonstrated with him
about the folly of it, but he enjoys the excitement of the speculation
game, and as long as he kept within bounds and gambled with his own
money I didn't see that anyone had any right to interfere."

"Ah, just so--as long as he operated with his own means and with his
own money.  But suppose the market suddenly goes against such a man,
and he is face to face with a tremendous loss, possibly ruin, what does
such a man do nine times out of ten?"

"Blow his brains out."

"Yes--sometimes that, but often he succumbs to temptation, and takes
what isn't his----"

"Then you think that Kenneth----"

"I think nothing.  I want to know.  He has come back from Africa a
changed man.  He is surly, morose, secretive.  That man has something
on his conscience.  We must find out what it is.  It is up to you to
ferret it out.  Set your detectives to work.  The company will spend
the last cent in its treasury to find those stones.  You must trail his
associates, find out where he goes.  The diamonds are probably right
here in New York.  Who first took Kenneth to Wall Street?"

"Signor Keralio----"

"Ah--always that fellow!  Who is he?"

"An adventurer of the worst type.  I have had him shadowed by one of my
men.  He has a police record as a dangerous criminal of international
reputation."

"And Kenneth's valet--that fellow François."

"He was formerly in Keralio's employ."

The President rose.  Extending his hand to the lawyer, he said:

"That's enough.  I don't think the trail will be hard to pick up.
Spare no expense.  Good night!"




CHAPTER XV

The last guest had gone.  One by one the lights in the Traynor
residence were extinguished.  The servants, tired after an exciting and
strenuous day, had gone to their quarters.

In the hall downstairs, the grandfather's clock rang out its musical
chimes and then, in ponderous tones, slowly struck the twelve hours of
midnight.

The master of the house was sitting at the desk in the library, looking
over some papers.  From time to time he glanced significantly, first at
the clock and then at the corner where Helen and Ray were chatting over
the events of the day.  At last the young girl took the hint.  Jumping
up, she exclaimed good naturedly:

"How selfish I am to be sitting gossiping here when poor Kenneth is so
tired.  Go to bed, both of you.  I'm so sleepy myself I can hardly keep
awake.  Good night!"

"Good night, dear!" said Helen, rising and kissing her.

"Good night, Ken!  Pleasant dreams," cried the young girl as she left
the room.

"Good night!" he responded hoarsely.

The sound of her footsteps died away in the distance and Helen and the
gambler sat there in silence.  He watched her furtively, trying to
guess the trend of her thoughts, his eyes bloodshot with wine, feasting
on every line of her girlish figure.

Never had she looked more beautiful, more desirable, than this evening.
Her _décolleté_ gown revealed a white, plump neck, her lips were red
and tempting, her large dark eyes fairly sparkled from excitement.  It
was a vision to distract a saint and Handsome was no saint.  It was
indeed only with the greatest difficulty that he curbed his impatience
to carry off the prize that lay within his grasp.

"Are you tired," he said at last.  "Do you want to go to bed?"

"Not very," she answered.  "I'm too excited to sleep.  Hasn't it been
an exciting day?"

He made no reply, pretending to be occupied at the desk, and she
relapsed into a dream silence, glad of a few quiet, peaceful moments to
be alone with her thoughts.  How good it was to have him home again!
Now she could be at peace once more and enjoy life as she used to.  She
could go to the opera, to the theater.  The days would not be so
monotonous.  She wondered why she was still unable to shake off the
feeling of anxiety and apprehension which had haunted her ever since he
went away.  With a devoted husband safe at her side, what reason had
she for feeling depressed?  Yet, for some reason she was unable to
explain, she was not able even now to throw off her melancholy and
presentiment of danger.

There recurred to her mind what Signor Keralio had said, his veiled,
ambiguous words of warning.  Could it be true, was it possible that her
husband had deceived her all these years and unsuspected by her, had
led a double life of deceit and disloyalty?  Certainly there was much
that needed explanation.  The loss of the diamonds did not directly
concern her, although she felt that, too, was part of the mystery.  But
his strange aloofness of manner, his inexplicable loss of memory and
nervousness, the frenzied outburst when she had mentioned Keralio's
name that afternoon, the sudden craving for drink--was not all this to
some extent, corroboration of what the fencing master has told her?
She thought she would question him, speak to him openly, frankly, as a
loyal wife should the man she loves, and give him an opportunity to
explain.  Now was as good a time as ever.  Looking up she said abruptly:

"Signor Keralio was here while you were away.  I started telling you
this afternoon, but you got so excited----"

Making a deprecatory gesture with his hand he said indifferently:

"That's all right.  I was tired and nervous.  I'm quieter now.  What
did Keralio have to say?"

"Nothing worth listening to.  He never says anything but impertinences."

He shrugged his shoulders.

"You mustn't take him too seriously."

Hotly she retorted:

"He takes himself too seriously.  If he only knew how repellent he is
to a decent woman he would cease to annoy me."

He laughed.

"Oh, Keralio's not a bad sort--when you get to know him.  Those
foreigners think nothing of making love to a woman----"

"I don't want to know him," she retorted with spirit, "and what's more,
I don't want him coming here.  One evening he was so insulting that I
had to show him the door.  He had the impudence to come again.  So I
had my servant put him out.  You won't invite him here again, will you?"

He was silent, while she sat watching him, amazed that he did not at
once fiercely resent the insult done her in his absence.  After a
pause, he said awkwardly:

"I don't invite him.  Keralio's the kind of a chap who invites himself."

"But can't you put him out?" she demanded with growing irritation.

"No--I can't," he answered doggedly.

"Why?" she demanded firmly.

"I can't--that's all!"

She looked at him wonderingly, and the color came and went in her face
and neck.  There was a note almost of contempt in her voice as she
demanded:

"What is the hold this creature has on you?  Is it something you are
ashamed of?"

The blood surged to his face and the veins stood out on his temples
like whipcord.  Another instant and it had receded, leaving him ghastly
pale.

"We have business interests in common, that's all," he said hastily and
apologetically.  "He has been very useful to me.  I don't like him any
more than you do, but in business one can't criticize too closely the
manners or morals of one's associates."

"No, but a man can prevent his associates from annoying his wife."

He made no answer, but toyed nervously with a paper cutter.  Determined
to get at the truth, she went on:

"What business interests can you have together?  Is it legitimate
business or merely stock gambling?"

"What do you mean?"

Rising from the divan, she went toward him.  Earnestly, she said:

"Kenneth, I've wanted to speak to you about this matter for a long
time.  During your absence I've heard rumors.  Things have been
insinuated.  A hint has been dropped here, gossip has been overheard
there--all to the effect that you are heavily involved in Wall Street.
Is it true?"

For a moment he was silent, at a loss what to answer.  He could not
imagine the reason for the questioning or where it might lead him, but
instinct warned him that it was dangerous ground and that caution was
necessary.  Why hadn't François told him of his brother's Wall Street
operations?  It would never do to show himself entirely ignorant of
them.  If such rumors existed, there was probably some basis of them.
No doubt his brother had played the market and kept from his wife the
extent of his losses.

"Is it true?" she repeated.

He shrugged his shoulders.  Nonchalantly, he replied:

"Never believe all you hear!"

Her face lit up with pleasure.

"Really?" she exclaimed.  "It isn't true?"

"Not a word of it.  I have money invested in stocks and bonds, but
anyone who accuses me of wild cat speculation is guilty of telling what
I would very politely call a d----d lie!"

Reassured more by his ease and carelessness of manner than by his
actual words of denial, the young wife gave an exclamation of delight.

"Oh, I'm so glad!" she exclaimed.  "You've no idea how relieved I feel.
It was worrying me terribly to feel that you might be in difficulties
and had not thought enough of me to take me into your confidence."
Looking at him appealingly she added:

"You will always confide in me, won't you Ken?"

"Sure I will, sweetheart----"

Trembling with the ardor he was trying to control he seized hold of her
hand and drew her on to his knee.  She offered no resistance, but
passively sat there, clasped against his broad shoulder, her face
radiant with happiness at the load which his words had taken off her
mind.

Putting his arm round her waist, he leaned forward as if to kiss her,
but drawing quickly back she said:

"There's still something else I must ask you before my happiness is
quite complete."

"What's that?" he demanded, impatient at these continual interruptions
to his amorous advances.

Turning she looked steadily into his face, as if trying to read the
truth or falsity of his answer.  She could not see his eyes, veiled as
they were by the glasses, but that sensitive mouth she knew so well,
that determined chin, that high forehead crowned by the bushy brown
hair with its solitary white lock--all these were as dear to her as
they had always been.  To think that he might have fondled some other
woman as he was now fondling her was intolerable agony.

"Kenneth," she said slowly and impressively, "are you sure that there
is no part of your life that you have kept hidden from me?"

He started and for a moment changed color.  What did she mean?  Was it
possible that she suspected the substitution, or was she alluding to
some past history of his brother's life, of which he knew nothing?
Evasively, he answered:

"Why all these question, sweetheart, the first day I come home.  Is
this the kind of welcome you promised me, the one I had a right to
expect.  I am very tired.  Let us go to bed."

His arm still around her, he again drew her to him and, stooping, tried
to reach her mouth with his own.  But again she resisted, her mind too
disturbed by jealousy to be in a mood to respond to his wooing.  Gently
she said:

"I know you are tired, Ken.  I am tired, too,--tired of all these
rumors and slanderous insinuations.  I have been made unhappy by
hearing this gossip.  It is my right to tell you what I have heard and
ask for a straightforward, loyal explanation.  I know you are true to
me.  I have never doubted it for an instant.  I only want a word from
you to forget what I've heard and dismiss the matter from my mind
forever."

He looked at her, an amused kind of expression playing about the
corners of his mouth.  It was only with an effort that he controlled
the muscles of his face.  What a comedy, he thought to himself!  Here
was this sweet little woman breaking her heart over something which, as
far as he knew, didn't exist.  But he must continue to play his part,
no matter at what cost.  Evidently, she had heard something for which
there might be some basis of truth.  She might even have proofs of his
brother's infidelity, and ready to produce them.  Too sweeping a denial
might still further complicate matters, arouse suspicion, and end in
exposure.  Cautiously, he replied:

"You know all there is in my life, sweetheart.  I never conceal
anything from you."

Looking searchingly at him, she demanded:

"Never?"

"Never."

"Has there been another woman in your life, Kenneth, since you married
me?"

"No, sweetheart--never.  If anyone told you that or even insinuated it,
he was a scoundrel.  It's a damned lie!  You are and always will be the
only one----"

Her head fell back on his shoulder.

"Then I am completely happy!" she murmured.

His arms folded about her and she felt his warm breath on her cheek.
But this time she did not resist.  It felt good to be sheltered there
in those strong arms against the attacks and calumnies of the world.

"It is late," he murmured.

Suddenly, he threw her head back and bending down till his mouth
reached hers he kissed her full on the lips.  She did not resist, but
just abandoned herself, responding only feebly to the fierce passion
that made him tremble like a leaf.  His face flushed, his hands
shaking, he murmured:

"It is very late.  Are you not tired?"

"No dear--I'm not tired.  There's no hurry.  We needn't get up early
to-morrow.  It's so beautiful here--sitting together like this--so
happy in each other's company."

"But I am tired," he said, trying to control his emotion.

It was almost more than he could endure, yet still he mastered himself,
and resisted the temptation that arose violently within him to take her
by force, if needs be, and carry her into the inner room, as the wild
beast, tiring of playing with its victim, suddenly ends the game by
seizing its hapless prey and drags it away to its lair.  Was he not the
master?  Why should he allow her childish prattle to stand in the way
of his desires.  For years, Handsome had not known female society save
that of those wretched outcasts who infest the mining camps.  He had
caroused with them and quarreled with them.  He had even loved one of
them--after the rough and ready fashion of the _veldt_.  She was a
Spaniard, a tall handsome woman, with large black eyes and the temper
of a fury.  She had killed her husband in a drunken brawl, and on
leaving prison had gone to South Africa.  She met the gambler one night
in a gambling house, and, without as much as asking for an
introduction, she went up to him and, in a characteristic Spanish
style, gave him a hearty kiss on both cheeks.  It was her way of
notifying her female associates that, henceforth, the big miner was her
man.  Handsome accepted the challenge, and for a couple of years they
lived as happily together as can two adventurers who are in constant
hot water with the police.  One day, in a fit of drunken jealousy, she
struck him.  Furious with rage, he seized her by the neck.  He did not
mean to harm her; it was his giant strength that was to blame.  Anyhow
her neck was broken and the coroner called it an accident.  For a week
or so, Handsome was really sorry.  She was the only woman he had ever
cared for.  She at least was a woman.

But this slip of a girl, with her childish prattle and aristocratic
airs, was quite different.  Accustomed to the rougher ways of the camp,
her fine manners and refined graces at first had rather intimidated
him.  He did not feel at home with her.  He felt awkward and ill at
ease.  Yet, for all that, she was a woman, too--a woman of his own
race, desirable, tempting.  When François had first suggested that he
impersonate his brother and enjoy his fortune, he had said nothing
about his brother's wife.  Perhaps he reserved her for his master,
Keralio.  At the thought, a pang of jealousy went through him.  If
Keralio, why not he?  Evidently Keralio had been stalking the game, for
she complained of his conduct and had dismissed him from the house.
Yet, in what position was he to frustrate Keralio in any of his
schemes?  He had him in his power; he was completely at his mercy.  He
allowed him to masquerade in New York as the millionaire, but he was
the real master of the Traynor home.  Even now, François might be
spying on their actions, eager to report to the arch conspirator.
Rising from the chair, he lifted her to her feet.

"Come, darling--it is late----"

He led her slowly, almost imperceptibly, in the direction of the inner
room.  A feeling of languor came over her, and she allowed him to lead
her, abandoning herself to his ardent, feverish embrace, responding
every now and then to the hot kisses he rained on her mouth and neck.
Through her thin dress he could feel her soft form pressing against
him.  From her neck arose a delicious aroma, a kind of feminine incense
that still further aroused and lashed his desire.

"I adore you--I adore you!" he murmured, as he kissed her again.
Slowly he led her past the bookcase and marble Venus to the open door
of her pink and white boudoir.

[Illustration: "I adore you--I adore you" he murmured, as he kissed her
again.]

She looked up at him in surprise.

"How you love me!" she murmured.  "You never used to care for me like
this."

Her head on his shoulder, her eyes half closed, she was conscious only
of the presence of the man she loved better than anyone in the world.

Yet even now, in the hour of her supreme content and felicity, when all
her tormenting anxieties and doubts had been dissipated by his frank
words of denial, there was still something that worried her.  He was
changed somehow, even in his love making.  It was delicious to be loved
passionately, fiercely, like this--to be carried off by force, as it
were, by your own husband.  But she did not understand how a man could
change so much in a few weeks.  Kenneth had always loved her deeply,
but never had she known him display such ardor as this.  She had heard
that men change, particularly after long absences from home.  Some, she
had heard, became colder; others were more demonstrative.  Of the two,
she thought the latter preferable.  If there was such love in the
world, why should it not be shown her.  Her own temperament was cold,
but no woman could but feel flattered that she possessed the power to
arouse men to such passion.

At last they had reached the threshold of the boudoir.  What to him was
an earthly paradise, was almost attained.  In a state of blissful
helplessness, intoxicated by a delicious sensation of being completely
dominated by a will stronger than her own, she permitted him to take
her where he wished.  Her eyes closed, her head on his shoulder, she
submitted willingly to his fervent kisses.  Another moment and he had
closed the door behind them, when, suddenly, a commotion on the landing
outside the library aroused both with a start.  There was the sound of
voices and people running up the stairs.

"What's that?" exclaimed Helen startled.

Irritated at this unlooked for interruption, the gambler went quickly
toward the landing to investigate.  François met him at the library
door.  In his hand he held an envelope.  Holding it out, he said:

"A telegram for Madame!"

"A telegram!" cried Helen, rushing forward.  "Good God, I hope Dorothy
is not----"

She tore it open, while Handsome stood by in silence.  On the valet's
face there was a triumphant expression, the gratified smile of one
rogue who enjoys the discomfiture of another.

Helen suddenly gave a cry.

"It's as I thought!" she exclaimed.  "Dorothy is worse.  The doctor
thinks it is scarlet fever.  I must go to her at once."

"Go where?" demanded Handsome in consternation.

"To Philadelphia."

"To Philadelphia to-night?" he cried in dismay.

"Yes--to-night," she said firmly.

He protested vigorously.

"Nonsense--you can't go to-night.  It will do no good.  Wait till the
morning.  There are no trains."

Quickly, the valet drew from his pocket a time-table.  With a side
glance at his master, he said:

"There is a train at 1.15.  If Madame is quick, she will make it.  The
car is already waiting downstairs."

Helen seized her fur coat, which the obliging valet had also brought up
from the hall.

"Yes--yes.  Throw a few things in my bag.  You needn't come, Ken.  I'll
telephone you directly I get to Philadelphia.  Good-bye!"

The next instant she was gone and the gambler, with a muttered curse,
went to the sideboard and poured out a glass of whiskey, with which to
drown his disappointment.




CHAPTER XVI

For a person so fastidious and particular, so fond of the luxurious and
the elegant, Signor Keralio had certainly selected a queer neighborhood
for his abode.  Miles distant from the fashionable centers, far away up
in the Bronx, he occupied the entire top floor of a dingy, broken down
tenement.  There were no other people in the house, it being in such
bad repair that no one cared to live in it, and as Keralio paid as much
as all the previous tenants combined and made no requests for
improvements, the landlord was only too glad to leave him undisturbed.
It was situated at the extreme end of a blind alley and, there being no
egress from the street save at one end, there was consequently little
or no traffic and, for the great part of the day and night, the silence
was as deep and unbroken as in the open country.

With his neighbors Signor Keralio was distantly polite, but never
intimate.  The district was a poor one, being settled mostly by Italian
laborers who rose and went to bed with the sun and toiled too long and
too hard each day to bother their heads as to why such a fine gentleman
as the Signor appeared to be, should live in such squalid quarters.  No
one had ever been admitted to his flat.  If the baker called, he left
the bread on the mat; if a chance peddler or book agent happened to
wander in, he had to talk through closed doors.  The Signor was always
busy and could not be disturbed.  The lights often burned all night
long, and sometimes people drove up in a taxi and went away again.  For
a while the corner gossips speculated idly as to who he might be, but
gradually they lost all interest.  When he purchased trifles at the
corner grocery he gave out casually that he was a newspaper man and had
to work all night, and the fact that muffled sounds of hammering and
machinery in motion had been heard at all hours, only helped to make
the explanation more plausible.

To-night, Keralio was perhaps more anxious than at any time to
discourage callers--especially should they happen to be inquisitive
secret service agents.  Another few days and he would have nothing more
to fear.  The presses would soon have completed their work and $500,000
worth of as fine a $10 counterfeit as ever deceived a bank teller would
be ready for distribution.  Half of them had already been run off and,
as he held them up to the light and critically examined the silken
thread that ran here and there through the specially prepared paper and
noted the careful coloring, the beautifully geometrical lathe work and
skilfully traced signatures, he silently congratulated himself.  Here
was half a million dollars' worth of splendid currency.  Detection was
absolutely impossible.  Had not François already succeeded in passing a
lot?  After all had been disposed of, he could afford to take a rest.
On the proceeds of this rich haul, he could live like a prince for a
few years in Europe, and when that was all gone, he still had the
diamonds to fall back upon.  Glancing at the clock, he wondered why
Handsome did not come.  He was anxious to get possession of the
diamonds.  It was too soon to attempt doing anything with the stones
now.  The hue and cry would be too loud.  All the diamond markets would
be watched, if they were not already.  He had a suspicion that Parker
and Steell suspected something wrong.  François had seen the President
in earnest consultation with the lawyer directly after Handsome had
announced the loss.  He had not been able to hear what was said, but
from their manner he inferred that the diamonds were the sole subject
of conversation.  They did not question Handsome's identity.  That
never entered their heads, but they doubted his story of losing the
stones.  They, no doubt, thought he had used the diamonds to make good
Wall Street losses.

He chuckled as he thought how admirably his scheme had worked out.  He
had hinted at Kenneth being heavily short in this street, which at once
explained a motive for Kenneth diverting the stones to his own use.
Yes, he had triumphed over them all--except one.  Helen Traynor, so
far, had foiled him in everything, and the more she resisted and
insulted him, the more determined he was to drag her at his feet.
Handsome, poor devil, fondly imagined he would inherit the wife as well
as the fortune.  How could he guess that he, Keralio, would send a
bogus telegram just in time to dash the cup from his lips.

Impatiently he strode up and down the rooms.  Why was Handsome late?  A
frown darkened his face.  He had better not trifle with him.  He must
obey without question or take the consequences.  He was in no mood to
be defied.

Suddenly, he started and listened.  His alert ear had caught the sound
of approaching footsteps on the stairs outside.  A moment later came
three deliberate knocks on the door, a signal which indicated a
friendly visitor.  Quickly, Keralio went forward and withdrew the bolt.

François entered, suit case in hand.  Hardly before he could take
breath after the long climb, Keralio exclaimed:

"Well, how are they going?"

The Frenchman grinned.

"_À merveille_!  Like hot cakes.  I've passed all of zem.  Good work,
is it not?"

"And the real stuff?" demanded Keralio.

"Is in here."

The valet pointed to the leather case.

Eagerly Keralio seized the portmanteau, and, opening it, emptied the
contents.  A perfect shower of greenbacks--genuine ones this time--fell
upon the floor.  With shaking hands, like a miser who trembles as he
handles his hoarded gold, Keralio picked up the money by armfuls and,
taking it to a table, proceeded to count it.

"Is it all here?" he demanded suspiciously.

The valet scowled.

"Do you think I'm holding any back on you?  _Ma foi, non_!"

Keralio, still counting, fixed his assistant with steely, piercing eyes.

"No, François, I think you know me too well for that.  You know I never
forget a service; you also know I never forgive anyone who crosses my
will."

The valet shrugged his shoulders.  In an injured tone he asked:

"What's all ze talk about?  I work well for you.  I do your dirty work,
_n'est ce pas_?  I never complain--I am faithful.  What more would you
have?"

"Why should you complain?  You get your share," rejoined his chief
sternly.

The valet was silent and Keralio went on:

"A few days more and we'll be rid of all the new stuff.  Then we'll
take down the presses and carry away the parts, piece by piece.  When
we're ready to leave this hole, there won't be a shred of evidence
left.  Have you heard any news from our man in Washington?  What are
the secret service men doing?"

"Ze alarm is given.  Zey have spotted several of ze bills.  Half a
dozen of ze cleverest sleuths in ze country have been put on our trail.
Zey will not succeed.  Ze scent is cold.  We've got zem completely
doped."

Keralio looked anxious.

"Is there any danger of them having shadowed you and followed you here?"

"No--_mon cher, pas le mains du monde_.  It took me three hours to come
here from ze Pennsylvania station--such a crazy in and out route I gave
ze chauffeur.  If they succeed in following such a labyrinth as that,
they deserve to get us."

Keralio smiled and pointed to a bottle of brandy on the table.
Approvingly, he said:

"Good boy!  There, take a drink and a cigar----"

After the valet had refreshed himself, he again confronted his chief.

"What else _à votre service_?"

Keralio pointed carelessly to a seat.  In a commanding tone, he said:

"Yes--I have more work for you.  Sit down.  I will tell you."

The valet took a chair and waited.  Keralio looked at him meditatively
for a moment.  Then suddenly he asked:

"When did you leave the house?"

"This afternoon at three o'clock."

"When did Mrs. Traynor return from Philadelphia?"

"Yesterday--furious at the hoax played upon her?  Miss Dorothy is
perfectly well----"

Keralio smiled.

"Of course.  I sent that telegram."

The valet grinned.  Admiringly, he exclaimed:

"You are admirable!  _Quel homme, mon dieu, quel homme_!"

Paying no heed to the compliment, Keralio went on:

"What did Handsome say?"

"He is puzzled himself and can't understand.  Everyone's up in the air.
They think it is a discharged maid who did it for spite."

"The next time Mrs. Traynor receives a sudden message about her baby it
will not be a hoax."

The valet looked up in surprise.

"What do you mean?"

Keralio did not answer the question immediately, but sat nervously
twisting his fingers, a moody sullen look in his pale saturnine face.
At last, breaking the heavy silence, he said:

"That woman insulted me.  You saw it.  You were there----"

The valet nodded.

"You mean she put you out--ah, _oui_, she has a _diable_ of a temper
when angry."

Keralio nodded.

"Yes--that I can never forgive.  She shall ask my pardon on her knees.
I will break her spirit, humiliate her pride.  I have been taxing my
brain how to do it.  At last I have hit on a plan--one that cannot fail
and you shall help me."

"In what way _s'il vous plait_?"

Bending forward, his black eyes flashing, Keralio said earnestly:

"That woman is devoted to only two beings in this world--her husband
and her baby.  Sooner or later, perhaps only in a few days, she will
discover that Handsome is an impostor.  He is such a fool that exposure
is inevitable.  The blow will almost kill her.  Above all, it will
humiliate her pride to know that unwittingly she has allowed that
drunken brute, that poor counterfeit of her husband, to caress and
fondle her.  Next in her affections comes her baby.  If any danger
threatened the child, she would stop at nothing, she would make any
sacrifice to ward off the danger.  I propose to bring about just that
situation----"

The valet half started up from his chair.  Hardened and callous as he
was in crime, he was hardly prepared to go to that extreme.

"Death?" he exclaimed, horror stricken, "you would kill ze child?"

"No fool--not kill the child.  I'll kidnap it--that's all.  We'll bring
the child here and, then I'll write the mother, telling her where it is
and to come to it, but warning her that if she values the child's life,
she must tell no one, and must come here unaccompanied.  Once she is
here, I will take care of the rest.  Do you understand?"

The valet breathed more freely.

"So you will that I----"

His chief nodded.

"Precisely.  You'll take the flyer to Philadelphia.  Say you come from
the mother.  They'll have no suspicion.  Take the child and come here
at once.  Understand?"

"_Oui_, monsieur."

Keralio rose.  In commanding tones, he said:

"Then go at once."

The valet went to get his hat.  As he approached the door Keralio
halted him and said:

"What's Handsome doing--keeping sober?"

"He has to, for I lock up all ze liquor.  He lives like a lord, buying
swell clothes, riding in ze automobile.  Last night he lost at ze club
$10,000 he had drew from ze bank."

Keralio gave a low whistle.

"The deuce he did!  Living high, eh?  Well--that's all right.  Let him
enjoy it.  His gay life won't last long--only just as long as it suits
my purpose."

"Hush!  Not a word--here he is!"

From the landing outside came the sound of a heavy body lurching.  Then
came the noise of someone groping for the handle, followed by a furious
pounding on the wooden panels.

"Open up there, will you!" shouted a hoarse voice.

"Drunk, as usual!" said Keralio contemptuously.

He suddenly threw the door open and the gambler, burly and unsteady on
his legs, almost fell in.  He was in evening dress, his collar and tie
rumpled, his hair unkempt.  His face was flushed, his eyes bloodshot.
Reeling in, he hiccoughed:

"What'n h--ll do you live so far up town for?  I thought I'd never get
here.  Say, this is the end of the world, ain't it?  Jumping off place,
eh?  Stopped several times on the way to get a drink.  My cabby nearly
got lost.  Been driving me round for three hours trying to locate the
blooming house.  Charged me $5.  Hell of a good business, ain't it.
Tain't on the level to treat an old pal that way.  Y'oughter be ashamed
o' yourself."

"I'm more ashamed of you--for making such a beast of yourself,"
rejoined Keralio angrily.  "Stop your cursed noise or you'll have the
police on top of us!"

Without ceremony, he pushed the newcomer into a seat and made a gesture
to François to go.  The valet went toward the door.

"Remember," said Keralio warningly.  "There must be no blundering.  I
want the child brought here----"

"_Oui_, monsieur--it shall be as you say."

The door closed and Keralio turned quietly to the miner.  Sternly, and
in a manner that brooked no nonsense, he demanded:

"Did you bring the diamonds?"

Handsome grinned, and pointed to his waist.

"I've got 'em all right!"  With another hiccough, he added: "But
there's no hurry, old sport.  Let's have a drink before we get talking
business."

In two rapid strides Keralio was up to him.  Fiercely he said:

"Give me the stones--give me them I say.  We've no time for your d----d
fooling.  Hand them over.  Come----"

For a moment the gambler just sat and looked at his master.  A giant in
physical strength compared with the slightly built foreigner, he could
have overpowered him as a child might crush an egg-shell, but he lacked
the mentality, the magnetism of the Italian.  He was cowed, dominated
by the stronger mind.  Grumbling, he began to fumble at his waist:

"I don't see what's the hurry."

"But I see," exclaimed Keralio, his eyes growing larger, as he already
saw the colossal stones glittering in his hand.

The next instant Handsome had slid his hand under his waistcoat and
unbuckled a belt he wore next his shirt.  Unfastening a pocket and
taking out the contents, he growled:

"Here they are!  I'm glad to get rid of the d----d things."

With a cry of exultant joy Keralio took hold of the stones and, going
to the window, greedily feasted his eyes on them.  Report had not
exaggerated the value and extraordinary beauty of the gems.  They were
worth more than a million.

"What do I get out of it?" whined the gambler.

Keralio regarded him with contempt.  Dryly he said:

"You get out of it that you're not sitting in the electric chair for
murdering your twin brother.  You get out of it that you're playing the
rôle of the millionaire, basking in the smiles of your brother's
charming wife, and making a drunken beast of yourself--that's what you
get out of it.  Isn't it enough?"

Handsome winced.  Keralio had a direct way of saying things to which
there was no answer possible.

"All right," he grumbled, "I'm not kicking."

"No--I wouldn't if I were you."

Changing the topic, Keralio carelessly lit a cigarette and, between the
puffs, asked:

"How's your wife?"

"My wife?  You mean his wife?"

Keralio smiled.

"Yours--for the time being."

Handsome scowled.

"It isn't so easy as I thought," he replied.  "I don't know if she
suspects something's wrong or not, but ever since that evening she was
called to Philadelphia she avoids me like the pest.  I can see in her
face that she's puzzled.  'It's my husband, and yet not my
husband'--that's what she's thinking all the time.  I can guess her
thoughts by the expression on her face."

Keralio shrugged his shoulders.

"That's your own fault.  I gave you the opportunity.  You failed to
profit by it.  You got drunk the first night you arrived.  Kenneth
Traynor was a temperate man.  Is it no wonder you excited wonder and
talk?  Then you were stupid under questioning and gave equivocal
answers.  Your explanation to Parker about the diamonds was more than
unfortunate; it was idiotic.  His suspicions were at once aroused.  He
may yet give us trouble before we have time to get rid of the stones.
Finding the wife eluded you, you began to stay out late at night.  You
caroused, you drank hard, you gambled--all of which follies your
brother never committed.  In other words, you are a fool."

The miner pointed to the diamonds which still lay on the table.
Sulkily he asked:

"Is that all you wanted?"

Keralio put the gems away in his pocket, and pointed to the stacks of
newly printed counterfeit money that lay in stacks all over the floor.

"No, you can help me make up bundles of this stuff."

Handsome opened wide his eyes at sight of the crisp currency.  Greedily
he exclaimed:

"Say--that's some money!  Ain't they beauties?"

Keralio made an impatient gesture and, taking off his coat, made a
gesture to his companion to do likewise.

"Come--there's no time to talk.  We must get rid of it all before
morning.  For all I know the detectives may be watching the house now."




CHAPTER XVII

"I'm sure it was Mary," exclaimed Ray positively.  "I never did like
the girl.  She was sullen and vicious and would stop at nothing to get
even with us for discharging her."

"Perhaps you are right," said Helen, "although it is hard to believe
that a woman would do such a cruel thing to a mother.  Just imagine how
worried I was all the way to Philadelphia, only to find when I got
there that no message had been sent, and Dorothy was perfectly well."

It was evening.  The two women were sitting alone in the library on the
second floor, Ray busy at her trousseau, Helen helping her with a piece
of embroidery.  The master of the house was absent, as usual.  He had
not come home to dinner, having telephoned at the last minute that he
was detained at the club, a thing of such common occurrence since his
return from South Africa that Helen had come to accept it as a matter
of course.  Indeed, things had come to such a pass that she rather
welcomed his absence.  She preferred the sweet, amiable companionship
of her little sister to that of a man who had suddenly become exacting,
over-bearing and quarrelsome.

"Why don't you let Dorothy come home?" asked Ray.  "Then you wouldn't
have this constant worry about her."

"I think I will, now that we are more settled and things are quieter.
I wrote to auntie to-day that I might go to Philadelphia one day next
week to bring her home.  You are right.  I shall not be happy until
she's with me.  I have such terrible dreams about her.  If anything
were to happen that child, I think it would kill me."

Ray nodded approvingly.  Sympathetically, she said:

"Yes, dear.  You'll feel better satisfied when she's with you.  Besides
she'll be a companion for you--especially when I'm married----"

Helen sighed and turned away her face so her sister should not see the
tears that suddenly filled her eyes.  Sorrowfully, she said:

"It will be terrible to lose you, dear.  Of course, I'm happy over your
marriage.  It would be very selfish in me to want to stand in the way
of your happiness.  I'm sure I wish you and Wilbur every joy
imaginable.  But I shall certainly feel very lonely when you are gone."

The young girl looked closely at her sister.  She realized that her
sister was no longer the happy, contented woman she once was, and she
readily guessed the cause.  Helen had not taken her into her
confidence, but she had ears and eyes.  Living in the house in such
close intimacy, she could not help noticing that the relations between
the wife and husband were no longer what they had been.  Guardedly she
said:

"But you have Kenneth."

Helen sighed and was silent.

Ray looked up.  More gently she said:

"Haven't you your husband, dear?"

Her sister shook her head.  There was a note of utter discouragement
and melancholy in her voice as she answered:

"He is seldom home--his club seems to have more attraction for him.  I
rarely see him except at breakfast time."  She was silent for a moment,
and then added quickly: "Would you believe that he hasn't been home a
single night since the time I was called to Philadelphia?"

Ray opened her eyes.

"He's out all night?"

"Yes--all night.  The other morning it was seven o'clock when he came
home--and his dress suit and shirt looked as if he had been in a fight."

The young girl put down her work and looked at her sister in dismay.

"Sis!--what's the matter with Ken all at once?"

Helen made no reply, but covering her face with her two hands, burst
into tears.  Ray rose quickly and going over to where she was sitting,
sat on the edge of the chair and put her arms about her.  Soothingly
she said:

"Don't cry, dear, don't cry.  He will soon be himself again.  His
terrible experience on the steamer upset him dreadfully.  His nervous
system underwent such a shock that it has entirely changed his
character.  Wilbur says it is quite a common phenomenon.  Only the
other day he read in some medical book an article on that very subject.
The writer says any great shock of that kind can cause a temporary
disarrangement of the moral sense and perceptions.  For example, a man
who, under ordinary circumstances is a perfect model of a husband, with
every good quality and virtue, may suddenly lose all sense of conduct
and become am unprincipled _roué_.  In other words, we have two natures
within us.  When our system is working normally we succeed in keeping
the evil that's in us under control; but following any great shock, the
system is disarranged, the evil gains the ascendancy, and we appear
quite another person.  This explains the dual personality about which
Wilbur and I had an argument the other day.  Don't you remember?"

Helen nodded.  Sadly she said:

"I begin to think you are right.  Certainly he has changed.  If he had
been like this when I first met him I should never have married him.
It is not the Kenneth I learned to love."  Bitterly, she added: "As he
is now, I feel I dislike and detest him.  Unless he soon changes for
the better, I shall leave him.  In self respect I can't go on living
like this?"

Kissing her sister again, Ray rose and went back to her seat.
Confidently, she said:

"Don't worry, dear.  I'm sure everything will be all right soon.  You
see if I'm not right.  By my wedding day--only three weeks away
now--you'll think as much of Ken as ever----"

"I hope so, dear, but three weeks is a long time to wait----"

The young girl laughed.

"Why that's nothing at all.  Just imagine Ken is ill or gone away from
you on a visit for that length of time----"

As she spoke the door opened, and François entered with a silver
salver, which he presented to his mistress.

"A letter for Madame."

Helen looked at the envelope and threw it down with a gesture of
impatience.  Crossly, she exclaimed:

"François, I do wish you'd be more careful.  Can't you read.  Don't you
see the letter is addressed to Mr. Traynor?"

The valet nodded.

"_Oui_, madame.  But as Monsieur is out I thought that possibly
madame----"

Incensed more at the fellow's impudent air than by what he actually
said, Helen lost her temper.  Angrily, she exclaimed:

"Don't think.  People of your class are not hired to think; they are
paid to do as they are told.  You've been very careless in your work
recently.  The next time it happens I shall have to tell you to find
another place."

The valet smiled.  An insolent look passed over his sallow, angular
face.  Dropping completely his deferential manner and fixing the two
women with a bold, familiar stare, he said impudently:

"You needn't wait till next time.  I'll quit right now, _parbleu_.
It's a rotten job, anyhow."

Indignant, Helen pointed to the door.

"Go!" she cried.  "The housekeeper will settle with you.  Never let me
see your face again."

The Frenchman shrugged his shoulders and went toward the door.  As he
reached it, he turned round, a sneer on his face:

"You'll see me again all right, but ze circumstances may be different?
My lady may not be so proud ze next time."

With this parting shot, he went away, and a moment later they heard him
going up to his room to pack his things.

Ray turned to her sister.  Reprovingly, she said:

"Weren't you a little severe with him?"

Helen shook her head.  Quickly, she said:

"I never could bear the sight of the man.  He is treacherous and
deceitful.  I'm not at all sure that he's honest.  It was only after
he'd been here some time that I learned he was formerly with Signor
Keralio.  That was enough to set me against him.  Like master, like
valet, as the saying goes, and it's usually a true saying.  On several
occasions lately I have noticed things that seemed suspicious.  The
fellow is more intimate now with Kenneth than I, his wife, have ever
been.  Only the other day I discovered them in earnest and intimate
conversation.  Directly I appeared they separated and François, instead
of continuing to converse on terms of apparent social equality, was
once more the fawning valet.  I didn't take the trouble to ask Kenneth
what it all meant.  So many singular things have happened since his
return, that this only adds one more to the list."

"May I come in?" said a voice.

Helen looked up quickly.  It was Wilbur Steell who was standing at the
door with his head half in the room, laughing at them.  The two women
had been so busy talking that they had not heard the sound of
approaching footsteps.  With an exclamation of joy Ray jumped to her
feet and ran up to him.

"It's Wilbur--my precious Wilbur!"

Helen nodded approvingly, as she noticed the girl's enthusiasm.
Certainly her sister had changed.  She was hardly the cold,
self-centered Ray of six months ago.  With a smile she said:

"It's astonishing how a man can alter a girl--if he's the right kind."

The lawyer laughed.

"It works both ways.  The right kind of woman can make a man change his
ways--even a hardened old bachelor.  Who could have guessed that I
would ever fall in love?"

Helen sighed.

"What is love?  We have it to-day; it eludes us to-morrow.  A few weeks
ago I thought I loved my husband better than any being in the world.
To-day, I can hardly look him in the face.  How do you account for it?"

Dropping into a chair, the lawyer look serious.

"I can't account for it, nor can I blame you.  Kenneth has returned
from South Africa a changed man.  Whether the wreck and the loss of the
diamonds affected his mind I do not know.  Only a psychologist could
determine that.  But he is not the same.  Where is he to-night?"

Helen threw up her hands.

"Do I ever know?" she exclaimed wearily.  "I haven't seen him since
morning, and don't expect to see him before breakfast to-morrow.  He's
at his club or drinking and carousing, or in some gambling house
playing roulette.  How do I know?"

"It is certainly a most singular case," said the lawyer meditatively.
"Mr. Parker and I have gone carefully over his accounts at the
Company's office.  Everything is perfectly regular.  There only remains
the missing diamonds.  We have detectives working on half a dozen clues
but so far we have accomplished nothing.  We have also gone to
Washington to get the secret service men interested in the case on the
ground that if the diamonds are here they were smuggled in and no duty
was paid.  But we found the secret service men busy following up
counterfeiters.  The country is being flooded with counterfeit $10
bills--a splendid reproduction, almost defying detection.  It is
believed that the plates and presses from which they are made are right
here in New York and the whole secret service force is at work trying
to run the counterfeiters to earth.  This is why our diamond case is
going so slowly.  They are so busy following up the counterfeiters they
have no time for us."

Ray, much interested, leaned eagerly forward.

"A counterfeit ten dollar bill, did you say?" she demanded.

"Yes--it is a remarkable counterfeit.  You would not know it from a
good one.  Only an expert can tell the difference.  But all these
crooks overreach themselves.  Clever as they are, they usually leave
some mark which betrays them.  For example, in printing this bill which
bears the head of Lincoln, they have spelled his first name
'Abrahem'--in other words, the engraver made an 'e' when it should have
been 'a.'"

Ray jumped up, quite excited.  Her eyes flashing, she cried.

"Isn't that strange!  I have a new $10 bill, and I noticed to-day the
queer spelling of Abraham.  Wouldn't it be funny if I had one of the
counterfeits?"

The lawyer smiled.

"It wouldn't be funny; it would be a tragedy, considering that in a
short while from now I am to pay your bills.  Where is the bank note?"

"I'll run up and get it.  It's in my purse."

When she had disappeared, Steell turned to his hostess and said:

"Have you seen Signor Keralio lately?"

"Hardly--you know I dismissed him from the house."

The lawyer sat thoughtfully drumming his fingers on the table.
Musingly, he said:

"Somehow I have a hunch that that fellow knows something about the
diamonds.  Does Kenneth ever see him?"

"I asked him the other day.  He said he did not."

"That's strange!" exclaimed the lawyer.  "It was only yesterday morning
that I saw them together in a taxicab."

"Where?" demanded Helen, surprised.

"Away uptown.  I had business up in the Bronx.  I was driving my car
and was near 200th street and going north when suddenly I had to steer
to one side to allow a taxicab to pass.  There were two men in it.  I
just chanced to glance inside and, to my surprise, I recognized your
husband and Keralio."

"What time was that?"

"Very early--about nine o'clock."

"What direction?"

"They were coming south."

"Then he must have been with Keralio all night, for he didn't come
home."

The lawyer was silent.  Certainly here was a mystery which needed more
detective talent than he possessed to clear up.  Yet he would not rest
until it was solved.  To-morrow he would get Dick Reynolds busy, and
they would go to work in earnest.  The first thing to find out was what
took Keralio and Kenneth to the Bronx.

"Does Keralio live in the Bronx?"

"I don't know," said Helen.

"I'll find out," said the lawyer, grimly.

At that moment Ray returned, holding out a new ten-dollar bill.

"I was right," she cried.  "The name Abraham is spelled with an 'e.'
Do you really think this is a counterfeit?"

The lawyer took the bill and examined it critically.

"I have no doubt of it," he answered.  "There are other
indications--the general appearance, the touch of the paper.  Where did
you get it?"

For a moment the young girl was puzzled.

"Let me think.  Where did I get it.  Oh yes, I know.  François gave it
to me."

"François!" exclaimed Helen.

The lawyer started and looked up in surprise.

"François, your brother-in-law's valet?"

"Yes--I wanted a $20 bill changed to pay for some things that came home
from the store, and he went out and brought me some old bills and this
new one."

The lawyer gave vent to a low, expressive whistle.

"François gave it to you, eh?  Where is Francois?"

"I discharged him to-day for insolence," said Helen.

"He's gone!"

"Yes--he went shortly before you came in."

The lawyer jumped to his feet, a look of exultation on his face.
Quickly, he said:

"Didn't you say that this François was formerly with Signor Keralio?"

"Yes--he was with him for years."

The lawyer gave a wild whoop of joy.

"Then we've got it--at last."

"Got what?" cried the women.

"A clue--a clue!" cried the lawyer, excitedly.  "Can't you see it?
François is hand in glove with Keralio--the master rogue who is making
this counterfeit."

"What do you propose to do?"

"Find where Keralio lives--then, perhaps, we'll find the lost diamonds."




CHAPTER XVIII

"This way," whispered Dick, as he darted swiftly from door to door,
"keep close behind me, and stick to the wall, or he'll see you."

But François was so utterly fagged after his long walk from the
Elevated road, carrying his heavy suitcase, that he worried about
nothing save his own discomfort.  Unable to find a taxi, he had been
compelled to tramp the entire distance, and the fatigue of it had made
him peevish.  He could have saved himself at least a mile if he had
taken a more direct road, but Keralio's orders were explicit.  He must
always follow a circuitous route so as to throw possible pursuers off
the scent.  There was no disobeying the orders of the chief, so on he
trudged, looking neither to right nor left, up one street, down
another, now crossing an empty lot, now darting through a narrow alley,
through the wastes and dreariness of Bronxville.

As he approached his journey's end, he accelerated his pace, going
along so fast that it was as much as Dick and Steell could do to keep
up with him.  The night was dark and foggy, and at times they could not
see him for the mist.  But as he came within the glare of each lamp
post, they could make out his lithe figure, scurrying along as if the
devil himself were at his heels.

"Let's get up closer," gasped Dick, who was winded from the long chase.
"I guess their den is in this neighborhood.  He'll slip in somewhere
and we'll lose him if we keep so far away."

"No--he may see us," whispered Steell cautiously.  "We can make him out
all right."

They increased their pace a little.  The valet was less than two blocks
away, and once he actually stopped and looked around as if to see if he
was followed.  Quickly Steell and Dick darted under a doorway, and,
seeing nothing to arouse his suspicion, François went on.

The lawyer was taking no chances to-night.  It was too good a game to
spoil.  That they were on the right trail at last he was morally
certain.  Ray's experience had given him the first clue.  After that it
was easy.  For two days Dick had shadowed the valet, and seen him
changing crisp $10 bills in half a dozen different places.  The lawyer
could have had him arrested at once, but he was after bigger game.  It
was not enough to arrest François.  He was only the tool.  They must
get the man higher up, the man who employed him.  That man, the lawyer
felt equally confident, was Keralio.  He was the master counterfeiter.
The first step to take was to find out where the counterfeiting was
done, where Keralio had his plant, and the only way to do this was to
follow the valet to his master's secret den.

For several days they had shadowed the Frenchman constantly, until
to-night they were rewarded by seeing him start with a suit case in the
direction of the Bronx.  They quickly gave chase, the lawyer confident
of results.  It was not part of his plan, however, to hurry matters or
do things prematurely.  To-night they would merely reconnoiter.  They
would content themselves by watching the premises, seeing who came and
went, and trying to obtain a glimpse of the interior.  If the evidence
was incriminating enough to make a raid successful, it would always be
time enough to call in the police.  Keralio, he was also well
convinced, had something to do with the missing diamonds, and possibly
the present investigation would throw some light on the mystery
surrounding Kenneth himself.  He had made no mention of his suspicions
to Helen, but he could not help feeling that in some way, yet to be
discovered, his old comrade had become involved with a band of crooks.
How otherwise explain his acquaintance with Keralio, an utter stranger
of dubious antecedents.  How explain the loss of the diamonds?  The
explanation Kenneth had given was decidedly fishy.  Parker did not
believe a word of it--in fact, frankly expressed, his opinion was that
his vice-president had disposed of the gems.  Had he himself not seen
Kenneth driving about the Bronx with Keralio at an impossible hour?
Had not Helen discovered François conversing on intimate terms with his
master?  It all looked decidedly bad; only time could unravel it all.
It was a fearful thing to suspect a man of Kenneth's standing, but
everything pointed to his being involved in a vast network of crime.

He was aroused from his reflections by an exclamation of warning from
his companion.

"Quick--there he goes!" whispered Dick.

The valet had suddenly made a sharp turn to the right, and was lost to
view.  But quick as he was, Dick was quicker.  The young man was a
little ahead of the lawyer, and, putting on a spurt of speed, he
reached the corner just in time to see the Frenchman and suitcase
disappear into a grimy, dilapidated looking tenement at the end of a
blind alley.

"We've run the fox to earth," whispered Steell exultantly.

"Could any melodrama wish for a more appropriate _mise-en-scène_?"
grinned Dick.

"Come opposite, and find out what we can see from the outside."

Crossing the street they took up positions in the shadow of a doorway.

The house which the Frenchman had entered was all dark and apparently
tenantless, except on the top floor where lights could be faintly seen
behind hermetically sealed shutters.  Straining his ears, Steell
thought he could hear the steady hum of machinery in motion.  With an
exclamation of satisfaction, he turned to his companion:

"We've got 'em, Dick, we've got 'em.  Do you hear the presses going?"

The young man listened.  The sound was plainly audible, but it was a
muffled sound, as if the walls and windows were padded with mattresses
to prevent any sounds of the operations within from reaching
inquisitive, outside ears.

"Let's go upstairs," whispered Steell.

Recrossing the road, they entered the house and began to grope their
way up the narrow, winding staircase.  They could make only slow
progress, not only because of the absence of light, but owing to the
rotten condition of the stairs.  Indescribably filthy and littered with
all sorts of rubbish and broken glass, in some places the boards had
broken through entirely, leaving gaping holes, which were so many
dangerous pitfalls.  Twice the lawyer came near breaking his neck.

At last they reached the top, both out of breath from the long and
perilous climb.

"Hush--there it is!" whispered Dick pointing at the end of a narrow
hall to a door from underneath which issued a faint glimmer of light.

Cautiously, noiselessly, treading on tiptoe, the lawyer and his
companion crept along the passage until they came to the door.  They
listened.  There was not a sound.  Even the hum of machinery which they
had heard in the street, had ceased.  Could the inmates have taken
alarm?

All at once they heard people talking.  Instantly, Steell recognized
the voice of Keralio.  He was questioning someone, no doubt the valet.
They listened.

"Well, did you carry out my orders?"

"_Oui_, monsieur, ze last of ze ten-dollar bills has been passed.  I
have ze money here."

"I did not mean that," broke in Keralio impatiently.  "I mean as
regards the child----"

"_Oui_, monsieur.  Didn't you receive my telegram.  I brought the child
from Philadelphia yesterday evening."

Steell, puzzled, turned to his companion.

"What child are they talking about?" he whispered.

"I have no idea.  Some more mischief they're up to, I guess."

Again Keralio's voice was heard asking:

"Where is Handsome to-day?  I told him to come.  Why isn't he here?"

"He's drinking again, monsieur.  When he's drunk you can't do anything
with him.  He's getting ugly about ze diamonds."

Steell nudged his fellow eavesdropper.

"Did you hear that?" he whispered.  "He spoke of diamonds!"

Keralio was heard bursting into a peal of savage laughter.

"Getting ugly is he?  What does he want?"

"He says you promised him half of ze proceeds when ze diamonds were
sold, and that now you are trying to do him out of it----  He says he's
sick of ze whole thing and will squeal to ze police unless you do ze
right thing."

Straining every nerve to hear, Steell glued his ear to the door.

Keralio burst out fiercely:

"Squeal, will he, the dog?  I'd like to know what will become of him
when the final reckoning's paid.  Will he tell the police that he was a
drunken adventurer in the South African mining camps before his twin
brother, Kenneth Traynor, arrived at Cape Town?  Will he tell the
police that he set the steamer afire, murdered his own brother, and,
profiting by the extraordinary resemblance, returned to New York,
passing himself off as the man who went away.  No, he won't tell all
that, will he?  But I will.  Did you bring the money?  Let me see it."

The talking suddenly ceased, and was followed by a deep silence.
Steell, staggered at this unexpected revelation, almost stumbled in his
eagerness to hear more.  Turning to his companion, he exclaimed in a
horror-stricken whisper:

"My God!  Did you hear that?  It's even worse than I feared.  They've
done away with Kenneth.  That man at the house is an impostor!"

"An impostor?" ejaculated Dick.  "Impossible.  Don't we all know
Kenneth when we see him?"

"Nothing's impossible!" rejoined the lawyer hurriedly.  "Kenneth had a
twin brother--the resemblance was so extraordinary as children that no
one knew them apart.  The brother disappeared years ago.  They thought
him dead.  Kenneth must have come across him in South Africa.  This
brother killed him and took his place.  It's all clear to me now.
We're in a den of assassins!"

Inside the conversation began again.

"Hush!  Listen!" whispered Steell.

The voice of Keralio was once more raised in angry tones.

"Didn't I tell you that I wanted the child brought here at once?"

"_Oui_, monsieur, but I could not.  I had ze rest of ze money to get
rid of and ze suitcase to carry.  I will bring her in a taxi to-morrow."

"Where is she?"

"Safe in the care of the woman who runs my boarding house."

"When did you bring her from Philadelphia?"

"Yesterday afternoon."

"Did you have any trouble?"

"_Non_, monsieur.  I didn't even have to go to ze house, although I had
a plausible story all ready.  I was going to say that Mrs. Traynor had
sent me to fetch Miss Dorothy because her mother wanted her home for ze
coming marriage of Miss Ray.  But it wasn't necessary to lie about it.
I found ze child playing in ze street near the house.  I merely told
her her mamma wanted her to come home, gave her some candy, and she
followed me willingly enough."

"By this time the alarm has been given."

"_Sans doute_, monsieur.  They probably telegraphed Mrs. Traynor last
night that ze child was missing----"

The voices again stopped.  Steell, his face white, and fists clenched,
turned to his companion:

"Good Heavens, Dick, did you hear that?  They've kidnapped Mrs.
Traynor's little girl--no doubt, with the idea of demanding ransom.
Thank God, we're in time to frustrate that crime----"

"Hush!" exclaimed his companion.  "Listen!"

Keralio proceeded:

"Now you understand what you are to do.  You bring the child here
to-morrow morning.  Meantime, I have already written in a disguised
hand to Mrs. Traynor telling her that her child is safe--for the
present, and that if she wants to see her she must come here to-morrow
afternoon.  I warned her that if she communicated with the police or
informed any of her friends, the child would be put to death before it
would be possible to effect a rescue.  That ought to bring her here----"

"Would monsieur go as far as to kill----"

"Why not," demanded Keralio fiercely.  "I permit nothing to stand in
the way of my will.  That woman can save her child's life, but she must
pay the price I ask.  She shall learn what it costs to dismiss me from
her house----"

The valet was heard to chuckle as he said:

"I don't love her any too much myself.  She discharged me from her
employ the other day so haughtily I felt like a whipped cur."

Again there was silence, followed by a muffled hammering.

"They're taking the printing press apart," whispered Dick, who through
the keyhole, had managed to get a glimpse of machinery.  "If we don't
act quickly, they'll get away with all the evidence.  Hadn't we better
go and call the police?"

For answer, the lawyer put his fingers to his lips with a warning
gesture, and beckoning the young man to follow, retraced his steps on
tiptoe along the narrow, dark hall and down the filthy, winding
staircase.  Not a word was spoken by either man until they reached the
street.  Once in the open air, the lawyer turned and said:

"Dick, we've uncovered as black a plot as was ever hatched in hell.  If
we don't queer the game and put them all in the chair it won't be my
fault.  We can't bring poor Kenneth back to life, but we can and will
revenge his cowardly murder.  It will be a positive joy to me to see
that arch-scoundrel Keralio electrocuted."

"What do you propose to do?" asked his companion.  "Hadn't we better
call Mrs. Traynor on the telephone and warn her before it's too late?"

The lawyer was silent for a few moments.  Then meditatively, he said:

"No, that would be a mistake.  No doubt, by this time, she has received
Keralio's anonymous letter.  She is probably frantic with anxiety over
the news of her child's disappearance, and will respond eagerly to any
clue that promises to take her to her child.  If we warned her she
would pay no heed.  She might pretend to, but only to pacify us.
Afraid that punishment might be visited on the child, she would obey
the warning not to talk, and she will come here to Keralio's flat
to-morrow at the time the letter stated.  Of course, she has no idea
Keralio wrote the letter.  But even if she had, it would make no
difference.  I know her.  She would run any risk to save her child."

"I think you're right," replied Dick, "but how, then, will you help
her?  There is no knowing what Keralio's object is in enticing her
here--you can be sure it's nothing good."

"Precisely--that's why we, too, must be on hand, together with a strong
force of detectives.  We'll get them all.  There will be no possible
escape.  We'll surround the house with men.  They'll be caught like
rats in a trap."

The lawyer turned to go.

"Where are you bound now?" asked Dick.

"To police headquarters!"




CHAPTER XIX

"There--take a little water--you're much better now!" said the nurse,
soothingly.

The patient swallowed greedily the cooling drink handed to him, and,
tired even by that small effort, fell back on his pillows exhausted.

"Where am I?" he inquired of the comely young woman, who in neat
service uniform, hovered about the bed.

"You're in St. Mary's Hospital."

"In New York?" he queried.

"No--San Francisco----"

He was too weak to question further, but his hollow blue eyes followed
her as she moved here and there, attending skilfully and swiftly to the
duties of the sick room.  Presently he made another venture:

"Have I been ill long?"

"Yes--very long."

"What's the matter?"

"Concussion of the brain, pneumonia and shock.  You are much better
now, but you mustn't talk so much or you may have a relapse."

He asked no more, but passed his hand over his brow in a bewildered
sort of way.  Presently, he began again:

"Does my wife come to see me?"

The nurse stopped in her work and looked at him curiously.  In
surprise, she exclaimed:

"Your wife!  Have you a wife?"

It was his turn now to be surprised.  In somewhat peevish tone he said:

"Of course I've a wife--everyone knows that."

"What's her name?"

"Helen--Helen Traynor."  Enthusiastically, he added: "Oh, you'd just
love my wife if you only knew her.  She's the sweetest, the most
unselfish----"

The nurse looked at him curiously.

"So your name is Traynor, is it?  We've tried to find out for a long
time.  But there were no marks on your clothes when you were picked up.
We did not know who you were and so have not been able to communicate
with any of your friends.  We guessed you were a man of social position
by your hands and teeth, and we knew your name began with a T because
of the monogram on the signet ring on your finger."

"Pick me up?" he echoed.  "Where did they pick me up?  What has
happened?  Was it an accident?"

"You were found unconscious, drifting in the ocean, clinging to a spar,
and were brought here by a sailing vessel.  You had a fracture of the
skull and you were half drowned.  It is supposed that you were one of
the passengers of the _Abyssinia_, which took fire and went down two
days after leaving Cape Town, but as several passengers and officers
whose bodies were never found also had names beginning with T, it was
impossible to identify you."

As he listened, the vacant, stupid expression on his face gradually
gave place to a more alert, intelligent look.  Indistinctly, vaguely,
he recalled things that had happened.  Slowly his brain cells began to
work.

He remembered cabling to Helen from Cape Town telling her of his
sailing on the _Abyssinia_.  He recalled the incidents of the first day
at sea.  The weather was beautiful.  Everything pointed to a good
voyage.  Who was traveling with him?  He could not remember.  Oh, yes,
now he knew.  François, his valet, and that other queer fellow he had
picked up at the diamond mines--his twin brother.  Yes, it all came
back to him now.

Why had he gone to the diamond mines?  Yes, now he knew--to take back
to New York the two big stones found on the Company's land.  He had
them safe in a belt he wore round his waist next to his skin.  The
second night out he went to bed about midnight and was fast asleep when
suddenly he heard shouts of "Fire!  Fire!"  Jumping up and looking out
of his cabin he saw stewards and passengers running excitedly about.
There was a reddish glare and a suffocating smell of smoke.  Quickly he
buckled on the belt with the diamonds, and, slipping on his trousers,
went out.  The electric lights had gone out.  The ship was in complete
darkness.  From all sides came shouts of men and screams of frightened
women.  It was a scene of utter demoralization and horror.  He was
groping his way along the narrow passage, when, suddenly, out of the
gloom a man sprang upon him, and, taken entirely by surprise, he was
borne to the deck before he had time to defend himself.  He could not
see the man's face and thought it was one of the passengers or sailors
who had gone mad, but when he felt a tug at his belt where the diamonds
were, he knew he had to do with a thief.  He fought back with all his
strength, but he was unarmed, while the stranger had a black jack which
he used unmercifully, raining fearful blows on his head.  The struggle
was too unequal to last.  Weak from loss of blood, he relaxed his grip,
and the thief, dealing one fearful parting blow, tore away the belt and
disappeared.  His life blood was flowing away, he felt sick and dizzy,
but just as the thief turned to run he managed to get a glimpse of his
face.  Now he remembered that face--it was the face of his twin
brother--the man he had rescued from starvation on the _veldt_.

Yes, it all came back to him now, like a horrible nightmare.  What had
happened since then?  How could he tell, since all this time his mind
had been a blank?  Helen, no doubt, believed him dead.  Mr. Parker and
all the others thought he had gone down with the ship.  But what of his
valet, François, and his cowardly, murderous brother--were they saved?
If so, the thief had the diamonds, and had probably disposed of them by
this time.  Perhaps there might still be time to capture the would-be
assassin and save the gems for the Americo-African Company.  Brother or
no brother, he would have no more pity on the unnatural, miserable
cutthroat.  The first step was to let his friends know where he was.
He must telegraph at once to Helen.

Yet, on second thought, it would not be wise to do that.  If Helen
really believed him dead and was now mourning his loss, it might be
almost a fatal shock if suddenly she were to receive a telegram saying
he was alive.  Such shocks have been known to kill people.  A better
plan would be to get well as soon as possible, leave the hospital, and
go to New York.  Once there, he could go quietly to his office and
learn how matters were.

The days passed, the convalescent making speedy progress toward
recovery, and in a few weeks more he was able to leave the hospital.
Making himself known quietly to a San Francisco business acquaintance,
he was quickly supplied with funds and immediately he turned his face
homeward.

The long, overland journey was tedious and exhausting, especially in
his present weakened condition, and even those who knew him well would
hardly have recognized in the pale emaciated looking stranger with ill
fitting clothes and untrimmed full growth of beard who emerged from the
train at the Grand Central Station, the carefully dressed, well groomed
Kenneth Traynor who, only a few months before, had sailed away from New
York on the _Mauretania_.

The noise and turmoil of the big metropolis, in striking contrast to
the quiet and seclusion of the sick room in which he had lived for so
many weeks, astonished him.  The crowds of suburbanites rushing
frantically for trains, elbowing and pushing in their anxiety to get
home, the strident hoarse cries of newsboys, the warning shouts of
wagon drivers as they drove recklessly here and there at murderous
speed, the blowing of auto horns, the ceaseless hum and roar of the big
city's heavy traffic--all this bewildered and dazed him.  At first he
did not remember just in what direction to turn, whether he lived in
the East or West side, uptown or down.  But as he got more accustomed
to his surroundings, it all came back to him.  How stupid--of course he
had to go downtown to 20th Street.  Once more he was himself again.
Hailing a taxi, he started for Gramercy Park.

Conflicting emotions stirred his breast as he drew near his home.  What
joy it would be to clasp Helen once more in his arms.  How delighted
she would be to see him!  Then he was filled with anxiety, a sudden
feeling of dread came over him.  Suppose some misfortune, some calamity
had happened during his absence!  Helen might have met with some
accident.  Baby might have been ill.  The worst might have happened.
He would never have heard.  Perhaps he was only going home to find his
happiness wrecked forever.

The driver made his way with difficulty down Fifth Avenue, threading
his way in and out the entanglement of carriages and automobiles,
until, after a ten minutes' run, turned into Gramercy Park and pulled
up short on the curb of the Traynor residence.

Eagerly Kenneth put his head out of the window and scanned the windows
for a glimpse of the loved one, but no one, not even a servant, was
visible.  The house looked deserted.  His misgivings returned.
Stepping out hastily, he paid the driver, and, running up the steps,
rang the bell.

Roberts, the faithful old butler, who had been in the family service
for years, came to open.  Seeing a rather shabbily attired person
outside, he held the door partly closed and demanded, suspiciously:

"Who is it you wish to see?"

Irritated at the manner of his reception, Kenneth gave the door a push
that nearly knocked the servant over.  Angrily, he exclaimed:

"What's the matter, Roberts?  Didn't you see it was me?"

The butler, who had recovered himself, and now believed he had to do
with a crank or some person under the influence of liquor, again barred
the way.  Trying to push the unwelcome visitor out, he said soothingly:

"Come now, my good man, you've made a mistake.  You don't live here."

Struck almost speechless with amazement at the brazen impudence of one
whom he had always regarded as a model servant, Kenneth turned round as
if about to make a wrathful outburst.  As he turned, the light from the
open door fell full on his face and now for the first time Roberts saw
the visitor's features.  With a startled exclamation the man fell
backward.  For a moment he was so surprised that he could not speak.
Then, in an awe-stricken whisper, he cried:

"Who are you?"

For a moment Kenneth thought the man had suddenly become insane.  For
his own servant not to know him was too ridiculous.  At that moment he
caught a glimpse of himself in the mirror of the hat stand.  Ah, now he
understood.  The beard and emaciated face had made quite a
difference--no wonder the man failed to recognize him.  Breaking into
laughter he exclaimed:

"No wonder you didn't recognize me, Roberts.  I have changed a little,
haven't I?  I've grown a beard since I saw you last and been through a
regular mill.  But you know me now don't you--I'm your long lost
master."

The servant shook his head.  Still closely scrutinizing Kenneth's face
as if greatly puzzled, he said:

"You're not my master, sir.  Mr. Kenneth Traynor left the house some
ten minutes before you arrived."

Kenneth stared at the man as if he thought he had gone clean out of his
mind.

"I went out ten minutes before I arrived," he echoed.  "What kind of
nonsense is that, Roberts?"

"I didn't say _you_ went out," replied the servant, beginning to lose
his patience.  "I said Mr. Kenneth Traynor went out.  You are not Mr.
Kenneth Traynor."

"Then who in the name of heaven am I?"

"I haven't the remotest idea," retorted the man.  Condescendingly, he
went on: "I admit you look a little like the master."  Impatiently he
added:

"You must excuse me.  I want to close the door."

Instead of obeying the hint to withdraw, Kenneth strode further into
the house, the protesting and indignant butler at his heels.

"You must really go," said the servant.

Kenneth turned around.

"Roberts--don't be a fool.  Don't you know me?  I know why you don't
recognize me.  You all think me dead, but I'm very much alive.  I did
not go down on the _Abyssinia_.  I was picked up and taken to San
Francisco and have been in a hospital there ever since.  I have just
come home.  Where's my wife?"

The butler stared and stood motionless, as if not knowing what to make
of it.

"But you came home long ago."

"Who came home?"

"You did."

"No, I didn't.  I've been in San Francisco all the time.  How could I
be here if I was sick in a San Francisco hospital?"

"Then who is the other Mr. Traynor?"

Now it was Kenneth's turn to be surprised.

"The other Mr. Traynor?" he echoed stupefied.

"Yes--the gentleman who looks more like you than you do yourself.  He
arrived here a month ago.  We all took him for you."

For the first time a light broke in on the darkness.  Who was the
person who looked so like him that he could successfully impersonate
him?  Who could it be but the man who left him for dead on the
_Abyssinia_ after murderously assaulting him?  Suddenly a horrible
thought came to him.  Grasping the butler's arm he exclaimed:

"My wife?  Is she well?"

"Yes, sir.  Mrs. Traynor's quite well."

"And Dorothy?"

"Quite well, sir."

"Thank God!"

The servant hesitated.

"That is--sir--Miss Dorothy----"

"Out with it, man.  Out with it."

"Mrs. Traynor's being greatly worried sir, lately.  Miss Dorothy was at
her aunt's in Philadelphia----"

"Yes, yes----"

"Someone's run away with Miss Dorothy.  She's been kidnapped."

"My God!"

"But Mrs. Traynor has a clue.  She got a letter yesterday, saying where
the child was.  She wouldn't confide in any of us and she left here
only half an hour ago to go to the place."

Again Kenneth was seized by panic.

"Gone to a kidnapper's den.  Great God!  She's running a terrible risk.
Where has she gone?  I'll go to her."

"I don't know, sir, but Mr. Steell may know----"

"Ah, that's right.  I'll go and see Steell."

Not waiting to say more he rushed down the steps, and, hailing another
taxi, went off at full speed in the direction of Wilbur Steell's office.




CHAPTER XX

The startling news from Philadelphia that Dorothy had suddenly
disappeared and was believed to have been kidnapped, fell upon the
Traynor home with the crushing force of a bombshell.  At first Helen
refused to credit the report.  It seemed impossible that any new
suffering was to be inflicted upon her after what she had already
endured.  White faced, her whole being shaken by emotion, she read and
re-read her aunt's letter, telling of the child's mysterious
disappearance, and when at last she could read it no more because of
the tears that blinded her, she threw herself limp and broken hearted
into Ray's arms.  Hysterically she cried:

"What have I done that I should be made to suffer in this way?  My God!
Where is my child?  This maddening suspense will kill me."

Ray tried to soothe her.  Reassuringly, she said:

"Don't worry, dear.  Everything will be all right.  A general alarm has
been sent out.  The police all over the country are searching high and
low.  It's only a question of a few hours and you'll have good news."

But the hours passed and no news came to cheer the distracted,
broken-hearted mother.  Dorothy had disappeared completely, leaving no
trace, no clue behind.

There was neither rest nor peace for the Traynor household that day.
Helen, almost out of her mind from grief and worry, refused to eat or
sleep until news of the missing child was received.  In her agony she
went down on her knees and prayed as she had never prayed before that
her child be restored to her.

Her little daughter was, she felt, the one link that still bound her to
life.  To her husband she felt she could not turn for sympathy.  The
romance of their early married life had been shattered forever by the
extraordinary change that had come over him.  He had long since ceased
to be to her any more than a name.  In her heart, she had come to
despise and detest him as much as before she had worshiped the very
ground he trod.  It was an astonishing revulsion of feeling which she
was powerless to explain; she only knew that the old love, the old
passion he had awakened was now quite dead.  He inspired in her no more
affection or feeling than the merest stranger.  Ever since his return
from South Africa they had lived apart.  Ever since that first night of
his return when their tête-à-tête in the library was interrupted by the
bogus telegram, he had quite ceased his amorous advances.  He seemed
anxious to avoid her.  Only on rare occasions, and then it was by
accident, did they find themselves in each other's company.

In fact, he was practically never home, living almost exclusively at
the club, where he went the pace with associates of his choosing,
mostly gamblers and men about town.  He had begun to drink hard and
when not in pool rooms or at the races, betting recklessly on the
horses, squandering such huge sums, and overdrawing his check account
so often that the bank was compelled to ask him to desist, he sat in
the barrooms with his cronies till all hours of the morning when he
would be brought home in a condition of shocking intoxication.  Happily
Helen was spared the spectacle of the degradation of a man she once had
loved with all the force of her virgin soul.  Roberts, the butler,
aided by the other servants, smuggled their intoxicated master up to
his room, where he remained until sober, when he went back to his club
only to repeat the same performance.

To such a man she could not turn for aid or consolation in the hour of
this new misfortune.  Indeed, ever since his return, he had been
strangely indifferent to the welfare of the child, never asking after
her or expressing a desire to see her.  At times it seemed as if he had
forgotten that he had a child.  By some strange metamorphosis he had
developed into an unnatural father as well as a brutal, indifferent
husband.

But to Helen, alone save for the devoted companionship of her sister,
this was anxiety and suffering enough.  Only twenty-four hours had
passed since the child disappeared, but to the unhappy mother it seemed
as many years.  Constantly at the telephone, expecting each moment to
hear that the police had been successful in finding the child, she was
gradually wearing herself away to a shadow.  Breakfast she left
untouched.  Lunch she refused to eat.  In vain Ray remonstrated with
her.  If she went on like that she would fall ill.  But still Helen
refused.  Tears choked her, and morning wore into afternoon and still
no news.

After lunch Ray went out to see if Mr. Steell could help them,
promising to return as soon as possible.  Helen sat and waited alone.
The clock was just striking two o'clock when the front doorbell rang
and a letter was brought to her.  She did not recognize the writing,
but eagerly she tore it open.  Instinctively, she felt it concerned her
missing darling.  The letter read as follows:


No. -- Lasalle Street, Bronx.
  Friday.

Madame:

Your child is safe and in good hands.  She wants to see her mother.  If
you come this afternoon (Friday) to the above address you can see her.
It is the house with the closed green shutters.  But if you value your
child's life you must come unaccompanied, and you must inform no one of
the contents of this letter, not even the members of your family.  If
you disobey, swift punishment will follow and your child will suffer.
Climb eight flights and knock three times on door at end of
passage.----X.


There was no signature.  The person who wrote it evidently had reasons
of his own for wishing to remain concealed.  That money would be
demanded was more than probable.  What other motive could the kidnapper
have?  Money she would give--all she had in the world, if only she
could get back her precious child.  That a visit to such a place
unattended was full of danger she did not stop to consider.  She only
knew that her child was close by--here in New York--and had asked for
her.  Not for a moment did she listen to the warnings of prudence.  Go
she must, and immediately.  She did not even stop to leave a note of
explanation for Ray.  Stuffing some money in a bag, she left the house,
saying she would return soon.

Taking the Third Avenue "L" she left the train at Tremont Avenue, and,
after considerable difficulty, found the house indicated in the letter.
Yes, there were the closed green shutters.  At first, on seeing it
apparently untenanted, she thought she must have made a mistake in the
number, but, finding that there was no other place near by that
answered the description as well, she decided to risk climbing the long
flight of stairs.

Arrived on the top floor, breathless from the unusual exertion, she saw
a long narrow passage, and, at the end of that, a door.  That, no
doubt, was the place.  Her heart beating violently, she went up to the
door and gave the three knocks.  For a moment or so there was no
answer.  A profound stillness reigned.  Then she heard footsteps
approaching, The next instant, the door was thrown open and a man's
voice, which sounded somewhat familiar, told her to enter.

At first when she went in, she could see nothing.  All the shutters of
the windows looking on the street were closed, and the only light was
that which filtered through the slats.  It was an ordinary, cheap flat,
with no carpets on the floors and little or no furniture.  On the
floor, scattered here and there, were nailed-up boxes, and parts of
machinery, some already crated, as if to be taken away.

"So you've come!  I thought you would," said a voice behind her.

She turned and found herself face to face with Signor Keralio.

At first she was so astonished that she was speechless.  Then her
instinct prompted her to turn and flee.  If this man had caused her to
be decoyed to this house it could be for no good purpose.  But there
was no way of egress.  The front door was closed and locked.  Not a
human soul was within call.  She was alone in an empty house with the
one man she distrusted and feared more than any one else in the world.

Making an effort to conceal her alarm, she turned and faced him boldly:

"What are you doing here?" she asked.

He smiled--a horrid, cynical smile she knew only too well.

"Has not a man the right to be in his own home?"

She started back in surprise.

"This your home?" she exclaimed, glancing around at the scanty and
shabby furnishings.

He shrugged his shoulders.

"Oh, don't judge by appearances.  I'm really very comfortable here.
It's away from the world.  I like to work undisturbed."  Significantly,
he added: "Then, you see, it is all my own.  I am quite at home here in
my own house.  No one can put me out--not even you----"

She raised her hand deprecatingly.

"Please don't remind me of that.  I have forgotten it long ago."

His eyes flashed dangerously as he made a step near and exclaimed:

"You have, but I have not.  I have not forgotten that you put me out of
your house ignominiously as one turns out a servant.  I have neither
forgotten nor forgiven.  That is why you are here to-day."

She looked at him in utter astonishment.

"What do you mean?"

He bowed and, with mock courtesy, waved her to a seat.

"I will tell you.  Did you receive a letter to-day?"

"Yes--I did."

"You came here in answer to that letter."

"Yes--I did."

"Do you know who wrote that letter?"

"No--not the least."

"It was I--I wrote the letter."

With a stifled cry of mingled fright and amazement, Helen jumped up
from the chair.

"You wrote the letter?" she exclaimed, incredulously.

He nodded.

"Yes--I wrote the letter."

Her eyes opened wide with terror, her hands clasped together nervously,
she exclaimed:

"Then you are----"

He bowed.

"Exactly.  I am the kidnapper of your child----"

Speechless, she stared at him, her large black eyes opened wide with
terror.  Looking wildly about her as if seeking her little daughter,
she gasped:

"Dorothy?  Dorothy here?  Where is she?"

"She is safe," he replied calmly.

"Where is she, where is she?  Take me to her!" she cried, distractedly,
going up to him and clasping her hands in humble supplication.

He shook off the hand which, in her maternal anxiety, she had laid on
his arm.  Lighting a cigarette, he gave a low laugh.

"Plenty of time.  There's no hurry.  You're not going yet."

Anxiously, she scrutinized his face, as if trying to read his meaning.

"She's going when I go, isn't she?"

He shrugged his shoulders.

"That depends--on you."

"What do you mean?"

Again he waved her to a seat.

"Sit down and I'll tell you."

Trembling, she dropped once more on to a chair and waited.  He puffed
deliberately at his cigarette for a few moments and then, turning his
glance in her direction, he smiled in a peculiar, horrible way and his
eyes ran over her figure in a way that made the crimson rush furiously
to her cheek.  There was no mistaking that smile.  It was the bold,
lustful look of the voluptuary who enjoys letting his eyes feast on the
prey that he knows cannot now escape him.

"Mrs. Traynor," he began in the caressing, dulcet tones which she
feared more than his anger, "you are an exceptional woman.  To most men
of my temperament you would not appeal.  They would find your beauty
too statuesque and cold.  I know you are clever, but love cannot feed
on intellect alone, I have loved many women, but never a woman just
like you.  Your coldness, your haughty reserve, your refinement would
intimidate most men and keep them at a distance, but not me.  Your
aloofness, your indifference only spurs me, only adds to the acuteness
of my desire.  I swore to myself that I would conquer you, overcome
your resistance, bend you to my will.  You turned me out of your home.
I swore to be avenged."

He stopped for a moment and watched her closely as if studying and
enjoying the effect of his words.  Then, amid a cloud of blue tobacco
smoke, he went on:

"I knew only one way to win you--it was to humiliate you, to place you
in a position where you would have to come to me on your knees."

She half rose from her chair.

"I would never do that," she cried.  "I would rather die!"

"Oh, yes, you will," he continued, calmly, making a gesture to her to
remain seated.  "When I've told you all, you'll see things in a
different light."  Fixing her steadily with his piercing black eyes, he
asked: "Have you noticed any difference in your husband since his
return."

She looked up quickly.

"Yes--what does it mean?  Can you explain?"

He nodded.

"Did you ever hear your husband speak of a twin brother he once had?"

Her face turned white as death and her heart throbbing violently, she
stared helplessly at her persecutor.  She tried to be calm, but she
could not.  Yet, why be so alarmed, why should this single question so
agitate her?  In the deepest recesses of her being she knew that it was
her unerring instinct warning her that she was about to hear something
that would entail worse suffering than any she had yet endured.

"Yes--yes--why do you ask?" she gasped.

"You all thought the brother dead."

"Yes."

"You were mistaken.  He is alive."

"Where is he?" she faltered.

"Here in New York."

"Where?"

"In your house.  The man who returned home was not your husband.  He
was your husband's twin brother."

She looked at him as one bewildered, as if she did not understand what
he was saying, as if words had suddenly lost their meaning.  Her face,
white as in death, she faltered:

"Not Kenneth--then where is Kenneth?"

"He is dead!"

Her powers of speech paralyzed, her large eyes starting from their
sockets from terror, an expression of mute helpless agony on her
beautiful face, she looked up at him with horror.  Not yet could she
fully grasp the meaning of his words.  At last the frightful spell was
broken.  With an effort the words came:

"Then you," she cried.  "You are his assassin!"

He shook his head as he replied carelessly:

"No--not I--his brother!"

She gave a cry of anguish and, starting to her feet, made a movement
forward, her hands clutching convulsively at her throat.  Air! air!
She must have air.  She felt sick and dizzy.  The room was spinning
round like a top, and then everything grew dark.  Lurching heavily
forward she would have fallen had he not caught her.

Instantly she shrank from the contact as from something unclean, and
with a low moan sank down on a chair and buried her face in her hands.
Her instinct had told her true.  Her loved one was dead, she would
never see him again, and that man who had come into the sanctity of her
home and fondled her in his arms was his murderer.  Oh, it was too
horrible!

The bitter, cynical smile was still on Keralio's lips as he went on:

"You see the folly of resisting me.  Had you surrendered at that time
all might have been well.  The price was not too much to pay.  I would
have been discreet.  No one but ourselves would have known that you and
I were----"

He did not complete the sentence, for at that moment she sprang forward
like an enraged tiger cat, and, seizing a cane that stood close by,
struck him across the face with all the force of her outraged womanhood.

"Murderer!  Assassin!" she cried indignantly.  "How dare you talk like
that to me?  I will denounce you to the whole world.  I will not rest
till I see you and that other scoundrel punished and my poor husband is
avenged.  On leaving here I shall go direct to the police."

Imbued with strength she never dreamed she possessed, she was about to
hit him again when he seized the cane and threw it away.  But across
his pale, handsome face lay a telltale red mark, the smart of which
burned into his soul.

His eyes flashed with anger and he made a visible effort to control
himself.  He took a step forward and, as he advanced she saw an
expression in his face which prompted her to retreat precipitately.  It
was a dangerous look, the look of a man who knew he had a helpless
woman in his power, a man who was desperate and would stop at nothing
to encompass his ends.  Now thoroughly frightened, she looked around
for some way to escape.  The windows were impossible, the only way was
by the door and he barred the way.  Besides, she would never go without
her child.

He noticed the movement and look of alarm, and he smiled.  Continuing
to advance, he said:

"There's no use making a fuss.  No one could hear you if you shouted
for help till the crack of doom.  You are alone with me--and absolutely
in my power.  Do as I ask and there is nothing you shall not have.
Refuse, and I answer for nothing.  Come----"

Her whole body trembling, her face white with terror, she kept on
retreating:

"Leave me alone!" she gasped, "or I will scream."

"Scream away," he laughed.  "There's no one here to hear you."

Suddenly he made a quick lunge forward and seized her.  She struggled
and resisted with all the energy born of despair, pushing, twisting,
scratching.  But they were too unevenly matched.  She was like an
infant in the grasp of an Hercules.  Slowly, she felt her strength
leaving her.  His iron grasp gradually closed on her, nearer and nearer
he drew her into his embrace.

With a last, superhuman effort, she managed to wrench herself free, out
of his grip, and breaking completely away, she fled into the next room.
But he was after her in a minute and again seized her, but not before
she screamed at the top of her voice:

"Help!  Help!  Kenneth!  Wilbur!  Help!  Help!"

He tried to gag her mouth to stifle her cries, but it was too late.
His quick ear caught the sound of approaching footsteps in the outside
hall.  Almost at the same instant there was a loud knocking at the door.

Keralio fell back, his face white and tense.  Had his plans failed at
the eleventh hour, could anyone have played him false?  If the game was
up, they should never take him alive.  Leaving Helen, he drew a
revolver, and, going quickly into the inner hall, he waited in grim
silence for the visitors to force an entrance.

"Open the door, or we'll break it in!" shouted a stern voice outside.
"There's no use resisting.  The place is surrounded."

Still no answer.  Keralio stood grimly in the shadow of the parlor
doorway, revolver in hand, while Helen cowered in the inner room, in
momentary expectation of a tragedy.

Crash!  The front door fell in, shattered into a thousand splinters,
and through the breach thus made rushed Wilbur Steell, Dick Reynolds,
and half a score husky Central Office detectives, revolvers in hand.

"There is he!" cried the lawyer, pointing to Keralio.

Quick as a flash, the Italian raised the revolver and fired, the bullet
entering the plastered wall an inch away from the lawyer's head.
Almost simultaneously, another pistol shot rang out, but this time the
aim was truer, for, with a cry of baffled rage, Keralio threw his arms
above his head and fell to the floor dead.  Quickly, one of the
detectives stooped down and compared his face with a photograph he had
taken from his pocket.

"Yes----" he exclaimed; "that's the fellow--well known counterfeiter.
Did time in San Quentin and Joliet.  Known as Baron Rapp, Richard
Barton and a dozen other aliases.  He's one of the slickest rogues in
the country.  We've got the valet safe downstairs.  I guess he'll get
twenty years."

But Steell had not waited to hear about Keralio.  There were others
more important to think about.  Rushing into the inner room, he found
Helen prostrate, half fainting from fright.

"Thank God, I'm in time!" he exclaimed.

"Dorothy," she murmured weakly.  "Save Dorothy!  She's somewhere here."

Going into another room, the lawyer found the little girl fast asleep
on a bed.  Bringing her to her mother, he said tenderly:

"Here's your treasure.  Now you can be happy."

She shook her head.  The nightmare of what Keralio had told her, still
obsessed her.

"No--" she shuddered; "--never again.  They have killed him!"

To her surprise, the lawyer, instead of sharing her sorrow, actually
smiled.

"Helen," he said; "I have a great surprise for you.  A friend has
accompanied me here.  He called at your house to-day, but you had just
left, so he called on me.  You have not seen him since he sailed away
three months ago on the _Mauretania_."

She listened bewildered.  Her color came and went.  What did he mean?
Could it be possible that--no, had not Keralio said he was dead?
Trembling with suppressed emotion, she whispered:

"Tell me--what is it--tell me----"

For all reply, the lawyer went to the door and beckoned to someone who
had waited in the outer hall.  A moment later a man entered, a tall,
well set figure that was strangely familiar.  Straining her eyes
through her tears, it seemed to her that her mind must be playing her
some trick, for there before her, stood Kenneth, not the impostor her
instinct had warned her to detest and avoid, but the real Kenneth she
had loved, the father of her child.  With a joyous exclamation, she
tottered forward.

"Kenneth!" she cried.

The man, his athletic form broken by sobs, opened his arms.

"My own precious darling!"

A moment later they were clasped in each other's arms.  Ah, now she
knew that he had come home!  This, indeed, was the husband she loved.
There was no deception this time.  Wonderingly, she turned to Steell.

"How did it happen?" she asked wonderingly.

"We'll tell you later--not now," he replied.

She shuddered as she asked in a low voice.

"But where is his brother?"

"Dead!  He shot himself at the club.  Kenneth and I went to confront
him at the club before coming here.  It was his only way out."

The detective stepped forward.  Addressing the lawyer and holding out
two enormous diamonds that sparkled like fire in the sunlight, he said:

"We've just found these, together with a lot of counterfeit money."

The lawyer laughed as he took charge of the diamonds.

"It'll please Mr. Parker to see these.  Come, Dick.  Our work is done."

Kenneth put his arms around his wife.

"Safe in port at last, dear."

"You'll never go away again," she murmured through her tears.