SALT-RISING BREAD.

The real formula for making salt-rising bread, as set down by the
daughter of Governor Stubbs, of Kansas, and by him communicated to
Theodore Roosevelt, is as follows, according to the "Saturday Evening
Post":

"On the night before you contemplate this masterpiece of baking take
half a cupful of corn meal and a pinch each of salt and sugar. Scald
this with new milk heated to the boiling point and mix to the thickness
of mush. This can be made in a cup. Wrap in a clean cloth and put in a
warm place overnight.

"In the morning, when all is ready, take a one-gallon stone jar and into
this put one scant cupful of new milk. Add a level teaspoonful of salt
and one of sugar. Scald this with three cupfuls of water heated to the
boiling point. Reduce to a temperature of one hundred and eight degrees
with cold water, using a milk thermometer to enable you to get exactly
the right temperature. Then add flour and mix to a good batter; after
the batter is made, mix in your starter that was made the night before.
Cover the stone jar with a plate and put the jar in a large kettle of
water and keep this water at a temperature of one hundred and eight
degrees until the sponge rises. It should rise at least an inch and a
half. When it has raised mix to a stiff dough, make into loaves and put
into pans. Do not let the heat get out of the dough while working.
Grease the loaves well on top and set your bread where it will be warm
and rise. After the loaves rise bake in a medium oven for one hour and
ten minutes. When you take the loaves from the oven wrap them in a
bread-cloth."



A CURE FOR LOVE.

Take twelve ounces of dislike, one pound of resolution, two grains of
common sense, two ounces of experience, a large sprig of time, and three
quarts of cooling water of consideration. Set them over a gentle fire of
love, sweeten it with sugar of forgetfulness, skim it with the spoon of
melancholy, put it in the bottom of your heart, cork it with the cork of
clean conscience. Let it remain and you will quickly find ease and be
restored to your senses again.

These things can be had of the apothecary at the house of Understanding
next door to Reason, on Prudent street.



DOING BUSINESS WITH A BANK

In opening your account with a bank it is proper that you should first
be introduced to the cashier, or some other official. If you are engaged
in business, that officer will inquire as to your particular business or
calling, your address, etc., and unless he is already satisfied on this
point, he may make inquiries as to your business standing. This being
satisfactory, he will hand you a passbook, and some deposit tickets,
whereupon you make your first deposit, entering the amount on the
ticket. You will then be asked to write your signature in a book
provided for that purpose, or upon a card to be filed away for
reference.


The Signature.

This signature should be just as you intend to use it in all your
dealings with the bank. If, for instance, your name is John Henry Smith,
you may write it J. H. Smith, J. Henry Smith. John H. Smith or John
Henry Smith, but whatever form you adopt should be used all the time.
Once having adopted the form, it should be maintained in exactly that
way. The only excuse for variation from your usual signature is when
presenting checks or other paper made payable to you. In that case,
supposing you had adopted the form J. Henry Smith for your regular
signature, and the check is made payable to John H. Smith, you should
first write on the back of that check "John H. Smith," and immediately
under this you should place your regular signature.


Depositing Money.

When making a deposit, always use the deposit ticket provided by the
bank, filling it out yourself in ink. From this ticket, which is first
checked up by the receiving teller, the amount of your deposit is placed
to your credit. Do not ask the teller to fill our your deposit ticket.
No doubt he would be glad to accommodate you, but to do so would violate
a rule which protects both the bank and the depositor, Deposit tickets
are preserved by the bank, and often serve to correct mistakes.


How to Avoid Mistakes.

Consider for a moment the vast aggregate of bank transactions, and you
will see that perfect system on the part of the banks and bank officials
is required to insure accuracy and avoid mistakes. Sometimes the
requirements of the banks may seem arbitrary and troublesome, but
reflection will show that they safeguard the depositor as well as the
bank. The simple rules here laid down will enable anyone who has
business with a bank to do so with the least trouble and with absolute
safety.


How to Make Out a Check.

Checks are the most satisfactory and most convenient method of paying a
debt or making any ordinary remittance. The stub of your check book will
furnish a permanent memorandum, and when the check is canceled and
returned to you by the bank, it is an indisputable evidence that the
debt has been paid, or that the remittance has been made. The making of
a check is a simple matter, but even the best business men make mistakes
sometimes which are as difficult to remedy as they are easy to avoid.
The hints here given and the facsimiles of checks printed in
illustration will repay careful study.


[Illustration: A Check Properly Drawn. The name and amount are against
the left side of their fields.]


The first facsimile shows a check properly made. It will be seen, in the
first place, that this check is written very plainly, and that there is
no room for the insertion of extra figures or words. The writing of the
amount commences as nearly as possible to the extreme left of the check.
The figures are written close together and there is no space between the
first figure and the dollar mark.

All erasures in checks should be avoided. If you have made a mistake,
tear a blank check from the back of your check book and use that in
place of the one spoiled.

Some business men allow their clerks to fill out checks on the
typewriter. This is ill-advised for two reasons: First, it is much
easier to alter a typewritten check than one filled in with a pen; in
the second place, a teller, in passing on the genuineness of a check,
takes into consideration the character of the handwriting in the body of
the check as well as in the signature. The typewritten characters offer
no clue to individuality.

Never mail a check drawn to "Bearer." Remember that if your check is
made payable to "Bearer" or to "John Smith or Bearer" it may be cashed
by anybody who happens to have it. Unless it is for a large amount the
paying teller of your bank will look only to see whether your signature
is correct, and, that being right, the bank cannot be held responsible
if the check should have come into the wrong hands.

A check drawn to order can be cashed only when the person to whose order
it has been drawn has indorsed it by writing his or her name on the back
and the bank will be responsible for the correctness of the indorsement.

If you make your check payable say, to William Armstrong or order,
nobody but William Armstrong, or some one to whom he indorses the check,
can collect the amount, and if through fraud or otherwise some one not
entitled to it gets the money which the check calls for, the
responsibility is not yours, but the bank's. It is for that reason that
bankers and business men use such great care in accepting checks.


[Illustration: A Check Carelessly Drawn. The text and numbers for the
amount is in the center of their fields, leaving of space for extra
text.]

[Illustration: The Same Check "Raised". The amount has been changed from
One Hundred/100.00 to Eighty-One Hundred/$8100.00.]


For the same reason you should never accept a check from anybody whom
you do not know as responsible, and you should not be surprised or
angered if some one else should hesitate to take a check from you.

Checks or drafts received by you should be deposited as soon as
possible. Should you receive a check for a considerable amount and have
no convenient bank account, you should go to the bank on which the check
is drawn and have the cashier certify it by stamping "Accepted" or
"Certified" across the face over his signature. That formality makes the
paper as good as money so long as the bank accepting it is solvent.

It sometimes happens that a check drawn in good faith by a responsible
party is withheld so long by the person receiving it that there is no
money to the account when the check is finally presented.


Paying Notes and Acceptances.

Make your notes and accepted drafts payable at the bank where you do
business. Whether it or other banks hold them for collection, they will
be presented to your bank when due.

Pay your notes, etc., on the day they fall due, and early in the day if
convenient, or leave a check for the amount with your bank on the day
before your paper matures. Banks will not pay notes or drafts without
instructions.

Keep a careful record of the days of maturity of all your paper. Banks
usually notify all payers a few days beforehand when their paper
matures, but this is only courtesy on their part and not an obligation.


Exchange.

"Exchange" means funds in other cities made available by bankers' drafts
on such places. These drafts afford the safest and cheapest means for
remitting money. Drafts on New York are worth their face value
practically all over the United States in settlement of accounts.


Collections.

A draft is sometimes the most convenient form for collecting an account.
The prevalence of the custom is due to the fact that most men will wait
to be asked to pay a debt. If a draft is a time draft it is accepted by
the person on whom it is drawn by writing his name and date across the
face. This makes it practically a note, to be paid at maturity.

Notes or drafts that you desire to have collected for you by your bank
should be left at the bank several days before they are due, so as to
give ample time to notify the payers.


Borrowing.

Banks are always willing to loan their funds to responsible persons
within reasonable limits. That is what they exist for. There is, of
course, a limit to the amount a bank may loan, even on the best known
security, but the customer of the bank is entitled to and will receive
the first consideration.

The customer should not hesitate, when occasion requires, to offer to
the bank for discount such paper as may come into his hands in the
course of business, if, in his opinion, the paper is good. At the same
time he should not be offended if his bank refuses to take it even
without giving reasons.


Indorsing Checks, Etc.

When depositing checks, drafts, etc., see that they are dated properly
and that the written amounts and figures correspond. The proper way to
indorse a check or draft--this also applies to notes and other
negotiable paper--is to write your name upon the back about one inch
from the top. The proper end may be determined in this way: As you read
the check, holding one end in each hand, draw the right hand toward you,
and turn the check over. The end which is then farthest from you is the
top. If, however, the check, draft or note has already been indorsed by
another person, you should write your name directly under the other
indorsement, even if that is on the wrong end. If your own name on the
face of the check, draft or note is misspelled, or has the wrong
initials, but if the paper is clearly intended for you, you should first
write your name as it appears on the face, and under it your regular
signature. You should indorse every check you deposit, even though it be
payable to bearer.


Mistakes in Banking.

Mr. Samuel Woods, a member of the American Institute of Bank Clerks,
recently contributed to Munsey's Magazine an interesting article on the
subject of "Mistakes in Banking." From this we are permitted by the
courtesy of the publishers of Munsey's to reproduce two of the
facsimiles shown.

One wrong word, or figure, or letter--the right thing in the wrong way
or the wrong place--the scratch of an eraser or the alteration of a
word--or any one of these things, in the making or cashing of a check,
is liable to become as expensive as a racing automobile.

The paying teller of a bank, says Mr. Woods, must keep his eyes open for
new dangers as well as old ones. The cleverest crooks in the country are
pitting their brains against his. After he has learned the proper guard
for all the well-known tricks and forgeries it is still possible that an
entirely new combination may leave him minus cash and plus experience.

But it is not the unique and novel swindle that is most dangerous,
either to a bank or an individual. It is the simple, ordinary mistake or
the time-worn trick that makes continuous trouble. Apparently, every new
generation contains a number of dishonest people who lay the same traps,
and a number of careless people who fall into these traps in the same
old way.


Check-Raising Made Easy.

One of the first lessons, for instance, that a depositor should learn
before he is qualified to own a check-book is to commence writing the
amount as near as possible to the extreme left of the check. Those who
forget this are often reminded of it in a costly way. Some one "raises"
their checks by writing another figure in front of the proper amount.
"Five hundred" might be "raised" to "twenty-five hundred" in this way,
even by an unskilled forger.

The highest court has recently decided that a bank cannot be held
responsible, when it pays a "raised" check, if the maker of the check
failed in the first place to write it out correctly. The treasurer of
the Bath Electric Company, of Bath, Maine, had written a check for one
hundred dollars, which was raised to eighty-one hundred dollars and
cashed. The court held that the company, and not the bank, should lose
the eight thousand dollars, because of the "gross carelessness" in
drawing up the check. Facsimiles showing the check as originally written
and as it looked when paid are here reproduced.


Altered Words and Figures.

The altered check is the bane of the paying teller's profession, and it
is the general practice in conservative banks to accept no checks or
other paper which shows signs of erasure or alteration in either words
or figures.



THE NAMES OF THE STATES.

Alabama--Indian; meaning "Here we rest."

Arkansas"--Kansas," the Indian name for "smoky water," with the French
prefix "arc," bow or bend in the principal river.

California--Caliente Fornala, Spanish for "hot furnace," in allusion to
the climate.

Colorado--Spanish; meaning "colored," from the red color of the Colorado
river.

Connecticut--Indian; meaning "long river."

Delaware--Named in honor of Lord De La Ware.

Florida--Named by Ponce de Leon, who discovered it in 1512, on Easter
Day, the Spanish Pascua de Flores, or "Feast of Flowers."

Georgia--In honor of George II. of England.

Illinois--From the Indian "illini," men, and the French suffix "ois,"
together signifying "tribe of men."

Indiana--Indian land. Iowa--Indian; meaning "beautiful land.'"

Kansas--Indian; meaning "smoky water."

Kentucky--Indian for "at the head of the river," or "the dark and bloody
ground."

Louisiana--In honor of Louis XIV. of France.

Maine--From the province of Maine, in France.

Maryland--In honor of Henrietta Maria, queen of Charles I. of England.

Massachusetts--The place of the great hills (the blue hills southwest of
Boston).

Michigan--The Indian name for a fish weir. The lake was so called from
the fancied resemblance of the lake to a fish trap.

Minnesota--Indian; meaning "sky-tinted water."

Mississippi--Indian; meaning "great father of waters." Missouri--Indian;
meaning "muddy."

Nebraska--Indian; meaning "water valley."

Nevada--Spanish; meaning "snow-covered," alluding to the mountains.

New Hampshire--From Hampshire county, England.

New Jersey--In honor of Sir George Carteret, one of the original
grantees, who had previously been governor of Jersey Island.

New York--In honor of the Duke of York.

North and South Carolina--Originally called Carolina, in honor of
Charles IX. of France.

Ohio--Indian; meaning "beautiful river."

Oregon--From the Spanish "oregano," wild marjoram, which grows
abundantly on the coast.

Pennsylvania--Latin; meaning Penn's woody land.

Rhode Island--From a fancied resemblance to the island of Rhodes in the
Mediterranean.

Tennessee--Indian; meaning "river with the great bend."

Texas--Origin of this name is unknown.

Vermont--French; meaning "green mountain."

Virginia--In honor of Elizabeth, the "Virgin Queen."

Wisconsin--Indian; meaning "gathering of the waters," or "wild rushing
channel."



MOTTOES OF THE STATES.

Arkansas--Regnant populi: The peoples rule.

California--Eureka: I have found it. Colorado--Nil sine numine: Nothing
without the Divinity.

Connecticut--Qui transtulit sustinet: He who has transferred, sustains.

Delaware--Liberty and Independence.

Florida--In God is Our trust.

Georgia--Wisdom, Justice, Moderation.

Illinois--State Sovereignty and National Union.

Iowa--Our liberties we prize, and our rights we will maintain.

Kansas--Ad astra per aspera: to the stars through rugged ways.

Kentucky--United we stand, divided we fall.

Louisiana--Union and Confidence.

Maine--Dirigo: I direct.

Maryland--Crescite et multiplicamini: Increase and multiply.

Massachusetts--Ense petit placidam sub libertate quietam: By her sword
she seeks under liberty a calm repose.

Michigan--Si quaeris peninsulam amoeanam  circumspice: If thou seekest a
beautiful peninsula, look around.

Minnesota--L'Etoile du Nord: The Star of the North.

Missouri--Salus populi suprema lex esto: Let the welfare of the people
be the supreme law.

Nebraska--Popular Sovereignty.

Nevada--Volens et potens: Willing and able.

New Jersey--Liberty and Independence.

New York--Excelsior: Higher.

Ohio--Imperium in imperio: An empire within an empire.

Oregon--Alis volat propriis: She flies with her own wings.

Pennsylvania--Virtue, Liberty, Independence.

Rhode Island--Hope.

South Carolina--Animis opibusque parati: Ready with our lives and
property.

Tennessee--Agriculture, Commerce. Vermont--Freedom and Unity.

Virginia--Sic semper tyrannis: So be it ever to tyrants.

West Virginia--Montani semper liberi: The mountaineers are always free.

Wisconsin--Forward.

United States
  E pluribus unum: From many, one.

  Annuit captis: God has favored the undertaking;

  Vovus ordo seclorum: A new order of ages.

  The first named on one side of the great seal, the other two on the
  reverse.



GEOGRAPHICAL NICKNAMES.

States and Territories.

Alabama, Cotton State;

Arkansas, Toothpick and Bear State;

California, Eureka and Golden State;

Colorado, Centennial State;

Connecticut, Land of Steady Habits: Freestone State and Nutmeg State;

Dakota, Sioux State;

Delaware, Uncle Sam's Pocket Handkerchief and Blue Hen State;

Florida, Everglade and Flowery State;

Georgia, Empire State of the South;

Idaho, Gem of the Mountains;

Illinois, Prairie and Sucker State;

Indiana, Hoosier State;

Iowa, Hawkeye State;

Kansas, Jayhawker State;

Kentucky, Corn-cracker State;

Louisiana, Creole State;

Maine, Timber and Pine Tree State;

Maryland, Monumental State;

Massachusetts, Old Bay State;

Michigan, Wolverine and Peninsular State;

Minnesota, Gopher and North Star State;

Mississippi, Eagle State;

Missouri, Puke State;

Nebraska, Antelope State;

Nevada, Sage State;

New Hampshire, Old Granite State;

New Jersey, Blue State and New Spain;

New Mexico, Vermin State;

New York, Empire State;

North Carolina, Rip Van Winkle, Old North and Turpentine State;

Ohio, Buckeye State;

Oregon, Pacific State;

Pennsylvania, Keystone, Iron and Oil State;

Rhode Island, Plantation State and Little Rhody;

South Carolina, Palmetto State;

Tennessee, Lion's Den State;

Texas, Lone Star State;

Utah, Mormon State;

Vermont, Green Mountain State;

Virginia, Old Dominion;

Wisconsin, Badger and Copper State.



Natives of States and Territories.

Alabama, lizards;

Arkansas, toothpicks;

California, gold-hunters;

Colorado, rovers;

Connecticut, wooden nutmegs;

Dakota, squatters;

Delaware, muskrats;

Florida, fly-up-the-creeks;

Georgia, buzzards;

Idaho, fortune seekers;

Illinois, suckers;

Indiana, hoosiers;

Iowa, hawkeyes;

Kansas, jayhawkers;

Kentucky, corn-crackers;

Louisiana, creoles;

Maine, foxes;

Maryland, clam-humpers;

Massachusetts, Yankees;

Michigan, wolverines;

Minnesota, gophers;

Mississippi, tadpoles;

Missouri, pukes;

Nebraska, bugeaters;

Nevada, sagehens;

New Hampshire, granite boys;

New Jersey, blues or clam-catchers;

New Mexico, Spanish Indians;

New York, Knickerbockers;

North Carolina, tarheels;

Ohio, buckeyes;

Oregon, hard cases;

Pennsylvania, pennamites, or leather-heads;

Rhode Island, gun flints;

South Carolina, weazles;

Tennessee, whelps;

Texas, beef-heads;

Utah, polygamists;

Vermont, Green Mountain boys;

Virginia, beagles;

Wisconsin, badgers.



Nicknames of Cities.

Atlanta, Gate City of the South;

Baltimore, Monumental City;

Bangor, Lumber City;

Boston, Modern Athens, Literary Emporium, City of Notions and Hub of the
Universe;

Brooklyn, City of Churches;

Buffalo, Queen of the Lakes;

Burlington (Iowa), Orchard City;

Charleston, Palmetto City;

Chicago, Prairie, or Garden City;

Cincinnati, Queen of the West and Porkopolis;

Cleveland, Forest City;

Denver, City of the Plains;

Detroit, City of the Straits;

Hartford, Insurance City;

Indianapolis, Railroad City;

Keokuk, Gate City.;

Lafayette, Star City;

Leavenworth, Cottonwood City;

Louisville, Falls City;

Lowell, Spindle City;

McGregor, Pocket City;

Madison, Lake City;

Milwaukee, Cream City;

Nashville, Rock City;

New Haven, Elm City;

New Orleans, Crescent City;

New York, Empire City, Commercial Emporium, Gotham, and Metropolis of
America;

Philadelphia, City of Brotherly Love, City of Penn, Quaker City, and
Centennial City;

Pittsburgh, Iron City and Smoky City;

Portland (Me.), Hill City;

Providence, Roger Williams' City, and Perry Davis' Pain Killer;

Raleigh, Oak City;

Richmond, (Va.), Cockade City;

Richmond (Ind.), Quaker City of the West;

Rochester, Aqueduct City;

Salt Lake City, Mormon City;

San Francisco, Golden Gate;

Savannah, Forest City of the South;

Sheboygan, Evergreen City;

St. Louis, Mound City;

St. Paul, North Star City;

Vicksburg, Key City;

Washington, City of Magnificent Distances, and Federal City.



THEOSOPHY.

Much is said nowadays about theosophy, which is really but another name
for mysticism. It is not a philosophy, for it will have nothing to do
with philosophical methods; it might be called a religion, though it has
never had a following large enough to make a very strong impression on
the world's religious history. The name is from the Greek word
theosophia--divine wisdom--and the object of theosophical study is
professedly to understand the nature of divine things. It differs,
however, from both philosophy and theology even when these have the same
object of investigation. For, in seeking to learn the divine nature and
attributes, philosophy employs the methods and principles of natural
reasoning; theology uses these, adding to them certain principles
derived from revelation. Theosophy, on the other hand, professes to
exclude all reasoning processes as imperfect, and to derive its
knowledge from direct communication with God himself. It does not,
therefore, accept the truths of recorded revelation as immutable, but as
subject to modification by later and personal revelations. The
theosophical idea has had followers from the earliest times. Since the
Christian era we may class among theosophists such sects as
Neo-Platonists, the Hesychasts of the Greek Church, the Mystics of
mediaeval times, and, in later times, the disciples of Paracelsus,
Thalhauser, Bohme, Swedenborg and others. Recently a small sect has
arisen, which has taken the name of Theosophists. Its leader was an
English gentleman who had become fascinated with the doctrine of
Buddhism. Taking a few of his followers to India, they have been
prosecuting their studies there, certain individuals attracting
considerable attention by a claim to miraculous powers. It need hardly
be said that the revelations they have claimed to receive have been,
thus far, without element of benefit to the human race.



THE EVOLUTION THEORY.

The evolution or development theory declares the universe as it now
exists to be the result of a long series of changes which were so far
related to each other as to form a series of growths analogous to the
evolving of the parts of a growing organism. Herbert Spencer defines
evolution as a progress from the homogeneous to the heterogeneous, from
general to special, from the simple to the complex elements of life, and
it is believed that this process can be traced in the formation of
worlds in space, in the multiplication of types and species among
animals and plants, in the origin and changes of languages and
literature and the arts, and also in all the changes of human
institutions and society. Asserting the general fact of progress in
nature, the evolution theory shows that the method of this progress has
been (1) by the multiplication of organs and functions; (2) according to
a defined unity of plan, although with (3) intervention of transitional
forms, and (4) with modifications dependent upon surrounding conditions.
Ancient writers occasionally seemed to have a glimmering knowledge of
the fact of progress in nature, but as a theory "evolution" belongs to
the enlightenment of the nineteenth century. Leibnitz, in the latter
part of the seventeenth century first uttered the opinion that the earth
was once in a fluid condition and Kant about the middle of the
eighteenth century, definitely propounded the nebular hypothesis, which
was enlarged as a theory by the Herschels. The first writer to suggest
the transmutation of species among animals was Buffon, about 1750, and
other writers followed out the idea. The eccentric Lord Monboddo was the
first to suggest the possible descent of man from the ape, about 1774.
In 1813 Dr. W. C. Wells first proposed to apply the principle of natural
selection to the natural history of man, and in 1822 Professor Herbert
first asserted the probable transmutation of species of plants. In 1844
a book appeared called "Vestiges of Creation," which, though evidently
not written by a scientific student, yet attracted great attention by
its bold and ingenious theories. The authorship of this book was never
revealed until after the death of Robert Chambers, a few years since, it
became known that this publisher, whom no one would ever have suspected
of holding such heterodox theories, had actually written it. But the two
great apostles of the evolution theory were Charles Darwin and Herbert
Spencer. The latter began his great work, the "First Principles of
Philosophy," showing the application of evolution in the facts of life,
in 1852. In 1859 appeared Darwin's "Origin of Species." The hypothesis
of the latter was that different species originated in spontaneous
variation, and the survival of the fittest through natural selection and
the struggle for existence. This theory was further elaborated and
applied by Spencer, Darwin, Huxley, and other writers in Europe and
America, and though to-day by no means all the ideas upheld by these
early advocates of the theory are still accepted, evolution as a
principle is now acknowledged by nearly all scientists. It is taken to
be an established fact in nature, a valid induction from man's knowledge
of natural order.



THE ENGLISH SPARROW.

The first English sparrow was brought to the United States in 1850, but
it was not until 1870 that the species can be said to have firmly
established itself. Since then it has taken possession of the country.
Its fecundity is amazing. In the latitude of New York and southward it
hatches, as a rule, five or six broods in a season, with from four to
six young in a brood. Assuming the average annual product of a pair to
be twenty-four young, of which half are females and half males, and
assuming further, for the sake of computation, that all live, together
with their offspring, it will be seen that in ten years the progeny of a
single pair would be 275,716,983,698.



FEMININE HEIGHT AND WEIGHT.

It is often asked how stout a woman ought to be in proportion to her
height. A very young girl may becomingly be thinner than a matron, but
the following table gives a fair indication of proper proportions:

Height                  Pounds   Height                     Pounds
Five feet           about 100    Five feet 7 inches.  about  150
Five feet 1 inch    about 106    Five feet 8 inches.  about  155
Five feet 2 inches  about 113    Five feet 10 inches. about  163
Five feet 3 inches  about 119    Five feet 10 inches. about  169
Five feet 4 inches  about 130    Five feet 11 inches. about  176
Five feet 5 inches  about 138    Six feet             about  180
Five feet 6 inches  about 144    Six feet 1 inch      about  186



WHEN A MAN BECOMES OF AGE.

The question sometimes arises whether it man is entitled to vote at an
election held on the day preceding the twenty-first anniversary of his
birth. Blackstone, in his Commentaries, book 1, page 463, says: "Full
age in male or female is 21 years, which age is completed on the day
preceding the anniversary of a person's birth, who, till that time, is
an infant, and so styled in law." The late Chief Justice Sharswood, in
his edition of Blackstone's Commentaries, quotes Christian's note on the
above as follows: "If he is born on the 16th day of February, 1608, he
is of age to do any legal act on the morning of the 15th of February,
1629, though he may not have lived twenty-one years by nearly
forty-eight hours. The reason assigned is that in law there is no
fraction of a day; and if the birth were on the last second of one day
and the act on the first second of the preceding day twenty-one years
after, then twenty-one years would be complete, and in the law it is the
same whether a thing is done upon one moment of the day or another."



DREAMS AND THEIR MEANING

The Bible speaks of dreams as being sometimes prophetic, or suggestive
of future events.

This belief has prevailed in all ages and countries, and there are
numerous modern examples, apparently authenticated, which would appear
to favor this hypothesis.

The interpretation of dreams was a part of the business of the
soothsayers at the royal courts of Egypt, Babylon and other ancient
nations.

Dreams and visions have attracted the attention of mankind of every age
and nation. It has been claimed by all nations, both enlightened and
heathen, that dreams are spiritual revelations to men; so much so, that
their modes of worship have been founded upon the interpretation of
dreams and visions. Why should we discard the interpretation of dreams
while our mode of worship, faith and knowledge of Deity are founded upon
the interpretation of the dreams and visions of the prophets and seers
of old.

Dreams vividly impressed upon the mind are sure to be followed by some
event.

We read in the Holy Scripture the revelation of the Deity to His chosen
people, through the prophet Joel: "And it shall come to pass, afterward,
that I will pour out My Spirit on all flesh, and your sons and your
daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young
men shall see visions, and also upon the servants and the handmaids in
those days will I pour out My Spirit." (Joel ii, 28.)

Both sacred and profane history contain so many examples of the
fulfilment of dreams that he who has no faith in them must be very
skeptical indeed.

Hippocrates says that when the body is asleep the soul is awake, and
transports itself everywhere the body would be able to go; knows and
sees all that the body could see or know were it awake; that it touches
all that the body could touch. In a word, it performs all the actions
that the body of a sleeping man could do were he awake.

A dream, to have a significance, must occur to the sleeper while in
healthy and tranquil sleep. Those dreams of which we have not a vivid
conception, or clear remembrance, have no significance.

Those of which we have a clear remembrance must have formed in the mind
in the latter part of the night, for up to that time the faculties of
the body have been employed in digesting the events of the day.



DICTIONARY OF DREAMS.

(Note.--If you do not find the word you want, look for a word of
identical or closely similar meaning.)

A

Abundance--Deceitful security.

Accident--Unexpected meeting.

Acorn--Irreparable fault.

Account--(Of possessions) bankruptcy.

Adultery--(That you commit) scandal, misfortune and disgrace.

Air--(Clear and serene) reconciliation; (dark and gloomy) sadness and
sickness.

Almonds--Peace, happiness; (tree) success in business.

Altar--Prosperity, speedy marriage.

Alms--(Giving) mediocrity; (receiving) privations.

Anchor--Safe enterprise.

Angry--(That you are) many powerful enemies.

Ape--Enemies, deceit.

Apples--Gain, profit; (to be eating) disappointment.

Apricots--Health, contentment.

Apple Tree--Good news; (if dead) ill news.

Artichokes--Embarrassment, pain.

Argument--Justice done.

Arm--(Right arm cut off) death of a female relative; (both arms cut off)
captivity and sickness; (broken or withered) sorrows, losses and
widowhood; (swollen) sudden fortune coming to a dear friend.

Ashes--Misfortune.

Asparagus--Success, profit.

Ass--Quarrel between friends; (one sleeping) security; (one braying)
dishonor; (ears of one) scandal; (one laden) profit.

Aunt--Wealth and friends.

Angel--Good news.

Ants--Time spent to no purpose.

Authority--(To have) easy times.


B

Babe--Happy marriage.

Baker--Gain.

Balloon--Literary note.

Barley--Good fortune.

Basket--Increase.

Babboon--Affronts.

Ball--(For dancing) jealousy, rage, then harmony.

Bank--Never to be rich, except by saving.

Barber--A long story, discontent.

Barn--(Full) wealthy marriage.

Bath--Marriage; (too cold) grief; (too hot) separation; (in running
water) disappointment; (in stagnant water) misfortune.

Beggar--Help when not expected.

Bells--Alarm, misfortune.

Bear--Danger, misfortune.

Beans--Quarrels.

Bed--Botheration, unrest.

Beer--Fatigue to no purpose.

Bees--Profit; (to catch) success; (stung by) to be over-worked.

Blind Person--False friends.

Blows--(To give) forgiveness; (to receive) advantage.

Boots--(New) success in love and business; (old) quarreling and failure.

Bonnet--(New) flirtation; (old or torn) rivalry.

Boat--(On clear water) happiness; (in muddy water) disgrace.

Bones--Large acquisition by small degrees.

Book--Information.

Bow and Arrows--Love affairs.

Bottles--A feast; (broken) sickness; (empty) melancholy.

Bouquet--(To carry) marriage; (to destroy) separation; (to throw away)
displeasure.

Brandy--Depravity.

Brook--(Clear) lasting friendship; (troubled) domestic quarrel.

Briars--Disputes.

Betrothal--Brief pleasures.

Birds--New pleasures; (singing) love, good fortune.

Bite--Mistrust, ingratitude.

Billiards--Hazards, dissipation.

Biscuit--Rejoicings, jolly feasting.

Blessing or Benediction--A forced marriage.

Blackbird--Scandal, deceit.

Bridge--(To pass one) success through industry; (to fall from) loss of
business and disappointment in love.

Bread--Profit; (white) lasting affection; (black) inconstancy.

Bugs--Enemies seeking to do injury.

Bull--(Peaceful) gain; (onset of) apprehension.

Butcher--Death of a friend.

Butterfly--Inconstancy.

Butter--Surprises; (to make) a legacy.


C

Cabbage--Health and long life.

Cage--(With bird) liberty; (without bird) imprisonment.

Cakes--Meeting with friends; (to make or eat) prosperity.

Calf--Assured success.

Camel--Riches.

Candle--Favors, praise.

Candy--Ardent love.

Cane--Correction.

Cards--Married life.

Carpenter--Arrangement of affairs.

Cart--Sickness and disgrace.

Cave--Quarrel, loss.

Carving--Business prosperity.

Cat--(To see) treason; (to kill) family quarrels.

Cellar--(Full) passing renown; (empty) health.

Cemetery--(To see) future prosperity; (to be in) news of a death.

Chain--Union; (broken) rupture.

Challenge--Rupture, illusion.

Cherries--Health; (to gather) deception by a woman; (to eat) love.

Chicken--(Cooking) good news.

Cheese--Vexation and after success.

Chestnuts--Home troubles.

Child--(Pretty) pleasure; (ugly) danger; (running) business difficulty.

Church--Heritage; (to pray in) deceit; (to speak aloud in) domestic
quarrels.

Chess--Affairs embarrassed,

Cider--Distant heritage, dispute.

Clams--Small possessions, stingily kept.

Clock--Marriage; (striking) a competency.

Coal--Persecution.

Cock--Pride, power, success; (one crowing) sudden trouble; (two
fighting) expensive follies.

Colic--Bickerings, estrangement

Corkscrew--Vexatious inquiries.

Corpse--Long life; news of the living; (one disinterred) infidelity.

Cow--Prosperity, abundance.

Cobbler--Long toil, ill paid.

Coffee--Misfortune.

Coffin--Speedy marriage.

Cooking--A wedding.

Corn--Riches; (to grind) abundance.

Crabs--Ill results of endeavor.

Cradle, or Crib--Increase in the family.

Cricket--Hospitality, home comfort.

Crocodile--A catastrophe.

Cross--(To see) disquiet; (to bear) tranquillity.

Crow--Disappointed expectations, humiliation; (to hear) disgrace.

Crowd--Many matters, much to hear.

Crutches--(To use) gambling losses; (to break or leave) recovery.

Cucumber--Serious illness.

Currants--(Red) friendship; (white) satisfaction; (black) infidelity.

Cypress--Despair, death of one cherished.


D

Dancing--(To engage in) successful endeavor; (to see) weariness.

Debts--(Denied) business safety; (admitted) distress.

Doctor--Robustness; (to be one) enjoyment.

Dog--Friendly services; (to play with) suffering through extravagance.

Desertion--Good news, permanence.

Devil--Temptations.

Diamonds--Brief, illusive happiness; (to find) loss; (to sell) peril.

Dice--Doubt, risks.

Dirt--Sickness, detraction.

Dispute--(Friendly) see Argument; (not friendly) see Quarrel.

Dishes--Possessions; (breaking) family quarrels.

Ditch--Bankruptcy.

Door--(Open) opportunities; (closed) unfruitful adventure; (to force)
reproof.

Dove--Home happiness, a lover.

Draughts--(To play at) disappointment.

Drawing--A proposal for rejection.

Drowning--Happiness.

Drum--Small difficulties, trifling loss.

Duck--Profit and pleasure; (to kill one) misfortune.

Duel--Rivalries; dissension.

Dumb--(One's self) quarrels; (another) peace.

Dwarf--Feeble foes.

Dyer--Embarrassed affairs.


E

Eagle--Worthy ambition; (kill one) gratified wishes.

Eating--Botheration.

Eclipse--(The sun) loss; (the moon) profit.

Eels--(Alive) vexation; (dead) vengeance satisfied.

Eggs--(A few) riches; (many) misadventure.

Elephant--Power; (feed one) gain of a service.

Embroidery--Love, ambition.

Epitaph--Indiscretion.

Eyes--Bad luck.


F

Face--(Smiling) joy; (pale) trouble.

Fairs--Sudden loss.

Falling--Dangerous elevation; (in a hole) calumny, disappointment.

Fan----Pride, rivalry.

Farmer--Full, good living.

Fatigue--Successful enterprise.

Father-in-Law--Unlucky.

Feast--Trouble ahead.

Feathers--(White) great joy, friendship; (black) hindrances.

Fields--Joy, good health, domestic happiness.

Fingers--(Scalded) envy; (cut) grief; (to see more than five on one
hand) new relatives.

Figs--(Dried) festivity; (green) hope; (to eat) transient pleasures.

Flowers--Happiness; (to gather) benefit; (to cast away) quarrels.

Flute--News of a birth.

Fire--Anger, danger.

Firearms--(To see) anger; (blaze of) spite; (to hear) havoc.

Fish--Success, joy; (to catch) deceit of friends.

Flag--Contention; (to bear) fame, honor.

Flame--(Luminous) good news.

Fleas--Unhappiness; (to kill) triumph over enemies.

Flies--That some one is jealous of us.

Flood--Misfortunes, calumny.

Fog--Deception.

Forest--Loss, shame.

Fountain--Abundance, health.

Fox--To be duped; (to kill) to triumph over enemies.

Frogs--Distrust; (hopping) vexation, annoyance.

Fruits--Joy, prosperity, gain; (to eat) be deceived by a woman;
(throwaway) trouble through others' envy.

Funeral--Inheritance, news of a birth or marriage.

Fur--(On the body) health and long life.


G

Gallows--Dignities and honors (proportionate to height).

Gambling--Deception.

Game--(Live) adventure.

Garden--Bright future days; (well kept) increase of fortune;
(disorderly) business losses and failure.

Garlic--Deceived by a woman.

Garments--Annoyance;  (white) innocence, comfort; (black) death of a
friend; (torn or soiled) sadness, misfortune.

Garter--Happy marriage.

Gauze--Affected modesty.

Ghost--(White) consolation; (black) temptation.

Gift--(From a man) danger; (from a woman) spite.

Gloves--Friendly advances.

Goat--(White) prosperity; (black) sickness.

Gold--Profit, fortune.

Goose--Same as Duck; (catch one) ensnarement.

Grandparents--Occasion for repentance.

Grapes--Enjoyment, rejoicing; (scant or poor) deprivations.

Grass--(Green) long life.

Grasshopper--Lost harvest or savings.

Grave--(Open) loss of a friend; (filled up) good fortune.

Guitar--Deception, ill-conduct.

Gypsy--Small troubles.


H

Hail--Trouble, sadness.

Hair--(Orderly) comfort, complacency; (tangled) perplexities; (falling
out) anxieties.

Ham--Happiness.

Harp--A handsome partner.

Harvest--Wealth in the country.

Hay--Abundance.

Heart--(Pain or troubles) sickness, danger.

Heaven--Some joyful event will happen.

Hell--You lead a bad life and should reform before it is too late.

Hen--Profit; (hear one) consolation; (one laying) joy.

Herbs--Prosperity; (to eat) grief.

Hermit--Treacherous friend.

Hill--(Up one) success; (down) misadventure.

Hole--Obstacles. See Falling.

Holly--Annoyance.

Honey--Success in business.

Horse--(See white one) unexpected good fortune; (see black one) partial
success; (mount or ride) success in enterprise; (curry one) a speedy
journey.

Hotel--(See one) wandering; (be in) discomfort.

House--(New or strange) consolation; (many) bewilderment.

Hunger--Profitable employment.

Hunt--Snares, accusations.

Husband--If a wife dreams that her husband is married to another it
betokens separation.


I

Ice--Treachery, misadventure.

Imps--Occasion for caution.

Infants--Connubial felicity.

Ink--Reconciliation; (upset) separation.

Insanity--Bright ideas, wise thought.

Iron--Cruel experience.

Island--Solitude, loneliness.

Itch--Small foes.

Ivory--Profitable enterprise.

Intoxication--(One's self) pleasures; (another) scandal.

Ivy--Children many and handsome.


J

Jail--(To enter) safety; (leaving one) single blessedness.

Jaw--Riches in the family.

Jew--Trickery.

Joy--Bad news.

Judge--Punishment.

Jug--Loss through awkwardness or neglect.


K

Keys--Explanations, progress in knowledge; (to lose) perplexity.

Killing--(To see) security; (one's self) love quarrels; (another)
jealousy.

Kids--Consolation.

King--Satisfaction, progress in affairs.

Kiss--(In the light) true love; (in the dark) risks; (a stranger) a new
lover; (a rival) treason; (married woman kissed by a stranger) a new
baby and a jealous husband.

Kitchen--Arrivals.

Kite--Vain glory.

Knife--Inconstancy, dissension.

Knitting--Mischievous talk, malice.

Knots--Embarrassments, difficulties.


L

Labor--Conjugal happiness, increase of fortune.

Ladder--(To go up) brief glory; (to go down) debasement.

Lady--Humiliation; (many) gossip.

Lambs--(To see) peace; (to have) profit; (to carry) success; (to buy)
great surprise; (to kill) secret grief.

Lame Person--Business misfortune.

Lamps--(Unlit) neglect; (lighted) love troubles.

Landscape--Unexpected gain.

Lantern--(Lighted) safe adventure; (unlit) blunder.

Larks--Riches, elevation.

Laughter--Troubled happiness, botheration.

Leg--(If sound and supple) successful enterprise, prosperous journey.

Letter--(To see) discovery; (to receive) good news from afar.

Lice--Wealth.

Lightning--A love quarrel.

Lily--(Faded) vain hopes; (fine) innocence, happiness.

Linen--Fortune, abundance.

Lion--Future dignity.

Liver--Losses, discomforts.

Lizard--Snares of dubious origin.

Laurel--Honor, gain.

Lawyer--Marriage of a friend.

Lead--Accusations, ingratitude.

Leaves--Transient indisposition.

Leech--Aid in trouble; (many of them) extortion, usury.

Leeks--Labor.

Lettuce--Poverty.

Locksmith--Robbery.

Lottery Tickets--(Number distinct) success in affairs; (number
indistinct) foolish expenditure.

Love--An all round good indication.

Lovers--Troubles and joys mixed.


M

Macaroni--Distress.

Man--(Handsome) love; (ugly) wrangles.

Mantle--Victimizing.

Manure--Depravity, shame.

Maps--A journey.

Marble--Estrangements.

Markets--(A busy one) joyous events; (empty) deprivations.

Marsh--Unfruitful endeavors.

Masks--Hypocrisy.

Measles--Wealth coupled with disgrace.

Meat--(Roast) kind reception, (boiled) melancholy.

Melon--Hope, Success.

Mice--Annoyances.

Milestone--Desires accomplished.

Milk--Love affairs.

Mills--Legacy from a relative

Mire--Mistakes, privations.

Mirror--(To look in) misunderstanding; (broken) misadventure.

Money--Losses in business; (to find) tardy discoveries.

Money-Lender--Persecution.

Monkey--Harmless mischief.

Moon--Love; (bright) continual pleasure; (clouded) sickness, danger to
one beloved; (full) wealth; (new) awakening affection; (failing) deceit;
(red) renown.

Mourning--Impending happiness, invitation to a ball or wedding.

Mouth--(Closed so that cannot eat) sudden death; (wider than usual)
riches.

Mud--Riches.

Mule--Difficulty.

Music--Ease, pleasure.

Mustard--Troubles.

Myrtle--Love declaration.


N

Nails--(Broken) misadventure; (very long) emoluments.

Nakedness--Threatened danger.

Navigating--Approaching journey.

Necklace--Jealousy, annoyance.

Needles--Disappointment in love.

Negro--Vexation, annoyance.

Nest--Good luck, profit.

Newspaper--Botheration, gossip.

Night--(Walking) uneasiness, melancholy.

Nightingale--Happy marriage.

Nose--(That yours is large) prosperity and acquaintance with rich
people.

Nurse--Long life.

Nuts--Peace and satisfaction after trouble and difficulty.


O

Oak--(Green) health, strength; (dead or fallen) heavy losses.

Oars--Safe enterprise; (to break or lose) dependence.

Offer of Marriage--New lovers.

Office--(Turn out of) death or loss of property.

Oil--Good harvest.

Old Person--(Man) prudence, wisdom; (woman) scandal.

Olives--Honors and dignities.

Onions--Aggravation, dispute with inferiors.

Opera--Pleasure followed by pain.

Orange Blossom--A marriage.

Oranges--Amusement, pleasure; (sour) chagrin, injury.

Orchard--Much of nothing.

Ostrich--Misadventure through vanity.

Oven--Ease, riches; (hot) feasting.

Owl--Secrets revealed.

Oysters--Satiety.


P

Pain--Trouble and recovery.

Painter--That everything will be lovely.

Palm-Tree--Honor, power, victory.

Paper--Tidings; (colored) deceit; (painted) brief happiness.

Parent--Good news.

Parrot--A bad neighbor, tale-bearing.

Pastry--(To eat) annoyance; (to make) good times.

Paths--(Straight) happiness; (crooked) ill to the willful.

Pawnbroker--Little result of big endeavor.

Peacock--Peril through pride, ambition or unwariness.

Peaches--Contentment, pleasure.

Pearls--Tears, distress.

Pears--Treachery; (to eat) tidings of death; (to gather) festivities.

Peas--Good fortune.

Pens--Tidings.

Peddler--You are mistaken in your estimate of a friend.

Pepper--Affliction, vexation.

Pheasant--Good fortune; (to kill one) peril; (to carry one) honor.

Piano--Disputes.

Pig--Pork--(Few) avarice; (many) profits.

Pigeon--Reconciliation.

Pillow--Disturbance.

Pills--Trouble.

Pine Tree--Danger.

Pins--Contradiction.

Pirates--Fortunate adventure.

Pitch--Evil companions.

Pitchfork--Punishment.

Playing--Entertainment.

Plums--Pleasure, happiness.

Policeman--Trouble.

Pomegranate--Power.

Postman--News from the absent.

Poverty--Thrift, advantage.

Preserves--Loss of time and money.

Priest--Reconciliation.

Procession--Happy love.

Pump--(If water) marriage and fortune; (if dry) flirtation.

Purchase--(On credit) deprivations; (for cash) possessions.

Purse--(Empty) something to get; (full) pride, disquiet.

Puzzle--Favors, pleasure.


Q

Quail--Family responsibilities.

Quarrel--Constancy, friendship.

Queen--Prosperity.

Questions--Wisdom.

Quill--Particular information.

Quoits--Rivalries.


R

Rabbit--(White) friendship; (black) trouble; (many) extensive pleasures.

Racing--Success in life.

Radishes--That you will discover secrets.

Raft--New views.

Rain--Legacy or gift.

Rainbow--Separation.

Rat--Secret enemies; (white) triumph over enemies.

Raven--Misfortune; (hear one) grief.

Reading--Venturesomeness.

Reaper--A picnic party.

Revenge--Repentance.

Ribbons--Prodigality.

Rice--Talking.

Ride--(With men) it is a good sign; (with women) a bad sign.

Ring--Approaching marriage.

Riot--Scarcity through mischief.

Rival--Quarrels.

River--Success in enterprise; (to fall in) attempts of enemies; (to
throw one's self in) confusion in affairs.

Robber--Fear.

Rock--Annoyance; (to surmount) difficulties overcome.

Roof--Adventure abroad.

Roses--Always of happy omen; (full blown) health, joy, abundance;
(faded) success, with some drawbacks; (white) innocence; (red)
satisfaction; (yellow) jealousy.

Ruffles--Honors, profitable occupation.

Ruins--Pleasant surprises.

Rust--Idle times, decay, failure.


S

Sailor--Tidings from abroad.

Salad--Embarrassments.

Salt--Wisdom.

Satin or Silk--Gain.

Sausage--Affliction, sickness.

Saw--Satisfactory conclusion in affairs.

Scissors--Enemies, hatred.

Scratches--Inconveniences, annoyances.

Screech-Owl--Death of near relative.

Sculptor--Profit.

Sea--Long journey, large affairs.

Seabeach--Tranquilly.

Secretary--Fortune.

Serenade--News of a marriage.

Sermon--Weariness, sleeplessness.

Servant--(Man) abuse of confidence; (maid) suspicion.

Sewing--Plots.

Shawl--(A fine one) honors; (thin or old) shame; (torn) detraction.

Sheep--Great gain.

Shell--(Filled) success; (empty) ill-omen.

Shepherd--Malice.

Ship--Wishes fulfilled; (in danger) unexpected good fortune.

Shoes--Advantageous speculation; (much worn) a speedy journey.

Shop--(To be in) pleasure denied; (to conduct) dues withheld.

Shroud--Death.

Singing--Vexation.

Skating--(To see) hindrances, crosses; (to do) success.

Skeleton--Disgust.

Sky--(Clear) happiness, peace; (clouded) misfortune.

Sleep--Illusive security.

Slippers--Comfort, satisfaction.

Smoke--Extravagant expectations.

Snail--Infidelity, dishonor.

Snakes--Treason, betrayal.

Sneezing--Long life.

Snow--(In season) good harvest; (unseasonable) discouragement.

Soap--Revelations, assistance.

Soldier--Quarrels.

Soup--Return of health or fortune.

Spectacles--Melancholy, obstacles.

Spider--(In the dark) gain; (in the light) contention; (kill one)
pleasure.

Sponge--Greed, avarice.

Sports--Pleasure and after regrets.

Spot--(On clothes) sadness; (on the sun) baseless fears.

Spy--(To be one) reprehension; (to see) rumors.

Stable--Hospitality, welcome.

Stag--Gain; (chase one) business failure.

Stammer--Decision, resolution.

Stars--Happiness; (pale) affliction; (shooting) death of relative.

Stocking--(To pull off) comfort; (to pull on) discomfort; (new) a visit;
(a hole in) deceitful fortune.

Stones--(Under foot) trouble, suffering; (thrown or falling) malice.

Storks--Loss, robbery.

Storm--Contest, vexation.

Stove--Riches.

Stranger--Return of a lost friend.

Strange Bed--Contentment.

Strange Room--A mystery solved.

Strawberries--Unexpected good fortune.

Straws--Poverty.

Street--(To walk in) a favorable reception.

Sugar--Privation and want.

Sun--(Bright) discovery of secrets; (clouded) bad news; (rising)
success; (setting) losses.

Supper--News of a birth.

Swallow--Successful enterprise.

Swans--Private riches.

Swearing--Disagreeables.

Sweeping--Confidence well placed.

Swimming--Enjoyment.

Swords--Misfortune.


T

Table--Joy; (to set) abundance.

Tailor--Unfaithfulness.

Tea--Confusion, incumbrance.

Tears--Joy, comfort.

Teeth--(Handsome) health, goodness; (mean or drawn) vexation, loss.

Ten-Pins--Undesirable adventures.

Tent--Quarrels.

Theater--Sadness, loss.

Thicket--Evasions, apprehensions.

Thief--(To be one) loss; (to lose by one) good speculations.

Thimble--Work hard to find.

Thirst--Affliction.

Thistle--Disputes, folly.

Thorns--Disappointment, pain; (to be pricked by) loss of money.

Thread--Intrigue; (tangled) confusion of affairs; (to break) failure;
(to split) a secret betrayed.

Thunder--Danger; (to see thunderbolt fall) death of a friend.

Tiger--Fierce enmity.

Toads--Something to disgust.

Tomb--Family matters, nuptials, births.

Torches--Invitation to a wedding.

Trap-Door--(Open) a secret divulged; (shut) mystery.

Travel--(On foot) work; (on wheels) fortune.

Treasure--(That you find one) disappointment.

Trees--In general; (green) hope; (withered) grief; (leafless) deceit;
(cut down) robbery; (to climb) change of employment.

Trousers--Honors and responsibilities.

Turkey--If you dream of a turkey you will shortly see a fool.

Turnips--Disappointment, annoyance.

Twins--Honors, riches.


U

Umbrella--(To a lady) A new lover; (to a gentleman) a breach of promise
suit.

Uncle--Advantageous marriage.

Undress--(One's self) rebuke; (another) scandal.

Uniform--(To see) humbling; (to wear) flattery.


V

Vegetables--(In general) weary toil; (to gather) quarrels; (to eat)
business losses.

Veil--Marriage; (black) death or separation.

Veins--Grief.

Vermin--Enough and to spare.

Villain--Danger of losing property.

Vine--Fruitfulness, abundance.

Vinegar--(To drink) wrangles; (spoiled) sickness.

Violets--Success of undertakings.

Violin--(In concert) sympathy, consolation; (alone) bereavement.

Visitors--Loneliness.

Virgin--Joy without regret; (pretended one) sorrow, evil.

Vulture--Bitter enmity; (kill one) triumph over foes; (one feeding)
returning fortune.


W

Wagon--(Loaded) emolument; (empty) ease, pleasure.

Wake--Poverty and misery.

Wall--Obstacles; (to be on) prosperity.

War--Misunderstandings and contention.

Wardrobe--Advantage.

Wash-Day--New friends, good resolutions.

Wasps--Annoyance; (to be stung) affronts.

Watch--Time well employed.

Watchman--Trifling loss.

Water--See Bath, Drink; (to drink) a marriage or birth; (to fall into)
reconciliation.

Water Carrier--Gain.

Wax--Desirable marriage.

Weasel--To be outwitted.

Wedding--Unexpected danger, troubled happiness.

Well--(Draw water from) good fortune; (fall into) peril.

Wheat--Money.

Wheelbarrow, Wheel--Disability, infirmity.

Whirlwind--Danger, scandal.

Widowhood--Satisfaction, new belongings.

Wife--If a man dreams he sees his wife married to another, it betokens a
separation.

Wolf--Enmity; (to kill one) gain, success.

Woman--Deceit; (fair) love; (ugly) scandal.

Wood-Cutter--Labor without profit.

Woods--(To rich) loss; (to poor) profit.

Work--(Of right hand) prosperity; (of left hand) impecuniosity.

Worms--Secret enemies, ill-health.

Wreck--Catastrophes, peril.

Writing--Pleasant and profitable discovery.


Y

Yeast--Increase, abundance.

Yoke--Responsibilities, particularly of marriage.

Youth--Good time, light responsibilities.



THE LANGUAGE OF FLOWERS.

Flowers may be combined and arranged so as to express even the nicest
shades of sentiment.

If a flower is offered reversed, its direct significance is likewise
reversed, so that the flower now means its opposite.

A rosebud divested of its thorns, but retaining its leaves conveys the
sentiment. "I fear no longer; I hope." Stripped of leaves and thorns, it
signifies, "There is nothing to hope or fear."

A full-blown rose placed over two buds signifies "Secrecy."

"Yes" is implied by touching the flower given to the lips.

"No" by pinching off a petal and casting it away.

"I am," is expressed by a laurel leaf twined around the bouquet. "I
have," by an ivy leaf folded together. "I offer you," by a leaf of
Virginia creeper.


Combinations and Their Meaning.

Moss, Rosebud and Myrtle--"A confession of love."

Mignonette and Colored Daisy--"Your qualities surpass your charms of
beauty."

Lily of the Valley and Ferns--"Your unconscious sweetness has fascinated
me."

Yellow Rose, Broken Straw and Ivy--"Your jealousy has broken our
friendship."

Scarlet Geranium, Passion Flower, Purple Hyacinth, and Arbor Vitae--"I
trust you will find consolation, through faith, in your sorrow; be
assured of my unchanging friendship."

Columbine, Day Lily, Broken Straw, Witch Hazel and Colored Daisy--"Your
folly and coquetry have broken the spell of your beauty."

White Pink, Canary Grass and Laurel--"Your talent and perseverance will
win you glory."

Golden-Rod and Monkshead, Sweet Pea and Forge-me-not--"Be cautious;
danger is near; I depart soon; forget me not."


Significance of Single Flowers.

Arbor Vitae--Unchanging friendship.

Camelia, White--Loveliness.

Candy-Tuft--Indifference.

Carnation, Deep Red--Alas! for my poor heart.

Carnation, White--Disdain.

China-Aster--Variety.

Clover, Four-Leaf--Be mine.

Clover, White--Think of me.

Clover, Red--Industry.

Columbine--Folly.

Columbine, Purple--Resolved to win.

Daisy--Innocence.

Dead Leaves--Sadness.

Deadly Nightshade--Falsehood.

Fern--Fascination.

Forget-me-not--True love, Forget me not.

Fuschia, Scarlet--Taste.

Geranium, Rose--Preference.

Geranium, Scarlet--Consolation.

Golden-Rod--Be cautious.

Heliotrope--Devotion.

Honey-Flower--Love, sweet and secret.

Hyacinth, White--Unobtrusive loveliness.

Ivy--Fidelity.

Lady's Slipper--Win me and wear me.

Lily, Day--Coquetry.

Lily, White-Sweetness.

Lily, Yellow--Gaiety.

Lily of the Valley--Return of happiness.

Mignonette--Your qualities surpass your charm.

Monkshead--Danger is near.

Myrtle--Love.

Oats--The witching soul of music.

Orange Blossoms--Chastity.

Pansy--Thoughts.

Passion Flower--Faith.

Peach Blossom--I am your captive.

Pear--Affection.

Primrose--Inconstancy.

Quaking Grass--Agitation.

Rose--Love.

Rose, Deep Red--Bashful shame.

Rose, Yellow--Jealousy.

Rose, White--I am worthy of you.

Rosebud, Moss--Confession of love.

Shamrock--Lightheartedness.

Straw--Agreement.

Straw, Broken--Broken agreement.

Sweet Pea--Depart.

Tuberose--Dangerous pleasures.

Verbena--Pray for me.

Witch Hazel--A spell.



ALPHABET OF ADVICE TO WRITERS.

A word out of place spoils the most beautiful thought.--Voltaire.

Begin humbly. Labor faithfully. Be patient.--Elizabeth Stuart Phelps.

Cultivate accuracy in words and things; amass sound knowledge; avoid all
affectation; write all topics which interest you.--F. W. Newman.

Don't be afraid. Fight right along. Hope right along.--S.L. Clemens.

Every good writer has much idiom; it is the life and spirit of
Language.--W. S. Landor.

Follow this: If you write from the heart, you will write to the
heart.--Beaconsfield

Genius may begin great works, but only continued labor completes
them.--Joubert.

Half the writer's art consists in learning what to leave in the
ink-pot.--Stevenson.

It is by suggestion, not cumulation, that profound impressions are made
on the imagination.--Lowell.

Joy in one's work is an asset beyond the valuing in mere dollars.--C. D.
Warner.

Keep writing--and profit by criticism. Use for a motto Michael Angelo's
wise words: "Genius is infinite patience."--L. M. Alcott.

Lord, let me never tag a moral to a story, nor tell a story without a
meaning.--Van Dyke.

More failures come from vanity than carelessness.--Joseph Jefferson.

Never do a "pot-boiler." Let one of your best things go to boil the
pot.--"O. Henry."

Originality does not mean oddity, but freshness. It means vitality, not
novelty.--Norman Hapgood.

Pluck feathers from the wings of your imagination, and stick them in the
tail of your judgment.--Horace Greeley.

Quintessence approximates genius. Gather much though into few words.
--Schopenhauer.

Revise. Revise. Revise.--E. E. Hale.

Simplicity has been held a mark of truth: it is also it mark of
genius.--Carlyle.

The first principle of composition of whatever sort is that it should be
natural and appear to have happened so.--Frederick Macmonnies.

Utilize your enthusiasms. Get the habit of happiness in
work.--Beveridge.

Very few voices but sound repellent under violent exertion.--Lessing.

Whatever in this world one has to say, there is a word, and just one
word, to express it. Seek that out and use it.--De Maupassant.

Yes, yes; believe me, you must draw your pen
Not once, nor twice, but o'er and o'er again
Through what you've written, if you would entice
The man who reads you once to read you twice.
                        -Horace (Conington, Tr.)

Zeal with scanty capacity often accomplishes more than capacity with no
zeal at all.--George Eliot.



WHAT DIFFERENT EYES INDICATE.

The long, almond-shaped eye with thick eyelids covering nearly half of
the pupil, when taken in connection with the full brow, is indicative of
genius, and is often found in artists, literary and scientific men. It
is the eye of talent, or impressibility. The large, open, transparent
eye, of whatever color, is indicative of elegance, of taste, of
refinement, of wit, of intelligence. Weakly marked eyebrows indicate a
feeble constitution and a tendency to melancholia, Deep sunken eyes are
selfish, while eyes in which the whole iris shows indicate erraticism,
if not lunacy. Round eyes are indicative of innocence; strongly
protuberant eyes of weakness of both mind and body. Eyes small and close
together typify cunning, while those far apart and open indicate
frankness. The normal distance between the eyes is the width of one eye;
a distance greater or less than this intensifies the character supposed
to be symbolized. Sharp angles, turning down at the corners of the eyes,
are seen in persons of acute judgment and penetration. Well-opened
steady eyes belong to the sincere; wide staring eyes to the impertinent.



THE MYSTERIES OF PALMISTRY

[Illustration: Various Forms of Fingers and Hands.
Nine hands with various markings and eleven fingers.]

The following points, upon which the Science of Palmistry is based,
explain its mysteries, and will be found very interesting, amusing and
instructive:


Form of the Hand.

Hands are classed into seven types, each of which is illustrated by the
cuts on the preceding page, and described as follows:

Plate I--The Elementary or Bilious Hand, indicating brutal instinct
instead of reason as the governing power of the character.

Plate II--The Square or Jupiter Hand, indicating a practical, stubborn,
methodical, and conventional character; one apt to be suspicious of
strangers and radical in views.

Plate III--The Spatulate or Nervous Hand, so named because of its
imagined resemblance to a spatula. It is broad at the base of the
fingers, and indicates great energy and push to discover; also, courage
and fearlessness.

Plate IV--The Philosophic or Venus Hand, has a long, thin, muscular
palm, with long, knotty fingers; indicates a student of nature and
searcher after truth.

Plate V--The Mercury or Artistic Hand, indicates quick temper,
impulsiveness; a character that is light-hearted, gay and charitable,
to-day; and to-morrow, sad, tearful and uncharitable.

Plate VI--The Lunar or Idealistic Hand, indicates an extremely sensitive
nature.

Plate VII--The Harmonic or Solar Hand, indicates a character of great
versatility, brilliant in conversation, and an adept in diplomacy.


The Fingers.

For fortune-telling the fingers from first to fourth are designated as
Jupiter, Saturn, Apollo and Mercury.

Note the cut on preceding page, representing the different types of
fingers, numbered from one to eleven.

1--Large fingers indicate a person of vulgar tastes and a cruel, selfish
disposition.

2--Small, thin fingers indicate a keen, quick acting mind and a person
not very particular about personal appearance.

3--Long, lean fingers indicate an inquiring disposition; love of details
in narrative; short fingers imply simple tastes and selfishness.

4--Fat fingers, largely developed at base, indicate sensualness; if
small at base, the reverse.

5--Smooth fingers indicate artistic ability.

6--Knotty fingers indicate truthfulness and good order in business
affairs.

7--Pointed fingers indicate a very magnetic and enthusiastic
personality.

8--Square fingers indicate a strong mind, regularity and love of good
order.

9--Spatulate fingers indicate a character of positiveness in opinions
and lacking in gentleness.

10--Fingers of mixed shape indicate a harmonious disposition, with
ability to easily adapt oneself to all conditions.

11--Obtuse fingers indicate coarse and cruel sensibilities.


The Phalanges of the Fingers.

See plate VIII, 1, 2, 3--The Phalanges of the Thumb: 4, 5, 6--Repeated
on each finger, indicate the phalanges of the four fingers.


The Mounts of the Hands.

See plate IX--A, Mount Venus; B, Mount Jupiter; C, Mount Saturn; D,
Mount Apollo; E. Mount Mercury; F, Mount Luna; G, Mount Mars.


The Shape and Length of the Phalanges
represent certain qualities and features of character, as presented in
the following:

Jupiter, the first finger; if the first phalange is longer than the
second, it indicates ability to control others, direct and maintain
order; if the second phalange is long and well developed, it indicates
leadership; if short and thin, intellectual weakness; if the third
phalange is long, it indicates love of power in material things.

Saturn, second finger; if the first phalange is longer than the second,
it indicates ability for mastering scientific subjects; if the second
phalange is long, it indicates great interest in subjects requiring deep
study; if the third phalange is long, it indicates a love of metaphysics
and money.

Apollo, third finger; if the first phalange is longer than the second,
it indicates love of the arts; if the second phalange is long, it
indicates success and love of riches; if the third phalange is thick, it
indicates an inherited talent of the arts.

Mercury, fourth finger; if the first phalange is longer than the second,
it indicates a taste for and love of research; if the second phalange is
long and well developed, it indicates industrious habits; if the third
phalange is long and fat, it indicates a desire for the comforts of
life.


The Mountains.

These are points or elevations on the palm.

Mount Venus, if prominent, indicates a person of strong passions, great
energy in business, and admiration of physical beauty in the opposite
sex; it also indicates love of children, home and wife, or husband. When
not well developed there is a lack of love for home, children, wife or
husband; and in a man, it indicates egotism and laziness,--in a woman,
hysteria.

Mount Jupiter, if prominent, indicates a person who is generous, loves
power, and is brilliant in conversation; if a woman, she desires to
shine and be a social leader. When not well developed, it indicates lack
of self-esteem, slovenliness and indifference to personal appearance.

Mount Saturn, if prominent, indicates a serious-minded person,
religiously inclined, slow to reach a conclusion, very prudent, free in
the expression of opinions, but inclined to be pessimistic.

Mount Apollo, if prominent, indicates ability as an artist, generosity,
courageousness, and a poetical nature, apt to be a spendthrift. When not
well developed, it indicates cautiousness and prudence.

Mount Mercury, if prominent, indicates keen perceptions, cleverness in
conversation, a talent for the sciences, industry, and deceitfulness. If
not well developed, it indicates a phlegmatic, stupid disposition.

Mount Luna, if prominent, indicates a dreamy, changeable, capricious,
enthusiastic, and inventive nature. When not well developed, it
indicates constancy, love of home, and ability to imitate others.

Mount Mars, if prominent, indicates self-respect, coolness, and control
of self under trying circumstances, courage, venturesomeness and
confidence in one's ability for anything undertaken. When not well
developed, it indicates the opposite of these characteristics.


Lines On the Hand.

If the lines of the hand are not well defined, this fact indicates poor
health.

Deep red lines indicate good, robust health. Yellow lines indicate
excessive biliousness.

Dark-colored lines indicate a melancholy and reserved disposition.

The Life Line extends from the outer base of Mount Jupiter, entirely
around the base of Mount Venus. If chained under Jupiter, it indicates
bad health in early life. Hair lines extending from it imply weakness,
and if cut by small lines from Mount Venus, misplaced affections and
domestic broils. If arising from Mount Jupiter, an ambition to be
wealthy and learned. If it is joined by the Line of the Head at its
beginning, prudence and wisdom are indicated. If it joins Heart and Head
line's at its commencement, a great catastrophe will be experienced by
the person so marked. A square on it denotes success. All lines that
follow it give it strength. Lines that cut the Life Line extending
through the Heart Line denote interference in a love affair. If it is
crossed by small lines, illness is indicated. Short and badly drawn
lines, unequal in size, imply bad blood and a tendency to fevers.

The Heart Line, if it extends across the hand at the base of the finger
mounts, and is deep and well defined, indicates purity and devotion; if
well defined from Mount Jupiter only, a jealous and tyrannical
disposition is indicated; if it begins at Mount Saturn and is without
branches, it is a fatal sign; if short and well defined in the Harmonic
type of hand it indicates intense affection when it is reciprocated; if
short on the Mercury type of hand, it implies deep interest in
intellectual pursuits; it short and deep in the Elementary type of hand,
it implies the disposition to satisfy desire by brutal force, instead of
by love.

The Head Line is parallel to Heart Line and forms the second branch of
letter M, generally very plain in most hands; if long and deep it
indicates ability to care for one's self; if hair lines are attached to
it, mental worry; if it divides toward Mount Mercury love affairs will
be first, and business secondary; if well defined its whole length, it
implies a well-balanced brain; a line from it extending into a star on
Mount Jupiter, great versatility, pride and love for knowledge are
indicated; if it extend to Mount Luna interest in occult studies is
implied; separated from the Life Line, indicates aggressiveness; if it
is broken, death is indicated from an injury in the head.

The Rascettes are lines across the wrist where the palm joins it.

It is claimed they indicate length of life; if straight it is a good
sign. One Rascette indicates thirty years of life; two lines, sixty;
three lines, ninety.

The Fate Line commences at Rascettes, and if it extends straight to
Mount Saturn, uninterrupted, and alike in both hands, good luck and
success are realized without personal exertion. If not in one hand and
interrupted in the other, success will be experienced only by great
effort. If well defined at the wrist the early life is bright and
promising; if broken in the center, misery for middle life is indicated.
If this line touches Mounts Luna and Venus, it indicates a good
disposition and wealth; if inclined toward any mount, it implies success
in that line for which the mount stands. If it is made up of
disconnected links, it indicates serious physical and moral struggles.
Should it end at Heart Line, the life has been ruined by unrequited
love. If it runs through a square, the life has been in danger and
saved. Should it merge into the Heart Line and continue to Mount
Jupiter, it denotes distinction and power secured through love.

The Girdle of Venus is a curved line extending from Mount Jupiter to
Mercury, encircling Saturn and Apollo. It appears on few hands, but it
indicates superior intellect, a sensitive and capricious nature; if it
extends to base of Jupiter it denotes divorce; ending in Mercury,
implies great energy; should it be cut by parallel lines in a man, it
indicates a hard drinker and gambler.

Lines of Reputation, commencing in the middle of the hand, at the Head
Line, Mount Luna or Mount Mars, indicate financial success from
intellectual pursuits after years of struggling with adversity. If from
Heart Line, real love of occupation and success; if from Head Line,
success from selfishness. An island on this line denotes loss of
character, a start on it near Apollo implies that success will be
permanent, and a square, brilliant success. The absence of this line
implies a struggle for recognition of one's abilities.

Line of Intuition, beginning at base of Mount Mercury, extends around
Mars and Luna; it is frequently found in the Venus, Mercury and Lunar
types of hands; when deeply dented with a triangle on Mount Saturn it
denotes clairvoyant power; if it forms a triangle with Fate Line, or
Life Line, a voyage will be taken.

Health Line commences at center of the Rascettes, takes an oblique
course from Fate Line, ending toward Mount Mercury. If straight and well
defined, there is little liability to constitutional diseases; when it
does not extend to Head Line, steady mental labor cannot be performed;
when it is broad and deep on Mount Mercury, diminishing as it enters the
Life Line, death from heart disease is indicated; small lines cutting it
denote sickness from biliousness. When joined to Heart Line, health and
business are neglected for Love; if made up of short, fine lines, there
is suffering from stomach catarrh; if it is checked by islands there is
a constitutional tendency to lung disease.

Marriage Lines extend straight across Mount Mercury; if short, affairs
of the heart without marriage are denoted. When near Heart Line early
marriage is indicated; if it turns directly to Heart Line, marriage will
occur between the ages of 16 and 21; if close to the top of the mount,
marriage will not take place before the 35th year; if it curves upward
it indicates a single life; when pronged and running toward the center
or to Mount Mars, divorce will occur. If the end at this line droops the
subject will outlive wife or husband; if broken, divorce is implied; if
it ends in a cross, the wife or husband will die from an accident. A
branch from this line upward implies a high position attained by
marriage. A black spot on this line means widowhood.

Children's Lines are small and upright, extending from the end of
Marriage Lines. If broad and well defined, males; if fine and narrow,
females are indicated. A line of this order that is deep and well
defined denotes prominence for that child.

Small Lines have a signification depending upon their position and
number.

A single line on Jupiter signifies success; on Saturn, happiness; on
Apollo, fame and talent.

Ascending small lines are favorable, while descending lines are
unfavorable signs.

Several small lines on Mars indicate warfare constantly.

Cross lines, failure.



RIDDLES, OLD AND NEW.

Feet have they, but they walk not--stoves.

Eyes have they, but they see not--potatoes.

Noses have they, but they smell not--tea-pots.

Mouths have they, but they taste not--rivers.

Hands have they, but they handle not--clocks.

Ears have they, but they hear not--corn stalks.

Tongues have they, but they talk not--wagons.

What thing is that which is lengthened by being cut at both ends? A
ditch.

Why do we all go to bed? Because the bed will not come to us.

Why Paris like the letter F? Because it is the capital of France.

In which month do ladies talk least? In February.

Why is a room full of married folks like an empty room? There is not a
single person in it.

Why is a peach-stone like a regiment? It has a kernel (Colonel).

Why is an island like the letter T? Because it is in the midst of
wa-t-er.

Why is a bee-hive like a spectator? Because it is a beeholder
(beholder).

What is that which a train cannot move without, and yet is not the least
use to it? A noise.

When is a man over head and ears in debt? When the hat he has on is not
paid for.

Why is a man led astray like one governed by a girl?  He is misled
(miss-led).

Why is a Jew in a fever like a diamond? He is a Jew ill (jewel).

Why are fixed stars like pen, ink and paper? They are stationary
(stationery).

What is that which is always invisible and never out of sight? The
letter I.

Why is a cook like a barber? He dresses hare (hair).

Why is a waiter like a race horse? He often runs for a plate or a cup.

Why is a madman like two men? He is one beside himself.

Why is a good story like a church bell? It is often told (tolled).

What is the weight of the moon? Four quarters.

What sea would make the best bed-room? Adriatic (a-dry attic).

Why is Ireland likely to become rich? Because the capital is always
Dublin (doubling).

What two letters make a county in Massachusetts? S. X. (Essex).

Why is a good saloon like a bad one? Both inn convenient

Why do dentists make good politicians? Because they have a great pull.

Why is the Hudson River like a shoe? Because it is a great place for
tows (toes).

Why is a race at a circus like a big conflagration? Because the heat is
in tents (intense).

Which is the left side of a plum pudding? The part that is not eaten.

Why is a man who runs in debt like a clock? He goes on tick.

Why is the wick of a candle like Athens? It is in the midst of grease
(Greece).

Why are deep sighs like long stockings? Heigh-ho's (high hose).

What occupation is the sun? A tanner.

Why are your eyes like stage horses? They are always under lashes.

Why are your teeth like verbs? Regular, irregular and defective?

What word makes you sick if you leave out one of its letters? Music.

What word of ten letters can be spelled with five? Expediency (X P D N
C).

Why should red-headed men be chosen for soldiers? They carry fire-locks.


Why is the letter D like a sailor? It follows the sea (C).

Why is a theological student like a merchant? Both study the Prophets
(profits).

If the alphabet were invited out to dine what time would U, V, W, X, Y
and Z go? After tea (T).

How can you take one from nineteen and leave twenty?   XIX--XX



LAST WORDS OF FAMOUS MEN AND WOMEN.

 "'Tis well."--George Washington.

"Tete d'armee."--Napoleon.

"I thank God that I have done my duty."--Admiral Nelson.

"I pray thee see me safe up, but for my coming down I can shift for
myself," were the last words of Sir Thomas More when ascending the
scaffold.

"God bless you."--Dr. Johnson.

"I have finished."--Hogarth.

"Dying, dying."--Thos. Hood.

"Drop the curtain, the farce is played out."--Rabelais.

"I am what I am. I am what I am."--Swift.

"I still live."--Daniel Webster.

"How grand these rays. They seem to beckon earth to heaven."--Humboldt.

"It is now time that we depart--I to die, you to live: but which is the
better destination is unknown."--Socrates.

"Adieu, my dear Morand, I am dying."--Voltaire.

"My beautiful flowers, my lovely flowers."--Richter.

"James, take good care of the horse."--Winfield Scott.

"Many things are becoming clearer to me."--Schiller.

"I feel the daisies growing over me."--John Keats.

"What, is there no bribing death?"--Cardinal Beaufort.

"Taking a leap in the dark. O, mystery."--Thomas Paine.

"There is not a drop of blood on my hands."'--Frederick V.

"I am taking a fearful leap in the dark."--Thomas Hobbes.

"Don't let that awkward squad fire over my grave."--Burns.

"Here, veteran, if you think it right, strike."--Cicero.

"My days are past as a shadow that returns not."--R. Hooker.

"I thought that dying had been more difficult,"--Louis XIV.

"O Lord, forgive me specially my sins of omission."--Usher.

"Let me die to the sounds of delicious music."--Mirabeau.

"It is small, very small," alluding to her neck.--Anna Boleyn.

"Let me hear those notes so long my solace and delight."--Mozart.

"We are as near heaven by sea as by land,"--Sir Humphrey Gilbert.

"I do not sleep. I wish to meet death awake."--Maria Theresa.

"I resign my soul to God; my daughter to my country."--Jefferson.



TOASTS AND SENTIMENTS

Merit to gain a heart, and sense to keep it.

Money to him that has spirit to use it.

More friends and less need of them.

May those who deceive us be always deceived.

May the sword of justice be swayed by the hand of mercy.

May the brow of the brave never want a wreath of laurel.

May we be slaves to nothing but our duty, and friends to nothing but
real merit.

May he that turns his back on his friend, fall into the hands of his
enemy.

May honor be the commander when love takes the field.

May reason guide the helm when passion blows the gale.

May those who would enslave become slaves themselves.

May genius and merit never want a friend.

May the road of happiness be lighted by virtue.

May life last as long as it is worth wearing.

May we never murmur without a cause, and never have a cause to murmur.

May the eye that drops for the misfortunes of others never shed a tear
for its own.

May the lovers of the fair sex never want means to support and spirit to
defend them. May the tear of misery be dried by the hand of
commiseration.

May the voyage of life end in the haven of happiness.

Provision to the unprovided.

Peace and honest friendship with all nations; entangling alliances with
none.

Riches to the generous, and power to the merciful.

Short shoes and long corns to the enemies of freedom.

Success to the lover, and joy to the beloved.

The life we love, with whom we love.

The friend we love, and the woman we dare trust.

The union of two fond hearts.

The lovers of honor, and honorable lovers.

The unity of hearts in the union of hands.

The liberty of the press without licentiousness.

The virtuous fair, and the fair virtuous.

The road to honor through the plains of virtue.

The hero of Saratoga--may his memory animate the breast of every
American.

The American's triumvirate, love, honor and liberty.

The memory of Washington.

May the example of the new world regenerate the old.

Wit without virulence, wine without excess, and wisdom without
affectation.

What charms, arms and disarms.

Home pleasant, and our friends at home.

Woman--She needs no eulogy, she speaks for herself.

Friendship--May its lamp ever be supplied by the oil of truth and
fidelity.

The American Navy--May it ever sail on the sea of glory.

May those who are discontented with their own country leave their
country for their country's good.

Discretion in speech is more than eloquence. May we always remember
these three things: The manner, the place and the time.


Here's a sigh to those who love me,
  And a smile to those who hate,
And whatever sky's above me,
  Here's a heart for every fate.
Were't the last drop in the well,
  As I gasped upon the brink,
Ere my fainting spirit fell,
  'Tis to thee that I would drink.
                                 --Byron.


Caddy's Toast in "Erminie"--'Ere's to the 'ealth o' your Royal 'Ighness;
hand may the skin o' ha gooseberry be big enough for han humbrella to
cover hall your enemies."


Here's to the girl I love,
  And here's to the girl who loves me,
And here's to all that love her whom I love,
  And all those that love her who love me.


I will drink to the woman who wrought my woe,
  In the diamond morning of long ago;
To the splendor, caught from Orient skies,
  That thrilled in the dark of her hazel eyes,
Her large eyes filled with the fire of the south,
  And the dewy wine of her warm red mouth.
                                      --Winter.


May those that are single get wives to their mind,
And those that are married true happiness find.


Here's a health to me and mine,
Not forgetting thee and thine;
And when thou and thine
Come to see me and mine,
May we and mine make thee and thine
As welcome as thou and thine
Have ever made me and mine.


Industry.--The right hand of fortune, the grave of care, and the cradle
of content.


Here's to the prettiest,
Here's to the wittiest,
Here's to the truest of all who are true.
Here's to the sweetest one,
Here's to them all in one--here's to you.


Our Country.--May she always be in the right--but, right or wrong, Our
Country.-- Stephen Decatur.


Here's to our sweethearts and our wives. May our sweethearts soon become
our wives and our wives ever remain our sweethearts.


Here's to the girls of the American shore;
  I love but one, I love no mare.
Since she's not here to drink her part,
  I drink her share with all my heart.


Here's to one and only one,
  And may that one be she
Who loves but one and only one,
  And may that one be me.


A glass is good and a lass is good,
  And a pipe to smoke in cold weather.
The world is good and the people are good,
  And we're all good fellows together.


Yesterday's yesterday while to-day's here,
To-day is to-day till to-morrow appear,
To-marrow's to-morrow until to-day's past,
And kisses are kisses as long as they last.


Our Country.--
  To her we drink, for her we pray,
    Our voices silent never;
  For her we'll fight, come what may;
    The Stars and Stripes forever.


Woman.--The fairest work of the great Author; the edition is large, and
no man should be without a copy.


Drink to me only with thine eyes,
  And I will pledge thee mine;
Or leave a kiss within the cup,
  And I'll not look for wine.
The thirst that from the soul doth rise
  Doth ask a drink divine;
But might I of Jove's nectar sip,
  I would not change from thine.
                               --Ben Jonson.


Drink to-day and drown all sorrow;
You shall perhaps not do't to-morrow;
Best while you have it, use your breath;
There is no drinking after death.
                        --Beaumont and Fletcher.


Home.--The father's kingdom; the child's paradise; the mother's world.


Here's to those I love;
Here's to those who love me;
Here's to those who love those I love,
And here's to those who love those who love those who love me.
                                 --Ouida's Favorite Toast.


A little health, a little wealth,
  A little house and freedom,
With some friends for certain ends,
  But little cause to need 'em.


Here's to the lasses we've loved, my lad,
  Here's to the lips we've pressed;
For of kisses and lasses,
Like liquor in glasses,
  The last is always the best.


Come in the evening, come in the morning,
Come when you're looked for, come without warning.


Here's to a long life and a merry one,
A quick death and an easy one,
A pretty girl and a true one,
A cold bottle and another one.


The Man We Love.--He who thinks the most and speaks the least ill of his
neighbor.


False Friends.--May we never have friends who, like shadows, keep close
to us in the sunshine only to desert us on a cloudy day or in the night.


Here's to those who'd love us if we only cared.
Here's to those we'd love if we only dared.


Here's to one another and one other, whoever he or she may be.


The world is filled with flowers,
  And flowers are filled with dew,
And dew is filled with love
  And you and you and you.


Here's to you as good as you are,
  And to me as bad as I am;
And as good as you are and as bad as I am,
  I'm as good as you are as bad as I am.


The Law.--The only thing certain about litigation is its uncertainty.


The Lawyer--Learned gentleman, who rescues your estate from your enemies
and keeps it for himself.


A Spreadeagle Toast.--The boundaries of our country: East, by the rising
sun; north, by the north pole; west by all creation; and south, by the
day of judgment.


When going up the bill of prosperity may you never meet a friend coming
down.


May the hinges of friendship never grow rusty.


Come, come, good wine is a good familiar creature, if it be well
used.--Shakespeare.


Shall I ask the brave soldier who fights by my side in the cause of
mankind whether our creeds agree?


May all single men be married, and all married men be happy.


Our Country's Emblem:--
  The lily of France may fade,
    The thistle and shamrock wither,
  The oak of England may decay,
    But the stars shine on forever.


The Good Things of the World.--Parsons are preaching for them, lawyers
are pleading for them, physicians are prescribing for them, authors are
writing for them, soldiers are fighting for them, but true philosophers
alone are enjoying them.


My life has been like sunny skies
  When they are fair to view;
But there never yet were lives or skies
  Clouds might not wander through.


The Three Great American Generals.--General Peace, General Prosperity
and General Satisfaction.


America.--
  Our hearts, our hopes are all with thee,
    Our hearts, our hopes, our prayers, our tears,
  Our faith triumphant o'er our fears,
    Are all with thee, are all with thee.


Our National Birds.--The American Eagle, the Thanksgiving Turkey: may
one give us peace in all our States--and the other a piece for all our
plates.


OPPORTUNITY.

Master of human destinies am I.
Fame, Love and Fortune on my footsteps wait.
Cities and fields I walk; I penetrate
Deserts and seas remote, and, passing by
Hovel, and mart, and palace, soon or late
I knock unbidden once at every gate!
If sleeping, wake--if feasting, rise before
I turn away. It is the hour of fate,
And they who follow me reach every state
Mortals desire, and conquer every foe
Condemned to failure, penury, and woe.
Save death; but those who doubt or hesitate,
Seek me in vain and uselessly implore:
I answer not, and I return no more.
                               --John J. Ingalls.


A health to Our Dearest.--May their purses always be heavy and their
hearts always light.


An Irishman's Toast.--
  Here's to the land of the shamrock so green,
  Here's to each lad and his darling colleen,
  Here's to the ones we love dearest and most.
  And may God save old Ireland--that's an Irishman's toast.


Here's a health to the future,
  A sigh for the past.
We can love and remember,
  And hope to the last,
And for all the base lies
  That the almanacs hold.
While there's love in the heart,
  We can never grow old.


Some hae meat and canna' eat,
  And some wad eat who want it;
But we hae meat and we can eat,
  So let the Lord be thankit.
                      --Burns.


A little health, a little wealth,
  A little house and freedom,
With some few friends for certain ends,
  But little cause to need 'em.

If I were a raindrop and you a leaf,
  I would burst from the cloud above you,
And lie on your breast in a rapture of rest,
  And love you--love you--love you.


If I were a brown bee and you were a rose,
  I would fly to you, love, nor miss you;
I would sip and sip from your nectared lip,
  And kiss you--kiss you--kiss you.
                --Ella Wheeler Wilcox, in Three Women.


Strange--is it not?--that of the myriads who
Before us passed the door of darkness through,
  Not one returns to tell us of the road,
Which to discover, we must travel too?
                                    --Omar.


Away with the flimsy idea that life with a past is attended.
There's now--only now--and no past. There's never a past; it has ended.
Away with the obsolete story and all of its yesterday sorrow!
There's only Today, almost gone, and in front of Today stands Tomorrow.
                                                  --Eugene Ware.


God made man
  Frail as a bubble;
God made Love,
  Love made trouble;
God made the vine;
  Was it a sin
That man made wine
  To drown trouble in?


"My character may be my own, but my reputation belongs to any old body
that enjoys gossiping more than telling the truth."


May your joy be as deep as the ocean,
Your trouble as light as its foam.


The man that has no music in himself,
Nor is not moved with concord of sweet sounds,
Is fit for treasons, stratagems and spoils;
The motions of his spirit are dull as night,
And his affections dark as Erebus.
Let no such man be trusted.
Mark the music.
                         --Shakespeare.


See the mountains kiss high heaven,
  And the waves clasp one another;
No sister flower would be forgiven
  If it disdained its brother;
And the sunlight clasps the earth,
  And the moonbeams kiss the sea;
What are all these kissings worth,
  If thou kiss not me?
                        --Percy Bysshe Shelley.


Jest a-wearyin' for you,
All the time a-feelin' blue;
Wishin' for you, wonderin' when
You'll be comin' home again;
Restless--don't know what to do--
Jest a-wearyin' for you.
                       --Frank Stanton.


Here's to Love, the worker of miracles. He strengthens the weak and
weakens the strong; he turns wise men into fools and fools into wise
men; he feeds the passions and destroys reason, and plays havoc among
young and old!
                            --Marguerite de Valois.


"Good Bye, God Bless You."

I like the Anglo--Saxon speech
  With its direct revealings;
It takes a hold, and seems to reach
  Way down into our feelings
That Some folks deem it rude, I know,
  And therefore they abuse it;
But I have never found it so--
  Before all else I choose it.
I don't object that men should air
  The Gallic they have paid for,
With "Au revoir," "Adieu, ma chere,"
  For that's what French was made for.
But when a crony takes your hand
  At parting to address you,
He drops all foreign lingo and
  He says, "Good--bye, God bless you."
                         --Eugene Field.



LANGUAGE OF PRECIOUS STONES.

The ancients attributed marvelous properties to many of the precious
stones. We give in tabular form the different months and the stones
sacred to them, as generally accepted, with their respective meanings.
It has been customary among lovers and friends to notice the
significance attached to the various stones in making birthday,
engagement and wedding presents.

January, Garnet.--Constancy and fidelity in every engagement.

February, Amethyst--Preventive against violent passions.

March, Bloodstone--Courage, wisdom and firmness in affection.

April, Sapphire--Free from enchantment; denotes repentance.

May, Emerald--Discovers false friends, and insures true love.

June, Agate--Insures long life, health and prosperity.

July, Ruby--Discovers poison; corrects evils resulting from mistaken
friendship.

August, Sardonyx--Insures conjugal felicity.

September, Chrysolite--Free from all evil passions and sadness of the
mind.

October, Opal--Denotes hope, and sharpens the sight and faith of the
possessor.

November, Topaz--Fidelity and friendship. Prevents bad dreams.

December, Turquoise--Prosperity in love.


Tiffany's list of birth stones is somewhat different from the above and
is given below:

Birth Stones.  (As given by Tiffany & Co.)

January--Garnet.

February--Amethyst, hyacinth, pearl.

March--Jasper, bloodstone.

April--Diamond, sapphire.

May--Emerald, agate.

June--Cat's-eye, turquoise, agate.

July--Turquoise, onyx.

August--Sardonyx, carnelian, moonstone, topaz.

September--Chrysolite.

October--Beryl, opal.

November--Topaz, pearl.

December--Ruby, bloodstone.



GRAMMAR-SPELLING-PRONUNCIATION

Five Hundred Common Errors Corrected

Concise Rules for the Proper Use of Words in Writing or Speaking.

The most objectionable errors in speaking or writing are those in which
words are employed that are unsuitable to convey the meaning intended.
Thus, a person wishing to express his intention of going to a given
place says, "I propose going," when, in fact, he purposes going. The
following affords an amusing illustration of this class of error: A
venerable matron was speaking of her son, who, she said, was quite
stage-struck: "In fact," remarked the old lady, "he is going to a
premature performance this evening!" Considering that most amateur
performances are premature, it cannot be said that this word was
altogether misapplied, though, evidently, the maternal intention was to
convey quite another meaning.

Other errors arise from the substitution of sounds similar to the words
which should be employed; that is, spurious words instead of genuine
ones. Thus, some people say "renumerative," when they mean
"remunerative." A nurse, recommending her mistress to have a
perambulator for her child, advised her to purchase a preamputator!

Other errors are occasioned by imperfect knowledge of English grammar;
thus, many people say, "Between you and I," instead of "Between you and
me." And there are numerous other departures from the rules of grammar,
which will be pointed out hereafter.

Misuse of the Adjective--"What beautiful butter!" "What a nice
landscape!" They should say, "What a beautiful landscape!" "What nice
butter!" Again, errors are frequently occasioned by the following
causes:

Mispronunciation of Words--Many persons say pronoun-ciation instead of
pronunciation; others say pro-nun-ce-a-shun, instead of
pro-nun-she-a-shun.

Misdivision of Words and Syllables--This defect makes the words an
ambassador sound like a nambassador, or an adder like a nadder.

Imperfect Enunciation--As when a person says hebben for heaven, ebber
for ever, jocholate for chocolate.

To correct these errors by a systematic course of study would involve a
closer application than most persons could afford, but the simple and
concise rules and hints here given, founded upon usage and the authority
of scholars, will be of great assistance to inquirers.



ENGLISH GRAMMAR IN A NUTSHELL.

Who and whom are used in relation to persons, and which in relation to
things. But it was once common to say, "the man which." This should now
be avoided. It is now usual to say, "Our Father who art in heaven,"
instead of "which art in heaven."

Whose is, however, sometimes applied to things as well as to persons. We
may therefore say, "The country whose inhabitants are free."

Thou is employed in solemn discourse, and you in common language. Ye
(plural) is also used in serious addresses, and you in familiar
language.

The uses of the word it are various, and very perplexing to the
uneducated. It is not only used to imply persons, but things, and even
ideas, and therefore in speaking or writing, its assistance is
constantly required. The perplexity respecting this word arises from the
fact that in using it in the construction of a long sentence, sufficient
care is not taken to insure that when it is employed it really points
out or refers to the object intended. For instance, "It was raining when
John set out in his cart to go to market, and he was delayed so long
that it was over before he arrived." Now what is to be understood by
this sentence: Was the rain over? or the market? Either or both might be
inferred from the construction of the sentence, which, therefore, should
be written thus: "It was raining when John set out in his cart to go to
market, and he was delayed so long that the market was over before he
arrived."

Rule--After writing a sentence always look through it, and see that
wherever the word it is employed, it refers to or carries the mind back
to the object which it is intended to point out.

The general distinction between this and that may be thus defined: this
denotes an object present or near, in time or place; that something
which is absent.

These refers, in the same manner, to present objects, while those refers
to things that are remote.

Who changes, under certain conditions, into whose and whom; but that and
which always remain the same, with the exception of the possessive case,
as noted above.

That may be applied to nouns or subjects of all sorts; as, the girl that
went to school, the dog that bit me, the opinion that he entertains.

The misuse of these pronouns gives rise to more errors in speaking and
writing than any other cause.

When you wish to distinguish between two or more persons, say: "Which is
the happy man?" not who--"Which of those ladies to you admire?"

Instead of "Whom do you think him to be?" say, "Who do you think him to
be?"

Whom should I see.

To whom do you speak?

Who said so?

Who gave it to you?

Of whom did you procure them?

Who was he?

Who do men say that I am?

Self should never be added to his, their, mine or thine.

Each is used to denote every individual of a number.

Every denotes all the individuals of a number.

Either and or denote an alternative: "I will take either road, at your
pleasure;" "I will take this or that."

Neither means not either, and nor means not the other. Either is
sometimes used for each--"Two thieves were crucified, on either side
one."

"Let each esteem others as good as themselves," should be, "Let each
esteem others as good as himself."

"There are bodies each of which are so small," should be, "each of which
is so small."

Do not use double superlatives, such as most straightest, most highest,
most finest.

The term worser has gone out of use; but lesser is stilt retained.

The use of such words as chiefest, extreamest, etc., has become
obsolete, because they do not give any superior force to the meanings of
the primary words, chief, extreme, etc.

Such expressions as more impossible, more indispensable, more universal,
more uncontrollable, more unlimited, etc., are objectionable, as they
really enfeeble the meaning which it is the object of the speaker or
writer to strengthen. For instance, impossible gains no strength by
rendering it more impossible. This class of error is common with persons
who say, "A great large house," "A great big animal," "A little small
foot," "A tiny little hand."

Here, there and where, originally denoting place, may now, by common
consent, be used to denote other meanings, such as, "There I agree with
you," "Where we differ," "We find pain where we expected pleasure,"
"Here you mistake me."

Hence, whence and thence, denoting departure, etc., may be used without
the word from. The idea of from is included in the word
whence--therefore it is unnecessary to say "From whence."

Hither, thither and whither, denoting to a place, have generally been
superseded by here, there and where. But there is no good reason why
they should not be employed. If, however, they are used, it is
unnecessary to add the word to, because that is implied--"Whither are
you going?" "Where are you going?" Each of these sentences is complete.
To say, "Where are you going to?" is redundant.

Two negatives destroy each other, and produce an affirmative. "Nor did
he not observe them," conveys the idea that he did observe them.

But negative assertions are allowable. "His manners are not impolite,"
which implies that his manners are in some degree marked by politeness.

Instead of "Let you and I." say "Let you and me."

Instead of "I am not so tall as him," say "I am not so tall as he."

When asked "Who is there?" do not answer "Me," but "I,"

Instead of "For you and I," say "For you and me."

Instead of "Says I," say "I said."

Instead of "You are taller than me," say "You are taller than I."

Instead of "I ain't," or "I arn't," say "I am not."

Instead of "Whether I be present or no," say "Whether I be present or
not."

For "Not that I know on,"' say "Not that I know."

Instead of "Was I to do so," say "Were I to do so."

Instead of "I would do the same if I was him," say "I would do the same
if I were he."

Instead of "I had as lief go myself," say "I would as soon go myself,"
or "I would rather."

It is better to say "Six weeks ago" than "Six weeks back."

It is better to say "Since which time," than "Since when,"

It is better to say "I repeated it," than "I said so over again."

Instead of "He was too young to have suffered much," say "He was too
young to suffer much."

Instead of "Less friends," say "Fewer friends." Less refers to quantity.

Instead of  "A quantity of people," say "A number of people."

Instead of "He and they we know," say "Him and them."

Instead of "As far as I can see," say "So far as I can see."

Instead of "A new pair of gloves," say "A pair of new gloves."

Instead of "I hope you'll think nothing on it," say "I hope you'll think
nothing of it."

Instead of "Restore it back to me," say "Restore it to me."

Instead of "I suspect the veracity of his story," say "I doubt the truth
of his story."

Instead of "I seldom or ever see him," say "I seldom see him."

Instead of "I expected to have found him," say "1 expected to find him."

Instead of "Who learns you music?" say "Who teaches you music?"

Instead of "I never sing whenever I can help it," say "I never sing when
I can help it."

Instead of "Before I do that I must first ask leave," say "Before I do
that I must ask leave."

Instead of saying "The observation of the rule," say "The observance of
the rule,"

Instead of "A man of eighty years of age," say "A man eighty years old."

Instead of "Here lays his honored head," say "Here lies his honored
head."

Instead of "He died from negligence," say "He died through neglect," or
"in consequence of neglect."

Instead of "Apples are plenty," say "Apples are plentiful."

Instead of "The latter end of the year," say "The end, or the close, of
the year."

Instead of "The then government," say "The government of that age, or
century, or year, or time."

Instead of "A couple of chairs," say "Two chairs."

Instead of "They are united together in the bonds of matrimony," say
"They are united in matrimony," or "They are married,"   '.

Instead of "We travel slow," say "We travel slowly."

Instead of "He plunged down into the river," say "He plunged into the
river."

Instead of "He jumped from off the scaffolding," say "He jumped off the
scaffolding."

Instead of "He came the last of all," say "He came the last."

Instead of "universal," with reference to things that have any limit,
say "general," "generally approved," instead of "universally approved,"
"generally beloved," instead of "universally beloved."

Instead of "They ruined one another," say "They ruined each other,"

Instead of "If in case I succeed," say "If I succeed."

Instead of "A large enough room," say "A room large enough."

Instead of "I am slight in comparison to you," say "I am slight in
comparison with you."

Instead of "I went for to see him," say "I went to see him."

Instead of "The cake is all eat up," say "The cake is all eaten."

Instead of "Handsome is as handsome does," say "Handsome is who handsome
does."

Instead of "The book fell on the floor," say "The book fell to the
floor."

Instead of "His opinions are approved of by all," say "His opinions are
approved by all."

Instead of "I will add one more argument," say "I will add one argument
more," or "another argument."

Instead of "A sad curse is war," say "War is a sad curse."

Instead of "He stands six foot high," say "He measures six feet," or
"His height is six feet."

Instead of "I go every now and then," say "I go sometimes (or often)."

Instead of "Who finds him in clothes," say "Who provides him with
clothes."

Say "The first two," and "the last two" instead of "the two first" "the
two last."

Instead of "His health was drank with enthusiasm," say "His health was
drunk enthusiastically."

Instead of "Except I am prevented," say "Unless I am prevented."

Instead of "In its primary sense," say "In its primitive sense."

Instead of "It grieves me to see you," say "I am grieved to see you."

Instead of "Give me them papers," say "Give me those papers."

Instead of "Those papers I hold in my hand," say "These papers I hold in
my hand."

Instead of "I could scarcely imagine but what," say "I could scarcely
imagine that."

Instead of "He was a man notorious for his benevolence," say "He was
noted for his benevolence."

Instead of "She was a woman celebrated for her crimes," say "She was
notorious on account of her crimes."

Instead of "What may your name be?" say "What is your name?"

Instead of "I lifted it up," say "I lifted it."

Instead of "It is equally of the same value," say "It is of the same
value," or "equal value."

Instead of "I knew it previous to your telling me," say "I knew it
previously to your telling me."

Instead of "You was out when I called," say "You were out when I
called."

Instead of "I thought I should have won this game," say "I thought I
should win this game."

Instead of "This much is certain," say "Thus much is certain," or "So
much is certain."

Instead of "He went away as it may be yesterday week," say "He went away
yesterday week."

Instead of "He came the Saturday as it may be before the Monday,"
specify the Saturday on which he came.

Instead of "Put your watch in your pocket," say "Put your watch into
your pocket."

Instead of "He has got riches," say "He has riches."

Instead of "Will you set down?" say "Will you sit down?"

Instead of "No thankee," say "No, thank you."

Instead of "I cannot do it without farther means," say "I cannot do it
without further means."

Instead of "No sooner but," or "No other but," say "than."

Instead of "Nobody else but her," say "Nobody but her."

Instead of "He fell down from the balloon," say "He fell from the
balloon."

Instead of "He rose up from the ground," say "He rose from the ground."

Instead of "These kind of oranges are not good," say "This kind of
oranges is not good."

Instead of "Somehow or another," say "Somehow or other."

Instead of "Will I give you some more tea?" say "Shall I give you some
more tea?"

Instead of "Oh, dear, what will I do?" say "Oh, dear, what shall I do?"

Instead of "I think indifferent of it," say "I think indifferently of
it."

Instead of "I will send it conformable to your orders," say "I will send
it conformably to your orders."

Instead of "To be given away gratis," say "To be given away."

Instead of "Will you enter in?" say "Will you enter?"

Instead of "This three days or more," say "These three days or more."

Instead of "He is a bad grammarian," say "He is not a grammarian."

Instead of "We accuse him for." say "We accuse him of."

Instead of "We acquit him from," say "We acquit him of."

Instead of "I am averse from that," say "I am averse to that."

Instead of "I confide on you," say "I confide in you."

Instead of "As soon as ever." say "As soon as."

Instead of "The very best," or "The very worst," say "The best or the
worst."

Avoid such phrases as "No great shakes," "Nothing to boast of," "Down in
my boots," "Suffering from the blues." All such sentences indicate
vulgarity.

Instead of "No one hasn't called," say "No one has called."

Instead of "You have a right to pay me," say "It is right that you
should pay me."

Instead of "I am going over the bridge," say "I am going across the
bridge."

Instead of "I should just think I could," say "I think I can."

Instead of "There has been a good deal," say "There has been much."

Instead of "The effort you are making for meeting the bill," say "The
effort you are making to meet the bill."

To say "Do not give him no more of your money," is equivalent to saying
"Give him some of your money." Say "Do not give him any of your money."

Instead of saying "They are not what nature designed them," say "They
are not what nature designed them to be."

Instead of saying "I had not the pleasure of hearing his sentiments when
I wrote that letter," say "I had not the pleasure of having heard," etc.

Instead of "The quality of the apples were good," say "The quality of
the apples was good."

Instead of "The want of learning, courage and energy are more visible,"
say "is more visible."

Instead of "We die for want," say "We die of want."

Instead of "He died by fever," say "He died of fever."

Instead of "I enjoy bad health," say "My health is not good."

Instead of "Either of the three," say "Any one of the three."

Instead of "Better nor that," say "Better than that."

Instead of "We often think on you," say "We often think of you."

Instead of "Mine is so good as yours," say "Mine is as good as yours."

Instead of "This town is not as large as we thought," say "This town is
not so large as we thought."

Instead of "Because why?" say "Why?"

Instead of "That there boy," say "That boy."

Instead of "The subject-matter of debate," say "The subject of debate."

Instead of saying "When he was come back," say "When he had come back."

Instead of saying "His health has been shook," say "His health has been
shaken."

Instead of saying "It was spoke in my presence," say "It was spoken in
my presence."

Instead of "Very right," or "Very wrong," say "Right" or "Wrong."

Instead of "The mortgagor paid him the money," say "The mortgagee paid
him the money." The mortgagee lends; the mortgagor borrows.

Instead of "I took you to be another person," say "I mistook you for
another person."

Instead of "On either side of the river," say "On each side of the
river."

Instead of "There's fifty," say "There are fifty."

Instead of "The best of the two" say "The better of the two,"

Instead of "My clothes have become too small for me" say "I have grown
too stout for my clothes."

Instead of "Two spoonsful of physic," say "Two spoonfuls of physic."

Instead of "She said, says she," say "She said."

Avoid such phrases as "I said, says I," "Thinks I to myself," etc.

Instead of "I don't think so," say "I think not."

Instead of "He was in eminent danger," say "He was in imminent danger."

Instead of "The weather is hot," say "The weather is very warm."

Instead of "I sweat," say "I perspire."

Instead of "I only want two dollars," say "I want only two dollars."

Instead of "Whatsomever," say "Whatever," or "Whatsoever."

Avoid such exclamations as "God bless me!" "God deliver me!" "By God!"
"By Gosh!" "Holy Lord!" "Upon my soul!" etc., which are vulgar on the one
hand, and savor of impiety all the other, for--"Thou shalt not take the
name of the Lord thy God in vain."



ACCENT AND PRONUNCIATION.

Accent is a particular stress or force of the voice upon certain
syllables or words. This mark in printing denotes the syllable upon
which the stress or force of the voice should be placed.

A word may have more than one accent. Take as an instance aspiration. In
uttering the word we give a marked emphasis of the voice upon the first
and third syllables, and therefore those syllables are said to be
accented. The first of these accents is less distinguishable than the
second, upon which we dwell longer; therefore the second accent in point
of order is called the primary, or chief accent of the word.

When the full accent falls on a vowel, that vowel should have a long
sound, as in vo'cal; but when it falls on or after a consonant, the
preceding vowel has a short sound, as in hab'it.

To obtain a good knowledge of pronunciation it is advisable for the
reader to listen to the examples given by good speakers, and by educated
persons. We learn the pronunciation of words, to a great extent, by
imitation, just as birds acquire the notes of other birds which may be
near them.

But it will be very important to bear in mind that there are many words
having a double meaning or application, and that the difference of
meaning is indicated by the difference of the accent, Among these words,
nouns are distinguished from verbs by this means: nouns are mostly
accented on the first syllabic, and verbs on the last.

Noun signifies name; nouns are the names of persons and things, as well
as of things not material and palpable, but of which we have a
conception and knowledge, such as courage, firmness, goodness, strength;
and verbs express actions, movements, etc. If the word used signifies
has been done, or is being done, or is, or is to be done, then that word
is a verb.

Thus when we say that anything is "an in'sult," that word is a noun, and
is accented all the first syllable; but when we say he did it "to
insult' another person," that word insult' implies acting, and becomes a
verb, and should be accented on the last syllable.


Simple Rules of Pronunciation.

C before a, o and u, and in some other situations, is a close
articulation, like k. Before e, i and y, c is precisely equivalent to s
in same, this; as in cedar, civil, cypress, capacity.

E final indicates that the preceding vowel is long; as in hate, mete,
sire, robe, lyre, abate, recede, invite, remote, intrude.

E final indicates that c preceding has the sound of s; as in lace,
lance, and that g preceding has the sound of j, as in charge, page,
challenge.

E final in proper English words never forms a syllable, and in the most
used words in the terminating unaccented syllables it is silent. Thus,
motive, genuine, examine, granite, are pronounced motiv, genuin, examin,
granit.

E final, in a few words of foreign origin, forms a syllable; as syncope,
simile.

E final is silent after l in the following terminations: ble, cle, dle,
fle, gle, kle, ple, tle, zle; as in able, manacle, cradle, ruffle,
mangle, wrinkle, supple, rattle, puzzle, which are pronounced a'bl,
mana'cl, cra'dl, ruf'fl, man'gl, wrin'kl, sup'pl, puz'zl.

E is usually silent in the termination en; as in taken, broken;
pronounced takn, brokn. OUS, in the termination of adjectives and their
derivatives, is pronounced us; as is gracious, pious, pompously.

CE, CI, TI, before a vowel, have the sound of sh; as in cetaceous,
gracious, motion, partial, ingratiate;  pronounced cetashus, grashus,
moshun, parshal, ingrashiate.

SI, after an accented vowel, is pronounced like zh; as in Ephesian,
coufusion; pronounced Ephezhan, confushon.

GH, both in the middle and at the end of words is silent; as in caught,
bought, fright, nigh, sigh; pronounced caut, baut, frite, ni, si. In the
following exceptions, however, gh is pronounced as f: cough, chough,
clough, enough, laugh, rough, slough, tough, trough.

When WH begins a word, the aspirate h precedes w in pronunciation: as in
what, whiff, whale; pronounced hwat, hwiff, hwale, w having precisely
the sound of oo, French ou. In the following words w is silent:---who,
whom, whose, whoop, whole.

H after r has no sound or use; as in rheum, rhyme; pronounced reum,
ryme.

H should be sounded in the middle of words; as in forehead, abhor,
behold, exhaust, inhabit, unhorse.

H should always be sounded except in the following words:--heir, herb,
honest, honor, hour, humor, and humble, and all their derivatives,--such
as humorously, derived from humor.

K and G are silent before n; as know, gnaw; pronounced no, naw.

W before r is silent; as in wring, wreath; pronounced ring, reath.

B after m is silent; as in dumb, numb; pronounced dum, num.

L before k is silent; as in balk, walk, talk; pronounced bauk, wauk,
tauk.

PH has the sound of f; as in philosophy; pronounced  filosofy.

NG has two sounds, one as in singer, the other as in fin-ger.

N after m, and closing a syllable, is silent; as in hymn, condemn.

P before s and t is mute; as in psalm, pseudo, ptarmigan; pronounced
salm, sudo, tarmigan.

R has two sounds, one strong and vibrating, as at the beginning of words
and syllables, such as robber, reckon, error; the other is at the
termination of the words, or when succeeded by a consonant, as farmer,
morn.


Common Errors in Pronunciation.

--ace, is not iss, as furnace, not furniss.

--age, not idge, as cabbage, courage, postage, village.

--ain, ane, not in, as certain, certane, not certin.

--ate, not it, as moderate, not moderit.

--ect, not ec, as aspect, not aspec; subject, not subjec.

--ed, not id, or ud, as wicked, not wickid or wickud.

--el, not l, model, not modl; novel, not novl.

--en, not n, as sudden, not suddn.--Burden, burthen, garden, lengthen,
seven, strengthen, often, and a few others, have the e silent.

--ence, not unce, as influence, not influ-unce.

--es, not is, as pleases, not pleasis.

--ile should be pronounced il, as fertil, not fertile, in all words
except chamomile (cam), exile, gentile, infantile, reconcile, and
senile, which should be pronounced ile.

--in, not n, as Latin, not Latn.

--nd, not n, as husband, not husban; thousand, not thousan.

--ness, not niss, as carefulness, not carefulniss.

--ng, not n, as singing, not singin; speaking, not speakin.

--ngth, not nth, as strength, not strenth.

--son, the o should be silent; as in treason, tre-zn, not tre-son.

--tal, not tle, as capital, not capitle; metal, not mettle; mortal, not
mortle; periodical, not periodicle.

--xt, not x, as next, not nex.



SHORT RULES FOR SPELLING.

Words ending in e drop that letter on taking a suffix beginning with a
vowel. Exceptions--words ending in ge, ce, or oe.

Final e of a primitive word is retained on taking a suffix beginning
with a consonant. Exceptions--words ending in dge, and truly, duly, etc.

Final y of a primitive word, when preceded by a consonant, is generally
changed into i on the addition of a suffix. Exceptions--retained before
ing and ish, as pitying. Words ending in ie and dropping the e by Rule
1, change the i to y, as lying. Final y is sometimes changed to e, as
duteous.

Nouns ending in y, preceded by a vowel, form their plural by adding s; o
as money, moneys. Y preceded by a consonant is changed to ies in the
plural; as bounty, bounties.

Final y of a primitive vowel, preceded by a vowel, should not be changed
into i before a suffix; as, joyless.

In words containing ei or ie, ei is used after the sound s, as ceiling,
seize, except in siege and in a few words ending in cier. Inveigle,
neither, leisure and weird also have ei. In other cases ie is used, as
in believe, achieve.

Words ending in ceous or cious, when relating to matter, end in ceous;
all others in cious.

Words of one syllable, ending in a consonant; with a single vowel before
it, double the consonant in derivatives; as, ship, shipping, etc. But if
ending in a consonant with a double vowel before it, they do not double
the consonant in derivatives; as troop, trooper, etc.

Words of more than one syllable, ending in a consonant preceded by a
single vowel, and accented on the last syllable, double that consonant
in derivatives; as commit, committed; but except chagrin, chagrined;
kidnap, kidnaped.

All words of one syllable ending in l, with a single vowel before it,
have ll at the close; as mill, sell.

All words of one syllable ending in l, with a double vowel before it,
have only one l at the close: as mail, sail.

The words foretell, distill, instill and fulfill retain the double ll of
their primitives. Derivatives of dull, skill, will and full also retain
the double ll when the accent falls on these words; as dullness,
skillful, willful, fullness.



PUNCTUATION.

A period (.) after every declarative and every imperative sentence; as,
It is true. Do right.

A period is also used after every abbreviation; as, Dr., Mr., Capt.

An interrogation point (?) after every question.

The exclamation point (!) after exclamations; as, Alas! Oh, how lovely!

Quotation marks (" ") inclose quoted expressions; as Socrates said: "I
believe the soul is immortal."

A colon (:) is used between parts of a sentence that are subdivided by
semi-colons.

A colon is used before a quotation, enumeration, or observation, that is
introduced by as follows, the following, or any similar expression; as,
Send me the following: 10 doz. "Armstrong's Treasury," 25 Schulte's
Manual, etc.

A semicolon (;) between parts that are subdivided by commas.

The semicolon is used also between clauses or members that are
disconnected in sense; as, Man grows old; he passes away; all is
uncertain. When as, namely, that is, is used to introduce an example or
enumeration, a semicolon is put before it and a comma after it; as, The
night was cold; that is, for the time of year.

A comma is used to set off interposed words, phrases and subordinate
clauses not restrictive; as, Good deeds are never lost, though sometimes
forgotten.

A comma is used to set off transposed phrases and clauses, as, "When the
wicked entice thee, consent thou not."

A comma is used to set off interposed words, phrases and clauses; as,
Let us, if we can, make others happy.

A comma is used between similar or repeated words or phrases; as, The
sky, the water, the trees, were illumined with sunlight.

A comma is used to mark an ellipsis, or the omission of a verb or other
important word.

A comma is used to set off a short quotation informally introduced; as,
Who said, "The good die young"?

A comma is used whenever necessary to prevent ambiguity.

The marks of parenthesis ( ) are used to inclose an interpolation where
such interpolation is by the writer or speaker of the sentence in which
it occurs. Interpolations by an editor or by anyone other than the
author of the sentence should be inclosed in brackets--[ ].

Dashes (--) may be used to set off a parenthetical expression, also to
denote an interruption or a sudden change of thought or a significant
pause.



THE USE OF CAPITALS.

1. Every entire sentence should begin with a capital.

2. Proper names, and adjectives derived from these, should begin with a
capital.

3. All appellations of the Deity should begin with a capital.

4. Official and honorary titles begin with a capital.

5. Every line of poetry should begin with a capital.

6. Titles of books and the heads of their chapters and divisions are
printed in capitals.

7. The pronoun I, and the exclamation O, are always capitals.

8. The days of the week, and the months of the year, begin with
capitals.

9. Every quotation should begin with a capital letter.

10. Names of religious denominations begin with capitals.

11. In preparing accounts, each item should begin with a capital.

12. Any word of special importance may begin with a capital.



THE NAME OF GOD IN FIFTY LANGUAGES.

Hebrew, Eleah, Jehovah;
Chaldaic, Eiliah;
Assyrian, Eleah;
Syrian and Turkish, Alah;
Malay, Alla;
Arabic, Allah;
Languages of the Magi, Orsi;
Old Egyptian, Teut;
Modern Egyptian, Teun;
Armenian, Teuti;
Greek, Theos;
Cretan, Thios;
Aedian and Dorian, Ilos;
Latin, Deus;
Low Latin, Diex;
Celtic Gaelic, Diu;
French, Dieu;
Spanish, Dios;
Portuguese, Deos;
Old German, Diet;
Provencal, Diou;
Low Breton, Done;
Italian, Dio;
Irish, Dia;
Olotu, Deu;
German and Swiss, Gott;
Flemish, God;
Dutch, God;
English, God;
Teutonic, Goth;
Danish and Swedish, Gud;
Norwegian, Gud;
Slav, Buch;
Polish, Bog;
Polacca, Bung;
Lapp, Jubinal;
Finnish, Jumala;
Runic, As;
Zembilian, As;
Pannanlian, Istu;
Tartar, Magatai;
Coromandel, Brama;
Persian, Sire;
Chinese, Prussa;
Japanese, Goezer;
Madagascar, Zannar;
Peruvian, Puchecammae.



FACTS ABOUT SPONGES.
By Albert Hart.

Sponges belong to the animal kingdom, and the principal varieties used
commercially are obtained off the coasts of Florida and the West Indies;
the higher grades are from the Mediterranean Sea, and are numerous in
variety.

A sponge in its natural state is a different-looking object from what we
see in commerce, resembling somewhat the appearance of the jelly fish,
or a mass of liver, the entire surface being covered with a thin, slimy
skin, usually of a dark color, and perforated to correspond with the
apertures of the canals commonly called "holes of the sponge." The
sponge of commerce is, in reality, only the skeleton of a sponge. The
composition of this skeleton varies in the different kinds of sponges,
but in the commercial grades it consists of interwoven horny fibers,
among and supporting which are epiculae of silicious matter in greater
or less numbers, and having a variety of forms. The fibers consist of a
network of fibriles, whose softness and elasticity determine the
commercial quality of a given sponge. The horny framework is perforated
externally by very minute pores, and by a less number of larger
openings. These are parts of an interesting double canal system, an
external and an internal, or a centripetal and a centrifugal. At the
smaller openings on the sponge's surface channels begin, which lead into
dilated spaces. In these, in turn, channels arise, which eventually
terminate in the large openings. Through these channels or canals
definite currents are constantly maintained, which are essential to the
life of the sponge. The currents enter through the small apertures and
emerge through the large ones.

The active part of the sponge, that is, the part concerned in nutrition
and growth, is a soft, fleshy mass, partly filling the meshes and lining
the canals. It consists largely of cells having different functions;
some utilized in the formation of the framework, some in digestion and
others in reproduction. Lining the dilated spaces into which different
canals lead are cells surmounted by whip-like processes. The motion of
these processes produces and maintains the water currents, which carry
the minute food products to the digestive cells in the same cavities.
Sponges multiply by the union of sexual product. Certain cells of the
fleshy pulp assume the character of ova, and others that of spermatozoa.
Fertilization takes place within the sponge. The fertilized eggs, which
are called larvae, pass out into the currents of the water, and, in the
course of twenty-four to forty-eight hours, they settle and become
attached to rocks and other hard substances, and in time develop into
mature sponges. The depth of the water in which sponges grow varies from
10 to 50 feet in Florida, but considerably more in the Mediterranean
Sea, the finer grades being found in the deepest water, having a
temperature of 50 to 57 degrees.



DON'T BE BURIED ALIVE.

From time to time we are horrified by learning that some person has been
buried alive, after assurances have been given of death. Under these
circumstances the opinion of a rising French physician upon the subject
becomes of world-wide interest, for since the tests which have been in
use for years have been found unreliable no means should be left untried
to prove beyond a doubt that life is actually extinct before conveying
our loved ones to the grave.

Dr. Martinot, as reported in the New York Journal, asserts that an
unfailing test may be made by producing a blister on the hand or foot of
the body by holding the flame of a candle to the same for a few seconds,
or until the blister is formed which will always occur. If the blister
contains any fluid it is evidence of life, and the blister only that
produced by an ordinary burn. If, on the contrary, the blister contains
only steam, it may be asserted that life is extinct. The explanation is
as follows:

A corpse, says Dr. Martinot, is nothing more than inert matter, under
the immediate control of physical laws which cause all liquid heated to
a certain temperature to become steam; the epidermis is raised, the
blister produced; it breaks with a little noise, and the steam escapes.
But if, in spite of all appearances, there is any remnant of life, the
organic mechanism continues to be governed by physiological laws, and
the blister will contain serous matter, as in the case of any ordinary
burns.

The test is as simple as the proof is conclusive. Dry blister: death.
Liquid blister: life. Any one may try it; there is no error possible.



HOW TO SERVE WINE.

A fine dinner may be spoiled by not serving the proper wine at the
proper time and at the proper temperature.

A white wine (Sauterne, Riesling, Moselle, etc.) should be used from the
beginning of the meal to the time the roast or game comes on. With the
roast serve red wine, either claret or Burgundy.

Use sparkling wines after the roast.

With dessert, serve apricot cordial.

Never serve red wine with soup or fish, and never a white wine with
game.


Storage, Temperature, Etc.

Store your wines in the cellar at 50 to 60 degrees.

All bottles should lie flat so that the cork is continually moist.

This rule should be specially observed with sparkling wines. Sparkling
wine should be served ice cold.

Put the wine on the ice--not ice in the wine.

Serve red wine at only about 5 degrees cooler than the dining-room.

White wine should be about 15 degrees cooler than the temperature of the
room.



THE STEPS IN THE GROWTH OF AMERICAN LIBERTY.

MAGNA CHARTA.

About seven hundred years ago there was organized a movement which
resulted in the great charter of English liberty--a movement which
foreshadowed the battle of our American forefathers for political
independence. On the 25th of August, 1213, the prelates and Barons,
tiring of the tyranny and vacillation of King John, formed a council and
passed measures to secure their rights. After two years of contest, with
many vicissitudes, the Barons entered London and the King fled into
Hampshire. By agreement both parties met at Runnymede on the 9th of
June, 1215, and after several days' debate, on June 15, Magna Charta
(the Great Charter), the glory of England, was signed and sealed by the
sovereign. The Magna Charta is a comprehensive bill of rights, and,
though crude in form, and with many clauses of merely local value, its
spirit still lives and will live. Clear and prominent we find the motto,
"No tax without representation." The original document is in Latin and
contains sixty-one articles, of which the 39th and 40th, embodying the
very marrow of our own State constitutions, are here given as translated
in the English statutes:

"39. No freeman shall be taken or imprisoned or be disseised of his
freehold, or liberties or free customs, or be otherwise destroped
[damaged], nor will be press upon him nor seize upon him [condemn him]
but by lawful judgment of his peers or by the law of the land.

"40. We will sell to no man, we will not deny or defer to any man,
either right or justice."

The Great Charter recognizes a popular tribunal as a check on the
official judges and may be looked upon as the foundation of the writ of
Habeas Corpus. It provides that no one is to be condemned on rumor or
suspicion, but only on the evidence of witnesses. It affords protection
against excessive emercements, illegal distresses and various processes
for debts and service due to the crown. Fines are in all cases to be
proportionate to the magnitude of the offense, and even the villein or
rustic is not to be deprived of his necessary chattels. There are
provisions regarding the forfeiture of land for felony. The testamentary
power of the subject is recognized over part of his personal estate, and
the rest to be divided between his widow and children. The independence
of the church is also provided for. These are the most important
features of the Great Charter, which, exacted by men with arms in their
hands from a resisting king, occupies so conspicuous a place in history,
which establishes the supremacy of the law of England over the will of
the monarch, and which still forms the basis of English liberties.



THE MECKLENBURG DECLARATION

More than a year before the signing of the Declaration of Independence a
document was drawn up that was almost a model in phraseology and
sentiment of the great charter of American freedom. There are various
accounts of this matter, but the most trustworthy is this:

At a public meeting of the residents of Mecklenburg County, North
Carolina, held at Charlotte on the 20th of May, 1775, it was

"Resolved, That whenever directly or indirectly abetted, or in any way,
form or manner countenanced, the unchartered and dangerous invasion of
our rights, as claimed by Great Britain, is an enemy to our country--to
America--and to the inherent and inalienable rights of man.

"Resolved, That we, the citizens of Mecklenburg County, do hereby
dissolve the political bonds which have connected us to the mother
country, and hereby absolve ourselves from all allegiance to the British
crown, and abjure all political connection, contract or association with
that nation, which has wantonly trampled on our rights and liberties,
and inhumanly shed the blood of American patriots at Lexington.

"Resolved, That we do hereby declare ourselves a free and independent
people; are and of right ought to be a sovereign and self-governing
association, under the control of no power other than that of our God
and the general government of the Congress. To the maintenance of which
independence we solemnly pledge to each other our mutual cooperation,
our lives, our fortunes, and our sacred honor."

There are two other resolutions, concerning the militia and the
administration of the law, but these, having no present value, are here
omitted.



THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE.
In Congress, July 4, 1776.

When, in the course of human events, it becomes necessary for one people
to dissolve the political bonds which have connected them with another,
and to assume, among the powers of the earth, the separate and equal
station to which the laws of Nature and Nature's God entitle them, a
decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should
declare the causes which impel them to the separation.

We hold these truths to be self-evident: that all men are created equal;
that they are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights;
that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. That
to secure these rights, governments are instituted among men, deriving
their just powers from the consent of the governed; that whenever any
form of government becomes destructive of these ends, it is the right of
the people to alter or to abolish it, and to institute a new government,
laying its foundation on such principles, and organizing its powers in
such form as to them shall seem most likely to effect their safety and
happiness. Prudence, indeed, will dictate that governments long
established should not be changed for light and transient causes; and
accordingly all experience has shown that mankind are more disposed to
suffer, while evils are sufferable, than to right themselves by
abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed. But when a long train
of abuses and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same object, evinces
a design to reduce them under absolute despotism, it is their right, it
is their duty, to throw off such government, and to provide new guards
for their future security. Such has been the patient sufferance of these
colonies, and such is now the necessity which constrains them to alter
their former systems of government. The history of the present King of
Great Britain is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations, all
having in direct object the establishment of an absolute tyranny over
these States. To prove this, let facts be submitted to a candid world.

He has refused his assent to laws the most wholesome and necessary for
the public good.

He has forbidden his governors to pass laws of immediate and pressing
importance, unless suspended in their operation till his assent should
be obtained; and when so suspended, he has utterly neglected to attend
to them.

He has refused to pass other laws for the accommodation of large
districts of people, unless those people would relinquish the right of
representation in the legislature--a right inestimable to them,
formidable to tyrants only.

He has called together legislative bodies at places unusual,
uncomfortable, and distant from the depository of their public records,
for the sole purpose of fatiguing them into compliance with his
measures.

He has dissolved representative houses repeatedly, for opposing with
manly firmness his invasions on the rights of the people.

He has refused, for a long time after such dissolutions, to cause others
to be elected; whereby the legislative powers, incapable of
annihilation, have returned to the people at large, for their exercise,
the state remaining, in the meantime, exposed to all the dangers of
invasion from without, and convulsions within.

He has endeavored to prevent the population of these States; for that
purpose obstructing the laws for naturalization of foreigners, refusing
to pass others to encourage their migration hither, and raising
conditions of new appropriation of lands. He has obstructed the
administration of justice, by refusing his assent to laws establishing
judiciary powers.

He has made judges dependent on his will alone for the tenure of their
offices and the amount and payment of their salaries.

He has erected a multitude of new offices, and sent hither swarms of
officers, to harass our people, and to eat out their substance.

He has kept among us, in times of peace, standing armies, without the
consent of our legislatures.

He has affected to render the military independent of, and superior to,
the civil power.

He has combined with others to subject us to a jurisdiction foreign to
our constitution, and unacknowledged by our laws; giving his assent to
their acts of pretended legislation:

For quartering large bodies of armed troops among us. For protecting
them, by mock trial, from punishment for any murders which they should
commit on the inhabitants of these States.

For cutting off our trade with all parts of the world. For imposing
taxes on us without our consent.

For depriving us, in many cases, of the benefits of trial by jury.

For transporting us beyond the seas to be tried for pretended offenses.

For abolishing the free system of English laws in a neighboring
province, establishing therein an arbitrary government, and enlarging
its boundaries, so as to render it at once an example and fit instrument
for introducing the same absolute rule into these colonies.

For taking away our charters, abolishing our most valuable laws, and
altering, fundamentally, the forms of our governments.

For suspending our own legislatures and declaring themselves invested
with power to legislate for us in all cases whatsoever.

He has abdicated government here, by declaring us out of his protection,
and waging war against us.

He has plundered our seas, ravaged our coasts, burnt our towns, and
destroyed the lives of our people.

He is, at this time, transporting large armies of foreign mercenaries,
to complete the works of death, desolation and tyranny, already begun
with circumstances of cruelty and perfidy scarcely paralleled in the
most barbarous ages, and totally unworthy the head of a civilized
nation.

He has constrained our fellow-citizens, taken captive on the high seas,
to bear arms against their country, to become the executioners of their
friends and brethren, or to fall themselves by their hands.

He has excited domestic insurrection among us, and has endeavored to
bring on the inhabitants of our frontiers the merciless Indian savages,
whose known rule of warfare is an undistinguished destruction of all
ages, sexes and conditions.

In every stage of these oppressions we have petitioned for redress in
the most humble terms; our repeated petitions have been answered only by
repeated injury. A prince whose character is thus marked by every act
which may define a tyrant is unfit to be ruler of a free people.

Nor have we been wanting in attention to our British brethren. We have
warned them, from time to time, of attempts by their legislature to
extend an unwarrantable jurisdiction over us. We have reminded them of
the circumstances of our emigration and settlement here. We have
appealed to their native justice and magnanimity; and we have conjured
them, by the ties of our common kindred, to disavow these usurpations,
which would inevitably interrupt our connection and correspondence.
They, too, have been deaf to the voice of justice and of consanguinity.
We must, therefore, acquiesce in the necessity which denounces our
separation, and hold them, as we hold the rest of mankind, enemies in
war, in peace friends.

We, therefore, the representatives of the United States of America, in
general Congress assembled, appealing to the supreme Judge of the world
for the rectitude of our intentions, do, in the name and by the
authority of the good people of these colonies, solemnly publish and
declare that these United Colonies are, and of right ought to be, free
and independent States; that they are absolved from all allegiance to
the British crown, and that all political connection between them and
the state of Great Britain is, and ought to be, totally dissolved; and
that, as free and independent States, they have full power to levy war,
conclude peace, contract alliances, establish commerce and to do all
other acts and things which independent States may of right do. And for
the support of this declaration, with a firm reliance on the protection
of Divine Providence, we mutually pledge to each other our lives, our
fortunes and our sacred honor.

The foregoing declaration was, by order of the Congress, engrossed, and
signed by the following members:

JOHN HANCOCK

New Hampshire--Josiah Bartlett, William Whipple, Matthew Thornton.

Massachusetts Bay--Samuel Adams, John Adams, Robert Treat Paine,
Elbridge Gerry.

Rhode Island--Stephen Hopkins, William Ellery.

Connecticut--Roger Sherman, Samuel Huntington, William Williams, Oliver
Wolcott

New York--William Floyd, Philip Livingston, Francis Lewis, Lewis Morris.

New Jersey--Richard Stockton. John Witherspoon, Francis Hopkinson, John
Hart, Abraham Clark.

Pennsylvania--Robert Morris, Benjamin Rush, Benjamin Franklin, John
Morton, George Clymer, James Smith, George Taylor, James Wilson, George
Ross.

Delaware--Caesar Rodney, George Read, Thomas McKean.

Maryland--Samuel Chase, William Paco, Thomas Stone, Charles Carroll, of
Carrollton.

Virginia--George Wythe, Richard Henry Lee, Thomas Jefferson, Benjamin
Harrison, Thomas Nelson, Jr., Francis Lightfoot Lee, Carter Braxton.

North Carolina--William Hooper, Joseph Hewes, John Penn.

South Carolina--Edward Rutledge, Thomas Heyward, Jr., Thomas Lynch, Jr.,
Arthur Middleton.

Georgia--Button Gwinett, Lyman Hall, George Walton.


The following clause formed part of the original Declaration of
Independence as signed, but was finally left out of the printed copies
"out of respect to South Carolina":

"He [King George III.] has waged cruel war against human nature itself,
violating its most sacred rights of life and liberty in the persons of a
distant people who never offended him, captivating and carrying them
into slavery in another hemisphere or to incur miserable death in their
transportation thither."



THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES.

We, the people of the United States, in order to form a more perfect
union, establish justice, insure domestic tranquillity, provide for the
common defense, promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of
liberty to ourselves and our posterity, do ordain and establish this
Constitution for the United States of America.

Article I.

SECTION I.

1. All legislative powers herein granted shall be vested in a Congress
of the United States, which shall consist of a Senate and House of
Representatives.

SECTION II.

1. The House of Representatives shall be composed of members chosen
every second year by the people of the several States; and the electors
in each State shall have the qualifications requisite for electors of
the most numerous branch of the State legislature.

2. No person shall be a representative who shall not have attained to
the age of twenty-five years, and have been seven years a citizen of the
United States, and who shall not, when elected, be an inhabitant of that
State in which he shall be chosen.

3. Representative and direct taxes shall be apportioned among the
several States which may be included within this Union, according to
their respective numbers, which shall be determined by adding to the
whole number of free persons, including those bound to service for a
term of years, and excluding Indians not taxed, three-fifths of all
other persons. The actual enumeration shall be made within three years
after the first meeting of the Congress of the United States, and within
every subsequent term of ten years, in such manner as they shall by law
direct. The number of representatives shall not exceed one for every
thirty thousand, but each State shall have at least one representative;
and until such enumeration shall be made, the State of New Hampshire
shall be entitled to choose three; Massachusetts, eight; Rhode Island
and Providence Plantations, one; Connecticut, five; New York, six; New
Jersey, four; Pennsylvania, eight; Delaware, one; Maryland, six;
Virginia, ten; North Carolina, five; South Carolina, five, and Georgia,
three.

4. When vacancies happen in the representation from any State, the
executive authority thereof shall issue writs of election to fill such
vacancies.

5. The House of Representatives shall choose their speaker and other
officers; and shall have the sole power of impeachment.

SECTION III.

1. The Senate of the United States shall be composed of two senators
from each State, chosen by the legislature thereof, for six years; and
each senator shall have one vote.

2. Immediately after they shall be assembled in consequence of the first
election, they shall be divided as equally as may be into three classes.
The seats of the senators of the first class shall be vacated at the
expiration of the second year, of the second class at the expiration of
the fourth year, and of the third class at the expiration of the sixth
year, so that one-third may be chosen every second year; and if
vacancies happen by resignation, or otherwise, during the recess of the
legislature of any State, the executive thereof may make temporary
appointments until the next meeting of the legislature, which shall then
fill such vacancies.

3. No person shall be a senator who shall not have attained to the age
of thirty years, and been nine years a citizen of the United States, and
who shall not, when elected, be an inhabitant of that State for which he
shall be chosen.

4. The Vice-President of the United States shall be president of the
Senate, but shall have no vote unless they be equally divided.

5. The Senate shall choose their other officers, and also a president
pro tempore, in the absence of the Vice-President, or when he shall
exercise the office of President of the United States.

6. The Senate shall have the sole power to try all impeachments. When
sitting for that purpose they shall be on oath or affirmation. When the
President of the United States is tried, the Chief Justice shall
preside; and no person shall be convicted without the concurrence of
two-thirds of the members present.

7. Judgment, in cases of impeachment, shall not extend further than to
removal from office, disqualification to hold and enjoy any office of
honor, trust or profit under the United States; but the party convicted
shall nevertheless be liable and subject to indictment, trial, judgment
and punishment, according to law.

SECTION IV.

1. The times, places and manner of holding elections for senators and
representatives shall be prescribed in each State by the legislature
thereof; but the Congress may at any time by law make or alter such
regulations, except as to the places of choosing senators.

2. The Congress shall assemble at least once in every year; and such
meeting shall be on the first Monday in December, unless they shall by
law appoint a different day.

SECTION V.

1. Each house shall be the judge of the election, returns and
qualifications of its own members, and a majority of each shall
constitute a quorum to do business; but a smaller number may adjourn
from day to day and may be authorized to compel the attendance of absent
members, in such manner and under such penalties as each house may
provide.

2. Each house may determine the rules of its proceedings, punish its
members for disorderly behavior, and, with the concurrence of
two-thirds, expel a member.

3. Each house shall keep a journal of its proceedings, and from time to
time publish the same, excepting such parts as in their judgment require
secrecy; and the yeas and nays of the members of either house on any
question shall, at the desire of one-fifth of those present, be entered
on the journal.

4. Neither house, during the Session of Congress, shall, without the
consent of the other, adjourn for more than three days, nor to any other
place than that in which the two houses shall be sitting.

SECTION VI.

1. The senators and representatives shall receive a compensation for
their services, to be ascertained by law, and paid out of the treasury
of the United States. They shall, in all cases, except treason, felony,
and breach of peace, be privileged from arrest during their attendance
at the session of their respective houses, and in going to and returning
from the same; and for any speech or debate in either house they shall
not be questioned in any other place.

2. No senator or representative shall, during the time for which he was
elected, be appointed to any civil office under the authority of the
United States, which shall have been created, or the emoluments whereof
shall have been increased, during such time; and no person holding any
office under the United States shall be a member of either house during
his continuance in office.

SECTION VII.

1. All bills for raising revenue shall originate in the House of
Representatives; but the Senate may propose or concur with amendments as
on other bills.

2. Every bill which shall have passed the House of Representatives and
the Senate, shall, before it becomes a law, be presented to the
President of the United States; if he approve he shall sign it, but if
not he shall return it, with his objections, to that house in which it
shall have originated, who shall enter the objections at large on their
journal, and proceed to reconsider it. If, after such reconsideration,
two-thirds of that house shall agree to pass the bill, it shall be sent,
together with the objections, to the other house, by which it shall
likewise be reconsidered, and if approved by two-thirds of that house,
it shall become a law. But in all such cases the votes of both houses
shall be determined by yeas and nays, and the names of the persons
voting for or against the bill be entered on the journal of each house
respectively. If any bill shall not be returned by the President within
ten days (Sundays excepted) after it shall have been presented to him,
the same shall be a law in like manner as if he had signed it, unless
the Congress, by their adjournment, prevent its return, in which case it
shall not be a law.

3. Every order, resolution or vote to which the concurrence of the
Senate and the House of Representatives may be necessary (except on a
question of adjournment) shall be presented to the President of the
United States; and before the same shall take effect, shall be approved
by him, or, being disapproved by him, shall be repassed by two-thirds of
the Senate and House of Representatives, according to the rules and
limitations prescribed in the case of a bill.

SECTION VIII.

The Congress shall have power--

1. To lay and collect taxes, duties, imposts and excises to pay the
debts and provide for the common defense and general welfare of the
United States; but all duties, imposts and excises shall be uniform
throughout the United States;

2. To borrow money on the credit of the United States;

3. To regulate commerce with foreign nations, and among the several
States, and with the Indian tribes;

4. To establish a uniform rule of naturalization, and uniform laws on
the subject of bankruptcies throughout the United States;

5. To coin money, regulate the value thereof, and of foreign coin, and
fix the standard of weights and measures;

6. To provide for the punishment of counterfeiting the securities and
current coin of the United States;

7. To establish post-offices and post-roads;

8. To promote the progress of science and useful arts, by securing for
limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right to their
respective writings and discoveries;

9. To constitute tribunals inferior to the Supreme Court;

10. To define and punish piracies and felonies committed on the high
seas, and offenses against the law of nations;

11. To declare war, grant letters of marque and reprisal, and make rules
concerning captures on land and water;

12. To raise and support armies, but no appropriation of money to that
use shall be for a longer term than two years;

13. To provide and maintain a navy;

14. To make rules for the government and regulation of the land and
naval forces;

15. To provide for calling forth the militia to execute the laws of the
Union, suppress insurrections and repel invasions;

16. To provide for organizing, arming and disciplining the militia, and
for governing such part of them as may be employed in the service of the
United States, reserving to the States, respectively, the appointment of
the officers, and the authority of training the militia according to the
discipline prescribed by Congress;

17. To exercise exclusive legislation, in all cases whatsoever, over
such district (not exceeding ten miles square) as may, by cession of
particular States, and the acceptance of Congress, become the seat of
the government of the United States, and to exercise like authority over
all places purchased by the consent of the legislature of the State in
which the same shall be, for the erection of forts, magazines, arsenals,
dock-yards, and other needful buildings;

And to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying
into execution the foregoing powers, and all other powers vested by the
Constitution in the Government of the United States, or in any
department or officer thereof.

SECTION IX

1. The migration or importation of such persons as any of the States now
existing shall think proper to admit shall not be prohibited by the
Congress prior to the year one thousand eight hundred and eight, but a
tax or duty may be imposed on such importation, not exceeding ten
dollars for each person.

2. The privilege of the writ of Habeas Corpus shall not be suspended,
unless when, in cases of rebellion or invasion, the public safety may
require it.

3. No bill of attainder or ex post facto law shall be passed.

4. No capitation or other direct tax shall be laid, unless in proportion
to the census or enumeration hereinbefore directed to be taken.

5. No tax or duty shall be laid on articles exported from any State.

6. No preference shall be given by any regulation of commerce or revenue
to the ports of one State over those or another; nor shall vessels bound
to or from one State be obliged to enter, clear, or pay duties in
another.

7. No money shall be drawn from the treasury but in consequence of
appropriations made by law; and a regular statement and account of the
receipts and expenditures of all public moneys shall be published from
time to time.

8. No title of nobility shall be granted by the United States; and no
person holding any office of profit or trust under them shall, without
the consent of the Congress, accept of any present, emolument, office or
title of any kind whatever, from any king, prince or foreign state.

SECTION X.

1. No State shall enter into any treaty, alliance, or confederation;
grant letters of marque and reprisal; coin money; emit bills of credit;
make anything but gold and silver coin a tender in payment of debts;
pass any bill of attainder, ex post facto law, or law impairing the
obligation of contracts, or grant any title of nobility.

2. No State shall, without the consent of the Congress, lay any impost
or duties on imports or exports, except what may be absolutely necessary
for executing its inspection laws; and the net produce of an duties and
imposts laid by any State on imports or exports shall be for the use of
the treasury of the United States; and all such laws shall be subject to
the revision and control of the Congress. No State shall, without the
consent of the Congress, lay any duty of tonnage, keep troops or ships
of war in time of peace, enter into any agreement or compact with
another State, or with a foreign power, or engage in war, unless
actually invaded, or in such imminent danger as will not admit of delay.

Article II.

SECTION I.

1. The executive power shall be vested in a President of the United
States of America. He shall hold his office during the term of four
years; and, together with the Vice-President chosen for the same term,
be elected as follows:

2. Each State shall appoint, in such manner as the legislature thereof
may direct, a number of electors equal to the whole number of senators
and representatives to which the State may be entitled in the Congress;
but no senator or representative, or person holding an office of trust
or profit under the United States, shall be appointed an elector.

3. The electors shall meet in their respective States, and vote by
ballot for two persons, of whom one at least shall not be an inhabitant
of the same State with themselves. And they shall make a list of all the
persons voted for and of the number of votes for each; which list they
shall sign and certify, and transmit sealed to the seat of government of
the United States, directed to the President of the Senate. The
President of the Senate shall, in the presence of the Senate and House
of Representatives, open all the certificates, and the votes shall then
be counted. The person having the greatest number of votes shall be the
President, if such number be a majority of the whole number of electors
appointed; and if there be more than one who have such a majority, and
have an equal number of votes, then the House of Representatives shall
immediately choose, by ballot, one of them for President, and if no
person have a majority, then, from the five highest on the list, the
said House shall, in like manner, choose the President. But in choosing
the President the votes shall be taken by States, the representation
from each State having one vote; a quorum for this purpose shall consist
of a member or members from two-thirds of all the States, and a majority
of all the States shall be necessary to a choice. In every case, after
the choice of the President, the person having the greatest number of
votes of the electors shall be the Vice-President. But if there should
remain two or more who have equal votes, the Senate shall choose from
them, by ballot, the Vice-President.

4. The Congress may determine the time of choosing the electors, and the
day on which they shall give their votes, which day shall be the same
throughout the United States.

5. No person, except a natural-born citizen, or a citizen of the United
States at the time of the adoption of this Constitution, shall be
eligible to the office of President; neither shall any person be
eligible to that office who shall not have attained the age of
thirty-five years, and been fourteen years a resident within the United
States.

6. In case of the removal of the President from office, or of his death,
resignation, or inability to discharge the powers and duties of said
office, the same shall devolve on the Vice-President; and the Congress
may, by law, provide for the case of removal, death, resignation or
inability, both of the President and Vice-President, declaring what
officer shall then act as President; and such officer shall act
accordingly, until the disability be removed, or a President shall be
elected.

7. The President shall, at stated times, receive for his services a
compensation, which shall neither be increased nor diminished during the
period for which he shall have been elected; and he shall not receive
within that period any other emoluments from the United States, or any
of them.

8. Before he enter on the execution of his office, he shall take the
following oath or affirmation:

"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully execute the
office of President of the United States; and will, to the best of my
ability, preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the United
States."

SECTION II.

1. The President shall be commander-in-chief of the army and navy of the
United States, and of the militia of the several States, when called
into the actual service of the United States. He may require the
opinion, in writing, of the principal officer in each of the executive
departments, upon any subject relating to the duties of their respective
offices, and he shall have power to grant reprieves and pardons for
offenses against the United States, except in cases of impeachment.

2. He shall have power, by and with the advice and consent of the
Senate, to make treaties, provided two-thirds of the Senators present
concur; and he shall nominate, and, by and with the advice and consent
of the Senate, shall appoint embassadors, other public ministers and
consuls, judges of the Supreme Court, and all other officers of the
United States whose appointments are not herein otherwise provided for,
and which shall be established by law. But the Congress may, by law,
vest the appointment of such inferior officers as they think proper in
the President alone, in the courts of law, or in the heads of
departments.

3. The President shall have power to fill all vacancies that may happen
during the recess of the Senate, by granting commissions which shall
expire at the end of their next session.

SECTION III.

1. He shall, from time to time, give to the Congress information of the
state of the Union, and recommend to their consideration such measures
as he shall judge necessary and expedient. He may, on extraordinary
occasions, convene both houses, or either of them; and in case of
disagreement between them, with respect to the time of adjournment, he
may adjourn them to such time as he shall think proper. He shall receive
embassadors and other public ministers. He shall take care that the laws
be faithfully executed; and shall commission all officers of the United
States.

SECTION IV.

1. The President, Vice-President and all civil officers of the United
States shall be removed from office on impeachment for, and conviction
of, treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors.

Article III.

SECTION I

1. The judicial power of the United States shall be vested in one
Supreme Court and in such inferior courts as Congress may from time to
time ordain and establish. The judges both of the Supreme and inferior
courts shall hold their offices during good behavior; and shall, at
stated times, receive for their services a compensation which shall not
be diminished during their continuance of office.

SECTION II.

1. The judicial power shall extend to all cases in law and equity
arising under this Constitution, the laws of the United States, and
treaties made, or which shall be made, under their authority; to all
cases affecting embassadors, other public ministers and consuls; to all
cases of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction; to controversies to which
the United States shall be a party; to controversies between two or more
States, between a State and citizens of another State, between citizens
of different States, between citizens of the same State claiming lands
under grants of different States, and between a State, or the citizens
thereof, and foreign states, citizens, or subjects.

2. In all cases affecting embassadors, other public ministers and
consuls, and those in which a State shall be a party, the Supreme Court
shall have original jurisdiction. In all the other cases mentioned, the
Supreme Court shall have appellate jurisdiction, both as to law and
fact, with such exceptions and under such regulations as the Congress
shall make.

3. The trial of all crimes, except in cases of impeachment, shall be by
jury, and such trial shall be held in the State where the said crime
shall have been committed; but when not committed within any State, the
trial shall be at such place or places as the Congress may by law have
directed.

SECTION III.

l. Treason against the United States shall consist only in levying war
against them or in adhering to their enemies, giving them aid and
comfort. No person shall be convicted of treason unless on the testimony
of two witnesses to the same overt act, or on confession in open court.

2. The Congress shall have power to declare the punishment of treason;
but no attainder of treason shall work corruption of blood, or
forfeiture, except during the life of the person attainted.

Article IV.

SECTION I.

1. Full faith and credit shall be given in each State to the public
acts, records and judicial proceedings of every other State; and the
Congress may, by general laws, prescribe the manner in which such acts,
records and proceedings shall be proved, and the effect thereof.

SECTION II. 1. The citizens of each State shall be entitled to all
privileges and immunities of citizens in the several States.

2. A person charged in any State with treason, felony, or other crime,
who shall flee from justice, and be found in another State, shall, on
demand of the executive authority of the State from which he fled, be
delivered up to be removed to the State having jurisdiction of the
crime.

3. No person held to service or labor in one State under the laws
thereof, escaping into another, shall, in consequence of any laws or
regulations therein, be discharged from such service or labor; but shall
be delivered up on claim of the party to whom such service or labor may
be due.

SECTION III.

1. New States may be admitted by the Congress into this Union; but no
new State shall be formed or erected within the jurisdiction of any
other State, nor any State be formed by the junction of two or more
States or parts of States, without the consent of the legislatures of
the States concerned, as well as of Congress.

2. The Congress shall have power to dispose of, and make all needful
rules and regulations respecting the territory or other property
belonging to the United States; and nothing in this Constitution shall
be so construed as to prejudice any claim of the United States, or of
any particular State.

SECTION IV.

1. The United States shall guarantee to every State in this Union a
republican form of government, and shall protect each of them against
invasion; and, on application of the legislature, or of the executive
(when the legislature cannot be convened), against domestic violence.

Article V.

1. The Congress, whenever two-thirds of both houses shall deem it
necessary, shall propose amendments to this Constitution; or, on the
application of the legislatures of two-thirds of the several States,
shall call a convention for proposing amendments, which, in either case,
shall be valid to all intents and purposes as part of this Constitution,
when ratified by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several
States, or by conventions in three-fourths thereof, as the one or the
other mode of ratification may be proposed by the Congress; provided,
that no amendment which may be made prior to the year one thousand eight
hundred and eight shall in any manner affect the first and fourth
clauses in the ninth section of the fifth article; and that no State,
without its consent, shall be deprived of its equal suffrage in the
Senate.

Article VI.

1. All debts contracted and engagements entered into before the adoption
of this Constitution shall be as valid against the United States under
this Constitution as under the Confederation.

2. This Constitution, and the laws of the United States which shall be
made in pursuance thereof, and all treaties made, or which shall be
made, under the authority of the United States, shall be the supreme law
of the land; and the judges of every State shall be bound thereby,
anything in the Constitution or laws of any State to the contrary
notwithstanding.

3. The senators and representatives before mentioned, and the members of
the several State legislatures, and all executive and judicial officers,
both of the United States and the several States, shall be bound by oath
or affirmation to support this Constitution; but no religious test shall
ever be required as a qualification to any office or public trust under
the United States.

Article VII.

1. The ratification of the convention of nine States shall be sufficient
for the establishment of this Constitution between the States so
ratifying the same. Done in convention by the unanimous consent of the
States present, the seventeenth day of December, in the year of our Lord
one thousand seven hundred and eighty-seven, and of the Independence of
the United States of America the twelfth. In witness whereof we have
hereunto subscribed our names.

GEORGE WASHINGTON,
President, and Deputy from Virginia.


AMENDMENTS.

Article I.

Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or
prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of
speech or of the press, or the right of the people peaceably to
assemble, and to petition the government for a redress of grievance.

Article II.

A well regulated militia being necessary to the security of a free
state, the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be
infringed.

Article III.

No soldier shall, in time of peace, be quartered in any house without
the consent of the owner, nor in time of war, but in a manner to be
prescribed by law.

Article IV.

The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers
and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be
violated; and no warrants shall issue but upon probable cause, supported
by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be
searched, and the persons or things to be seized.

Article V.

No person shall be held to answer for a capital or otherwise infamous
crime, unless on a presentment or indictment of a grand jury, except in
cases arising in the land or naval forces, or in the militia, when in
actual service in time of war or public danger; nor shall any person be
subject for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy of life or
limb, nor shall be compelled, in any criminal case, to be a witness
against himself, nor be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without
due process of law; nor shall private property be taken for public use,
without just compensation.

Article VI.

In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a
speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury of the State and district
wherein the crime shall have been committed, which district shall have
been previously ascertained by law; and to be informed of the nature and
cause of the accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses against
him; to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor,
and to have the assistance of counsel for his defense.

Article VII.

In suits at common law, where the value in controversy shall exceed
twenty dollars, the right of trial by jury shall be preserved; and no
fact tried by a jury shall be otherwise reexamined, in any court of the
United States, than according to the rules of the common law.

Article VIII.

Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor
cruel and unusual punishment inflicted.

Article IX.

The enumeration in the Constitution of certain rights shall not be
construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people.

Article X.

The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor
prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively,
or to the people. [The preceding ten amendatory articles were proposed
to the legislatures of the States by the first Congress, September 25,
1789, and notification of ratification received from all the States
except Connecticut, Georgia and Massachusetts.]

Article XI.

The judicial power of the United States shall not be construed to extend
to any suit in law or equity commenced or prosecuted against one of the
United States by citizens or subjects of any foreign state.

[Proposed by the Third Congress, and Congress notified of its adoption
January 8, 1798.]

Article XII.

1. The electors shall meet in their respective States, and vote by
ballot for President and Vice-President, one of whom, at least, shall
not be an inhabitant of the same State with themselves. They shall name
in their ballots the person voted for as President, and in distinct
ballots the person voted for as Vice-President; and they shall make
distinct lists of all persons voted for as President, and of all persons
voted for as Vice-President; and of the number of votes for each; which
lists they shall sign and certify, and transmit sealed to the seat of
government of the United States, directed to the President of the
Senate. The President of the Senate shall, in the presence of the Senate
and House of Representatives, open the certificates, and the votes shall
then be counted. The person having the greatest number of votes for
President shall be the President, if such number be a majority of the
whole number of electors appointed; and if no person have such majority,
then from the persons having the highest numbers, not exceeding three,
on the list of those voted for as President, the House of
Representatives shall choose immediately, by ballot, the President. But,
in choosing the President, the votes shall be taken by States, the
representation from each State having one vote; a quorum for this
purpose shall consist of a member or members from two-thirds of the
States, and a majority of all the States shall be necessary to a choice.
And if the House of Representatives shall not choose a President
whenever the right of choice shall devolve upon them, before the fourth
day of March next following, then the Vice-President shall act as
President, as in the case of the death or other constitutional
disability of the President.

2. The person having the greatest number of votes as Vice-President
shall be the Vice-President, if such number be a majority of the whole
number of electors appointed, and if no person have a majority, then
from the two highest numbers on the list the Senate shall choose the
Vice-President. A quorum for the purpose shall consist of two-thirds of
the whole number of senators, and a majority of the whole number shall
be necessary to a choice.

3. But no person constitutionally ineligible to the office of President
shall be eligible to that of Vice-President of the United Stales.

[Proposed by the Eighth Congress, and declared adopted September 23,
1804, by proclamation of the Secretary of State.]

Article XIII.

1. Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except as a punishment for
crime, whereof the party shall have been duly convicted, shall exist
within the United States, or any place subject to their jurisdiction.

2. Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate
legislation.

[Proposed by the Thirty-eighth Congress, and declared adopted December
18, 1865, by proclamation of the Secretary of State.]

Article XIV.

SECTION I.

All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the
jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the State
wherein they reside. No State shall make or enforce any law which shall
abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States,
nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property,
without due process or law, nor deny to any person within its
jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.

SECTION II. Representatives shall be apportioned among the several
States according to their respective numbers, counting the whole number
of persons in each State, excluding Indians not taxed. But when the
right to vote at any election for the choice of electors for President
and Vice-President of the United States, representatives in Congress,
the executive and judicial officers of a State, or the members of the
legislature thereof, is denied to any of the male inhabitants of such
State, being twenty-one years of age, and citizens of the United
States, or in any way abridged, except for participation in rebellion or
other crime, the basis of representation therein shall be reduced in the
proportion which the number of such male citizens shall bear to the
whole number of male citizens twenty-one years of age in such State.

SECTION III. No person shall be a senator or representative in Congress,
or elector of President and Vice-President, or hold any office, civil or
military, under the United States, or under any State, who, having
previously taken an oath as a member of Congress, or as an officer of
the United States, or as a member of any State legislature, or as an
executive or judicial officer of any State, to support the Constitution
of the United States, shall have engaged in insurrection or rebellion
against the same, or given aid or comfort to the enemies thereof; but
Congress may, by a vote of two-thirds of each house, remove such
disability.

SECTION IV. The validity of the public debt of the United States,
authorized by law, including debts incurred for payment of pensions and
bounties for services in suppressing insurrection or rebellion, shall
not be questioned. But neither the United States nor any State shall
assume or pay any debt or obligation incurred in aid of insurrection or
rebellion against the United States, or any claim for the loss or
emancipation of any slave; but all such debts, obligations and claims
shall be held illegal and void.

SECTION V. The Congress shall have power to enforce, by appropriate
legislation, the provisions of this article.

[Proposed by the Thirty-ninth Congress and declared adopted by concurrent
resolution of Congress, July 21, 1868.]

Article XV.

SECTION I.

The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied
or abridged by the United States, or any State, on account of race,
color or previous condition of servitude.

SECTION II.

The Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate
legislation.

[Proposed by the Fortieth Congress, and declared adopted by proclamation
of the Secretary of State, March 30, 1870.]



WORKINGMEN EASILY GULLED.

Who fought for King George in 1776? Working people.

What interest did they have in being ruled by him? None.

Why, then, did they risk their lives for him? Because he hired them.

Where did the king get the money to pay them? By taxing them.

Then they really paid themselves for fighting? Certainly.

In every war ever fought the working people paid the expenses.



"WHAT constitutes a state?
Men who their duties know,
But know their rights, and, knowing,
Dare maintain."
--Jones.



JEFFERSON'S POLITICAL POLICY.

1. Legal equality of all human beings.

2. The people the only source of power.

3. No hereditary offices, nor order of "nobility," nor title.

4. No unnecessary taxation.

5. No national banks or bonds.

6. No costly splendor of administration.

7. Freedom of thought and discussion.

8. Civil authority superior to the military.

9. No favored classes; no special privileges; no monopolies.

10. Free and fair elections; universal suffrage.

11. No public money spent without warrant of law.

12. No mysteries in government hidden from the public eye.

13. Representatives bound by the instructions of their constituents.

14. The Constitution of the United States a special grant of powers
limited and definite.

15. Freedom, sovereignty and independence of the respective States.

16. Absolute severance of Church and State.

17. The Union a compact--not a consolidation nor a centralization.

18. Moderate salaries, economy and strict accountability.

19. Gold and silver currency--supplemented by treasury notes bearing no
interest and bottomed on taxes.

20. No State banks of issue.

21. No expensive navy or diplomatic establishment.

22. A progressive or graduated tax laid upon wealth.

23. No internal revenue system. A complete separation of public moneys
from bank funds.



PRESIDENTS OF THE UNITED STATES.

Declaration of Independence   July 4th, 1776

General Washington, first President.   1789 and 1793

John Adams   1797

Thomas Jefferson   1801 and 1805

James Madison   1809 and 1813

James Monroe   1817 and 1821

John Quincy Adams   1825

General Andrew Jackson   1829 and 1833

Martin Van Buren   1837

General William Henry Harrison (died 4th April)  1841

John Tyler (elected as Vice-President).   1841

James Knox Polk   1845

General Zachary Taylor (died 9th July, 1850)   1849

Millard Fillmore (elected as Vice-President)  1850

General Franklin Pierce   1853

James Buchanan   1857

Abraham Lincoln (assassinated 14th April, 1865)   1861 and 1865

Andrew Johnson (elected as Vice-President)    1865

General Ulysses S. Grant  1869 and 1873

Rutherford B. Hayes   1877

General J. Abram Garfield (died 19th September, 1881)   1881

General Chester A. Arthur (elected as V. Pres.)   1881

Grover Cleveland   1885

Benjamin H. Harrison   1889

Grover Cleveland   1893

William McKinley (elected)   1897

(Re-elected)  1901

(Assassinated September 14, 1901)

Theodore Roosevelt (elected Vice-President)  1901

(Became President September 14)  1901

Theodore Roosevelt (elected)   1905

Wm. H. Taft   1909



FACTS ABOUT THE LIBERTY BELL.

Cast by Thomas Lester, Whitechapel, London.

Arrived in Philadelphia in August, 1752.

First used in statehouse, Philadelphia, Aug. 27, 1752.

Twice recast by Pass & Snow, Philadelphia, to repair crack, September,
1752.

Muffled and tolled Oct. 5, 1765, on arrival of ship Royal Charlotte with
stamps.

Muffled and tolled Oct. 31, 1765, when stamp act was put in operation.

Summoned meeting to prevent landing of cargo of tea from the ship Polly
Dec. 27, 1774.

Summoned meeting of patriots April 25, 1775, after battle of Lexington.

Proclaimed declaration of independence and the birth of a new nation at
great ratification meeting July 8, 1776.

First journey from Philadelphia made in September, 1777, to Allentown,
Pa., to escape capture by the British; returned June 27, 1778.

Proclaimed treaty of peace April 16, 1783.

Tolled for the death of Washington Dec. 26, 1799.

Rung on the fiftieth anniversary of the declaration of independence July
4, 1826.

Last used in tolling for the death of John Marshall July 8, 1835,

Principal tours: To New Orleans in 1885; Chicago, 1893; Atlanta, 1895;
Boston, 1902; St Louis, 1904.



HOW THE PRESIDENTS DIED.

George Washington's death was the result of a severe cold contracted
while riding around his farm in a rain and sleet storm on Dec. 10, 1799.
The cold increased and was followed by a chill, which brought on acute
laryngitis. He died at the age of 68, on Dec. 14, 1799.

John Adams died from old age, having reached his ninety-first milestone.
Though active mentally, he was nearly blind and unable to hold a pen
steadily enough to write. He passed away without pain on July 4, 1826.

Thomas Jefferson died at the age of eighty-three, a few hours before
Adams, on July 4, 1826. His disease was chronic diarrhoea, superinduced
by old age, and his physician said the too free use of the waters of the
white sulphur springs.

James Madison also died of old age, and peacefully, on June 28, 1836.
His faculties were undimmed to the last. He was eighty-five.

James Monroe's demise, which occurred in the seventy-third year of his
age, on July 4, 1831, was assigned to enfeebled health.

John Quincy Adams was stricken with paralysis on Feb. 21, 1848, while
addressing the Speaker of the House of Representatives, being at the
time a member of Congress. He died in the rotunda of the Capitol. He was
eighty-one years of age.

Andrew Jackson died on June 8, 1845, seventy-eight years old. He
suffered from consumption and finally dropsy, which made its appearance
about six months before his death.

Martin Van Buren died on July 24, 1862, from a violent attack of asthma,
followed by catarrhal affections of the throat and lungs. He was eighty
years of age.

William Henry Harrison's death was caused by pleurisy, the result of a
cold, which he caught on the day of his inauguration. This was
accompanied with severe diarrhoea, which would not yield to medical
treatment. He died on April 4, 1841, a month after his inauguration. He
was sixty-eight years of age.

John Tyler died on Jan. 17, 1862, at the age of seventy-two. Cause of
death, bilious colic.

James K. Polk was stricken with a slight attack of cholera in the spring
of 1849, while on a boat going up the Mississippi River. Though
temporarily relieved, he had a relapse on his return home and died on
June 15, 1849, aged fifty-four years.

Zachary Taylor was the second President to die in office. He is said to
have partaken immoderately of ice water and iced milk, and then later of
a large quantity of cherries. The result was an attack of cholera
morbus. He was sixty-six years old.

Millard Fillmore died from a stroke of paralysis on March 8, 1874, in
his seventy-fourth year.

Franklin Pierce's death was due to abdominal dropsy, and occurred on
Oct. 8, l869, in the sixty-fifth year of his age.

James Buchanan's death occurred on June 1, 1868, and was caused by
rheumatic gout. He was seventy-seven years of age.

Abraham Lincoln was shot by J. Wilkes Booth at Ford's Theater,
Washington, D. C., on April 14, 1865, and died the following day, aged
fifty-six.

Andrew Johnson died from a stroke of paralysis July 31, 1875, aged
sixty-seven.

U. S. Grant died of cancer of the tongue, at Mt. McGregor, N. Y., July
3, 1885.

James A. Garfield was shot by Charles J. Guiteau on July 2. 1881. Died
Sept. 19, 1881.

Chester A. Arthur, who succeeded Garfield, died suddenly of apoplexy in
New York City, Nov. 18, 1886.

Rutherford B. Hayes died Jan. 17, 1803, the result of a severe cold
contracted in Cleveland, Ohio.

Benjamin Harrison died March 13, 1901. Cause of death, pneumonia.

William McKinley was assassinated Sept. 14, 1901.

Grover Cleveland died on June 24, 1908, of debility, aged 71.



WHO IS THE AUTHOR?

The following literary curiosity found its way recently into the query
column of a Boston newspaper. Nobody seems to know who wrote it:

O I wish I was in eden
Where all the beastes is feedin,
the Pigs an cows an osses.
And the long tale Bull wot tosses
the Bulldog and the Rabbit,
acaus it is his habbit;
Where Lions, Tigurs, monkees,
And them long-ear'd things call'd Donkeys,
Meat all together daylee
With Crockedyles all Skaley,
Where sparros on the bushis
Sings to there mates, the thrushis,
an Hawks and Littel Rens
Wawks about like Cocks and Ens,
One looking at the tuther
for all the World like a Bruther.
Where no quarlin is or Phytin,
its tru wot ime aritin.
O for a wauk at even,
somewhere abowt 6 or 7,
When the Son be gwain to bed,
with his fase all fyree red.
O for the grapes and resins
Wot ripens at all seesins;
the appels and the Plumbs
As Big as my 2 thums;
the hayprecocks an peechis,
Wot all within our reech is,
An we mought pick an heat,
paying nothing for the treat.
O for the pooty flouers
A bloomin at all ours,
So that a large Bokay
Yew may gether any day
Of ev'ry flour that blose
from Colleflour to rose.



THE ART OF NOT FORGETTING.

A Brief but Comprehensive Treatise Based on Loisette's Famous System of
Memory Culture.

So much has been said about Loisette's memory system, the art has been
so widely advertised, and so carefully guarded from all the profane who
do not send five or many dollars to the Professor, that a few pages,
showing how man may be his own Loisette, may be both interesting and
valuable.

In the first place, the system is a good one, and well worth the labor
of mastering, and if the directions are implicitly followed there can be
no doubt that the memory will be greatly strengthened and improved, and
that the mnemonic feats otherwise impossible may be easily performed.
Loisette, however, is not an inventor, but an introducer. He stands in
the same relation to Dr. Pick that the retail dealer holds to the
manufacturer: the one produced the article, the other brings it to the
public. Even this statement is not quite fair to Loisette, for he has
brought much practical common sense to bear upon Pick's system, and, in
preparing the new art of mnemonics for the market, in many ways he has
made it his own.

If each man would reflect upon the method by which he himself remembers
things, he would find his hand upon the key of the whole mystery. For
instance, I was once trying to remember the word "Blythe." There
occurred to my mind the words "Bellman," "Belle," and the verse:

  "---- the peasant upward climbing
  Hears the bells of Buloss chiming."

"Barcarole," "Barrack," and so on, until finally the word "Blythe"
presented itself with a strange insistence, long after I had ceased
trying to recall it.

On another occasion, when trying to recall the name "Richardson," I got
the words "hay-rick," "Robertson," "Randallstown," and finally
"wealthy," from which, naturally, I got "rich" and "Richardson" almost
in a breath.

Still another example: Trying to recall the name of an old schoolmate,
"Grady," I got "Brady," "grave," "gaseous," "gastronome," "gracious,"
and I finally abandoned the attempt, simply saying to myself that it
began with a "G," and there was an "a" sound after it. The next morning
when thinking of something entirely different, this name "Grady" came up
in my mind with as much distinctness as though someone had whispered it
in my ear. This remembering was done without any conscious effort on my
part, and was evidently the result of the exertion made the day before
when the mnemonic processes were put to work. Every reader must have had
a similar experience which he can recall, and which will fall in line
with the examples given.

It follows, then, that when we endeavor, without the aid of any system,
to recall a forgotten fact or name, our memory presents to us words of
similar sound or meaning in its journey toward the goal to which we have
started it. This goes to show that our ideas are arranged in groups in
whatever secret cavity or recess of the brain they occupy, and that the
arrangement is not an alphabetical one exactly, and not entirely by
meaning, but after some fashion partaking of both.

If you are looking for the word "meadow" you may reach "middle" before
you come to it, or "Mexico," or many, words beginning with the "m"
sound, or containing the "dow", as window, or "dough," or you may get
"field" or "farm"--but you are on the right track, and if you do not
interfere with your intellectual process you will finally come to the
idea which you are seeking.

How often have you heard people say, "I forget his name, it is something
like Beadle or Beagle--at any rate it begins with a B." Each and all of
these were unconscious Loisettians, and they were practicing blindly,
and without proper method or direction, the excellent system which he
teaches. The thing, then, to do--and it is the final and simple truth
which Loisette teaches--is to travel over this ground in the other
direction--to cement the fact which you wish to remember to some other
fact or word which you know will be brought out by the implied
conditions--and thus you will always be able to travel from your given
starting-point to the thing which you wish to call to mind.

It seems as though a channel were cut in our mind-stuff along which the
memory flows. How to construct an easy channel for any event or series
of events or facts which one wishes to remember, along which the mind
will ever afterward travel, is the secret of mnemonics.

Loisette, in common with all the mnemonic teachers, uses the old device
of representing numbers by letters--and as this is the first and easiest
step in the art, this seems to be the most logical place to introduce
the accepted equivalents of the Arabic numerals:

0 is always represented by s, z or c soft.

1 is always represented by t, th or d.

2 is always represented by n.

3 is always represented by m.

4 is always represented by r.

5 is always represented by l.

6 is always represented by sh, j, ch soft or g soft.

7 is always represented by g hard, k, c hard, q or final ng.

8 is always represented by f or v.

9 is always represented by p or b.

All the other letters are used simply to fill up. Double letters in a
word count only as one. In fact, the system goes by sound, not by
spelling, For instance, "this" or "dizzy" would stand for ten; "catch"
or "gush" would stand for 76, and the only difficulty is to make some
word or phrase which will contain only the significant letters in the
proper order, filled out with non-significants into some guise of
meaning or intelligibility.

You can remember the equivalents given above by noting that z is the
first letter of "zero," and c of "cipher," t has but one stroke, n has
two, m three; the script f is very like 8; the script p like 9; r is the
last letter of "four;" l is the Roman numeral for 50, which suggests 5.
The others may be retained by memorizing these nonsense lines:

  Six shy Jewesses chase George.
  Seven great kings came quarreling.

Suppose you wished to get some phrase or word that would express the
number 3,685, you arrange the letters this way:

    3   ..   6   ..   8   ..   5
a   m    a  sh    a   f    a   1
e        e   j    e   v    e
i        i  ch    i        i
o        o   g    o        o
u        u        u        u
h        h        h        h
w        w        w        w
x        x        x        x
y        y        y        y

You can make out "image of law," "my shuffle," "matchville," etc., etc.,
as far as you like to work it out.

Now, suppose you wished to memorize the fact that $1,000,000 in gold
weighs 3,685 pounds, you go about it in this way, and here is the kernel
and crux of Loisette's system: "How much does $1,000,000 in gold weigh?"


"Weigh-scales."

"Scales--statue of justice."

"Statue of Justice--image of law."

The process is simplicity itself. The thing you wish to recall, and that
you fear to forget, is the weight; consequently you cement your chain of
suggestion to the idea which is most prominent in your mental question.
What do you weigh with? Scales. What does the mental picture of scales
suggest? The statue of Justice, blindfolded and weighing out award and
punishment to man. Finally, what is this statue of Justice but the image
of law? And the words "image of law," translated back from the
significant letters m, g soft, f and 1, give you 3--6--8--5, the number
of pounds in $1,000,000 in gold. You bind together in your mind each
separate step in the journey, the one suggests the other, and you will
find a year from now that the fact will be as fresh in your memory as it
is today. You cannot lose it. It is chained to you by an unbreakable
mnemonic tie. Mark that it is not claimed that "weight" will of itself
suggest "scales," and "scales" "statue of Justice," etc., but that,
having once passed your attention up and down that ladder of ideas, your
mental tendency will be to take the same route, and get to the same goal
again and again. Indeed, beginning with the weight of $1,000,000, "image
of law" will turn up in your mind without your consciousness of any
intermediate station on the way, after some iteration and reiteration of
the original chain.

Again, so as to fasten the process in the reader's mind even more
firmly, suppose that it were desired to fix the date of the battle of
Hastings (A. D. 1066) in the memory; 1066 may be represented by the
words "the wise judge" (th--1, s--0, j--6, dg--6; the others are
non-significants); a chain might be made thus:

Battle of Hastings--arbitrament of war.

Arbitrament of war--arbitration.

Arbitration--judgment.

Judgment--the wise judge.

Make mental pictures, connect ideas, repeat words and sounds, go about
it any way you please, so that you will form a mental habit of
connecting the "battle of Hastings" with the idea of "arbitrament of
war," and so on for the other links in the chain, and the work is done.

Loisette makes the beginning of his system unnecessarily difficult, to
say nothing of his illogical arrangement in the grammar of the art of
memory, which he makes the first of his lessons. He analyzes suggestion
into--

1. Inclusion.

2. Exclusion.

3. Concurrence.

All of which looks very scientific and orderly, but is really misleading
and badly named. The truth is that one idea will suggest another:

1. By likeness or opposition of meaning, as "house" suggests "room" or
"door," etc.; or, "white" suggests "black"; "cruel," "kind," etc.

2. By likeness of sound, as "harrow" and "barrow"; "Henry" and
"Hennepin."

3. By mental juxtaposition, a peculiarity different in each person, and
depending upon each one's own experiences. Thus, "St. Charles" suggests
"railway bridge" to me, because I was vividly impressed by the breaking
of the Wabash bridge at that point. "Stable" and "broken leg" come near
each other in my experience, as do "cow" and "shot-gun" and "licking."

Out of these three sorts of suggestion it is possible to get from anyone
fact to another in a chain certain and safe, along which the mind may be
depended upon afterwards always to follow.

The chain is, of course, by no means all. Its making and its binding
must be accompanied by a vivid, methodically directed attention, which
turns all the mental light gettable in a focus upon the subject passing
across the mind's screen. Before Loisette was thought of this was known.
In the old times in England, in order to impress upon the mind of the
rising generation the parish boundaries in the rural districts, the boys
were taken to each of the landmarks in succession, the position and
bearing of each pointed out carefully, and, in order to deepen the
impression, the young people were then and there vigorously thrashed--a
mechanical method of attracting the attention which was said never to
have failed. This system has had its supporters in many of the
old-fashioned schools, and there are men who will read these lines who
can recall, with an itching sense of vivid impression, the 144 lickings
which were said to go with the multiplication table.

In default of a thrashing, however, the student must cultivate as best
he can an intense fixity of perception upon every fact or word or date
that he wishes to make permanently his own. It is easy. It is a matter
of habit. If you will, you can photograph an idea upon your cerebral
gelatine so that neither years nor events will blot it out or overlay
it. You must be clearly and distinctly aware of the thing you are
putting into your mental treasure-house, and drastically certain of the
cord by which you have tied it to some other thing of which you are
sure. Unless it is worth your while to do this, you might as well
abandon any hope of mnemonic improvement, which will not come without
the hardest kind of hard work, although it is work that will grow
constantly easier with practice and reiteration. You need, then:

1. Methodic suggestion.

2. Methodic attention.

3. Methodic reiteration.

And this is all there is to Loisette, and a great deal it is. Two of
them will not do without the third. You do not know how many steps there
are from your hall door to your bedroom, though you have attended to and
often reiterated the journey. But if there are twenty of them, and you
have once bound the word "nice," or "nose," or "news" or "hyenas," to
the fact of the stairway, you can never forget it.

The Professor makes a point, and very wisely, of the importance of
working through some established chain, so that the whole may be carried
away in the mind--not alone for the value of the facts so bound
together, but for the mental discipline so afforded.

Here, then, is the "President Series," which contains the name and date
of inauguration of each President from Washington to Cleveland. The
manner in which it is to be mastered is this: Beginning at the top, try
to find in your mind some connection between each word and the one
following it. See how you can at some future time make one suggest the
next, either by suggestion of sound or sense, or by mental
juxtaposition. When you have found this dwell on it attentively for a
moment or two. Pass it backward and forward before you, and then go on
to the next step.

The chain runs thus, the names of the President being in capitals, the
date words or date phrases being inclosed in parentheses:

President  Chosen for the first word as the one most apt to occur to the
           mind of anyone wishing to repeat the names of the Presidents.

Dentist       President and dentist.

Draw          What does a dentist do?

(To give up)  When something is drawn from one it is given up.
              This is a date phrase meaning 1789.

WASHINGTON.   Associate the quality of self-sacrifice with
              Washington's character.

Morning wash   Washington and wash.

Dew            Early wetness and dew.

Flower beds    Dew and flowers.

(Took a bouquet)  Flowers and bouquet. Date phrase (1797),

Garden         Bouquet and garden.

Eden           The first garden.

Adam           Juxtaposition of thought.

ADAMS          Suggestion by sound.

Fall           Juxtaposition of thought.

Failure        Fall and failure.

(Deficit)      Upon failure there is usually a deficit
               Date word (1801).

Debt           The consequence of a deficit.

Confederate bonds   Suggestion by meaning.

Jefferson Davis    Juxtaposition of thought.

JEFFERSON.

Now follow out the rest for yourself, taking about ten at a time, and
binding those you do last to those you have done before, each time,
before attacking the next bunch.


JEFFERSON
Judge Jeffreys
(bloody assize)
bereavement
(too heavy a sob)
parental grief
mad son
MADISON
Maderia
frustrating
first-rate wine
(defeating)
feet
toe the line
row
MONROE
row
boat
steamer
side-splitting
(divert)
annoy
harassing
HARRISON
Old Harry
the tempter
(the fraud)
painted clay
baked clay
tiles
TYLER
Wat Tyler
poll tax
compulsory
(free will)
free offering
burnt offering
poker
POLK
end of dance
termination "ly"
(adverb)
part of speech
part of a man
TAYLOR
measurer
theodoilte
(Theophilus)
fill us
FILLMORE
more fuel
the flame
flambeau
bow
arrow
PIERCE
hurt (feeling)
wound
soldier
cannon
BUCHANAN
rebuke
official censure
(to officiate)
wedding
linked
LINCOLN
civil service
ward politician
(stop 'em)
stop procession
(tough boy)
Little Ben
Harry
HARRISON
Tippecanoe
tariff too
knapsack
war-field
(the funnel)
windpipe
throat
quinzy
QUINCY ADAMS
quince
fine fruit
(the fine boy)
sailor boy
sailor
jack tar
JACKSON
stone wall
indomitable
(tough make)
oaken furniture
bureau
VAN BUREN
rent
link
stroll
seashore
take
give
GRANT
award
school premium
examination
cramming
(fagging)
laborer
hay field
HAYES
hazy
clear
(vivid)
brightly lighted
camp-fire
war-field
GARFIELD
Guiteau
murderer
prisoner
prison fare
(half fed)
well fed
well read
author
ARTHUR
round table
tea cup
(half full)
divide
cleave
CLEVELAND
City of Cleveland
two
twice
(the heavy shell)
mollusk
unfamiliar word
dictionary
Johnson's
JOHNSON
son
bad son
(thievish bay)
dishonest boy
(back)
Mac
McKINLEY
kill
Czolgosz
(zees)
seize
ruffian
rough rider
rouse
ROOSEVELT
size
heavy
fat
TAFT

It will be noted that some of the date words, as "free will," only give
three figures of the date, 845; but it is to be supposed that if the
student knows that many figures in the date of Polk's inauguration he
can guess the other one.

The curious thing about this system will now become apparent. If the
reader has learned the series so that he can say it down from President
to Taft, he can with no effort, and without any further preparation, say
it backwards from Taft up to the commencement! There could be no better
proof that this is the natural mnemonic system. It proves itself by its
works.

The series should be repeated backward and forward every day for a
month, and should be supplemented by a series of the reader's own
making, and by this one, which gives the numbers from 0 to 100, and
which must be chained together before they can be learned:

 0--hoes
 1--wheat
 2--hen
 3--home
 4--hair
 5--oil
 6--shoe
 7--hook
 8--off
 9--bee
10--daisy
11--tooth
12--dine
13--time
14--tower
15--dell
16--ditch
17--duck
18--dove
21--hand
19--tabby
20--hyenas
22--nun
23--name
24--owner
25--nail
26--hinge
27--ink
28--knife
29--knob
30--muse
31--Mayday
32--hymen
33--mama
34--mare
35--mill
36--image
37--mug
38--muff
39--mob
40--race
41--hart
42--horn
43--army
44--warrior
45--royal
46--arch
47--rock
48--wharf
49--rope
50--wheels
51--lad
52--lion
53--lamb
54--lair
55--lily
56--lodge
57--lake
58--leaf
59--elbow
60--chess
61--cheat
62--chain
63--sham
64--chair
65--jail
66--judge
67--jockey
68--shave
69--ship
70--eggs
71--gate
72--gun
73--comb
74--hawker
75--coal
76--cage
77--cake
78--coffee
79--cube
80--vase
81--feet
82--vein
83--fame
84--fire
85--vial
86--fish
87--fig
88--fife
89--fib
90--piles
91--putty
92--pane
93--bomb
94--bier
95--bell
96--peach
98--beef
97--book
99--pope
100--diocese