CANDY MEDICATION

    BY
    BERNARD FANTUS, M. D.
    Professor of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, College of
    Medicine, University of Illinois, Chicago.

[Illustration]

    ST. LOUIS
    C. V. MOSBY COMPANY
    1915




    COPYRIGHT 1915, BY C. V. MOSBY COMPANY

    _Press of
    C. V. Mosby Company
    St. Louis_




PREFACE.


CANDY MEDICATION has given such delightful results in practice among
children that the author believes it should be more widely known
and used. A formulary to serve as the common meeting ground for the
prescribing physician and the dispensing pharmacist seems absolutely
necessary to make this form of medication more generally available; and
it is mainly to supply this formulary that this little book has been
published.

Researches conducted by the author in the Pharmacologic Laboratory of
the University of Illinois during the past five years, as well as the
experience gained by the use of this form of medication in private
practice, form the basis of this publication.

To give the best results, the sweet tablets described in this formulary
should be freshly prepared on physician's order; thereby securing
efficiency and palatability to the highest degree, and enabling
the physician to prescribe the dose and combination needed for the
particular case in hand. To bring these tablets into the category of
extemporaneous preparations, the author has elaborated the process of
"fat covering" which makes the preparation of these tablets no more
difficult than the making of pills or of suppositories.

In the pages that precede the formulary, an attempt has been made to
present the principles that have been used in the elaboration of the
formulae, so that formulae for other medicaments suitable to this form
of administration may be developed.

Concise directions on the care and use of the tablet machine have been
included, to enable any pharmacist equipped with an inexpensive tablet
machine to prepare these tablets without difficulty.

The author is keenly aware of the fact that there are probably still
some imperfections in the formulae given herein; though he has
spared neither time nor labor in making them as perfect as possible.
Therefore, comments and criticisms, as well as suggestions, are most
welcome, and will receive careful consideration.

It is the author's hope that this booklet may be instrumental in
robbing childhood of one of its terrors, namely, nasty medicine; that
it may lessen the difficulties experienced by nurse and mother in
giving medicament to the sick child; and help to make the doctor more
popular with the little ones.

                                             BERNARD FANTUS, M.D.

    _Chicago, March, 1915._




CONTENTS.


    CHAPTER                                                PAGE
       I. Historical Introduction                           11
      II. Tabellae Dulces                                   14
     III. The Uses of Sweet Tablets                         16
      IV. The Making of Sweet Tablets                       23
       V. The Tablet Machine                                27
      VI. The Construction of Formulae for Sweet Tablets    31
            Choice of Flavor                                31
            Subduing of Tastes                              31
            Choice of Color                                 34
     VII. Formulae for the Preparation of Sweet Tablets     35
    VIII. Formulae for Stock Preparations                   72
          References                                        75
          Index                                             77




CANDY MEDICATION




CHAPTER I.

HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION.


THE IDEA of presenting medicine in candy form is really very old.
The term confection, which originally meant a medicinal compound
being derived from the Latin word "_conficere_," to put together, has
been applied since the days of classical antiquity to mixtures of
medicinal substances with saccharine matter. The only official relics
of this once very extensive class of preparations are the confection
of rose and the confection of senna; both of which, however, are
also practically obsolete. The reason for this is not difficult to
find. Neither of them come up to our modern ideas of a confection.
We may officially call them a confection, but a youngster would be
disrespectful enough to disagree with the pharmacopoeia.

More closely akin to candy are lozenges, and yet they are not real
candy. The only one among them that is pleasant is the santonin
lozenge; and it is the only one that is popular. An especially good
imitation of candy form are the deservedly popular so-called German
worm lozenges. It was acquaintance with these that led the writer to
seek for other real candy medicaments. He could find only two such upon
the market: viz., Calomel Tablets under the name of "Aromatic Calomel,"
and Phenolphthalein Tablets under various fanciful trade-names, such
as "Purgen," "Phenolax," etc., unless "Candy Cathartic Cascarets,"
and the French candy laxative known as "Tamar Indien" were also to be
included.



Convinced that administration in candy form would be ideal for
children, the author took a number of years ago a course of instruction
with a candy-maker, in the hope of finding in the confectioner's art
some new form of pleasant administration for medicine. He made sulphur
taffy and cod-liver oil chocolate creams;[1] but these and a large
number of other attempts were unsuccessful. It may be of interest,
in this connection, to note that, in 1911, Sir James Sawyer[2]
published in "The Lancet" a process for the production of what he
calls "cremulae" or medicated chocolate creams. They were prepared by
evaporating a mixture of sugar and of milk to the consistency of paste,
in which various medicaments might be incorporated, and which is then
covered with chocolate, as in the popular chocolate drop. This is, as
will be seen, a troublesome process. The author's studies in the candy
shop seemed to point to "fondant" as the most suitable candy form for
purposes of medication. "Fondant", however, has the disadvantage of
becoming hard with age. Free from this objection and closely similar
to the "fondant" is a rather lightly compressed tablet made of finely
powdered cane sugar. And so finally the tablet form was chosen as
the best and most convenient for candy medication--a form which was
already in successful use, as has been stated, for the administration
of calomel and of phenolphthalein. For such tablets the term _tabellae
dulces_,[3] or sweet tablets, might be proposed.




CHAPTER II.

TABELLAE DULCES.


TO BE SUCCESSFUL, sweet tablets must meet the following requirements:

1. They must be perfectly delicious sweets, attractive in form, color,
and odor; and free from the slightest suspicion of disagreeable or
medicinal taste.

2. They must disintegrate rapidly in the mouth; for a sick child will
usually not suck candy as a healthy youngster would.

3. To constitute a real advance in therapeutics, it must be possible
for the average pharmacist to prepare them extemporaneously, so that
the physician may be able to fit the medicament to suit the case,
and that the pharmacist may not be forced to carry in stock a large
assortment of these more or less perishable goods.

In view of these exacting requirements, it may seem remarkable
that over fifty different medicaments are at present available for
administration in the form of sweet tablets. This has been accomplished
by taking advantage of the fact that some medicines are practically
tasteless; that modern synthetic chemistry has enriched our resources
in this direction by the production of a large number of tasteless,
or almost tasteless, and yet active substances; and that many of the
isolated active principles of drugs are easily disguised. In some
cases a chemical trick is successful, e. g., using a little alkali
or a little acid to render the substance less soluble in the mouth.
Some of the bitterest alkaloids, e.g., strychnine, have been rendered
available for candy medication by the use of finely powdered fuller's
earth, or of Lloyd's Reagent, to be described later. Quite a number of
almost insoluble substances of slight but lingering taste can be made
perfectly pleasant by saccharinization.




CHAPTER III.

THE USES OF SWEET TABLETS.


IT MAY seem strange that modern pharmacy which boasts of so many
elegant and palatable preparations suitable for adults, has thus far
done so little to render medicine more acceptable to children; and yet
attractiveness and palatability are even more important for the little
ones than for the grown-ups. Syrups have hitherto been our chief aids
in making medicines more pleasant for children. Unfortunately, however,
many a child has had its palate offended by liquid medicines to such
a degree that it abhors spoon-medicine of any kind, and will struggle
even against the most palatable. When one witnesses the struggling
of the average child against the average medicine, one cannot but
wonder whether at times the struggle does not do more harm than the
medicine can do good, and wish that we had other means of administering
medicines to the little ones. As all children love candy, this would
seem the form most desirable for them. For one who has not used candy
medication there is a revelation in store in the positive enjoyment
and eagerness with which children take these sweet tablets. And many
a petted child that has grown up into a sensitive woman, who believes
she cannot swallow a pill, also cannot and will not take medicine. It
so happens that just these are often excessively fond of candy and
will take candy medicine. Another use for candy medication is in the
treatment of the insane, who frequently will not take medicine, but may
take it in candy form.

It may be of interest to see how many indications may be met, confining
oneself entirely to the list of candy medicaments:

1. For effect upon the alimentary tract:

    _Absorbent:_
        Charcoal.

    _Antacid:_
        Chalk.
        Magnesia.
        Sodium Bicarbonate.

    _Emetics:_
        Apomorphine.
        Tartar Emetic.
        Emetine.

    _Antiemetics:_
        Cocaine.
        Anaesthesine.
        Morphine.
        Bismuth Subnitrate or subcarbonate.
        Chalk.
        Cerium Oxalate.

    _Antidiarrheal:_
        Bismuth Subnitrate or Subcarbonate.
        Tannalbin.
        Morphine.
        Chalk.

    _Cathartics:_
        Calomel.
        Mercury with Chalk.
        Phenolphthalein.
        Elaterin.
        Resin of Podophyllum.
        Resin of Jalap.
        Senna.
        Sulphur.

    _Antispasmodic:_
        Atropine.

    _Intestinal Antiseptic:_
        Magnesium salicylate.
        Mercurials.
        Lactic acid ferment.

    _Anthelmintic:_
        Santonin.


2. For effect upon the respiratory system:

    _Expectorants:_
        Apomorphine.
        Emetine.
        Terpin hydrate.
        Sajodin.

    _Antitussic:_
        Heroine.
        Morphine.
        Sabromin.

    _Antispasmodic:_
        Atropine.


3. For effect upon the circulatory system:

    _Circulatory Stimulants:_
        Digitalis.
        Strophanthin.
        Atropine.
        Strychnine.
        Caffeine.

    _Circulatory Depressant:_
        Aconitine.

    _Vaso-Dilator:_
        Nitroglycerin.


4. For effect upon genito-urinary system:

    _Diuretic:_
        Diuretin.
        Caffeine.

    _Urinary Antiseptic:_
        Hexamethylenamine.


5. For effect upon skin:

    _Diaphoretic:_
        Pilocarpine.
        Dover's Powder.

    _Anhydrotic:_
        Atropine.


6. For effect upon nervous system:

    _Depressants:_
        Morphine.
        Hyoscine.
        Sabromin.
        Sulphonmethane.
        Adalin.

    _Stimulants:_
        Atropine.
        Cocaine.
        Strychnine.
        Caffeine.


7. Antipyretics:

    Acetphenetidin.
    Antipyrin.
    Acetylamidosalol (Salophen).
    Aconitine.
    Aristochin.


8. Hematinics:

    Iron,
      Reduced Iron,
      Iron carbonate, saccharated.
    Arsenic.


9. Tonics:

    Iron, quinine, strychnine.

10. Specifics:

    _In Malaria:_
        Aristochin.
        Saloquinine.
        Arsenic.

    _In Syphilis:_
        Mercurials.
        Sajodin.

    _In Rheumatic Fever:_
        Acetylsalicylic acid (Aspirin).
        Acetylamidosalol (Salophen).
        Magnesium salicylate.

    _In Myxedema:_
        Thyroid.

Of course, a large variety of combinations of these could be elaborated.

It, therefore, seems established that we have, in candy medication,
a method of fairly extensive applicability; an almost complete
therapeutic armamentarium of the greatest possible value in the
treatment of children. For the tiny infant this method is, of course,
unsuitable as well as unnecessary. As soon, however, as the youngster
commences to know what candy is, it is ready for candy medication. It
is particularly during the ages of from three to ten that this form of
administration is indicated.

Several objections have been raised against this method. Perhaps the
most serious one lies in the danger of poisoning, from the fact that
children enjoy these tablets so much that they are likely to eat a
large number of them at one time, should the mother be careless enough
to leave them within reach. The only way to prevent such an occurrence
is not to prescribe more tablets than would constitute a safe dose
should all of them be taken at one time. It is better to have the
patient get a new supply daily than to have a single case of death or
serious disturbance occur from this source.

Another objection that has been raised is that the dose of some of the
medicines is very small. In the case of such remedies as sulphur and
chalk the author admits that the dose is perhaps too small to be of
practical importance. In the case of most other medicaments, however,
the smallness of dose is of advantage rather than of disadvantage,
in that it necessitates administration at short intervals. If the
administration of small doses frequently repeated until the desired
effect is obtained is a good principle in practice, it is particularly
so in pediatrics. For are not all the vital processes of the child much
more rapid than those of the adult; are not its bowel movements, its
urinations more frequent, does it not need nourishment more often? Then
why not medicine?




CHAPTER IV.

THE MAKING OF SWEET TABLETS.


IT IS GENERALLY supposed that tablet making is an art, requiring
special expertness and expensive machinery. Now while both of these
ideas are correct when the preparation of a large variety of tablets
and of large quantities is contemplated, they are erroneous in regard
to the making of prescription quantities of these sweet tablets, which
present a comparatively simple and relatively uniform problem in tablet
making.

Though the process of making moulded tablets was introduced by Dr.
Robert M. Fuller of New York before the Academy of Medicine on February
21, 1878, in a paper entitled: "Dose-Dispensing Simplified,"[4] the
simplification was evidently not such that druggists could notice it;
for moulded tablets have not become popular among them, perhaps mainly
because they require drying. Likewise are compressed tablets, which
were introduced even earlier by Professor Brockeden of England in 1844,
considered unsuitable for extemporaneous preparation, as granulation
of the powder by moistening is believed to be necessary; and this, of
course, also requires drying.

A step in the direction of rendering tablet making available for
extemporaneous preparation was made in 1909 by A. Schleimer[5] by
advocating the use of cacao butter in lieu of granulation of the
powder and subsequent drying. This brings tablets into the category
of extemporaneous preparations. All that is necessary is to add three
percent of cacao butter to the powder, and it is ready for immediate
compression in a tablet machine. Having found that cacao butter is
liable to become rancid on keeping of some tablets made with it, the
author experimented to find a substitute devoid of this tendency, and
found it in paraffin of low melting point.[6] For tablets that are
not to be kept for any length of time, cacao butter is preferable, as
it melts readily and is digestible. The amount of paraffin, however,
that enters into the composition of each tablet is so small that in
spite of its indigestibility, it seems that it could not meet with any
but theoretic objection. Either of these materials, in form of fine
shavings, is added to the extent of three to five per cent. with just
sufficient trituration to distribute fairly well. Excessive trituration
lessens the efficiency of the lubricating agent. If the tablet has a
tendency to stick to the punches, the material can be worked better if
a little talcum, say three per cent. is added to the powder by stirring
it in with a spatula rather than by trituration. This process renders
tablet making no more difficult or time-consuming than the making of
pills or capsules.



The author has succeeded in still further simplifying the process by
the preparation of what he would propose to call "fat sugar." Having
noticed that the addition of, say, 10 per cent. of powdered cacao to
sugar forms an almost ideal powder for immediate compression in the
tablet machine, the idea occurred to him to reproduce, as nearly as
possible, the physical condition of cacao by covering each particle of
powdered starch with a thin layer of fat, which can readily be done by
triturating starch with liquid petrolatum. While other fat, such as
cacao butter, "Crisco" or paraffin, might be used for this purpose, by
dissolving the fat in ether and thus distributing it over the starch,
permitting the ether subsequently to evaporate, the author has found
that liquid petrolatum, 1 part, distributed over 3 parts of starch
forms a powder which added to sugar in proportion of about twenty
per cent. renders it admirably suitable for compression in a tablet
machine. The starch might be sweetened by previously triturating it
with an alcoholic solution of saccharin and permitting the alcohol to
evaporate; though this sweetening is not essential. For starch, thus
prepared, the author proposes the name "fat starch", the formula for
which will be found in Chapter VIII. Sugars containing twenty per cent.
of "fat starch", are ready for immediate compression in the tablet
machine; and admit of admixture of a moderate amount of medicament
without losing this quality. If a large amount of medicament is to
be incorporated, then an additional amount of "fat starch" should
be allowed. Sugars containing "fat starch" the author has called
"fat sugars" for want of a better name. He is aware of the fact that
petrolatum is not a fat in the true sense of the word. Nevertheless
it is, no doubt, its "fatty" nature that does the work; other fatty
substances, such as cacao butter or "Crisco", producing the same result
as far as rendering the powder suitable for compression in the tablet
machine is concerned. Liquid petrolatum has the advantage over these of
being devoid of tendency to rancidity.

Excessive trituration interferes with the efficiency of the fat starch,
evidently by distributing the fat all over the powder, rendering it
homogeneous, which is inimical to tablet making. Therefore in case of
the red fat sugar which is used as a vehicle for poisonous medicaments
that require very thorough trituration, it is recommended that the fat
starch be added after the trituration.

The author would suggest that the pharmacist prepare the various fat
sugars described in Chapter VIII and that he keep them on hand, in
a cool and _dark_ place, adding the medicament as prescribed by the
physician, making use of Chapter VII for guidance in the elaboration of
individual formulae.




CHAPTER V.

THE TABLET MACHINE.


THE GROUNDLESSNESS of the second objection to tablet making by retail
druggists, namely, the necessity of possessing expensive machinery, can
perhaps best be shown by the illustrations here given. The simplest
and yet practical form of tablet machine known to the author is the
"No. 25" machine of Whitall-Tatum Company of Philadelphia (Fig. 1). The
price of this machine is about ten dollars.

Its chief disadvantage is that it works rather slowly, as the powder
must be put into the die by hand with a small tool furnished with the
machine. An automatically feeding machine of reasonable price is the
"Eureka" Hand Tablet Machine, furnished by the F. J. Stokes Co., of
Philadelphia (Fig. 2). This machine may also be obtained for motor
power.

Detailed directions for the putting up and the use of these machines
seem unnecessary here as they accompany the machine when sent out by
the manufacturer. A few points on the care of the tablet machine may,
however, be brought out in order to save the novice trouble and mishaps.

All compressing machines for tablet making consist essentially of a die
and two punches, an upper and a lower. It is important that these be
kept scrupulously clean and free from rust, nicks and scratches; for
unless these parts be perfectly smooth it is impossible to get them to
work properly. When not in use, they should be kept completely covered
with vaselin or else immersed in liquid petrolatum, in order to protect
them against rust. When required for use, the grease is removed from
them as completely as possible by means of a soft cloth.

[Illustration: Fig. 1

A simple yet practical form of tablet machine.]

In putting the die and punches into the machine, it is best to put in
the lower punch first, making sure that it has been pushed completely
down into its socket. Then put in the die, so that the top of the die
be exactly flush all around with the table of the machine. See to it
that the face of the lower punch be exactly flush with the top of the
die when the punch is at its highest point. Then insert the upper punch
in its socket; and let it enter the die before locking it in place, so
as to insure perfect alignment.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.

The Eureka Hand Tablet Machine. An automatically feeding machine of
reasonable price.]

When die and punches are to be removed, take out the upper punch first,
then the lower punch and die, which may come out suddenly and be
injured by knocking against the upper punch if the latter be still in
place.

When particles of the powder stick to the die or punches, they should
not be scraped off with a hard instrument, as this is liable to
scratch, but should be wiped off with a soft, slightly moistened
cloth. To prevent sticking, a little talcum may be used, sprinkled over
the powder and lightly mixed by stirring with a spatula.

When the upper face of the tablet splits off, we speak of "capping."
To overcome this, ten per cent. of fat starch may be added to the
powder. Should "capping" still occur, the amount of fat starch might be
increased. "Capping" may also be due to the use of excessive pressure.
It may furthermore be due to die or punches being worn or damaged. When
this has occurred, the best thing to do is to get a new set of punches,
or to have the damaged one refinished by an expert mechanic, preferably
the makers of the tablet machine.

It would lead us beyond the scope of this work to give detailed
directions for making tablets of all kinds. A pharmacist who has
equipped himself with a tablet machine and has developed the ambition
to make a general line of tablets[7] may be referred to Mr. Joseph R.
Wood's book[8] on this subject.




CHAPTER VI.

THE CONSTRUCTION OF FORMULAE FOR SWEET TABLETS.


Choice of Flavor.

THERE are quite a number of medicines sufficiently free from taste
and odor to be made perfectly pleasant by the mere admixture of sugar
and of flavoring. These can, of course, be prepared with any flavor
desired. In the formulary, rose has been chosen as the flavor under
these circumstances, but any other flavor may be used instead.

Substances that have a slightly acrid taste are generally best
disguised by peppermint. For sour taste, lemon is best. Wintergreen was
chosen as the flavor for salicylates.

Substances that have a slightly bitter taste are best disguised by
"vanilla cacao sugar." For drugs that, in addition to a slightly bitter
taste, have an odor that needs disguising, "cinnamon cacao sugar" is to
be preferred.


The Subduing of Tastes.

There are quite a number of drugs that have a tendency to leave a
rather persistent disagreeable after-taste, drugs of slight solubility,
particles of which remain on the tongue longer than the sugar
does, so that their taste lingers after the taste of the sugar has
disappeared. For such drugs saccharinization solves the problem of
candy medication. The saccharin will be most efficient, as the author
has shown by repeated experiments, if it is directly incorporated with
the drug in solution rather than in dry form. Saccharinization is,
therefore, carried out in the formulary by triturating the drug with a
saturated (3 per cent.) alcoholic solution of saccharin, and permitting
the alcohol to evaporate subsequently. The drying may be expedited by
using a hot mortar. When alcohol is not permissible, as in the case
of "Alcresta" preparations (see below), dry saccharinization must be
used instead, that is, triturating the drug with saccharin, preferably
a 1 to 10 trituration. Likewise when time does not permit moist
saccharinization, triturating the substance with a somewhat larger
amount of saccharin will answer the purpose.

A second expedient for the subduing of taste is fat covering, which
consists of triturating the drug with liquid petrolatum or other fat,
e. g., Crisco in ether, and permitting the ether to evaporate. The thin
film of fat left on the drug delays its solution to a slight degree,
yet sufficiently to reduce the taste, so that certain drugs--such
as aspirin, digitalis, diuretin--can be administered in the form of
sweet tablets in useful dose. In these cases, saccharinization and fat
covering combined give the best results.



Most of the alkaloids can be administered in candy form by
saccharinization with or without additional fat covering, and, in the
case of some, the addition of sodium bicarbonate is still further
useful in lessening the solubility, thereby subduing the taste. Only
in the case of the bitterest alkaloids such as strychnine and of
alkaloids that have to be given in large doses such as quinine are
different expedients necessary. For quinine, aristochin or saloquinine
solve the problem. For strychnine, Lloyd's "Alcresta" strychnine gives
good results. In 1910, John Uri Lloyd[9] of Cincinnati discovered
that the addition of fuller's earth to alkaloids almost completely
abolished their bitter taste. He found on further research that this
activity resided in the finest particles, especially those of colloidal
dimensions, which could be separated from the coarser portion of
fuller's earth by elutriation. By means of this powder, now known as
Lloyd's Reagent, it is possible to obtain the bitterest alkaloids, even
strychnine, in almost tasteless form. That this strychnine combination
is still active, can be proved by the fact that it will kill a dog
almost as readily as the uncombined strychnine. Lloyd has coined the
name "Alcresta" for these alkaloidal combinations; they are marketed
by Ely Lilly and Company. The combination of the strychnine with
fuller's earth is destroyed by alkali and by alcohol. Hence alcohol
must not be added to the powder after the Alcresta combination has been
incorporated. The addition of a little acid lessens the bitterness of
the combination by lessening solubility in the mouth. The addition of
acid is also of advantage to lessen the solubility in the saliva, and
with it the taste, of such resinous bodies as the resin of podophyllum.


Choice of Color.

To indicate tablets containing poisonous substances, a dark red color
is chosen, unless cacao disguises the taste better. It would be
advisable not to prescribe more than a small number of such tablets
to be dispensed at one time, so as to prevent the possibility of
poisoning. The choice of the other colors has been more or less
without special principle underlying it, yellow having been chosen for
lemon, and green for wintergreen, leaving pink for rose and white for
peppermint. The relation of color to flavor can, of course, be varied.




CHAPTER VII.

FORMULAE FOR THE PREPARATION OF SWEET TABLETS


The subjoined formulae are published to serve for guidance in the
preparation of sweet tablets and as a basis for further study and
improvement.

The doses given are children's doses, none of them exceeding a dose
safe for a child three years of age. Most of the tablets carry as large
a dose as can well be given in this way; which in some cases, though
not in many, is not sufficient for a three-year-old child. Where a
larger dose can easily be disguised in the same manner, this fact is
noted in connection with the formulae.

A warning may not be amiss, in this connection, not to put up in this
form anything that does not result in a faultlessly pleasant, actually
delicious candy. For confidence once lost is not easily restored.

Formulae for the preparation of the stock sugars referred to in this
formulary will be found in Chapter VIII. They can all be prepared
extemporaneously. The drying necessary after the addition of coloring
may be expedited by the use of a warm mortar. Nevertheless, alternate
formulae have been inserted in most instances to facilitate rapid
extemporaneous compounding, in case the stock sugar be not at hand.

While most of these tablets keep well, a few deteriorate. In any case,
the freshly prepared tablet will be found more pleasant than one that
has become stale by being kept in stock.

Should difficulty be experienced in the compression of some of these
tablets, the addition of a little shaved paraffin by gentle trituration
in a mortar; or the stirring in of a little talcum powder with a
spatula; or both measures combined will probably overcome the trouble.
Some powders work best with light pressure; others require rather heavy
pressure.


1. TABELLAE ACETPHENETIDINI DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Acetphenetidin.

0.06 Gm. (gr. 1).

_Caution:_--Only a moderate number should be ordered at one time.

    Acetphenetidin                           6.00 Gm.
    Alcoholic solution of saccharin, 3%      2.00 Cc.
    Vanilla cacao sugar                     24.00 Gm.

Mix the acetphenetidin with the alcoholic solution of saccharin (in a
hot mortar if in a hurry) and permit the alcohol to evaporate; then mix
with the vanilla cacao sugar by thorough trituration in a mortar; and
compress in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make
one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Acetphenetidin           6.00 Gm.
    Saccharin                0.06 Gm.
    Tincture of vanilla      1.50 Cc.
    Cacao powder             3.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered         21.00 Gm.

Mix the saccharin with the tincture of vanilla, then add the
acetphenetidin and permit the alcohol to evaporate. Finally add the
other ingredients, triturating until they are thoroughly mixed.
Compress in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make
one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


2. TABELLAE ACETYLAMIDOSALOLI DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Acetylamidosalol (Salophen).

0.06 Gm. (gr. 1).

    Acetylamidosalol     6.00 Gm.
    Green fat sugar     24.00 Gm.

Mix by thorough trituration in a mortar, and compress in a tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm.
tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Acetylamidosalol                     6.00 Gm.
    Spirit of gaultheria                 1.00 Cc.
    Malachite green solution, 1:1000     1.00 Cc.
    Fat starch                           6.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     18.00 Gm.

Mix the acetylamidosalol and the sugar with the coloring and the flavor
by thorough trituration; add the fat starch by gentle trituration; and
compress in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make
one hundred 0.3 Gm. tablets.


3. TABELLAE ACIDI ACETYLSALICYLICI DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Acetylsalicylic Acid (Aspirin).

0.015 Gm. (gr. 1/4.)

    Acetylsalicylic acid                   1.50 Gm.
    Alcoholic solution of saccharin, 3%    1.50 Cc.
    Liquid petrolatum                      0.50 Cc.
    Yellow fat sugar                      28.00 Gm.

Mix the acetylsalicylic acid with the alcoholic solution of saccharin
(in a hot mortar if in a hurry), and permit the alcohol to evaporate.
Add the liquid petrolatum and triturate. Finally mix with the yellow
fat sugar and compress in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and
punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


4. TABELLAE ACONITINI DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Aconitine.

0.00003 Gm. (gr. 1/2000).

_Caution:_--Order only a small number at one time.

    Aconitine, crystallized     0.003 Gm.
    Red fat sugar              30.00 Gm.

Mix the aconitine with the red fat sugar by very thorough trituration
in a mortar and compress in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and
punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Aconitine, crystallized       0.003 Gm.
    Carmine                       0.75 Gm.
    Spirit of cinnamon, 10%       0.30 Cc.
    Fat starch                    6.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered              23.25 Gm.

Triturate the aconitine with the sugar, added in portions, until well
mixed. Add the spirit of cinnamon and the carmine and triturate again
until the red color is perfectly uniform. Then add the fat starch,
triturating gently and for a short time only. Compress in tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, and make one hundred 0.30 Gm.
tablets.


5. TABELLAE ADALINI DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Adalin.

0.03 Gm. (gr. 1/2).

_Caution:_--Only a moderate number should be ordered at one time.

    Adalin                                  3.00 Gm.
    Alcoholic solution of saccharin, 3%     4.00 Gm.
    White sugar fat                        27.00 Gm.

Mix the alcoholic solution of saccharin with the adalin (in a hot
mortar if in a hurry), and permit the alcohol to evaporate. Then mix
thoroughly with the white fat sugar and compress in a tablet machine,
using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Adalin                    3.00 Gm.
    Saccharin                 0.12 Gm.
    Spirit of peppermint      0.50 Cc.
    Fat starch                6.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powder            21.00 Gm.

Mix the saccharin with the spirit of peppermint, then add the adalin,
and triturate. Then incorporate the sugar by thorough trituration.
Finally add the fat starch and triturate gently. Compress in tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm.
tablets.


6. TABELLAE ANAESTHESINI DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Anaesthesine.

0.015 Gm. (gr. 1/4).

Not more than a small number of these tablets should be ordered at one
time.

    Anaesthesine       1.50 Gm.
    Pink fat sugar    28.50 Gm.

Mix the anaesthesine with the pink fat sugar and compress in tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm.
tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Anaesthesine           1.50 Gm.
    Spirit of rose, 1%     0.60 Cc.
    Carmine                0.20 Gm.
    Fat starch             6.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered       22.50 Gm.

Triturate the anaesthesine with the sugar and the spirit of rose, add
the carmine, and triturate until thoroughly mixed. Finally, add the fat
starch with gentle trituration and compress in a tablet machine, using
3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


7. TABELLAE ANTIMONII ET POTASSII TARTRATIS DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Antimony and Potassium Tartrate (Tartar Emetic).

0.0006 Gm. (gr. 1/100).

_Caution:_--Only a moderate number of these tablets should be ordered
at one time, 0.030 Gm. having produced death in children. It would take
fifty of these tablets, however, to yield such dose. Larger dose might
be administered in this form.

    Antimony and potassium tartrate     0.06 Gm.
    Red fat sugar                      18.00 Gm.

Mix by thorough trituration in a mortar and compress in tablet machine,
using 5/16-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.18 Gm. tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Antimony and potassium tartrate    0.06 Gm.
    Carmine                            0.50 Gm.
    Spirit of cinnamon, 10%            0.20 Cc.
    Fat starch                         3.60 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                   14.40 Gm.

Having thoroughly triturated the antimony and potassium tartrate
with the sugar, add the coloring and the flavoring; and triturate
again until the color is perfectly uniform. Then add the fat starch,
triturating gently and for a short time only. Compress in a tablet
machine using 5/16-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.18 Gm.
tablets.


8. TABELLAE ANTIPYRINAE DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Antipyrine.

0.015 Gm. (gr. 1/4).

_Caution:_--Only a moderate number should be ordered at one time.

    Antipyrine                            1.50 Gm.
    Alcoholic solution of saccharin, 3%   3.00 Cc.
    Liquid petrolatum                     0.50 Cc.
    Vanilla cacao sugar                  28.00 Gm.

Mix the antipyrine with the alcoholic solution of saccharin (in a
hot mortar if in a hurry) and permit the alcohol to evaporate. Add
the liquid petrolatum and triturate. Then incorporate the vanilla
cacao sugar; and compress in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and
punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Antipyrine             1.50 Gm.
    Saccharin              0.09 Gm.
    Tincture of vanilla    1.50 Cc.
    Liquid petrolatum      0.50 Cc.
    Cacao powder           3.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered       25.00 Gm.

Mix the tincture of vanilla with the saccharin, add the antipyrine
and permit the alcohol to evaporate. Add the liquid petrolatum and
triturate. Then incorporate the cacao powder and the sugar by thorough
trituration; and compress in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and
punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


9. TABELLAE APOMORPHINAE DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Apomorphine.

0.0006 Gm. (gr. 1/100).

_Caution:_--Only a small number should be ordered at one time; two
milligrams of apomorphine having produced alarming collapse in a child.

    Apomorphine hydrochloride   0.06 Gm.
    Vanilla cacao sugar        30.00 Gm.

Mix the ingredients by thorough trituration in a mortar; and compress
in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one
hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Apomorphine hydrochloride  0.06 Gm.
    Tincture of vanilla        1.50 Cc.
    Cacao powder               3.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered           27.00 Gm.

Directions, same as above.


10. TABELLAE ARISTOCHINAE DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Aristochin.

0.06 Gm. (gr. 1).

    Aristochin                             6.00 Gm.
    Alcoholic solution of saccharin, 3%    3.00 Cc.
    Sodium bicarbonate                     1.00 Gm.
    Vanilla cacao sugar                   23.00 Gm.

Mix the aristochin with the alcoholic solution of saccharin (in a hot
mortar if in a hurry) and permit the alcohol to evaporate. Then add the
vanilla cacao sugar, and finally the sodium bicarbonate by thorough
trituration in a mortar. Compress in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch
die and punches to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.

_Note:_--If any difficulty be experienced in compressing this powder
into tablets, the addition of a little shaved paraffin will probably
overcome the trouble.


Alternate Formula.

    Aristochin           6.00 Gm.
    Saccharin            0.09 Gm.
    Sodium bicarbonate   1.00 Gm.
    Tincture of vanilla  1.50 Cc.
    Cacao powder         3.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered     20.00 Gm.

Mix the saccharin with the tincture of vanilla, add the aristochin
and mix by trituration. Incorporate the cacao powder, the sugar, and
finally the sodium bicarbonate. Mix by thorough trituration in a mortar
and compress in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to
make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.

_Note:_--See above note.


11. TABELLAE ARSENI TRIOXIDI DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Arsenic Trioxide.

0.0006 Gm. (gr. 1/100).

_Caution:_--Owing to the toxicity of arsenic trioxide not more than a
small number should be ordered at one time.

Larger doses could be administered in this form.

    Arsenic trioxide      0.06 Gm.
    Red fat sugar        18.00 Gm.

Mix the arsenic trioxide with the red fat sugar by thorough trituration
in a mortar and compress in a tablet machine, using 5/16-inch die and
punches, to make one hundred 0.18 Gm. tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Arsenic trioxide             0.06 Gm.
    Carmine                      0.50 Gm.
    Spirit of cinnamon, 10%      0.20 Cc.
    Fat starch                   3.60 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered             14.40 Gm.

Having triturated the arsenic trioxide with the sugar, add the carmine
and the spirit of cinnamon, and triturate again until the color is
perfectly uniform. Then add the fat starch, triturating gently and for
a short time only. Compress in a tablet machine, using 5/16-inch die
and punches, to make one hundred 0.18 Gm. tablets.


12. TABELLAE ATROPINAE DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Atropine.

0.0003 Gm. (gr. 1/200).

_Caution:_--Only a small number should be ordered at one time.

    Atropine sulphate        0.03 Gm.
    Vanilla cacao sugar     30.00 Gm.

Mix the atropine sulphate with the vanilla cacao sugar by thorough
trituration in a mortar; then compress in a tablet machine, using
3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Atropine sulphate       0.03 Gm.
    Tincture of vanilla     1.50 Cc.
    Cacao powder            3.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered        27.00 Gm.

Triturate the atropine sulphate with the sugar until thoroughly mixed;
then add the cacao powder and the tincture of vanilla, and triturate
again until the color is perfectly uniform. Compress in tablet machine,
using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


13. TABELLAE BISMUTHI SUBCARBONATIS DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Bismuth Subcarbonate.

0.20 Gm. (gr. 3).

    Bismuth subcarbonate    20.00 Gm.
    Fat starch               2.00 Gm.
    Pink fat sugar          18.00 Gm.

Mix by thorough trituration in a mortar and compress in a tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.40 Gm.
tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Bismuth subcarbonate    20.00 Gm.
    Carmine                  0.20 Gm.
    Spirit of rose, 1%       0.40 Cc.
    Fat starch               6.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered         14.00 Gm.

Thoroughly mix the bismuth subcarbonate with the sugar, the carmine,
and the spirit of rose by trituration in a mortar; add the fat starch
by gentle trituration; and compress in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch
die and punches, to make one hundred 0.40 Gm. tablets.


14. TABELLAE BISMUTHI SUBNITRATIS DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Bismuth Subnitrate.

0.20 Gm. (gr. 3).

    Bismuth subnitrate    20.00 Gm.
    Fat starch             2.00 Gm.
    Pink fat sugar        18.00 Gm.

Mix by thorough trituration in a mortar and compress in a tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.40 Gm.
tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Bismuth subnitrate      20.00 Gm.
    Carmine                  0.20 Gm.
    Spirit of rose, 1%       0.40 Cc.
    Fat starch               6.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered         14.00 Gm.

Thoroughly mix the bismuth subnitrate with the sugar, the carmine, and
the spirit of rose by trituration in a mortar; add the fat starch by
gentle trituration; and compress in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch
die and punches, to make one hundred 0.40 Gm. tablets.


15. TABELLAE CAFFEINAE DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Caffeine.

0.006 Gm. (gr. 1/10).

    Caffeine (alkaloid)                    0.60 Gm.
    Alcoholic solution of saccharin, 3%    4.00 Cc.
    Vanilla cacao sugar                   29.30 Gm.

Mix the alcoholic solution of saccharin with the caffeine (in a hot
mortar if in a hurry) and permit the alcohol to evaporate. Then mix
with the vanilla cacao sugar and compress in a tablet machine, using
3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Caffeine (alkaloid)       0.60 Gm.
    Saccharin                 0.12 Gm.
    Tincture of vanilla       1.50 Cc.
    Cacao powder              3.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered          26.30 Gm.

Mix the saccharin with the tincture of vanilla, then add the caffeine
and finally the other ingredients, and triturate until they are
thoroughly mixed. Compress in tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and
punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


16. TABELLAE CARBONIS LIGNI DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Charcoal.

0.18 Gm. (gr. 3).

    Charcoal, finely powdered            18.00 Gm.
    Alcoholic solution of saccharin, 3%   3.00 Cc.
    Alcohol                              15.00 Cc.
    Extract of glycyrrhiza, powdered      3.00 Gm.
    Spirit of anise, 10%                  1.00 Cc.
    Spirit of coriander, 10%              0.50 Cc.
    Cacao butter, in thin shavings        1.50 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                       7.50 Gm.

Mix all the ingredients except the cacao butter by thorough trituration
(in a warm mortar if in a hurry), permit the alcohol to evaporate
_completely_; then incorporate the cacao butter by gentle trituration
for a short time only. Compress in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die
and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


17. TABELLAE CERII OXALATIS DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Cerium Oxalate.

0.12 Gm. (gr. 2).

    Cerium oxalate     12.00 Gm.
    Fat starch          2.00 Gm.
    White fat sugar    16.00 Gm.

Mix by thorough trituration in a mortar and compress in a tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm.
tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Cerium oxalate        12.00 Gm.
    Spirit of peppermint   0.04 Cc.
    Fat starch             5.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered       13.00 Gm.

Mix the cerium oxalate, the powdered sugar, and the spirit of
peppermint by thorough trituration in a mortar; add the fat starch by
gentle trituration for a short time only; and compress in a tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm.
tablets.


18. TABELLAE COCAINAE DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Cocaine.

0.001 Gm. (gr. 1/60).

_Caution:_--Only a small number of these tablets should be ordered at
one time, as centigram doses have produced lethal results in children.

    Cocaine hydrochloride    0.10 Gm.
    Vanilla cacao sugar     30.00 Gm.

Mix by thorough trituration in a mortar and compress in a tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm.
tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Cocaine hydrochloride    0.10 Gm.
    Tincture of vanilla      1.50 Cc.
    Cacao powder             3.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered         27.00 Gm.

Mix the cocaine hydrochloride and sugar by trituration in a mortar;
then add the cacao and the tincture of vanilla, and triturate again
until the color is perfectly uniform; and compress in a tablet machine,
using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


19. TABELLAE CRETAE DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Chalk.

0.12 Gm. (gr. 2).

Each tablet represents approximately one half teaspoonful of the
official chalk mixture.

    Prepared chalk    12.00 Gm.
    Fat starch         3.00 Gm.
    Red fat sugar     10.00 Gm.

Mix by thorough trituration in mortar and compress in a tablet machine,
using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.25 Gm. tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Prepared chalk            12.00 Gm.
    Carmine                    0.20 Gm.
    Spirit of cinnamon, 10%    0.15 Cc.
    Fat starch                 5.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered            8.00 Gm.

Mix the chalk, the flavoring, and the coloring with the sugar by
thorough trituration in a mortar, until the pink color is perfectly
uniform; then add the fat starch by gentle trituration for a short
time only; and compress in a tablet machine, using a 3/8-inch die and
punches, to make one hundred 0.25 Gm. tablets.


20. TABELLAE DIGITALIS DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Digitalis.

0.008 Gm. (gr. 1/8).

_Caution:_--Owing to the toxicity of the digitalis, it is best not to
order more than a limited number of these tablets at one time.

    Digitalis powder                      0.80 Gm.
    Alcoholic solution of saccharin, 3%   3.00 Cc.
    Liquid petrolatum                     0.30 Cc.
    Cinnamon cacao sugar                 29.00 Gm.

Mix the powdered digitalis with the alcoholic solution of saccharin
(in a warm mortar if in a hurry) and permit the alcohol to evaporate.
Then add the liquid petrolatum and triturate. Finally incorporate the
cacao sugar by thorough trituration in a mortar. Compress in a tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm.
tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Digitalis powder                   0.80 Gm.
    Alcoholic solution of saccharin    3.00 Cc.
    Liquid petrolatum                  0.30 Cc.
    Spirit of cinnamon, 10%            0.15 Cc.
    Cacao powder                       3.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                   26.00 Gm.

Prepare the digitalis, as above described. Mix it with the cacao, the
sugar, and the spirit of cinnamon by thorough trituration in a mortar;
and compress in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to
make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


21. TABELLAE ELATERINI DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Elaterin.

0.0006 Gm. (gr. 1/100).

_Caution:_--Only a small number of these tablets should be ordered at
one time.

    Elaterin trituration, 10%            0.60 Gm.
    Red fat sugar                       18.00 Gm.

Thoroughly triturate the elaterin with the red fat sugar, added in
portions, and make one hundred 0.18 Gm. tablets by compressing in a
tablet machine, using 5/16-inch die and punches.


Alternate Formula.

    Elaterin trituration, 10%            0.60 Gm.
    Carmine                              0.50 Gm.
    Spirit of cinnamon, 10%              0.20 Cc.
    Fat starch                           3.60 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     13.30 Gm.

Having thoroughly mixed the elaterin trituration with sugar, add the
carmine and the spirit of cinnamon, and triturate again until the color
is uniform. Then add the fat starch by gentle trituration; and compress
in a tablet machine, using 5/16-inch die and punches, to make one
hundred 0.18 Gm. tablets.


22. TABELLAE EMETINAE DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Emetine.

0.0012 Gm. (gr. 1/50).

_Caution:_--Only a moderate number should be ordered at one time.

    Emetine                              0.12 Gm.
    Sodium bicarbonate                   2.00 Gm.
    Vanilla cacao sugar                 28.00 Gm.

Mix the ingredients by thorough trituration in a mortar and compress in
a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred
0.30 Gm. tablets.

_Note:_--If the powder does not work well in the machine, a little
shaved paraffin added by gentle trituration will overcome the trouble.


Alternate Formula.

    Emetine               0.12 Gm.
    Sodium bicarbonate    2.00 Gm.
    Tincture of vanilla   1.50 Cc.
    Cacao powder          3.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered      25.00 Gm.

Thoroughly triturate the emetine with the sugar and sodium bicarbonate;
then add the cacao powder and the tincture of vanilla, and triturate
again until the color is perfectly uniform; and compress in a tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm.
tablets.

_Note:_--See note under above formula.


23. TABELLAE FERMENTI ACIDI LACTICI DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Lactic Acid Ferment.

0.06 Gm. (gr. 1).

    Lactic acid ferment   6.00 Gm.
    Yellow fat sugar     24.00 Gm.

Triturate gently in a mortar and compress in a tablet machine, using
3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Lactic acid ferment    6.00 Gm.
    Spirit of lemon, 10%   1.25 Cc.
    Tincture of curcuma    2.50 Cc.
    Fat starch             6.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered       18.00 Gm.

Mix the sugar with the tincture of curcuma and the spirit of lemon and
permit the alcohol to evaporate. Then thoroughly incorporate the lactic
acid ferment by gentle trituration in a mortar. Finally add the fat
starch by gentle trituration for a short time only; and compress in a
tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred
0.30 Gm. tablets.


24. TABELLAE FERRI CARBONATIS DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Ferrous Carbonate.

0.02 Gm. (gr. 1/3).

    Saccharated ferrous carbonate  13.50 Gm.
    Cinnamon cacao sugar           16.50 Gm.

Mix by thorough trituration in a mortar and compress in a tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm.
tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Saccharated ferrous carbonate  13.50 Gm.
    Spirit of cinnamon, 10%         0.10 Cc.
    Cacao powder                    1.50 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                15.00 Gm.

Mix by thorough trituration; and compress in a tablet machine, using
3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


25. TABELLAE FERRI ET ARSENI DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Iron (0.02 Gm.), and Arsenic (0.0006 Gm.).

_Caution:_--Only a moderate number of these tablets should be ordered
at one time.

    Arsenic trioxide                0.06 Gm.
    Saccharated ferrous carbonate  13.50 Gm.
    Cinnamon cacao sugar           16.50 Gm.

Mix by thorough trituration in a mortar and compress in a tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm.
tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Arsenic trioxide                0.06 Gm.
    Saccharated ferrous carbonate  13.50 Gm.
    Spirit of cinnamon, 10%         0.10 Cc.
    Cacao powder                    1.50 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                15.00 Gm.

Triturate the arsenic trioxide with the sugar, added in portions, until
thoroughly mixed. Then add the other ingredients; triturate again until
the color is perfectly uniform; and compress in a tablet machine, using
3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


26. TABELLAE FERRI REDUCTI DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Reduced Iron.

0.06 Gm. (gr. 1).

    Reduced Iron          6.00 Gm.
    Vanilla cacao sugar  24.00 Gm.

Mix by thorough trituration in a mortar and compress in a tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm.
tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Reduced iron          6.00 Gm.
    Tincture of vanilla   1.50 Cc.
    Cacao powder          2.50 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered      21.50 Gm.

Directions same as above.


27. TABELLAE FERRI, QUININAE ET STRYCHNINAE DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Iron, Quinine and Strychnine.

Equivalent to about 1 Cc. of Elixir of Iron, Quinine and Strychnine.

_Caution:_--Only a moderate number of these tablets should be ordered
at one time.

    Alcresta strychnine, 5%         0.54 Gm.
    Lloyd's Reagent                 1.00 Gm.
    Aristochin                      1.00 Gm.
    Saccharated ferrous carbonate   3.33 Gm.
    Saccharin                       0.10 Gm.
    Cinnamon cacao sugar           24.03 Gm.

Mix the ingredients by thorough trituration in a mortar and compress in
a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred
0.30 Gm. tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Alcresta strychnine, 5%         0.54 Gm.
    Lloyd's Reagent                 1.00 Gm.
    Aristochin                      1.00 Gm.
    Saccharated ferrous carbonate   3.33 Gm.
    Saccharin                       0.10 Gm.
    Spirit of cinnamon, 10%         0.15 Cc.
    Cacao powder                    2.50 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                21.53 Gm.

Mix the spirit of cinnamon with the sugar, and set aside. Mix the
other ingredients by thorough trituration in a mortar; and finally
incorporate the flavored sugar. Compress in a tablet machine, using
3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


28. TABELLAE GLYCERYLIS NITRATIS DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Nitroglycerin.

0.0003 Gm. (gr. 1/200).

_Caution:_--Only a small number of these tablets should be ordered at
one time.

These tablets do not keep well, hence should be freshly prepared when
wanted.

Larger doses might be administered in this form.

    Spirit of nitroglycerin, 1%   3.00 Cc.
    Red fat sugar                18.00 Gm.

Triturate the spirit of nitroglycerin with the red fat sugar and permit
the alcohol to evaporate. When thoroughly dry, compress in a tablet
machine, using 5/16-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.18 Gm.
tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Spirit of nitroglycerin, 1%   3.00 Cc.
    Spirit of cinnamon, 10%       0.20 Cc.
    Carmine                       0.50 Gm.
    Fat starch                    3.60 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered              14.40 Gm.

Triturate the carmine with the spirit of cinnamon and the sugar, until
the color is perfectly uniform. Then add the spirit of nitroglycerin,
and triturate again thoroughly but gently. Finally incorporate the fat
starch by gentle trituration for a short time only; and compress in a
tablet machine, using 5/16-inch die and punches, to make one hundred
0.18 Gm. tablets.


29. TABELLAE HEROINAE DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Heroine.

0.0006 Gm. (gr. 1/100).

_Caution:_--Owing to the toxicity of heroine only a small number of
these tablets should be ordered at one time.

    Heroine hydrochloride                 0.06 Gm.
    Alcoholic solution of saccharin, 3%   2.00 Cc.
    Sodium bicarbonate                    1.00 Gm.
    Vanilla cacao sugar                  29.00 Gm.

Mix the heroine hydrochloride with the alcoholic solution of saccharin
(in a hot mortar if in a hurry) and permit the alcohol to evaporate;
then add the vanilla cacao sugar. Triturate thoroughly; and compress in
a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred
0.30 Gm. tablets.

_Note:_--If any difficulty is found in the compressing of these
tablets, the addition of a small amount of shaved paraffin will
overcome it.


Alternate Formula.

    Heroine hydrochloride   0.06 Gm.
    Saccharin               0.06 Gm.
    Sodium bicarbonate      1.00 Gm.
    Tincture of vanilla     1.50 Cc.
    Cacao powder            3.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered        26.00 Gm.

Mix the saccharin with the tincture of vanilla; then add the heroine
hydrochloride. Permit the alcohol to evaporate. Thoroughly triturate
with the sugar, added in portions. Finally add the sodium bicarbonate
and the cacao powder; and triturate again until the color is uniform.
Compress in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make
one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.

_Note:_--See note under above formula.


30. TABELLAE HEXAMETHYLENAMINAE DULCES

Sweet Tablets of Hexamethylenamine (Urotropin).

0.03 Gm. (gr. 1/2).

As much as 0.06 Gm. (gr. 1) may be given in this form.

    Hexamethylenamine      3.00 Gm.
    Vanilla cacao sugar   27.00 Gm.

Mix by thorough trituration in a mortar and compress in a tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm.
tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Hexamethylenamine                    3.00 Gm.
    Tincture of vanilla                  1.50 Cc.
    Cacao powder                         3.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     24.00 Gm.

Directions, same as above.


31. TABELLAE HYDRARGYRI CHLORIDI MITIS DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Mild Mercurous Chloride (Calomel).

0.006 Gm. (Gr. 1/10).

Much larger dose could be administered in this form.

    Mild mercurous chloride              0.60 Gm.
    Pink fat sugar                      17.40 Gm.

Mix by thorough trituration in a mortar and compress in a tablet
machine, using 5/16-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.18 Gm.
tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Mild mercurous chloride              0.60 Gm.
    Carmine                              0.10 Gm.
    Spirit of rose, 1%                   0.40 Cc.
    Fat starch                           3.60 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     14.40 Gm.

Having thoroughly triturated the mild mercurous chloride with the
sugar, add the carmine and the spirit of rose; and triturate again
until the pink color is perfectly uniform. Then add the fat starch by
triturating gently and for a short time only. Compress in a tablet
machine, using 5/16-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.18 Gm.
tablets.


32. TABELLAE HYDRARGYRI CUM CRETA DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Mercury with Chalk.

0.03 Gm. (gr. 1/2.).

Larger dose could be administered in this form.

    Mercury with chalk                   3.00 Gm.
    White fat sugar                     27.00 Gm.

Mix by thorough trituration in a mortar and compress in a tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm.
tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Mercury with chalk                   3.00 Gm.
    Spirit of peppermint                 0.60 Cc.
    Fat starch                           6.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     21.00 Gm.

Mix the ingredients, with the exception of the fat starch, by thorough
trituration in a mortar; add the latter by gentle trituration for a
short time only; and compress in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die
and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


33. TABELLAE HYDRARGYRI IODIDI FLAVI DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Yellow Mercurous Iodide.

0.003 Gm. (gr. 1/20).

Larger dose could be administered in this form.

These tablets must be well protected against light or they will rapidly
become dark; when thus protected, they keep fairly well.

    Yellow mercurous iodide              0.30 Gm.
    White fat sugar                     18.00 Gm.

Mix by thorough trituration in a mortar and compress in a tablet
machine, using 5/16-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.18 Gm.
tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Yellow mercurous iodide              0.30 Gm.
    Spirit of peppermint                 0.40 Cc.
    Fat starch                           3.60 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     14.10 Gm.

Having thoroughly triturated the yellow mercurous iodide with the
sugar, add the spirit of peppermint and triturate again. Then add the
fat starch, triturating gently and for a short time only. Compress in
a tablet machine, using 5/16-inch die and punches, to make one hundred
0.18 Gm. tablets.


34. TABELLAE HYDRARGYRI IODIDI RUBRI DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Red Mercuric Iodide.

0.001 Gm. (gr. 1/60).

_Caution:_--Only a moderate number of these tablets should be ordered
at one time.

Larger dose of red mercuric iodide could be administered in this form.

    Red mercuric iodide                  0.10 Gm.
    Red fat sugar                       18.00 Gm.

Thoroughly mix the red mercuric iodide with the red fat sugar by
trituration in a mortar; and compress in a tablet machine, using
5/16-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.18 Gm. tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Red mercuric iodide                  0.10 Gm.
    Spirit of cinnamon, 10%              0.20 Cc.
    Carmine                              0.50 Gm.
    Fat starch                           3.60 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     13.80 Gm.

Having thoroughly triturated the red mercuric iodide with the sugar,
add the carmine and the spirit of cinnamon and triturate again. Then
add the fat starch, triturating gently and for a short time only.
Compress in a tablet machine, using 5/16-inch die and punches, to make
one hundred 0.18 Gm. tablets.


35. TABELLAE HYOSCINAE DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Hyoscine.

0.00006 Gm. (gr. 1/1000).

Much larger dose could be administered in this form, _e. g._, 0.0006
Gm. (gr. 1/100) per tablet.

_Caution:_--Only a small number of these tablets should be ordered at
one time.

    Hyoscine hydrobromide                0.006 Gr.
    Red fat sugar                       18.00 Gm.

Triturate the hyoscine hydrobromide with red fat sugar, added in
portions, and compress in a tablet machine, using 5/16-inch die and
punches, to make one hundred 0.18 Gm. tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Hyoscine hydrobromide                0.006 Gm.
    Carmine                              0.50  Gm.
    Spirit of cinnamon, 10%              0.20  Cc.
    Fat starch                           3.60  Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     14.00  Gm.

Having thoroughly triturated the hyoscine hydrobromide with the sugar,
add spirit of cinnamon and the carmine, and triturate again until
the color is perfectly uniform. Then add the fat starch, triturating
gently and for a short time only. Compress in a tablet machine, using
5/16-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.18 Gm. tablets.


36. TABELLAE IPECACUANHAE ET OPII DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Ipecac and Opium (Dover's Powder).

0.03 Gm. (gr. 1/2).

_Caution:_--Owing to the toxicity of opium, only a small number should
be ordered at one time.

    Powdered ipecac                      0.30 Gm.
    Deodorized opium                     0.30 Gm.
    Alcoholic solution of saccharin, 3%  2.00 Cc.
    Sodium bicarbonate                   2.00 Gm.
    Cinnamon cacao sugar                27.40 Gm.

Mix the ipecac with the opium and the alcoholic solution of saccharin
(in a warm mortar if in a hurry) and permit the alcohol to evaporate;
then add the other ingredients, triturate thoroughly; and compress in
a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred
0.30 Gm. tablets.

_Note:_--If any difficulty is experienced in the compression of these
tablets, the addition of a little shaved paraffin will probably remedy
it.


Alternate Formula.

    Powdered ipecac                      0.30 Gm.
    Deodorized opium                     0.30 Gm.
    Alcoholic solution of saccharin, 3%  2.00 Cc.
    Spirit of cinnamon                   0.15 Cc.
    Sodium bicarbonate                   2.00 Gm.
    Cacao powder                         3.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     24.40 Gm.

Directions, same as above.


37. TABELLAE MAGNESII OXIDI DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Magnesia.

0.06 Gm. (gr. 1).

The dose may seem small; it represents, however, 1/3 teaspoonful of
Magnesia Magma (Milk of Magnesia) N. F.

    Heavy Magnesium oxide                6.00 Gm.
    Saccharin                            0.03 Gm.
    Spirit of peppermint                 0.60 Cc.
    Fat starch                           5.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     14.00 Gm.

Mix the saccharin with the spirit of peppermint, add the magnesia, and
mix by thorough trituration in a mortar. Then incorporate the sugar
by thorough trituration, and fat starch by gentle trituration for a
short time only. Compress in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and
punches, to make one hundred 0.25 Gm. tablets.


38. TABELLAE MAGNESII SALICYLATIS DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Magnesium Salicylate.

0.03 Gm. (gr. 1/2).

    Magnesium salicylate                 3.00 Gm.
    Green fat sugar                     27.00 Gm.

Mix by thorough trituration in a mortar, and compress in a tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm.
tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Magnesium salicylate                 3.00 Gm.
    Spirit of gaultheria, 10%            1.20 Cc.
    Solution of malachite green, 1:1000  1.20 Cc.
    Fat starch                           6.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     21.00 Gm.

Mix the ingredients, excepting the fat starch, by thorough trituration
in a mortar; incorporate the fat starch by gentle trituration for a
short time only; and compress in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die
and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


39. TABELLAE MORPHINAE DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Morphine.

0.0006 Gm. (gr. 1/100).

_Caution:_--Owing to the toxicity of morphine only a few of these
tablets should be ordered at one time, perhaps not more than three, as
a few milligrams are liable to constitute a lethal dose.

    Morphine (alkaloid)                  0.06 Gm.
    Alcoholic solution of saccharin, 3%  2.00 Cc.
    Sodium bicarbonate                   1.00 Gm.
    Vanilla cacao sugar                 29.00 Gm.

Mix the morphine with the alcoholic solution of saccharin (in a hot
mortar if in a hurry), and permit the alcohol to evaporate; then
add the sodium bicarbonate and the vanilla cacao sugar, triturating
thoroughly; and compress in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and
punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.

_Note:_--If any difficulty is experienced in the compression of these
tablets, the addition of a little shaved paraffin will probably remedy
it.


Alternate Formula.

    Morphine (alkaloid)                  0.06 Gm.
    Saccharin                            0.06 Gm.
    Tincture of vanilla                  1.50 Cc.
    Sodium bicarbonate                   1.00 Gm.
    Cacao powder                         3.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     26.00 Gm.

Mix the saccharin with the tincture of vanilla, add the morphine, and
allow the alcohol to evaporate. Then incorporate the other ingredients
by thorough trituration in a mortar; and compress in a tablet machine,
using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.

_Note:_--See note under above formula.


40. TABELLAE PHENOLPHTHALEINI DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Phenolphthalein.

0.06 Gm. (gr. 1).

    Phenolphthalein                      6.00 Gm.
    Alcoholic solution of saccharin, 3%  4.00 Cc.
    Vanilla cacao sugar                 24.00 Gm.

Mix the phenolphthalein with the alcoholic solution of saccharin (in a
hot mortar if in a hurry), and permit the alcohol to evaporate. Then
add the vanilla cacao sugar. Mix thoroughly and compress in a tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm.
tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Phenolphthalein                      6.00 Gm.
    Saccharin                            0.12 Gm.
    Tincture of vanilla                  1.50 Cc.
    Cacao powder                         3.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     21.00 Gm.

Mix the saccharin with the tincture of vanilla, and incorporate the
phenolphthalein. Finally add the sugar and the cacao by thorough
trituration in a mortar. Compress in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch
die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


41. TABELLAE PILOCARPINAE DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Pilocarpine.

0.0012 Gm. (gr. 1/50).

_Caution:_--Only a moderate number of these tablets should be ordered
at one time.

    Pilocarpine hydrochloride            0.12 Gm.
    Vanilla cacao sugar                 30.00 Gm.

Mix by thorough trituration in a mortar; and compress in a tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm.
tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Pilocarpine hydrochloride            0.12 Gm.
    Tincture of vanilla                  1.50 Cc.
    Cacao powder                         3.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     27.00 Gm.

Mix the pilocarpine hydrochloride with the sugar by thorough
trituration in a mortar, add the cacao powder and triturate again
until the color is perfectly uniform. Finally incorporate the tincture
of vanilla and compress in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and
punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


42. TABELLAE RESINAE JALAPAE DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Resin of Jalap.

0.03 Gm. (gr. 1/2).

_Caution:_--Only a small number of these tablets should be ordered at
one time.

    Resin of jalap                       3.00 Gm.
    Cinnamon cacao sugar                27.00 Gm.

Mix by thorough trituration in a mortar; and compress in a tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm.
tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Resin of jalap                       3.00 Gm.
    Spirit of cinnamon, 10%              0.20 Cc.
    Cacao powder                         3.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     24.00 Gm.

Mix the resin of jalap, the cacao, and the sugar by thorough
trituration in a mortar; finally incorporate the spirit of cinnamon;
and compress in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to
make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


43. TABELLAE RESINAE PODOPHYLLI DULCES

Sweet Tablets of Resin of Podophyllum.

0.001 Gm. (gr. 1/60).

_Caution:_--Only a small number of these tablets should be ordered at
one time.

    Citric acid                          0.05 Gm.
    Resin of podophyllum                 0.10 Gm.
    Alcoholic solution of saccharin, 3%  2.00 Cc.
    Cinnamon cacao sugar                30.00 Gm.

Mix the resin of podophyllum and the citric acid with the alcoholic
solution of saccharin and permit the alcohol to evaporate. Add the
cinnamon cacao sugar; triturate thoroughly; and compress in a tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm.
tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Citric acid                          0.05 Gm.
    Resin of podophyllum                 0.10 Gm.
    Alcoholic solution of saccharin, 3%  2.00 Cc.
    Spirit of cinnamon, 10%              0.20 Cc.
    Cacao powder                         3.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     27.00 Gm.

Directions, same as above.


44. TABELLAE SABROMINI DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Sabromin.

0.06 Gm. (gr. 1).

    Sabromin                             6.00 Gm.
    Pink fat sugar                      24.00 Gm.

Mix the Sabromin with the pink fat sugar by thorough trituration in a
mortar. Compress in a tablet machine, with rather heavy pressure, using
3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Sabromin                             6.00 Gm.
    Spirit of rose, 1%                   0.60 Cc.
    Carmine                              0.20 Gm.
    Fat starch                           6.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     18.00 Gm.

Mix the Sabromin with the carmine and the sugar, add the spirit of
rose, and triturate until thoroughly mixed. Finally incorporate the fat
starch; and compress in tablet machine, with rather heavy pressure,
using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


45. TABELLAE SAJODINI DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Sajodin.

0.06 Gm. (gr. 1).

    Sajodin                              6.00 Gm.
    Pink fat sugar                      24.00 Gm.

Mix the sajodin with the pink fat sugar by thorough trituration in a
mortar. Compress in a tablet machine, with rather heavy pressure, using
3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Sajodin                              6.00 Gm.
    Spirit of rose, 1%                   0.60 Cc.
    Carmine                              0.20 Gm.
    Fat starch                           6.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     18.00 Gm.

Mix the sajodin with the carmine and the sugar, add the spirit of rose,
and triturate until thoroughly mixed. Finally incorporate the fat
starch; and compress in tablet machine, with rather heavy pressure,
using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


46. TABELLAE SALOQUININAE DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Saloquinine.

0.06 Gm. (gr. 1).

    Saloquinine                          6.00 Gm.
    Green fat sugar                     24.00 Gm.

Mix the saloquinine with the green fat sugar by thorough trituration
in a mortar; and compress in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and
punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Saloquinine                          6.00 Gm.
    Spirit of gaultheria, 10%            1.00 Cc.
    Solution of malachite green, 1:1000  1.00 Cc.
    Fat starch                           6.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     18.00 Gm.

Mix the saloquinine and the sugar, the coloring and the flavoring by
thorough trituration in a mortar; incorporate the fat starch by gentle
trituration; and compress in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and
punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


47. TABELLAE SANTONINI DULCES

Sweet Tablets of Santonin.

0.03 Gm. (gr. 1/2).

_Caution:_--Only a small number of these tablets should be ordered at
one time, perhaps not more than three, as 0.13 Gm. has caused the death
of a child.

    Santonin                             3.00 Gm.
    Alcoholic solution of saccharin, 3%  2.00 Cc.
    Vanilla cacao sugar                 27.00 Gm.

Mix the alcoholic solution of saccharin with the santonin (in a hot
mortar if in a hurry) and permit the alcohol to evaporate. Then mix
thoroughly with the vanilla cacao sugar; and compress in a tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm.
tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Santonin                             3.00 Gm.
    Saccharin                            0.06 Gm.
    Tincture of vanilla                  1.50 Cc.
    Cacao powder                         3.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     24.00 Gm.

Mix the saccharin with the tincture of vanilla, add the santonin, and
permit the alcohol to evaporate. Then mix with the sugar and the cacao
by thorough trituration in a mortar. Compress in a tablet machine,
using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


48. TABELLAE SENNAE DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Senna.

0.06 Gm. (gr. 1).

    Senna, powdered                      6.00 Gm.
    Alcoholic solution of saccharin, 3%  2.00 Cc.
    Paraffin, in thin shavings           1.50 Gm.
    Yellow fat sugar                    22.50 Gm.

Pour the alcoholic solution of saccharin over the senna and permit the
alcohol to evaporate completely. (Dry saccharinization, using 0.06
Gm. of saccharin, is slightly less efficient; but may be used for
extemporaneous preparations.)

Incorporate the yellow fat sugar by thorough trituration in a mortar;
and finally the paraffin by gentle trituration for a short time only.
Compress in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make
one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Senna, powdered                      6.00 Gm.
    Saccharin                            0.06 Gm.
    Spirit of lemon, 10%                 0.15 Cc.
    Tincture of curcuma                  3.00 Cc.
    Fat starch                           6.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     18.00 Gm.

Mix the saccharin with the senna, add the sugar and triturate
thoroughly until well mixed. Then add the spirit of lemon and the
tincture of curcuma, and permit the alcohol to evaporate and the
powder to dry completely. Finally incorporate the fat starch by gentle
trituration for a short time only. Compress in a tablet machine, using
3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


49. TABELLAE SODII BICARBONATIS DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Sodium Bicarbonate.

0.06 Gm. (gr. 1).

    Sodium bicarbonate                   6.00 Gm.
    Spirit of peppermint                 0.60 Cc.
    Fat starch                           6.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     18.00 Gm.

Mix the sodium bicarbonate with the sugar and the spirit of peppermint
by thorough trituration in a mortar. Then incorporate fat starch by
gentle trituration for a short time only; and compress in a tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm.
tablets.


50. TABELLAE STROPHANTHINI DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Strophanthin.

0.00003 Gm. (gr. 1/2000).

_Caution:_--Only a small number of these tablets should be ordered at
one time.

    Strophanthin trituration, 10%        0.03 Gm.
    Alcoholic solution of saccharin, 3%  2.00 Cc.
    Vanilla cacao sugar                 30.00 Gm.

Mix the strophanthin trituration with alcoholic solution of saccharin
(in a hot mortar if in a hurry); and permit the alcohol to evaporate.
Add the vanilla cacao sugar and triturate thoroughly. Compress in a
tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred
0.30 Gm. tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Strophanthin trituration, 10%        0.03 Gm.
    Saccharin                            0.06 Gm.
    Tincture of vanilla                  1.50 Cc.
    Cacao powder                         3.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     27.00 Gm.

Mix the saccharin with the tincture of vanilla, add the strophanthin,
and permit the alcohol to evaporate. Mix with the sugar by thorough
trituration in a mortar; and incorporate the cacao powder, triturating
until thoroughly mixed and the color is uniform. Compress in a tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm.
tablets.


51. TABELLAE ALCRESTA STRYCHNINAE DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Alcresta Strychnine.

0.0003 Gm. (gr. 1/200).

_Caution:_--Only a small number of these tablets should be ordered at
one time, probably not more than ten, as four milligrams have been
lethal to a child.

    Citric acid                          0.06 Gm.
    Alcresta strychnine, 5%              0.60 Gm.
    Saccharin                            0.10 Gm.
    Cinnamon cacao sugar                29.30 Gm.

Mix the citric acid, alcresta strychnine and saccharin by thorough
trituration in a mortar. Add the cinnamon cacao sugar in portions and
triturate thoroughly. Compress in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die
and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Citric acid                          0.06 Gm.
    Alcresta strychnine, 5%              0.60 Gm.
    Saccharin                            0.10 Gm.
    Spirit of cinnamon, 10%              0.15 Cc.
    Cacao powder                         3.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     26.30 Gm.

Mix the spirit of cinnamon with the sugar; permit the alcohol to
evaporate. In another mortar mix the citric acid, the alcresta
strychnine, and the saccharin; add the flavored sugar in portions,
and triturate until thoroughly mixed; finally add the cacao powder,
and triturate again until the color is uniform. Compress in a tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm.
tablets.


52. TABELLAE SULPHONMETHANI DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Sulphonmethane.

0.03 Gm. (gr. 1/2).

_Caution:_--Only a moderate number of these tablets should be ordered
at one time.

    Sulphonmethane                       3.00 Gm.
    Alcoholic solution of saccharin, 3%  2.00 Cc.
    Liquid petrolatum                    1.00 Cc.
    White fat sugar                     27.00 Gm.

Mix the sulphonmethane with the alcoholic solution of saccharin (in a
hot mortar if in a hurry) and permit the alcohol to evaporate. Add the
liquid petrolatum and triturate again. Finally add the white fat sugar
and compress in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to
make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Sulphonmethane                       3.00 Gm.
    Saccharin                            0.06 Gm.
    Liquid petrolatum                    1.00 Cc.
    Spirit of peppermint                 0.60 Cc.
    Fat starch                           3.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     23.00 Gm.

Mix the saccharin with the spirit of peppermint and the sulphonmethane.
Allow the alcohol to evaporate. Add the liquid petrolatum and triturate
again. Incorporate the sugar by thorough trituration in a mortar; add
the fat starch, triturating gently and for a short time only. Compress
in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches to make one hundred
0.30 Gm. tablets.


53. TABELLAE SULPHURIS DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Sulphur.

0.06 Gm. (gr. 1).

    Precipitated sulphur                 6.00 Gm.
    Cinnamon cacao sugar                24.00 Gm.

Mix by thorough trituration in a mortar; and compress in a tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm.
tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Precipitated sulphur                 6.00 Gm.
    Spirit of cinnamon, 10%              0.15 Cc.
    Cacao powder                         3.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     21.00 Gm.

Directions, same as above.


54. TABELLAE TANNALBINI DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Tannalbin.

0.06 Gm. (gr. 1).

    Tannalbin                            6.00 Gm.
    Vanilla cacao sugar                 19.00 Gm.

Mix by thorough trituration in a mortar, and compress in a tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.25 Gm.
tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Tannalbin                            6.00 Gm.
    Tincture of vanilla                  1.50 Cc.
    Cacao powder                         2.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     17.00 Gm.

Directions, same as above.


55. TABELLAE TERPINI HYDRATIS DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Terpin Hydrate.

0.03 Gm. (gr. 1/2).

Represents half-teaspoonful of the Elixir of Terpin Hydrate, N. F., in
a much more pleasant form.

    Terpin Hydrate                       3.00 Gm.
    Vanilla Cacao Sugar                 27.00 Gm.

Mix by thorough trituration in a mortar and compress in a tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm.
tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Terpin hydrate                       3.00 Gm.
    Tincture of vanilla                  1.50 Cc.
    Cacao powder                         3.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     24.00 Gm.

Mix the cacao, the sugar, and the tincture of vanilla, and allow the
alcohol to evaporate. Add the terpin hydrate; and compress in a tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm.
tablets.


56. TABELLAE TERPINI HYDRATIS CUM HEROINA DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Terpin Hydrate (0.03 Gm.) with Heroine. 0.0006 Gm.
(gr. 1/100).

Represents a half-teaspoonful of the N. F. Elixir with but half the
amount of heroine in a much more pleasant form.

_Caution:_--Only a small number of these tablets should be ordered at
one time.

    Heroine hydrochloride                0.06 Gm.
    Alcoholic solution of saccharin, 3%  2.00 Cc.
    Terpin hydrate                       3.00 Gm.
    Vanilla cacao sugar                 27.00 Gm.

Mix the heroine hydrochloride with the alcoholic solution of saccharin
(in a hot mortar if in a hurry), and permit the alcohol to evaporate.
Add the terpin hydrate and the vanilla cacao sugar; triturate
thoroughly; and compress in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and
punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Heroine hydrochloride                0.06 Gm.
    Saccharin                            0.06 Gm.
    Tincture of vanilla                  1.50 Cc.
    Terpin hydrate                       3.00 Gm.
    Cacao powder                         3.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     24.00 Gm.

Mix the heroine hydrochloride with the saccharin and the tincture of
vanilla, and allow alcohol to evaporate. Mix with the sugar, added in
portions. Finally incorporate the terpin hydrate and the cacao powder
by thorough trituration; and compress in a tablet machine, using
3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


57. TABELLAE THEOBROMINAE SODIO-SALICYLATIS DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Theobromine Sodio-salicylate (Diuretin).

0.015 Gm. (gr. 1/4).

    Theobromine sodio-salicylate         1.50 Gm.
    Alcoholic solution of saccharin, 3%  2.00 Cc.
    Liquid petrolatum                    0.50 Cc.
    White fat sugar                     28.00 Gm.

Mix the diuretin with the alcoholic solution of saccharin (in a hot
mortar if in a hurry), and permit the alcohol to evaporate. Add the
liquid petrolatum and triturate. Finally incorporate the white fat
sugar, and compress in a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and
punches, to make one hundred 0.30 Gm. tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Theobromine sodio-salicylate         1.50 Gm.
    Saccharin                            0.06 Gm.
    Liquid petrolatum                    0.50 Cc.
    Spirit of peppermint                 0.60 Cc.
    Fat starch                           5.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     23.00 Gm.

Mix the theobromine sodio-salicylate and the saccharin with the spirit
of peppermint and permit the alcohol to evaporate. Add the liquid
petrolatum and triturate. Finally incorporate the sugar by thorough
trituration and the fat starch by gentle trituration; and compress in
a tablet machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred
0.30 Gm. tablets.


58. TABELLAE THYROIDEAE DULCES.

Sweet Tablets of Thyroid.

0.06 Gm. (gr. 1).

    Desiccated thyroid gland             6.00 Gm.
    Cinnamon cacao sugar                19.00 Gm.

Mix by thorough trituration in a mortar and compress in a tablet
machine, using 3/8-inch die and punches, to make one hundred 0.25 Gm.
tablets.


Alternate Formula.

    Desiccated thyroid gland             6.00 Gm.
    Spirit of cinnamon                   0.15 Cc.
    Cacao powder                         2.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     17.00 Gm.

Directions, same as above.




CHAPTER VIII.

FORMULAE FOR STOCK PREPARATIONS.

(Referred to in Chapter VII.)


1. FAT STARCH.

    Alcoholic solution of saccharin, 3%,[A]  15.00 Cc.
    Liquid petrolatum                        25.00 Cc.
    Starch                                   75.00 Gm.

Mix the starch with the solution of saccharin, and permit the alcohol
to evaporate completely. Then incorporate the liquid petrolatum.


2. CINNAMON CACAO SUGAR.

    Spirit of cinnamon, 10%                   0.50 Cc.
    Cacao powder                             10.00 Gm.
    Dextrose[B]                              10.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                          80.00 Gm.

Mix thoroughly by trituration in a mortar; and preserve in a
well-stoppered bottle.


3. GREEN FAT SUGAR.

    Spirit of gaultheria, 10%                 4.00 Cc.
    Solution of malachite green, 1:1000       4.00 Cc.
    Fat starch                               20.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                          80.00 Gm.

Mix the powdered sugar with the solution of malachite green; permit to
dry. Add the fat starch and the spirit of gaultheria, and preserve in a
well-stoppered bottle. Keep in a dark place.


4. PINK FAT SUGAR.

    Solution of carmine, N. F.                0.50 Cc.
    Spirit of rose, 1%                        2.00 Cc.
    Fat starch                               20.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                          80.00 Gm.

Add the solution of carmine to the sugar and triturate until thoroughly
mixed. Then add the fat starch and the spirit of rose, and preserve in
a well-stoppered bottle in a dark place.


5. RED FAT SUGAR.

    Solution of carmine, N. F.           6.00 Cc.
    Spirit of cinnamon, 10%              1.00 Cc.
    Fat starch                          20.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     80.00 Gm.

Mix the carmine solution with the sugar and permit the powder to
dry. Then add the spirit of cinnamon. Owing to the fact that the red
fat sugar is used with poisonous substances requiring very thorough
trituration which is liable to lessen the efficiency of the fat
starch, it is well to add the latter _after_ the medicament has been
incorporated with the red cinnamon sugar. Preserve in a well-stoppered
bottle in a dark place.


6. VANILLA CACAO SUGAR.

    Tincture of vanilla                  5.00 Cc.
    Cacao powder                        10.00 Gm.
    Dextrose[C]                         10.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     80.00 Gm.

Mix thoroughly by trituration in a mortar, and preserve in a
well-stoppered bottle.


7. WHITE FAT SUGAR.

    Spirit of peppermint                 2.00 Cc.
    Fat starch                          20.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     80.00 Gm.

To the powdered sugar add the fat starch and the spirit of peppermint.
Mix and preserve in a well-stoppered bottle in a dark place.


8. YELLOW FAT SUGAR.

    Spirit of lemon, 10%                 5.00 Cc.
    Tincture of curcuma                 10.00 Cc.
    Fat starch                          20.00 Gm.
    Sugar, powdered                     80.00 Gm.

Mix the powdered sugar with the tincture of curcuma and permit the
alcohol to evaporate; then add the spirit of lemon and the fat starch.
Mix well and preserve in a well-stoppered bottle in a dark place.


FOOTNOTES:

[A] Not absolutely necessary.

[B] Equivalent amount of sugar might be used though powder may not work
quite as well in machine.

[C] Equivalent amount of sugar might be used, though powder may not
work as well in machine.




REFERENCES.


END NOTES:

[1] _Fantus, B._--Candy Medication, Journal of the American Medical
Association, September 14, 1912, Vol. LIX, p. 842.

[2] _Sawyer, Sir James_--The Lancet, August 12, 1911, p. 435.

[3] _Fantus, B._--Tabellae Dulces, Journal of the American
Pharmaceutical Association, May, 1914, Vol. III.

[4] _Fuller, Robert M._--Dose Dispensing Simplified, New Remedies,
March, 1878, p. 69.

[5] _Schleimer, A._--The National Druggist, February, 1909, p. 54.

[6] _Fantus, B._--Candy Medication Formulary, Journal of the National
Association of Retail Druggists, May 22 and 29, and June 12 and 13,
1913, Vol. XVI, pp. 407, 471, 599, 663.

[7] _Fantus, B._--The Making of Tablets by the Retail Druggist, Journal
of the American Pharmaceutical Association, January, 1914, Vol. III,
No. 1, p. 72.

[8] _Wood, Joseph R._--Tablet Manufacture, J. B. Lippincott Co.,
Philadelphia, Pa.

[9] _Lloyd, John Uri_--Lloyd's Reagent, Preliminary Announcement,
Journal of the American Pharmaceutical Association, May, 1914, Vol.
III, No. 5, p. 625.




INDEX


    A
    Absorbents, 17
    Alcresta Strychnine, 33
    Anhydrotic, 19
    Antacids, 17
    Anthelmintic, 18
    Antidiarrheals, 17
    Antiemetics, 17
    Antipyretics, 20
    Antiseptic, Urinary, 19
    Antiseptics, Intestinal, 18
    Antispasmodics, 18
    Antitussic, 18
    Aromatic Calomel, 11

    C
    Cacao butter process, 24
    "Capping", 30
    Cathartics, 18
    Chocolate creams, medicated, 12
    Choice of color, 34
    Choice of flavor, 31
    Cinnamon Cacao Sugar, 72
    Circulatory depressant, 19
    Circulatory stimulants, 19
    Color, choice of, 34
    Confection, 11
    Construction of Formulae, 31
    Cough Remedies, 18
    Cremulae, 12

    D
    Depressants, 19
    Depressant, Circulatory, 19
    Diaphoretics, 19
    Difficulties in Tablet Making, 29, 36
    Diuretics, 19

    E
    Emetics, 17
    Eureka Tablet Machine, 27
    Expectorants, 18

    F
    Fat covering, 25, 32
    Fat starch, 72
    Fat sugars, 72, 73
    Fat sugar process, 24
    Flavor, choice of, 31
    Fondant, 12
    Formulae, construction of, 31
    Formulae for stock preparations, 72
    Formulae for sweet tablets, 35
    Formulary, 36-71
    Fuller's earth, 33

    G
    Green fat sugar, 72

    H
    Hematinics, 20
    Historical Introduction, 11

    I
    Indications for sweet tablets, 16
    Intestinal antiseptics, 18

    L
    Lloyd's Reagent, 33
    Lozenges, 11

    M
    Machine, Tablet, 27
    Making of sweet tablets, 23
    Malaria, specifics in, 20
    Myxedema, specific in, 20

    O
    Objections to sweet tablets, 21

    P
    Paraffin process, 24
    Phenolax, 11
    Pink fat sugar, 72
    Purgen, 11

    R
    References, 75
    Red fat sugar, 73
    Rheumatic fever, specifics in, 20

    S
    Saccharinization, 32
    Specifics, 20
    "Sticking," 29
    Stimulants, 20
    Stimulants, circulatory, 19
    Stock preparations, 72
    Subduing of tastes, 31
    Sweet Tablets:
      Acetphenetidin, 36
      Acetylamidosalol, 37
      Acetylsalicylic Acid, 37
      Aconitine, 37
      Adalin, 38
      Alcresta Strychnine, 66
      Anaesthesine, 39
      Antimony and Potassium Tartrate, 39
      Antipyrine, 40
      Apomorphine, 40
      Aristochin, 41
      Arsenic Trioxide, 42
      Aspirin, 37
      Atropine, 42
      Bismuth Subcarbonate, 43
      Bismuth Subnitrate, 43
      Caffeine, 44
      Calomel, 54
      Cerium Oxalate, 45
      Chalk, 46
      Charcoal, 45
      Cocaine, 46
      Digitalis, 47
      Diuretin, 70
      Dover's Powder, 57
      Elaterin, 48
      Emetine, 48
      Ferrous Carbonate, 50
      Heroine, 52
      Hexamethylenamine, 53
      Hyoscine, 56
      Ipecac and Opium, 57
      Iron and Arsenic, 50
      Iron, Quinine and Strychnine, 51
      Jalap, 61
      Lactic Acid Ferment, 49
      Magnesia, 58
      Magnesium Salicylate, 58
      Mercuric Iodide, Red, 56
      Mercurous Chloride, Mild, 54
      Mercurous Iodide, Yellow, 55
      Mercury with Chalk, 54
      Morphine, 59
      Nitroglycerin, 52
      Phenacetine, 36
      Phenolphthalein, 59
      Pilocarpine, 60
      Podophyllum, 61
      Reduced Iron, 51
      Resin Jalap, 61
      Resin Podophyllum, 61
      Sabromin, 62
      Sajodin, 62
      Salophen, 37
      Saloquinine, 63
      Santonin, 64
      Senna, 64
      Sodium Bicarbonate, 65
      Strophanthin, 65
      Strychnine, 66
      Sulphonal, 67
      Sulphonmethane, 67
      Sulphur, 68
      Tannalbin, 68
      Tartar Emetic, 39
      Terpin Hydrate, 68
      Terpin Hydrate with Heroine, 69
      Theobromine Sodio-salicylate, 70
      Thyroid, 71
      Urotropin, 53
    Syphilis, specifics in, 20

    T
    Tabellae Dulces, 14
      Acetphenetidini, 36
      Acetylamidosaloli, 37
      Acidi Acetylsalicylici, 37
      Aconitini, 37
      Adalini, 38
      Anaesthesini, 39
      Antimonii et Potassii Tartratis, 39
      Antipyrinae, 40
      Apomorphinae, 40
      Aristochinae, 41
      Arseni Trioxidi, 42
      Atropinae, 42
      Bismuthi Subcarbonatis, 43
      Bismuthi Subnitratis, 43
      Caffeinae, 44
      Carbonis Ligni, 45
      Cerii Oxalatis, 45
      Cocainae, 46
      Cretae, 46
      Digitalis, 47
      Elaterini, 48
      Emetinae, 48
      Fermenti Acidi Lactici, 49
      Ferri Carbonatis, 50
      Ferri et Arseni, 50
      Ferri Reducti, 51
      Ferri, Quininae et Strychninae, 51
      Glycerylis Nitratis, 52
      Heroinae, 52
      Hexamethylenaminae, 53
      Hydrargyri Chloridis Mitis, 54
      Hydrargyri cum Creta, 54
      Hydrargyri Iodidi Flavi, 55
      Hydrargyri Iodidi Rubri, 56
      Hyoscinae, 56
      Ipecacuanhae et Opii, 57
      Magnesii Oxidi, 58
      Magnesii Salicylatis, 58
      Morphinae, 59
      Phenolphthaleini, 59
      Pilocarpinae, 60
      Resinae Jalapae, 61
      Resinae Podophylli, 61
      Sabromini, 62
      Sajodini, 62
      Saloquininae, 63
      Santonini, 64
      Sennae, 64
      Sodii, Bicarbonatis, 65
      Strophanthini, 65
      Strychninae, 66
      Sulphonmethani, 67
      Sulphuris, 68
      Tannalbini, 68
      Terpini Hydratis, 68
      Terpini Hydratis cum Heroina, 69
      Theobrominae Sodio-salicylatis, 70
      Thyroideae, 71
    Tablet machine, 27
    Tablet machine, F. T. Stokes Co., 27
    Tablet machine, Whitall-Tatum Co., 27
    Tamar Indien, 12
    Tastes, subduing of, 31
    Tonics, 20

    U
    Urinary antiseptics, 19
    Uses of sweet tablets, 16

    V
    Vanilla Cacao sugar, 23
    Vaso-dilator, 19

    W
    White fat sugar, 73

    Y
    Yellow fat sugar, 73