DRAMATIS PERSONAE.

  GHOST OF ANDREA           |
  REVENGE                   | the Chorus.
  KING OF SPAIN.
  VICEROY OF PORTUGAL.
  DON CIPRIAN, duke of Castile.
  HIERONIMO, knight-marshall of Spain.
  BALTHAZAR, the Viceroy's son.
  LORENZO, Don Ciprian's son [and Bel-imperia's brother].
  HORATIO, Hieronimo's son.
  ALEXANDRO     |
  VILLUPPO      | lords of Portual.
  PEDRINGANO, servant of Bel-imperia.
  SERBERINE, servant of Balthazar.
  Spanish General, Portuguese Embassador, Old Man, Painter Page,
  Hangman, Citizens, Soldiers, Attendants, &c.
  BEL-IMPERIA, Lorenzo's sister.
  ISABELLA, Hieronimo's wife.
  PAGE.
  MESSENGER.
  CHRISTOPHEL.
  SERVANT.
  SENEX (DON BAZULTO).
  CITIZENS.


SCENE: Spain; and Portugal.





ACTVS PRIMVS.




[Prologue]

                Enter the GHOAST OF ANDREA, and with him REUENGE.

  GHOAST.  When this eternall substance of my soule
    Did liue imprisond in my wanton flesh,
    Ech in their function seruing others need,
    I was a courtier in the Spanish court:
    My name was Don Andrea; my discent,
    Though not ignoble, yet inferiour far
    To gratious fortunes of my tender youth,
    For there, in prime and pride of all my yeeres,
    By duteous seruice and deseruing loue,
    In secret I possest a worthy dame,
    Which hight sweet Bel-imperia by name.
    But in the haruest of my sommer ioyes
    Deaths winter nipt the blossomes of my blisse,
    Forcing diuorce betwixt my loue and me;
    For in the late conflict with Portingale
    My valour drew me into dangers mouth
    Till life to death made passage through my wounds.
    When I was slaine, my soule descended straight
    To passe the flowing streame of Archeron;
    But churlish Charon, only boatman there,
    Said that, my rites of buriall not performde,
    I might not sit amongst his passengers.
    Ere Sol had slept three nights in Thetis lap,
    And slakte his smoaking charriot in her floud,
    By Don Horatio, our knight-marshals sonne,
    My funerals and obsequies were done.
    Then was the fariman of hell content
    To passe me ouer to the slimie strond
    That leades to fell Auernus ougly waues.
    There, pleasing Cerberus with honied speech,
    I past the perils of the formost porch.
    Not farre from hence, amidst ten thousand soules,
    Sate Minos, Eacus and Rhadamant;
    To whome no sooner gan I make approach,
    To craue a pasport for my wandring ghost,
    But Minos in grauen leaues of lotterie
    Drew forth the manner of my life and death.
    "This knight," quoth he, "both liu'd and died in loue;
    And for his loue tried fortune of the warres;
    And by warres fortune lost both loue and life."
    "Why then," said Eacus, "convey him hence
    To walke with lovers in our field of loue
    And the course of euerlasting time
    Vnder greene mirtle-trees and cipresse shades."
    "No, no!" said Rhadamant, "it were not well
    With louing soules to place a martialist.
    He died in warre, and must to martiall fields,
    Where wounded Hector liues in lasting paine,
    And Achilles Mermedons do scoure the plaine."
    Then Minos, mildest censor of the three,
    Made this deuice, to end the difference:
    "Send him," quoth he, "to our infernall king,
    To dome him as best seemes his Maiestie."
    To this effect my pasport straight was drawne.
    In keeping on my way to Plutos court
    Through dreadfull shades of euer-glooming night,
    I saw more sights than thousand tongues can tell
    Or pennes can write or mortall harts can think.
    Three waies there were: that on the right hand side
    Was ready way vnto the foresaid fields
    Where louers liue and bloudie martialists,
    But either sort containd within his bounds;
    The left hand path, declining fearfuly,
    Was ready downfall to the deepest hell,
    Where bloudie Furies shakes their whips of steele,
    And poore Ixion turnes an endles wheele,
    Where vsurers are choakt with melting golde,
    And wantons are imbraste with ougly snakes,
    And murderers groane with neuer-killing wounds,
    And periured wights scalded in boiling lead,
    And all foule sinnes with torments ouerwhelmd;
    Twixt these two waies I trod the middle path,
    Which brought me to the faire Elizian greene,
    In midst whereof there standes a stately towre,
    The walles of brasse, the gates of adamant.
    Heere finding Pluto with his Proserpine,
    I shewed my pasport, humbled on my knee.
    Whereat faire Proserpine began to smile,
    And begd that onely she might giue me doome.
    Pluto was pleasd, and sealde it with a kisse.
    Forthwith, Reuenge, she rounded thee in th' eare,
    And bad thee lead me though the gates of horn,
    Where dreames haue passage in the silent night.
    No sooner had she spoke but we weere heere,
    I wot not how, in the twinkling of an eye.

  REUENGE.  Then know, Andrea, that thou ariu'd
    Where thou shalt see the author of thy death,
    Don Balthazar, the prince of Portingale,
    Depriu'd of life by Bel-imperia:
    Heere sit we downe to see the misterie,
    And serue for Chorus in this tragedie.




[ACT I. SCENE 1.]
                [The Spanish Court]

                Enter SPANISH KING, GENERALL, CASTILLE, HIERONIMO.

  KING.  Now say, l[ord] generall: how fares our campe?

  GEN.  All wel, my soueraigne liege, except some few
    That are deceast by fortune of the warre.

  KING.  But what portends thy cheerefull countenance
    And posting to our presence this in hast?
    Speak, man:  hath fortune giuen vs victorie?

  GEN.  Victorie, my liege, and that with little losse.

  KING.  Out Portugals will pay vs tribute then?

  GEN.  Tribute, and wonted homage therewithall.

  KING.  Then blest be Heauen, and Guider of the heauens,
    From whose faire influence such iustice flowes!

  CAST.  O multum dilecte Deo, tibi militat aether,
    Et coniuratae curato poplite gentes
    Succumbent: recto soror est victoria iuris!

  KING.  Thanks to my loving brother of Castille.
    But, generall, vnfolde in breefe discourse
    Your forme of battell and your warres successe,
    That, adding all the pleasure of thy newes
    Vnto the height of former happines,
    With deeper wage and gentile dignitie
    We may reward thy blisfull chiualrie.

  GEN.  Where Spaine and Portingale do ioyntly knit
    Their frontiers, leaning on each others bound,
    There met our armies in the proud aray:
    Both furnisht well, both full of hope and feare,
    Both menacing alike with daring showes,
    Both vaunting sundry colours of deuice,
    Both cheerly sounding trumpets, drums and fifes,
    Both raising dreadfull clamors to the skie,
    That valleis, hils, and riuers made rebound
    And heauen it-selfe was frighted with the sound.
    Our battels both were pitcht in squadron forme,
    Each corner strongly fenst with wings of shot;
    But, ere we ioyned and came to push of pike,
    I brought a squadron of our readiest shot
    From out our rearward to begin the fight;
    They brought another wing to incounter vs;
    Meane-while our ordinance plaid on either side,
    And captaines stroue to haue their valours tride.
    Don Pedro, their chiefe horsemens corlonell,
    Did with his cornet brauely make attempt
    To break our order of our battell rankes;
    But Don Rogero, worthy man of warre,
    Marcht forth against him with our musketiers
    And stopt the mallice of his fell approach.
    While they maintaine hot skirmish too and fro,
    Both battailes ioyne and fall to handie blowes,
    Their violent shot resembling th' oceans rage
    When, roaring lowd and with a swelling tide,
    It beats vpon the rampiers of huge rocks,
    And gapes to swallow neighbor-bounding lands.
    Now, while Bellona rageth heere and there,
    Thick stormes of bullets ran like winters haile,
    And shiuered launces darke the troubled aire;
    Pede pes & cuspide cuspis,
    Arma sonant armis vir petiturque viro;
    On euery side drop captaines to the ground,
    And souldiers, some ill-maimde, some slaine outright:
    Heere falls a body sundred from his head;
    There legs and armes lye bleeding on the grasse,
    Mingled with weapons and vnboweled steeds,
    That scattering ouer-spread the purple plaine.
    In all this turmoyle, three long hovres and more
    The victory to neither part inclinde,
    Till Don Andrea with his braue lanciers
    In their maine battell made so great a breach
    That, halfe dismaid, the multitude retirde.
    But Balthazar, the Portingales young prince,
    Brought rescue and encouragde them to stay.
    Heere-hence the fight was eagerly renewd,
    And in that conflict was Andrea slaine,--
    Braue man-at-arms, but weake to Balthazar.
    Yet, while the prince, insulting ouer him,
    Breathd out proud vaunts, sounding to our reproch,
    Friendship and hardie valour ioyned in one
    Prickt forth Horatio, our knight-marshals sonne,
    To challenge forth that prince in single fight.
    Not long betweene these twain the fight indurde,
    But straight the prince was beaten from his horse
    And forcst to yeeld him prisoner to his foe.
    When he was taken, all the rest fled,
    And our carbines pursued them to death,
    Till, Phoebus waning to the western deepe,
    Our trumpeters were chargd to sound retreat.

  KING.  Thanks, good l[ord] general, for these good newes!
    And, for some argument of more to come,
    Take this and weare it for thy soueraignes sake.

                  Giue him his chaine.

    But tell me now:  hast thou confirmed a peace?

  GEN.  No peace, my liege, but peace conditionall,
    That, if with homage tribute be well paid,
    The fury of your forces wilbe staide.
    And to this peace their viceroy hath subscribde,

                  Giue the K[ING] a paper.

    And made a solemne vow that during life
    His tribute shalbe truely paid to Spaine.

  KING.  These words, these deeds become thy person wel.
    But now, knight-marhsall, frolike with thy king,
    For tis thy sonne that winnes this battels prize.

  HIERO.  Long may he liue to serue my soueraigne liege!
    And soone decay unless he serue my liege!

                  A [trumpet] a-farre off.

  KING.  Nor thou nor he shall dye without reward.
    What meanes this warning of this trumpets sound?

  GEN.  This tels me that your Graces men of warre,
    Such as warres fortune hath reseru'd from death,
    Come marching on towards your royall seate,
    To show themselues before your Maiestie;
    For so gaue I in charge at my depart.
    Whereby by demonstration shall appeare
    That all, except three hundred or few more,
    Are safe returnd and by their foes inricht.

                  The armie enters, BALTHAZAR betweene LORENZO
                  and HORATIO, captiue.

  KING.  A gladsome sight!  I long to see them heere.

                  They enter and passe by.

    Was that the warlike prince of Portingale
    That by our nephew was in triumph led?

  GEN.  It was, my liege, the prince of Portingale.

  KING.  But what was he that on the other side
    Held him by th' arme as partner of the prize?

  HIERO.  That was my sonne, my gracious soueraigne;
    Of whome though from his tender infancie
    My louing thoughts did neuer hope but well,
    He neuer pleasd his fathers eyes till now,
    Nor fild my hart with ouercloying ioyes.

  KING.  Goe, let them march once more about these walles,
    That staying them we may conferre and talke
    With our braue prisoner and his double guard.

                  [Exit a MESSENGER.]

    Hieoronimo, it greatly pleaseth vs
    That in our victorie thou haue a share
    By vertue of thy worthy sonnes exploit.

                  Enter againe.

    Bring hether the young prince of Portingale!
    The rest martch on, but, ere they be dismist,
    We will bestow on euery soldier
    Two duckets, and on euery leader ten,
    That they may know our largesse welcomes them.

                  Exeunt all [the army] but BAL[THAZAR],
                  LOR[ENZO], and HOR[ATIO].

  [KING.]  Welcome, Don Balthazar!  Welcome nephew!
    And thou, Horatio, thou art welcome too!
    Young prince, although thy fathers hard misdeedes
    In keeping backe the tribute that he owes
    Deserue but euill measure at our hands,
    Yet shalt thou know that Spaine is honorable.

  BALT.  The trespasse that my father made in peace
    Is now controlde by fortune of the warres;
    And cards once dealt, it bootes not aske why so.
    His men are slaine,--a weakening to his realme;
    His colours ceaz'd,--a blot vnto his name;
    His sonne distrest,--a corsiue to his hart;
    These punishments may cleare his late offence.

  KING.  I, Balthazar, if he obserue this truce,
    Our peace will grow the stronger for these warres.
    Meane-while liue thou, though not in libertie,
    Yet free from bearing any seruile yoake;
    For in our hearing thy deserts were great.
    And in our sight thy-selfe art gratious.

  BALT.  And I shall studie to deserue this grace.

  KING.  But tell me,--for their holding makes me doubt:
    To Which of these twaine art thou prisoner?

  LOR.  To me, my liege.

  HOR.                   To me, my soueraigne.

  LOR.  This hand first tooke his courser by the raines.

  HOR.  But first my launce did put him from his horse.

  LOR.  I ceaz'd the weapon and enioyde it first.

  HOR.  But first I forc'd him lay his weapons downe.

  KING. Let goe his arm, vpon my priviledge!

                  Let him goe.

    Say, worthy prince:  to whether didst thou yeeld?

  BALT.  To him in curtesie; to this perforce;
    He spake me faire, this other gaue me strokes;
    He promisde life, this other threatned death;
    He wan my loue, this other conquerd me;
    And, truth to say, I yeeld my-selfe to both.

  HIERO.  But that I [know] your Grace is iust and wise,
    And might seeme partiall in this difference,
    Inforct by nature and by law of armes,
    My tongue should plead for young Horatios right.
    He hunted well that was a lyons death,
    Not he that in a garment wore his skin;
    So hares may pull dead lyons by the beard.

  KING.  Content thee, marshall; thou shalt haue no wrong,
    And for thy sake thy sonne shall want to right.
    Will both abide the censure of my doome?

  LOR.  I craue no better than your Grace awards.

  HOR.  Nor I, although I sit beside my right.

  KING.  Then by iudgement thus your strife shall end:
    You both deserue and both shall haue reward.
    Nephew, thou tookst his weapon[s] and his horse:
    His weapons and his horse are thy reward.
    Horatio, thou didst force him first to yeeld:
    His ransome therefore is thy valours fee;
    Appoint the sum as you shall both agree.
    But, nephew, thou shalt haue the prince in guard,
    For thine estate best fitteth such a guest;
    Horatios house were small for all his traine.
    Yet, in regard they substance passeth his,
    And that iust guerdon may befall desert,
    To him we yeeld the armour of the prince.
    How likes don Balthazar of this deuice?

  BALT.  Right well, my liege, if this prouizo were:
    That Don Horatio beare vs company,
    Whome I admire and loue for chiualrie.

  KING.  Horatio, leaue him not that loues thee so.
    Now let vs hence, to see our souldiers paide,
    And feast our prisoner as our friendly guest.

                  Exeunt.




[ACT I.  SCENE 2.]

                [Portugal:  the VICEROY'S palace.]

                Enter VICEROY, ALEXANDRO, VILLUPPO.

  VICE.  Is our embassadour dispatcht for Spaine?

  ALEX.  Two daies, my liege, are past since his depart.

  VICE.  And tribute paiment gone along with him?

  ALEX.  I, my good lord.

  VICE.  Then rest we heere a-while in our vnrest;
    And feede our sorrowes with inward sighes,
    For deepest cares break neuer into teares.
    But wherefore sit I in a regall throne?
    This better fits a wretches endles moane.
    Yet this is higher then my fortunes reach,
    And therefore better then my state deserues.

                  Falles to the grounde.

    I, I, this earth, image of melancholly,
    Seeks him whome fates [adiudge] to miserie!
    Heere let me lye!  Now am I at the lowest!
    Qui iacet in terra non habet vnde cadat.
    In me concumpsit vires fortuna nocendo,
    Nil superest vt iam possit obesse magis.
    Yes, Fortune may bereaue me of my crowne--
    Heere, take it now; let Fortune doe her worst,
    She shall now rob me of this sable weed.
    O, no, she enuies none but pleasent things.
    Such is the folly of despightfull chance,
    Fortune is blinde and sees not my deserts,
    So is she deafe and heares not my laments;
    And, coulde she heare, yet is she willfull mad,
    And therefore will not pittie my distresse.
    Suppose that she coulde pittie me, what then?
    What helpe can be expected at her hands
    Whose foote is standing on a rowling stone
    And minde more mutable then fickle windes?
    Why waile I, then, wheres hope of no redresse?
    O, yes, complaining makes my greefe seeme lesse.
    My late ambition hath distaind my faith,
    My breach of faith occaisioned bloudie warres,
    Those bloudie warres haue spent my treasur[i]e,
    And with my treasur[i]e my peoples blood,
    And with the blood my ioy and best beloued,--
    My best beloued, my sweet and onely sonne!
    O, wherefore went I not to warre my-selfe?
    The cause was mine; I might haue died for both.
    My yeeres were mellow, but his young and greene:
    My death were naturall, but his was forced.

  ALEX.  No doubt, my liege, but still the prince suruiues.

  VICE.  Suruiues!  I, where?

  ALEX.  In Spaine, a prisoner by michance of warre.

  VICE.  Then they haue slaine him for his fathers fault.

  ALEX.  That were a breach to common lawe of armes.

  VICE.  They recke no lawes that meditate reuenge.

  ALEX.  His ransomes worth will stay from foule reuenge.

  VICE.  No; if he liued, the newes would soone be heere.

  VILLUP.  My soueraign, pardon the author of ill newes,
    And Ile bewray the fortune of thy sonne.

  VICE.  Speake on; Ile guerdon thee, what-ere it be.
    Mine eare is ready to receiue ill newes,
    My hart growne hard gainst mischiefes battery;
    Stand vp, I say, and tell thy tale at large.

  VILLUP.  Then heare that truth which these mine eies have seene:
    When both the armies were in battell ioyned.
    Don Balthazar amidst the thickest troupes,
    To winne renowme, did wondrous feats of armes;
    Amongst the rest I saw him hand-to-hand
    In single fight with their lord generall.
    Till Alexandro, that heere counterfeits
    Vnder the colour of a duteous freend,
    Discharged a pistol at the princes back,
    As though he would haue slaine their generall,
    But therwithall Don Balthazar fell downe;
    And when he fell, then we began to flie;
    But, had he liued, the day had sure bene ours.

  ALEX.  O wiched forgerie!  O traiterous miscreant!

  VICE.  Hold thou thy peace!  But now, Villuppo, say:
    Where then became the carkasse of my sonne?

  VILLUP.  I saw them drag it to the Spanish tents.

  VICE.  I, I, my nightly dreames haue tolde me this!
    Thou false, vnkinde, vnthankfull, traiterous beast!
    Wherein had Balthazar offended thee,
    That thou should betray him to our foes?
    Wast Spanish golde that bleared so thine eyes
    That thou couldst see no part of our deserts?
    Perchance, because thou art Terseraes lord,
    Thou hadst some hope to weare this diademe
    If first my sonne and then my-selfe were slaine;
    But thy ambitious thought shall breake thy neck.
    I, this was it that made thee spill his bloud!

                  Take the crowne and put it on againe.

    But Ile now weare it till they bloud be spilt.

  ALEX.  Vouchsafe, dread soueraigne, to heare me speak!

  VICE.  Away with him!  his sight is second hell!
    Keepe him till we determine his death.
    If Balthazar be dead, he shall not liue.

                 [They take him out.]

    Villuppo, follow vs for thy reward.

                 Exit VICE[ROY].

  VILLUP.  Thus haue I with an enuious forged tale
    Deceiued the king, betraid mine enemy,
    And hope for guerdon of my villany.




[ACT I.  SCENE 3.]

                [Spain: the palace]

                Enter HORATIO and BEL-IMPERIA.

  BEL.  Signior Horatio, this is the place and houre
    Wherein I must intreat thee to relate
    The circumstance of Don Andreas death,
    Who liuing was my garlands sweetest flower,
    And in his death hath buried my delights.

  HOR.  For loue of him and seruice to yourself,
    [Ile not] refuse this heauy dolefull charge;
    Yet teares and sighes, I feare, will hinder me.
    When both our armies were enioynd in fight,
    Your worthie chiualier admist the thikst,
    For glorious cause still aiming at the fairest,
    Was at the last by yong Don Balthazar
    Encountered hand-to-hand.  Their fight was long,
    Their harts were great, their clamours menacing,
    Their strength alike, their strokes both dangerous;
    But wrathfull Nemesis, that wicked power,
    Enuying at Andreas praise and worth,
    Cut short his life to end his praise and woorth.
    She, she her-selfe, disguisde in armours maske,
    As Pallas was before proud Pergamus,
    Brought in a fresh supply of halberdiers,
    Which pauncht his horse and dingd him to the ground.
    Then yong Don Balthazar, with ruthles rage,
    Taking aduantage of his foes distresse,
    Did finish what his halberdiers begun;
    And left not till Andreas life was done.
    Then, though too late, incenst with iust remorce,
    I with my band set foorth against the prince,
    And brought him prisoner from his halba[r]diers.

  BEL.  Would thou hadst slaine him that so slew my loue!
    But then was Don Andreas carkasse lost?

  HOR.  No; that was it for which I cheefely stroue,
    Nor stept I back till I recouerd him.
    I tooke him vp, and wound him in mine armes,
    And, welding him vnto my priuate tent,
    There laid him downe and dewd him with my teares,
    And sighed and sorrowed as became a freend.
    But neither freendly sorrow, sighes and teares
    Could win pale Death from his vsurped right.
    Yet this I did, and lesse I could not doe:
    I saw him honoured with due funerall.
    This scarfe I pluckt from off his liueles arme,
    And wear it in remembrance of my freend.

  BEL.  I know the scarfe: would he had kept it still!
    For, had he liued, he would haue kept it still,
    And worne it for his Bel-imperias sake;
    For twas my fauour at his last depart.
    But now weare thou it both for him and me;
    For, after him, thou hast deserued it best.
    But, for thy kindnes in his life and death,
    Be sure, while Bel-imperias life endures,
    She will be Don Horatios thankfull freend.

  HOR.  And, madame, Don Horatio will not slacke
    Humbly to serue faire Bel-imperia.
    But now, if your good liking stand thereto,
    Ile craue your pardon to goe seeke the prince;
    For so the duke, your father, gaue me charge.

                Exit.

  BEL.  I, goe, Horatio; leaue me heere alone,
    For solitude best fits my cheereles mood.--
    Yet what auailes to waile Andreas death,
    From whence Horatio proues my second loue?
    Had he not loued Andrea as he did,
    He could not sit in Bel-imperias thoughts.
    But how can loue finde harbour in my brest,
    Till I reuenge the death of my beloued?
    Yes, second loue shall further my reuenge:
    Ile loue Horatio, my Andreas freend,
    The more to spight the prince that wrought his end;
    And, where Don Balthazar, that slew my loue,
    He shall, in rigour of my iust disdaine,
    Reape long repentance for his murderous deed,--
    For what wast els but murderous cowardise,
    So many to oppresse one valiant knight,
    Without respect of honour in the fight?
    And heere he comes that murdred my delight.

                Enter LORENZO and BALTHAZAR.

  LOR.  Sister, what meanes this melanchollie walke?

  BEL.  That for a-while I wish no company.

  LOR.  But heere the prince is come to visite you.

  BEL.  That argues that he liues in libertie.

  BAL.  No madam, but in pleasing seruitude.

  BEL.  Your prison then, belike, is your conceit.

  BAL.  I, by conceite my freedome is enthralde.

  BEL.  Then with conceite enlarge your-selfe againe.

  BAL.  What if conceite haue laid my hart to gage?

  BEL.  Pay that you borrowed, and recouer it.

  BAL.  I die if it returne from whence it lyes.

  BEL.  A hartles man, and liue?  A miracle!

  BAL.  I, lady, loue can work such miracles.

  LOR.  Tush, tush, my lord!  let goe these ambages,
    And in plaine tearmes acquaint her with your loue.

  BEL.  What bootes complaint, when thers no remedy?

  BAL.  Yes, to your gracios selfe must I complaine,
    In whose faire answere lyes my remedy,
    On whose perfection all my thoughts attend,
    On whose aspect mine eyes finde beauties bowre,
    In whose translucent brest my hart is lodgde.

  BEL. Alas, my lord! there but words of course,
    And but deuise to driue me from this place.

                She, going in, lets fall her gloue, which
                HORATIO, comming out, takes vp.

  HOR.  Madame, your gloue.

  BEL.  Thanks, good Horatio; take it for thy paines.

                [BEL-IMPERIA exits.]

  BAL.  Signior Horatio stoopt in happie time!

  HOR.  I reapt more grace that I deseru'd or hop'd.

  LOR.  My lord, be not dismaid for what is past;
    You know that women oft are humerous:
    These clouds will ouerblow with little winde;
    Let me alone, Ill scatter them my-selfe.
    Meane-while let vs deuise to spend the time
    In some delightfull sports and reuelling.

  HOR.  The king, my lords, is comming hither straight
    To feast the Portingall embassadour;
    Things were in readiness before I came.

  BAL.  Then heere it fits vs to attend the king,
    To welcome hither our embassadour,
    And learne my father and my countries health.

                Enter the banquet, TRUMPETS, the KING,
                and EMBASSADOUR.

  KING.  See, lord embassador, how Spaine intreats
    Their prisoner Balthazar, thy viceroyes sonne:
    We pleasure more in kindenes than in warres.

  EMBASS.  Sad is our king, and Portingale laments,
    Supposing that Don Balthazar is slaine.

  BAL. [aside]  So am I, slaine by beauties tirannie!--
    You see, my lord, how Balthazar is slaine:
    I frolike with the Duke of Castilles sonne,
    Wrapt euery houre in pleasures of the court,
    And graste with fauours of his Maiestie.

  KING.  Put off your greetings till our feast be done;
    Now come and sit with vs, and taste our cheere.

                Sit to the banquet.

    Sit downe, young prince, you are our second guest;
    Brother, sit downe; and nephew, take your placel
    Signior Horatio, waite thou vpon our cup,
    For well thou hast deserued to be honored.
    Now, lordings, fall too: Spaine is Portugall,
    And Portugall is Spaine; we both are freends;
    Tribute is paid, and we enioy our right.
    But where is olde Hieronimo, our marhsall?
    He promised vs, in honor of our guest,
    To grace our banquet with some pompous iest.

                Enter HIERONIMO with a DRUM, three KNIGHTS,
                each with scutchin; then he fethces three
                KINGS; they take their crownes and them
                captiue.

    Hieronimo, this makes contents mine eie,
    Although I sound well not the misterie.

  HIERO.  The first arm'd knight that hung his scutchin vp

                He takes the scutchin ahd giues it to
                the KING.

    Was English Robert, Earle of Glocester,
    Who, when King Stephen bore sway in Albion,
    Arriued with fiue and twenty thousand men
    In Portingale, and, by successe of warre,
    Enforced the king, then but a Sarasin,
    To beare the yoake of the English monarchie.

  KING.  My lord of Portingale, by this you see
    That which may comfort both your king and you,
    And make your late discomfort seeme the lesse.
    But say, Hieronimo:  what was the next?

  HIERO.  The second knight that hung his scutchin vp

                He doth as he did before.

    Was Edmond, Earle of Kent in Albion.
    When English Richard wore the diadem,
    He came likewise and razed Lisbon walles,
    And tooke the king of Portingale in fight,--
    For which, and other suche seruice done,
    He after was created Duke of Yorke.

  KING.  This is another speciall argument
    That Portingale may daine to beare our yoake,
    When it by little England hath beene yoakt.
    But now, Hieronimo, what were the last?

  HIERO.  The third and last, not least in our account,

                Dooing as before.

    Was, as the rest, a valiant Englishman,
    Braue Iohn of Gaunt, the Duke of Lancaster,
    As by his scuthcin plainely may appeare:
    He with a puissant armie came to Spaine
    And tooke our Kinge of Castille prisoner.

  EMBASS.  This is an argument for our viceroy
    That Spaine may not insult for her successe,
    Since English warriours likewise conquered Spaine
    And made them bow their knees to Albion.

  KING.  Hieronimo, I drinke to thee for this deuice,
    Which hath pleasde both the embassador and me:
    Pledge me, Hieronimo, if thou loue the king!

                Takes the cup of HORATIO.

    My lord, I feare we sit but ouer-long,
    Vnlesse our dainties were more delicate,--
    But welcome are to you the best we haue.
    Now let vs in, that you may be dispatcht;
    I think our councell is already set.

                Exeunt omnes.

                [CHORUS.]

  ANDREA.  Come we for this from depth of vnder ground,--
    To see him feast that gaue me my deaths wound?
    These pleasant sights are sorrow to my soule:
    nothing but league and loue and banqueting!

  REUENGE.  Be still, Andrea;  ere we go from hence,
    Ile turne their freendship into fell despight,
    Their loue to mortall hate, their day to night,
    Their hope into dispaire, their peace in warre,
    Their ioyes to paine, their blisse to miserie.




ACTUS SECUNDUS.




[ACT II.  SCENE 1.]

                [The DUKE's castle.]

                Enter LORENZO and BALTHAZAR.

  LORENZO.  My lord, though Bel-imperia seeme thus coy,
    Let reason holde you in your wonted ioy:
    In time the sauage bull sustaines the yoake,
    In time all haggard hawkes will stoope to lure,
    In time small wedges cleaue the hardest oake,
    In time the [hardest] flint is pearst with softest shower;
    And she in time will fall from her disdaine,
    And rue the sufferance of your freendly paine.

  BAL.  No; she is wilder, and more hard withall,
    Then beast or bird, or tree or stony wall!
    But wherefore blot I Bel-imperias name?
    It is my fault, not she that merits blame.
    My feature is not to content her sight;
    My wordes are rude and worke her no delight;
    The lines I send her are but harsh and ill,
    Such as doe drop from Pan and Marsias quill;
    My presents are not of sufficient cost;
    And, being worthles, all my labours lost.
    Yet might she loue me for my valiancie.
    I; but thats slandred by captiuitie.
    Yet might she loue me to content her sire.
    I; but her reason masters [her] desire.
    Yet might she loue me as her brothers freend.
    I; but her hopes aime at some other end.
    Yet might she loue me to vpreare her state.
    I; but perhaps she [loues] some nobler mate.
    Yet might she loue me as her beauties thrall.
    I; but I feare she cannot loue at all.

  LOR.  My lord, for my sake leaue these extasies,
    And doubt not but weele finde some remedie.
    Some cause there is that lets you not be loued:
    First that must needs be knowne, and then remoued.
    What if my sister loue some other knight?

  BAL.  My sommers day will turne to winters night.

  LOR.  I haue already founde a strategeme
    To sound the bottome of this doubtfull theame.
    My lord, for once you shall be rulde by me;
    Hinder me not what ere you heare or see:
    By force or faire meanes will I cast about
    To finde the truth of all this question out.
    Ho, Pedringano!

  PED.          Signior.

  LOR.                  Vien qui presto!

                Enter PEDRINGANO.

  PED.  Hath your lordship any seruice to command me?

  LOR.  I, Pedringano, seruice of import.
    And, not to spend the time in trifling words,
    Thus stands the case:  it is not long, thou knowst,
    Since I did shield thee from my fathers wrath
    For thy conueniance in Andreas love,
    For which thou wert adiudg'd to punishment;
    I stood betwixt thee and thy punishment,
    And since thou knowest how I haue favored thee.
    Now to these fauours will I adde reward,
    Not with faire woords, but store of golden coyne
    And lands and liuing ioynd with dignities,
    If thou but satisfie my iust demaund;
    Tell truth and haue me for thy lasting freend.

  PED.  What-ere it be your lordship shall demaund,
    My bounden duety bids me tell the truth,
    If case it lye in me to tell the truth.

  LOR.  Then, Pedringano, this is my demaund;
    Whome loues my sister Bel-imperia?
    For she reposeth all her trust in thee.
    Speak, man, and gaine both freendship and reward:
    I meane, whome loues she in Andreas place?

  PED.  Alas, my lord, since Don Andreas death
    I haue no credit with her as before,
    And therefore know not if she loue or no.

  LOR.  Nay, if thou dally, then I am thy foe,
    And feare shall force what frendship cannot winne.
    Thy death shall bury what thy life conceales.
    Thou dyest for more esteeming her than me!

                [Draws his sword.]

  PED.  Oh stay, my lord!

  LOR.  Yet speak the truth, and I will guerdon thee
    And shield thee from what-euer can ensue,
    And will conceale what-euer proceeds from thee;
    But, if thou dally once againe, thou diest!

  PED.  If madame Bel-imperia be in loue--

  LOR.  What, villaine!  ifs and ands?

  PED.  Oh stay, my lord!  she loues Horatio!

                BALTHAZAR starts back.

  LOR.  What!  Don Horatio, our knight-marshals sonne?

  PED. Euen him, my lord.

  LOR.  Now say but how knoest thou he is her loue,
    And thou shalt finde me kinde and liberall.
    Stand vp, I say, and feareles tell the truth.

  PED.  She sent him letters,--which my-selfe perusde,--
    Full-fraught with lines and arguments of loue,
    Perferring him before Prince Balthazar.

  LOR.  Sweare on this crosse that what thou saiest is true,
    And that thou wilt conseale what thou hast tolde.

  PED.  I sweare to both, by him that made vs all.

  LOR.  In hope thine oath is true, heeres thy reward.
    But, if I proue thee periurde and vniust,
    This very sword whereon thou tookst thine oath
    Shall be the worker of thy tragedie.

  PED.  What I haue saide is true, and shall, for me,
    Be still conceald from Bel-imperia.
    Besides, your Honors liberalitie
    Deserues my duteous seruice euen till death.

  LOR.  Let this be all that thou shall doe for me:
    Be watchfull when and where these louers meete,
    And giue me notice in some secret sort.

  PED.  I will, my lord.

  LOR.  Then thou shalt finde that I am liberall.
    Thou knowest that I can more aduance thy state
    Then she:  be therefore wise and faile me not.
    Goe and attend her as thy custome is,
    Least absence make her think thou doost amisse.

                Exit PEDRINGANO.

    Why, so, Tam armis quam ingenio:
    Where wordes preuaile not, violence preuailes.
    But golde doth more than either of them both.
    How likes Prince Balthazar this strategeme?

  BAL.  Both well and ill; it makes me glad and sad:
    Glad, that I know the hinderer of my loue;
    Sad, that I fear she hates me whome I loue;
    Glad, that I know on whome to be reueng'd;
    Sad, that sheele flie me if I take reuenge.
    Yet must I take reuenge or dye my-selfe;
    For loue resisted growes impatient.
    I think Horatio be my destind plague:
    First, in his hand he brandished a sword,
    And with that sword he fiercely waged warre,
    And in that warre he gaue me dangerous wounds,
    And by those wounds he forced me to yeeld,
    And by my yeelding I became his slaue;
    Now, in his mouth he carries pleasing words,
    Which pleasing wordes doe harbour sweet conceits,
    Which sweet conceits are lim'd with slie deceits,
    Which slie deceits smooth Bel-imperias eares,
    And through her eares diue downe into her hart,
    And in her hart set him, where I should stand.
    Thus hath he tane my body by force,
    And now by sleight would captiuate my soule;
    But in his fall Ile tempt the Destinies,
    And either loose my life or winne my loue.

  LOR. Lets goe, my lord;  [our] staying staies reuenge.
    Doe but follow me, and gaine your loue;
    Her fauour must be wonne by his remooue.

                Exeunt.




[ACT II.  SCENE 2.]

[The Duke's Castle]

                Enter HORATIO and BEL-IMPERIA.

  HOR.  Now, madame, since by fauour of your love
    Our hidden smoke is turnd to open flame,
    And that with lookes and words we feed our thought,--
    Two chiefe contents where more cannot be had,--
    Thus in the midst of loues faire blandeshments
    Why shew you signe of inward languishments?

                PEDRINGANO sheweth all to the PRINCE and
                LORENZO, placing them in secret.

  BEL.  My hart, sweet freend, is like a ship at sea:
    She wisheth port, where, riding all at ease,
    She may repaire what stormie times haue worne,
    And, leaning on the shore, may sing with ioy
    That pleasure followes paine, and blisse annoy.
    Possession of thy loue is th' onely port
    Wherein my hart, with feares and hopes long tost,
    Each howre doth wish and long to make resort,
    There to repaire the ioyes that it hath lost,
    And, sitting safe, to sing in Cupids quire
    That sweetest blisse is crowne of loues desire.

                BALTHAZAR, aboue.

  BAL.  O sleepe, mine eyes; see not my loue prophande!
    Be deafe, my ears; heare not my discontent!
    Dye, hart; another ioyes what thou deseruest!

  LOR.  Watch still, mine eyes, to see this loue disioyned!
    Heare still, mine eares, to heare them both lament!
    Liue, hart, to ioy at fond Horatios fall!

  BEL.  Why stands Horatio speecheles all this while?

  HOR.  The lesse I speak, the more I meditate.

  BEL.  But whereon doost thou cheifely meditate?

  HOR.  On dangers past and pleasures to ensue.

  BAL. On pleasures past and dangers to ensue!

  BEL.  What dangers and what pleasures doost thou mean?

  HOR.  Dangers of warre and pleasures of our loue.

  LOR.  Dangers of death, but pleasures none at all!

  BEL. Let dangers goe; thy warre shall be with me,
    But such a [warre] as breakes no bond of peace.
    Speake thou faire words, Ile crosse them with faire words;
    Send thou sweet looks, Ile meet them with sweet looks;
    Write louing lines, Ile answere louing lines;
    Giue me a kisse, Ile counterchecke thy kisse:
    Be this our warring peace, or peacefull warre.

  HOR.  But, gratious madame, then appoint the field
    Where triall of this warre shall first be made.

  BAL.  Ambitious villaine, how his boldenes growes!

  BEL.  Then be thy fathers pleasant bower in the field,--
    Where first we vowd a mutuall amitie.
    The court were dangerous; that place is safe.
    Our howre shalbe when Vesper ginnes to rise,
    That summons home distresfull trauellers.
    There none shall heare vs but the harmeles birds:
    Happelie the gentle nightingale
    Shall carroll vs a-sleepe ere we be ware,
    And, singing wit the prickle at her breast,
    Tell our delight and mirthfull dalliance.
    Till then, each houre will seeme a yeere and more.

  HOR.  But, honie-sweet and honorable loue,
    Returne we now into your fathers sight;
    Dangerous suspition waits on our delight.

  LOR.  I, danger mixt with iealous despite
    Shall send thy soule into eternalle night!

                Exeunt.




[ACT II.  SCENE 3.]

                [The Spanish court.]

                Enter the KING OF SPAINE, PORTINGALE
                EMBASSADOUR, DON CIPRIAN, &c.

  KING.  Brother of Castille, to the princes loue
    What saies your daughter Bel-imperia?

  CIP.  Although she coy it, as becomes her kinde,
    And yet dissemble that she loues the prince,
    I doubt not, I, but she will stoope in time;
    And, were she froward,--which she will not be,--
    Yet heerin shall she follow my aduice,
    Which is to loue him or forgoe my loue.

  KING.  Then, lord embassadour of Portingale,
    Aduise thy king to make this marriage vp
    For strengthening of our late-confirmed league;
    I know no better meanes to make vs freends.
    Her dowry shall be large and liberall;
    Besides that she is daughter and halfe heire
    Vnto our brother heere, Don Ciprian,
    And shall enioy the moitie of his land,
    Ile grace her marriage with an vnckles gift,
    And this is it:  in case the match goe forward,
    The tribute which you pay shalbe releast;
    And, if by Balthazar she haue a sonne,
    He shall enioy the kingdome after vs.

  EMBAS.  Ile make the motion to my soueraigne liege,
    And worke it if my counsaile may preuaile.

  KING.  Doe so, my lord; and, if he giue consent,
    I hope his presence heere will honour vs
    In celebration of the nuptiall day,--
    And let himselfe determine of the time.

  EM.  Wilt please your Grace command me ought besid?

  KING.  Commend me to the king; and so, farewell!
    But wheres Prince Balthazar, to take his leaue?

  EM.  That is perfourmd alreadie, my good lord.

  KING.  Amongst the rest of what you haue in charge,
    The princes raunsome must not be forgot:
    Thats none of mine, but his that tooke him prisoner,--
    And well his forwardnes deserues reward:
    It was Horatio, our knight-marshalls sonne.

  EM.  Betweene vs theres a price already pitcht,
    And shall be send with all conuenient speed.

  KING.  Then once againe farewell, my lord!

  EM.  Farwell, my lord of Castile, and the rest!

                Exit.

  KING.  Now, brother, you must make some little paines
    To winne faire Bel-imperia from her will;
    Young virgins must be ruled by their freends.
    The prince is amiable, and loues her well;
    If she neglect him and forgoe his loue,
    She both will wrong her owne estate and ours.
    Therefore, whiles I doe entertaine the prince
    With greatest pleasure that our court affoords,
    Endeauor you to winne your daughters thought.
    If she giue back, all this will come to naught.

                Exeunt.




[ACT II.  SCENE 4.]

                [HORATIO's garden.]

                Enter HORATIO, BEL-IMPERIA, and PEDRINGANO.

  HOR.  Now that the night begins with sable wings
    To ouer-cloud the brightnes of the sunne,
    And that in darkenes pleasures may be done,
    Come, Bel-imperia, let vs to the bower,
    And there is safetie passe a pleasant hower.

  BEL.  I follow thee, my loue, and will not backe,
    Although my fainting hart controles my soule.

  HOR.  Why, make you doubt of Pedringanos faith?

  BEL.  No; he is as trustie as my second selfe.
    Goe, Pedringano, watch without the gate,
    And let vs known if any make approach.

  PED.  [aside]  In-steed of watching, Ile deserue more golde
    By fetching Don Lorenzo to this match.

                Exit PED[RINGANO].

  HOR.  What means my loue?

  BEL.                          I know not what, my-selfe;
    And yet my hart foretels me some some mischaunce.

  HOR.  Sweet, say not so; faire Fortune is our freend,
    And heauens haue shut vp day to pleasure vs.
    The starres, thou seest, holde back their twinckling shine
    And Luna hides her-selfe to pleasure vs.

  BEL. Thou hast preuailed!  Ile conquer my misdoubt,
    And in thy loue and councell drowne my feare.
    I feare no more; loue now is all my thoughts!
    Why sit we not? for pleasure asketh ease.

  HOR.  The more thou sitst within these leauy bowers,
    The more will Flora decke it with her flowers.

  BEL. I; but, if Flora spye Horatio heere,
    Her iealous eye will think I sit too neere.

  HOR.  Harke, madame, how the birds record by night,
    For ioy that Bel-imperia sits in sight!

  BEL.  No; Cupid counterfeits the nightingale,
    To frame sweet musick to Horatios tale.

  HOR.  If Cupid sing, then Venus is not farre,--
    I, thou art Venus, or some fairer starre!

  BEL.  If I be Venus, thou must needs be Mars;
    And where Mars raigneth, there must needs be warres.

  HOR.  Then thus begin our wars:  put forth thy hand,
    That it may combat with my ruder hand.

  BEL.  Set forth thy foot to try the push of mine.

  HOR.  But, first, my lookes shall combat against thee.

  BEL.  Then ward thy-selfe!  I dart this kiss as thee.

  HOR. Thus I [return] the dart thou threwest at me!

  BEL.  Nay then, to gaine the glory of the field,
    My twining armes shall yoake and make thee yeeld.

  HOR.  Nay then, my armes are large and strong withall:
    Thus elmes by vines are compast till they fall.

  BEL.  O, let me goe, for in my troubled eyes
    Now maist thou read that life in passion dies!

  HOR.  O, stay a-while, and I will dye with thee;
    So shalt thou yeeld, and yet haue conquerd me.

  BEL.  Whose there?  Pedringano?  We are betraide!

                Enter LORENZO, BALTHAZAR, CERBERIN,
                PEDRINGANO, disguised.

  LOR.  My lord, away with her!  take her aside!
    O sir, forbeare, your valour is already tride.
    Quickly dispatch, my maisters.

                Th[e]y hang him in the arbor.

  HOR.                          What, will you murder me?

  LOR.  I; thus!  and thus!  these are the fruits of loue!

                They stab him.

  BEL.  O, saue his life, and let me dye for him!
    O, saue him, brother!  saue him, Balthazar!
    I loued Horatio, but he loued not me.

  BAL.  But Balthazar loues Bel-imperia.

  LOR.  Although his life were still ambitious, proud,
    Yet is he at the highest now he is dead.

  BEL.  Murder!  murder!  helpe!  Hieronimo, helpe!

  LOR.  Come, stop her mouth!  away with her!

                Exeunt.

                Enter HIERONIMO in his shirt, &c.

  HIERO.  What outcried pluck me from my naked bed,
    And chill my throbbing hart with trembling feare,
    Which neuer danger yet could daunt before?
    Who cals Hieronimo?  speak; heare I am!
    I did not slumber; therefore twas no dreame.
    No, no; it was some woman cride for helpe.
    And heere within this garden did she crie,
    And in this garden must I rescue her.
    But stay!  what murderous spectacle is this?
    A man hanged vp, and all the murderers gone!
    And in the bower, to lay the guilt on me!
    This place was made for pleasure not for death.

                He cuts him downe.

    Those garments that he weares I oft haue seene,--
    Alas!  it is Horatio, my sweet sonne!
    O, no; but he that whilome was my sonne!
    O, was it thou that call'dst me from my bed?
    O, speak, if any sparke of life remaine!
    I am thy father.  Who hath slaine my sonne?
    What sauadge monster, not of humane kinde,
    Hath heere beene glutted with thy harmeles blood,
    And left they bloudie corpes dishonoured heere,
    For me amidst these darke and dreadfull shades
    To drowne thee with an ocean of my teares?
    O heauens, why made you night, to couer sinne?
    By day this deed of darknes had not beene.
    O earth, why didst thou not in time deuoure
    The [vile] prophaner of this sacred bower?
    O poore Horatio, what hadst thou misdoone
    To leese thy life ere life was new begun?
    O wicked butcher, what-so-ere thou wert,
    How could thou strangle vertue and desert?
    Ay me, most wretched!  that haue lost my ioy
    In leesing my Horatio, my sweet boy!

                Enter ISABELL.

  ISA.  My husbands absence makes my hart to throb.
    Hieronimo!

  HIERO.  Heere, Isabella.  Helpe me to lament;
    For sighes are stopt, and all my teares are spent.

  ISA.  What worlde of griefe--my sonne Horatio!
    O wheres the author of this endles woe?

  HIERO.  To know the author were some ease of greefe,
    For in reuenge my hart would finde releefe.

  ISA.  Then is he gone?  and is my sonne gone too?
    O, gush out, teares!  fountains and flouds of teares!
    Blow, sighes, and raise and euerlasting storme;
    For outrage fits our cursed wretchedness.

  HIERO.  Sweet louely rose, ill pluckt before thy time!
    Faire, worthy sonne, not conquerd, but betraid!
    Ile kisse thee now, for words with teares are [stainde].

  ISA.  And Ile close vp the glasses of his sight;
    For once these eyes were onely my delight.

  HIERO.  Seest thou this handkercher besmerd with blood?
    It shall not from me till I take reuenge;
    Seest thou those wounds that yet are bleeding fresh?
    Ile not intombe them till I haue reueng'd:
    Then will I ioy amidst my discontent,
    Till then, my sorrow neuer shalbe spent.

  ISA.  The heauens are iust, murder cannot be hid;
    Time is the author of both truth and right,
    And time will bring this trecherie to light.

  HIERO.  Meane-while, good Isabella, cease thy plaints,
    Or, at the least, dissemble them awhile;
    So shall we sooner finde the practise out,
    And learne by whome all this was brought about.
    Come, Isabell, now let vs take him vp.

                They take him vp.

    And beare him in from out this cursed place.
    Ile say his dirge,--singing fits not this case.
    O aliquis mihi quas pulchrum ver educet herbas

                HIERO[NIMO] sets his brest vnto his sword.

    Misceat, et nostro detur medicina dolori;
    Aut siqui faciunt annorum obliuia succos
    Prebeat; ipse metam megnum quaecunque per orbem
    Gramina sol pulchras eiecit lucis in oras.
    Ipse bibam quicquid meditatur saga veneni,
    Quicquid et irarum ui caeca nenia nectit.
    Omnia perpetiar, lethum quoque, dum semel omnis
    Nost in extincto moriatur pectore sensus.
    Ergo tua perpetuus speeliuit limunia somnus?
    Emoriar tecum: sic, sic iuuat ire sub vmbras!
    Attamen absistam properato cedere letho,
    Ne mortem vindicta tuam tum nulla sequatur.

                Heere he throwes it from him and beares the
                body away.

                [CHORUS.]

  ANDREA.  Broughtst thou me hether to increase my paine?
    I lookt that Balthazar should haue been slaine;
    But tis my freend Horatio that is slaine,
    And they abuse faire Bel-imperia,
    On whom I doted more then all the world,
    Because she lou'd me more then all the world.

  REUENGE.  Thou talkest of haruest, when the corne is greene;
    The end is [growne] of euery worke well done;
    The sickle comes not till the corne be ripe.
    Be still, and, ere I lead thee from this place,
    Ile shew thee Balthazar in heauy case.




ACTUS TERTIUS.




[ACT III.  SCENE 1.]

                [The Portuguese court.]

                Enter VICEROY OF PORTINGALE, NOBLES, ALEXANDRO,
                VILLUPPO.

  VICEROY.  Infortunate condition of kings,
    Seated amidst so many helples doubts!
    First,we are plast vpon extreamest height,
    And oft supplanted with exceeding hate,
    But euer subiect to the wheele of chance;
    And at our highest neuer ioy we so
    As we doubt and dread our ouerthrow.
    So striueth not the waues with sundry winds
    As fortune toyleth in the affaires of kings,
    That would be feard, yet feare to be beloued,
    Sith feare and loue to kings is flatterie.
    For instance, lordings, look vpon your king,
    By hate depriued of his dearest sonne,
    The only hope of our successiue line.

  NOB.  I had not thought that Alexandros hart
    Had beene enuenomde with such extreame hate;
    But now I see that words haue seuerall workes,
    And theres no credit in the countenance.

  VIL.  No, for, my lord, had you beholde the traine
    That fained loue had coloured in his lookes
    When he in campe consorted Balthazar,
    Farre more inconstant had you thought the sunne,
    That howerly coasts the center of the earth,
    Then Alexandros purpose to the prince.

  VICE.  No more, Villuppo! thou hast said enough,
    And with thy words thou saiest our wounded thoughts.
    Nor shall I longer dally with the world,
    Procrastinating Alexandros death.
    Goe, some of you, and fetch the traitor forth,
    That, as he is condemned, he may dye.

                Enter ALEXANDRO, with a NOBLE-MAN and
                HALBERTS.

  NOB. In such extreames will nought but patience serue.

  ALEX.  But in extreames what patience shall I vse?
    Nor discontents it me to leaue the world,
    With whome there nothing can preuaile but wrong.

  NOB.  Yet hope the best.

  ALEX.                         Tis heauen my hope:
    As for the earth, it is too much infect
    To yeeld me hope of any of her mould.

  VICE.  Why linger ye? bring froth that daring feend,
    And let him die for his accursed deed.

  ALEX.  Not that I feare the extremitie of death--
    For nobles cannot stoop to seruile feare--
    Doo I, O king, thus discontented liue;
    But this, O this, torments my labouring soule,
    That thus I die suspected of a sinne
    Whereof, as Heauens haue knowne my secret thoughts,
    So am I free from this suggestion!

  VICE.  No more, I say; to the tortures!  when?
    Binde him, and burne his body in those flames,

                They binde him to the stake.

    That shall prefigure those vnquenched fiers
    Of Phlegiton prepared for his soule.

  ALEX.  My guiltles death will be aueng'd on thee!
    On thee, Villuppo, that hath malisde thus,
    Or for thy meed hast falsely me accusde!

  VIL.  Nay, Alexandro, if thou menace me,
    Ile lend a hand to send thee to the lake
    Where those thy words shall perish with thy workes,
    Iniurious traitour, monstrous homicide!

                Enter EMBASSADOUR.

  [EM.]  Stay!  hold a-while!  and heer, with pardon of
    His Maiestie, lay hands vpon Villuppo!

  VICE.  Embassadour, what newes nath vrg'd this sodain
    entrance?

  EM.  Know, soueraigne l[ord], that Balthazar doth liue.

  VICE.  What saiest thou?  liueth Balthazar, our sonne?

  EM.  Your Highnes sonne, L[ord] Balthazar doth liue,
    And, well intreated in the court of Spaine,
    Humbly commends him to your Maiestie.
    These eies beheld; and these my followers,
    With these, the letters of the kings commend,

                Giues him letters

    Are happie witnesses of his Highnes health.

                The KING lookes on the letters, and proceeds.

  VICE. [reads]  "Thy sonne doth liue; your tribute is receiu'd;
    Thy peace is made, and we are satisfied.
    The rest resolue vpon as things proposde
    For both our honors and they benefite."

  EM.  These are his Highnes farther articles.

                He giues him more letters.

  VICE.  Accursed wrech to intimate these ills
    Against the life and reputation
    Of noble Alexandro!  come, my lord, vnbinde him!
    [To ALEXANDRO]  Let him vnbinde thee that is bounde to death,
    To make a quitall for thy discontent.

                They vnbinde him.

  ALEX.  Dread lord, in kindnes you could do no lesse,
    Vpon report of such a damned fact;
    But thus we see our innocence hath sau'd
    The hopeles like which thou, Villuppo, sought
    By thy suggestions to haue massacred.

  VICE.  Say, false Villuppo, wherefore didst thou thus
    Falsely betray Lord Alexandros life?
    Him whom thou knowest that no vnkindenes els
    But euen the slaughter of our deerest sonne
    Could once haue moued vs to haue misconceaued.

  ALEX.  Say, trecherous Villuppo; tell the King!
    Or wherein hath Alexandro vsed thee ill?

  VIL.  Rent with remembrance of so foule a deed,
    My guiltie soule submits me to thy doome,
    For, not for Alexandros iniuries,
    But for reward and hope to be preferd,
    Thus haue I shamelesly hazarded his life.

  VICE.  Which, villaine, shalbe ransomed with thy death,
    And not so meane a torment as we heere
    Deuised for him who thou saidst slew our sonne,
    But with the bitterest torments and extreames
    That may be yet inuented for thine end.

                ALEX[ANDRO] seemes to intreat.

    Intreat me not!  Goe, take the traitor hence!

                Exit VILLUPPO.

    And, Alexandro, let vs honor thee
    With publique notice of thy loyaltie.
    To end those things articulated heere
    By our great l[ord], the mightie king of Spaine,
    We with our councell will deliberate.
    Come, Alexandro, keepe vs company.

                Exeunt.




[ACT III.  SCENE 2.]

                [Spain: near the DUKE's castle.]

                Enter HIERONIMO.

  HIERO.  Oh eies!  no eies but fountains fraught with teares;
    Oh life! no life, but liuely fourme of death;
    Oh world! no world, but masse of publique wrongs,
    Confusde and filde with murder and misdeeds;
    Oh sacred heauens, if this vnhallowed deed,
    If this inhumane and barberous attempt,
    If this incomparable murder thus
    Of mine, but now no more my sonne
    Shall pass vnreueald and vnreuenged passe,
    How should we tearme your dealings to be iust,
    If you vniustly deale with those that in your iustice trust?
    The night, sad secretary to my mones,
    With direfull visions wake my vexed soule,
    And with the wounds of my distresfull sonne
    Solicite me for notice of his death;
    The ougly feends do sally forth of hell,
    And frame my hart with fierce inflamed thoughts;
    The cloudie day my discontents records,
    Early begins to regester my dreames
    And driue me forth to seeke the murtherer.
    Eies, life, world, heauens, hel, night and day,
    See, search, show, send, some man, some meane, that may!

                A letter falleth.

    Whats heere? a letter?  Tush, it is not so!
    A letter for Hieronimo.
    [Reads]  "For want of incke receiue this bloudie writ.
    Me hath my haples brother hid from thee.
    Reuenge thy-selfe on Balthazar and him,
    For these were they that murdered thy sonne.
    Hieronimo, reuenge Horatios death,
    And better fare then Bel-imperia doth!"--
    What meanes this vnexpected miracle?
    My sonne slaine by Lorenzo and the prince?
    What cause had they Horatio to maligne?
    Or what might mooue thee, Bel-imperia,
    To accuse they brother, had he beene the meane?
    Hieronimo, beware!  thou art betraide,
    And to intrap they life this traine is laide.
    Aduise thee therefore, be not credulous:
    This is deuised to endanger thee,
    That thou, by this, Lorenzo shoulst accuse.
    And he, for thy dishonour done, show draw
    Thy life in question and thy name in hate.
    Deare was the life of my beloved sonne,
    And of his death behoues me to be aueng'd:
    Then hazard not thine own, Hieronimo,
    But liue t'effect thy resolution!
    I therefore will by circumstances trie
    What I can gather to confirme this writ,
    And, [harken] neere the Duke of Castiles house,
    Close if I can with Belimperia,
    To listen more, but nothing to bewray.

                Enter PEDRINGANO.

    Now, Predringano!

  PED.                  Now, Hieronimo!

  HIERO.  Wheres thy lady?

  PED.                  I know not; heers my lord.

                Enter LORENZO.

  LOR.  How now, whose this?  Hieronimo?

  HIERO.                My lord.

  PED.  He asketh me for my lady Bel-imperia.

  LOR.  What to doo, Hieronimo?  Vse me.

[Dialogue from the undated and the 'A' manuscript.]

  HIERO.  Oh, no, my lord, I dare not, it must not be;
    I humbly thank your lordship.