GOOD STORIES

REPRINTED FROM

THE LADIES' HOME JOURNAL

OF PHILADELPHIA




1907



GOOD STORIES

from THE LADIES' HOME JOURNAL




_Warding Off a Catastrophe_

A fat woman entered a crowded street car and, seizing a strap, stood
directly in front of a man seated in the corner.  As the car started
she lunged against his newspaper and at the same time trod heavily on
his toes.

As soon as he could extricate himself he rose and offered her his seat.

"You are very kind, sir," she said, panting for breath.

"Not at all, madam," he replied; "it's not kindness; it's simply
self-defense."



_Not What She Expected_

A charming, well-preserved widow had been courted and won by a
physician.  She had children.  The wedding-day was approaching, and it
was time the children should know they were to have a new father.
Calling one of them to her she said: "Georgie, I am going to do
something before long that I would like to talk about with you."

"What is it, Ma ?" aiked the boy.

"I am intending to marry Doctor Jones in a few days, and----"

"Bully for you.  Ma, Does Doctor Jones know it ?"



_Of Course_

The morning class had been duly instructed and enlightened upon the
subject of our national independence.  Feeling sure she had made a
real and lasting impression with her explanations and blackboard
illustrations the young teacher began with the usual round of
questions:

"Now, Sammy Smith, where was the Declaration of Independence signed?"

Sammy, with a shout of glee: "At de bottom, ma'am--that's what you
said!"



_He Had Certainly Met Him_

A traveler going to New Zealand was asked by a friend if he would
inquire, while there, as to the whereabouts of the friend's
grandfather, Jeremiah Thompson.

"Certainly," said the traveler, and wherever he went he asked for news
of the ancestor, but without avail.

One day he was introduced to a fine old Maori of advanced age.  "Did
you ever meet with an Englishman named Jeremiah Thompson?" he asked.

A smile passed over the Maori's face.  "Meet him?" he repeated.  "Why,
I ate him!"



_No Place Like Home_

A Bostonian died, and when he arrived at St. Peter's gate he was asked
the usual questions:

"What is your name, and where are you from ?"

The answer was, "Mr. So-and-So, from Boston."

"You may come in," said St. Peter, "but I know you won't like it."



_She Felt Bad When Well_

An old lady, really quite well, was always complaining and "enjoying
poor health," as she expressed it.  Her various ailments were to her
the most interesting topic in the world.  One day a neighbor found her
eating a hearty meal, and asked her how she was.

"Poor me," she sighed, "I feel very well, but I always feel bad when I
feel well, because I know I am going to feel worse afterward."



_Drove Him Mad_

They took him to the sanatorium moaning feebly: "Thirty-nine,
thirty-nine."

"What does he mean by that?" the attendant inquired.

"It's the number of buttons on the back of his wife's new frock," the
family doctor explained.



_Tweedledum or Tweedledee_

Joseph Chamberlain was the guest of honor at a dinner in an important
city.  The Mayor presided, and when coffee was being served the Mayor
leaned over and touched Mr. Chamberlain, saying, "Shall we let the
people enjoy themselves a little longer, or had we better have your
speech now?"



_It Was Mary's Own Idea_

"Did you mail my letter, Mary?" asked her mistress.  "It was an
important one, you know."

"Yis, mum, indeed I did."

"But why have you brought back the two cents I gave you for the stamp?"

"Sure, I didn't have to use it, mum," replied Mary.  "I slipped th'
letther into th' box whin nobody was lukin'."



_He Couldn't Very Well_

A husband was being arraigned in court in a suit brought by his wife
for cruelty.

"I understand, sir," said the Judge, addressing the husband, "that one
of the indignities you have showered upon your wife is that you have
not spoken to her for three years.  Is that so?"

"It is, your Honor," quickly answered the husband.

"Well, sir," thundered the judge, "why didn't you speak to her, may I
ask?"

"Simply," replied the husband, "because I didn't want to interrupt
her."



_A Coat That Wouldn't Come Off_

The inspector asked the boys of the school he was examining: "Can you
take your warm overcoats aff?"  "Yes, sir," was the response.  "Can
the bear take his warm overcoat off?"  "No, sir."  "Why not?"  There
was silence for a while, and then a little boy spoke up: "Please, sir,
because God alone knows where the buttons are."



_The Young Housewife's Latest_

In the cook's absence the young mistress of the house undertook, with
the help of a green waitress, to get the Sunday luncheon.  The
flurried maid, who had been struggling in the kitchen with a coffee
machine that refused to work, confessed that she had forgotten to wash
the lettuce.

"Well, never mind, Eliza.  Go on with the coffee, and I'll do it,"
said the considerate mistress.  "Where do you keep the soap?"



_He Did His Best_

A hungry Irishman went into a restaurant on Friday and said to the
waiter:

"Have yez any whale?"

"No."

"Have yez any shark?"

"No."

"Have yez any swordfish?"

"No."

"Have yez any jellyfish?"

"No."

"All right," said the Irishman. "Then bring me ham and eggs and a
beefsteak smothered wid onions.  The Lord knows I asked for fish."



_The Power Behind_

At a prayer-meeting a good old brother stood up and said he was glad
to give the following testimony:

"My wife and I," he said, "started in life with hardly a cent in the
world.  We began at the lowest round of the ladder, but the Lord has
been good to us and we have worked up--we have prospered.  We bought a
little farm and raised good crops.  We have a good home and a nice
family of children, and," he added with much emphasis, "I am the head
of that family."

After he sat down his wife promptly arose to corroborate all that he
had said.  She said that they had started in life with hardly a cent,
the Lord had been good to them and they had prospered; they did have a
farm and good crops, and it was true they did have a fine family of
children.  But she added with satisfaction, "I am the neck that moves
the head."



_Easy Enough_

Some visitors who were being shown over a pauper lunatic asylum, says
"Harper's Weekly," inquired of their guide what method was employed to
discover when the inmates were sufficiently recovered to leave.

"Well," replied he, "you see, it's this way.  We have a big trough of
water, and we turns on the tap.  We leave it running, and tells 'em to
bail out the water with pails until they've emptied the trough."

"How does that prove it?" asked one of the visitors.

"Well," said the guide, "them as ain't idiots turns off the tap."



_He Had Left the Cards All Right_

The high-born dame was breaking in a new footman--stupid but honest.

In her brougham, about to make a round of visits, she found she had
forgotten her bits of pasteboard.  So she sent the man back with
orders to bring some of her cards that were on the mantelpiece in her
boudoir, and put them in his pocket.

At different houses, she told the footman to hand in one, and
sometimes a couple, until at last she told Jeames to leave three at
one house.

"Can't do it, mum."

"How's that?"

"I've only got two left--the ace of spades and the seven of clubs."



_And That Settled It_

"If ye please, mum," said the ancient hero, in an appealing voice, as
he stood at the back door of the cottage on washday, "I've lost my
leg----"

"Well, I ain't got it," snapped the woman fiercely,

And the door closed with a bang.



_What Do You Think the Porter Did_?

A lady in the centre seat of the parlor car heard the request of a
fellow-passenger directly opposite asking the porter to open the
window, and, scenting a draft, she immediately drew a cloak about her.

"Porter, if that window is opened," she snapped testily, "I shall
freeze to death."

"And if the window is kept closed," returned the other passenger, "I
shall surely suffocate."

The poor porter stood absolutely puzzled between the two fires.

"Say, boss," he finally said to a commercial traveler seated near by,
"what would you do?"

"Do?" echoed the traveler.  "Why, man, that is a very simple matter;
open the window and freeze one lady.  Then close it and suffocate the
other."



_She Said It_

A visitor of noble birth was expected to arrive at a large country
house in the North of England, and the daughter of the house, aged
seven, was receiving final instructions from her mother.

"And now, dear," she said, "when the Duke speaks to you do not forget
always to say 'your Grace.'"

Presently the great man arrived, and after greeting his host and
hostess he said to the child, "Well, my dear, and what is your name?"
Judge of his surprise when the little girl solemnly closed her eyes
and with clasped hands exclaimed, "For what we are about to receive
may we be truly fankful, amen."



_His Idea of Genius_

A young man once said to Thomas A. Edison, the inventor; "Mr. Edison,
don't you believe that genius is inspiration?"

"No," replied Edison; "genius is _per_spiration."



_Took the Wrong House_

On one of the Southern railroads there is a station-building that is
commonly known by travelers as the smallest railroad station in
America.  It is of this station that the story is told that an old
farmer was expecting a chicken-house to arrive there, and he sent one
of his hands, a newcomer, to fetch it.  Arriving there the man saw the
house, loaded it on to his wagon and started for home.  On the way he
met a man in uniform with the words "Station Agent" on his cap.

"Say, hold on.  What have you got on that wagon?" he asked.

"My chicken-house, of course," was the reply.

"Chicken-house be jiggeredl" exploded the official.  "That's the
station!"



_And Tommy Did_

"And now," said the teacher, "I want Tommy to tell the school who was
most concerned when Absalom got hung by the hair ?"

TOMMY: "Abs'lom."



_The Prayer of Cyrus Brown_

  "The proper way for a man to pray,"
    Said Deacon Lemuel Keyes,
  "And the only proper attitude,
    Is down upon his knees."

  "No, I should say the way to pray,"
    Said Reverend Doctor Wise,
  "Is standing straight, with outstretched arms,
    And rapt and upturned eyes."

  "Oh, no; no, no," said Elder Slow,
    "Such posture is too proud:
  A man should pray with eyes fast closed
    And head contritely bowed."

  "It seems to me his hands should be
    Austerely clasped in front,
  With both thumbs pointing toward the ground,"
    Said Reverend Doctor Blunt.

  "Las' year I fell in Hodgkin's well
  Head first," said Cyrus Brown,
  "With both my heels a-stickin' up,
  My head a-p'inting down,

  "An' I made a prayer right then an' there--
  Best prayer I ever said,
  The prayingest prayer I ever prayed,
  A-standing on my head."

    --SAM WALTER FOSS.



_Couldn't Tell Which_

Jones had come home later than usual and had ready a good explanation,
but his wife gave him no chance, and immediately began to tell him
what she thought of him.  He endured it patiently all evening, quietly
read his paper and went to bed.  His wife was still talking.

When he was almost asleep he could hear her still scolding him
unmercifully.  He dropped off to sleep and awoke after a couple of
hours, only to hear his wife remark:

"I hope all the women don't have to put up with such conduct as this."

"Annie," said Jones, "are you talking again or yet?"



_The Greater Calamity_

Two or three urchins were running down a long and very steep flight of
steps, when the foremost stumbled and fell headlong twenty to thirty
feet, and was only stopped near the bottom by doubling backward around
the newel-post.  It looked as though his back was broken, and that he
was a dead small boy, but he gathered himself up, thrust his hands
anxiously in his trousers' pockets, and ejaculated;

"B' gosh, I b'l'eve I lost a cent."



_Her First Railroad Ride_

An old lady in Missouri took her first railroad trip last week, says
"The Butter Democrat."  She noticed the bell-cord overhead, and,
turning to a boy, she said: "Sonny, what's that for?"  "That, marm,"
he said, with a mischievous twinkle in his eye, "is to ring the bell
when you want something to eat."

Shortly afterward the old lady reached her umbrella up to the cord and
gave it a vigorous pull.  The train was in the middle of a trestle.
The whistle sounded, the brakes were pulled on, the train began to
slacken its speed, windows were thrown up, questions asked, and
confusion reigned among the passengers.  The old lady sat calmly
through it all.

Presently the conductor came running through the train and asked: "Who
pulled the bell?"

"I did," replied the old lady meekly.

"Well, what do you want?" asked the conductor impatiently.

"Well," said the old lady meditatively, "you may bring me a ham
sandwich and a cup of tea, please."



_The Parson and the "Light"_

A parson had had a call from a little country parish to a large and
wealthy one in a big city.  He asked time for prayer and
consideration.  He did not feel sure of his light.  A month passed.
Some one met hie youngest son.  "How is it, Josiah; is your father
going to B------?"

"Well," answered the youngster judicially, "paw is still prayin' for
light, but most of the things is packed."



_Turn About is Fair Play_

Last Christmas a middle-aged tinplate-worker married a widow whose
acquaintance he had made but a few weeks before while working some
little distance away from home.

"Sarrah," he said nervously, after the guests had departed, "I 'ave a
weddin' present for ye."

"What is it, John?" said Sarrah with a smirk.

"I 'ope ye won't be 'fended, Sarrah," said John, more agitated than
ever, "but it is--er--er--it is five of 'em."

"Five of wat?" asked Sarrah.

"Five children!" blurted out John desperately, anticipating a scene.
"I didn't tell ye I 'ad children--five of 'em."

Sarrah took the news quite calmly; in fact, she appeared relieved.

"Oh, well, John," she said, "that do make it easier for me to tell ye.
Five is not so bad as me, watever.  Seven I 'ave got!"

"Wat!" howled John.

"Seven," repeated Sarrah composedly.  "That is my weddin' present to
ye, John."



_His Only Chance_

"Is there a man in all this audience," demanded the female lecturer on
woman's rights, "that has ever done anything to lighten the burden on
his wife's shoulders?  What do you know of woman's work?  Is there a
man here," she continued, folding her arms, and looking over the
assembly with superb scorn, "that has ever got up in the morning,
leaving his tired, worn-out wife to enjoy her slumbers, gone quietly
downstairs, made the fire, cooked his own breakfast, sewed the missing
buttons on the children's clothes, darned the family stockings,
scoured the pots and kettles, cleaned and filled the lamps, and done
all this, if necessary, day after day, uncomplainingly?  If there be
such a man in this audience let him rise up!  I should really like to
see him!"

And, in the rear of the hall, a mild-looking man in spectacles, in
obedience to the summons, timidly arose.  He was the husband of the
eloquent speaker.  It was the first time he had ever had a chance to
assert himself.



_He Saw Them, All Right_

Two officers were sent to arrest a Quaker; his wife met them at the
door and said, "Walk in, gentlemen; my husband will see thee."

After waiting some time they got impatient and called the woman,
saying, "You said we should see your husband presently."

"No, friend," she replied; "I said he would see thee--he did see thee,
did not like thy looks, and went out by the back door."



_An Easy Way to Stop It_

William Penn was once urging a man he knew to stop drinking to excess,
when the man suddenly asked:

"Can you tell me of an easy way to do it?"

"Yes," Penn replied readily, "it is just as easy as to open thy hand,
friend."

"Convince me of that," the man exclaimed, "and I will promise upon my
honor to do as you tell me."

"Well, my friend," Penn answered, "whenever thee finds a glass of
liquor in thy hand, open that hand before the glass touches thy lips,
and thee will never drink to excess again."

The man was so struck by the simplicity of the great Quaker's advice
that he followed it and reformed.



_What Brought Them_?

A rural school has a pretty girl as its teacher, but she was much
troubled because many of her pupils were late every morning.  At last
she made the announcement that she would kiss the first pupil to
arrive at the schoolhouse the next morning.  At sunrise the largest
three boys of her class were sitting on the doorstep of the
schoolhouse, and by six o'clock every boy in the school and four of
the directors were waiting for her to arrive.



_Give and Take_

An English statesman on one occasion, when engaged in canvassing,
visited a working-man's house, in the principal room of which a
pictorial representation of the Pope faced an illustration of King
William, of pious and immortal memory, in the act of crossing the
Boyne.

The worthy man stared in amazement, and seeing his surprise the
voter's wife exclaimed;

"Shure, my husband's an Orangeman and I'm a Catholic."

"How do you get on together?" asked the astonished politician.

"Very well, indade, barring the twelfth of July, when my husband goes
out with the Orange procession and comes home feelin' extry
pathriotic."

"What then?"

"Well, he always takes the Pope down and jumps on him and then goes
straight to bed.  The next morning I get up early, before he is awake,
and take down King William and pawn him and buy a new Pope with the
money.  Then I give the old man the ticket to get King William out."



_Too Much of a Good Thing_

"I've got the very thing you want," said the stableman to a ruralist
in search of a horse; "a thorough-going road horse.  Five years old,
sound as a quail, $175 cash down, and he goes ten miles without
stopping."

The purchaser threw his hands skyward.

"Not for me," he said, "not for me.  I wouldn't gif you five cents for
him.  I live eight miles out in de country, und I'd haf to walk back
two miles."



_Had Missed It_

"What are you crying for, my poor little boy?" said a man to a crying
boy.

"Pa fell downstairs."

"Don't take on so, my boy.  He'll get better soon."

"That isn't it.  Sister saw him fall--all the way.  I never saw
nuffen."



_Denied the Only Shade_

It was a broiling hot day in the park, and those walking therein were
well-nigh exhausted, when a very stout old lady came bustling along
one of the paths, closely followed by a rough-looking tramp.

Twice she commanded him to leave her, but Still he followed just
behind.

At last the old lady, quite disgusted, turned angrily around and said:

"Look here, my man, if you don't go away I shall call a policeman."

The poor fellow looked up at her with a tear in his eye, and then
remarked:

"For goodness' sake, mum, have mercy and don't call a policeman, for
ye're the on'y shady spot in the park."



_Wanted to Make Her Happy_

In one of the many hospitals in the South a bright, busy-looking and
duty-loving woman hustled up to one of the wounded soldiers who lay
gazing at the ceiling above his cot.  "Can't I do something for you,
my poor fellow?" said the woman imploringly.  The "poor fellow" looked
up languidly.  The only things he really wanted just at that time were
his discharge and a box of cigars.  When he saw the strained and
anxious look on the good woman's face, however, he felt sorry for her,
and with perfect sang froid he replied: "Why, yes; you can wash my
face if you want to."

"I'd be only too glad to," gasped the visitor eagerly.

"All right," said the cavalier gallantly, "go ahead.  It's been washed
twenty-one times already to-day, but I don't mind going through it
again if it'll make you any happier."



_Easy Enough_

A noted mathematician, considered by many a wonder, stopped at a hotel
in a small town in Missouri.  As usual, in such places, there were a
number of drummers on hand; there was also a meeting of some medical
men at the place, who used the hotel as headquarters.  One of the
doctors thought it would be quite a joke to tell the mathematician
that some of the M.D.'s had concluded to kidnap him and take out his
brains to learn how it was he was so good in mathematics.  He was then
asked by them what he was going to do about it.  He replied: "Why, I
shall simply go on without brains just as you doctors are doing."



_Not a Complaint at All_

The good priest had come to his parishioner after the funeral of the
latter's mother-in-law to express condolences.

"And what complaint was it, Pat," he asked sympathetically, "that
carried the old lady off?"

"Kumplaint, did yi ask, father?" answered Pat.  "Thir wuz no kumplaint
from anybody.  Everybody wuz satisfied."



_He Caught It, But_----

The ferry-dock was crowded with weary homegoers when through the crowd
rushed a man--hot, excited, laden to the chin with bundles of every
shape and size.  He sprinted down the pier, his eyes fixed on a
ferryboat only two or three feet out from the pier.  He paused but an
instant on the string-piece, and then, cheered on by the amused crowd,
he made a flying leap across the intervening stretch of water and
landed safely on the deck.  A fat man happened to be standing on the
exact spot on which he struck, and they both went down with a
resounding crash.  When the arriving man had somewhat recovered his
breath he apologized to the fat man.  "I hope I didn't hurt you," he
said.  "I am sorry.  But, anyway, I caught the boat!"

"But, you idiot," said the fat man, "the boat was coming in!"



_He Didn't Mind_

A certain railway in Michigan has a station entitled Sawyer's Mills,
but usually entitled, for short, Sawyer's.

A rural couple on one of the trains attracted much attention by their
evident fondness for each other until the brakeman thrust his head in
the doorway of the car and called out, "Sawyer! Sawyer!"

"Reuben" suddenly assumed the perpendicular and indignantly exclaimed,
"Well, I don't care if you did; we've been engaged three weeks."



_He Announced His Intentions_

Young man and his lady-love attended a protracted meeting which was
being held in the village church.  Arriving late they found the church
filled, but a gentleman arose and gave the lady his seat, while the
young man was ushered far away to a seat in another part of the
building.

The service grew warm and impressive.

"Will those who want our prayers please stand up?" said the preacher.

At this juncture the young man thought it was getting late and he
would get his sweetheart and go home, but not just knowing where she
sat he rose to his feet and looked over the audience.

The minister, mistaking his intentions, asked: "Young man, are you
seeking salvation?"

To which the young man responded: "At present I am seeking Sal
Jackson!"



_As a Last Resort_

"Well, doctor," said the patient who was an incessant talker, "why in
the world don't you look at my tongue, if you want to, instead of
writing away like a newspaper editor?  How long do you expect I am
going to sit here with my mouth wide open?"

"Just one moment more, please, madam," replied the doctor; "I only
wanted you to keep still long enough so that I could write this
prescription."



_He Got the Information_

At a country fair a machine which bore a sign reading, "How to Make
Your Trousers Last," occupied a prominent position in the grounds and
attracted much attention, says "Harper's Weekly."  A countryman who
stood gaping before it was told by the exhibitor, a person with a long
black mustache, a minstrel-stripe shirt, and a ninety-four-carat
diamond in a red cravat, that for one cent deposited in the slot the
machine would dispense its valuable sartorial advice.  The countryman
dug the required coin from the depths of a deep pocket and dropped it
in the slot.  Instantly the machine delivered a card on which was
neatly printed:

"Make your coat and waistcoat first."



_After Many Trials_

He WAS a sad-faced American tourist, and as he seated himself in a
London restaurant he was immediately attended by an obsequious waiter.

"I want two eggs," said the American--"one fried on one side and one
on the other."

"'Ow is that, sir ?" asked the astounded waiter.

"Two eggs--one fried on one side and one on the other."

"Very well, sir."

The waiter was gone several minutes, and when he returned his face was
a study.

"Would you please repeat your border, sir?"

"I said, very distinctly, two eggs--one fried on one side and one on
the other."

Oppressive silence, and then a dazed "Very well, sir."

This time he was gone longer, and when he returned he said anxiously:

"Would it be awsking too much, sir, to 'ave you repeat your border,
sir?  I cawn't think I 'ave it right, sir, y'know."

"Two eggs," said the American sadly and patiently--"one fried on one
side and one on the other."

More oppressive silence and another and fainter "Very well, sir."

This time he was gone still longer.  When he returned his collar was
unbuttoned, his hair disheveled and his face scratched and bleeding.
Leaning over the waiting patron he whispered beseechingly:

"Would you mind tyking boiled heggs, sir?  I've 'ad some words with
the cook."



_It Was His Only Tie_

One morning, as Mark Twain returned from a neighborhood morning call,
sans necktie, his wife met him at the door with the exclamation;
"There, Sam, you have been over to the Stowes's again without a
necktie!  It's really disgraceful the way you neglect your dress!"

Her husband said nothing, but went up to his room.

A few minutes later his neighbor--Mrs. S.--was summoned to the door by
a messenger, who presented her with a small box neatly done up.  She
opened it and found a black silk necktie, accompanied by the following
note:

"Here is a necktie.  Take it out and look at it.  I think I stayed
half an hour this morning.  At the end of that time will you kindly
return it, as it is the only one I have?--MARK TWAIN."



Playing Doctor

BILLY: "Gentlemen, before we begin to operate, if you will hold the
patient's hands and feet I'll get that four cents out of his
right-hand pocket."



_The Feminine Point of View_

The Willoughbys had said good-by to Mrs. Kent.  Then Mr. Willoughby
spoke thoughtfully:

"It was pleasant of her to say that about wishing she could see more
of people like us, who are interested in real things, instead of the
foolish round of gayety that takes up so much of her time and gives
her so little satisfaction, wasn't it?"

His wife stole a sidewise glance at his gratified face, and a
satirical smile crossed her own countenance.

"Very pleasant, George," she said clearly.  "But what I knew she
meant, and what she knew that I knew she meant, was that my
walking-skirt is an inch too long and my sleeves are old style, and
your coat, poor dear, is beginning to look shiny in the back."

"Why--what--how----" began Mr. Willoughby helplessly; then he shook
his head and gave it up.



_He Had Faith in the Doctor_

A young English laborer went to the register's office to record his
father's death.  The register asked the date of death.

"Well, father ain't dead yet," was the reply; "but he will be dead
before morning, and I thought it would save me another trip if you
would put it down now."

"Oh, that won't do at all," said the register.  "Why, your father may
be well before morning."

"Ah, no, he won't," said the young laborer.  "Our doctor says he
won't, and he knows what he's given father."



_What He Used the Milk For_

A clergyman had been for some time displeased with the quality of milk
served him.  At length he determined to remonstrate with his milkman
for supplying such weak stuff.  He began mildly:

"I've been wanting to see you in regard to the quality of milk with
which you are serving me."

"Yes, sir," uneasily answered the tradesman.

"I only wanted to say," continued the minister, "that I use the milk
for drinking purposes exclusively, and not for christening."



_Nothing if Not Polite_

An interested visitor who was making the final call in the tenement
district, rising, said:

"Well, my good woman, I must go now.  Is there anything I can do for
you?"

"No, thank ye, mem," replied the submerged one.  "Ye mustn't mind it
if I don't return the call, will ye?  I haven't any time to go slummm'
meself."



_Her Little Game_

As a married couple were walking down one of the main thoroughfares of
a city the husband noted the attention which other women obtained from
passers-by, and remarked to his better half:

"Folks never look at you.  I wish I had married some one better
looking."

The woman tartly replied: "It's your fault.  Do you think a man will
stare at me when you're walking with me?  You step behind and see
whether men don't look at me."

The husband hung back about a dozen yards, and for the length of the
street was surprised to see every man his wife passed stare hard at
her and even turn around and look after her.

"Sure, lassie!" he exclaimed as he rejoined her, "I was wrong and take
it back.  I'll never say aught about your looks again."

The wife had made a face at every man she met.



_A Case of Adaptation_

Two dusky small boys were quarreling; one was pouring forth a volume
of vituperous epithets, while the other leaned against a fence and
calmly contemplated him.  When the flow of language was exhausted he
said;

"Are you troo?"

"Yes."

"You ain't got nuffin' more to say?"

"No."

"Well, all dem tings what you called me you is."



_What Would Happen_

A woman agitator, holding forth on the platform and presenting the
greatness other sex, cried out: "Take away woman and what would
follow?"

And from the audience came a clear, male voice: "We would."



_Couldn't Fool Him That Far_

Years ago, when telephones were still a novelty, a farmer came to town
one day and called on a lawyer friend of his whom he supplied with
butter, and who had had a telephone recently put in his office.

"Need any butter this morning?" asked the farmer.

"Well, I don't know," answered the lawyer.  "Wait a minute.  I'll ask
my wife about it."

After speaking through the 'phone he went on; "No; my wife says no."

The farmer's face was a study for a moment.  Then he broke out with:
"Look-a-here, Mr. Lawyer, I may be a 'Rube' and have my whiskers full
of hay and hayseed, but I'm not such a big fool as to believe that
your wife is in that box!"



_And They Wondered_!

At a banquet held in a room, the walls of which were adorned with many
beautiful paintings, a well-known college president was called upon to
respond to a toast.  In the course of his remarks, wishing to pay a
compliment to the ladies present, and designating the paintings with
one of his characteristic gestures, he said: "What need is there of
these painted beauties when we have so many with us at this table?"



_She Had Him That Time_

It was the same old story of a man who refused to tell his wife the
outcome of a business transaction in which, naturally, she took a deep
interest.

"No," he sneered, "I won't tell you.  If I did you'd repeat it.  You
women can never keep a secret."

"John," said the woman quietly, "have I ever told the secret about the
solitaire engagement ring you gave me eighteen years ago being paste?"



_Necessity: Not Choice_

A woman hurried up to a policeman at the corner of Twenty-third Street
in New York City.

"Does this crosstown car take you down to the Bridge toward Brooklyn?"
she demanded.

"Why, madam," returned the policeman, "do you want to go to Brooklyn?"

"No, I don't want to" the woman replied, "but I have to."



_Mr. Beecher's Prescription_

A country clergyman once called on Mr. Beecher and asked his advice
about what to do with persons who go to sleep in church.

"Well," said Mr. Beecher, "I'll tell you what I do.  When I first came
to Plymouth Church I gave the sexton strict orders that if he saw any
person asleep in my congregation he should go straight to the pulpit
and wake up the minister."



_A Recipe for a Bridal Couple_

It was on a train going through Indiana.  Among the passengers was a
newly-married couple, who made themselves known Co such an extent that
the occupants of the car commenced passing sarcastic remarks about
them.  The bride and groom stood the remarks for some time, but
finally the latter, who was a man of tremendous size, broke out in the
following language at his tormentors: "Yes, we're married--just
married.  We are going one hundred and sixty miles farther, and I am
going to 'spoon' all the way.  If you don't like it you can get out
and walk.  She's my violet and I'm her sheltering oak."

During the remainder of the journey they were left in peace.



_Both of the Same Kind_

A lady stepped from the Limited Express at a side station, on a
special stop order.  To the only man in sight she asked:

"When is the train for Madison due here, please?"

"The train went an hour ago, ma'am: the next one is to-morrow at eight
o'clock."

The lady in perplexity then asked:

"Where is the nearest hotel?"

"There is no hotel here at all," replied the man.

"But what shall I do?" asked the lady.  "Where shall I spend the
night?"

"I guess you'll have to stay all night with the station agent," was
the reply.

"Sir!" flashed up the lady, "I'd have you know I'm a lady."

"Well," said the man as he strode off, "so is the station agent."



"_Follow the Leader_"

A young curate was asked to take a Sunday-school class of girls of
eighteen or nineteen years each, which had formerly been taught by a
lady.  The young clergyman consented, but insisted upon being properly
introduced to the class.  The superintendent accordingly took him to
the class for this purpose and said:

"Young ladies, I introduce to you Mr. Chase, who will in future be
your teacher.  I would like you to tell him what your former teacher
did each Sunday so that he can go on in the same way.  What did she
always do first?"

And then a miss of sixteen said: "Kiss us."



_Very Easily Explained_

A neighbor whose place adjoined Bronson Alcott's had a vegetable
garden in which he took a great interest.  Mr. Alcott had one also,
and both men were especially interested in their potato patches.  One
morning, meeting by the fence, the neighbor said, "How is it, Mr.
Alcott, you are never troubled with bugs, while my vines are crowded
with them?"

"My friend, that is very easily explained," replied Mr. Alcott.  "I
rise very early in the morning, gather all the bugs from my vines and
throw them into your yard."



_Proved His Teacher Wrong_

Little Willie's father found his youthful son holding up one of his
rabbits by the ears and saying to him: "How much is seven times seven,
now?"

"Bah," the father heard the boy say, "I knew you couldn't.  Here's
another one.  Six times six is how much?"

"Why, Willie, what in the world are you doing with your rabbit?" asked
the father.

Willie threw the rabbit down with disgust.  "I knew our teacher was
lying to us," was all he said.

"Why, how?" asked his father.

"Why, she told us this morning that rabbits were the greatest
multipliers in the world."



At the Department Store

A man with a low voice had just completed his purchases in the
department store, says the "Brooklyn Eagle."

"What is the name?" asked the clerk.

"Jepson," replied the man.

"Chipson?"

"No, Jepson."

"Oh, yes, Jefferson."

"No, Jepson; J-e-p-s-o-n."

"Jepson?"

"That's it.  You have it.  Sixteen eighty-two----"

"Your first name; initial, please."

"Oh, K."

"O.K. Jepson."

"Excuse me, it isn't O. K.  You did not understand me.  I said 'Oh'."

"O. Jepson."

"No; rub out the O. and let the K. stand."

The clerk iooked annoyed.  "Will you please give me your initials
again?"

"I said K."

"I beg your pardon, you said O. K.  Perhaps you had better write it
yourself."

"I said 'Oh'----"

"Just now you said K."

"Allow me to finish what I started.  I said 'Oh,' because I did not
understand what you were asking me.  I did not mean that it was my
initial.  My name is Kirby Jepson."

"Oh!"

"No, not O., but K.  Give me the pencil, and I'll write it down for
you myself.  There, I guess it's O. K. now."



_The Worst Death There Is_ BY BILL NYE

It is now the proper time for the cross-eyed woman to fool with the
garden hose.  I have faced death in almost every form, and I do not
know what fear is, but when a woman with one eye gazing into the
zodiac and the other peering into the middle of next week, and wearing
one of those floppy sunbonnets, picks up the nozzle of the garden hose
and turns on the full force of the institution, I fly wildly to the
Mountains of Hepsidam.

Water won't hurt any one, of course, if care is used not to forget and
drink any of it, but it is this horrible suspense and uncertainty
about facing the nozzle of a garden hose in the hands of a cross-eyed
woman that unnerves and paralyzes me.

Instantaneous death is nothing to me.  I am as cool and collected
where leaden rain and iron hail are thickest as I would be in my own
office writing the obituary of the man who steals my jokes.  But I
hate to be drowned slowly in my good clothes and on dry land, and have
my dying gaze rest on a woman whose ravishing beauty would drive a
narrow-gauge mule into convulsions and make him hate himself t'death.



_A Long-Lived Family_

A "dime museum" manager, having heard of a man 123 years of age,
journeyed to his home to try and secure him for exhibition purposes.

"Well, my friend," said the museum manager, "the proofs of your age
seem to be all right.  Now, how would you like to come to my place,
just do nothing but sit on a platform and let people look at you, and
I will pay you $100 a week ?"

"I'd like it all right," answered the aged man.  "But I couldn't go,
of course, unless I had my father's consent."

"Your father!" gasped the manager.  "Do you mean to say your father is
alive?"

"Yes, indeed," replied the man.

"Well, where is your father?  Home here?" asked the manager.

"Oh, yes," was the answer.  "He's upstairs, putting grandfather to
bed!"



_Silenced the Ringleader_

The head teacher in a Sunday-school was much worried by the noise of
the pupils in the next room, At last, unable to bear it any longer, he
mounted a chair and looked over the partition.  Seeing a boy a little
taller than the others talking a great deal, he leaned over, hoisted
him over the partition, and banged him into a chair in his room,
saying:

"Now be quiet."

A quarter of an hour later a smaller head appeared around the door and
a meek little voice said:

"Please, sir, you've got our teacher."



_Got Out of That, All Right_

"My dear," said a wife to her husband, "do you realize that you have
forgotten that this is my birthday ?"

"Yes, dearie, I did forget it," replied the husband.  "Isn't it
natural that I should?  There isn't really anything about you to
remind me that you are a day older than you were a year ago."



_He Simply Looked That Way_

The man in the smoker was boasting of his unerring ability to tell
from a man's looks exactly what city he came from.  "You, for
example," he said to the man next to him, "you are from New Orleans?"
He was right.

"You, my friend," turning to the man on the other side of him, "I
should say you are from Chicago?"  Again he was right.

The other two men got interested.

"And you are from Boston?" he asked the third man.

"That's right, too," said the New Englander.

"And you from Philadelphia, I should say?" to the last man.

"No, sir," answered the man with considerable warmth; "I've been sick
for three months: that's what makes me look that way!"



_What She Would Like_

A little girl stood in a city meat-market waiting for some one to
attend to her wants.  Finally the proprietor was at liberty,
approached her and said benignantly, "Is there anything you would
like, little girl?"

"Oh, yes, sir, please: I want a diamond ring, and a seal-skin sacque,
a real foreign nobleman, and a pug dog, and a box at the opera, and,
oh, ever so many other things; but all Ma wants is ten cents' worth of
bologna."



_The Highest Price in the Store_

A rich American woman visited a Japanese art shop in Paris.  It
happened to be a dull, dark afternoon.  She looked at the bronzes,
jewels, drawings and other things, and finally, pointing toward a
dusky corner, she said to the polite young salesman: "How much is that
Japanese idol over there worth?"

The salesman bowed, and answered: "About five hundred thousand francs,
madam.  It is the proprietor."



_From Different Points_

"Father, you were born in California, you say?"

"Yes, my son."

"And mother was born in New York ?"

"Yes."

"And I was born in Indiana?"

"Yes, my boy."

"Well, father, don't it beat the Dutch how we all got together!"



_So Son: So Father_?

A small boy who had been very naughty was first reprimanded, then told
that he must take a whipping.  He flew upstairs and hid in the far
corner under a bed.  Just then the father came home.  The mother told
him what had occurred.  He went upstairs and proceeded to crawl under
the bed toward the youngster, who whispered excitedly, "Hello, Pop, is
she after you, too?"



_How Could He_?

"Papa" was becoming impatient at the lateness of the hour when he
remarked: "I can't see why that young fellow who is calling on Minnie
hasn't sense enough to go home.  It's near midnight."

"The dear little brother" of the family just then came in, heard his
father's remark, and ventured some light:

"He can't go, father.  Sister's sitting on him."



_Couldn't Leave Town_

A lawyer had a horse that always balked when he attempted to cross a
certain bridge leading out of the village.  No amount of whipping or
urging would induce him to cross it, so he advertised him for sale:
"To be sold for no other reason than that the owner would like to
leave town."



_He Knew His Father_

"Suppose," said a father to his little boy, "you have half an apple
and I give you another half.  How much have you?"

"A whole apple," said the boy.

"Well," continued the father, "suppose you had a half dollar and I
gave you another half dollar.  What would you have then?"

"A fit," promptly answered the boy.



_A Valuable Office Boy_

The employer was bending over a table, looking at the directory.  The
new office boy slipped up quietly and poked a note into his hand.  The
surprised employer opened it, and read:

"Honored Sir--Yer pants is ripped."



_She Had a Question to Ask_

A certain prominent dry-goods merchant is also a Sunday-school
superintendent.  Not long since he devoted the last few moments of the
weekly session to an impressive elucidation of the parable of the
Prodigal Son, and afterward asked with due solemnity if any one of the
"little gleaners" present desired to ask a question.  Sissy Jones's
hand shot up.

"Very well," he said, designating her with a benevolent finger and a
bland smile, "what is it you would like to know, Cecilia?"

"Please, what's the price of them little pink parasols in your
show-window?"



_The Only Time When He Does_

A "Subscriber" once wrote to an editor and asked: "Please tell me,
does a man in running around a tree go before or behind himself?"

The editor answered:

"That depends.  If he is trying to catch himself, necessarily he
follows himself, and consequently goes behind.  If, on the contrary,
he is running away from himself, the deduction leads to the very
obvious conclusion that he precedes himself, and consequently goes
before.  If he succeeds in catching up with himself, and passes
himself, at the moment of passing he neither precedes nor follows
himself, but both he and himself are running even.  This is the only
case where he does not go before or behind himself."



_In the Absence of a Tip_

"Excuse me, madam, would you mind walking the other way and not
passing the horse?" said an English cabman with exaggerated politeness
to the fat lady who had just paid a minimum fare, with no fee.

"Why?" she inquired.

"Because if 'e sees wot 'e's been carrying for a shilling 'e'll 'ave a
fit," was the freezing answer.



_Her Father Didn't Like It_

A young man told his girl the other night that if she didn't marry him
he'd get a rope and hang himself right in front of her house.  "Oh,
please, don't do it, dear," she said; "you know father doesn't want
you hanging around here."



_He Didn't Mind His Going Once_

An elderly gentleman, a stranger in New York and not sure of his way,
stopped a young man on Fifth Avenue and said:

"Young man, I would like very much to go to Central Park."

The young man became thoughtful for a moment, and then, looking the
old gentleman in the face, said:

"Well, I don't mind your going just this once, but don't ever, ever
ask me to go there again."



_Never Again_

It was a pitiful mistake, an error sad and grim.  I waited for the
railway train; the light was low and dim.  It came at last, and from a
car there stepped a dainty dame, and, looking up and down the place,
she straight unto me came.  "Oh, Jack!" she cried, "oh, dear old
Jack!" and kissed me as she spake; then looked again, and, frightened,
cried, "Oh, what a bad mistake!"  I said, "Forgive me, maiden fair,
for I am not your Jack; and as regards the kiss you gave, I'll
straightway give it back."  And since that night I've often stood upon
that platform dim, but only once in a man's whole life do such things
come to him.



_A Kiss in the Rain_ by SAMUEL MINTURN PECK

  One stormy morn I chanced to meet
    A lassie in the town;
  Her locks were like the ripened wheat,
    Her laughing eyes were brown.
  I watched her as she tripped along
    Till madness filled my brain,
  And then--and then--I know 'twas wrong--
   I kissed her in the rain.

  With raindrops shining on her cheek
    Like dewdrops on a rose,
  The little lassie strove to speak,
    My boldness to oppose;
  She strove in vain, and quivering,
    Her fingers stole in mine;
  And then the birds began to sing,
    The sun began to shine.

  Oh, let the clouds grow dark above,
    My heart is light below;
  'Tis always summer when we love,
    However winds may blow;
  And I'm as proud as any prince,
    All honors I disdain:
  'She says I am her _rain beau_ since
    I kissed her in the rain.



_What He Had Re(a)d_

An Irishman, says "The Rochester Times," recently went before Judge
Stephens to be naturalized.

"Have you read the Declaration of Independence?" the Court asked.

"I hov not," said Pat.

"Have you read the Constitution of the United States?"

"I hov not, yer Honor."

The Judge looked sternly at the applicant, and asked:

"Well, what have you read?"

Patrick hesitated but the fraction of a second before replying:

"I hov red hairs on me neck, yer Honor."



_Apostle and Epistle_

A man riding through the mountains of Tennessee stopped one evening to
water his horse before a little cabin, outside of which sat an old
colored woman watching the antics of a couple of piccaninnies playing
near by.

"Good-evening, Aunty," he called.  "Cute pair of boys you've got.
Your children?"

"Laws-a-massy!  Mah chillun!  'Deed, dem's mah daughteh's chilluns.
Come hyah, you boys."

As the boys obeyed the summons the man inquired their names.

"Clah to goodness, sah, dem chilluns is right smaht named!" said the
old woman.  "Ye see, mah daughteh done got 'ligion long ago, an' named
dese hyah boys right out de Bible, sah.  Dis hyah one's named Apostle
Paul, an' de uddah's called Epistle Peter."



_More than Enough_

An eight-year-old boy went to a church picnic, and, being a favorite
with the ladies, had been liberally supplied with good things to eat.
Later in the day one of the ladies noticed the boy sitting near a
stream with a woebegone expression on his face and his hands clasped
over his stomach.

"Why, what's the matter, Willie?" she kindly asked.  "Haven't you had
enough to eat?"

"Oh, yes'm," said the boy.  "I've had enough.  I feel as though I
don't want all I've got."



_His Only Request_

A pretty young girl was walking through a Richmond hospital with
delicacies for the sick and wounded.  She overheard a suffering young
Confederate officer say, "Oh, my Lord!"

Wishing to rebuke him slightly she came to his bedside and said:

"I think that I heard you call upon the name of the Lord.  I am one of
His daughters.  Is there anything that I can do for you?"

He looked upon the lovely face.

"Yes," he said, "please ask Him to make me His son-in-law."



A Good Majority

A well-known English surgeon was imparting some clinical instructions
to half a dozen students, according to "The Medical Age."  Pausing at
the bedside of a doubtful case he said: "Now, gentlemen, do you think
this is or is not a case for operation?"

One by one each student made his diagnosis, and all of them answered
in the negative.

"Well, gentlemen, you are all wrong," said the wielder of the scalpel,
"and I shall operate to-morrow."

"No, you won't," said the patient, as he rose in his bed; "six to one
is a good majority; gimme my clothes."



_Ready to Accommodate Her_

Attorney-General Moody was once riding on the platform of a Boston
street car, standing next to the gate that protected passengers from
cars coming on the other track.  A Boston lady came to the door of the
car, and, as it stopped, started toward the gate, which was hidden
from her by the men standing before it.

"Other side, please, lady," said the conductor.

He was ignored as only a born-and-bred Bostonian can ignore a man.
The lady took another step toward the gate.

"You must get off the other side," said the conductor.

"I wish to get off on this side," came the answer in tones that
congealed that official into momentary silence.  Before he could
explain or expostulate Mr. Moody came to his assistance.

"Stand to one side, gentlemen," he remarked quietly.  "The lady wishes
to climb over the gate."



_A New Name for Them_

One rainy afternoon Aunt Sue was explaining the meaning of various
words to her young nephew.  "Now, an heirloom, my dear, means
something that has been handed down from father to son," she said.

"Well," replied the boy thoughtfully, "that's a queer name for my
pants."



_He Wanted to Know_

A bishop in full robes of office, with his gown reaching to his feet,
was teaching a Sunday-school class.  At the close he said he would be
glad to answer any questions.

A little hand went up, and he asked: "Well, my boy?"

"Can I ask?" said the boy.

"Certainly," said the Bishop; "what is it ?"

"Well," asked the boy, "is dem all you've got on, or do you wear pants
under dem?"



_Woman's Love and Man's Love_

"There's just two things that break up most happy homes," observed a
philosopher.

"What's them?" inquired a listener.

"Woman's love for dry goods an' man's love for wet goods, b'gosh!"



_Much Simpler_

At a country fair out in Kansas a man went up to a tent where some elk
were on exhibition, and stared wistfully up at the sign.

"I'd like to go in there," he said to the keeper, "but it would be
mean to go in without my family, and I cannot afford to pay for my
wife and seventeen children."

The keeper stared at him in astonishment.  "Are all those your
children?" he gasped.

"Every one," said the man.

"You wait a minute," said the keeper.  "I'm going to bring the elk out
and let them see you all."



_One Button was in Use_

A school principal was trying to make clear to his class the
fundamental doctrines of the Declaration of Independence.

"Now, boys," he said, "I will give you each three ordinary buttons.
Here they are.  You must think of the first one as representing Life,
of the second one as representing Liberty, and the third one as
representing the Pursuit of Happiness.  Next Sunday I will ask you
each to produce the three buttons and tell me what they represent."

The following Sunday the teacher said to the youngest member:

"Now, Johnnie, produce your three buttons and tell me what they stand
for."

"I ain't got 'em all," he sobbed, holding out two of the buttons.
"Here's Life an' here's Liberty, but mommer sewed the Pursuit of
Happiness on my pants."



_He Remembered_

A restaurant-keeper hung out this sign:

     "Coffee:
   Such as Mother Used to Make."

A customer asked, pointing to the sign:

"Is your coffee really such as mother used to make?"

"It is," replied the proprietor.

"Then," said the man with a reminiscent look, "give me a cup of tea."



_Wasn't Delicate at All_

A young man, not regarded as a very desirable suitor, had called upon
a young lady a number of times, each time to be told by the maid that
"Miss Florence was not well today."

One day, in response to his card, the young lady's mother, who was a
recent accession to the newly-rich ranks, and whose education was not
as sure as it might be, appeared and explained once more to the young
man that the daughter was not well.

"I am very sorry, indeed," said the young man as he rose to go, "that
your daughter is so delicate."

"Delicate?" sniffed the mother; "Florence dell'cate?  Not at all.
Why, she is the most indelicate girl you ever met."



_A Live Topic_

A member of the faculty of the University of Chicago, according to
"Harper's Weekly," tells of the sad case of a young woman from Indiana
who was desirous of attaining social prominence in Chicago.

Soon after her arrival there she made the acquaintance of a student at
the university to whom she took a great fancy.

Evidently it was at this time she realized for the first time that her
early education had been neglected, for she said to a friend:

"I suppose that, as he is a college man, I'll have to be awful careful
what I say.  Whatever will I talk about to him?"

The friend suggested history as a safe topic.  To her friend's
astonishment she took the advice seriously, and shortly commenced in
earnest to "bone up" in English history.

When the young man called, the girl listened for some time with
ill-concealed impatience to his talk of football, outdoor meets,
dances, etc., but finally she decided to take the matter in her own
hands.  She had not done all that reading for nothing; so, a pause in
the conversation affording the desired opportunity, she suddenly
exclaimed, with considerable vivacity:

"Wasn't it awful about Mary, Queen of Scots?"

"Why, what's the matter?" stammered the student, confused.

"My gracious!" almost yelled the girl from Indiana, "didn't you know?
Why, the poor thing had her head cut off!"



_The After-College Girl's Complaint_

A lady was calling on some friends one summer afternoon.  The talk
buzzed along briskly, fans waved and the daughter of the house kept
twitching uncomfortably, frowning and making little smothered
exclamations of annoyance.  Finally, with a sigh, she rose and left
the room.

"Your daughter," said the visitor, "seems to be suffering from the
heat."

"No," said the hostess.  "She is just back home from college and she
is suffering from the family grammar."



_It All Seemed So Unnecessary_

A city man once had occasion, says "Lippincott's Magazine," to stop at
a country home where a tin basin and a roller-towel on the back porch
sufficed for the family's ablutions.  For two mornings the "hired man"
of the household watched in silence the visitor's efforts at making a
toilette under the unfavorable auspices, but when on the third day the
tooth-brush, nail-file, whisk-broom, etc., had been duly used and
returned to their places in the traveler's grip, he could suppress his
curiosity no longer, so boldly put the question: "Say, Mister, air you
always that much trouble to yo'se'f?"



_Overdid it a Bit_

A famous statesman prided himself on his success in campaigning, when
called upon to reach a man's vote through his family pride.

On one of his tours he passed through a country town when he came
suddenly upon a charming group--a comely woman with a bevy of little
ones about her--in a garden.  He stopped short, then advanced and
leaned over the front gate.

"Madam," he said In his most ingratiating way, "may I kiss these
beautiful children?"

"Certainly, sir," the lady answered demurely.

"They are lovely darlings," said the campaigner after he had finished
the eleventh.  "I have seldom seen more beautiful babies.  Are they
all yours, marm?"

The lady blushed deeply.

"Of course they are--the sweet little treasures," he went on.  "From
whom else, marm, could they have inherited these limpid eyes, these
rosy cheeks, these profuse curls, these comely figures and these
musical voices?"

The lady continued blushing.

"By-the-way, marm," said the statesman, "may I bother you to tell your
estimable husband that ------, the Republican candidate for Governor,
called upon him this evening?"

"I beg your pardon," said the lady, "I have no husband."

"But these children, madam--you surely are not a widow ?"

"I fear you were mistaken, sir, when you first came up.  These are not
my children.  This is an orphan asylum!"



_One on the Doctor That Time_

A prominent physician, whose specialty was physical diagnosis,
required his patients, before entering his private consultation-room,
to divest themselves of all superfluous clothing in order to save
time.  One day a man presented himself without having complied with
this requirement.

"Why do you come in here without complying with my rules?" demanded
the doctor.  "Just step into that side room and remove your clothing
and then I'll see you.  Next patient, please!"

The man did as requested, and after a time presented himself in
regular order duly divested of his clothing.

"Now," said the doctor, "what can I do for you ?"

"I just called," replied the man, "to collect that tailoring bill
which you owe us."



_Anxious About Him_

One winter's day a very bowlegged tramp called at a home in Ontario
and stood to warm himself by the kitchen stove.  A little boy in the
home surveyed him carefully for some minutes, then finally approaching
him, he said: "Say, mister, you better stand back; you're warping!"



_The Only Way He Could Help_

Chief Justice Matthews, while presiding over the Supreme Court at
Washington, took the several Justices of the Court for a run down
Chesapeake Bay.  A stiff wind sprang up, and Justice Gray was getting
decidedly the worst of it. As he leaned over the rail in great
distress, Chief Justice Matthews touched him on the shoulder and said
in a tone of deepest sympathy: "Is there anything I can do for you,
Gray?"

"No, thank you," returned the sick Justice, "unless your Honor can
overrule this motion."



_He Was Willing to Oblige_

A young North Carolina girl is charming, but, like a great many other
charming people, she is poor.  She never has more than two evening
gowns in a season, and the ruin of one of them is always a very
serious matter to her.  She went to a little dancing-party last week
and she wore a brand-new white frock.  During the evening a great big,
red-faced, perspiring man came up and asked her to dance.  He wore no
gloves.  She looked at his well-meaning but moist hands despairingly,
and thought of the immaculate back of her waist.  She hesitated a bit,
and then she said, with a winning smile;

"Of course I'll dance with you, but, if you don't mind, won't you
please use your handkerchief?"

The man looked at her blankly a moment or two.  Then a light broke
over his face.

"Why, certainly," he said.

And he pulled out his handkerchief and blew his nose.



_Not All the Time, But_----

A man saw a waiter in a restaurant spill a tureen of tomato soup over
a young lady's white gown.

The young lady, instead of flying into a passion, smiled.  She said it
didn't matter.  She continued to eat and to talk as though nothing had
happened.

This so impressed the man that he got an introduction to the young
lady, proposed to her at the end of a month or so, and was accepted.

Some time after the marriage he spoke of the tomato-soup accident.

"I shall never forget it," said the bride.

"Your conduct," said the man, "was admirable."

"I remember," she said, "that I did behave very well at the time; but
I wish you could have seen the marks of my teeth on the bedpost that
night."



_Necessity and Invention_

A mother with her seven children started away on a journey.  After
entering the car the largest child was laid out flat on the seat, and
the remaining six then sat upon him in a row.

When the conductor came around to collect the fares the mother counted
her money, handed it over, smiled, and suavely said: "Sir, the oldest
is under six."



_Taking No Chances_

An epileptic dropped in a fit on the streets of Boston not long ago,
and was taken to a hospital.  Upon removing his coat there was found
pinned to his waistcoat a slip of paper on which was written:

"This is to inform the house-surgeon that this is just a case of plain
fit: not appendicitis.  My appendix has already been removed twice."



_Too Much Curiosity_

A dangerous operation was being performed upon a woman.  Old Doctor
A------, a quaint German, full of kindly wit and professional
enthusiasm, had several younger doctors with him.  One of them was
administering the ether.  He became so interested in the old doctor's
work that he withdrew the cone from the patient's nostrils and she
half-roused and rose to a sitting posture, looking with wild-eyed
amazement over the surroundings.  It was a critical period, and Doctor
A------ did not want to be interrupted.  "Lay down, dere, voman," he
commanded gruffly.  "You haf more curiosity as a medical student."



_They Were Both Charged_

A little girl, brushing her hair, found that it "crackled," and asked
her mother why it did.

"Why, dear, you have electricity in your hair," explained the mother.

"Isn't that funny?" commented the little one.  "I have electricity in
my hair, and Grandmother has gas in her stomach."



_Could Use the Other Kind, Too_

"Here," said the salesman, "is something we call the 'lovers' clock.'
You can set it so it will take it two hours to run one hour."

"I'll take that," said Miss Jarmer with a bright blush.  "And now, if
you have one that can be set so as to run two hours in one hour's time
or less, I think I'd like one of that kind, too."



_A Regard for Appearance_

A milliner endeavored to sell to a colored woman one of the last
season's hats at a very moderate price.  It was a big white
picture-hat.

"Law, no, honey!" exclaimed the woman.  "I could nevah wear that.  I'd
look jes' like a blueberry in a pan of milk."



_Rapid-Fire_

A frivolous young English girl, with no love for the Stars and
Stripes, once exclaimed at a celebration where the American flag was
very much in evidence:

"Oh, what a silly-looking thing the American flag is!  It suggests
nothing but checker-berry candy."

"Yes," replied a bystander, "the kind of candy that has made everybody
sick who ever tried to lick it."



_Kipling at a Luncheon_

At a tea the other day, says "The New York Sun," a woman heard the
following remarks made about her favorite author.  She turned to
listen, amazed by the eccentricities of conduct narrated.

"Yes, you know," the hostess was saying, "Kipling came in and behaved
so strangely!  At luncheon he suddenly sprang up and wouldn't let the
waitress come near the table.  Every time that she tried to come near
he would jump at her.

"He made a dive for the cake, which was on the lower shelf of the
sideboard, and took it into the parlor to eat it.  He got the crumbs
all over the sofa and the beautiful rug.

"When he had finished his cake he simply sat and glared at us."

The visitor finally could not control herself, and asked:

"Excuse me, but are you speaking of Mr. Rudyard Kipling?"

"Mr. Rudyard Kipling?" echoed the hostess.  "Oh, no; Kipling is our
dog!"



_Getting His Trousseau Ready_

The kindly 'Squire of the neighborhood was just leaving from a
friendly social visit to Mrs. Maguire.

"And your son, Mrs. Maguire?" said the 'Squire as he reached for his
hat.  "I hope he is well.  Busy, I suppose, getting ready for his
wedding tonight ?"

"Well, not very busy this minit, 'Squire," answered the beaming
mother.  "He's upstairs in bed while I'm washing out his trousseau."



_There Was a Chance_

"Going to send your boy on an ocean trip, are you?" said a friend to
a father.

"Yes," replied the father.  "You see, if there is anything in him I
think a long sea voyage will bring it out."



_Deserved to be Tried_

The Judge was at dinner in the new household when the young wife
asked: "Did you ever try any of my biscuits, Judge?"

"No," said the Judge, "I never did, but I dare say they deserve it."



_End of the Honeymoon_

An old married man happened to meet a beaming bridegroom on the
latter'S first day at business after the wedding trip.

"Hello!" said he; "finished your honeymoon yet?"

"I don't know," replied the happy husband, smiling.  "I have never
been able to determine the exact meaning of the word honeymoon."

"Well, then, has your wife commenced to do the cooking yet?"



_If You Have a Mole_

No one is said to be without a mole or two, and these are some of the
prognostications that mole-wearers may draw from their brown
ornaments;

A mole on the right side of a man's forehead denotes wonderful luck;
on the right side of a woman's forehead, gifts from the dead.

On the left side of a man's forehead a mole denotes a long term in
prison, on the left side of a woman's forehead, two husbands and a
life of exile.

A man with a mole in the middle of his forehead has a cruel mind; a
woman with such a mole is foolish and envious.

A mole on the neck in man or woman promises a long and happy life,
wealth and fame.

A man with a mole on the left side of the upper lip rarely marries,
and such a mole in the case of a woman denotes suffering.

On the right side of the upper-lip a mole promises great good fortune
to both sexes.



_Her Own Eyes Good Enough for Him_

A little Scotch boy's grandmother was packing his luncheon for him to
take to school one morning.  Suddenly looking up in the old lady's
face, he said:

"Grandmother, does yer specs magnify?"

"A little, my child," she answered.

"Aweel, then," said the boy, "I wad juist like it if ye wad tak' them
aff when ye're packin' my loonch."



_How Did He Know_?

After dinner, when the ladies had gone upstairs, the men, over their
coffee and cigars, talked, as men will, of love.

All of a sudden the host cried in a loud voice:

"I will tell you, gentlemen, this is the truth: I have kissed the
dainty Japanese girl.  I have kissed the South Sea Island maiden.  I
have kissed the slim Indian beauty.  And the girls of England, of
Germany, even of America, I have kissed, but it is most true that to
kiss my wife is best of all."

Then a young man cried across the table:

"By Heaven, sir, you are right there!"



_So Mother--So Son_

Vincent was altogether too garrulous in school to please his
teachers.  Such punishments as the institution allowed to be meted
out were tried without any apparent effect upon the boy until at last
the head Master decided to mention the lad's fault upon his monthly
report.

So the next report to his father had these words: "Vincent talks a
great deal."

Back came the report by mail duly signed, but with this written in
red ink under the comment: "You ought to hear his mother."



_An Endless Wash_

In one of the lesser Indian hill wars an English detachment took an
Afghan prisoner.  The Afghan was very dirty.  Accordingly two
privates were deputed to strip and wash him.

The privates dragged the man to a stream of running water, undressed
him, plunged him in, and set upon him lustily with stiff brushes and
large cakes of white soap.

After a long time one of the privates came back to make a report.  He
saluted his officer and said disconsolately:

"It's no use, sir.  It's no use."

"No use?" said the officer.  "What do you mean?  Haven't you washed
that Afghan yet?"

"It's no use, sir," the private repeated.  "We've washed him for two
hours, but it's no use."

"How do you mean it's no use ?" said the officer angrily.

"Why, sir," said the private, "after rubbin' him and scrubbin' him
till our arms ached I'll be hanged if we didn't come to another suit
of clothes."



_Once Dead Always Dead_

The hero of the play, after putting up a stiff fight with the
villain, had died to slow music, says a storyteller in "The Chicago
Tribune."

The audience insisted on his coming before the curtain.

He refused to appear.

But the audience still insisted.

Then the manager, a gentleman with a strong accent, came to the front.

"Ladies an' gintlemen," he said, "the carpse thanks ye kindly, but he
says he's dead, an' he's goin' to stay dead."



_Had to Get it Done Somehow_

A little boy bustled into a grocery one day with a memorandum in his
hand.

"Hello, Mr. Smith," he said.  "I want thirteen pounds of coffee at 32
cents."

"Very good," said the grocer, and he noted down the sale, and put his
clerk to packing the coffee.  "Anything else, Charlie?"

"Yes.  Twenty-seven pounds of sugar at 9 cents."

"The loaf, eh?  And what else?"

"Seven and a half pounds of bacon at 20 cents."

"That will be a good brand.  Go on."

"Five pounds of tea at 90 cents; eleven and a half quarts of molasses
at 8 cents a pint; two eight-pound hams at 21 1/4 cents, and five
dozen jars of pickled walnuts at 24 cents a jar."

The grocer made out the bill,

"It's a big order," he said.  "Did your mother tell you to pay for
it?"

"My mother," said the boy, as he pocketed the neat and accurate bill,
"has nothing to do with this business.  It is my arithmetic lesson
and I had to get it done somehow."



_A Personal Demonstration_

Chatting in leisurely fashion with Prince Bismarck in Berlin Lord
Russell asked the Chancellor how he managed to rid himself of
importunate visitors whom he could not refuse to see, but who stuck
like burrs when once admitted.

"Oh," replied Bismarck, "I have my easy escape.  My wife knows people
of this class very well, and when she is sure there is a bore here
and sees them staying too long she manages to call me away on some
plausible pretext."

Scarcely had he finished speaking when the Princess Bismarck appeared
at the door.  "My dear," she said to her husband, "you must come at
once and take your medicine; you should have taken it an hour ago."



_Not for Him_

A quiet and retiring citizen occupied a seat near the door of a
crowded car when a masterful stout woman entered.

Having no newspaper behind which to hide he was fixed and subjugated
by her glittering eye.  He rose and offered his place to her.
Seating herself--without thanking him--she exclaimed in tones that
reached to the farthest end of the car:

"What do you want to stand up there for?  Come here and sit on my
lap."

"Madam," gasped the man, as his face became scarlet.  "I beg your
pardon, I--I----"

"What do you mean?" shrieked the woman.  "You know very well I was
speaking to my niece there behind you."



_Such a Pleasant Room_

"It ain't ev'rybody I'd put to sleep in this room," said old Mrs.
Jinks to the fastidious and extremely nervous young minister who was
spending a night at her house.

"This here room is full of sacred associations to me," she went on,
as she bustled around opening shutters and arranging the curtains.
"My first husband died in that bed with his head on these very
pillers, and poor Mr. Jinks died settin' right in that corner.
Sometimes when I come into the room in the dark I think I see him
settin' there still.

"My own father died layin' right on that lounge under the winder.
Poor Pa!  He was a Speeritualist, and he allus said he'd appear in
this room after he died, and sometimes I'm foolish enough to look for
him.  If you should see anything of him tonight you'd better not tell
me; for it'd be a sign to me that there was something in
Speeritualism, and I'd hate to think that.

"My son by my first man fell dead of heart-disease right where you
stand.  He was a doctor, and there's two whole skeletons in that
closet that belonged to him, and half a dozen skulls in that lower
drawer.

"There, I guess things'll do now----

"Well, good-night, and pleasant dreams."



_Giving a Woman Her Rights_

The car was full and the night was wet.  The bell rang, the car
stopped, and a lady entered.  As she looked tired a nice old
gentleman in the corner rose and inquired in a kind voice, "Would you
like to sit down, ma'am?  Excuse me, though," he added; "I think you
are Mrs. Sprouter, the advocate of woman's rights."

"I am, sir," replied the lady calmly.

"You think that women should be equal to men?" further queried the
old gentleman.

"Certainly," was the firm reply.

"You think that they should have the same rights and privileges?" was
the next question.

"Most emphatically," came from the supporter of woman's rights.

"Very well," said the kind old gentleman, sitting down again, "just
stand up and enjoy them."



_A Riddle to Willie_

  I asked my Pa a simple thing;
    "Where holes in doughnuts go?"
  Pa read his paper, then he said:
    "Oh, you're too young to know."

  I asked my Ma about the wind:
    "Why can't you see it blow?"
  Ma thought a moment, then she said:
   "Oh, you're too young to know."

  Now, why on earth do you suppose
    They went and licked me so?
  Ma asked: "Where is that jam?"  I said:
    "Oh, you're too young to know."



_Under Her Bed_

Mrs. Hicks was telling some ladies about the burglar scare in her
house the night before.

"Yes," she said, "I heard a noise and got up, and there from under
the bed I saw a man's legs sticking out."

"Mercy," exclaimed a woman--"the burglar's legs?"

"No, my dear, my husband's legs.  He had heard the noise, too."



_Didn't Think He Was Polite_

They were on their honeymoon.  He had bought a catboat and had taken
her out to show her how well he could handle a boat, putting her to
tend the sheet.  A puff of wind came, and he shouted in no uncertain
tones:

"Let go the sheet."

No response.

Then again:

"Let go that sheet, quick."

Still no movement.  A few minutes after, when both were clinging to
the bottom of the overturned boat, he said:

"Why didn't you let go that sheet when I told you to, dear?"

"I would have," said the bride, "if you had not been so rough about
it.  You ought to speak more kindly to your wife."



_He Had a Large Reach_

President Eliot, of Harvard, on a visit to the Pacific Coast, met
Professor O. B. Johnson, of the University of Washington, says "The
New York Tribune." In the course of the conversation President Eliot
asked the Westerner what chair he held.

"Well," said Professor Johnson, "I am professor of biology, but I
also give instruction in meteorology, botany, physiology, chemistry,
entomology and a few others."

"I should say that you occupied a whole settee, not a chair," replied
Harvard's chief.



_When Fighting Really Began_

An aged, gray-haired and very wrinkled old woman, arrayed in the
outlandish calico costume of the mountains, was summoned as a witness
in court to tell what she knew about a fight in her house.  She took
the witness-stand with evidences of backwardness and proverbial
Bourbon verdancy.  The Judge asked her in a kindly voice what took
place.  She insisted it did not amount to much, but the Judge by his
persistency finally got her to tell the story of the bloody fracas.

"Now, I tell ye, Jedge, it didn't amount to nuthn'.  The fust I
knowed about it was when Bill Saunder called Tom Smith a liar, en Tom
knocked him down with a stick o' wood.  One o' Bill's friends then
cut Tom with a knife, slicin' a big chunk out o' him.  Then Sam
Jones, who was a friend of Tom's, shot the other feller and two more
shot him, en three or four others got cut right smart by somebody.
That nachly caused some excitement, Jedge, en then they commenced
fightin'."



_The Wrong Kind of a Baby_

In a certain home where the stork recently visited there is a
six-year-old son of inquiring mind.  When he was first taken in to
see the new arrival he exclaimed:

"Oh, mamma, it hasn't any teeth!  And no hair!"  Then, clasping his
hands in despair, he cried: "Somebody has done us!  It's an old baby."



_A Poser for the Salesman_

"It's not so much a durable article that I require, sir," said Miss
Simpkins.  "I want something dainty, you know; something coy, and at
the same time just a wee bit saucy--that might look well for evening
wear."



_Not in the Army, After All_

A Methodist negro exhorter shouted: "Come up en jine de army ob de
Lohd."

"Ise done jined," replied one of the congregation.

"Whar'd yoh jine?" asked the exhorter.

"In de Baptis' Chu'ch."

"Why, chile," said the exhorter, "yoh ain't in the army; yoh's in de
navy."