With great pleasure I watched her but recently as she was walking along
the street, stopping to have a word and so a part in the lives of a
group of children at play by the wayside, hastening her step a little
to have a word with a washerwoman toting her bundle of clothes,
stopping for a word with a laboring man returning with dinner pail in
hand from his work, returning the recognition from the lady in her
carriage, and so imparting some of her own rich life to all with whom
she came in contact.

And as good fortune would have it, while still watching her, an old
lady passed her,--really old, this one, though at least ten or fifteen
years younger, so far as the count by the seasons is concerned.
Nevertheless she was bent in form and apparently stiff in joint and
muscle.  Silent in mood, she wore a countenance of long-faced sadness,
which was intensified surely several fold by a black, sombre headgear
with an immense heavy veil still more sombre looking if possible.  Her
entire dress was of this description.  By this relic-of-barbarism garb,
combined with her own mood and expression, she continually proclaimed
to the world two things,--her own personal sorrows and woes, which by
this very method she kept continually fresh in her mind, and also her
lack of faith in the eternal goodness of things, her lack of faith in
the love and eternal goodness of the Infinite Father.

Wrapped only in the thoughts of her own ailments, and sorrows, and
woes, she received and she gave nothing of joy, nothing of hope,
nothing of courage, nothing of value to those whom she passed or with
whom she came in contact.  But on the contrary she suggested to all and
helped to intensify in many, those mental states all too prevalent in
our common human life.  And as she passed our friend one could notice a
slight turn of the head which, coupled with the expression in her face,
seemed to indicate this as her thought,--Your dress and your conduct
are not wholly in keeping with a lady of your years.  Thank God, then,
thank God they are not.  And may He in His great goodness and love send
us an innumerable company of the same rare type; and may they live a
thousand years to bless mankind, to impart the life-giving influences
of their own royal lives to the numerous ones all about us who stand so
much in need of them.

Would you remain always young, and would you carry all the joyousness
and buoyancy of youth into your maturer years?  Then have care
concerning but one thing,--how you live in your thought world.  This
will determine all.  It was the inspired one, Gautama, the Buddha, who
said,--"The mind is everything; what you think you become."  And the
same thing had Ruskin in mind when he said,--"Make yourself nests of
pleasant thoughts.  None of us as yet know, for none of us have been
taught in early youth, what fairy palaces we may build of beautiful
thought,--_proof against all adversity_."

And would you have in your body all the elasticity, all the strength,
all the beauty of your younger years?  Then live these in your mind,
making no room for unclean thought, and you will externalize them in
your body.  In the degree that you keep young in thought will you
remain young in body.  And you will find that your body will in turn
aid your mind, for body helps mind the same as mind builds body.

You are continually building, and so externalizing in your body
conditions most akin to the thoughts and emotions you entertain.  And
not only are you so building from within, but you are also continually
drawing from without, forces of a kindred nature.  Your particular kind
of thought connects you with a similar order of thought from without.
If it is bright, hopeful, cheerful, you connect yourself with a current
of thought of this nature.  If it is sad, fearing, despondent, then
this is the order of thought you connect yourself with.

If the latter is the order of your thought, then perhaps unconsciously
and by degrees you have been connecting yourself with it.  You need to
go back and pick up again a part of your child nature, with its
careless and cheerful type of thought.  "The minds of the group of
children at play are unconsciously concentrated in drawing to their
bodies a current of playful thought.  Place a child by itself, deprive
it of its companions, and soon it will mope and become slow of
movement.  It is cut off from that peculiar thought current and is
literally 'out of its element.'

"You need to bring again this current of playful thought to you which
has gradually been turned off.  You are too serious or sad, or absorbed
in the serious affairs of life.  You can be playful and cheerful
without being puerile or silly.  You can carry on business all the
better for being in the playful mood when your mind is off your
business.  There is nothing but ill resulting from the permanent mood
of sadness and seriousness,--the mood which by many so long maintained
makes it actually difficult for them to smile at all.

"At eighteen or twenty you commenced growing out of the more playful
tendency of early youth.  You took hold of the more serious side of
life.  You went into some business.  You became more or less involved
in its cares, perplexities and responsibilities.  Or, as man or woman,
you entered on some phase of life involving care or trouble.  Or you
became absorbed in some game of business which, as you followed it,
left no time for play.  Then as you associated with older people you
absorbed their old ideas, their mechanical methods of thinking, their
acceptance of errors without question or thought of question.  In all
this you opened your mind to a heavy, care-laden current of thought.
Into this you glided unconsciously.  That thought is materialized in
your blood and flesh.  The seen of your body is a deposit or
crystallization of the unseen element ever flowing to your body from
your mind.  Years pass on and you find that your movements are stiff
and cumbrous,--that you can with difficulty climb a tree, as at
fourteen.  Your mind has all this time been sending to your body these
heavy, inelastic elements, making your body what now it is. . . .

"Your change for the better must be gradual, and can only be
accomplished by bringing the thought current of an all-round
symmetrical strength to bear on it,--by demanding of the Supreme Power
to be led in the best way, by diverting your mind from the many
unhealthy thoughts which habitually have been flowing into it without
your knowing it, to healthier ones. . . .

"Like the beast, the bodies of those of our race have in the past
weakened and decayed.  This will not always be.  Increase of spiritual
knowledge will show the cause of such decay, and will show, also, how
to take advantage of a Law or Force to build us up, renew ever the body
and give it greater and greater strength, instead of blindly using that
Law or Force, as has been done in the past, to weaken our bodies and
finally destroy them."


Full, rich, and abounding health is the normal and the natural
condition of life.  Anything else is an abnormal condition, and
abnormal conditions as a rule come through perversions.  God never
created sickness, suffering, and disease; they are man's own creations.
They come through his violating the laws under which he lives.  So used
are we to seeing them that we come gradually, if not to think of them
as natural, then to look upon them as a matter of course.

The time will come when the work of the physician will not be to treat
and attempt to heal the body, but to heal the mind, which in turn will
heal the body.  In other words, the true physician will be a teacher;
his work will be to keep people well, instead of attempting to make
them well after sickness and disease comes on; and still beyond this
there will come a time when each will be his own physician.  In the
degree that we live in harmony with the higher laws of our being, and
so, in the degree that we become better acquainted with the powers of
the mind and spirit, will we give less attention to the body,--no less
_care_, but less _attention_.

The bodies of thousands today would be much better cared for if their
owners gave them less thought and attention.  As a rule, those who
think least of their bodies enjoy the best health.  Many are kept in
continual ill health by the abnormal thought and attention they give
them.

Give the body the nourishment, the exercise, the fresh air, the
sunlight it requires, keep it clean, and then think of it as little as
possible.  In your thoughts and in your conversation never dwell upon
the negative side.  Don't talk of sickness and disease.  By talking of
these you do yourself harm and you do harm to those who listen to you.
Talk of those things that will make people the better for listening to
you.  Thus you will infect them with health and strength and not with
weakness and disease.

To dwell upon the negative side is always destructive.  This is true of
the body the same as it is true of all other things.  The following
from one whose thorough training as a physician has been supplemented
by extensive study and observations along the lines of the powers of
the interior forces, are of special significance and value in this
connection: "We can never gain health by contemplating disease, any
more than we can reach perfection by dwelling upon imperfection, or
harmony through discord.  We should keep a high ideal of health and
harmony constantly before the mind. . . .

"Never affirm or repeat about your health what you do not wish to be
true.  Do not dwell upon your ailments, nor study your symptoms.  Never
allow yourself to be convinced that you are not complete master of
yourself.  Stoutly affirm your superiority over bodily ills, and do not
acknowledge yourself the slave of any inferior power. . . .  I would
teach children early to build a strong barrier between themselves and
disease, by healthy habits of thought, high thinking, and purity of
life.  I would teach them to expel all thoughts of death, all images of
disease, all discordant emotions, like hatred, malice, revenge, envy,
and sensuality, as they would banish a temptation to do evil.  I would
teach them that bad food, bad drink, or bad air makes bad blood; that
bad blood makes bad tissue, and bad flesh bad morals.  I would teach
them that healthy thoughts are as essential to healthy bodies as pure
thoughts to a clean life.  I would teach them to cultivate a strong
will power, and to brace themselves against life's enemies in every
possible way.  I would teach the sick to have hope, confidence, cheer.
Our thoughts and imaginations are the only real limits to our
possibilities.  No man's success or health will ever reach beyond his
own confidence; as a rule, we erect our own barriers.

"Like produces like the universe through.  Hatred, envy, malice,
jealousy, and revenge all have children.  Every bad thought breeds
others, and each of these goes on and on, ever reproducing itself,
until our world is peopled with their offspring.  The true physician
and parent of the future will not medicate the body with drugs so much
as the mind with principles.  The coming mother will teach her child to
assuage the fever of anger, hatred, malice, with the great panacea of
the world,--Love.  The coming physician will teach the people to
cultivate cheerfulness, good-will, and noble deeds for a health tonic
as well as a heart tonic; and that a merry heart doeth good like a
medicine."


The health of your body, the same as the health and strength of your
mind, depends upon what you relate yourself with.  This Infinite Spirit
of Life, this Source of all Life, can from its very nature, we have
found, admit of no weakness, no disease.  Come then into the full,
conscious, vital realization of your oneness with this Infinite Life,
open yourself to its more abundant entrance, and full and ever-renewing
bodily health and strength will be yours.

  "And good may ever conquer ill,
    Health walk where pain has trod;
  'As a man thinketh, so is he,'
    Rise, then, and think with God."


The whole matter may then be summed up in the one sentence, "God is
well and so are you."  You must awaken to the knowledge of your _real
being_.  When this awakening comes, you will have, and you will see
that you have, the power to determine what conditions are externalized
in your body.  You must recognize, you must realize yourself as one
with Infinite Spirit.  God's will is then your will; your will is God's
will, and "with God all things are possible."  When we are able to do
away with all sense of separateness by living continually in the
realization of this oneness, not only will our bodily ills and
weaknesses vanish, but all limitations along all lines.

Then "delight thyself in the Lord, and He shall give thee the desires
of thine heart."  Then will you feel like crying all the day long, "The
lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places; yea, I have a goodly
heritage."  Drop out of mind your belief in good things and good events
coming to you in the future.  Come _now_ into the real life, and
coming, appropriate and actualize them _now_.  Remember that only the
best is good enough for one with a heritage so royal as yours.

  "We buy ashes for bread;
  We buy diluted wine;
  Give me the true,--
  Whose ample leaves and tendrils curled
  Among the silver hills of heaven,
  Draw everlasting dew."




THE SECRET, POWER, AND EFFECTS OF LOVE.

This is the Spirit of Infinite Love.  The moment we recognize ourselves
as one with it we become so filled with love that we see only the good
in all.  And when we realize that we are all one with this Infinite
Spirit, then we realize that in a sense we are all one with each other.
When we come into a recognition of this fact, we can then do no harm to
any one, to any thing.  We find that we are all members of the one
great body, and that no portion of the body can be harmed without all
the other portions suffering thereby.

When we fully realize the great fact of the oneness of all life,--that
all are partakers from this one Infinite Source, and so that the same
life is the life in each individual, then prejudices go and hatreds
cease.  Love grows and reigns supreme.  Then, wherever we go, whenever
we come in contact with the fellow-man, we are able to recognize the
God within.  We thus look only for the good, and we find it.  It always
pays.

There is a deep scientific fact underlying the great truth, "He that
takes the sword shall perish by the sword."  The moment we come into a
realization of the subtle powers of the thought forces, we can quickly
see that the moment we entertain any thoughts of hatred toward another,
he gets the effects of these diabolical forces that go out from us, and
has the same thoughts of hatred aroused in him, which in turn return to
the sender.  Then when we understand the effects of the passion, hatred
or anger, even upon the physical body, we can see how detrimental, how
expensive this is.  The same is true in regard to all kindred thoughts
or passions, envy, criticism, jealousy, scorn.  In the ultimate we
shall find that in entertaining feelings of this nature toward another,
we always suffer far more than the one toward whom we entertain them.

And then when we fully realize the fact that selfishness is at the root
of all error, sin, and crime, and that ignorance is the basis of all
selfishness, with what charity we come to look upon the acts of all.
It is the ignorant man who seeks his own ends at the expense of the
greater whole.  It is the ignorant man, therefore, who is the selfish
man.  The truly wise man is never selfish.  He is a seer, and
recognizes the fact that he, a single member of the one great body, is
benefited in just the degree that the entire body is benefited, and so
he seeks nothing for himself that he would not equally seek for all
mankind.

If selfishness is at the bottom of all error, sin, and crime, and
ignorance is the basis of all selfishness, then when we see a
manifestation of either of these qualities, if we are true to the
highest within us, we will look for and will seek to call forth the
good in each individual with whom we come in contact.  When God speaks
to God, then God responds, and shows forth as God.  But when devil
speaks to devil, then devil responds, and the devil is always to pay.

I sometimes hear a person say, "I don't see any good in him."  No?
Then you are no seer.  Look deeper and you will find the very God in
every human soul.  But remember it takes a God to recognize a God.
Christ always spoke to the highest, the truest, and the best in men.
He knew and he recognized the God in each because he had first realized
it in himself.  He ate with publicans and sinners.  Abominable, the
Scribes and Pharisees said.  They were so wrapped up in their own
conceits, their own self-centredness, hence their own ignorance, that
they had never found the God in themselves, and so they never dreamed
that it was the real life of even publicans and sinners.

In the degree that we hold a person in the thought of evil or of error,
do we suggest evil and error to him.  In the degree that he is
sensitively organized, or not well individualized, and so, subject to
the suggestions of the thought forces from others, will he be
influenced; and so in this way we may be sharers in the very evil-doing
in which we hold another in thought.  In the same way when we hold a
person in the thought of the right, the good, and the true,
righteousness, goodness, and truth are suggested to him, and thus we
have a most beneficent influence on his life and conduct.  If our
hearts go out in love to all with whom we come in contact, we inspire
love, and the same ennobling and warming influences of love always
return to us from those in whom we inspire them.  There is a deep
scientific principle underlying the precept--If you would have all the
world love you, you must first love all the world.

In the degree that we love will we be loved.  Thoughts are forces.
Each creates of its kind.  Each comes back laden with the effect that
corresponds to itself and of which it is the cause.

  "Then let your secret thoughts be fair--
  They have a vital part, and share
  In shaping words and moulding fate;
  God's system is so intricate."


I know of no better practice than that of a friend who continually
holds himself in an attitude of mind that he continually sends out his
love in the form of the thought,--"Dear everybody, I love you."  And
when we realize the fact that a thought invariably produces its effect
before it returns, or before it ceases, we can see how he is
continually breathing out a blessing not only upon all with whom he
comes in contact, but upon all the world.  These same thoughts of love,
moreover, tokened in various ways, are continually coming to him from
all quarters.

Even animals feel the effects of these forces.  Some animals are much
more sensitively organized than many people are, and consequently they
get the effects of our thoughts, our mental states, and emotions much
more readily than many people do.  Therefore whenever we meet an animal
we can do it good by sending out to it these thoughts of love.  It will
feel the effects whether we simply entertain or whether we voice them.
And it is often interesting to note how quickly it responds, and how
readily it gives evidence of its appreciation of this love and
consideration on our part.

What a privilege and how enjoyable it would be to live and walk in a
world where we meet only Gods.  In such a world you can live.  In such
a world I can live.  For in the degree that we come into this higher
realization do we see only the God in each human soul; and when we are
thus able to see Him in every one we meet, we then live in such a world.

And when we thus recognize the God in every one, we by this recognition
help to call it forth ever more and more.  What a privilege,--this
privilege of yours, this privilege of mine!  That hypocritical judging
of another is something then with which we can have nothing to do; for
we have the power of looking beyond the evolving, changing,
error-making self, and seeing the real, the changeless, the eternal
self which by and by will show forth in the full beauty of holiness.
We are then large enough also to realize the fact that when we condemn
another, by that very act we condemn ourselves.

This realization so fills us with love that we continually overflow it,
and all with whom we come in contact feel its warming and life-giving
power.  These in turn send back the same feelings of love to us, and so
we continually attract love from all quarters.  Tell me how much one
loves and I will tell you how much he has seen of God.  Tell me how
much he loves and I will tell you how much he lives with God.  Tell me
how much he loves and I will tell you how far into the Kingdom of
Heaven,--the kingdom of harmony, he has entered, for "love is the
fulfilling of the law."

And in a sense love is everything.  It is the key to life, and its
influences are those that move the world.  Live only in the thought of
love for all and you will draw love to you from all.  Live in the
thought of malice or hatred, and malice and hatred will come back to
you.

  "For evil poisons; malice shafts
    Like boomerangs return,
  Inflicting wounds that will not heal
    While rage and anger burn."


Every thought you entertain is a force that goes out, and every thought
comes back laden with its kind.  This is an immutable law.  Every
thought you entertain has moreover a direct effect upon your body.
Love and its kindred emotions are the normal and the natural, those in
accordance with the eternal order of the universe, for "God is love."
These have a life-giving, health-engendering influence upon your body,
besides beautifying your countenance, enriching your voice, and making
you ever more attractive in every way.  And as it is true that in the
degree that you hold thoughts of love for all, you call the same from
them in return, and as these have a direct effect upon your mind, and
through your mind upon your body, it is as so much life force added to
your own from without.  You are then continually building this into
both your mental and your physical life, and so your life is enriched
by its influence.

Hatred and all its kindred emotions are the unnatural, the abnormal,
the perversions, and so, out of harmony with the eternal order of the
universe.  For if love is the fulfilling of the law, then these, its
opposites, are direct violations of law, and there can never be a
violation of law without its attendant pain and suffering in one form
or another.  There is no escape from this.  And what is the result of
this particular form of violation?  When you allow thoughts of anger,
hatred, malice, jealousy, envy, criticism, or scorn to exercise sway,
they have a corroding and poisoning effect upon the organism; they pull
it down, and if allowed to continue will eventually tear it to pieces
by externalizing themselves in the particular forms of disease they
give rise to.  And then in addition to the destructive influences from
your own mind you are continually calling the same influences from
other minds, and these come as destructive forces augmenting your own,
thus aiding in the tearing down process.

And so love inspires love; hatred breeds hatred.  Love and good will
stimulate and build up the body; hatred and malice corrode and tear it
down.  Love is a savor of life unto life; hatred is a savor of death
unto death.

  "There are loyal hearts, there are spirits brave,
    There are souls that are pure and true;
  Then give to the world the best you have,
    And the best will come back to you.

  "Give love, and love to _your_ heart will flow,
    A strength in your utmost need;
  Have faith, and a score of hearts will show
    Their faith in _your_ word and deed."


I hear it said,--How in regard to one who bears me hatred, towards whom
I have entertained no such thoughts and feelings, and so have not been
the cause of his becoming my enemy?  This may be true, but the chances
are that you will have but few enemies if there is nothing of an
antagonistic nature in your own mind and heart.  Be sure there is
nothing of this nature.  But if hatred should come from another without
apparent cause on your part, then meet it from first to last with
thoughts of love and good-will.  In this way you can, so to speak, so
neutralize its effects that it cannot reach you and so cannot harm you.
Love is positive, and stronger than hatred.  Hatred can always be
conquered by love.

On the other hand, if you meet hatred with hatred, you simply intensify
it.  You add fuel to the flame already kindled, upon which it will feed
and grow, and so you increase and intensify the evil conditions.
Nothing is to be gained by it, everything is to be lost.  By sending
love for hatred you will be able so to neutralize it that it will not
only have no effect upon you, but will not be able even to reach you.
But more than this, you will by this course sooner or later be able
literally to transmute the enemy into the friend.  Meet hatred with
hatred and you degrade yourself.  Meet hatred with love and you elevate
not only yourself but also the one who bears you hatred.

The Persian sage has said, "Always meet petulance with gentleness, and
perverseness with kindness.  A gentle hand can lead even an elephant by
a hair.  Reply to thine enemy with gentleness.  Opposition to peace is
sin."  The Buddhist says, "If a man foolishly does me wrong I will
return him the protection of my ungrudging love.  The more evil comes
from him the more good shall go from me."  "The wise man avenges
injuries by benefits," says the Chinese.  "Return good for evil,
overcome anger by love; hatred never ceases by hatred, but by love,"
says the Hindu.

The truly wise man or woman will recognize no one as an enemy.
Occasionally we hear the expression, "Never mind; I'll get even with
him."  Will you?  And how will you do it?  You can do it in one of two
ways.  You can, as you have in mind, deal with him as he deals, or
apparently deals, with you,--pay him, as we say, in his own coin.  If
you do this you will get even with him by sinking yourself to his
level, and both of you will suffer by it.  Or, you can show yourself
the larger, you can send him love for hatred, kindness for
ill-treatment, and so get even with him by raising him to the higher
level.  But remember that you can never help another without by that
very act helping yourself; and if forgetful of self, then in most all
cases the value to you is greater than the service you render another.
If you are ready to treat him as he treats you, then you show clearly
that there is in you that which draws the hatred and ill-treatment to
you; you deserve what you are getting and should not complain, nor
would you complain if you were wise.  By following the other course you
most effectually accomplish your purpose,--you gain a victory for
yourself, and at the same time you do a great service for him, for
which it is evident he stands greatly in need.

Thus you may become his saviour.  He in turn may become the saviour of
other error-making, and consequently care-encumbered men and women.
Many times the struggles are greater than we can ever know.  We need
more gentleness and sympathy and compassion in our common human life.
Then we will neither blame nor condemn.  Instead of blaming or
condemning we will sympathize, and all the more we will

      "Comfort one another,
  For the way is often dreary,
  And the feet are often weary,
    And the heart is very sad.
  There is a heavy burden bearing,
  When it seems that none are caring,
    And we half forget that ever we were glad

      "Comfort one another
  With the hand-clasp close and tender,
  With the sweetness love can render,
    And the looks of friendly eyes.
  Do not wait with grace unspoken,
  While life's daily bread is broken--
    Gentle speech is oft like manna from the skies."


When we come fully to realize the great fact that all evil and error
and sin with all their consequent sufferings come through ignorance,
then wherever we see a manifestation of these in whatever form, if our
hearts are right, we will have compassion, sympathy and compassion for
the one in whom we see them.  Compassion will then change itself into
love, and love will manifest itself in kindly service.  Such is the
divine method.  And so instead of aiding in trampling and keeping a
weaker one down, we will hold him up until he can stand alone and
become the master.  But all life-growth is from within out, and one
becomes a true master in the degree that the knowledge of the divinity
of his own nature dawns upon his inner consciousness and so brings him
to a knowledge of the higher laws; and in no way can we so effectually
hasten this dawning in the inner consciousness of another, as by
showing forth the divinity within ourselves simply by the way we live.

By example and not by precept.  By living, not by preaching.  By doing,
not by professing.  By living the life, not by dogmatizing as to how it
should be lived.  There is no contagion equal to the contagion of life.
Whatever we sow, that shall we also reap, and each thing sown produces
of its kind.  We can kill not only by doing another bodily injury
directly, but we can and we do kill by every antagonistic thought.  Not
only do we thus kill, but while we kill we suicide.  Many a man has
been made sick by having the ill thoughts of a number of people centred
upon him; some have been actually killed.  Put hatred into the world
and we make it a literal hell.  Put love into the world and heaven with
all its beauties and glories becomes a reality.

Not to love is not to live, or it is to live a living death.  The life
that goes out in love to all is the life that is full, and rich, and
continually expanding in beauty and in power.  Such is the life that
becomes ever more inclusive, and hence larger in its scope and
influence.  The larger the man and the woman, the more inclusive they
are in their love and their friendships.  The smaller the man and the
woman, the more dwarfed and dwindling their natures, the more they
pride themselves upon their "exclusiveness."  Any one--a fool or an
idiot--can be exclusive.  It comes easy.  It takes and it signifies a
large nature to be universal, to be inclusive.  Only the man or the
woman of a small, personal, self-centred, self-seeking nature is
exclusive.  The man or the woman of a large, royal, unself-centred
nature never is.  The small nature is the one that continually strives
for effect.  The larger nature never does.  The one goes here and there
in order to gain recognition, in order to attach himself to the world.
The other stays at home and draws the world _to him_.  The one loves
merely himself.  The other loves all the world; but in his larger love
for all the world he finds himself included.

Verily, then, the more one loves the nearer he approaches to God, for
God is the spirit of infinite love.  And when we come into the
realization of our oneness with this Infinite Spirit, then divine love
so fills us that, enriching and enrapturing our own lives, from them it
flows out to enrich the life of all the world.

In coming into the realization of our oneness with the Infinite Life,
we are brought at once into right relations with our fellowmen.  We are
brought into harmony with the great law, that we find our own lives in
losing them in the service of others.  We are brought to a knowledge of
the fact that all life is one, and so that we are all parts of the one
great whole.  We then realize that we can't do for another without at
the same time doing for ourselves.  We also realize that we cannot do
harm to another without by that very act doing harm to ourselves.  We
realize that the man who lives to himself alone lives a little,
dwarfed, and stunted life, because he has no part in this larger life
of humanity.  But the one who in service loses his own life in this
larger life, has his own life increased and enriched a thousand or a
million fold, and every joy, every happiness, everything of value
coming to each member of this greater whole comes as such to him, for
he has a part in the life of each and all.

And here let a word be said in regard to true service.  Peter and John
were one day going up to the temple, and as they were entering the gate
they were met by a poor cripple who asked them for alms.  Instead of
giving him something to supply the day's needs and then leaving him in
the same dependent condition for the morrow and the morrow, Peter did
him a real service, and a real service for all mankind by saying,
Silver and gold have I none, but such as I have I give unto thee.  _And
then he made him whole_.  He thus brought him into the condition where
he could help himself.  In other words, the greatest service we can do
for another is to help him to help himself.  To help him directly might
be weakening, though not necessarily.  It depends entirely upon
circumstances.  But to help one to help himself is never weakening, but
always encouraging and strengthening, because it leads him to a larger
and stronger life.

There is no better way to help one to help himself than to bring him to
a knowledge of himself.  There is no better way to bring one to a
knowledge of himself than to lead him to a knowledge of the powers that
are lying dormant within his own soul.  There is nothing that will
enable him to come more readily or more completely into an awakened
knowledge of the powers that are lying dormant within his own soul,
than to bring him into the conscious, vital realization of his oneness
with the Infinite Life and Power, so that he may open himself to it in
order that it may work and manifest through him.

We will find that these same great truths lie at the very bottom of the
solution of our social situation; and we will also find that we will
never have a full and permanent solution of it until they are fully
recognized and built upon.




WISDOM AND INTERIOR ILLUMINATION.

This is the Spirit of Infinite Wisdom, and in the degree that we open
ourselves to it does the highest wisdom manifest itself to and through
us.  We can in this way go to the very heart of the universe itself and
find the mysteries hidden to the majority of mankind,--hidden to them,
though not hidden of themselves.

In order for the highest wisdom and insight we must have absolute
confidence in the Divine guiding us, but not through the channel of some
one else.  And why should we go to another for knowledge and wisdom?
With God is no respect of persons.  Why should we seek these things
second hand?  Why should we thus stultify our own innate powers?  Why
should we not go direct to the Infinite Source itself?  "If any man lack
wisdom let him ask of God."  "Before they call I will answer, and while
they are yet speaking, I will hear."

When we thus go directly to the Infinite Source itself we are no longer
slaves to personalities, institutions, or books.  We should always keep
ourselves open to suggestions of truth from these agencies.  We should
always regard them as agencies, however, and never as sources.  We should
never recognize them as masters, but simply as teachers.  With Browning,
we must recognize the great fact that--

  "Truth is within ourselves; it takes no rise
  From outward things, whate'er you may believe.
  There is an inmost centre in us all,
  Where truth abides in fullness."


There is no more important injunction in all the world, nor one with a
deeper interior meaning, than "To thine own self be true."  In other
words, be true to your own soul, for it is through your own soul that the
voice of God speaks to you.  This is the interior guide.  This is the
light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world.  This is
conscience.  This is intuition.  This is the voice of the higher self,
the voice of the soul, the voice of God.  "Thou shalt hear a voice behind
thee, saying: This is the way, walk ye in it."

When Moses was on the mountain it was after the various physical
commotions and manifestations that he heard the "still, small voice," the
voice of his own soul, through which the Infinite God was speaking.  If
we will but follow this voice of intuition, it will speak ever more
clearly and more plainly, until by and by it will be absolute and
unerring in its guidance.  The great trouble with us is that we do not
listen to and do not follow this voice within our own souls, and so we
become as a house divided against itself.  We are pulled this way and
that, and we are never _certain_ of anything.  I have a friend who
listens so carefully to this inner voice, who, in other words, always
acts so quickly and so fully in accordance with his intuitions, and whose
life as a consequence is so absolutely guided by them, that he always
does the right thing at the right time and in the right way.  He always
knows when to act and how to act, and he is never in the condition of a
house divided against itself.

But some one says, "May it not be dangerous for us to act always upon our
intuitions?  Suppose we should have an intuition to do harm to some one?"
We need not be afraid of this, however, for the voice of the soul, this
voice of God speaking through the soul, will never direct one to do harm
to another, nor to do anything that is not in accordance with the highest
standards of right, and truth, and justice.  And if you at any time have
a prompting of this kind, know that it is not the voice of intuition; it
is some characteristic of your lower self that is prompting you.

Reason is not to be set aside, but it is to be continually illumined by
this higher spiritual perception, and in the degree that it is thus
illumined will it become an agent of light and power.  When one becomes
thoroughly individualized he enters into the realm of all knowledge and
wisdom; and to be individualized is to recognize no power outside of the
Infinite Power that is back of all.  When one recognizes this great fact
and opens himself to this Spirit of Infinite Wisdom, he then enters upon
the road to the true education, and mysteries that before were closed now
reveal themselves to him.  This must indeed be the foundation of all true
education, this evolving from within, this evolving of what has been
involved by the Infinite Power.

All things that it is valuable for us to know will come to us if we will
but open ourselves to the voice of this Infinite Spirit.  It is thus that
we become seers and have the power of seeing into the very heart of
things.  There are no new stars, there are no new laws or forces, but we
can so open ourselves to this Spirit of Infinite Wisdom that we can
discover and recognize those that have not been known before; and in this
way they become new to us.  When in this way we come into a knowledge of
truth we no longer need facts that are continually changing.  We can then
enter into the quiet of our own interior selves.  We can open the window
and look out, and thus gather the facts as we choose.  This is true
wisdom.  "Wisdom is the knowledge of God."  Wisdom comes by intuition.
It far transcends knowledge.  Great knowledge, knowledge of many things,
may be had by virtue simply of a very retentive memory.  It comes by
tuition.  But wisdom far transcends knowledge, in that knowledge is a
mere incident of this deeper wisdom.

He who would enter into the realm of wisdom must first divest himself of
all intellectual pride.  He must become as a little child.  Prejudices,
preconceived opinions and beliefs always stand in the way of true wisdom.
Conceited opinions are always suicidal in their influences.  They bar the
door to the entrance of truth.

All about us we see men in the religious world, in the world of science,
in the political, in the social world, who through intellectual pride are
so wrapped in their own conceits and prejudices that larger and later
revelations of truth can find no entrance to them; and instead of growing
and expanding, they are becoming dwarfed and stunted, and still more
incapable of receiving truth.  Instead of actively aiding in the progress
of the world, they are as so many dead sticks in the way that would
retard the wheels of progress.  This, however, they can never do.  Such
always in time get bruised, broken, and left behind, while God's
triumphal car of truth moves steadily onward.

When the steam engine was still being experimented with, and before it
was perfected sufficiently to come into practical use, a well-known
Englishman--well known then in scientific circles--wrote an extended
pamphlet proving that it would be impossible for it ever to be used in
ocean navigation, that is, in a trip involving the crossing of the ocean,
because it would be utterly impossible for any vessel to carry with it
sufficient coal for the use of its furnace.  And the interesting feature
of the whole matter was that the very first steam vessel that made the
trip from England to America, had among its cargo a part of the first
edition of this carefully prepared pamphlet.  There was only the one
edition.  Many editions might be sold now.

This seems indeed an amusing fact; but far more amusing is the man who
voluntarily closes himself to truth because, forsooth, it does not come
through conventional, or orthodox, or heretofore accepted channels; or
because it may not be in full accord with, or possibly may be opposed to,
established usages or beliefs.  On the contrary--

  "Let there be many windows in your soul,
  That all the glory of the universe
  May beautify it.  Not the narrow pane
  Of one poor creed can catch the radiant rays
  That shine from countless sources.  Tear away
  The blinds of superstition: let the light
  Pour through fair windows, broad as truth itself
  And high as heaven. . . .  Tune your ear
  To all the worldless music of the stars
  And to the voice of nature, and your heart
  Shall turn to truth and goodness as the plant
  Turns to the sun.  A thousand unseen hands
  Reach down to help you to their peace-crowned heights,
  And all the forces of the firmament
  Shall fortify your strength.  Be not afraid
  To thrust aside half-truths and grasp the whole."


There is a great law in connection with the coming of truth.  It is this:
Whenever a man or a woman shuts himself or herself to the entrance of
truth on account of intellectual pride, preconceived opinions,
prejudices, or for whatever reason, there is a great law which says that
truth _in its fullness_ will come to that one from no source.  And on the
other hand, when a man or a woman opens himself or herself fully to the
entrance of truth from _whatever_ source it may come, there is an equally
great law which says that truth will flow in to him or to her from all
sources, from all quarters.  Such becomes the free man, the free woman,
for it is the truth that makes us free.  The other remains in bondage,
for truth has had no invitation and will not enter where it is not fully
and freely welcomed.

And where truth is denied entrance the rich blessings it carries with it
cannot take up their abode.  On the contrary, when this is the case, it
sends an envoy carrying with it atrophy, disease, death, physically and
spiritually as well as intellectually.  And the man who would rob another
of his free and unfettered search for truth, who would stand as the
interpreter of truth for another, with the intent of remaining in this
position, rather than endeavoring to lead him to the place where he can
be his own interpreter, is more to be shunned than a thief and a robber.
The injury he works is far greater, for he is doing direct and positive
injury to the very life of the one he thus holds.

Who has ever appointed any man, whoever he may be, as the keeper, the
custodian, the dispenser of God's illimitable truth?  Many indeed are
moved and so are called to be teachers of truth; but the true teacher
will never stand as the interpreter of truth for another.  The _true
teacher_ is the one whose endeavor is to bring the one he teaches to a
true knowledge of himself and hence of his own interior powers, that he
may become his own interpreter.  All others are, generally speaking,
those animated by purely personal motives, self-aggrandizement, or
personal gain.  Moreover, he who would claim to have all truth and the
only truth, is a bigot, a fool, or a knave.

In the Eastern literature is a fable of a frog.  The frog lived in a
well, and out of his little well he had never been.  One day a frog whose
home was in the sea came to his well.  Interested in all things, he went
in.  "Who are you?  Where do you live?" said the frog in the well.  "I am
so and so, and my home is in the sea."  "The sea?  What is that?  Where
is that?"  "It is a very large body of water, and not far away."  "How
big is your sea?"  "Oh, very big."  "As big as this?" pointing to a
little stone lying near.  "Oh, much bigger."  "As big as this?" pointing
to the board upon which they were sitting.  "Oh, much bigger."  "How much
bigger, then?"  "Why, the sea in which I live is bigger than your entire
well; it would make millions of wells such as yours."  "Nonsense,
nonsense; you are a deceiver and a falsifier.  Get out of my well.  Get
out of my well.  I want nothing to do with any such frogs as you."

"Ye shall know the truth and the truth shall make you free," is the
promise.  Ye shall close yourselves to truth, ye shall live in your own
conceits, and your own conceits shall make fools and idiots of you, would
be a statement applicable to not a few, and to not a few who pride
themselves upon their superior intellectual attainments.  Idiocy is
arrested mental growth.  Closing one's self for whatever reason to truth
and hence to growth, brings a certain type of idiocy, though it may not
be called by this name.  And on the other hand, another type is that
arrested growth caused by taking all things for granted, without proving
them for one's self, merely because they come from a particular person, a
particular book, a particular institution.  This is caused by one's
always looking without instead of being true to the light within, and
carefully tending it that it may give an ever-clearer light.

With brave and intrepid Walt Whitman, we should all be able to say--

  "From this hour I ordain myself loos'd of limits
      and imaginary lines,
  Going where I list, my own master total and absolute,
  Listening to others, considering well what they say,
  Pausing, searching, receiving, contemplating,
  Gently, but with undeniable will divesting myself of the
      holds that would hold me."


Great should be the joy that God's boundless truth is open to all, open
_equally_ to all, and that it will make each one its dwelling place in
proportion as he earnestly desires it and opens himself to it.

And in regard to the wisdom that guides us in our daily life, there is
nothing that it is right and well for us to know that may not be known
when we recognize the law of its coming, and are able wisely to use it.
Let us know that all things are ours as soon as we know how to
appropriate them.

  "I hold it as a changeless law,
    From which no soul can sway or swerve,
  We have that in us which will draw
    Whate'er we need or most deserve."


If the times come when we know not what course to pursue, when we know
not which way to turn, the fault lies in ourselves.  If the fault lies in
ourselves then the correction of this unnatural condition lies also in
ourselves.  It is never necessary to come into such a state if we are
awake and remain awake to the light and the powers within us.  The light
is ever shining, and the only thing that it is necessary for us
diligently to see to is that we permit neither this thing nor that to
come between us and the light.  "With Thee is the fountain of life; in
Thy light shall we see light."

Let us hear the words of one of the most highly illumined men I have ever
known, and one who as a consequence is never in the dark, when the time
comes, as to what to do and how to do it.  "Whenever you are in doubt as
to the course you should pursue, after you have turned to every outward
means of guidance, _let the inward eye see, let the inward ear hear_, and
allow this simple, natural, beautiful process to go on unimpeded by
questionings or doubts. . . .  In all dark hours and times of unwonted
perplexity we need to follow one simple direction, found, as all needed
directions can be found, in the dear old gospel, which so many read, but
alas, _so few interpret_.  'Enter into thine inner chamber and shut the
door.'  Does this mean that we must literally betake ourselves to a
private closet with a key in the door?  If it did, then the command could
never be obeyed in the open air, on land or sea, and the Christ loved the
lakes and the forests far better than the cramping rooms of city dwelling
houses; still his counsels are so wide-reaching that there is no spot on
earth and no conceivable situation in which any of us may be placed where
we cannot follow them.

"One of the most intuitive men we ever met had a desk in a city office
where several other gentlemen were doing business constantly and often
talking loudly.  Entirely undisturbed by the many various sounds about
him, this self-centred, faithful man would, in any moment of perplexity,
draw the curtains of privacy so completely about him that he would be as
fully enclosed in his own psychic aura, and thereby as effectually
removed from all distractions as though he were alone in some primeval
wood.  Taking his difficulty with him into the mystic silence in the form
of a direct question, to which he expected a certain answer, he would
remain utterly passive until the reply came, and never once through many
years' experience did he find himself disappointed or misled.  Intuitive
perceptions of truth are the daily bread to satisfy our daily hunger;
they come like the manna in the desert day by day; each day brings
adequate supply for that day's need only.  They must be followed
instantly, for dalliance with them means their obscuration, and the more
we dally the more we invite erroneous impressions to cover intuition with
a pall of conflicting moral phantasy born of illusions of the terrence
will.

"One condition is imposed by _universal law_, and this we must obey.  Put
all wishes aside save the one desire to know _truth_; couple with this
one demand the fully consecrated determination to follow what is
distinctly perceived as truth immediately it is revealed.  No other
affection must be permitted to share the field with this all-absorbing
love of _truth_ for its own sake.  Obey this one direction and never
forget that expectation and desire are bride and bridegroom and forever
inseparable, and you will soon find your hitherto darkened way grow
luminous with celestial radiance, for with the heaven within, all heavens
without incessantly co-operate."  This may be termed going into the
"silence."  This it is to perceive and to be guided by the light that
lighteth every man that cometh into the world.  This it is to listen to
and be guided by the voice of your own soul, the voice of your higher
self.

The soul is divine and in allowing it to become translucent to the
Infinite Spirit it reveals all things to us.  As man turns away from the
Divine Light do all things become hidden.  There is nothing hidden of
itself.  When the spiritual sense is opened, then it transcends all the
limitations of the physical senses and the intellect.  And in the degree
that we are able to get away from the limitations set by them, and
realize that so far as the real life is concerned it is one with the
Infinite Life, then we begin to reach the place where this voice will
always speak, where it will never fail us, if we follow it, and as a
consequence where we will always have the divine illumination and
guidance.  To know this and to live in this realization is not to live in
heaven hereafter, but to live in heaven here and now, _today and every
day_.

No human soul need be without it.  When we turn our face in the right
direction it comes as simply and as naturally as the flower blooms and
the winds blow.  It is not to be bought with money or with price.  It is
a condition waiting simply to be realized, by rich and by poor, by king
and by peasant, by master and by servant the world over.  All are equal
heirs to it.  And so the peasant, if he find it first, lives a life far
transcending in beauty and in real power the life of his king.  The
servant, if he find it first, lives a life surpassing the life of his
master.


If you would find the highest, the fullest, and the richest life that not
only this world but that any world can know, then do away with the sense
of the separateness of your life from the life of God.  Hold to the
thought of your oneness.  In the degree that you do this you will find
yourself realizing it more and more, and as this life of realization is
lived, you will find that no good thing will be withheld, for all things
are included in this.  Then it will be yours, without fears or
forebodings, simply to do today what your hands find to do, and so be
ready for tomorrow, _when it comes_, knowing that tomorrow will bring
tomorrow's supplies for the mental, the spiritual, and the physical life.
Remember, however, that tomorrow's supplies are not needed until tomorrow
comes.

If one is willing to trust himself _fully_ to the Law, the Law will never
fail him.  It is the half-hearted trusting to it that brings uncertain,
and so, unsatisfactory results.  Nothing is firmer and surer than Deity.
It will never fail the one who throws himself wholly upon it.  The secret
of life then, is to live continually in this realization, whatever one
may be doing, wherever one may be, by day and by night, both waking and
sleeping.  It can be lived in while we are sleeping no less than when we
are awake.  And here shall we consider a few facts in connection with
sleep, in connection with receiving instruction and illumination while
asleep?

During the process of sleep it is merely the physical body that is at
rest and in quiet; the soul life with all its activities goes right on.
Sleep is nature's provision for the recuperation of the body, for the
rebuilding and hence the replacing of the waste that is continually going
on during the waking hours.  It is nature's great restorer.  If
sufficient sleep is not allowed the body, so that the rebuilding may
equalize the wasting process, the body is gradually depleted and
weakened, and any ailment or malady, when it is in this condition, is
able to find a more ready entrance.  It is for this reason that those who
are subject to it will take a cold, as we term it, more readily when the
body is tired or exhausted through loss of sleep than at most any other
time.  The body is in that condition where outside influences can have a
more ready effect upon it, than when it is in its normal condition.  And
when they do have an effect they always go to the weaker portions first.

Our bodies are given us to serve far higher purposes than we ordinarily
use them for.  Especially is this true in the numerous cases where the
body is master of its owner.  In the degree that we come into the
realization of the higher powers of the mind and spirit, in that degree
does the body, through their influence upon it, become less gross and
heavy, finer in its texture and form.  And then, because the mind finds a
kingdom of enjoyment in itself, and in all the higher things it becomes
related to, _excesses_ in eating and drinking, as well as all others,
naturally and of their own accord fall away.  There also falls away the
desire for the heavier, grosser, less valuable kinds of food and drink,
such as the flesh of animals, alcoholic drinks, and all things of the
class that stimulate the body and the passions rather than build the body
and the brain into a strong, clean, well-nourished, enduring, and fibrous
condition.  In the degree that the body thus becomes less gross and
heavy, finer in its texture and form, is there less waste, and what there
is is more easily replaced, so that it keeps in a more regular and even
condition.  When this is true, less sleep is actually required.  And even
the amount that is taken does more for a body of this finer type than it
can do for one of the other nature.

As the body in this way grows finer, in other words, as the process of
its evolution is thus accelerated, it in turn helps the mind and the soul
in the realization of ever higher perceptions, and thus body helps mind
the same as mind builds body.  It was undoubtedly this fact that Browning
had in mind when he said:

        "Let us cry 'All good things
  Are ours, nor soul helps flesh, more now,
  Than flesh helps soul.'"

Sleep, then, is for the resting and the rebuilding of the body.  The soul
needs no rest, and while the body is at rest in sleep the soul life is
active the same as when the body is in activity.

There are some, having a deep insight into the soul's activities, who say
that we travel when we sleep.  Some are able to recall and bring over
into the conscious, waking life the scenes visited, the information
gained, and the events that have transpired.  Most people are not able to
do this and so much that might otherwise be gained is lost.  They say,
however, that it is in our power, in proportion as we understand the
laws, to go where we will, and to bring over into the conscious, waking
life all the experiences thus gained.  Be this, however, as it may, it
certainly is true that while sleeping we have the power, in a perfectly
normal and natural way, to get much of value by way of light,
instruction, and growth that the majority of people now miss.

If the soul life, that which relates us to Infinite Spirit, is always
active, even while the body is at rest, why may not the mind so direct
conditions as one falls asleep, that while the body is at rest, it may
continually receive illumination from the soul and bring what it thus
receives over into the conscious, waking life?  This, indeed, can be
done, and is done by some to great advantage; and many times the highest
inspirations from the soul come in this way, as would seem most natural,
since at this time all communications from the outer, material world no
longer enter.  I know those who do much work during sleep, the same as
they get much light along desired lines.  By charging the mind on going
to sleep as to a particular time for waking, it is possible, as many of
us know, to wake on the very minute.  Not infrequently we have examples
of difficult problems, problems that defied solution during waking hours,
being solved during sleep.

A friend, a well-known journalist, had an extended newspaper article
clearly and completely worked out for her in this way.  She frequently
calls this agency to her aid.  She was notified by the managing editor
one evening to have the article ready in the morning,--an article
requiring more than ordinary care, and one in which quite a knowledge of
facts was required.  It was a matter in connection with which she knew
scarcely anything, and all her efforts at finding information regarding
it seemed to be of no avail.

She set to work, but it seemed as if even her own powers defied her.
Failure seemed imminent.  Almost in desperation she decided to retire,
and putting the matter into her mind in such a way that she would be able
to receive the greatest amount of aid while asleep, she fell asleep and
slept soundly until morning.  When she awoke her work of the previous
evening was the first thing that came into her mind.  She lay quietly for
a few minutes, and as she lay there, the article, completely written,
seemed to stand before her mind.  She ran through it, arose, and without
dressing took her pen and transcribed it on to paper, literally acting
simply as her own amanuensis.

The mind acting intently along a particular line will continue so to act
until some other object of thought carries it along another line.  And
since in sleep only the body is in quiet while the mind and soul are
active, then the mind on being given a certain direction when one drops
off to sleep, will take up the line along which it is directed, and can
be made, in time, to bring over into consciousness the results of its
activities.  Some will be able very soon to get results of this kind; for
some it will take longer.  Quiet and continued effort will increase the
faculty.

Then by virtue of the law of the drawing power of mind, since the mind is
always active, we are drawing to us even while sleeping, influences from
the realms kindred to those in which we in our thoughts are living before
we fall asleep.  In this way we can put ourselves into relation with what
ever kinds of influence we choose and accordingly gain much during the
process of sleep.  In many ways the interior faculties are more open and
receptive while we are in sleep than while we are awake.  Hence the
necessity of exercising even greater care as to the nature of the
thoughts that occupy the mind as we enter into sleep, for there can come
to us only what we by our own order of thought attract.  We have it
entirely in our own hands.

And for the same reason,--this greater degree of receptivity during this
period,--we are able by understanding and using the law, to gain much of
value more readily in this way than when the physical senses are fully
open to the material world about us.  Many will find a practice somewhat
after the following nature of value: When light or information is desired
along any particular line, light or information you feel it is right and
wise for you to have, as, for example, light in regard to an uncertain
course of action, then as you retire, first bring your mind into the
attitude of peace and good-will for all.  You in this way bring yourself
into an harmonious condition, and in turn attract to yourself these same
peaceful conditions from without.

Then resting in this sense of peace, quietly and calmly send out your
earnest desire for the needed light or information; cast out of your mind
all fears or forebodings lest it come not, for "in quietness and in
confidence shall be your strength."  Take the expectant attitude of mind,
firmly believing and expecting that when you awake the desired results
will be with you.  Then on awaking, before any thoughts or activities
from the outside world come in to absorb the attention, remain for a
little while receptive to the intuitions or the impressions that come.
When they come, when they manifest themselves clearly, then act upon them
without delay.  In the degree that you do this, in that degree will the
power of doing it ever more effectively grow.

Or, if for unselfish purposes you desire to grow and develop any of your
faculties, or to increase the health and strength of your body, take a
corresponding attitude of mind, the form of which will readily suggest
itself in accordance with your particular needs or desires.  In this way
you will open yourself to, you will connect yourself with, and you will
set into operation within yourself, the particular order of forces that
will make for these results.  Don't be afraid to voice your desires.  In
this way you set into operation vibratory forces which go out and which
make their impress felt somewhere, and which, arousing into activity or
uniting with other forces, set about to actualize your desires.  No good
thing shall be withheld from him who lives in harmony with the higher
laws and forces.  There are no desires that shall not be satisfied to the
one who knows and who wisely uses the powers with which he or she is
endowed.

Your sleep will be more quiet, and peaceful, and refreshing, and so your
power increased mentally, physically, and spiritually, simply by sending
out as you fall asleep, thoughts of love and good-will, thoughts of peace
and harmony for all.  In this way you are connecting yourself with all
the forces in the universe that make for peace and harmony.

A friend who is known the world over through his work along humane lines,
has told me that many times in the middle of the night he is awakened
suddenly and there comes to his mind, as a flash of inspiration, a
certain plan in connection with his work.  And as he lays there quietly
and opens himself to it, the methods for its successful carrying out all
reveal themselves to him clearly.  In this way many plans are entered
upon and brought to a successful culmination that otherwise would never
be thought of, plans that seem, indeed, marvelous to the world at large.
He is a man with a sensitive organism, his life in thorough harmony with
the higher laws, and given wholly and unreservedly to the work to which
he has dedicated it.  Just how and from what source these inspirations
come he does not fully know.  Possibly no one does, though each may have
his theory.  But this we do know, and it is all we need to know now, at
least,--that to the one who lives in harmony with the higher laws of his
being, and who opens himself to them, they come.

Visions and inspirations of the highest order will come in the degree
that we make for them the right conditions.  One who has studied deeply
into the subject in hand has said: "To receive education spiritually
while the body is resting in sleep is a perfectly normal and orderly
experience, and would occur definitely and satisfactorily in the lives of
all of us, if we paid more attention to internal and consequently less to
external states with their supposed but unreal necessities. . . .  Our
thoughts make us what we are here and hereafter, and our thoughts are
often busier by night than by day, for when we are asleep to the exterior
we can be wide awake to the interior world; and the unseen world is a
substantial place, the conditions of which are entirely regulated by
mental and moral attainments.  When we are not deriving information
through outward avenues of sensation, we are receiving instruction
through interior channels of perception, and when this fact is understood
for what it is worth, it will become a universal custom for persons to
take to sleep with them the special subject on which they most earnestly
desire particular instruction.  The Pharaoh type of person dreams, and so
does his butler and baker; but the Joseph type, which is that of the
truly gifted seer, both dreams and interprets."

But why had not Pharaoh the power of interpreting his dreams?  Why was
Joseph the type of the "truly gifted seer?"  Why did he not only dream,
but had also the power to interpret both his own dreams and the dreams of
others?  Simply read the lives of the two.  He who runs may read.  In all
true power it is, after all, living the life that tells.  And in
proportion as one lives the life does he not only attain to the highest
power and joy for himself, but he also becomes of ever greater service to
all the world.  One need remain in no hell longer than he himself chooses
to; and the moment he chooses not to remain longer, not all the powers in
the universe can prevent his leaving it.  One can rise to any heaven he
himself chooses; and when he chooses so to rise, all the higher powers of
the universe combine to help him heavenward.

When one awakes from sleep and so returns to conscious life, he is in a
peculiarly receptive and impressionable state.  All relations with the
material world have for a time been shut off, the mind is in a freer and
more natural state, resembling somewhat a sensitive plate, where
impressions can readily leave their traces.  This is why many times the
highest and truest impressions come to one in the early morning hours,
before the activities of the day and their attendant distractions have
exerted an influence.  This is one reason why many people can do their
best work in the early hours of the day.

But this fact is also a most valuable one in connection with the moulding
of every-day life.  The mind is at this time as a clean sheet of paper.
We can most valuably use this quiet, receptive, impressionable period by
wisely directing the activities of the mind along the highest and most
desirable paths, and thus, so to speak, set the pace for the day.

Each morning is a fresh beginning.  We are, as it were, just beginning
life.  We have it _entirely_ in our own hands.  And when the morning with
its fresh beginning comes, all yesterdays should be yesterdays, with
which we have nothing to do.  Sufficient is it to know that the way we
lived our yesterday has determined for us our today.  And, again, when
the morning with its fresh beginning comes, all tomorrows should be
tomorrows, with which we have nothing to do.  Sufficient to know that the
way we live our today determines our tomorrow.

  "Every day is a fresh beginning,
    Every morn is the world made new;
  You who are weary of sorrow and sinning,
    Here is a beautiful hope for you,
    A hope for me and a hope for you.

  "All the past things are past and over,
    The tasks are done, and the tears are shed.
  Yesterday's errors let yesterday cover;
    Yesterday's wounds, which smarted and bled,
    Are healed with the healing which might has shed.



  "Let them go, since we cannot relieve them,
    Cannot undo and cannot atone.
  God in His mercy receive, forgive them!
    Only the new days are our own.
    Today is ours, and today alone.

  "Here are the skies all burnished brightly;
    Here is the spent earth all reborn;
  Here are the tired limbs springing lightly
    To face the sun and to share with the morn
    In the chrism of dew and the cool of dawn.

  "Every day is a fresh beginning,
    Listen, my soul, to the glad refrain,
  And, spite of old sorrow and older sinning,
    And puzzles forecasted, and possible pain,
    Take heart with the day and begin again."


Simply the first hour of this new day, with all its richness and glory,
with all its sublime and eternity-determining possibilities, and each
succeeding hour as it comes, but _not before_ it comes.  This is the
secret of character building.  This simple method will bring any one to
the realization of the highest life that can be even conceived of, and
there is nothing in this connection that can be conceived of that cannot
be realized somehow, somewhen, somewhere.

This brings such a life within the possibilities of _all_, for there is
_no one_, if really in earnest and if he really desires it, who cannot
live to his highest for a single hour.  But even though there should be,
if he is _only earnest in his endeavor_, then, through the law that like
builds like, he will be able to come a little nearer to it the next hour,
and still nearer the next, and the next, until sooner or later comes the
time when it becomes the natural, and any other would require the effort.

In this way one becomes in love and in league with the highest and best
in the universe, and as a consequence, the highest and best in the
universe becomes in love and in league with him.  They aid him at every
turn; they seem literally to move all things his way, because forsooth,
he has first moved their way.




THE REALIZATION OF PERFECT PEACE.

This is the Spirit of Infinite Peace, and the moment we come into
harmony with it there comes to us an inflowing tide of peace, for peace
is harmony.  A deep interior meaning underlies the great truth, "To be
spiritually minded is life and peace."  To recognize the fact that we
are spirit, and to live in this thought, is to be spiritually minded,
and so to be in harmony and peace.  Oh, the thousands of men and women
all about us weary with care, troubled and ill at ease, running hither
and thither to find peace, weary in body, soul, and mind; going to
other countries, traveling the world over, coming back, and still not
finding it.  Of course they have not found it and they never will find
it in this way, because they are looking for it where it is not.  They
are looking for it without when they should look within.  Peace is to
be found only within, and unless one find it there he will never find
it at all.

Peace lies not in the external world.  It lies within one's own soul.
We may travel over many different avenues in pursuit of it, we may seek
it through the channels of the bodily appetites and passions, we may
seek it through all the channels of the external, we may chase for it
hither and thither, but it will always be just beyond our grasp,
because we are searching for it where it is not.  In the degree,
however, that we order the bodily appetites and passions in accordance
with the promptings of the soul within will the higher forms of
happiness and peace enter our lives; but in the degree that we fail in
doing this will disease, suffering, and discontent enter in.

To be at one with God is to be at peace.  The child simplicity is the
greatest agency in bringing this full and complete realization, the
child simplicity that recognizes its true relations with the Father's
life.  There are people I know who have come into such a conscious
realization of their oneness with this Infinite Life, this Spirit of
Infinite Peace, that their lives are fairly bubbling over with joy.  I
have particularly in mind at this moment a comparatively young man who
was an invalid for several years, his health completely broken with
nervous exhaustion, who thought there was nothing in life worth living
for, to whom everything and everybody presented a gloomy aspect, and he
in turn presented a gloomy aspect to all with whom he came in contact.
Not long ago he came into such a vital realization of his oneness with
this Infinite Power, he opened himself so completely to its divine
inflow, that today he is in perfect health, and frequently as I meet
him now he cannot resist the impulse to cry out, "Oh, it is a joy to be
alive."

I know an officer on our police force who has told me that many times
when off duty and on his way home in the evening, there comes to him
such a vivid and vital realization of his oneness with this Infinite
Power, and this Spirit of Infinite Peace so takes hold of and so fills
him, that it seems as if his feet could scarcely keep to the pavement,
so buoyant and so exhilarated does he become by reason of this
inflowing tide.

He who comes into this higher realization never has any fear, for he
has always with him a sense of protection, and the very realization of
this makes his protection complete.  Of him it is true,--"No weapon
that is formed against thee shall prosper;" "There shall no ill come
nigh thy dwelling;" "Thou shalt be in league with the stones of the
field, and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee."

These are the men and the women who seem to live charmed lives.  The
moment we fear anything we open the door for the entrance of the
actualization of the very thing we fear.  An animal will never harm a
person who is absolutely fearless in regard to it.  The instant he
fears he opens himself to danger; and some animals, the dog for
example, can instantly detect the element of fear, and this gives them
the courage to do harm.  In the degree that we come into a full
realization of our oneness with this Infinite Power do we become calm
and quiet, undisturbed by the little occurrences that before so vex and
annoy us.  We are no longer disappointed in people, for we always read
them aright.  We have the power of penetrating into their very souls
and seeing the underlying motives that are at work there.

A gentleman approached a friend the other day, and with great show of
cordiality grasped him by the hand and said, "Why, Mr. ------, I am so
glad to see you."  Quick as a flash my friend read him, and looking him
steadily in the eye, replied, "No, you are mistaken, you are not glad
to see me; but you are very much disconcerted, so much so that you are
now blushing in evidence of it."  The gentleman replied, "Well, you
know in this day and age of conventionality and form we have to put on
the show and sometimes make believe what we do not really feel."  My
friend once more looked him in the face and said, "Again you are
mistaken.  Let me give you one little word of advice: You will always
fare better and will think far more of yourself, always to recognize
and to tell the truth rather than to give yourself to any semblance of
it."

As soon as we are able to read people aright we will then cease to be
disappointed in them, we will cease to place them on pedestals, for
this can never be done without some attendant disappointment.  The fall
will necessarily come, sooner or later, and moreover, we are thus many
times unfair to our friends.  When we come into harmony with this
Spirit of Peace, evil reports and apparent bad treatment, either at the
hands of friends or of enemies, will no longer disturb us.  When we are
conscious of the fact that in our life and our work we are true to that
eternal principle of right, of truth, of justice that runs through all
the universe, that unites and governs all, that always eventually
prevails, then nothing of this kind can come nigh us, and come what may
we will always be tranquil and undisturbed.

The things that cause sorrow, and pain, and bereavement will not be
able to take the hold of us they now take, for true wisdom will enable
us to see the proper place and know the right relations of all things.
The loss of friends by the transition we call death will not cause
sorrow to the soul that has come into this higher realization, for he
knows that there is no such thing as death, for each one is not only a
partaker, but an eternal partaker, of this Infinite Life.  He knows
that the mere falling away of the physical body by no means affects the
real soul life.  With a tranquil spirit born of a higher faith he can
realize for himself, and to those less strong he can say--

  "Loving friends! be wise and dry
  Straightway every weeping eye;
  What you left upon the bier
  Is not worth a single tear;
  'Tis a simple sea-shell, one
  Out of which the pearl has gone.
  The shell was nothing, leave it there;
  The pearl--the soul--was all, is here."

And so far as the element of separation is concerned, he realizes that
to spirit there are no bounds, and that spiritual communion, whether
between two persons in the body, or two persons, one in the body and
one out of the body, is within the reach of all.  In the degree that
the higher spiritual life is realized can there be this higher
spiritual communion.

The things that we open ourselves to always come to us.  People in the
olden times expected to see angels and they saw them; but there is no
more reason why they should have seen them than that we should see them
now; no more reason why they should come and dwell with them than that
they should come and dwell with us, for the great laws governing all
things are the same today as they were then.  If angels come not to
minister unto us it is because we do not invite them, it is because we
keep the door closed through which they otherwise might enter.

In the degree that we are filled with this Spirit of Peace by thus
opening ourselves to its inflow does it pour through us, so that we
carry it with us wherever we go.  In the degree that we thus open
ourselves do we become magnets to attract peace from all sources; and
in the degree that we attract and embody it in ourselves are we able to
give it forth to others.  We can in this way become such perfect
embodiments of peace that wherever we go we are continually shedding
benedictions.  But a day or two ago I saw a woman grasp the hand of a
man (his face showed the indwelling God), saying, "Oh, it does me so
much good to see you.  I have been in anxiety and almost in despair
during the past few hours, but the very sight of you has rolled the
burden entirely away."  There are people all around us who are
continually giving out blessings and comfort, persons whose mere
presence seems to change sorrow into joy, fear into courage, despair
into hope, weakness into power.

It is the one who has come into the realization of his own true self
who carries this power with him and who radiates it wherever he
goes,--the one who, as we say, has found his centre.  And in all the
great universe there is but one centre,--the Infinite Power that is
working in and through all.  The one who then has found his centre is
the one who has come into the realization of his oneness with this
Infinite Power, the one who recognizes himself as a spiritual being,
for God is spirit.

Such is the man of power.  Centred in the Infinite, he has thereby, so
to speak, connected himself with, he has attached his belts to, the
great power-house of the universe.  He is constantly drawing power to
himself from all sources.  For, thus centred, knowing himself,
conscious of his own power, the thoughts that go from his mind are
thoughts of strength; and by virtue of the law that like attracts like,
he by his thoughts is continually attracting to himself from all
quarters the aid of all whose thoughts are thoughts of strength, and in
this way he is linking himself with this order of thought in the
universe.

And so to him that hath, to him shall be given.  This is simply the
working of a natural law.  His strong, positive, and hence constructive
thought is continually working success for him along all lines, and
continually bringing to him help from all directions.  The things that
he sees, that he creates in the ideal, are through the agency of this
strong constructive thought continually clothing themselves, taking
form, manifesting themselves in the material.  Silent, unseen forces
are at work which will sooner or later be made manifest in the visible.

Fear and all thoughts of failure never suggest themselves to such a
man; or if they do, they are immediately sent out of his mind, and so
he is not influenced by this order of thought from without.  He does
not attract it to him.  He is in another current of thought.
Consequently the weakening, failure-bringing thoughts of the fearing,
the vacillating, the pessimistic about him, have no influence upon him.
The one who is of the negative, fearing kind not only has his energies
and his physical agents weakened, or even paralyzed through the
influence of this kind of thought that is born within him, but he also
in this way connects himself with this order of thought in the world
about him.  And in the degree that he does this does he become a victim
to the weak, fearing, negative minds all around him.  Instead of
growing in power, he increases in weakness.  He is in the same order of
thought with those of whom it is true,--and even that which they have
shall be taken away from them.  This again is simply the working of a
natural law, the same as is its opposite.  Fearing lest I lose even
what I have I hide it away in a napkin.  Very well.  I must then pay
the price of my "fearing lest I lose."

Thoughts of strength both build strength from within and attract it
from without.  Thoughts of weakness actualize weakness from within and
attract it from without.  Courage begets strength, fear begets
weakness.  And so courage begets success, fear begets failure.  It is
the man or the woman of faith, and hence of courage, who is the master
of circumstances, and who makes his or her power felt in the world.  It
is the man or the woman who lacks faith and who as a consequence is
weakened and crippled by fears and forebodings, who is the creature of
all passing occurrences.

Within each one lies the cause of whatever comes to him.  Each has it
in his own hands to determine what comes.  Everything in the visible,
material world has its origin in the unseen, the spiritual, the thought
world.  This is the world of cause, the former is the world of effect.
The nature of the effect is always in accordance with the nature of the
cause.  What one lives in his invisible, thought world, he is
continually actualizing in his visible, material world.  If he would
have any conditions different in the latter he must make the necessary
change in the former.  A clear realization of this great fact would
bring success to thousands of men and women who all about us are now in
the depths of despair.  It would bring health, abounding health and
strength to thousands now diseased and suffering.  It would bring peace
and joy to thousands now unhappy and ill at ease.

And oh, the thousands all about us who are continually living in the
slavery of fear.  The spirits within that should be strong and
powerful, are rendered weak and impotent.  Their energies are crippled,
their efforts are paralyzed.  "Fear is everywhere,--fear of want, fear
of starvation, fear of public opinion, fear of private opinion, fear
that what we own today may not be ours tomorrow, fear of sickness, fear
of death.  Fear has become with millions a fixed habit.  The thought is
everywhere.  The thought is thrown upon us from every direction. . . .
To live in continual dread, continual cringing, continual fear of
anything, be it loss of love, loss of money, loss of position or
situation, is to take the readiest means to lose what we fear we shall."

By fear nothing is to be gained, but on the contrary, everything is to
be lost.  "I know this is true," says one, "but I am given to fear;
it's natural to me and I can't help it."  Can't help it!  In saying
this you indicate one great reason of your fear by showing that you do
not even know yourself as yet.  You must know yourself in order to know
your powers, and not until you know them can you use them wisely and
fully.  Don't say you can't help it.  If you think you can't, the
chances are that you can't.  If you think you can, and act in
accordance with this thought, then not only are the chances that you
can, but if you act fully in accordance with it, that you can and that
you will is an absolute certainty.  It was Virgil who in describing the
crew which in his mind would win the race, said of them,--They can
because they think they can.  In other words, this very attitude of
mind on their part will infuse a spiritual power into their bodies that
will give them the strength and endurance which will enable them to win.

Then take the thought that you _can_; take it merely as a seed-thought,
if need be, plant it in your consciousness, tend it, cultivate it, and
it will gradually reach out and gather strength from all quarters.  It
will focus and make positive and active the spiritual force within you
that is now scattered and of little avail.  It will draw to itself
force from without.  It will draw to your aid the influence of other
minds of its own nature, minds that are fearless, strong, courageous.
You will thus draw to yourself and connect yourself with this order of
thought.  If earnest and faithful, the time will soon come when all
fear will loose its hold; and instead of being an embodiment of
weakness and a creature of circumstances, you will find yourself a
tower of strength and a master of circumstances.

We need more faith in every-day life,--faith in the power that works
for good, faith in the Infinite God, and hence faith in ourselves
created in His image.  And however things at times may seem to go,
however dark at times appearances may be, the knowledge of the fact
that "the Supreme Power has us in its charge as it has the suns and
endless systems of worlds in space," will give us the supreme faith
that all is well with us, the same as all is well with the world.
"Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on Thee."

There is nothing firmer, and safer, and surer than Deity.  Then, as we
recognize the fact that we have it in our own hands to open ourselves
ever more fully to this Infinite Power, and call upon it to manifest
itself in and through us, we will find in ourselves an ever increasing
sense of power.  For in this way we are working in conjunction with it,
and it in turn is working in conjunction with us.  We are then led into
the full realization of the fact that all things work together for good
to those that love the good.  Then the fears and forebodings that have
dominated us in the past will be transmuted into faith, and faith when
rightly understood and rightly used is a force before which nothing can
stand.

Materialism leads naturally to pessimism.  And how could it do
otherwise?  A knowledge of the Spiritual Power working in and through
us as well as in and through all things, a power that works for
righteousness, leads to optimism.  Pessimism leads to weakness.
Optimism leads to power.  The one who is centred in Deity is the one
who not only outrides every storm, but who through the faith, and so,
the conscious power that is in him, faces storm with the same calmness
and serenity that he faces fair weather; for he knows well beforehand
what the outcome will be.  He knows that underneath are the everlasting
arms.  He it is who realizes the truth of the injunction, "Rest in the
Lord, wait patiently for Him and He shall give thee thy heart's
desire."  All shall be given, simply given, to him who is ready to
accept it.  Can anything be clearer than this?

In the degree, then, that we work in conjunction with the Supreme Power
do we need the less to concern ourselves about results.  To live in the
full realization of this fact and all that attends it brings peace, a
full, rich, abiding peace,--a peace that makes the present complete,
and that, going on before, brings back the assurance that as our days,
so shall our strength be.  The one who is thus centred, even in the
face of all the unrest and the turmoil about us, can realize and say--



  "I stay my haste, I make delays,
    For what avails this eager pace?
  I stand amid eternal ways,
    And what is mine shall know my face.

  "Asleep, awake, by night or day,
    The friends I seek are seeking me;
  No wind can drive my bark astray,
    Nor change the tide of destiny.



  "The waters know their own, and draw
    The brooks that spring in yonder height;
  So flows the good with equal law
    Unto the soul of pure delight

  "The stars come nightly to the sky;
    The tidal wave unto the sea;
  Nor time, nor space, nor deep, nor high,
    Can keep my own away from me."




COMING INTO FULLNESS OF POWER.

This is the Spirit of Infinite Power, and in the degree that we open
ourselves to it does power become manifest in us.  With God all things
are possible,--that is, in conjunction with God all things are
possible.  The true secret of power lies in keeping one's connection
with the God who worketh all things; and in the degree that we keep
this connection are we able literally to rise above every conceivable
limitation.

Why, then, waste time in running hither and thither to acquire power?
Why waste time with this practice or that practice?  Why not go
directly to the mountain top itself, instead of wandering through the
by-ways, in the valleys, and on the mountain sides?  That man has
absolute dominion, as taught in all the scriptures of the world, is
true not of physical man, but of _spiritual man_.  There are many
animals, for example, larger and stronger, over which from a physical
standpoint he would not have dominion, but he can gain supremacy over
even these by calling into activity the higher mental, psychic, and
spiritual forces with which he is endowed.

Whatever can't be done in the physical can be done in the spiritual.
And in direct proportion as a man recognizes himself as spirit, and
lives accordingly, is he able to transcend in power the man who
recognizes himself merely as material.  All the sacred literature of
the world is teeming with examples of what we call miracles.  They are
not confined to any particular times or places.  There is no age of
miracles in distinction from any other period that may be an age of
miracles.  Whatever has been done in the world's history can be done
again through the operation of the same laws and forces.  These
miracles were performed not by those who were more than men, but by
those who through the recognition of their oneness with God became
God-men, so that the higher forces and powers worked through them.

For what, let us ask, is a miracle?  Is it something supernatural?
Supernatural only in the sense of being above the natural, or rather,
above that which is natural to man in his ordinary state.  A miracle is
nothing more nor less than this.  One who has come into a knowledge of
his true identity, of his oneness with the all-pervading Wisdom and
Power, thus makes it possible for laws higher than the ordinary mind
knows of to be revealed to him.  These laws he makes use of; the people
see the results, and by virtue of their own limitations, call them
miracles and speak of the person who performs these apparently
supernatural works as a supernatural being.  But they as supernatural
beings could themselves perform these supernatural works if they would
open themselves to the recognition of the same laws, and consequently
to the realization of the same possibilities and powers.  And let us
also remember that the supernatural of yesterday becomes, as in the
process of evolution we advance from the lower to the higher, from the
more material to the more spiritual, the common and the natural of
today, and what seems to be the supernatural of today becomes in the
same way the natural of tomorrow, and so on through the ages.  Yes, it
is the God-man who does the things that appear supernatural, the man
who by virtue of his realization of the higher powers transcends the
majority and so stands out among them.  But any power that is possible
to one human soul is possible to another.  The same laws operate in
every life.  We can be men and women of power or we can be men and
women of impotence.  The moment one vitally grasps the fact that he can
rise he will rise, and he can have absolutely no limitations other than
the limitations he sets to himself.  Cream always rises to the top.  It
rises simply because _it is the nature of cream to rise_.

We hear much said of "environment."  We need to realize that
environment should never be allowed to make the man, but that man
should always, _and always can_, condition the environment.  When we
realize this we will find that many times it is not necessary to take
ourselves out of any particular environment, because we may yet have a
work to do there; but by the very force we carry with us we can so
affect and change matters that we will have an entirely new set of
conditions in an old environment.

The same is true in regard to "hereditary" traits and influences.  We
sometimes hear the question asked, "Can they be overcome?"  Only the
one who doesn't yet know himself can ask a question such as this.  If
we entertain and live in the belief that they cannot be overcome, then
the chances are that they will always remain.  The moment, however,
that we come into a realization of our true selves, and so of the
tremendous powers and forces within,--the powers and forces of the mind
and spirit,--hereditary traits and influences that are harmful in
nature will begin to lessen, and will disappear with a rapidity
directly in proportion to the completeness of this realization.

  "There is no thing we cannot overcome;
  Say not thy evil instinct is inherited,
  Or that some trait inborn makes thy whole life forlorn,
  And calls down punishment that is not merited.

  "Back of thy parents and grandparents lies
  The Great Eternal Will!  That too is thine
  Inheritance,--strong, beautiful, divine,
  Sure lever of success for one who tries.



  "There is no noble height thou canst not climb;
  All triumphs may be thine in Time's futurity,
  If, whatso'er thy fault, thou dost not faint or halt;
  But lean upon the staff of God's security.

  "Earth has no claim the soul cannot contest;
  Know thyself part of the Eternal Source;
  Naught can stand before thy spirit's force;
  The soul's Divine Inheritance is best."

Again there are many who are living far below their possibilities
because they are continually handing over their individualities to
others.  Do you want to be a power in the world?  Then be yourself.
Don't class yourself, don't allow yourself to be classed among the
second-hand, among the _they-say_ people.  Be true to the highest
within your own soul, and then allow yourself to be governed by no
customs or conventionalities or arbitrary man-made rules that are not
founded upon _principle_.  Those things that are founded upon principle
will be observed by the right-minded, the right-hearted man or woman,
in any case.

Don't surrender your individuality, which is your greatest agent of
power, to the customs and conventionalities that have gotten their life
from the great mass of those who haven't enough force to preserve their
individualities,--those who in other words have given them over as
ingredients to the "mush of concession" which one of our greatest
writers has said characterizes our modern society.  If you do surrender
your individuality in this way, you simply aid in increasing the
undesirable conditions; in payment for this you become a slave, and the
chances are that in time you will be unable to hold even the respect of
those whom you in this way try to please.

If you preserve your individuality then you become a master, and if
wise and discreet, your influence and power will be an aid in bringing
about a higher, a better, and a more healthy set of conditions in the
world.  All people, moreover, will think more of you, will honor you
more highly for doing this than if you show your weakness by
contributing yourself to the same "mush of concession" that so many of
them are contributing themselves to.  With all classes of people you
will then have an influence.  "A great style of hero draws equally all
classes, all extremes of society to him, till we say the very dogs
believe in him."

To be one's self is the only worthy, and by all means the only
satisfactory, thing to be.  "May it not be good policy," says one, "to
be governed sometimes by one's surroundings?"  What is good policy?  To
be yourself, first, last, and always.

  "This above all,--to thine own self be true;
  And it must follow, as the night the day,
  Thou canst not then be false to any man."


"When we appeal to the Supreme and our life is governed by a principle,
we are not governed either by fear of public opinion or loss of others'
approbation, and we may be sure that the Supreme will sustain us.  If
in any way we try to live to suit others we never shall suit them, and
the more we try the more unreasonable and exacting do they become.  The
government of your life is a matter that lies entirely between God and
yourself, and when your life is swayed and influenced from any other
source you are on the wrong path."  When we find the kingdom within and
become centred in the Infinite, then we become a law unto ourselves.
When we become a law unto ourselves, then we are able to bring others
to a knowledge of laws higher than they are governed or many times even
enslaved by.

When we have found this centre, then that beautiful simplicity, at once
the charm and the power of a truly great personality, enters into our
lives.  Then all striving for effect,--that sure indicator of weakness
and a lack of genuine power,--is absent.  This striving for effect that
is so common is always an indicator of a lack of something.  It brings
to mind the man who rides behind a dock-tailed horse.  Conscious of the
fact that there is not enough in _himself_ to attract attention, in
common with a number of other weaklings, he adopts the brutal method of
having his horse's tail sawed off, that its unnatural, odd appearance
may attract from people the attention that he of himself is unable to
secure.

But the one who strives for effect is always fooled more than he
succeeds in fooling others.  The man and the woman of true wisdom and
insight can always see the causes that prompt, the motives that
underlie the acts of all with whom he or she comes in contact.  "He is
great who is what he is from nature and who never reminds us of others."

The men and the women who are truly awake to the real powers within are
the men and women who seem to be doing so little, yet who in reality
are doing so much.  They seem to be doing so little because they are
working with higher agencies, and yet are doing so much because of this
very fact.  They do their work on the higher plane.  They keep so
completely their connection with the Infinite Power that _It_ does the
work for them and they are relieved of the responsibility.  They are
the care-less people.  They are care-less because it is the Infinite
Power that is working through them, and with this Infinite Power they
are simply co-operating.

_The secret of the highest power is simply the uniting of the outer
agencies of expression with the Power that works from within_.  Are you
a painter?  Then in the degree that you open yourself to the power of
the forces within will you become great instead of mediocre.  You can
never put into permanent form inspirations higher than those that come
through your own soul.  In order for the higher inspirations to come
through it, you must open your soul, you must open it fully to the
Supreme Source of all inspiration.  Are you an orator?  In the degree
that you come into harmony and work in conjunction with the higher
powers that will speak through you will you have the real power of
moulding and of moving men.  If you use merely your physical agents,
you will be simply a demagogue.  If you open yourself so that the voice
of God can speak through and use your physical agents, you will become
a great and true orator, great and true in just the degree that you so
open yourself.

Are you a singer?  Then open yourself and let the God within pour forth
in the spirit of song.  You will find it a thousand times easier than
all your long and studied practice without this, and other things being
equal, there will come to you a power of song so enchanting and so
enrapturing that its influence upon all who hear will be irresistible.

When my cabin or tent has been pitched during the summer on the edge or
in the midst of a forest, I have sometimes lain awake on my cot in the
early morning, just as the day was beginning to break.  Silence at
first.  Then an intermittent chirp here and there.  And as the
unfolding tints of the dawn became faintly perceptible, these grew more
and more frequent, until by and by the whole forest seemed to burst
forth in one grand chorus of song.  Wonderful! wonderful!  It seemed as
if the very trees, as if every grass-blade, as if the bushes, the very
sky above, and the earth beneath, had part in this wonderful symphony.
Then, as I have listened as it went on and on, I have thought.  What a
study in the matter of song!  If we could but learn from the birds.  If
we could but open ourselves to the same powers and allow them to pour
forth in us, what singers, what movers of men we might have!  Nay, what
singers and what movers of men _we would have_!

Do you know the circumstances under which Mr. Sankey sang for the first
time "The Ninety and Nine?"  Says one of our able journals: "At a great
meeting recently in Denver, Mr. Ira W. Sankey, before singing 'The
Ninety and Nine,' which, perhaps, of all his compositions is the one
that has brought him the most fame, gave an account of its birth.
Leaving Glasgow for Edinburg with Mr. Moody, he stopped at a news-stand
and bought a penny religious paper.  Glancing over it as they rode on
the cars, his eye fell on a few little verses in the corner of the
page.  Turning to Mr. Moody he said, 'I've found my hymn.'  But Mr.
Moody was busily engaged and did not hear a word.  Mr. Sankey did not
find time to make a tune for the verses, so he pasted them in his music
scrapbook.

"One day they had an unusually impressive meeting in Edinburg, in which
Dr. Bonar had spoken with great effect on 'The Good Shepherd.'  At the
close of the address Mr. Moody beckoned to his partner to sing.  He
thought of nothing but the Twenty-third Psalm, but that he had sung so
often.  His second thought was to sing the verses he had found in the
newspaper, but the third thought was, how could it be done when he had
no tune.  Then a fourth thought came, and that was to sing them anyway.
He put the verses before him, touched the keys of the organ, opened his
mouth and sang, not knowing where he was going to come out.  He
finished the first verse amid profound silence.  He took a long breath
and wondered if he could sing the second the same way.  He tried and
succeeded; after that it was easy to sing it.  When he finished the
hymn the meeting was all broken down and the throngs were crying.  Mr.
Sankey says it was the most intense moment of his life.  Mr. Moody said
he never heard a song like it.  It was sung at every meeting, and was
soon going over the world."

When we open ourselves to the highest inspirations they never fail us.
When we fail to do this we fail in attaining the highest results,
whatever the undertaking.

Are you a writer?  Then remember that the one great precept underlying
all successful literary work is, _Look into thine own heart and write.
Be true.  Be fearless.  Be loyal to the promptings of your own soul_.
Remember that an author can never write more than he himself is.  If he
would write more, then he must be more.  He is simply his own
amanuensis.  He in a sense writes himself into his book.  He can put no
more into it than he himself is.

If he is one of a great personality, strong in purpose, deep in
feeling, open always to the highest inspirations, a certain indefinable
something gets into his pages that makes them breathe forth a vital,
living power, a power so great that each reader gets the same
inspirations as those that spoke through the author.  That that's
written between the lines is many times more than that that's written
in the lines.  It is the spirit of the author that engenders this
power.  It is this that gives that extra twenty-five or thirty per cent
that takes a book out of the class called medium and lifts it into the
class called superior,--that extra per cent that makes it the one of
the hundred that is truly successful, while the ninety-nine never see
more than their first edition.

It is this same spiritual power that the author of a great personality
puts into his work, that causes it to go so rapidly from reader to
reader; for the only way that any book circulates in the ultimate is
from mouth to mouth, any book that reaches a large circulation.  It is
this that many times causes a single reader, in view of its value to
himself, to purchase numbers of copies for others.  "A good poem," says
Emerson, "goes about the world offering itself to reasonable men, who
read it with joy and carry it to their reasonable neighbors.  Thus it
draws to it the _wise and generous souls_, confirming their secret
thoughts, and through their sympathy _really publishing itself_."

This is the type of author who writes not with the thought of having
what he writes become literature, but he writes with the sole thought
of reaching the hearts of the people, giving them something of vital
value, something that will broaden, sweeten, enrich, and beautify their
lives; that will lead them to the finding of the higher life and with
it the higher powers and the higher joys.  It most always happens,
however, that if he succeeds in thus reaching the people, the becoming
literature part somehow takes care of itself, and far better than if he
aimed for it directly.

The one, on the other hand, who fears to depart from beaten paths, who
allows himself to be bound by arbitrary rules, limits his own creative
powers in just the degree that he allows himself so to be bound.  "My
book," says one of the greatest of modern authors, "shall smell of the
pines and resound with the hum of insects.  The swallow over my window
shall interweave that thread or straw he carries in his bill into my
web also."  Far better, gentle sage, to have it smell of the pines and
resound with the hum of insects than to have it sound of the rules that
a smaller type of man gets by studying the works of a few great,
fearless writers like yourself, and formulating from what he thus gains
a handbook of rhetoric.  "Of no use are the men who study to do exactly
as was done before, who can never understand that _today is a new day_."

When Shakspeare is charged with debts to his authors, Landor replies:
"Yet he was more original than his originals.  He breathed upon dead
bodies and brought them into life."  This is the type of man who
doesn't move the world's way, but who moves the world his way.

I had rather be an amanuensis of the Infinite God, as it is my
privilege literally to be, than a slave to the formulated rules of any
rhetorician, or to the opinions of any critic.  Oh, the people, the
people over and over!  Let me give something to them that will lighten
the every-day struggles of our common life, something that will add a
little sweetness here, a little hope there, something that will make
more thoughtful, kind, and gentle this thoughtless, animal-natured man,
something that will awaken into activity the dormant powers of this
timid, shrinking little woman, powers that when awakened will be
irresistible in their influence and that will surprise even herself.
Let me give something that will lead each one to the knowledge of the
divinity of every human soul, something that will lead each one to the
conscious realization of _his own divinity_, with all its attendant
riches, and glories, and powers,--let me succeed in doing this, and I
can then well afford to be careless as to whether the critics praise or
whether they blame.  If it is blame, then under these circumstances it
is as the cracking of a few dead sticks on the ground below, compared
to the matchless music that the soft spring gale is breathing through
the great pine forest.

Are you a minister, or a religious teacher of any kind?  Then in the
degree that you free yourself from the man-made theological dogmas that
have held and that are holding and limiting so many, and in the degree
that you open yourself to the Divine Breath, will you be one who will
speak with authority.  In the degree that you do this will you study
the prophets less and be in the way of becoming a prophet yourself.
The way is open for you exactly the same as it has ever been open for
anyone.

If when born into the world you came into a family of the
English-speaking race, then in all probability you are a Christian.  To
be a Christian is to be a follower of the _teachings_ of Jesus, the
Christ; to live in harmony with the same laws he lived in harmony with:
in brief, _to live his life_.  The great central fact of his teaching
was this conscious union of man with the Father.  It was the complete
realization of this oneness with the Father on his part that made Jesus
the Christ.  It was through this that he attained to the power he
attained to, that he spake as never man spake.

He never claimed for himself anything that he did not claim equally for
all mankind.  "The mighty works performed by Jesus were not
exceptional, they were the natural and necessary concomitants of his
state; he declared them to be in accordance with unvarying order; he
spoke of them as no unique performances, but as the outcome of a state
to which all might attain if they chose.  As a teacher and demonstrator
of truth, according to his own confession, he did nothing for the
purpose of proving his solitary divinity. . . .  The life and triumph
of Jesus formed an epoch in the history of the race.  His coming and
victory marked a new era in human affairs; he introduced a new because
a more complete ideal to the earth, and when his three most intimate
companions saw in some measure what the new life really signified, they
fell to the earth, speechless with awe and admiration."

By coming into this complete realization of his oneness with the
Father, by mastering, absolutely mastering every circumstance that
crossed his path through life, even to the death of the body, and by
pointing out to us the great laws which are the same for us as they
were for him, he has given us an ideal of life, an ideal for us to
attain to _here and now_, that we could not have without him.  _One has
conquered first; all may conquer afterward_.  By completely realizing
it first for himself, and then by pointing out to others this great law
of the at-one-ment with the Father, he has become probably the world's
greatest saviour.

Don't mistake his mere person for his life and his teachings, an error
that has been made in connection with most all great teachers by their
disciples over and over again.  And if you have been among the number
who have been preaching a dead Christ, then for humanity's sake, for
Christ's sake, for God's sake, and I speak most reverently, don't steal
the people's time any longer, don't waste your own time more, in giving
them stones in place of bread, dead form for the spirit of living
truth.  In his own words, "let the dead bury their dead."  Come out
from among them.  Teach as did Jesus, _the living Christ_.  Teach as
did Jesus, _the Christ within_.  Find this in all its transcendent
beauty and power,--find it as Jesus found it, then you also will be one
who will speak with authority.  Then you will be able to lead large
numbers of others to its finding.  This is the pearl of great price.

It is the type of preacher whose soul has never as yet even perceived
the _vital spirit_ of the teachings of Jesus, and who as a consequence
instead of giving this to the people, is giving them old forms and
dogmas and speculations, who is emptying our churches.  This is the
type whose chief efforts seem to be in getting men ready to die.  The
Germans have a saying, Never go to the second thing first.  We need men
who will teach us first how to live.  Living quite invariably precedes
dying.  This also is true, that when we once know how to live, and live
in accordance with what we know, then the dying, as we term it, will in
a wonderfully beautiful manner take care of itself.  It is in fact the
only way in which it can be taken care of.

It is on account of this emptying of our churches, for the reason that
the people are tiring of mere husks, that many short-sighted people are
frequently heard to say that religion is dying out.  Religion dying
out?  How can anything die before it is really born?  And so far as the
people are concerned, religion is just being born, or rather they are
just awaking to a vital, every-day religion.  We are just beginning to
get beyond the mere letter into its real, vital spirit.  Religion dying
out?  Impossible even to conceive of.  Religion is as much a part of
the human soul as the human soul is a part of God.  And as long as God
and the human soul exist, religion will never die.

Much of the dogma, the form, the ceremony, the mere letter that has
stood as religion,--and honestly, many times, let us be fair enough to
say,--this, thank God, is rapidly dying out, and never so rapidly as it
is today.  By two methods it is dying.  There is, first, a large class
of people tired of or even nauseated with it all, who conscientiously
prefer to have nothing rather than this.  They are simply abandoning
it, the same as a tree abandons its leaves when the early winter comes.
There is, second, a large class in whom the Divine Breath is stirring,
who are finding the Christ within in all its matchless beauty and
redeeming power.  And this new life is pushing off the old, the same as
in the spring the newly awakened life in the tree pushes off the old,
lifeless leaves that have clung on during the winter, to make place for
the new ones.  And the way this old dead leaf religion is being pushed
off on every hand is indeed most interesting and inspiring to witness.

Let the places of those who have been emptying our churches by reason
of their attempts to give stones for bread, husks and chaff for the
life-giving grain, let their places be taken even for but a few times
by those who are open and alive to these higher inspirations, and then
let us again question those who feel that religion is dying out.  "It
is the live coal that kindles others, not the dead."  Let their places
be taken by those who have caught the inspiration of the Divine Breath,
who as a consequence have a message of mighty value and import for the
people, who by virtue of this same fact are able to present it with a
beauty and a power so enrapturing that it takes captive the soul.  Then
we will find that the churches that today are dotted here and there
with a few dozen people will be filled to overflowing, and there will
not be even room enough for all who would enter.  "Let the shell perish
that the pearl may appear."  We need no new revelations as yet.  We
need simply to find the vital spirit of those we already have.  Then in
due time, when we are ready for them, new ones will come, but not
before.

"What the human soul, all the world over, needs," says John Pulsford,
"is not to be harangued, however eloquently, about the old, accepted
religion, but to be permeated, charmed, and taken captive by _a warmer
and more potent Breath of God than they ever felt before_.  And I
should not be true to my personal experience if I did not bear
testimony that this Divine Breath is as exquisitely adapted to the
requirements of the soul's nature as a June morning to the planet.  Nor
does the morning breath leave the trees freer to delight themselves and
develop themselves under its influence than the Breath of God allows
each human mind to unfold according to its genius.  Nothing stirs the
central wheel of the soul like the Breath of God.  The whole man is
quickened, his senses are new senses, his emotions new emotions; his
reason, his affections, his imagination, are all new-born.  The change
is greater than he knows; he marvels at the powers in himself which the
Breath is opening and calling forth.  He finds his nature to be an
unutterable thing; he is sure therefore that the future must have
inconceivable surprises in store.  And herein lies the evidence, which
I commend to my readers, of the existence of God, and of the Eternal
human Hope.  Let God's Breath kindle new spring-time in the soul, start
into life its deeply buried germs, lead in heaven's summer; you will
then have as clear evidence of God from within as you have of the
universe from without.  Indeed, your internal experience of life, and
illimitable Hope in God will be nearer to you, and more prevailing,
than all your external and superficial experience of nature and the
world."

There is but one source of power in the universe.  Whatever then you
are, painter, orator, musician, writer, religious teacher, or whatever
it may be, know that to catch and take captive the secret of power is
so to work in conjunction with the Infinite Power, in order that it may
continually work and manifest through you.  If you fail in doing this,
you fail in everything.  If you fail in doing this, your work, whatever
it may be, will be third or fourth rate, possibly at times second rate,
but it positively never can be first rate.  Absolutely impossible will
it be for you ever to become a master.

Whatever estimate you put upon yourself will determine the
effectiveness of your work along any line.  As long as you live merely
in the physical and the intellectual, you set limitations to yourself
that will hold you as long as you so live.  When, however, you come
into the realization of your oneness with the Infinite Life and Power,
and open yourself that it may work through you, you will find that you
have entered upon an entirely new phase of life, and that an ever
increasing power will be yours.  Then it will be true that your
strength will be as the strength of ten because your heart is pure.

  "O God!  I am one forever
    With Thee by the glory of birth;
  The celestial powers proclaim it
    To the utmost bounds of the earth.

  "I think of this birthright immortal,
    And my being expands like a rose,
  As an odorous cloud of incense
    Around and above me flows.

  "A glorious song of rejoicing
    In an innermost spirit I hear,
  And it sounds like heavenly voices,
    In a chorus divine and clear.

  "And I feel a power uprising,
    Like the power of an embryo god;
  With a glorious wall it surrounds me,
    And lifts me up from the sod."




PLENTY OF ALL THINGS--THE LAW OF PROSPERITY.

This is the Spirit of Infinite Plenty, the Power that has brought, that
is continually bringing, all things into expression in material form.
He who lives in the realization of his oneness with this Infinite Power
becomes a magnet to attract to himself a continual supply of whatsoever
things he desires.

If one hold himself in the thought of poverty, he will be poor, and the
chances are that he will remain in poverty.  If he hold himself,
whatever present conditions may be, continually in the thought of
prosperity, he sets into operation forces that will sooner or later
bring him into prosperous conditions.  The law of attraction works
unceasingly throughout the universe, and the one great and never
changing fact in connection with it is, as we have found, that like
attracts like.  If we are one with this Infinite Power, this source of
all things, then in the degree that we live in the realization of this
oneness, in that degree do we actualize in ourselves a power that will
bring to us an abundance of all things that it is desirable for us to
have.  In this way we come into possession of a power whereby we can
actualize at all times those conditions that we desire.

As all truth exists _now_, and awaits simply our perception of it, so
all things necessary for present needs exist _now_, and await simply
the power in us to appropriate them.  God holds all things in His
hands.  His constant word is, My child, acknowledge me in all your
ways, and in the degree that you do this, in the degree that you live
this, then what is mine is yours.  Jehovah-jireh,--the Lord will
provide.  "He giveth to all men liberally and upbraideth not."  He
giveth liberally to all men who put themselves in the right attitude to
receive from Him.  He forces no good things upon any one.

The old and somewhat prevalent idea of godliness and poverty has
absolutely no basis for its existence, and the sooner we get away from
it the better.  It had its birth in the same way that the idea of
asceticism came into existence, when the idea prevailed that there was
necessarily a warfare between the flesh and the spirit.  It had its
origin therefore in the minds of those who had a distorted, a one-sided
view of life.  True godliness is in a sense the same as true wisdom.
The one who is truly wise, and who uses the forces and powers with
which he is endowed, to him the great universe always opens her
treasure house.  The supply is always equal to the demand,--equal to
the demand when the demand is rightly, wisely made.  When one comes
into the realization of these higher laws, then the fear of want ceases
to tyrannize over him.

Are you out of a situation?  Let the fear that you will not get another
take hold of and _dominate_ you, and the chances are that it may be a
long time before you will get another, or the one that you do get may
be a very poor one indeed.  Whatever the circumstances, you must
realize that you have within you forces and powers that you can set
into operation that will triumph over any and all apparent or temporary
losses.  Set these forces into operation and you will then be placing a
magnet that will draw to you a situation that may be far better than
the one you have lost, and the time may soon come when you will be even
thankful that you lost the old one.

Recognize, working in and through you, the same Infinite Power that
creates and governs all things in the universe, the same Infinite Power
that governs the endless systems of worlds in space.  Send out your
thought,--thought is a force, and it has occult power of unknown
proportions when rightly used and wisely directed,--send out your
thought that the right situation or the right work will come to you at
the right time, in the right way, and that you will recognize it when
it comes.  Hold to this thought, never allow it to weaken, hold to it,
and continually water it with firm expectation.  You in this way put
your advertisement into a psychical, a spiritual newspaper, a paper
that has not a limited circulation, but one that will make its way not
only to the utmost bounds of the earth, but of the very universe
itself.  It is an advertisement, moreover, which if rightly placed on
your part, will be far more effective than any advertisement you could
possibly put into any printed sheet, no matter what claims are made in
regard to its being "the great advertising medium."  In the degree that
you come into this realization and live in harmony with the higher laws
and forces, in that degree will you be able to do this effectively.

If you wish to look through the "want" columns of the newspapers, then
do it not in the ordinary way.  Put the higher forces into operation
and thus place it on a higher basis.  As you take up the paper, take
this attitude of mind: If there is here an advertisement that it will
be well for me to reply to, the moment I come to it I will recognize
it.  Affirm this, believe it, expect it.  If you do this in full faith
you will somehow feel the intuition the moment you come to the right
one, and this intuition will be nothing more nor less than your own
soul speaking to you.  When it speaks then act at once.

If you get the situation and it does not prove to be exactly what you
want, if you feel that you are capable of filling a better one, then
the moment you enter upon it take the attitude of mind that this
situation is the stepping-stone that will lead you to one that will be
still better.  Hold this thought steadily, affirm it, believe it,
expect it, and all the time be faithful, _absolutely faithful_ to the
situation in which you are at present placed.  If you are _not_
faithful to it then the chances are that it will not be the
stepping-stone to something better, but to something poorer.  If you
are faithful to it, the time may soon come when you will be glad and
thankful, when you will rejoice, that you lost your old position.

This is the law of prosperity: When apparent adversity comes, be not
cast down by it, but make the best of it, and always look forward for
better things, for conditions more prosperous.  To hold yourself in
this attitude of mind is to set into operation subtle, silent, and
irresistible forces that sooner or later will actualize in material
form that which is today merely an idea.  But ideas have occult power,
and ideas, when rightly planted and rightly tended, are the seeds that
actualize material conditions.

Never give a moment to complaint, but utilize the time that would
otherwise be spent in this way in looking forward and actualizing the
conditions you desire.  Suggest prosperity to yourself.  See yourself
in a prosperous condition.  Affirm that you will before long be in a
prosperous condition.  Affirm it calmly and quietly, but strongly and
confidently.  Believe it, believe it absolutely.  Expect it,--keep it
continually watered with expectation.  You thus make yourself a magnet
to attract the things that you desire.  Don't be afraid to suggest, to
affirm these things, for by so doing you put forth an ideal which will
begin to clothe itself in material form.  In this way you are utilizing
agents among the most subtle and powerful in the universe.  If you are
particularly desirous for anything that you feel it is good and right
for you to have, something that will broaden your life or that will
increase your usefulness to others, simply hold the thought that at the
right time, in the right way, and through the right instrumentality,
there will come to you or there will open up for you the way whereby
you can attain what you desire.

I know of a young lady who a short time ago wanted some money very
badly.  She wanted it for a good purpose; she saw no reason why she
shouldn't have it.  She is one who has come into an understanding of
the power of the interior forces.  She took and held herself in the
attitude of mind we have just pointed out.  In the morning she entered
into the silence for a few moments.  In this way she brought herself
into a more complete harmony with the higher powers.  Before the day
closed a gentleman called, a member of a family with which she was
acquainted.  He asked her if she would do for the family some work that
they wanted done.  She was a little surprised that they should ask her
to do this particular kind of work, but she said to herself, "Here is a
call.  I will respond and see what it will lead to."  She undertook the
work.  _She did it well_.  When she had completed it there was put into
her hands an amount of money far beyond what she had expected.  She
felt that it was an amount too large for the work she had done.  She
protested.  They replied, "No; you have done us a service that
transcends in value the amount we offer to pay you."  The sum thus
received was more than sufficient for the work she wished to accomplish.

This is but one of many instances in connection with the wise and
effective use of the higher powers.  It also carries a lesson,--Don't
fold your hands and expect to see things drop into your lap, but set
into operation the higher forces and then take hold of the first thing
that offers itself.  Do what your hands find to do, _and do it well_.
If this work is not thoroughly satisfactory to you, then affirm,
believe, and expect that it is the agency that will lead you to
something better.  "The basis for attracting the best of all the world
can give to you is to first surround, own, and live in these things in
mind, or what is falsely called imagination.  All so-called imaginings
are realities and forces of unseen element.  Live in mind in a palace
and gradually palatial surroundings will gravitate to you.  But so
living is _not_ pining, or longing, or complainingly wishing.  It is
when you are 'down in the world,' calmly and persistently seeing
yourself as up.  It is when you are now compelled to eat from a tin
plate, regarding that tin plate as only the certain step to one of
silver.  It is not envying and growling at other people who have silver
plate.  That growling is just so much capital stock taken from the bank
account of mental force."

A friend who knows the power of the interior forces, and whose life is
guided in every detail by them, has given a suggestion in this form:
When you are in the arms of the bear, even though he is hugging you,
look him in the face and laugh, but all the time keep your eye on the
bull.  If you allow all of your attention to be given to the work of
the bear, the bull may get entirely out of your sight.  In other words,
if you yield to adversity the chances are that it will master you, but
if you recognize in yourself the power of mastery over conditions then
adversity will yield to you, and will be changed into prosperity.  If
when it comes you calmly and quietly recognize it, and use the time
that might otherwise be spent in regrets, and fears, and forebodings,
in setting into operation the powerful forces within you, it will soon
take its leave.

Faith, absolute dogmatic faith, is the only law of true success.  When
we recognize the fact that a man carries his success or his failure
with him, and that it does not depend upon outside conditions, we will
come into the possession of powers that will quickly change outside
conditions into agencies that make for success.  When we come into this
higher realization and bring our lives into complete harmony with the
higher laws, we will then be able so to focus and direct the awakened
interior forces, that they will go out and return laden with that for
which they are sent.  We will then be great enough to attract success,
and it will not always be apparently just a little ways ahead.  We can
then establish in ourselves a centre so strong that instead of running
hither and thither for this or that, we can stay at home and draw to us
the conditions we desire.  If we firmly establish and hold to this
centre, things will seem continually to come our way.

The majority of people of the modern world are looking for things that
are practical and that can be utilized in every-day life.  The more
carefully we examine into the laws underlying the great truths we are
considering, the more we will find that they are not only eminently
practical, but in a sense, and in the deepest and truest sense, they
are the only practical things there are.

There are people who continually pride themselves upon being
exceedingly "practical," but many times those who of themselves think
nothing about this are the most practical people the world knows.  And,
on the other hand, those who take great pride in speaking of their own
practicality are many times the least practical.  Or again, in some
ways they may be practical, but so far as life in its totality is
concerned, they are absurdly impractical.

What profit, for example, can there be for the man who, materially
speaking, though he has gained the whole world, has never yet become
acquainted with his own soul?  There are multitudes of men all about us
who are entirely missing the real life, men who have not learned even
the a, b, c of true living.  Slaves they are, abject slaves to their
temporary material accumulations.  Men who thinking they possess their
wealth are on the contrary completely possessed by it.  Men whose lives
are comparatively barren in service to those about them and to the
world at large.  Men who when they can no longer hold the body,--the
agency by means of which they are related to the material world,--will
go out poor indeed, pitiably poor.  Unable to take even the smallest
particle of their accumulations with them, they will enter upon the
other form of life naked and destitute.

The kindly deeds, the developed traits of character, the realized
powers of the soul, the real riches of the inner life and unfoldment,
all those things that become our real and eternal possessions, have
been given no place in their lives, and so of the real things of life
they are destitute.  Nay, many times worse than destitute.  We must not
suppose that habits once formed are any more easily broken off in the
other form of life than they are in this.  If one voluntarily grows a
certain mania here, we must not suppose that the mere dropping of the
body makes all conditions perfect.  All is law, all is cause and
effect.  As we sow, so shall we also reap, not only in this life but in
all lives.

He who is enslaved with the sole desire for material possessions here
will continue to be enslaved even after he can no longer retain his
body.  Then, moreover, he will have not even the means of gratifying
his desires.  Dominated by this habit, he will be unable to set his
affections, for a time at least, upon other things, and the desire,
without the means of gratifying it will be doubly torturing to him.
Perchance this torture may be increased by his seeing the accumulations
he thought were his now being scattered and wasted by spendthrifts.  He
wills his property, as we say, to others, but he can have no word as to
its use.

How foolish, then, for us to think that any material possessions _are
ours_.  How absurd, for example, for one to fence off a number of acres
of God's earth and say they are _his_.  Nothing is ours that we cannot
retain.  The things that come into our hands come not for the purpose
of being possessed, as we say, much less for the purpose of being
hoarded.  They come into our hands to be used, to be wisely used.  We
are stewards merely, and as stewards we shall be held accountable for
the way we use whatever is entrusted to us.  That great law of
compensation that runs through all life is wonderfully exact in its
workings, although we may not always fully comprehend it, or even
recognize it when it operates in connection with ourselves.

The one who has come into the realization of the higher life no longer
has a desire for the accumulation of enormous wealth, any more than he
has a desire for any other _excess_.  In the degree that he comes into
the recognition of the fact that he is wealthy within, external wealth
becomes less important in his estimation.  When he comes into the
realization of the fact that there is a source within from which he can
put forth a power to call to him and actualize in his hands at any time
a sufficient supply for all his needs, he no longer burdens himself
with vast material accumulations that require his constant care and
attention, and thus take his time and his thought from the real things
of life.  In other words, he first finds the _kingdom_, and he realizes
that when he has found this, all other things follow in full measure.

It is as hard for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven, said
the Master,--he who having nothing had everything,--as it is for a
camel to pass through the eye of a needle.  In other words, if a man
give all his time to the accumulation, the hoarding of outward material
possessions far beyond what he can possibly ever use, what time has he
for the finding of that wonderful kingdom, which when found, brings all
else with it.  Which is better, to have millions of dollars, and to
have the burden of taking care of it all,--for the one always involves
the other,--or to come into the knowledge of such laws and forces that
every need will be supplied in good time, to know that no good thing
shall be withheld, to know that we have it in our power to make the
supply always equal to the demand?

The one who enters into the realm of this higher knowledge, never cares
to bring upon himself the species of insanity that has such a firm hold
upon so many in the world today.  He avoids it as he would avoid any
loathsome disease of the body.  When we come into the realization of
the higher powers, we will then be able to give more attention to the
real life, instead of giving so much to the piling up of vast
possessions that hamper rather than help it.  It is the medium ground
that brings the true solution here, the same as it is in all phases of
life.

Wealth beyond a certain amount cannot be used, and when it cannot be
used it then becomes a hindrance rather than an aid, a curse rather
than a blessing.  All about us are persons with lives now stunted and
dwarfed who could make them rich and beautiful, filled with a perennial
joy, if they would begin wisely to use that which they have spent the
greater portion of their lives in accumulating.

The man who accumulates during his entire life, and who leaves even all
when he goes out for "benevolent purposes," comes far short of the
ideal life.  It is but a poor excuse of a life.  It is not especially
commendable in me to give a pair of old, worn-out shoes that I shall
never use again to another who is in need of shoes.  But it is
commendable, if indeed doing anything we ought to do can be spoken of
as being commendable, it is commendable for me to give a good pair of
strong shoes to the man who in the midst of a severe winter is
practically shoeless, the man who is exerting every effort to earn an
honest living and thereby take care of his family's needs.  And if in
giving the shoes I also give myself, he then has a double gift, and I a
double blessing.

There is no wiser use that those who have great accumulations can make
of them than wisely to put them into life, into character, _day by day
while they live_.  In this way their lives will be continually enriched
and increased.  The time will come when it will be regarded as a
disgrace for a man to die and leave vast accumulations behind him.

Many a person is living in a palace today who in the real life is
poorer than many a one who has not even a roof to cover him.  A man may
own and live in a palace, but the palace for him may be a pool-house
still.

Moth and rust are nature's wise provisions--God's methods--for
disintegrating and scattering, in this way getting ready for use in new
forms, that which is hoarded and consequently serving no use.  There is
also a great law continually operating whose effects are to dwarf and
deaden the powers of true enjoyment, as well as all the higher
faculties of the one who hoards.

Multitudes of people are continually keeping away from them higher and
better things because they are forever clinging on to the old.  If they
would use and pass on the old, room would be made for new things to
come.  Hoarding always brings loss in one form or another.  Using,
wisely using, brings an ever renewing gain.

If the tree should as ignorantly and as greedily hold on to this year's
leaves when they have served their purpose, where would be the full and
beautiful new life that will be put forth in the spring?  Gradual decay
and finally death would be the result.  If the tree is already dead,
then it may perhaps be well enough for it to cling on to the old, for
no new leaves will come.  But as long as the life in the tree is
active, it is _necessary_ that it rid itself of the old ones, that room
may be made for the new.

Opulence is the law of the universe, an abundant supply for every need
if nothing is put in the way of its coming.  The natural and the normal
life for us is this,--To have such a fullness of life and power by
living so continually in the realization of our oneness with the
Infinite Life and Power that we find ourselves in the constant
possession of an abundant supply of all things needed.

Then not by hoarding but by wisely using and ridding ourselves of
things as they come, an ever renewing supply will be ours, a supply far
better adapted to present needs than the old could possibly be.  In
this way we not only come into possession of the richest treasures of
the Infinite Good ourselves, but we also become open channels through
which they can flow to others.




HOW MEN HAVE BECOME PROPHETS, SEERS, SAGES, AND SAVIOURS.

I have tried thus far to deal fairly with you in presenting these vital
truths, and have spoken of everything on the basis of our own reason
and insight.  It has been my aim to base nothing on the teachings of
others, though they may be the teachings of those inspired.  Let us now
look for a moment at these same great truths in the light of the
thoughts and the teachings as put forth by some of the world's great
thinkers and inspired teachers.

The sum and substance of the thought presented in these pages is, you
will remember, that the great central fact in human life is the coming
into a conscious, vital realization of our oneness with the Infinite
Life, and the opening of ourselves fully to this divine inflow.  I and
the Father are one, said the Master.  In this we see how he recognized
his oneness with the Father's life.  Again he said, The words that I
speak unto you I speak not of myself: but the Father that dwelleth in
me, He doeth the works.  In this we see how clearly he recognized the
fact that he of himself could do nothing, only as he worked in
conjunction with the Father.  Again, My Father works and I work.  In
other words, my Father sends the power, I open myself to it, and work
in conjunction with it.

Again he said, Seek ye first the kingdom of God and His righteousness,
and all these things shall be added unto you.  And he left us not in
the dark as to exactly what he meant by this, for again he said.  Say
not Lo here nor lo there, know ye not that the kingdom of heaven is
within you?  According to his teaching, the kingdom of God and the
kingdom of heaven were one and the same.  If, then, his teaching is
that the kingdom of heaven is within us, do we not clearly see that,
putting it in other words, his injunction is nothing more nor less
than, Come ye into a conscious realization of your oneness with the
Father's life.  As you realize this oneness you find the kingdom, and
when you find this, all things else shall follow.

The story of the prodigal son is another beautiful illustration of this
same great teaching of the Master.  After the prodigal had spent
everything, after he had wandered in all the realms of the physical
senses in the pursuit of happiness and pleasure, and found that this
did not satisfy but only brought him to the level of the animal
creation, he then came to his senses and said, I will arise and go to
my Father.  In other words, after all these wanderings, his own soul at
length spoke to him and said, You are not a mere animal.  You are your
Father's child.  Arise and go to your Father, who holds all things in
His hands.  Again, the Master said, Call no man your Father upon the
earth: for one is your Father, which is in heaven.  Here he recognized
the fact that the real life is direct from the life of God.  Our
fathers and our mothers are the agents that give us the bodies, the
houses in which we live, but the real life comes from the Infinite
Source of Life, God, who is our Father.

One day word was brought to the Master that his mother and his brethren
were without, wishing to speak with him.  Who is my mother and who are
my brethren? said he.  Whosoever shall do the will of my Father which
is in heaven, the same is my brother, and my sister, and mother.

Many people are greatly enslaved by what we term ties of relationship.
It is well, however, for us to remember that our true relatives are not
necessarily those who are connected with us by ties of blood.  Our
truest relatives are those who are nearest akin to us in mind, in soul,
in spirit.  Our nearest relatives may be those living on the opposite
side of the globe,--people whom we may never have seen as yet, but to
whom we will yet be drawn, either in this form of life or in another,
through that ever working and never failing law of attraction.

When the Master gave the injunction, Call no man your father upon the
earth: for one is your Father, which is in heaven, he here gave us the
basis for that grand conception of the fatherhood of God.  And if God
is equally the Father of all, then we have here the basis for the
brotherhood of man.  But there is, in a sense, a conception still
higher than this, namely, the oneness of man and God, and hence the
oneness of the whole human race.  When we realize this fact, then we
clearly see how in the degree that we come into the realization of our
oneness with the Infinite Life, and so, every step that we make
Godward, we aid in lifting all mankind up to this realization, and
enable them, in turn, to make a step God-ward.

The Master again pointed out our true relations with the Infinite Life
when he said, Except ye become as little children ye shall not enter
into the kingdom of heaven.  When he said, Man shall not live by bread
alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God, he
gave utterance to a truth of far greater import than we have as yet
commenced fully to grasp.  Here he taught that even the physical life
can not be maintained by material food alone, but that one's connection
with this Infinite Source determines to a very great extent the
condition of even the bodily structure and activities.  Blessed are the
pure in heart for they shall see God.  In other words, blessed are they
who in all the universe recognize only God, for by such God shall be
seen.

Said the great Hindu sage, Manu, He who in his own soul perceives the
Supreme Soul in all beings, and acquires equanimity toward them all,
attains the highest bliss.  It was Athanasius who said, Even we may
become Gods walking about in the flesh.  The same great truth we are
considering is the one that runs through the life and the teachings of
Gautama, he who became the Buddha.  People are in bondage, said he,
because they have not yet removed the idea of _I_.  To do away with all
sense of separateness, and to recognize the oneness of the self with
the Infinite, is the spirit that breathes through all his teachings.
Running through the lives of all the mediaeval mystics was this same
great truth,--union with God.

Then, coming nearer to our own time, we find the highly illumined seer,
Emanuel Swedenborg, pointing out the great laws in connection with what
he termed, the divine influx, and how we may open ourselves more fully
to its operations.  The great central fact in the religion and worship
of the Friends is, the inner light,--God in the soul of man speaking
directly in just the degree that the soul is opened to Him.  The
inspired one, the seer who when with us lived at Concord, recognized
the same great truth when he said, We are all inlets to the great sea
of life.  And it was by opening himself so fully to its inflow that he
became one inspired.

All through the world's history we find that the men and the women who
have entered into the realm of true wisdom and power, and hence into
the realm of true peace and joy, have lived in harmony with this Higher
Power.  David was strong and powerful and his soul burst forth in
praise and adoration in just the degree that he listened to the voice
of God and lived in accordance with his higher promptings.  Whenever he
failed to do this we hear his soul crying out in anguish and
lamentation.  The same is true of every nation or people.  When the
Israelites acknowledged God and followed according to His leadings they
were prosperous, contented, and powerful, and nothing could prevail
against them.  When they depended upon their own strength alone and
failed to recognize God as the source of their strength, we find them
overcome, in bondage, or despair.

A great immutable law underlies the truth, Blessed are they that hear
the word of God and do it.  Then follows all.  We are wise in the
degree that we live according to the higher light.

All the prophets, seers, sages, and saviours in the world's history
became what they became, and consequently had the powers they had,
through an entirely natural process.  They all recognized and came into
the conscious realization of their oneness with the Infinite Life.  God
is no respecter of persons.  He doesn't create prophets, seers, sages,
and saviours as such.  He creates men.  But here and there one
recognizes his true identity, recognizes the oneness of his life with
the Source whence it came.  He lives in the realization of this
oneness, and in turn becomes a prophet, seer, sage, or saviour.
Neither is God a respecter of races or of nations.  He has no chosen
people; but here and there a race or nation becomes a respecter of God
and hence lives the life of a chosen people.

There has been no age or place of miracles in distinction from any
other age or place.  What we term miracles have abounded in all places
and at all times where conditions have been made for them.  They are
being performed today just as much as they ever have been when the laws
governing them are respected.  Mighty men, we are told they were,
mighty men who walked with God; and in the words "who walked with God"
lies the secret of the words "mighty men."  Cause, effect.

The Lord never prospers any man, but the man prospers because he
acknowledges the Lord, and lives in accordance with the higher laws.
Solomon was given the opportunity of choosing whatever he desired; his
better judgment prevailed and he chose wisdom.  But when he chose
wisdom he found that it included all else beside.  We are told that God
hardened Pharaoh's heart.  I don't believe it.  God never hardens any
one's heart.  Pharaoh hardened his own heart and God was blamed for it.
But when Pharaoh hardened his heart and disobeyed the voice of God, the
plagues came.  Again, cause, effect.  Had he, on the contrary,
listened,--in other words, had he opened himself to and obeyed the
voice of God, the plagues would not have come.

We can be our own best friends or we can be our own worst enemies.  In
the degree that we become friends to the highest and best within us, we
become friends to all; and in the degree that we become enemies to the
highest and best within us, do we become enemies to all.  In the degree
that we open ourselves to the higher powers and let them manifest
through us, then by the very inspirations we carry with us do we become
in a sense the saviours of our fellow-men, and in this way we all are,
or may become, the saviours one of another.  In this way you may
become, indeed, one of the world's redeemers.




THE BASIC PRINCIPLE OF ALL RELIGIONS--THE UNIVERSAL RELIGION.

The great truth we are considering is the fundamental principle running
through all religions.  We find it in every one.  In regard to it all
agree.  It is, moreover, a great truth in regard to which all people
can agree, whether they belong to the same or to different religions.
People always quarrel about the trifles, about their personal views of
minor insignificant points.  They always come together in the presence
of great fundamental truths, the threads of which run through all.  The
quarrels are in connection with the lower self, the agreements are in
connection with the higher self.

A place may have its factions that quarrel and fight among themselves,
but let a great calamity come upon the land, flood, famine, pestilence,
and these little personal differences are entirely forgotten and all
work shoulder to shoulder in the one great cause.  The changing, the
evolving self gives rise to quarrels; the permanent, the soul self
unites all in the highest efforts of love and service.

Patriotism is a beautiful thing; it is well for me to love my country,
but why should I love my own country more than I love all others?  If I
love my own and hate others, I then show my limitations, and my
patriotism will stand the test not even for my own.  If I love my own
country and in the same way love all other countries, then I show the
largeness of my nature, and a patriotism of this kind is noble and
always to be relied upon.

The view of God in regard to which we are agreed, that He is the
Infinite Spirit of Life and Power that is back of all, that is working
in and through all, that is the life of all, is a matter in regard to
which all men, all religions can agree.  With this view there can be no
infidels or atheists.  There are atheists and infidels in connection
with many views that are held concerning God, and thank God there are.
Even devout and earnest people among us attribute things to God that no
respectable men or women would permit to be attributed to themselves.
This view is satisfying to those who cannot see how God can be angry
with his children, jealous, vindictive.  A display of these qualities
always lessens our respect for men and women, and still we attribute
them to God.

The earnest, sincere heretic is one of the greatest friends true
religion can have.  Heretics are among God's greatest servants.  They
are among the true servants of mankind.  Christ was one of the greatest
heretics the world has ever known.  He allowed himself to be bound by
no established or orthodox teachings or beliefs.  Christ is
preëminently a type of the universal.  John the Baptist is a type of
the personal.  John dressed in a particular way, ate a particular kind
of food, belonged to a particular order, lived and taught in a
particular locality, and he himself recognized the fact that he must
decrease while Christ must increase.  Christ, on the other hand, gave
himself absolutely no limitations.  He allowed himself to be bound by
nothing.  He was absolutely universal and as a consequence taught not
for his own particular day, but for all time.

This mighty truth which we have agreed upon as the great central fact
of human life is the golden thread that runs through all religions.
When we make it the paramount fact in our lives we will find that minor
differences, narrow prejudices, and all these laughable absurdities
will so fall away by virtue of their very insignificance, that a Jew
can worship equally as well in a Catholic cathedral, a Catholic in a
Jewish synagogue, a Buddhist in a Christian church, a Christian in a
Buddhist temple.  Or all can worship equally well about their own
hearth-stones, or out on the hillside, or while pursuing the avocations
of every-day life.  For true worship, only God and the human soul are
necessary.  It does not depend upon times, or seasons, or occasions.
Anywhere and at any time God and man in the bush may meet.

This is the great fundamental principle of the universal religion upon
which all can agree.  This is the great fact that is permanent.  There
are many things in regard to which all cannot agree.  These are the
things that are personal, non-essential, and so as time passes they
gradually fall away.  One who doesn't grasp this great truth, a
Christian, for example, asks "But was not Christ inspired?"  Yes, but
he was not the only one inspired.  Another who is a Buddhist asks, "Was
not Buddha inspired?"  Yes, but he was not the only one inspired.  A
Christian asks, "But is not our Christian Bible inspired?"  Yes, but
there are other inspired scriptures.  A Brahmin or a Buddhist asks,
"Are not the Vedas inspired?"  Yes, but there are other inspired sacred
books.  Your error is not in believing that your particular scriptures
are inspired, but your error is--and you show your absurdly laughable
limitations by it--your inability to see that other scriptures are also
inspired.

The sacred books, the inspired writings, all come from the same
source,--God, God speaking through the souls of those who open
themselves that He may thus speak.  Some may be more inspired than
others.  It depends entirely on the relative degree that this one or
that one opens himself to the Divine voice.  Says one of the inspired
writers in the Hebrew scriptures, Wisdom is the breath of the power of
God, and _in all ages_ entering into holy souls she maketh them friends
of God and prophets.

Let us not be among the number so dwarfed, so limited, so bigoted as to
think that the Infinite God has revealed Himself to one little handful
of His children, in one little quarter of the globe, and at one
particular period of time.  This isn't the pattern by which God works.
Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons, but in every
nation he that revereth God and worketh righteousness is accepted of
Him, says the Christian Bible.

When we fully realize this truth we will then see that it makes but
little difference what particular form of religion one holds to, but it
does make a tremendous difference how true he is to the _vital_
principles of this one.  In the degree that we love self less and love
truth more, in that degree will we care less about converting people to
our particular way of thinking, but all the more will we care to aid
them in coming into the full realization of truth through the channels
best adapted to them.  The doctrine of our master, says the Chinese,
consisted solely in integrity of heart.  We will find as we search that
this is the doctrine of every one who is at all worthy the name of
master.

The great fundamental principles of all religions are the same.  They
differ only in their minor details according to the various degrees of
unfoldment of different people.  I am sometimes asked, "To what
religion do you belong?"  What religion?  Why, bless you, there is only
one religion,--the religion of the living God.  There are, of course,
the various creeds of the same religion arising from the various
interpretations of different people, but they are all of minor
importance.  The more unfolded the soul the less important do these
minor differences become.  There are also, of course, the various
so-called religions.  There is in reality, however, but one religion.

The moment we lose sight of this great fact we depart from the real,
vital spirit of true religion and allow ourselves to be limited and
bound by form.  In the degree that we do this we build fences around
ourselves which keep others away from us, and which also prevent our
coming into the realization of universal truth; there is nothing worthy
the name of truth that is not universal.

There is only one religion.  "Whatever road I take joins the highway
that leads to Thee," says the inspired writer in the Persian
scriptures.  "Broad is the carpet God has spread, and beautiful the
colors he has given it."  "The pure man respects every form of faith,"
says the Buddhist.  "My doctrine makes no difference between high and
low, rich and poor; like the sky, it has room for all, and like the
water, it washes all alike."  "The broad minded see the truth in
different religions; the narrow minded see only the differences," says
the Chinese.  The Hindu has said, "The narrow minded ask, 'Is this man
a stranger, or is he of our tribe?'  But to those in whom love dwells,
the whole world is but one family."  "Altar flowers are of many
species, but all worship is one."  "Heaven is a palace with many doors,
and each may enter in his own way."  "Are we not all children of one
Father?" says the Christian.  "God has made of one blood all nations,
to dwell on the face of the earth."  It was a latter-day seer who said,
"That which was profitable to the soul of man the Father revealed to
the ancients; that which is profitable to the soul of man today
revealeth He this day."

It was Tennyson who said, "I dreamed that stone by stone I reared a
sacred fane, a temple, neither pagoda, mosque, nor church, but loftier,
simpler, always open-doored to every breath from heaven, and Truth and
Peace and Love and Justice came and dwelt therein."

Religion in its true sense is the most joyous thing the human soul can
know, and when the real religion is realized, we will find that it will
be an agent of peace, of joy, and of happiness, and never an agent of
gloomy, long-faced sadness.  It will then be attractive to all and
repulsive to none.  Let our churches grasp these great truths, let them
give their time and attention to bringing people into a knowledge of
their true selves, into a knowledge of their relations, of their
oneness, with the Infinite God, and such joy will be the result, and
such crowds will flock to them, that their very walls will seem almost
to burst, and such songs of joy will continually pour forth as will
make all people in love with the religion that makes for every-day
life, and hence the religion that is true and vital.  Adequacy for
life, adequacy for everyday life here and now, must be the test of all
true religion.  If it does not bear this test, then it simply is not
religion.  We need an everyday, a this-world religion.  All time spent
in connection with any other is worse than wasted.  The eternal life
that we are now living will be well lived if we take good care of each
little period of time as it presents itself day after day.  If we fail
in doing this, we fail in everything.




ENTERING NOW INTO THE REALIZATION OF THE HIGHEST RICHES.

I hear the question, What can be said in a concrete way in regard to
the method of coming into this realization?  The facts underlying it
are, indeed, most beautiful and true, but how can we actualize in
ourselves the realization that carries with it such wonderful results?

The method is not difficult if we do not of ourselves make it
difficult.  The principal word to be used is the word,--Open.  Simply
to open your mind and heart to this divine inflow which is waiting only
for the opening of the gate, that it may enter.  It is like opening the
gate of the trough which conducts the water from the reservoir above
into the field below.  The water, by virtue of its very nature, will
rush in and irrigate the field if the gate is but opened.  As to the
realization of our oneness with this Infinite Life and Power, after
seeing, as I think we have clearly seen by this time, the relations it
bears to us and we to it, the chief thing to be said is
simply,--Realize your oneness with it.  The open mind and heart whereby
one is brought into the receptive attitude is the first thing
necessary.  Then the earnest, sincere desire.

It may be an aid at first to take yourself for a few moments each day
into the quiet, into the silence, where you will not be agitated by the
disturbances that enter in through the avenues of the physical senses.
There in the quiet alone with God, put yourself into the receptive
attitude.  Calmly, quietly, and expectantly desire that this
realization break in upon and take possession of your soul.  As it
breaks in upon and takes possession of the soul, it will manifest
itself to your mind, and from this you will feel its manifestations in
every part of your body.  Then in the degree that you open yourself to
it you will feel a quiet, peaceful, illuminating power that will
harmonize body, soul, and mind, and that will then harmonize these with
all the world.  You are now on the mountain top, and the voice of God
is speaking to you.  _Then, as you descend, carry this realization with
you_.  Live in it, waking, working, thinking, walking, sleeping.  In
this way, although you may not be continually on the mountain top, you
will nevertheless be continually living in the realization of all the
beauty, and inspiration, and power you have felt there.

Moreover, the time will come when in the busy office or on the noisy
street you can enter into the silence by simply drawing the mantle of
your own thoughts about you and realizing that there and everywhere the
Spirit of Infinite Life, Love, Wisdom, Peace, Power, and Plenty is
guiding, keeping, protecting, leading you.  This is the spirit of
continual prayer.  This it is to pray without ceasing.  This it is to
know and to walk with God.  _This it is to find the Christ within_.
This is the new birth, the second birth.  First that which is natural,
then that which is spiritual.  It is thus that the old man Adam is put
off and the new man Christ is put on.  This it is to be saved unto life
eternal, whatever one's form of belief or faith may be; for it is life
eternal to know God.  "The Sweet By and By" will be a song of the past.
We will create a new song--"The Beautiful Eternal Now."

This is the realization that you and I can come into this very day,
this very hour, this very minute, if we desire and if we will it.  And
if now we merely set our faces in the right direction, it is then but a
matter of time until we come into the full splendors of this complete
realization.  To set one's face in the direction of the mountain and
then simply to journey on, whether rapidly or more slowly, will bring
him to it.  But unless one set his face in the right direction and make
the start, he will not reach it.  It was Goethe who said:

  "Are you in earnest?  Seize this very minute:
  What you can do, or dream you can, begin it;
  Boldness has genius, power, and magic in it.
  Only engage and then the mind grows heated;
  Begin and then the work will be completed."


Said the young man, Gautama Siddhârtha, I have awakened to the truth
and I am resolved to accomplish my purpose,--Verily I shall become a
Buddha.  It was this that brought him into the life of the Enlightened
One, and so into the realization of Nirvana right here in this life.
That this same realization and life is within the possibilities of all
here and now was his teaching.  It was this that has made him the Light
Bearer to millions of people.

Said the young man, Jesus, Know ye not that I must be about my Father's
business?  Making this the one great purpose of his life he came into
the full and complete realization,--I and the Father are one.  He thus
came into the full realization of the Kingdom of Heaven right here in
this life.  That all could come into this same realization and life
here and now was his teaching.  It was this that has made him the Light
Bearer to millions of people.

And so far as practical things are concerned, we may hunt the wide
universe through and we shall find that there is no injunction more
practical than, Seek ye first the kingdom of God and His righteousness
and all other things shall be added unto you.  And in the light of what
has gone before, I think there is no one who is open to truth and
honest with himself who will fail to grasp the underlying reason and
see the great laws upon which it is based.

Personally I know lives that have so fully entered into the kingdom
through the realization of their oneness with the Infinite Life and
through the opening of themselves so fully to its divine guidance, that
they are most wonderful concrete examples of the reality of this great
and all-important truth.  They are people whose lives are in this way
guided not only in a general way, but literally in every detail.  They
simply live in the realization of their oneness with this Infinite
Power, continually in harmony with it, and so continually in the
realization of the kingdom of heaven.  An abundance of all things is
theirs.  They are never at a loss for anything.  The supply seems
always equal to the demand.  They never seem at a loss in regard to
what to do or how to do it.  Their lives are care-less lives.  They are
lives free from care because they are continually conscious of the fact
that the higher powers are doing the guiding, and they are relieved of
the responsibility.  To enter into detail in connection with some of
these lives, and particularly with two or three that come to my mind at
this moment, would reveal facts that no doubt to some would seem almost
incredible if not miraculous.  But let us remember that what is
possible for one life to realize is possible for all.  This is indeed
the natural and the normal life, that which will be the every-day life
of every one who comes into and who lives in this higher realization
and so in harmony with the higher laws.  This is simply getting into
the current of that divine sequence running throughout the universe;
and when once in it, life then ceases to be a plodding and moves along
day after day much as the tides flow, much as the planets move in their
courses, much as the seasons come and go.

All the frictions, all the uncertainties, all the ills, the sufferings,
the fears, the forebodings, the perplexities of life come to us because
we are out of harmony with the divine order of things.  They will
continue to come as long as we so live.  Rowing against the tide is
hard and uncertain.  To go with the tide and thus to take advantage of
the working of a great natural force is safe and easy.  To come into
the conscious, vital realization of our oneness with the Infinite Life
and Power is to come into the current of this divine sequence.  Coming
thus into harmony with the Infinite, brings us in turn into harmony
with all about us, into harmony with the life of the heavens, into
harmony with all the universe.  And above all, it brings us into
harmony with ourselves, so that body, soul, and mind become perfectly
harmonized, and when this is so, life becomes full and complete.

The sense life then no longer masters and enslaves us.  The physical is
subordinated to and ruled by the mental; this in turn is subordinated
to and continually illumined by the spiritual.  Life is then no longer
the poor, one-sided thing it is in so many cases; but the three-fold,
the all-round life with all its beauties and ever increasing joys and
powers is entered upon.  Thus it is that we are brought to realize that
the middle path is the great solution of life; neither asceticism on
the one hand nor license and perverted use on the other.  Everything is
for use, but all must be wisely used in order to be fully enjoyed.

As we live in these higher realizations the senses are not ignored but
are ever more fully perfected.  As the body becomes less gross and
heavy, finer in its texture and form, all the senses become finer, so
that powers we do not now realize as belonging to us gradually develop.
Thus we come, in a perfectly natural and normal way, into the
super-conscious realms whereby we make it possible for the higher laws
and truths to be revealed to us.  As we enter into these realms we are
then not among those who give their time in speculating as to whether
this one or that one had the insight and the powers attributed to him,
but we are able _to know_ for ourselves.  Neither are we among those
who attempt to lead the people upon the hearsay of some one else, but
we know whereof we speak, and only thus can we speak with authority.
There are many things that we cannot know until by living the life we
bring ourselves into that state where it is possible for them to be
revealed to us.  "If any man will do His will, he shall know of the
doctrine."  It was Plotinus who said, The mind that wishes to behold
God must itself become God.  As we thus make it possible for these
higher laws and truths to be revealed to us, we will in turn become
enlightened ones, channels through which they may be revealed to others.

When one is fully alive to the possibilities that come with this higher
awakening, as he goes here and there, as he mingles with his
fellow-men, he imparts to all an inspiration that kindles in them a
feeling of power kindred to his own.  We are all continually giving out
influences similar to those that are playing in our own lives.  We do
this in the same way that each flower emits its own peculiar odor.  The
rose breathes out its fragrance upon the air and all who come near it
are refreshed and inspired by this emanation from the soul of the rose.
A poisonous weed sends out its obnoxious odor; it is neither refreshing
nor inspiring in its effects, and if one remain near it long he may be
so unpleasantly affected as to be made even ill by it.

The higher the life the more inspiring and helpful are the emanations
that it is continually sending out.  The lower the life the more
harmful is the influence it continually sends out to all who come in
contact with it.  Each one is continually radiating an atmosphere of
one kind or the other.

We are told by the mariners who sail on the Indian Seas, that many
times they are able to tell their approach to certain islands long
before they can see them by the sweet fragrance of the sandalwood that
is wafted far out upon the deep.  Do you not see how it would serve to
have such a soul playing through such a body that as you go here and
there a subtle, silent force goes out from you that all feel and are
influenced by; so that you carry with you an inspiration and
continually shed a benediction wherever you go; so that your friends
and all people will say,--His coming brings peace and joy into our
homes, welcome his coming; so that as you pass along the street, tired,
and weary, and even sin-sick men and women will feel a certain divine
touch that will awaken new desires and a new life in them; that will
make the very horse as you pass him turn his head with a strange,
half-human, longing look?  Such are the subtle powers of the human soul
when it makes itself translucent to the Divine.  To know that such a
life is within our living here and now is enough to make one burst
forth with songs of joy.  And when the life itself is entered upon, the
sentiment of at least one song will be:

  "Oh!  I stand in the Great Forever,
    All things to me are divine;
  I eat of the heavenly manna,
    I drink of the heavenly wine.

  "In the gleam of the shining rainbow
    The Father's Love I behold,
  As I gaze on its radiant blending
    Of crimson and blue and gold.

  "In all the bright birds that are singing,
    In all the fair flowers that bloom,
  Whose welcome aromas are bringing
    Their blessings of sweet perfume;

  "In the glorious tint of the morning,
    In the gorgeous sheen of the night,
  Oh! my soul is lost in rapture,
    My senses are lost in sight."


As one comes into and lives continually in the full, conscious
realization of his oneness with the Infinite Life and Power, then all
else follows.  This it is that brings the realization of such
splendors, and beauties, and joys as a life that is thus related with
the Infinite Power alone can know.  This it is to come into the
realization of heaven's richest treasures while walking the earth.
This it is to bring heaven down to earth, or rather to bring earth up
to heaven.  This it is to exchange weakness and impotence for strength;
sorrows and sighings for joy; fears and forebodings for faith; longings
for realizations.  This it is to come into fullness of peace, power,
and plenty.  This it is to be in tune with the Infinite.