Transcriber’s notes

  Text printed underlined, in italics or in bold face type in the
  original work have been transcribed between ~tildes~, _underscores_
  and =equal signs= respectively.




  FARM BULLETIN No. 1

  APRIL, 1916


  [Illustration]


  =~IMPLEMENT SHEDS~=
  How They Should Be Designed
  The Simple Shed Type
  The Open Shed Type
  The Wide Enclosed Type
  The Two-Story Type
  Space Required for Common Implements
  The Selection of Building Material

  Revised, September, 1916.


[Illustration: Copyright 1916

National Lumber Manufacturers Association]

Over fifty million dollars is lost every year on American farms because
implements and machinery are not properly housed. Is part of this wasted
on YOUR farm?

Protection of farm machinery in well built implement sheds means dollars
earned through dollars saved. On the average farm an implement shed
saves annually as much as the income from $1,800 at interest.


  Implement Sheds
  _by_
  _K. J. T. Ekblaw_

  [Illustration]

  _Price, Ten Cents_

  Published by the
  TRADE EXTENSION DEPARTMENT
  National Lumber Manufacturers
  Association

  CHICAGO :: ILLINOIS

  APRIL, 1916

  General Series No. 10

  Fourth Edition, February, 1917.


[Illustration: Fig. 1. Exterior of Simple Implement Shed]

[Illustration: Fig. 2. Perspective of Framing of Simple Implement Shed]

[Illustration]




Implement Sheds

_By K. J. T. Ekblaw_


A very fair indication of the thrift and general prosperity of a farmer
is the method he employs in caring for his tools. Shiftlessness, waste,
lack of energy, constant buying and heavy burdens of debt will accompany
poor care. Good care is an indication of shrewdness, business ability,
long-lived machinery, comfortable bank balances and the assurance of a
peaceful, prosperous future.

To the progressive man, figures speak more forcibly than does the most
persuasive lecturer on economic topics. The report of the United States
Census for 1910 contains some figures that bear a distinct message to
the farmers of the country. In 1900 the value of all farm property in
the shape of farm implements and machinery was $749,775,970; in 1910
this same value had increased to $1,265,149,783, representing an
increase of 68.7 per cent. This increase can be ascribed mainly to
increased quantity rather than to higher prices, for the increase in
price of farm machinery has been comparatively slight. It means that the
farmers are realizing the benefits to be derived from the use of
labor-saving machinery. In 1900 the acreage of improved land in farms
was 414,498,487; in 1910 this became 478,451,750, an increase of only
15.4 per cent. These figures may be a little more significant if
expressed in the following way: In 1900 there was $1.80 worth of
machinery for each acre of improved farm land; in 1910 this had
increased to $2.65, or an increase of over 47 per cent.

These figures will immediately indicate an opportunity for the
furtherance of economic agriculture. With so much capital invested in
equipment, the American farmer would certainly be a very bad business
man indeed if he did not take some means of protecting this equipment
to reduce depreciation and to increase its length of life. The question
has sometimes been asked, does it pay to house farm machinery? Is it not
a better practice not to give any special care to the machinery but use
it as long as it will run without care then buy newer and more
up-to-date equipment?

The situation bears some consideration. According to Census figures, the
average investment per farm in farm machinery is almost exactly $200.
This, however, is the case when every sort of farm is included, and
since the Census Bureau’s definition of a farm is extremely liberal it
would not be practical for our purposes. A fair estimate of the average
value of farm machinery on a farm is $1,000. No reliable figures are
available to indicate the rate of depreciation of farm machinery; one
farmer will take excellent care of his binder and it may do service for
twenty or twenty-five years, while another farmer will leave his binder
in the middle of the field where the last stalk of grain was cut, and it
would be surprising if his machine could operate satisfactorily for more
than five seasons. To take ten years as the average life of farm
machinery is certainly to be considered conservative.

Most farm machines are well and substantially constructed and will
render satisfactory and efficient service with slight repairs for a much
longer term of years than the average which has just been given. It is
entirely safe to assume that the average length of efficient service can
be increased to fifteen years providing proper care is given. It is
almost equally safe to assume that the average life of uncared-for
machinery will not be much more than five years.

The farmer who has a thousand dollars worth of machinery to which he
gives no care and attention will then have an annual reduction in value
of $200, besides his interest charge of $60 on his investment or a total
debit of $260. The farmer who properly houses his machinery will have an
annual deduction of $66.66 for depreciation and the same interest charge
of $60. He will have, in addition, an annual charge of $25 for interest
and depreciation on his building if it cost $250, or a total of $151.66,
which is $108.34 less than that of his improvident neighbor. The careful
farmer then may consider that he has in his implement house an
investment representing over $1,800 as shown by the saving it brings
him; as a simple implement shed can be built for $250, a net profit of
an interest-paying $1,550 remains. Putting the problem in another way,
on many farms the savings on machinery will pay for a shed in two or
three years.

[Illustration: Fig. 3. Details of Simple Implement Shed

Only one wide sliding door is shown, though another smaller door can be
inserted if desired. The truss construction shown in Fig. 10 is used
above the wide door. Either vertical or horizontal siding may be used,
the former being simple and satisfactory construction. The front wall
may be omitted in localities where inclement weather is uncommon.]

[Illustration: Fig. 4. Exterior of Open Type of Implement Shed]

[Illustration: Fig. 5. Perspective of Framing of Open Type of Implement
Shed]

In view of the fact that the small tractor is becoming an extremely
popular source of farm power, special consideration should be given to
its shelter. The tractor is an implement that would be extremely likely
to be injured as a result of exposure to weather. It is entirely
possible that the damage which may be done to this one single machine in
one winter’s exposure may be sufficient to pay for the cost of a machine
shed which will house all the implements on the farm.

So much for the economic side. The figures that have just been given
relate only to a very conservative case. On many farms the saving would
be a great deal more. Besides this there are other things of which the
value cannot be estimated, such as the benefit of having a machine that
will operate when it is called upon to do so; the added value an
implement shed gives to the farm; and the additional prestige which will
redound to the owner of the farm.

The careful farmer will, of course, find that criticisms of
ill-cared-for machinery do not apply to him; he has a machine shed, and
knows the value of paint, oil, and grease in extending the life of
implements. His equipment always looks new, for as rust breaks through
the protecting coat of paint, a new coat is immediately applied; and his
plowshares, discs, cultivator shovels, and other bright parts of
implements are always given a thorough coating of grease before being
put away for the winter. As a result, his implements are ready for
business when spring comes and time is valuable.




THE DESIGN OF THE BUILDING


In preparing the design for machine sheds one of the first
considerations is that of economy. A machine shed is a building which is
almost always used for no other purpose than to shelter machinery. It is
not like a bin for the storage of grain where strength is an exceedingly
important factor nor is it like a barn where so many operations are
carried on within; consequently the simplest and cheapest structure that
is consistent with reasonable durability is the one that is the most
advisable. Wood is a product available in every section and is the
cheapest and most suitable material for the construction of an implement
shed.

[Illustration: Fig. 6. Details of Open Type of Implement Shed

Framing of 6x6 posts, thoroughly braced. Ends may be boarded or left
open as desired. Foundation piers act as wheel guards. Width between
posts can be varied to suit requirements.]

Paint, the great preservative, should be applied to all farm
buildings. The initial cost of two coats of good paint is not
prohibitive; the durability of the wood may be increased almost
indefinitely if the surface is kept covered to prevent the ingress of
the spores of decay. The prosperous farmer’s buildings are always kept
painted, not only to preserve the wood, but to improve the appearance of
the buildings themselves.

On new wood, two coats are usually sufficient. The first coat should
contain mainly oil, with a small amount of the base and coloring
pigments, so that it will permeate every pore; the second coat should be
heavier, containing less oil and more pigment. Surfaces that have been
painted can be kept in good condition by the occasional application of a
single coat.

The planning of an implement shed will require data as to the number and
size of machines and the amount of space that each will occupy. The
arrangement of the machines so as to make them easily accessible at
times when they are most needed is also important, e. g., a binder being
used but once a year may well occupy a far corner, leaving a space near
the door for the mower and plow, implements which are used oftener and
for longer periods than the binder. The manure spreader, wagons and
buggies are used so much throughout the year that they should be
especially accessible. Table I, pages 19 and 20, gives the floor space
required for most farm machines; the height of the machine is also
given. Of course, it is entirely possible to crowd machines together as
they are put into the shed, and so much saving in room can be
accomplished in this way that little clearance space need be left. For
instance, the outer edge of a binder platform can be easily raised
several feet, provided a pair of reel slats with the attached arms are
removed, and in this space beneath the platform can be stored such
implements as hand drill, walking plows, etc. Similar opportunities for
economy in space can very easily be found.

[Illustration: Fig. 7. Exterior of Wide Enclosed Implement Shed]

[Illustration: Fig. 8. Perspective of Framing of Wide Enclosed Implement
Shed]

In general the construction of a machine shed is that of the very
simplest; yet utility and beauty can be very easily combined with
simplicity. Since the building is not subjected to any heavy load, as
would be the case with a crib or a barn, the framing is just
sufficiently strong to safely hold the wall and roof covering and to
prevent collapse of the building from wind or snow and ice loads. Very
often 2x4’s or 4x4’s constitute the studs or posts and no heavier stock
is used throughout the building. In wide sheds it may be found
necessary to use larger stuff and especially in the plate above the wide
doorway. A two-story machine shed will, of course, require heavier and
more substantial framing, but a two-story shed is comparatively rare. A
floor may or may not be used as the owner may desire. It is likely to
prove somewhat expensive in first cost and in maintenance, though for
convenience it is much to be desired, especially if any repair work is
to be done in the building.

The roof may be of almost any style from the simple single pitch shed
roof to the modified shed roof or the ordinary double pitch gable roof.
It is desirable that the pitch should be not less than one-quarter in
order to get the greatest life out of the shingles, which are likely to
collect moisture and give shorter service where the pitch is quite flat.
The foundation of a machine shed will naturally not be designed for
great strength except in the case of a two-story structure, since the
only load which it has to support is that of the superstructure itself.
A footing 12 to 16 inches wide at the bottom and extending down a foot
or 15 inches into solid soil will support a building of this kind.
However, if a concrete floor is put in the building as is sometimes done
in the more expensive ones, it will be well to extend the foundation
wall and footing to a point below the frost line, which will vary from a
foot to three feet according to climate.

Sills are usually not necessary in the simple framing of machine sheds.
The posts can be set directly upon foundation walls and fastened in any
one of many different ways that have been devised. Timbers are more
subject to decay at the ends than elsewhere, consequently it is
advisable to treat them at this point with a preservative such as
creosote. This will add greatly to the durability. The foundation wall
should be brought up some distance above the ground so as to further
protect the bottom timbers from moisture. This above-ground extension
must be omitted at doorways.

[Illustration: Fig. 9. Details of a Wide Enclosed Implement Shed

Strong framing is necessary to insure durability in this structure.
Members may be solid or built up. Details of one form of roof truss are
shown in Fig. 11. Note solid foundation. Doors may be located to suit
requirements.]

One of the most serious problems in the design of a machine shed is the
insertion of doors. Wide doors are an absolute necessity, especially for
certain machines. An eight-foot door is large enough for the majority of
farm machines, even allowing the modern binder with its folding grain
dividers to enter in safety. The wide drill, the rake, and several other
implements require a much wider door than this and it may be necessary
to provide an opening 12 or even 14 feet wide. This leaves a long
unsupported section of the plate directly above the doorway. To keep
it and the roof from sagging, special provision must be made either by
putting in an exceptionally strong plate at this point, by building up a
small wooden truss, or by making a truss of wood and iron as shown in
the illustration. (Fig. 10.)

The doors themselves should be very solidly and substantially made. It
is a matter of good practice to have as few doors as possible. In the
average machine shed one 8-foot door and one 12 or 14-foot door are
sufficient to meet requirements. A door wider than four feet should not
be swung on hinges under any circumstances, as it is sure to pull out
the hinges or to sag very badly. Sliding doors of good construction are
to be recommended in preference to hinged doors (Fig. 12). It is
entirely possible to make a good close-fitting door of this type and
there need never be any trouble in its operation.

The use of other buildings for the storage of farm implements is not a
desirable procedure except in certain instances, such as keeping wagons
in the driveway of cribs, leaving the spreader at the end of an alleyway
of a barn for convenience in loading, etc. In general, other buildings
are much more expensive than a machine shed and those portions of them
devoted to the storage of farm implements could in most cases be more
profitably used, especially when the very small unit floor-space cost of
a machine shed is taken into consideration. Then, too, if a special
place is not provided for the implements, the farm animals may come in
contact with them, causing injury of the animals or damage to the
machines.




REPRESENTATIVE TYPES OF SHEDS


=The Simple Shed Type.= The needs of the average farm for a cheap,
easily built implement shed are met by this building. Illustrations of
this type of shed are shown in Figs. 1, 2 and 3. The framing consists of
6x6 posts set on a light 1:2½:5 mixture concrete foundation at intervals
of eight feet, the plate consisting of two 2x6’s. Short diagonal braces
can be set in underneath between the plate and the post in order to give
the plate further support. The rafters for a span of 18 feet should be
at least 2x6 and better 2x8, set not less than two feet apart on
centers. The wall covering may consist of vertical siding, either 10 or
12-inch boards, with the cracks covered by ogee battens. For horizontal
siding, studs are necessary; these should be 2x4’s, placed not over 3
feet apart. Either drop-siding, German or novelty siding or ordinary
weather-boarding may be used satisfactorily, but the latter is somewhat
light for a building of this kind and would probably not be as durable
as the others mentioned.

[Illustration: Fig. 10. Detail of Truss Over Large Doors in Implement
Shed]

[Illustration: Fig. 11. Roof Truss Details

The upper illustration (Fig. 10) shows a method of building a truss
above wide doors to prevent sagging of roof. It may be varied to suit
circumstances.

The roof trusses shown in Fig. 11 suggest methods of framing for wide
sheds, as in Fig. 3 and Fig. 9.]

The building may be entirely enclosed, having the doors on the high
side. The practice of enclosing the building entirely is generally to be
recommended, though sometimes for the sake of economy and convenience
and in localities where the winds are very constant in their direction,
it may be advisable to omit part of the exterior wall covering, leaving
one side open, this side being the one opposite to the direction from
which the prevailing winds come.


=The Open Shed Type.= Under some circumstances the open shed type of
building (shown in Figs. 4, 5 and 6) will be the more suitable. This is
especially true where wagons, racks and spreaders are used frequently.
The framing of the building consists simply of 6x6 posts set on concrete
piers at intervals of 9 feet. On these are set 2x6 rafters supporting a
double pitched gable roof. The building is opened on both sides but both
ends may be enclosed.

This building is extremely convenient, although it does not give very
thorough protection to the machines. A wagon or spreader can be driven
directly through one of the bays and horses unhitched outside. With a
building 18 feet wide and eaves overhanging one foot, the implements
will be protected from all but driving rains, though sweeping snow will
have free access to the interior. The posts are placed nine feet apart
in order to provide sufficient room for driving a team through. It may
be possible to reduce this dimension to eight feet, or to increase it to
10 feet in case a three-horse team is to be driven through. The concrete
piers supporting the posts are made conical in shape, acting thus as
wheel guards to prevent the hubs of the wheels from striking the posts.

One or more bays of the shed may be enclosed if desired to give adequate
shelter to machines, such as mowers, binders, etc., which would suffer
from exposure. Of course, the shed as well as the preceding one can be
built to any length desired, though a building more than four times as
long as it is wide will present a somewhat peculiar appearance on
account of the long, low roof line.

[Illustration: Fig. 12. Construction Details

These details apply in general to the implement shed plans. The girder
splice shown makes a firm, solid joint. If double hung sash are used,
standard window framing is employed, as shown. Wide doors are always
hung on a track; the detail shows weather strip at top, and bracket with
roller at bottom to keep door from swinging out.]


=The Wide Enclosed Type.= A better and a little more expensive type of
implement shed, yet one perhaps better suited to the average farm is
shown in Figs. 7, 8 and 9. This shed is made 26 feet in width and as
long as may be necessary, although a building 26x40 will usually be
found sufficiently large to house the machines on the average
general-purpose farm. The framing of this shed is a little more
substantial than in the types previously discussed, consisting of 6x6’s
with 4x6 plates. Should horizontal siding be used, it will naturally
follow that instead of using these posts, 2x4 studs will be employed as
previously described in the simple shed type on page thirteen. The
height of the walls should be not less than 10 feet, which with the
gable roof will make the building a little more attractive in appearance
than the one previously described. A span of 26 feet is almost too great
for the adequate support of the roof unless some device such as truss
bracing and purline is used to give the rafters additional stiffness.
(Fig. 11.)

Experience has shown that the two widths--18 feet and 26 feet are
peculiarly adaptable to the dimensions of the various farm machines.
Using the 26-foot width, considerable opportunity is given for the
utilization of the floor space, since a wider floor area unsupported by
posts is available. As far as possible, interior posts should be
avoided, for they interfere very seriously in the placing and moving of
machinery.


=The Two-Story Type.= As stated before, the use of a two-story machine
shed is rather rare, for two reasons: First, the additional expense in
material and labor, and, Second, the difficulty of getting machines up
to the second floor. The only advantage that is gained is the doubling
of the floor space under the same roof.

[Illustration: Fig. 13. Details of Two-Story Implement Shed

The framing in this type of shed must be unusually strong and
substantial. The girders and, in fact, all framing members, may be
either solid or built up. A central post is necessary in each framing
unit.]

The construction of the building (illustrated in Figs. 13, 14 and 15)
will necessarily be rather substantial. The framing may consist of 6x6
posts and 4x6 girts, which should be securely joined in order to give
rigidity to the structure. The girts are located at vertical intervals
of not to exceed 5 feet, so as to afford good nailing for vertical
siding. If horizontal siding is used, the girts may be spaced wider,
say, one each at the top, bottom, and middle of the post, while 2x6
studs are set in on which to nail the boards. Diagonal bracing is a
decided advantage. The building may be constructed either 18 or 26 feet
wide, and it is seldom that a building longer than 40 feet will be
necessary. The foundation should be much more substantial than in the
types previously described. It should extend well below the frost line
and be almost as strong as that used for barns.

The second floor will be used for the storage of the lighter machines
such as small plows, harrows, drills and all the lighter tools which
make up the farmer’s equipment; while the first floor will be utilized
for the storage of the heavier machines such as binders, wagons, etc.
Getting the lighter machines up to the second floor may be accomplished
in one of two ways. An ordinary block and tackle can be utilized either
through an outside door in the gable of the roof or through a hole in
the floor in the interior of the building. If space is available the
construction of a rather steep runway outside the building and leading
to the second floor may be advantageous. This runway can be constructed
of rather light material, using a pair of 4x6’s for joists, and flooring
them with rough 2-inch stuff. An angle of 30 degrees with the horizontal
will make it possible to pull machines up the runway with only a small
amount of labor. This arrangement has been found to be superior to the
use of a hoist. It can be used to the best advantage when the shed is
located on the slope of a rather steep hill.

TABLE I.

Floor Space and Height of Space Required to House Common Farm
Implements.

                                                         Floor   Height
                                                         Space  of Space
        Implements--                                    in Feet  in Feet

  Plows--
  Walking                                                 8x3       3
  Sulky and horse gang (tongue off; add 10 ft. for
    tongue)                                               8x6       4
  Engine gang                                            16x7       5

  Harrows--
  Spike tooth, per section                                5x5       2
  Spring tooth, per section                               5x4       1½
  Single disc, 8 ft. with truck (tongue off)              6x9       4
  Double disc, 7 ft. with truck (tongue off)              8x8       4

  Weeder--
  (Thills on)                                            13x8       4

  Grain Drills--
  12x7 (tongue off; add 10 ft. for tongue)                5x8       5
  16x7 with press attachment (tongue off)                7x11       5

  Rollers--
  Smooth                                                 3x10       4½
  Corrugated, single (tongue off; add 10 ft. for tongue) 3x10       4
  Corrugated, double                                      4x8       4

  Corn Planter--
  Two row (tongue off; add 10 ft. for tongue)            5½x6       3½

  Cultivators--
  Walking, one horse                                      7x2       3½
  Riding, single row (tongue off; add 10 ft. for tongue)  8x5       4
  Riding, two row (tongue off; add 10 feet for tongue)   8x10       4
  Alfalfa (tongue off; add 10 ft. for tongue)             7x6       5

  Mower--
  6 ft. (tongue off; add 10 ft. for tongue)               5x6       7

  Binders--
  Grain, 8 ft. (tongue truck off)                        8x14       7
  Grain, 6 ft. (tongue truck off)                        8x12       7
  Corn (tongue off; add 11 ft. for tongue)               13x6       7

  Hay Rakes--
  Self-dump (thills off)                                5½x11½      5
  Side-delivery (tongue off; add 10 ft. for tongue)      13x9       5

  Tedders--
  Kicker (tongue off; add 8 ft. for tongue)              5½x8       5
  Combination (see side-delivery rakes)

  Hay Loader                                             14x9½      9

  Ensilage Cutter, 20-ton (tongue off)                   11x5½      7

  Corn Shredder, 8 roll                                  20x8       9

  Corn Sheller                                           20x8      11

  Hay Press                                              16x6       6

  Grain Separator, 32-inch                               26x8       8½

  Clover Huller                                          24x8       8

  Gasoline Tractor, 20-4 H. P.                           15x9       9

  Gasoline Tractor, 10-20 H. P.                          12x8       8

  Portable Engine, 6 H. P.                                9x5       6

  Fanning Mill, 24-inch                                   4x3½      5

  Wagons--
  Farm gear (tongue off; add 10 ft. for tongue)          11x5½      4
  Wagon with box and top (tongue off)                    11x5½      5½
  Wagon with box and tip top (tongue off)                11x5½      6½
  Wagon with hay rack (tongue off)                       16x7½      5

  Buggies--
  One seated (thills up)                                  8x5½      7
  Two seated (tongue off)                                10x5½      8

  Grain Dump (knocked down)                              12x4       4

  Potato Machinery--
  Planter (tongue off; add 9 ft. for tongue)              5x3       4
  Sprayer, two wheeled barrel (thills off)                6x6       5
  Digger, wheeled, elevator (tongue off)                 13x4       3

  Automobiles--
  Small                                                  11x6       7
  Large                                                  14x7       8

  Phosphorus Distributor, 1,000 lbs. (tongue off; add 10
  ft. for tongue)                                        4x10       4

  Manure Spreader, 50 bu. (tongue off; add 10 ft. for
  tongue)                                                17x7       6




  There is a WOOD
  For Every Need


  THIS?

[Illustration: Fig. 14. Exterior of Two-Story Implement Shed]

[Illustration: Fig. 15. Perspective of Framing of Two-Story Implement
Shed]

  OR THIS?

The Automobile and Family Carriage Are Kept Under Cover. Is This Fair to
the Implements Which Make the Farm Pay?

[Illustration: Courtesy Tractor Farming. Fig. 16]

  “When it comes to actual waste, the Great American Desert with its
  constant canopy of blue sky over it has very little on the Great
  American Machine Shed. The chief difference is that the former is
  found in a particular locality only, while the latter extends from
  coast to coast. Both are in the open, both represent zero in
  profitable and economical usage, and both need the undivided attention
  of conservation experts.”--Tractor Farming.


Wood “Where Best”

The legitimate use of lumber where it is best, or by proper selection or
treatment can be made to serve economically and safely, is the aim of
the lumbermen in publishing a series of bulletins on Farm Structures.
Wood has for so long been the most widely used building material that
its availability and importance have either been taken for granted or
lost sight of. It is helpful to review the outstanding features of the
present situation:

  Wood remains the most universal, most adaptable building material in
  the world.

  The supply is ample for all requirements, and the kinds and grades
  best suited for all purposes are obtainable everywhere.

  In cost it remains one of the cheapest materials.

  It is the lightest building material known, and the strongest, weight
  for weight.

  Its qualities are known; it is easy to work; it can be cut and shaped
  by any one into the myriad uses required for the shelter and comfort
  of man.

  There is no material more beautiful in appearance, more susceptible to
  artistic finish, nor which is as productive of sentiment and
  satisfaction for home building.

  Wood is a non-conductor of heat,--cool in summer and warm in winter.

The relative qualities of durability, serviceability and workability
should be considered in selecting wood for homes and farm buildings.
=Consult the local lumber dealer.= His knowledge and advice will assure
cheaper, more stable buildings.

Except where naturally durable woods are available, a preservative
treatment will prove economical for timber exposed to moisture and
decay, as sills, basement flooring, fence posts; and in similar
situations.


  Other Farm Bulletins.

  Other Bulletins in this series are upon:

  Dairy and General Purpose Barns
  Ice Houses
  Garages
  Silos
  Poultry Houses
  Grain Storage Buildings
  Farm Residences
  Swine Houses
  The Preservative Treatment of Farm Timbers

  Ask for those that will be helpful to you. Address:

  NATIONAL LUMBER MANUFACTURERS
  ASSOCIATION
  Lumber Exchange
  CHICAGO

[Illustration]