Belinda, a young lady of fortune in Warwickshire, comes to London on
business and meets at her lodging-house a mysterious fair recluse.
Imagining that their lots may be somewhat akin, she induces the retired
beauty to relate the history of her misfortunes.

Cleomira upon her father's death is removed from the court to the
country by a prudent mother. She does not take kindly to housewifery,
and languishes until friends persuade her mother to let her attend a
ball. There she meets the glorious Lysander, and in spite of her
mother's care, runs away to join him in London. Her ruin and desertion
inevitably follow. The sight of a rival in her place makes her
frantically resolve to die by poison, but the apothecary gives her only
a harmless opiate. Thinking herself dying, she sends a last letter to
her faithless lover. When she awakes and hears how indifferently he has
received the report of her death, she at length overcomes her unhappy
passion, and retires from the world.

Belinda then relates how her marriage with the deserving Worthly was
postponed by her father's death. In the interim the captivating Sir
Thomas Courtal has occasion to render her a slight service at the
overturn of her coach, and fires her with a passion which her mild
esteem for Worthly is too weak to overcome. Courtal perceives and
encourages her fondness, though he poses as Worthly's friend. She gives
him an assignation in a wood, where she is saved from becoming a victim
to his lust only by the timely arrival of her true admirer. In the duel
that ensues Worthly falls, Courtal flees, and a little later Belinda
goes to London in hopes of seeing him. At the playhouse she is only too
successful in beholding him in a box accompanied by his wife and
mistress. From the gossip of her friends she learns that his real name
is Lord----, and from one of the ladies she hears such stories of his
villainy that she can no longer doubt him to be a monster.

Worthly, meanwhile, has recovered from his wound and weds Belinda's
sister. Lysander and Courtal prove to be in reality the same bland
villain, the inconstant Bellamy. His two victims, sympathizing in their
common misfortune, agree to retire together to a remote spot where they
can avoid all intercourse with the race of men. "And where a solitary
Life is the effect of Choice, it certainly yields more solid Comfort,
than all the publick Diversions which those who are the greatest
Pursuers of them can find."

The same admirable sentiment was shared by the surviving heroine of "The
Double Marriage: or, the Fatal Release" (1726), who after witnessing a
signal demonstration of the perfidy of man, resolves to shun for ever
the false sex.

Dazzled by the numerous accomplishments of Bellcour, the charming
Alathia weds him in secret. When he finds that his father has designed
to bestow his hand upon the heiress of an India merchant, he dares not
confess his fault, but lets himself be carried to Plymouth to meet his
intended bride. There he determines to escape from his father during a
hunting party, but while passing a wood, he hears cries and rescues a
fair maiden from violation. The beautiful stranger allows him to conduct
her back to Plymouth, and turns out to be Mirtamene, the woman he is to
marry. Though very much in love with this new beauty, Bellcour cannot
relinquish the thought of Alathia without a struggle. But in fatal
hesitation the time slips by, and he is finally compelled to wed a
second bride. Meanwhile the deserted Alathia hears disquieting reports
of her husband's conduct. In disguise as a boy she travels to Plymouth
to see for herself, confronts her guilty partner, and after hearing his
confession, stabs herself. Overcome by remorse and love, Bellcour
imitates her, while Mirtamene "warn'd by the example of Bellcour, that
Interest, Absence, or a new Passion, can make the most seeming constant
Lover false, took a Resolution ever to contemn and hate that betraying
Sex to which she owed her Misfortune and the Sight of such a Disaster as
she had beheld in Alathia."

Not content to retire in disgust from the world, Glicera, the victim of
fickle man in "The City Jilt" (1726) determines to retaliate upon the
lover who has ruined and abandoned her when the death of her father left
her without a fortune or a protector. To secure her revenge she
encourages the advances of a senile alderman, Grubguard by name, whom
she takes infinite delight in deceiving by the help of an ingenious
confidant. Meanwhile an unfortunate lawsuit and the extravagances of his
wife have ruined the false Melladore, who is obliged to mortgage his
estate to Grubguard. Glicera obtains the deeds from the amorous
alderman, and then sends him packing. Melladore is forced to beg of her
sufficient funds to purchase a commission and later dies in battle. With
the fortune she has won from her various lovers Glicera retires from the
world and henceforth shuns the society of men.

In these three tales Mrs. Haywood followed the guidance of her own
experience when it ran counter to the traditions of romance. The
betrayed heroine ought to have died, or at least to have been immured in
a convent to suffer a living death, but instead of acquiescing in their
fate, Belinda and Cleomira, Mirtamene, and Glicera defy the world, and
in the last case prove that the worm may turn.

Among the works of her first decade of authorship a few effusions in
which Mrs. Haywood has succeeded to a degree in motivating,
characterizing, or analyzing the passions of her characters, must be
exempted from the general charge of commonplaceness. The first of these
is "Idalia: or, the Unfortunate Mistress" (1724), the story of a young
Venetian beauty--like Lasselia, her charms can only be imagined not
described--whose varied amorous adventures carry her over most of Italy.

She is sought by countless suitors, among them the base Florez, whom her
father promptly forbids the house. Idalia's vanity is piqued at the loss
of a single adorer, and more from perverseness than from love she
continues to correspond with him. He makes no further use of her
condescension than to boast of her favors, until at the command of his
patron, Don Ferdinand, he induces Idalia to make an assignation with
him. Ferdinand meets her and not without difficulty at length effects
her ruin. Her lover's friend, Henriquez, in conducting her to a place of
safety in Padua, becomes himself the victim of her charms, quarrels with
Ferdinand, and slays him and is slain. Henriquez' brother, Myrtano, next
succeeds as Idalia's adorer, but learning that he is about to make an
advantageous marriage, she secretly decamps. In her flight the very
guide turns out to be a noble lover in disguise. When she escapes from
him in a ship bound for Naples, the sea-captain pays her crude court,
but just in time to save her from his embraces the ship is captured by
Barbary corsairs--commanded by a young married couple. Though the
heroine is in peasant dress, she is treated with distinction by her
captors. Her history moves them to tears, and they in turn are in the
midst of relating to her the involved story of their courtship, when the
vessel is wrecked by a gale. Borne ashore on a plank, Idalia is succored
by cottagers, and continues her journey in man's clothes. She is loved
by a lady, and by the lady's husband, who turns out to be her dear
Myrtano. Their felicity is interrupted by the jealousy of Myrtano's
wife, who appeals to the Pope and forces the lovers to separate by his
order. Idalia leads a miserable life, persecuted by all the young
gallants of Rome. One day she sees Florez, the first cause of all her
misfortunes, pass the window, and with thoughts bent on revenge sends
him a billet, which he carries to his master. Myrtano keeps the
appointment, muffled in a cloak, and Idalia stabs him by mistake.
Overcome by remorse, she dies by the same knife.

The motivation of the heroine at the beginning of the story, as Miss
Morgan has pointed out,[13]is more elaborate than usual in Haywoodian
romance. To show a young girl's vanity teasing her into an intrigue
required a more delicate appreciation of the passions than the stock
situations in love stories afforded. Obliged to draw upon her own
resources, Mrs. Haywood handled the incidents with a niceness that could
hardly have been expected from the author of "Love in Excess." Her sense
for _vraisemblance_ protected her from many absurdities, though not from
all. For instance, when Idalia to preserve herself from the
importunities of Ferdinand employs the same threat of stabbing herself
that Clarissa Harlowe in similar circumstances holds over Lovelace, the
Italian heroine very naturally tries first to stab her seducer. But
realism vanishes when Idalia begins her romantic flight from place to
place and from lover to lover. The incidents of romance crowd fast
around her. When in man's clothes she is loved by a woman who takes her
for what she seems, and by the woman's husband who knows her for what
she is, the reader cannot help recalling a similar Gordian love-knot in
Sidney's "Arcadia." Perhaps the only convincing detail in the latter
part of the book is the heroine's miserable end. But although the
sentiments of the characters are reported in concealed blank verse that
smacks of theatrical rant, though the absurd Oriental digressions, the
disguises, the frequent poisonings, and fortunate accidents all detract
from the naturalness and plausibility of the tale, yet one cannot deny
the piece occasional merits, which if smothered in extravagances, are
hopeful signs of a coming change. The very excess of strained and
unnatural incidents indicates that the popular palate was becoming
cloyed; for a time the writers of fiction attempted to stimulate it by
spicing the dish, but when the limit of mordancy was reached, a new diet
became imperative.

Though in no sense a soothing draught for the overstrained sensibilities
of romance readers, "The Fatal Secret: or, Constancy in Distress" (1724)
nevertheless represents a valuable part of Mrs. Haywood's contribution
to the technique of the novel. Few of her works indicate more clearly
her power to display the operations of passion dominating a young and
innocent heart.

When the story opens, Anadea is a heart-free maid of sixteen, better
educated than most young girls, and chiefly interested in her studies.
Fearing to leave her unprovided for, her father urges her to marry, and
she, though inclined to a single life, returns a dutiful answer, begging
him to direct her choice. He fixes upon the worthy Chevalier de Semar,
and bids her prepare for the wedding.

  "The Time which the necessary Preparations took up, Anadea pass'd in
  modelling her Soul, as much as possible, to be pleas'd with the State
  for which she was intended.--The Chevalier had many good Qualities,
  and she endeavoured to add to them in Imagination a thousand more.
  Never did any Woman take greater Pains to resist the Dictates of
  Desire, than she did to create them ...yet she had it not in her
  Power to feel any of those soft Emotions, those Impatiencies for his
  Absence, those tender Thrillings in his Presence, nor any of those
  agreeable Perplexities which are the unfailing Consequences of Love
  ...and she began, at length, to lay the Blame on her own want of
  Sensibility, and to imagine she had not a Heart fram'd like those of
  other Women."

At the house of a friend Anadea meets the Count de Blessure and feels
the starts of hitherto unsuspected passion. Beside this new lover the
Chevalier appears as nought. Her mind is racked by an alternation of
hope and despair.

  "In Anxieties, such as hopeless Lovers feel, did the discontented
  Anadea pass the Night:--She could not avoid wishing, though there was
  not the least Room for her to imagine a Possibility of what she
  wish'd:--She could not help praying, yet thought those Prayers a Sin.
  --Her once calm and peaceful Bosom was now all Hurry and Confusion:--
  The Esteem which she had been long labouring to feel for the
  Chevalier, was now turn'd to Aversion and Disdain; and the
  Indifference she had for all Mankind, now converted into the most
  violent Passion for  one ...she thought she could be contended to
  live a single Life, and knew so little of the encroaching Nature of
  the Passion she had entertained, that she believed she should never
  languish for any greater Joy, than that she might, without a Crime,
  indulge Contemplation with the Idea of his Perfections; and to destroy
  that pleasing Theory by marrying with another ...was more terrible to
  her than the worst of Deaths.--Confounded what to do, or rather wild
  that there was nothing she could do that might be of Service to her in
  an Exigence like this, her Mind grew all a Chaos, and the
  unintermitting Inquietudes of her Soul not permitting any Repose, she
  ...had a very good Pretence to keep her Chamber, and receive no
  Visits."

She passes the day in tormenting perplexities, sometimes relieved by
intervals of unsubstantial joy, when she fancies that her affianced may
break off the match for some reason, that his sickness, an accident, or
death may leave her free to wed Blessure. In imagination she pictures to
herself happy meetings with her lover, and even repeats their
conversation. Then recollecting her true situation, she lapses into real
woe and bitterness of heart. The Count, however, has been deeply
affected by her charms, and though he learns that she is engaged to De
Semar, he sends her an appealing letter to discover whether the match is
the result of choice or duty. Upon the receipt of this billet the soul
of Anadea is distracted between the impulses of love and the dictates of
prudence. Finally she writes a discreet, but not too severe reply,
intimating that her choice is due more to duty than to inclination.
Naturally the Count protests vehemently against her sacrificing herself
to a man for whom she cares nothing, vows that the day of her wedding
with De Semar shall be his last upon earth, and entreats a meeting.

  "What now became of the enamour'd Anadea? How was it possible for a
  Heart so prepossessed as hers, to hold out in a Reserve which was very
  near breaking the Strings which held  it--... Yet still the
  Consequences that might attend this Meeting, for a Time repelled the
  Dictates of her Passion.--But it was no more than a faint Struggle;
  Love! all-conquering, all-o'er-powering Love! triumphed over every
  other Consideration! and she consented to his and her own impatient
  Wishes."

Under the pretence of a change of air she goes to a friend's house at
Versailles, where Blessure secretly weds her. After a short period of
felicity, they are betrayed by an officious maid. Blessure kills the
Chevalier, but is himself wounded and cast into prison. His father
secures a pardon by promising the king's mistress that the Count shall
marry her daughter, but Blessure remains constant to Anadea, though
keeping his marriage a secret for fear of infuriating his father. He is
sent away by his displeased parent to learn the virtue of obedience,
while Anadea retires to St. Cloud to await her husband's return. There
the story ends in an unexpected tragedy of incest and blood.

The back-stairs intrigues and the sensational horrors which to the
majority of Mrs. Haywood's readers doubtless seemed the chief attraction
of the story are not different from the melodramatic features of
countless other amatory tales, French and English. But when for a dozen
pages the author seeks to discover and explain the motives of her
characters both by impersonal comment and by the self-revelation of
letters, she is making a noteworthy step--even if an unconscious one--
toward the Richardsonian method of laying bare the inner natures of
ordinary people. She has here pursued the analysis of character as an
end in itself, for in "The Fatal Secret" there is no hint of disguised
scandal, nor any appeal to the pruriency of degenerate readers.
Sensational in the extreme the story is, but nevertheless the progress
of the narrative is delayed while the sentiments of the heroine are
examined in the minutest detail. While better known romancers exploited
chiefly the strange and surprising adventures (other than amorous) of
their characters, or used the _voyage imaginaire_ for the purposes of
satire, Eliza Haywood and her female colleagues stimulated the popular
taste for romances of the heart. In trying to depict the working of
intense human passions they rendered a distinct service to the
development of English fiction.

The story of "The Mercenary Lover" (1726) involved, besides the ability
to body forth emotion, considerable power to show a gradual degradation
in the character of one of the heroines.

The avaricious Clitander gains the moiety of a fortune by marrying the
young, gay Miranda, but cannot rest without securing to himself the
portion of the elder sister as well. Althea's thoughtful and less
volatile nature has hitherto resisted the assaults of love, but her
insidious brother-in-law undermines her virtue by giving her wanton
books and tempting her with soft speeches until she yields to his
wishes. When he attempts to make her sign a deed of gift instead of a
will to provide for their child, she discovers his treachery and flees
to the country. By playing upon her tenderness he coaxes her back and
poisons her. Miranda is fully informed of her husband's villainy, but
contents herself with removing from the house. Thus Clitander loses not
only his sister-in-law's, but his wife's fortune as well, and is
completely unmanned by remorse and apprehension.

The contrast between the characters of the gay and thoughtless wife and
the pensive, pure-minded girl is skilfully managed, and the various
steps in the downward course of Althea's nature are exhibited in detail.
Like Anadea in "The Fatal Secret" she retires to her chamber not to
sleep, but to indulge in the freedom of her thoughts, which are poured
forth at length to let the reader into the secrets of her passion-ridden
bosom. To reveal character in action was beyond the limit of Eliza
Haywood's technique; and once the story is well under way, Althea
becomes as colorless as only a heroine of romance can be. But the
author's effort to differentiate the female characters before the action
begins, and to make a portion of the plot turn upon a psychological
change in one of them shows that even sensation-loving readers were
demanding a stricter veracity of treatment than had hitherto been
necessary.

But perhaps the most careful interlocking of character and event to be
found among these embryo novels is contained in "The Life of Madam De
Villesache. Written by a Lady, who was an Eye-witness of the greatest
part of her Adventures, and faithfully Translated from her French
Manuscript. By Mrs. Eliza Haywood" (1727). Since no original source for
this story has come to light, we may probably assume that the French
manuscript was a complete fabrication on the part of the English author.
At any rate, the tale was one of passion and intrigue such as she
delighted to compose.

Henrietta, daughter of a certain Duke, grows up in obscure circumstances
to be a miracle of beauty. When her father comes to carry her to court,
her rustic lover, Clermont, pleads so effectually that she consents to a
secret union with him. In the glare of the court she half forgets her
country husband until too fatally reminded of him by being sought in
marriage by the Marquis of Ab----lle. Her attempts at evasion are vain,
and rather than face her father's anger, she permits herself to be
married a second time. She has not long enjoyed her new rank when
Clermont, whom she has informed of her step, appears to reproach her and
to claim his rights. Still irresolute, she persuades him by tears and
prayers not to expose her perfidy, and secretly admits him to a
husband's privileges. In due time the pair are caught by the Marquis,
and to avoid his rage confess their prior marriage. Clermont is thrown
into prison, where he dies not without suspicion of poison. Henrietta
retires to convent, but the Duke, her father, in order to gain the
Marquis's estate for her unborn infant, manages to stifle the evidence
of her first marriage. Enraged that he cannot obtain a divorce, the
Marquis resolves to be revenged upon his perjured wife. He intercepts
her coach in a wood outside of Paris and brutally murders her. The Duke
orders her magnificently buried. Although nothing against the Marquis
can be proved, he is not allowed to escape the vengeance of heaven, but
goes mad and in a lucid interval just before death confesses his crimes.

The weakness and irresolution of the heroine are made the pivot of each
turning point in the plot. When she yields to her lover's entreaties to
consummate a hasty marriage; when fear of her father's displeasure
induces her to keep their union a secret; when her love of luxurious
grandeur at court persuades her to contract a more exalted match; when
her terror of Clermont forces her into a shameless expedient for the
sake of mollifying his anger; and when after her exposure by her
husband, the Marquis, she brazens out her trial in hopes of maintaining
the splendor of her rank and fortune, she is welding link by link the
chain of circumstance that draws her to ultimate disaster. She is by no
means a simple heroine motivated by the elementary passions; instead she
is constantly swayed by emotions and desires of the most diverse and
complex nature. After her first taste of court life she learns to look
back on her husband's rusticity with a sort of contempt, and to regret
her precipitate action.

  "Not that she hated Clermont; on the contrary, she had yet very great
  Remains of her former Passion for him, whenever she reflected on the
  Endearments which had past between them: but then she depis'd the
  Meanness of his Extraction, and the Thoughts that she had put him in
  possession of a Title, which gave him the Power, whenever he pleas'd
  to exert it, of calling her from the present Grandeur of her State,
  and obliging her to live with him in a mean Retirement; made all
  Desires instigated by her Affection, immediately give way to that new
  Idol of her Wishes, Greatness! And she more ardently endeavour'd to
  find some Stratagem to prevent him from ever seeing her again, than
  she had formerly pray'd in the Simplicity and Innocence of her
  Affections, never to be separated from him." (p. 14).

When an ambitious marriage is proposed, her first horror at the thought
of deserting her country husband yields to a sort of resignation when
she persuades herself of the necessity of the step. And when she
considers the riches, title, and agreeable person of the Marquis, she
almost disdains herself for hesitating to prefer him to Clermont. Her
life is the tragedy of a soul too indolent to swim against the current
of events. Mrs. Haywood managed to give extraordinary vividness and
consistency to the character of the vacillating Henrietta by making the
plot depend almost entirely upon the indecision of the heroine.
Consequently none of the author's women are as sharply defined as this
weak, pleasure-loving French girl. The character drawing, though too
much subordinated to the sensational elements in the story, is
nevertheless distinct and true to life.

Most probably, however, the few attempts at analysis of character or
interrelation of character and plot were of little concern both to the
author of emotional fiction and to her readers. The romancer's purpose
was not to reveal an accurate picture of life and manners, but to thrill
the susceptible bosom by scenes of tender love, amorous rapture, or
desperate revenge. The department of sensationalism especially exploited
by women writers and generally allowed to be most suited to their genius
is sufficiently indicated by the words typographically emphasized on the
title-page of one of Mrs. Haywood's few essays. "Reflections on the
Various Effects of LOVE, According to the contrary Dispositions of the
Persons on whom it operates. Illustrated with a great many Examples of
the good and bad Consequences of that PASSION. Collected from the best
Ancient and Modern HISTORIES. Intermix'd with the latest AMOURS and
INTRIGUES of Persons of the First Rank of both Sexes, of a certain
Island adjacent to the Kingdom of Utopia. Written by the Author of The
Mercenary Lover, and the Memoirs of the said Island. Love is not sin,
but where 'tis sinful Love. Never before made Publick." To any
contemporary connoisseur of hectic literature such a feast of Love,
Passion, Histories, Amours, and Intrigues as this, offered in the shop
of N. Dobb in the Strand for the small price of one shilling, must have
been irresistible. No less moving was the appeal of Eliza's fiction to
such Biddy Tipkins and Polly Honeycombes as delighted in a tale of
amorous adventure, particularly if it was set in the glittering
atmosphere of the court. A typical story of intrigues among the great is
"Lasselia: or, the Self-Abandoned" (1723).

The heroine, niece of Madame de Montespan, finding herself in danger of
becoming her aunt's rival in the affections of Louis XIV, goes secretly
into the country to visit her friends M. and Mme Valier, where she falls
in love with De L'Amye, a married gentleman. Summoned back to court by
the amorous monarch, Lasselia chooses rather to flee from the protection
of her friends in the disguise of a pilgrim, and led by lucky chance
casts herself on the protection of her lover, who conveys her to a
country inn and there maintains her for some time to their mutual
felicity. Mile Douxmourie, once affianced to De L'Amye but jilted by
him, accidentally discovers the pair and immediately communicates with
the gallant's wife, who with the Valiers soon appears to reclaim the
recreants. The wife rages at her husband, he at the perfidious
Douxmourie, while Lasselia offers to stab herself. By the good offices
of her friends, however, the girl is persuaded to enter a nunnery where
she becomes a pattern of piety. De L'Amye is reconciled to his wife.

In the first few pages of the story the author makes a noteworthy
attempt to create an atmosphere of impending disaster. When De L'Amye
first meets the heroine, three drops of blood fall from his nose and
stain the white handkerchief in her hand, and the company rallies him on
this sign of an approaching union, much to his wife's discomfiture. The
accident and her yet unrecognized love fill Lasselia's mind with uneasy
forebodings. "She wou'd start like one in a Frenzy, and cry out, Oh! it
was not for nothing that those ominous Drops of Blood fell from him on
my Handkerchief!--It was not for nothing I was seiz'd with such an
unusual Horror--Nor is it in vain, that my Soul shrinks, and seems to
dread a second Interview!--They are all, I fear, too sure Predictions of
some fatal Consequence." These gloomy thoughts at length give way to an
ecstasy of despairing love, and when her affection is reciprocated, to a
series of passionate letters and poems, which indeed make necessary the
author's apology for the "too great Warmth" of the style.

Since the ultimate disaster of adventurous heroines was regarded as a
sop to moral readers, Mrs. Haywood frequently failed to gratify her
audience with a happy ending, but occasionally a departure from strict
virtue might be condoned, provided it took place in a country far
removed from England. The scene of "The Padlock: or, No Guard without
Virtue"[14] was appropriately laid in Spain.

Don Lepidio of Seville, by his jealous conduct, completely alienates the
affections of his young and beautiful wife, Violante. She finally writes
a reply to the earnest entreaties of an unknown lover, and though filled
with apprehension at seeing her letter carried off by an ugly black
slave, agrees to meet him. Don Honorius, for it was he who had assumed
the disguise of the slave, proves to be the wonder of his sex. He
persuades her to elope to the house of one of his relations, and after
Lepidio has secured a divorce, marries her with great felicity.

That novels of intrigue, even without the tinsel of court dress and the
romance of French or Spanish setting, were acceptable to Eliza Haywood's
public is shown by the two parts of "The Masqueraders: or, Fatal
Curiosity" (1724-5), which in the most luscious language of passion
narrate the philanderings of a "charming Rover" called Dorimenus, "whose
real Name, for some Reasons, I shall conceal." London masquerades, as
the title indicates, play a large part in the plot. A more sprightly
tale, though still of the unedifying sort, is "Fantomina: or, Love in a
Maze. Being the Secret History of an Amour between two Persons of
Condition." The story is so fantastic that it can hardly be suspected of
having any connection with an actual occurrence, but the novelist was
not unaware of the advertising value of hinted scandal.

A young lady of distinguished birth, beauty, wit, and spirit for a
frolic goes masked to the theatre, and there falling in love with the
agreeable Beauplaisir, begins an intrigue with him. When his ardor
cools, she lures him on again under a different disguise, and thus
manages four several _liaisons_ successively as Fantomina, Celia the
Chambermaid, the Widow Bloomer, and the fair Incognita. Meanwhile she
meets her lover frequently in public assemblies without ever arousing
his suspicion of her double, or rather manifold identity. But at length
she is unable to disguise the effects of her imprudence, her gallant
ungallantly refuses to marry her, and the fair intriguer is packed off
to a convent in France.

Though the story cannot pretend to support the cause of morality, the
style of this piece is unusually clear and straightforward, sometimes
suitably periphrastic, but never inflated. The passion described is that
of real life ungarnished by romance. Only greater refinement was needed
to make the entertainment fit for ladies and gentlemen.

The cardinal defect of some of Mrs. Haywood's romances-in-little lay,
however, in a romantic over-refinement of the passions rather than in a
too vigorous animalism. Full of the most delicate scruples is "The
Surprise: or, Constancy Rewarded" (1724),[15] appropriately dedicated to
the Sir Galahad of comedy, Sir Richard Steele. The story relates how
Euphemia discovers that the seemingly faithless Bellamant has, in
reality, abandoned her on the day set for their marriage because he was
unwilling to have her share in the loss of his fortune. She, meanwhile,
has inherited a convenient sum, redeems him from his creditors, and
after practicing a little mystification to test his constancy, leads him
to the altar. Few of Mrs. Haywood's novels are more entirely moral or
more essentially dull.

Though the scene of "The Rash Resolve: or, the Untimely Discovery"
(1724) is laid in Porto Rico and in Spain, the romancer took little
advantage of her opportunity to introduce the usual "cloak and sword"
incidents of Spanish fiction. Instead her tale is one of generous love
and melting pathos more characteristic of the romance than of the
_novella_ or its successors.

The Porto Rican heiress, Emanuella, is defrauded of her fortune by her
guardian, Don Pedro, and imprisoned in his house to force her to marry
his son, Don Marco. That generous lover helps her to escape to Madrid,
and to emphasize the truth of her claims against his wily father, falls
upon his sword in the presence of the court. Emanuella's title to her
fortune cleared by this extraordinary measure, she continues to reside
at the house of Don Jabin, whose daughter, Berillia, she saves from a
monastery by making up the deficiency in her dowry. The ungrateful girl,
however, resents Emanuella's disapproval of her foppish lover, and
resolves to be revenged upon her benefactress. She, therefore, forwards
Emanuella's affair with Emilius until the lovers are hopelessly
compromised; then taking advantage of the loss of the lady's fortune at
sea, blackens her character to Emilius and provokes him to desert her.
The abandoned Emanuella enters a convent.

Emilius is challenged by Octavio as a rival in the love of Julia, and
though he had never before heard of the lady, he soon becomes her lover
in fact, and eventually marries her. Emanuella escapes from the nunnery
and wanders to a little provincial town where she bears a son to
Emilius. Berillia, who has been rusticated to a village near by in
consequence of her amour, encounters her unfortunate friend by chance
and runs away from her duenna to join her. She persuades Emanuella to
draw a large sum on Don Jabin, robs her, and goes to join her gallant.
The injured lady supports her child by mean drudgery until by chance she
meets Emilius and his wife, who do all they can to comfort her. But worn
out by her afflictions, she dies of a broken heart, leaving her son to
be adopted by his father.

Dr. Johnson might with equal truth have said to Mrs. Haywood as to the
author of the "Memoirs of Miss Sydney Biddulph," "I know not, Madam,
that you have a right ...to make your readers suffer so much." Even the
pathetic "History of Jemmy and Jenny Jessamy" has nothing to surpass the
train of woes exhibited in this earlier tale.

In the same "soft" style are two novels, "The Unequal Conflict: or,
Nature Triumphant" (1725) and its sequel, "Fatal Fondness: or, Love its
own Opposer." The plot begins with the writer's favorite situation.

Philenia, affianced to Coeurdemont, falls in love with Fillamour. By the
help of a confidant, Antonia, the lovers are enabled to arrange a plan
of escape. On the eve of the wedding Fillamour breaks into the house
and, leaving his servants to bind and gag the father, flies immediately
to his soul's adored.

"He threw himself on his knees, as he approach'd the dear mistress of
his soul, and with a voice and manner all soft and  love-inspiring.--Now
madam, said he, if the adoring Fillamour is not unworthy the glory of
your deliverance, I come to offer it, and to assure you, that not only
this, but the service of my whole future life is entirely devoted to
you. The innocent Philenia had not presently the power of replying, the
different emotions of love, and shame, fear, and joy, made such a
confusion in her sentiments, that she could only look the meanings of
them all: Fillamour, however, found enough in this mute language to make
him know, he was in as fair a way of happiness, as he cou'd wish; and
returning her glances with others as languishing, as the most melting
longing love cou'd teach the loveliest eyes in the world, they
continued, for some moments, thus transmitting souls--" until their
confidant hurries them out of the house.

After the elopement Fillamour is distracted by the opposing motives of
love and interest. To marry Philenia means ruin, for his ambitious
uncle, who has proposed an advantageous marriage to him, would never
forgive him for a love match. The innocent cause of his distress finally
discovers his perplexity and agrees to live a single life until they can
marry without loss of fortune. In this state of affairs "their love
seem'd to be a copy of that pure and immaterial passion, which angels
regard each other with, and, which we are allow'd to hope shall be our
portion, when, shaking off our earth, we meet in a happier world, where
we are to live and love forever." The lovers' paradise is invaded by
Philenia's father, who carries her home and locks her up more closely
than before. In a short time she has the shocking intelligence that
Fillamour has married according to the wishes of his worldly uncle. She
still remains constant to him, but "the remainder of her yet surprising
adventures," remarks the author, "and those of Antonia and Coeurdemont
must be told another time, having good reason to doubt my reader will be
tir'd, when I am so myself."

Eliza was perhaps the first to recover from the fatigue, for in a little
more than two months the continuation, costing sixpence more than the
first instalment, was offered to her readers.

After making his marriage of _convenance_ Fillamour again pays his court
to Philenia, and seizing a lucky moment to surprise her on her daily
walk, half by persuasion, half by force, carries his point. But before
they can meet a second time she is carried off by a gang of villains,
who mistake her for another woman. The languishing Misimene, who has
pursued Fillamour into the country in man's clothes, consoles him for
the loss of his first love. Upon his return to town he finds that his
wife has fled to join her lover. Meanwhile Philenia's honor is preserved
by timely shipwreck of the vessel in which the ravishers are carrying
her off. Washed ashore on the inevitable plank, she supports herself
among the fisher folk by weaving nets until after a year's toil she is
relieved by Antonia and Coeurdemont, now happily married. The relation
of their adventures occupies some pages. Philenia comes back to town to
find her lover weltering in his blood, stabbed by the jealous Misimene.
Believing him dead, she seizes the same sword, plunges it into her
bosom, and instantly expires. Misimene goes into frenzies, and Fillamour
alone recovers to live out a life of undying grief.

  "Thus was the crime of giving way to an unwarrantable passion,
  punish'd in the persons of Philenia and Misimene, and that of perjury
  and ingratitude in Fillamour; while the constancy of Antonia, and the
  honour of Coeurdemont, receiv'd the reward their virtues merited, and
  they continued, to their lives end, great and shining examples of
  conjugal affection."

Apparently Philenia's adventures were somewhat too improbable even for
the taste of readers steeped in melodramatic romances, for if we may
judge by the few copies that have survived, these effusions did not
enjoy a wide popularity. But not to be discouraged by failure, Mrs.
Haywood soon produced another extravagant and complicated romance,
entitled "Cleomelia: or, the Generous Mistress. Being the Secret History
of a Lady Lately arriv'd from Bengall" (1727). The scene might equally
well have been laid in the Isle of Wight, but Bengal on the title-page
doubtless served to whet the curiosity of readers.

Gasper, secretly affianced to Cleomelia, is conveyed out of Bengal by an
avaricious father to prevent him from marrying, and she, believing him
unfaithful, gives her hand to the generous Heartlove. Informed of the
truth by a letter from her lover announcing his speedy return, she
boards a ship bound for England, leaving her husband and lover to fight
a duel in which Heartlove falls. Meanwhile the heroine is shipwrecked,
finds a new suitor in the ship's captain, and hearing of her husband's
death and of Gasper's marriage to a Spanish lady, marries the captain.
Hardly has he departed on his first voyage, when the still faithful
Gasper returns to claim her, only to find her again the bride of
another. In despair he goes to England, and when her second husband is
lost at sea, she follows to reward his constancy.

Cleomelia's generosity does not seem to be as notable as the sub-title
would indicate, but the story was evidently intended to illustrate
virtues exalted to a high romantic level.

With the same end in view Mrs. Haywood attempted an even loftier flight
into the empyrean of romance, with the result that "Philidore and
Placentia: or, L 'Amour trop Delicat" (1727) is more conventional and
stilted than any other work from her pen. It imitates closely the heroic
French romances, both in the inflated style and elaborate regard for the
tender passion, and in the structure of the plot with little histories
of the principal characters interspersed at intervals throughout the
story. In substance the tale is simply a mosaic of romantic adventures,
though some of the hero's wanderings in the desert after being marooned
by pirates and especially his encounter with the "tyger" sound like a
faint echo of "Captain Singleton" or of Captain John Smith's "True
Travels."

The noble Philidore falls in love with the rich and beautiful Placentia,
but as his estate is no match for hers, he contents himself with
entering her service in disguise and performing menial offices for the
pleasure of seeing her. One day she hears him singing in a grotto, and
is charmed by the graceful replies he makes to her questions. A little
later he saves her from robbers at the expense of a slight wound. She
offers to make him groom of her chamber, but fearful of being
recognized, he declines. Finally she lays her fortune at his feet, but
he has too much generosity to accept the offer. Leaving a letter
revealing his true rank and his poverty, he sails for Persia. Some time
later, the return of Placentia's long lost brother, by depriving her of
her fortune, puts her on a level with her lover.

Philidore is captured by pirates and with eleven others set on shore on
a desert strand. Three of the little company reach civilization. After
recuperating their strength, they set out for Persia overland, but a
tiger deprives Philidore of his two companions. A little later he
rescues an unknown youth from three assailants, but not before the
stranger has been seriously wounded. A passing traveller carries them to
the castle of a Persian nobleman. There Philidore waits with the utmost
impatience for the wounded man to recover strength enough to relate his
story, but this, as also the misfortunes, perplexities, and dangers to
which the despairing passion of the enamoured Placentia occasioned her
to reduce herself, and the catastrophe of Philidore's surprising fate,
must be told in a Second Part.

Part II. The youthful stranger, concealing his name and family, relates
the sad effects of his love for the favorite wife of the Bashaw of
Liperto, and how by her aid he was enabled to escape from slavery, only
to be pursued and about to be retaken by janizaries when rescued by
Philidore.

Our hero is kindly received by his uncle in Persia, who soon dies and
leaves him sole heir of an enormous fortune. He is now Placentia's equal
in wealth as well as rank, and immediately embarks for England. Driven
into Baravat by contrary winds, he is moved to ransom a female captive
on hearing of her grief at her hard fate, but what is his surprise when
the fair slave proves to be Placentia. "Kisses, embraces, and all the
fond endearments of rewarded passion made up for their want of speech--
in their expressive looks, and eager graspings, the violence of their
mutual flame was more plainly demonstrated, than it could have been by
the greatest elegance of language--those of the Persians that stood by,
who understood not English, easily perceived, not only that they were
lovers, but also that they were so to the most unbounded height of
tender passion."

Placentia relates how she had eluded her brother and set sail to rejoin
her lover, how she had been saved from the arms of the brutal ship's
captain by a timely attack of pirates, and how, sold to a Moslem
merchant and still annoyed by the attentions of the captain, she had
abandoned all thoughts of life till redeemed by Philidore's generosity.

With Placentia, her maid, and young Tradewell, the maid's lover,
ransomed, Philidore sails blissfully to England. But upon landing
Placentia becomes suddenly cold to him. He forces his way into her
house, and finds that her brother is the young stranger whose life he
had saved in Persia. Meanwhile Placentia, whose fortune is now no match
for Philidore's, flees to parts unknown, leaving a letter conjuring him
to forget her. After a long search the brother and lover find her place
of concealment, and the former removes her scruples by settling a large
estate upon her. "Nothing could be more splendid than the celebration of
their nuptials; and of their future bliss, the reader may better judge
by their almost unexampled love, their constancy, their generosity and
nobleness of soul, than by any description I am able to give of it."

"Philidore and Placentia" is one of the few novels by Mrs. Haywood that
do not pretend to a moral purpose. Realism needed some justification,
for realism at the time almost invariably meant a picture of vice and
folly, and an author could not expose objectionable things except in the
hope that they would lessen in fact as they increased in fiction. But in
spite of the disapproval sometimes expressed for fables on the ground of
their inherent untruth, idealistic romances were generally justified as
mirrors of all desirable virtues. Pious Mrs. Penelope Aubin wrote no
other kind of fiction, though she sometimes admitted a deep-dyed villain
for the sake of showing his condign punishment at the hands of
providence. It was perhaps due to the sale of this lady's novels,
largely advertised toward the end of 1727 and apparently very
successful, that Mrs. Haywood was encouraged to desert her favorite
field of exemplary novels showing the dangerous effects of passion for
an excursion into pure romance. That she found the attempt neither
congenial nor profitable may be inferred from the fact that it was not
repeated.

If the highly imaginary romances suffered from an excess of delicacy,
certain other tales by Mrs. Haywood overleaped decency as far on the
other side. The tendency of fiction before Richardson was not toward
refinement. The models, French and Spanish, which writers in England
found profit in imitating, racked sensationalism to the utmost degree by
stories of horrible and perverted lust. All the excitement that could be
obtained from incest, threatened, narrowly averted, or actually
committed, was offered to eager readers. Usually, as in Defoe's "Moll
Flanders" or Fielding's "Tom Jones," ignorance of birth was an essential
element in the plot. A story of this type in which the catastrophe is
prevented by a timely discovery of the hero's parentage, is "The Force
of Nature: or, the Lucky Disappointment" (1725).

Felisinda, daughter of Don Alvario of Valladolid, falls in love with a
dependent of her father's named Fernando, who returns her passion, but
when by a dropped letter she reveals their mutual tenderness, her father
becomes exceedingly disordered and threatens to marry her out of hand to
Don Carlos, who had long solicited the match. That generous lover,
however, refuses to marry her against her will. The disappointment
proves mortal to Don Alvario, who leaves his estate to Felisinda and
Fernando equally, provided they do not marry each other. Felisinda is
committed to the care of an abbess named Berinthia, but by the aid of a
probationer, Alantha, the lovers manage to correspond. They agree that
Fernando shall convert his moiety to ready money, convey it to Brussels,
and there await Felisinda, whose escape he entrusts to a friend,
Cleomas. Alantha, meantime, has fallen in love with Fernando, and
substitutes herself for Felisinda. Cleomas in conducting the supposed
mistress of his friend to the nearest port falls under the influence of
her beauty and attempts to betray her, but is prevented and slain by a
chance passenger, who turns out to be Carlos. He brings Alantha to a
better mind, and conducts her in search of Fernando, but they discover
in Brussels that he has set out again for Spain. When Fernando reaches
Valladolid to inquire what has become of Cleomas and his lady, he is
arrested on the charge of abducting Alantha. At the trial he is accused
of having made away with her, and is sentenced to death, whereupon
Berinthia, the abbess, faints, and being revived, owns him for her son
by Alvario, and "in tears and blessings pours out all the mother on
him." At the proper moment Carlos comes in with Alantha to prove
Fernando's innocence. Felisinda rewards the constancy of Carlos, and
Fernando can do no less than marry Alantha.

Incest is almost the only crime not to be found in the extraordinary
series of barefaced and infamous intrigues crowded into the pages of
"The Injur'd Husband: or, the Mistaken Resentment" (1723). The author
naively remarks in the dedication that "The Subject of the Trifle I
presume to offer, is, The Worst of Women," and she has indeed
out-villained the blackest of her male villains in the character of the
wicked Baroness.

The doting Baron de Tortillee marries the lascivious and extravagant
Mademoiselle La Motte, who promotes the villainous Du Lache to be the
instrument of her vile pleasures. After enjoying several lovers of his
procuring, she fixes her affections upon the worthy Beauclair. Du Lache
despairs of ensnaring him, because he is about to marry the lovely
Montamour, but by a series of base expedients he manages to blacken the
character of that lady in her lover's eyes, and to put the charms of the
Baroness in such a light that Beauclair is at length drawn in to pay his
court to her. For some time she thus successfully deludes her husband,
but when the despicable La Branche openly boasts of her favors and
allows some of her letters to fall into the hands of one of her numerous
lovers, her perfidy is soon completely exposed. To add to her confusion
she hears that the Baron, whom she had drugged into idiocy and sent into
the country, has been cured by a skilful physician and is about to
return. Du Lache despatches two assassins to murder him on the road, but
the Baron by a lucky chance escapes the murderers, forces them to
confess, and sets out to punish his guilty wife. Meanwhile Beauclair
suspects that he has wronged his innocent lady and endeavors to see her,
but she at first refuses to see him, and when by a ruse he gains access
to her presence, will not listen to him or give him any grounds for
hope. In despair he returns to Paris and meets the young Vrayment. He
discovers the infamous Du Lache hiding in a convent. To save his life
the wretch offers to reveal the frauds he had put in practice against
Montamour, but while he is doing so, the Baron meets them, and
concluding that Beauclair is in collusion with the villain, attacks them
both. Beauclair disarms his antagonist and is about to return him his
weapon, when Du Lache stabs the Baron in the back. Vrayment has
witnessed the quarrel and summoned assistance. Beauclair and Du Lache
are haled before a magistrate and are about to be condemned equally for
the crime, when Vrayment reveals herself as Montamour disguised as a
man, and persuades the judge that Beauclair is innocent. Du Lache and
his accomplices are broken on the wheel, the Baroness takes poison, and
Beauclair is united to his faithful Montamour.

In the conduct of the story the writer shows no deficiency in expressing
the passions, but rather a want of measure, for thrill follows thrill so
fast that the reader can hardly realize what is happening. And as if the
lusts and crimes of the Baroness did not furnish enough sensational
incidents, the tender romance of Beauclair and Montamour is superadded.
The hero is a common romantic type, easily inconstant, but rewarded
above his merits by a faithful mistress. A woman disguised as a man was
a favorite device with Mrs. Haywood as well as with other writers of
love stories, but one need read only the brazen Mrs. Charke's memoirs or
Defoe's realistic "Moll Flanders" to discover that it was a device not
unheard of in real life. The actual occurrence of such disguises,
however, made no difference to the female writers of fiction. Anything
soul-stirring, whether from romances or from plays, was equally grist to
their mills.

In seeking for the most dramatic _dénouements_ sensational romancers
were not long in perceiving the suspense that could be produced by
involving the chief characters in a trial for their lives. Mrs. Behn had
by that means considerably protracted the interest in "The Fair Jilt:
or, the Amours of Prince Tarquin and Miranda" (1688), and Mrs. Haywood,
following her example, succeeded in giving a last stimulus to the jaded
nerves of the readers of "The Force of Nature" and "The Injur'd
Husband." And finally the title-page of an anonymous work attributed to
her indicates that the struggling authoress was not insensible to the
popular demand for romances of roguery. A prospective buyer might have
imagined that he was securing a criminal biography in "Memoirs of the
Baron de Brosse, Who was Broke on the Wheel in the Reign of Lewis XIV.
Containing, An Account of his Amours. With Several Particulars relating
to the Wars in those Times," but the promise of the title was
unfulfilled, for Mrs. Haywood was no journalist to make capital out of a
malefactor's exit from the world. The whole book is a chronicle of the
Baron's unsuccessful pursuit of a hard-hearted beauty named Larissa,
mingled with little histories of the Baron's rivals, of a languishing
Madam de Monbray, and of Larissa's mother. The fair charmer finally
marries a count, and her lover, plunged into adequate despair, can
barely exert himself to answer a false accusation trumped up by the
revengeful Monbray. With the verdict in his favor the story ends
abruptly, and the promised continuation was apparently never written. We
read nothing of the wars, nor of the Baron's execution on the wheel.

Tortures, tragedies of blood, and heinous crimes added piquancy to Mrs.
Haywood's love stories, but were not the normal material of her
romances. Her talent was chiefly for "soft things." She preferred the
novel of intrigue and passion in which the characters could be run
through a breathless maze of amatory adventures, with a pause now and
again to relate a digressive episode for variety's sake. Typical of this
sort, the best adapted to the romancer's genius, is "The Agreeable
Caledonian: or, Memoirs of Signiora di Morella, a Roman Lady, Who made
her Escape from a Monastery at Viterbo, for the Love of a Scots
Nobleman. Intermix'd with many other Entertaining little Histories and
Adventures which presented themselves to her in the Course of her
Travels." No moralizing, no romantic idealism disturbs the rapid current
of events. It is a pure "cloak and sword" novel, definitely located in
Italy, with all the machinery of secret assignations, escapes from
convents, adventures on the road and at inns, sudden assaults, duels,
seductions, and revenge characteristic of Spanish fiction.

Don Jaques di Morella determines to marry his daughter, Clementina, to a
certain Cardinal, who has offered to renounce the scarlet hat for love
of her. When she piques her lover by her evident unwillingness to wed,
Don Jaques packs her off to a convent at Viterbo. By picking up a copy
of verses Clementina becomes acquainted with Signiora Miramene, who
relates the history of her correspondence with the Baron Glencairn.

Clementina becomes the instrument of the lovers, but no sooner sees the
lovely North Briton than she herself is captivated. In response to her
proffered affection, Glencairn manages by an extraordinary device to
convey her out of the convent. In spite of the rage of Dan Jaques they
escape to Sienna. The further surprising turns in their affairs to be
later communicated to the public.

Part II. At Sienna the lovers enjoy a season of perfect felicity until
Don Jaques comes to town in pursuit of a defaulting steward, discovers
Clementina, and apprehends the pair. While the two are confined in
separate convents awaiting trial, Clementina's maid, Ismenia (who has
already related her little history), becomes their go-between and serves
her mistress the same trick that Clementina had already played upon her
friend Miramene. Ismenia and the faithless Baron decamp to parts
unknown, while Clementina's father starts back to Rome with his recreant
daughter. In man's clothes she escapes from her parent to seek revenge
upon her lover. At an inn she hears a woman in the next room complaining
of her gallant's desertion, and going in to console her, hears the
moving story of Signiora Vicino and Monsieur Beaumont, told as a warning
to the credulous and unwary sex. The injured fair enters a convent.

Still in pursuit of her lover, Clementina on Montelupe meets the funeral
of a young woman who had been torn to pieces by wolves. The chief
mourner proves to be Glencairn. She is hindered in an attempt to stab
him and thrown into prison, where he visits her and disarms her
resentment by offering to marry her. After the ceremony they proceed to
Paris where each plunges into dissipation. Finally they separate,
Clementina dies of a fever, and the Baron is left free to pursue his
inclinations through a possible third part, which, however, was never
written.

After a slumber of forty years "The Agreeable Caledonian" was reprinted,
as the "Monthly Review" informs us, from a copy corrected by Mrs.
Haywood not long before her death.[16] The review continues, "It is like
the rest of Mrs. Haywood's novels, written in a tawdry style, now
utterly exploded; the romances of these days being reduced much nearer
the standard of nature, and to the manners of the living world." Realism
is, indeed, far to seek in the brief but intricate tissue of incidents
that made the novel of 1728. To a taste accustomed to "Sir Charles
Grandison," and "Peregrine Pickle," and "The Sentimental Journey" the
rehash of Eliza Haywood's novel must have seemed very far even from the
manners of the world of fiction. The judgment of the "Critical Review"
was still more savage in its accuracy.[17] "This is a republication of a
dull, profligate Haywoodian production, in which all the males are
rogues, and all the females whores, without a glimpse of plot, fable, or
sentiment." In its uncompromising literalness the critic's verdict ranks
with the learned Ascham's opinion of the "Morte D'Arthur,"--except that
it has not been superseded. The same animadversion might be urged
against Defoe's "Colonel Jacque" or "The Fortunate Mistress." If Mrs.
Haywood sinned against the standards of the age to come, she was not out
of touch with the spirit of her own generation.

As a writer she knew but one unfailing recipe for popularity: whatever
she touched must be forthwith gilded with passion. The chief _raison
d'être_ for "The Fair Hebrew: or, a True, but Secret History of Two
Jewish Ladies, Who lately resided in London" (1729) was to gratify the
prejudices of anti-Semitic readers, yet it is hardly distinguishable
from her sentimental love stories.

The young and gay Dorante, going to the synagogue for a lark, is tempted
by the sight of a fair hand to break into the woman's apartment and to
expose himself to the charms of the beautiful Kesiah. He engages her in
a correspondence, but at their first interview she gives him clearly to
understand that he can gain nothing from her but by marriage. Driven by
his unhappy passion, he complies with her demand, and she becomes a
Church of England woman. But once married, Kesiah is too proud to permit
the concealment that prudence demands. Though his father is sure to
disinherit them, she insists upon revealing the marriage.

Dorante entrusts his small stock of money to his wife's brother,
Abimelech, in order to start him in trade. The Jew goes to Holland with
a woman whom he has saved from religious murder at the hands of a
Levite, and nothing further is heard from him or the money. Imprisoned
by his creditors, Dorante is persuaded by his wife to sign away the
entail of his estate in return for a sum of money. Thereupon she departs
with the gold and a new gallant, leaving her unhappy husband to be
rescued from want by the kindness, of a younger brother. After the poor
solace of hearing that Kesiah and her paramour have been lost at sea, he
dies of a broken heart.[18]


Though Eliza Haywood exhausted nearly every possible bit of
sensationalism that could be extracted from tales of passion, she almost
never made use of the heroic feats of arms which constituted a no less
important resource of the French romances. Her heroes are victors in
love but not in war. The sole exception is a little romance of Moorish
chivalry in the eighth century. Though this period had already been
pre-empted by Mrs. Manley's "Memoirs of Europe," there is little doubt
that Mrs. Haywood was responsible for "The Arragonian Queen: A Secret
History" (1724), a peculiar blend of heroic adventures in battle,
bullfight, and tournament, with amorous intrigues of the most involved
kind.

Prince Albaraizor of Arragon goes to assist Omar, King of Valencia,
against a traitorous foe, and with the help of the young general,
Abdelhamar, succeeds in vanquishing the enemy, though the latter youth
is seriously wounded while performing miracles of valor. To reward the
conqueror the hand of the Princess Zephalinda is bestowed upon him, but
she unfortunately is already enamored of Abdelhamar, whom she had
learned to love at a bullfight. But in spite of a repining letter from
her constant lover, and in spite of his appearance before her all pale
and trembling from his wounds, the Princess refuses to deviate from her
duty.

  "The next Day the Marriage was celebrated with all the intended
  Magnificence, and on their return from the Mosque, the Prince and
  Princess repair'd to a stately Scaffold, adorn'd with inventive
  Luxury, whence they might behold a Tournament, the Prize of which was
  a Sword richly embellish'd with Diamonds, to be given by the Princess
  to him that should overcome; the whole Court were there, endeavouring
  to outshine each other in the Costliness of their Apparel--within the
  Barriers were all the Flower of the adjoining Kingdoms, drawn thither
  with a Thirst of Fame, and a Desire to shew their Dexterity. The
  Arragonian Noblemen were the Defenders against all Comers, and were
  like to have carried away the Prize, behaving themselves with the
  utmost Skill and Courage, when there appear'd in the Lists a Knight in
  black Armour, whose whole Air and dexterity in Horsemanship
  immediately attracted the Eyes of the numerous Spectators; the first
  Course he made, confirm'd them in the good opinion they had conceiv'd
  of him: in short, no body was able to stand against him, and he
  remain'd Conqueror, with the universal Applause of the whole Company.
  --He waited for some time, to see if no fresh Challengers would offer
  themselves; but none appearing, he was led to the Princess's Scaffold,
  to receive the Reward he had so well merited: He took it with the
  greatest Submission, but without putting up his Beaver, or discovering
  who he was, and kissing it with profound Respect, retir'd, without so
  much as making any obeisance to the King or Prince; and mixing himself
  with the Crowd of Knights, got off without being discover'd. Every
  body was surpriz'd at the uncourteous Behaviour of so otherwise
  accomplish'd a Cavalier, but none could possibly give the least guess
  at who it should be--the succeeding Diversions soon put him out of
  every body's Thoughts but Zephalinda's; she well knew it could be none
  but Abdelhamar, and trembled lest he should have been discovered,
  fearing his concealing his Recovery, and his disrespectful Carriage
  towards her Father and her Husband, might have given room to Surmises
  prejudicial to her Honour: but when watching him with her Eyes, and
  seeing him get off unfollow'd, or observ'd, she then began afresh to
  pine at Fate, who could render Abdelhamar Conqueror in every Action
  that he undertook, and only vanquish'd when he fought in hopes of
  gaining her."

The Prince and his bride return to their own country to receive the
crown. By the most tender assiduities Albaraizor has almost succeeded in
gaining the love of his wife when Abdelhamar again intrudes as
ambassador to congratulate him on his coronation. Though her old love
returns more strongly than ever, the Queen guards her honor well, and
insists that her lover marry Selyma, a captive Princess. But that lady,
stung by Abdelhamar's indifference, learns to hate him, and out of
revenge persuades the King that his wife is unfaithful to him. An
indiscreet letter from Abdelhamar confirms his suspicions. He orders
both Queen and ambassador cast into prison and by his woes destroys the
happiness of the whole court.

The passages relating the monarch's love and jealousy are described with
a fulness entirely lacking in the tournament scene quoted above, and we
may fairly infer that both writer and reader were more deeply interested
in affairs of the heart than in feats of arms, however glorious. The
emphasis given to love rather than to war in this tale is significant as
a contrast to the opposite tendency in such romances of a century later
as "Ivanhoe," in which a tournament scene very similar in outline to
that in "The Arragonian Queen" is told with the greatest attention to
warlike detail, while the love story, though not allowed to languish, is
kept distinctly subordinate to the narrative of chivalric adventure.
Mrs. Haywood, however, was too warm-blooded a creature to put aside the
interests of the heart for the sake of a barbarous Gothic brawl, and too
experienced a writer not to know that her greatest forte lay in painting
the tender rather than the sterner passions.

In this respect she forms a decided contrast to Defoe, whose men and
women are almost never startled out of their matter-of-fact attitude.
His picaresque characters, though outwardly rogues or their female
counterparts, have at bottom something of the dissenting parson and
cool-headed, middle-aged man of business. Whatever else they may be,
they are never love-sick. Passion is to them a questionable asset, and
if they marry, they are like to have the matter over with in the course
of half a paragraph. Eliza Haywood, however, possessed in excess the one
gift that Defoe lacked. To the scribbling authoress love was the force
that motivated all the world. Crude and conventional as are many of her
repeated attempts to analyze the workings of a mind under the sway of
soft desires, she nevertheless succeeded now and then in actuating her
heroines with genuine emotion. Both romance and realism were woven into
the intricate web of the Richardsonian novel, and the contribution of
Mrs. Haywood deserves to be remembered if only because she supplied the
one element missing in Defoe's masterpieces. Each writer in his day was
considered paramount in his or her particular field.[19]


FOOTNOTES
[1]
_Les Héros de Roman_, 1664, circulated in MS. and printed in 1688
without the consent of the author. Not included in Boileau's _Works_
until 1713.

[2]
The story of Tellisinda, who to avoid the reproach of barrenness imposes
an adopted child upon her husband, but later bearing a son, is obliged
to see a spurious heir inherit her own child's estate, was borrowed with
slight changes from La Belle Assemblée, I, Day 5, and used in Mrs.
Haywood's _Fruitless Enquiry_, (1727).

[3]
_La Pierre philosophale des dames, ou les Caprices de l'amour et du
destin_, by Louis Adrien Duperron de Castera, (1723), 12mo.

[4]
_L'Illustre Parisienne_, (1679), variously attributed to Préchac and to
Mme de Villedieu, had already been translated as _The Illustrious
Parisian Maid, or The Secret Amours of a German Prince_, (1680). A
synopsis is given by H.E. Chatenet, _Le Roman et les Romans d'une femme
de lettres ... Mme de Villedieu_, (Paris, 1911), 253-9.

[5]
I have not seen a copy of the book.

[6]
Mrs. E. Griffith's comment on the work is typical of the tendency to
moralize even the amusements of the day. See _A Collection of Novels_,
(1777), II, 162. "The idea on which this piece is founded, has a good
deal of merit in it; as tending to abate envy, and conciliate content;
by shewing, in a variety of instances, that appearances are frequently
fallacious; that perfect or permanent happiness is not the lot of mortal
life; and that peace of mind and rational enjoyment are only to be found
in bosoms free from guilt, and from intimate connection with the
guilty."

[7]
I have omitted two or three unessential stories in the analysis.

[8]
Act I, sc. ii. In the novel the heroine is shut up by a miserly hunks of
an uncle to force her into a detested mercenary match with his son. In
the play the mistress is the wife of the old and jealous keeper of the
asylum.

[9]
Preface to _The Mercenary Lover_, (1726).

[10]
_The Rash Resolve_, (1724).

[11]
_The Double Marriage_, (1726).

[12]
Lodge's _Rosalynde, ed._ E.C. Baldwin, p. 19. _Philidore and Placentia_
(1727), p. 12.

[13]
Miss C.E. Morgan, _The Novel of Manners_, (1911), 100.

[14]
A companion-piece to the third edition of _The Mercenary Lover_, (1728).

[15]
A companion-piece to _The Fatal Secret: or, Constancy in Distress_.

[16]
_Monthly Review_, XXXVIII, 412, May, 1768. _Clementina; or the History
of an Italian Lady, who made her Escape from a Monastery,_ etc.

[17]
_Critical Review_, XXV, 59.

[18]
In both editions is advertised "Persecuted Virtue: or, the Cruel Lover.
A True Secret History, Writ at the Request of a Lady of Quality," which
was advertised also in the _Daily Post_, 28 Nov. 1728. I have not found
a copy.

[19]
An anonymous poem prefixed to Mrs. Elizabeth Boyd's _The Happy
Unfortunate; or, the Female Page_ (1737) testifies to Mrs. Haywood's
reputation in the following terms:

  "Yeild [_sic_] Heywood yeild, yeild all whose tender Strains,
  Inspire the Dreams of Maids and lovesick Swains;
  Who taint the unripen'd Girl with amorous Fire,
  And hint the first faint Dawnings of Desire:
  Wing each Love-Atom, that in Embryo lies,
  And teach young Parthenissa's Breasts to rise.
  A new Elisa writes," etc., etc.




CHAPTER III


THE DUNCAN CAMPBELL PAMPHLETS

Only once did Eliza Haywood compete with Defoe upon the same ground.
Both novelists were alive to the value of sensational matter, but as we
have seen, appealed to the reader's emotional nature from different
sides. Defoe with his strong interest in practical life looked for
stirring incidents, for strange and surprising adventures on land and
sea, for unusual or uncanny occurrences; whereas Mrs. Haywood, less a
journalist than a romancer, rested her claim to public favor upon the
secure basis of the tender passions. In the books exploiting the deaf
and dumb prophet Duncan Campbell, whose fame, once illustrated by
notices in the "Tatler" and "Spectator,"[1] was becoming a little dimmed
by 1720, each writer chose the kind of material that the natural
propensity and previous experience of each had trained him or her to use
with the greatest success.

Accordingly the "History of the Life and Adventures of Mr. Duncan
Campbell, a gentleman who, though deaf and dumb, writes down any
stranger's name at first sight, with their future contingencies of
fortune: Now living in Exeter Court, over against the Savoy in the
Strand," published by Curll on 30 April, 1720, and written largely by
Defoe, devoted only four chapters directly to the narrative of the
conjuror's life, while four chapters and the Appendix were given over to
disquisitions upon the method of teaching deaf and dumb persons to read
and write; upon the perception of demons, genii, or familiar spirits;
upon the second sight; upon magic in all its branches; and upon the laws
against false diviners and soothsayers. Beside showing the keenness of
his interest in the supernatural, the author deliberately avoided any
occasion for talking gossip or for indulging "persons of airy tempers"
with sentimental love-tales. "Instead of making them a bill of fare out
of patchwork romances and polluting scandal," reads the preface signed
by Duncan Campbell, "the good old gentleman who wrote the adventures of
my life has made it his business to treat them with a great variety of
entertaining passages which always terminate in morals that tend to the
edification of all readers, of whatsoever sex, age, or profession."
Those who came to consult the seer on affairs of the heart, therefore,
received only the scantiest mention from his biographer, and never were
the languishing and sighing of Mr. Campbell's devotees described with
any romantic glamor. On the contrary, Defoe portrayed in terse and
homely phrases the follies and affectations of the dumb man's fair
clients. The young blooming beauty who found little Duncan "wallowing in
the dust" and bribed him with a sugarplum to reveal the name of her
future husband; the "sempstress with an itching desire for a parson";
housekeepers in search of stolen goods; the "widow who bounced" from one
end of the room to the other and finally "scuttled too airily downstairs
for a woman in her clothes"; and the chambermaid disguised as a fine
lady, who by "the toss of her head, the jut of the bum, the sidelong
leer of the eye" proclaimed her real condition--these types are treated
by Defoe in a blunt realistic manner entirely foreign to Eliza Haywood's
vein. Some passages,[2] perhaps, by a sentiment too exalted or by a
description in romantic style suggest the hand of another writer,
possibly Mrs. Haywood, but more probably William Bond, in whose name the
reprint of 1728 was issued.[3] But in the main, the book reflected
Defoe's strong tendency to speculate upon unusual and supernatural
phenomena, and utterly failed to "divulge the secret intrigues and
amours of one part of the sex, to give the other part room to make
favorite scandal the subject of their discourse."[4]

That Defoe had refrained from treating one important aspect of Duncan
Campbell's activities he was well aware. "If I was to tell his
adventures with regard, for instance, to women that came to consult him,
I might, perhaps, have not only written the stories of eleven thousand
virgins that died maids, but have had the relations to give of as many
married women and widows, and the work would have been endless."[5] In
his biography of the Scotch prophet he does not propose to clog the
reader with any adventures save the most remarkable and those in various
ways mysterious.

The "method of swelling distorted and commented trifles into volumes" he
is content to leave to the writers of fable and romance. It was not long
before the press-agents of the dumb presager found a romancer willing to
undertake the task that Defoe neglected. Mrs. Haywood in her association
with Aaron Hill and his circle could hardly have escaped knowing William
Bond, who in 1724 was playing Steele to Hill's Addison in producing the
numbers of the "Plain Dealer." Instigated perhaps by him, the rising
young novelist contributed on 19 March, 1724, the second considerable
work on the fortune-teller, under the caption: "A Spy upon the Conjurer:
or, a Collection of Surprising Stories, with Names, Places, and
particular Circumstances relating to Mr. Duncan Campbell, commonly known
by the Name of the Deaf and Dumb Man; and the astonishing Penetration
and Event of his Predictions. Written to my Lord---- by a Lady, who for
more than Twenty Years past; has made it her Business to observe all
Transactions in the Life and Conversation of Mr. Campbell."[5a]

"As long as Atalantis shall be read," some readers were sure to find
little to their taste in the curious information contained in the first
biography of Campbell, but Mrs. Haywood was not reluctant to gratify an
appetite for scandal when she could profitably cater to it. Developing
the clue afforded her by the announcement in Defoe's "Life and
Adventures" of a forthcoming little pocket volume of original letters
that passed between Mr. Campbell and his correspondents,[6] she composed
a number of epistles as coming from all sorts of applicants to the
prophet. These missives, however, were preceded by a long letter
addressed to an anonymous lord and signed "Justicia," which was chiefly
concocted of anecdotes illustrative of the dumb man's powers. Unlike the
incidents in Defoe's work, the greater number of the stories relate to
love affairs in the course of which one party or the other invoked the
seer's assistance. Although the author was thoroughly acquainted with
the previous history of Mr. Campbell,[7] she was evidently more
interested in the phenomena of passion than in the theory of divination,
A brief discussion of astrology, witchcraft, and dreams easily led her
to a narrative of "Mr. Campbell's sincerity exemplify'd, in the story of
a lady injured in the tenderest part by a pretended friend." A glance
through the table of contents reveals the preponderance of such headings
as "A strange story of a young lady, who came to ask the name of her
husband"; "A whimsical story of an old lady who wanted a husband";
"Reflections on the inconstancy of men. A proof of it in a ruin'd girl,
that came to ask Mr. Campbell's advice"; "A story of my Lady
Love-Puppy"; "A merry story of a lady's chamber-maid, cook-maid, and
coach-man," and so on. Evidences of an attempt to suggest, if not actual
references to, contemporary scandal, are to be found in such items as "A
strange instance of vanity and jealousy in the behaviour of Mrs. F--- ";
"The particulars of the fate of Mrs. J---- L---- "; and "A story of
the Duke of---- 's mistress." It is not surprising that "Memoirs of a
Certain Island" appeared within six months of "A Spy upon the Conjurer."

When "Justicia" refers to her personal relations with the lord to whom
her letter is addressed, her comments are still more in keeping with the
acknowledged forte of the lady novelist. They are permeated with the
tenderest emotions. The author of "Moll Flanders" and "The Fortunate
Mistress" might moralize upon the unhappy consequences of love, but he
was inclined to regard passion with an equal mind. He stated facts
simply. Love, in his opinion, was not a strong motive when uncombined
with interest. But Eliza Haywood held the romantic watchword of all for
love, and her books are a continual illustration of _Amor vincit omnia_.
In the present case her words seem to indicate that the passions of love
and jealousy so often experienced by her characters were not unfamiliar
to her own breast. Even Duncan Campbell's predictions were unable to
alter her destiny.

  "But tho' I was far enough from disbelieving what he said, yet Youth,
  Passion, and Inadvertency render'd his Cautions ineffectual. It was in
  his Hand-Writing I first beheld the dear fatal Name, which has since
  been the utter Destruction of my Peace: It was from him I knew I
  should be undone by Love and the Perfidy of Mankind, before I had the
  least Notion of the one, or had seen any of the other charming enough
  to give me either Pain or Pleasure.... Yet besotted as I was, I had
  neither the Power of defending myself from the Assaults of Love, nor
  Thought sufficient to enable me to make those Preparations which were
  necessary for my future Support, while I had yet the means" ...(p.
  13).

  "Yet so it is with our inconsiderate Sex!--To vent a present Passion,
  --for the short liv'd Ease of railing at the Baseness of an ungrateful
  Lover,--to gain a little Pity,--we proclaim our Folly, and become the
  Jest of all who know us.--A forsaken Woman immediately grows the
  Object of Derision,--rallied by the Men, and pointed at by every
  little Flirt, who fancies herself secure in her own Charms of never
  being so, and thinks 'tis want of Merit only makes a Wretch.

  "For my dear Lord, I am sensible, tho' our Wounds have been a long
  time heal'd, there yet remains a Tenderness, which, if touch'd, will
  smart afresh.--The Darts of Passion, such as we have felt, make too
  indeliable an Impression ever to be quite eraz'd;--they are not
  content with the eternal Sear they leave on the Reputation ..."
  (p.76).

These passages are in substance and style after Eliza Haywood's manner,
while the experiences therein hinted at do not differ essentially from
the circumstances of her own life.

The various aspects of love and jealousy are also the theme of the
second and third parts of "A Spy upon the Conjurer."[8] The two packets
of letters were merely imaginary, unless the pseudonymous signatures of
some of the missives may have aided contemporary readers to "smoke"
allusions to current gossip. At any rate the references are now happily
beyond our power to fathom.

Apparently the taste for Duncan Campbell anecdotes was stimulated by the
piquant sauce of scandal, for beside the several issues of "A Spy upon
the Conjurer" a second and smaller volume of the same sort was published
on 10 May, 1725. This sixpenny pamphlet of forty pages, entitled "The
Dumb Projector: Being a Surprizing Account of a Trip to Holland made by
Mr. Duncan Campbell. With the Manner of his Reception and Behaviour
there. As also the various and diverting Occurrences that happened on
his Departure," was, like the former work, couched in the form of a
letter to a nobleman and signed "Justicia." Both from internal
evidence[9] and from the style it can be assigned with confidence to the
author of "A Spy upon the Conjurer." The story, relating how Mr.
Campbell was induced to go into Holland in the hope of making his
fortune, how he was disappointed, the extraordinary instances of his
power, and his adventures amatory and otherwise, is of little importance
as a narrative. The account differs widely from that of Campbell's trip
to the Netherlands in the "Life and Adventures" of 1720.

Soon after the publication of "The Dumb Projector" Defoe also made a
second contribution to the now considerable Duncan Campbell literature
under the title of "The Friendly Daemon: or, the Generous Apparition.
Being a True Narrative of a Miraculous Cure newly performed upon ... Dr.
Duncan Campbell, by a familiar Spirit, that appeared to him in a white
surplice, like a Cathedral Singing Boy." The quotation of the story from
Glanvil already used by the prophet's original biographer, and the keen
interest in questions of the supernatural displayed by the writer, make
the attribution of this piece to Defoe a practical certainty. Evidently,
then, Eliza Haywood was not the only one to profit by keeping alive the
celebrity of the fortune-teller.

The year 1728 was marked by the reissue of the "Life and Adventures" as
"The Supernatural Philosopher ... by William Bond," whose probable
connection with the work has already been discussed, and by the
publication in the "Craftsman"[10] of a letter, signed "Fidelia,"
describing a visit to Duncan Campbell. The writer, who professes an
intense admiration for Mr. Caleb D'Anvers and all his works, relates how
the dumb oracle, after writing down her name, had prophesied that the
Craftsman would certainly gain his point in 1729. She concludes with
praise of Mr. Campbell, and an offer to conduct Caleb to visit him on
the ensuing Saturday. That the communication was not to be regarded as a
companion-piece to the letter from Dulcibela Thankley in the "Spectator"
(No. 474), was the purport of the editorial statement which introduced
it: "I shall make no other Apology for the Vanity, which I may seem
guilty of in publishing the following Letter, than assuring the Reader
it is _genuine_, and that I do it in Complyance with the repeated
Importunity of a _fair Correspondent_." The style of the letter does not
strongly suggest that of "A Spy upon the Conjurer," though the
concluding sentence, "_Love_ shall be there too, who waits forever upon
_Wit_," is a sentiment after Eliza's heart. And moreover, though
"Fidelia" and "Justicia" may be one and the same persons, Mr. D'Anvers'
assurances that the letter is genuine are not to be relied upon with too
much confidence, for had he wished to praise himself, he would naturally
have resorted to some such device.

The last volume relating to the Scotch wizard did not appear until 1732,
two years after Campbell's death. "Secret Memoirs of the late Mr. Duncan
Campbel, The famous Deaf and Dumb Gentleman. Written by Himself, who
ordered they should be publish'd after his Decease," consisted of 164
pages devoted to miscellaneous anecdotes of the prophet, a reprint of
Defoe's "Friendly Daemon" (p. 166), "Original Letters sent to Mr.
Campbel by his Consulters" (p. 196), and "An Appendix, By Way of
Vindication of Mr. Duncan Campbel, Against That groundless Aspersion
cast upon him, That he but pretended to be Deaf and Dumb. By a Friend of
the Deceased" (p. 225). The authorship of this book has received but
slight attention from students of Defoe, and still remains something of
a puzzle. No external evidence on the point has yet come to light, but
some probable conclusions may be reached through an examination of the
substance and style.

In the first place, there is no probability--the statement on the
title-page notwithstanding--that Mr. Campbell himself had anything to do
with the composition of the "Memoirs." Since the magician had taken no
part in the literary exploitation of his fame during his lifetime, it is
fair to infer that he did not begin to do so two years after his death.
Moreover, each of the three writers, Bond, Defoe, and Eliza Haywood,
already identified with the Campbell pamphlets was perfectly capable of
passing off fiction as feigned biography. Both the author of "Memoirs of
a Cavalier" and the scribbler of secret histories had repeatedly used
the device. There is no evidence, however, that William Bond had any
connection with the present work, but a large share of it was almost
certainly done by Defoe and Mrs. Haywood.

The former had died full of years on 26 April, 1731, about a year before
the "Secret Memoirs" was published. It is possible, however, that he may
have assembled most of the material for the book and composed a number
of pages. The inclusion of his "Friendly Daemon" makes this suspicion
not unlikely. And furthermore, certain anecdotes told in the first
section, particularly in the first eighty pages, are such stories as
would have appealed to Defoe's penchant for the uncanny, and might well
have been selected by him. The style is not different from that of
pieces known to be his.

But that the author of "Robinson Crusoe" would have told the "little
History" of the young woman without a fortune who obtains the husband
she desires by means of a magic cake (p. 86) is scarcely probable, for
the story is a sentimental tale that would have appealed to love-sick
Lydia Languishes. As far as we know, Defoe remained hard-headed to the
last. But Mrs. Haywood when she was not a scandal-monger, was a
sentimentalist. The story would have suited her temperament and the
tastes of her readers. It is told so much in her manner that one could
swear that the originator of the anecdote was _aut Eliza, aut diabola_.
A few pages further on (p. 104) appears the incident of a swaggerer who
enters the royal vault of Westminster Abbey at dead of night on a wager,
and having the tail of his coat twitched by the knife he has stuck in
the ground, is frightened into a faint--a story which Mrs. Haywood later
retold in different words in her "Female Spectator."[11] The "Secret
Memoirs" further informs us by a casual remark of Mr. Campbell's that
Eliza Haywood was well acquainted with the seer.

  "Sometimes, when surrounded by my Friends, such as Anthony Hammond,
  Esq; Mr. Philip Horneck, Mr. Philips, Mr.----, Mrs. Centlivre, Mrs.
  Fowk, Mrs. Eliza Haywood, and other celebrated Wits, of which my
  House, for some Years has been the general Rendezvous, a good Bowl of
  Punch before me, and the Glass going round in a constant Circle of
  Mirth and Good Humour, I have, in a Moment, beheld Sights which has
  froze my very Blood, and put me into Agonies that disordered the whole
  Company" (p. 131).

The last anecdote in the first section is a repetition at some length of
the story of Campbell's adventures in Holland, not as related in Defoe's
"Life and Adventures," but according to the version in Mrs Haywood's
"Dumb Projector." The beginning, which has to do with a grave old
gentleman who was bit by a viper, is told in almost the same words;
indeed some letters that passed between the characters are identically
the same, and the end, though much abbreviated, contains a number of
sentences taken word for word from the earlier telling of the story.
Finally, Mrs. Haywood was the first and hitherto the only writer of the
Campbell pamphlets who had printed letters supposedly addressed to the
prophet by his clients. The device was peculiarly hers. The "Original
Letters sent to Mr. Campbel by his Consulters" in the "Secret Memoirs"
are similar to those already composed by her for "A Spy upon the
Conjurer." There is no reason to think that she did not invent the later
epistles as well as the former.

If, then, a number of anecdotes in the "Secret Memoirs" are suggestive
of Mrs. Haywood's known writings, and if one of them remained in her
memory thirteen years later; if the pamphlet carefully alludes to Eliza
Haywood as one of the dumb seer's particular friends, and if it repeats
in slightly different form her peculiar account of the dumb projector's
journey into Holland; and if, finally, the book contains a series of
letters to Campbell from fictitious correspondents fashioned on the last
already used by her, we may conclude that in all likelihood the
authoress whose name had previously been associated with Duncan Campbell
literature was again concerned in writing or revising this latest work.
At least a cautious critic can say that there is no inherent
improbability in the theory that Defoe with journalistic instinct,
thinking that Campbell's death in 1730 might stimulate public interest
in the wizard, had drafted in the rough the manuscript of a new
biography, but was prevented by the troubles of his last days from
completing it; that after his death the manuscript fell into the hands
of Mrs. Haywood, or perhaps was given to her by the publishers Millan
and Chrichley to finish; that she revised the material already written,
supplemented it with new and old matter of her own, composed a packet of
Original Letters, and sent the volume to press. The origin of the
"Appendix, by Way of Vindication of Mr. Duncan Campbel" remains unknown,
and any theory about the authorship of the "Secret Memoirs" must be
regarded in last analysis as largely conjectural.[11a]

Though the author of the original "Life and Adventures" has received
most of the credit due to Campbell's biographer, Mrs. Haywood, as we
have seen, was not less active in exploiting the deaf and dumb
gentleman. Her "Spy upon the Conjurer" was fubbed off upon the public as
often as Defoe's earlier volume, and neither writer could claim any
advantage over the other from his second and slighter contribution. Each
held successfully his own coign of vantage. Eliza Haywood, in
contemporary opinion, outranked Defoe almost as far as an interpreter of
the heart as he surpassed her in concocting an account of a new marvel
or a tale of strange adventure. The arbitress of the passions indeed
wrote nothing to compare in popularity with "Robinson Crusoe," but
before 1740 her "Love in Excess" ran through as many editions as "Moll
Flanders" and its abridgments, while "Idalia: or, the Unfortunate
Mistress" had been reprinted three times separately and twice with her
collected novels before a reissue of Defoe's "Fortunate Mistress" was
undertaken. When in 1740 Applebee published a new edition of "Roxana,"
he had it supplemented by "a continuation of nearly one hundred and
fifty pages, many of which are filled with rubbish about women named
Cleomira and Belinda."[12] Here again Mrs. Haywood's red herring crossed
the trail of Defoe, for oddly enough the sheets thus accurately
characterized were transcribed word for word from Eliza's second novel,
"The British Recluse." At the point where the heroine swallows a
sleeping potion supposing it poison, faints, and is thought to be dead,
the narrative breaks off abruptly with the words:

  "Though the History of Cleomira and Belinda's Misfortunes, may be
  thought foreign to my Affairs ... yet it is absolutely necessary I
  should give it a Place, because it is the Source, or Spring, of many
  strange and uncommon Scenes, which happened to me during the remaining
  Part of my Life, and which I cannot give an Account of without"
  ...[13]

The pages which follow relate how Roxana became reconciled to her
daughter, died in peace, and was buried at Hornsey. The curious reader
finds, however, no further mention of Belinda and her friend. Evidently
Applebee's hack simply stole as much copy as he needed from an almost
forgotten book, trusting to receive his money before the fraud was
discovered. The volumes of Eliza Haywood were indeed a mine of emotional
scenes, and those who wished to read of warm desires or palpitating
passions had to turn to her romances or do without. Wretched as her work
seems in comparison to the modern novel, it was for the time being the
nearest approach to idealistic fiction and to the analysis of human
feelings. Defoe's romances of incident were the triumphant culmination
of the picaresque type; Mrs. Haywood's sentimental tales were in many
respects mere vague inchoations of a form as yet to be produced. But
when freed from the impurities of intrigue and from the taint of
scandal, the novel of heart interest became the dominant type of English
fiction. Unfortunately, however, Eliza Haywood was too practical a
writer to outrun her generation. The success of "A Spy upon the
Conjurer" may have convinced her that a ready market awaited stories of
amorous adventure and hinted libel. At any rate, she soon set out to
gratify the craving for books of that nature in a series of writings
which redounded little to her credit, though they brought her wide
notoriety.

FOOTNOTES
[1]
_Tatler_, No. 14; _Spectator_, Nos. 323, 474, 560.

[2]
Particularly the incongruous description of Duncan Campbell's first
appearance in London, where the writer finds the "heavenly youth" seated
like a young Adonis in the "center of an angelic tribe" of "the most
beautiful females that ever my eyes beheld," etc. G.A. Aitken's edition
of _The Life and Adventures of Mr. Duncan Campbell_, 87-9.

[3]
_The Supernatural Philosopher_ ... by William Bond, of Bury St. Edmonds