INSTALLING A BATTERY ON A CAR


A battery must be installed carefully on the car if it is to have any
chance to give good service. Careless installation of a battery which
is in good working order will invariably lead to trouble in a very
short time. On the other hand, a properly installed battery is, nine
times out of ten, a good working and long lived battery.

After you have removed the old battery, scrape all rust and corrosion
from the inside of the battery box or compartment in which the battery
is placed. This can best be done with a putty knife and wire brush. If
you find that electrolyte has been spilled in the box, pour a
saturated solution of baking soda on the parts affected so as to
neutralize the acid. Then wipe the inside of the box dry and paint it
with a good acid proof paint.

Next take out the hold down bolts. Clean them with a wire brush, and
oil the threads on the bolt and in the nut to make them work easily.
It is very important that this oiling be done, as the oil protects the
bolts from corrosion, and to remove the nuts from a corroded bolt is
an extremely difficult and aggravating piece of work, often resulting
in the bolts being broken. Should such bolts become loose while the
car is in use, it is hard to tighten them.

Wooden strips found in the battery box should be thoroughly cleaned
and scraped, and then painted with acid proof paint. When you lower
the battery into its box, lower it all the way gently. Do not lower it
within an inch or so of the bottom of the case and then drop it. This
will result in broken jars and plate lugs. Turn the hold downs tight,
but not so tight as to break the sealing compound at the ends of the
battery, thereby causing electrolyte to leak out, and battery to
become a "slopper".

Cables and connectors should be scraped bright with a knife and
brushed thoroughly with the wire brush to remove all corrosion. Old
tape which has become acid soaked should be removed and the cable or
wire underneath cleaned. Before applying new tape, take a small round
bristle brush and paint Vaseline liberally over the exposed cable
immediately back of the taper terminal. Then cover the Vaseline with
tape, which Should be run well back from the terminal. The Vaseline
prevents the corrosion of the cable and the tape holds the Vaseline in
place. After the tape has been applied, paint it with acid proof
paint. Cover the terminals of the battery with Vaseline. Cables must
have enough slack to prevent strains from being put on the battery
terminals.

By following these directions, you will not only have a properly
installed battery, which will have a good chance to give good service,
but will have a neat looking job which is most pleasing to the eye of
the car owner.

Remove all dirt from the battery and cable terminals and thoroughly
clean the surfaces which are to connect together, but do not scrape
off the lead coating. Apply a heavy coating of pure Vaseline to these
surfaces and tighten the connection perfectly, squeezing out the
Vaseline. Then give the whole connection a heavy coating of Vaseline.
This is very important in order to prevent connection trouble.

If battery is installed in an enclosing box, be sure that none of the
ventilating holes are clogged.


STORING BATTERIES


When a battery is not in active use on a car it should be put into
storage. Storage is necessary:

1. When a car is to stand idle for a considerable period, such as is
the case when it is held for future delivery.

2. When a car is laid up for the winter.

3. When batteries are kept in stock.

Batteries may be stored "wet," i.e., completely assembled and filled
with electrolyte, or "dry," i.e., in a dry disassembled condition,
without electrolyte. In deciding whether a battery should be stored
"wet" or "dry," two things are to be considered, i.e. the length of
time the battery is to be in storage, and the condition of the
battery. If a battery is to be out of commission for a year or more,
it should be put into "dry" storage. If it is to be in storage for
less than one year, it may be put into "wet" storage if it is in a
good condition. If the condition of the battery is such that it will
need to be dismantled soon for repairs, it should be put into "dry"
storage, even though it is to be out of service for less than one year.

Batteries in "dry" storage require no attention while they are in
storage, but they must be dismantled before being put into storage and
reassembled when put back into service.

When a battery is brought in to be stored, note its general condition
carefully.

(a) Its General Appearance-condition of case, handles, terminals,
sealing compound, and so on.

(b) Height and specific gravity of the electrolyte in each cell.

(c) Age of Battery. Question owner as to length of time he has had
battery. Read date marks on battery if there are any, or determine age
by the age code. See page 243. If a battery is less than a year old,
is in good condition, and is to be stored for less than one year, it
may be put into "wet" storage. If it is more than a year old, put it
into dry storage, unless it is in first class shape and is to be
stored for only several months.

After making your general observations, clean the battery, add
distilled water to bring the electrolyte up to the proper level, put
the battery on charge and keep it on the line until it is fully
charged. Watch for any abnormal condition during the charge, such as
excessive temperature rise, failure of voltage to come up, failure of
specific gravity to come up, and gassing before gravity becomes
constant.

If no abnormal conditions develop during the charge, put the battery
on discharge at a rate which will cause the voltage to drop to 1.7
volts per cell in about four hours. Measure the cell voltages at
regular intervals during the discharge test. If the voltage of any
cell drops much more rapidly than that of the other cells, that cell
is defective in some way, and should be opened for inspection. If the
voltage of all cells drops to 1.7 in three hours or less, the battery
should be put into dry storage.

After completing the discharge test, recharge it fully, no matter
whether it is to be put into wet or dry storage.

If no trouble developed during the charge or discharge, the battery
may be put into "wet" storage. If trouble did develop, the battery
should be put into "dry" storage.

If dry storage is found to be necessary the owner should be informed
that the condition of his battery would cause it to deteriorate in wet
storage and necessitate much more expensive repairs when put into use
again than will be necessary in the thorough overhauling and
rejuvenation of dry storage. He should be advised that dry storage
involves dismantling, drying out elements and reassembling with the
needed repairs and new separators in the Spring. Be sure that the
customer understands this. If it is evident that repairs or new parts,
involving costs additional to storage charges, will be necessary, tell
him so. Do not leave room for a complaint about costs in the Spring.

To avoid any misunderstanding, it is highly advisable to have the
customer put his signature on a STORAGE AGREEMENT which states fully
the terms under which the battery is accepted for storage. The storage
cost may be figured on a monthly basis, or a price for the entire
storage period may be agreed upon. The monthly rate should be the same
as the regular price for a single battery recharge. If a flat rate is
paid for the entire storage period, $2.00 to $3.00 is a fair price.


"Wet" Storage


1. Store the batteries on a bench or shelf in a convenient location
and large enough to allow a little air space around each battery.

2. Place each battery upon wooden strips in order to keep the bottom
of the battery clear of the bench or shelf.

3. Apply Vaseline freely to the battery terminals, and to exposed
copper wires in the battery cables if the cables are burned directly
to the battery terminals. If the cables are not burned on, remove them
from the battery.

4. If convenient, install the necessary wiring, switches, etc., so
that batteries may be connected up and charged where they stand.
Otherwise the batteries must be charged occasionally oil the charging
bench.

  [Fig. 151 Batteries connected for trickle charge]

5. Batteries in wet storage may be charged by the Exide "Trickle"
charge method, or may be given a bench charge at regular intervals.

6. Bench Charge Method.--Once every month, add distilled water to
replace evaporation. Then give battery a bench charge. See page 198.
Before putting battery into service repeat this process and just
before putting the battery into service, make the high rate discharge
test on it. See page 266.

7. Trickle Charge Method.--This consists of charging the batteries in
storage continuously at a very low rate, which is so low that no
gassing occurs, and still gives enough charge to maintain the
batteries in good condition. In many cases the "Trickle" Charge method
will be found more convenient than the bench charge method, and it has
the advantage of keeping the batteries in condition for putting into
service on short notice. It should, however, be used only where direct
current lighting circuits are available.

In the "Trickle" method, the batteries are first given a complete
bench charge, and are then connected in series across a charging
circuit with one or several incandescent lamps in series with the
batteries to limit the current. In Fig. 151, an example of connections
for a "Trickle" charge is given. The charging current for different
sized batteries varies from 0.05 to 0.15 ampere. The following table
gives the lamps required to give the desired current on 110 volt
circuit.

In each case, the lamps are connected in series with the batteries.
The "2-25 watt, (lamps), in parallel" listed in the table are to be
connected in parallel with each other and then in series with the
batteries. The same is true of the "3-25 watt (lamps), in series"
listed in the table.


Series on 115 Volt Line

Amp. Hours                    No. of Cells     No. 115 Volt
Capacity       Amperes        in Series        Lamps Required
5 Amp. Rate    Approximate    on Line          115 Volt

50 or less        0.05        3                5-15 watt, in series
50 or less        0.05        30               2-15 watt, in series
50 or less        0.05        45               1-15 watt, in series
50-100            0.10        3                3-25 watt, in series
50-100            0.10        3                1-25 watt, in series
50-100            0.10        45               2-25 watt, in parallel
100 or over       0.15        3                2-25 watt, in series
100 or over       0.15        30               1-25 watt, in series
100 or over       0.15        45               3-25 watt, in parallel

Every two months interrupt the trickle charge long enough to add water
to bring the electrolyte up to the proper level. When this has been
done, continue the trickle charge.

Before putting the batteries into service, see that the electrolyte is
up to the correct level, and that the specific gravity of the
electrolyte is 1.280-1.300. If necessary, give a short charge on the
charging bench to bring the specific gravity up to the correct value.


Dry Storage


1. Give the battery a complete charge. Pour out the electrolyte, and
separate the groups. If the negatives have bulged active material,
press them in the plate press. In batteries such as the Prest-OLite in
which it is difficult to remove the plates from the cover, the groups
need not be separated unless the negatives have badly bulged active
material. It may not be necessary to separate the groups even then,
provided that the positives are not buckled to any noticeable extent.
If only a very slight amount of buckling exists, the entire element
may be pressed by putting thin boards between the plates in place of
the separators.

2. Immerse the negatives in distilled water for ten to twelve hours.
If positives and negatives cannot be separated, wash each complete
element in a gentle stream of water.

3. Remove plates from water and allow them to drain thoroughly and
dry. The negatives will heat up when exposed to the air, and when they
do so they should be immersed in the water again to cool them. Repeat
this as long as they tend to heat up. Then allow them to dry
thoroughly.

4. Throw away the old separators. Rubber separators may be saved if in
good condition. Clean the covers and terminals., wash out the jars,
and turn the case up side down to drain out the water. Examine the box
carefully. It is advisable to wash with a solution of baking soda,
rinsing the water in order to neutralize as far as possible the action
of acid remaining on the box. If this is not done, the acid may start
decomposition of the box while in storage, in which case the owner of
the battery may insist on its renewal before acceptance at the end of
the storage period.

5. When, the plates are perfectly dry, nest the positives and
negatives together, using dry cardboard instead of separators, and
replace them in the jars in their proper positions.

6. Replace the covers and vent plugs, but, of course, do not use any
sealing compound on them.

7. Tie the terminals and top connectors to the handle on the case with
a wire.

8. Tag the battery with the owner's name and address, using the tag on
which you made the sketch of the arrangement of the terminals and top
connections.

9. Store the battery in a dry place, free from dust, until called for.

10. When the battery is to be put into service again, put in new
separators, put the elements in the jars, seal the covers, and burn on
the top connectors and terminals (if these are of the burned-on type).
Fill the cells with electrolyte of about 1.310 specific gravity and
allow the battery to stand for ten to twelve hours in order to cool.
Then put the battery on charge at one-half the normal charging rate
and charge until the specific gravity of the electrolyte stops rising
and remains stationary for five hours. The total time required for
this development charge will be about four days. Watch the temperature
of the electrolyte carefully, and if it should rise to 110°
Fahrenheit, stop the charge until it cools.

11. The specific gravity will fall during the first part of the
charge, due to the new separators; at the end of the charge, the
specific gravity should be 1.280-1.300. If it is not within these
limits, adjust it by withdrawing some electrolyte with the hydrometer
and adding water if the gravity is high, or 1.400 electrolyte if the
gravity is low.

12. Clean the case thoroughly and give it a coat of asphaltum paint.

13. Just before putting the battery into service, give it a high rate
discharge test. See page 266.


DETERMINING AGE OF BATTERY


Battery manufacturers use codes to indicate the age of their
batteries. These codes consist of letters, figures, or combinations of
letters and figures, which are stamped on the inter-cell connectors or
on the nameplate. The codes may also be burned on the case.

The codes of the leading makes of batteries follow. In addition to
determining the age of a battery by means of the code, the owner
should be questioned as to the time the battery was installed on his
car. If the battery is the original one which came with the car, the
dealer's or car manufacturer's records will help determine the
battery's age. If a new battery has been installed to replace the one
that came with the car, the battery distributor's records will help
determine the age of the battery.

Familiarity with the different makes and types of battery will also
help in determining a battery's age. Manufacturers make improvements
in the construction of their batteries from time to time, and by
keeping up-to-date on battery constructions, it is often possible to
approximate the age of a battery by such changes.

If a battery was kept "dry" while in stock, its age should be figured
from the time it was prepared for service and placed on the car, since
batteries in dry storage do not deteriorate. Some batteries are
shipped from the factory "wet," i.e., filled with electrolyte and
fully charged and the age of such batteries should be figured from the
time they were shipped from the factory, because deterioration begins
as soon as a battery is filled with electrolyte. When batteries are
"dry" no chemical action can take place, and the battery does not
deteriorate, while in a "wet" battery, chemical action takes place
which gradually causes a battery to deteriorate.


Exide Age Code.


Since October, 1917, the date of shipment of Exide batteries from the
factory, or from Exide Deposts has been stamped on the top of the
first inter-cell connector from the negative end of the batter instead
of on the nameplate figures are used to indicate the dates, as
follows:

  [Image: Exide and Philadelphia battery age code charts]

All Philadelphia batteries shipped prior to April 1, 1920 and all
batteries shipped from depot stock after this date carry double letter
branding. The first battery is the factory date and the second letter
in this code indicates latest month during which the guarantee may
begin.

Batteries sold direct from Philadelphia to all classes of customers
after April 1, 1920, carry the single letter branding code, indicating
month of manufacture.

The letters used in the double letter age code are selected from the
table given above, and the second letter is the important one, since
it gives the latest date from which adjustment can be made. If a
Philadelphia battery with a double letter age code comes in,
therefore, the foregoing table should be consulted in determining the
age of the battery.

If a Philadelphia battery with a single letter age code comes in, the
following table should be consulted in determining the age of the
battery:

  [Image: Single Letter Philadelphia Batteries Age Code Chart]


Prest-O-Lite Age Code.


All Prest-O-Lite batteries carry a date letter stamped on the
cell-connectors. This letter indicates the month and year in which the
battery was manufactured. The letter is preceeded by a number which
represents the factory at which the battery was built.


Prest-O-Lite Factory Marks.


  Indianapolis--50    Cleveland--7    San Francisco--23


For example: "50-K" indicates that the battery was manufactured at
Indianopolis in January, 1920.

In addition to the above, each "Wet" Prest-O-Lite battery is branded
in the side with a date, as "9-19," indicating October, 1919. This
date is really sixty days ahead of the actual building date, to allow
time for shipping, etc., before the guarentee starts. The branded
"9-19" was actually built in August, 1919.


Titan Age Code.


The age of Titan batteries is indicated by a number stamped on one of
the inter-cell connectors, this number indicating the month the
battery was hipped from the factory.

  [Image: Age code charts for Titan batteries]

  [Image: Age code charts for U.S.L., and Vesta batteries]

  [Image: Age code charts for Westinghouse and Willard batteries]



RENTAL BATTERIES


Rental batteries are those which are put on a customer's car while his
own is being repaired or recharged. They are usually rebuilt batteries
turned in when a new battery is bought. They may also be made of the
good parts of batteries which are junked. By carefully saving good
parts, such as plates, jars, covers, and cases, a stock of parts will
gradually be acquired from which rental batteries may be made. Rental
batteries may also be bought from the battery manufacturers.

A supply of rental batteries should, of course, be kept ready to go
out at any time. The number of such batteries depends upon the size of
the business. 25 batteries for each 1000 cars in the territory served
is a good average. Do not have too many rental batteries of the same
type. Many of them will be idle most of the time and thus will not
bring in any money. Rentals should be made to fit those makes of cars
of which there are the greatest number in the territory served by the
repair shop. Sufficient parts should be kept on hand to make up other
rentals on short notice.


Terminals for Rental Batteries


There are several combination terminals on the market which allow
rental batteries equipped with them to be easily connected to several
of the various types of cable terminals that are in use. Yet it is a
universal experience for the average service station always to have
calls for rental batteries with just the type of terminals which are
not on hand. When the station has many batteries with the clamp type
straight posts the call always seems to be for the taper plug type and
vice versa.

  [Fig. 152 Best type of connection to be used whenever possible]

Most of us will agree that the clamp type post terminal is the cause
of much trouble. It is almost impossible to prevent corrosion at the
positive post and many a car owner has found that this has been his
trouble when his lights burn all right but the battery seemingly does
not have power enough to turn over the engine and yet every cell tests
1.280. Service Station men should not scrape and clean up a corroded
clamp type terminal and put it back on again, but should cut it off
and put on either a taper plug or, preferably, a lead-plated copper
terminal lug. Of course either of these terminal connections
necessitates changing the battery terminals to correspond.

For rental batteries it will be found that short cable terminals with
lead-plated copper lugs at the end will enable a battery man to
connect most any type of cable terminal on any car. It is true that
such connections must be taped up, but the prompt service rendered
more than offsets a little tape. Figures 152 to 158 illustrate how
these connections can be made to the taper plug and clamp types which
are used on most cars.

  [Fig. 153 Method of connecting rental battery with cable
   terminals to car with taper plug]

  [Fig. 154 Another method of connecting copper terminal
   lug to clamp terminal on car]

  [Fig. 155 Method of connecting rental batteries with
   cable terminals to cars with clamp type terminals]

Fig. 155. Showing method of connecting rental batteries with cable
terminals, to cars with clamp type terminals. In Fig. 155 the cable
insulation is stripped for a space of an inch and the strands are
equally divided with an awl. A bolt is passed through the opening and
a washer and nut complete the connection.

  [Fig. 156 and Fig. 157 Two methods of connecting a clamp type
   terminal to taper plug terminals]

Two methods of connecting a clamp type terminal to taper plug
terminals. In Fig. 156 a taper plug is inserted and screwed tight. The
projecting part of the plug has been turned down to fit the clamp type
terminal which is clamped to it. In Fig. 157 a bolt is passed through
and the clamp type terminal tightened to the plug type terminal with a
washer and nut.

  [Fig. 158 Lead plated copper terminal lug]

Fig. 158 shows a simple means of putting on a lead-plated copper
terminal lug without solder. These lugs should be soldered on whenever
possible, but it is often a difficult job to put one on in the
confined space of some battery compartments. In such places, a quick
and lasting job can be made with a band vise and a short piece of
round iron. This latter is laid across the lug and the vise screwed
up, making a crimp across the lug which firmly grips down upon the
bared cable strands that have been inserted into the lug.

New batteries sold to replace other batteries should be installed with
cable connections, as illustrated in Figure 152. This method of
connecting a battery is superior to any other method and will never
cause trouble. It will usually be found that the old taper plugs or
clamp terminals that have been in use have started to corrode and that
a new battery works increasingly at a disadvantage from the day it is
installed until the corrosion becomes so great that the car cannot be
started and then the customer kicks about his new battery. The best
connection possible will pay handsome dividends to all concerned, in
the end.

Marking Rental Batteries. Rental batteries should be marked in a
mariner which enables them to be recognized quickly. Painting the
cases a red color is a good way. The service station's name should
appear somewhere on the battery. A good plan is to have a lead tag,
which is attached to the handle at the negative end of the battery, or
is tacked to the case. The name may also be painted on the case. Each
battery should be given a number which should preferably be painted in
large white figures on the end or side of each case. The number may
also be stamped on a lead tag tied to the handle at the negative end.

A service station which sells a certain make of battery should not use
cases of some other make if the name of the other make appears on the
case. Such names may give a wrong impression to the customer, which
will not be fair either to the service station or to the manufacturer
whose name appears on the case. If the service station sells, another
make of battery, the customer may get the impression that the service
station man does not have enough confidence in the make which he
sells, and must use some other make for his rentals. If the rental
battery does not give good service, the customer will get the
impression that the manufacturer whose name appears on the case does
not turn out good batteries, when as a matter of fact, the plates,
covers, jars, and other parts used in the rental battery may not have
been made by this manufacturer. Some battery men would, perhaps,
consider the failure of a rental battery as an opportunity to "knock"
the manufacturer whose name appears on the case. Such an action may
have the desired effect on a very few customers, but the great
majority of men have no use for any one who "knocks" a competitor's
products.

Keeping a Record of Rental Batteries. A careful record should be kept
of all rental batteries. The more carefully such a record is kept, the
less confusion there will be in knowing just where every rental
battery is. A special rack for rental batteries, such as those shown
in Figures 88 and 89 should be provided, and all rental batteries
which are in the shop should be kept there, except when they are on
charge or are being overhauled. Have them fully charged and ready to
go out immediately, without keeping a customer waiting around, when he
is in a hurry to go somewhere else.

General Rental Policy. No service station should make a practice of
installing rental batteries on any car unless the owner leaves his own
battery to be repaired or recharged. The purpose of having a stock of
rental batteries is to enable customers to have the use of their cars
while their own batteries are being repaired by the battery man who
furnishes the rental battery and not to furnish batteries to car
owners who may be taking their batteries to some other station to be
repaired. It is, of course, a good thing to be generous and
accommodating, but every battery repairman should think of his own
business first, before he helps build up the business of a competitor.

The customer must have some inducement to bring in your rental battery
and get his own. A rental charge of 25 cents-per day serves as a
reminder to most customers. However, some customers are forgetful and
the battery man must telephone or write to any owner who fails to call
for his battery. If, due to failure to keep after the owner, a rental
battery is out for several weeks, there is likely to be an argument
when the rental bill is presented to the owner. If the delay in
calling in a rental battery is due to failure to repair the customer's
battery, the rental charge should be reduced.

A rental battery should not be put in place of a battery which is
almost ready for the junk pile. The thing to do is to sell the
customer a new battery. Repairs on an almost worn out battery are
expensive and the results may not be satisfactory.


RADIO BATTERIES


The wide-awake battery man will not overlook the new and rapidly
growing field which has been opened for him by the installation of
hundreds of thousands of radio-phone receiving sets in all parts of
the country. The so-called radio "craze" has affected every state, and
every battery repairman can increase his income to a considerable
extent by selling, charging, and repairing radio storage batteries.

The remarkable growth of the radio-phone has, of course, been due to
the radio broadcasting stations which have been established in all
parts of the country, and from which concerts, speeches, market
reports, baseball reports, news reports, children's stories and
religious services are sent out. These broadcasting stations have
sending ranges as high as 1,000 miles. The fact that a service station
is not located near a broadcasting station is therefore no reason why
it should not have its share of the radio battery business, because
the broadcasting stations are scattered all over the United States,
and receiving sets may be made powerful enough to "pick up" the waves
from at least one of the broadcasting stations.

Radio receiving sets may be divided into two general classes, the
"Crystal" sets and the "Bulb" sets. "Crystal" sets use crystals of
galena (lead sulphide), silicon (a crystalline form of silicon, one of
the chemical elements), or carborundum (carbide of silicon) to
"detect" or, in other words, to rectify the incoming radio waves so
that they may be translated into sound by the telephone receivers.
Receiving sets using these crystals do not use a battery, but these
sets are not very sensitive, and cannot "pick up" weak waves. This
means that crystal receiving sets must be used near the broadcasting
stations, before the waves have been weakened by traveling any
considerable distance.

As a general rule, the radio-listener's first receiving set uses a
crystal detector. Very often it is difficult to obtain good results
with such a set, and a more elaborate set is obtained. Moreover, even
if a crystal set does give good results, the owner of such a set soon
hears of friends who are able to hear concerts sent out from distance
stations. This gives him the desire to be able to hear such stations
also and he then buys a receiving set which uses the "audion-bulb" for
detecting, or rectifying the incoming waves.

The audion-bulb resembles an ordinary incandescent lamp. It contains
three elements:

1. In the center of the bulb is a short tungsten filament, the ends of
which are brought out to two terminals in the base of the bulb. This
filament must be heated to incandescence, and a storage battery is
required for this purpose, because it is necessary to have a very
steady current in order to obtain clear sounds in the receiver. Lately
plans have been suggested for using a direct current lighting line,
and even an alternating current lighting line for heating the
filament, but at present such plans have not been perfected, and the
battery will undoubtedly continue to be used with the majority of sets.

2. Surrounding the filament but not touching it is a helix of wire,
only one end of which is brought out to a terminal in the base of the
bulb. This helix is called the "grid." In some bulbs the grid is not
made in the form of a helix, but is made of two flat gridlike
structures, one on each side of the filament.

3. Surrounding the "grid" is the "plate" which is sometimes in the
shape of a hollow metallic cylinder. Some plates are not round, but
may be oval, or they may be two flat plates joined together at some
point, and one placed on either side of the grid. The plate has one
terminal in the base of the bulb.

  [Fig. 159 Illustrating the principle of the Audion Bulb]

The action of an audion-bulb is quite complex, but a simpler
explanation, though one which may not be exactly correct from a purely
technical point of view, is as follows, referring to Figure 159:

The "A" battery heats the filament, causing a stream of electrically
charged particles to flow out from the filament in all directions.
These electrons act as a conductor, and close the circuit which
consists of the plate, the "B" battery, and the telephone receivers,
one end of this circuit being connected to one side of the filament
circuit. Current then flows from the positive terminal of the "B"
battery to the plate, then to the filament by means of the stream of
electrons emitted by the filament, along one side of the filament,
through the wire connected to the positive terminal of the "A" battery
to the telephone receivers, through the receivers to the negative
terminal of the "B" battery.

As long as the filament remains lighted a steady current flows through
the above circuit. The "grid" is connected to the aerial wire to
intercept the radio waves. These waves produce varying electrical
charges on the grid. Since the stream of charged particles emitted by
the filament must pass through the grid to reach the plate, the
charges which the radio waves produce on the grid strengthen or weaken
the stream of electrons emitted by the filament, and thus vary the
current flowing in the telephone receiver circuit. The changes in this
current cause the receiver diaphragm to vibrate, the vibrations
causing sounds to be heard. Since the variation in the telephone
receiver circuit is caused by electrical charges produced by the radio
waves, and since the radio waves change according to the sounds made
at the transmitting station, the variations in the telephone receiver
current produces the same sounds that are sent out at the transmitting
station. In this way concerts, speeches, etc., are reproduced in the
receivers.

The modern radio receiving set includes various devices, such as
variable condensers, variocouplers, loose-couplers, variometers, the
purpose of which is to "tune" or adjust the receiving set to be
capable of receiving the radio waves. An explanation of such devices
is not within the scope of this book, but there are numerous
reasonably priced books and pamphlets on the market which describes in
a simple manner all the component parts of a radio-receiving set.

From the foregoing remarks it is seen that a six-volt storage battery
is required with each receiving set which uses the audionbulb type
detector. The filament current of an audion-bulb averages about one
ampere. If additional bulbs are used to obtain louder sounds, each
such bulb also draws one ampere from the storage battery. The standard
audion-bulb receiving set does not use more than three bulbs, and
hence the maximum current drawn from the battery does not exceed three
amperes.

The automobile battery manufacturers have built special radio
batteries which have thick plates and thick separators to give longer
life. The thick plates are much stronger and more durable than the
thin plates used in starting and lighting work, but do not have the
heavy current capacity that the starting and lighting battery plates
have. A high current capacity is, of course, not necessary for radio
work, and hence thick plates are used.

Batteries used for radio work do not operate under the severe
conditions which exist on automobiles, and trouble is much less likely
to develop. However, the owner of the radio set rarely has any means
of keeping his battery charged, and his battery gradually discharges
and must then be recharged. It is in the sale of batteries for radio
work and in the recharging of them that the battery man can "cash-in"
on the radio phone "craze."

This business rightfully belongs to the automobile battery man and he
should go after it as hard as he can. A little advertising by the
service station man, stating that he sells radio batteries, and also
recharges them should bring in: very profitable business. The battery
man who calls for and delivers the radio batteries which need
recharging and leaves rental batteries in their place so that there is
no interruption in the reception of the evening concerts is the one
who will get the business.

As already stated, radio storage batteries have thick plates and thick
separators. Perforated rubber sheets are also used in addition to the
separators. Large sediment spaces are also generally provided to allow
a considerable amount of sediment to accumulate without causing
short-circuits. The cases are made of wood or hard rubber. Since radio
batteries are used in homes and are, therefore, used with handsomely
finished cabinets containing the radio apparatus, the manufacturers
give the cases of some of their radio batteries a pleasing varnished
or mahogany finish. Before returning radio batteries which have been
recharged, the entire batteries should be cleaned and the cases
polished. Returning radio batteries in a dirty condition, when they
were received clean, and polished, will drive the radio recharging
business to some other service station.


VESTA RADIO BATTERIES


The Vesta Battery Corporation manufacturers three special types of "A"
batteries for radio work, as follows:

1. The 6EA battery, made in capacities of 60, 80, and 100 ampere
hours. Fig. 160.

2. The V6EA7 battery, having a capacity of 80 ampere hours. Fig. 161.

3. The R6EA battery, having a capacity of 100 ampere hours. Fig. 162.

  [Fig. 160, 161, 162, 163 Various Vesta Radio batteries]

Vesta Radio Batteries. Fig. 160 shows the 6EA Series, "A" Battery.
Fig. 161 shows the V6EA Series, "A" Battery. Fig. 162 shows the R6EA
(Rubber Case) Series, "A" Battery. Fig. 163 shows the "B" Battery.

These batteries have 5, 7, 9 plates per cell, respectively. The plates
are each 5 inches high, 5 7/8 inches wide, and 5/32 inches thick. The
cases for these batteries are furnished in three designs--plain black
boxes (all sizes), finished maple boxes (7 plate size only), and hard
rubber boxes (9 plate size only). These Vesta batteries are the "A"
batteries used for heating the filaments of the audion bulbs. The
Vesta Radio "B" battery, Fig. 163, is a 12 cell, 24 volt battery, with
a 22 and a 20 volt tap.


EXIDE RADIO BATTERIES


  [Fig. 164 Exide Radio "A" battery]

The Exide Radio "A" battery, Fig. 164, is made in four sizes, the
capacities ranging from 20 to 120 ampere-hours. The design and
construction of these batteries are similar to the Exide starting
batteries. The over-all height of these batteries is approximately
95/8 inches, the width 7-5/16 inches, while the length varies with the
number of the plates.

Type       Cat. No.      Length      Weight         Capacity

3-LXL-3    13735         4-9/16      15-1/2 lbs.    20 amp. hrs.
3-LXL-5    13736         5-11/16     24-1/2 lbs.    40 amp. hrs.
3-LXL-9    13737         9-1/16      42-1/2 lbs.    80 amp. hrs.
3-LXL-13   13750         12-7/16     59-1/2 lbs.    120 amp. hrs.


WILLARD RADIO BATTERIES


The Willard Storage Battery Co. manufactures both "A" and "B" storage
batteries. The Willard "A" battery, Fig. 165, is an all-rubber
battery. The case is a rubber "Monobloc" construction, that is, the
entire case is pressed into shape at one time. There are no separate
jars for the cells, there being rubber partitions which form integral
parts of the case. The case is, therefore, really a solid, one piece,
three compartment jar. The ribs at the bottoms of the compartments are
parts of the one-piece block, and are higher than those found in the
usual starting and lighting battery. Embedded in each side wall of the
case is a bronze button which holds the handle in place. Soft rubber
gaskets of pure gum rubber surround the post to make an acid proof
seal to prevent electrolyte from seeping from the cells. The
separators are the standard Willard "Threaded Rubber" separators.

  [Fig. 165, 166, and 167 Various Willard Radio Batteries]

Willard Radio Batteries. Fig. 165 shows the All-Rubber "A" Battery.
Fig. 166 shows the complete "B" Battery. Fig. 167 shows one cell of
the "B" Battery.

The Willard "A" battery comes in five sizes, type WRR97 (20 ampere
hours capacity), type WRRO (50 ampere hours capacity), type WRR1 (89
ampere hours capacity), type WRR2 (100 ampere hours capacity), and
type WRR3 (125 ampere hours capacity).

The Willard "B" storage battery, type CBR124, Figs. 166 and 167, is a
twelve cell battery, each cell consisting of a round glass container
having one negative and one positive plate insulated from each other
by a small "Threaded Rubber" separator. The plates and separators rest
on a hard rubber "bottom rest" which consists of a short length of
hard rubber tube, so formed as to support the plates and separators
and at the same time hold them together. The cells are assembled in a
case which has a separate compartment for each cell. As seen from Fig,
166, the upper parts of the cells project above the top of the case,
which simplifies inspection.


WESTINGHOUSE RADIO BATTERIES


  [Fig. 168 Westinghouse Radio "A" battery, Type HR]

  [Fig. 169 Westinghouse Radio "B" battery, Type L, and
   Fig. 170 Westinghouse Radio "B" battery, Type M]

The Westinghouse Union Battery Co. manufactures both "A" and "B"
storage batteries. Their "ER" type, Fig. 168, is the "A" battery, and
their "L" and "M" types, Figs. 169 and 170, are the "B" batteries. The
HR battery has 3/16 inch thick plates, high rests to provide ample mud
and acid space, and thick separators. Rubber sheets are placed on both
sides of the positive plates. Rubber covered cables are moulded into
the terminals to minimize corrosion at the positive terminal. The "HR"
batteries are made in six and eight volt sizes, with 3 plates per
cell, 5 plates per cell, 9 plates per cell, and 13 plates per cell.

The Westinghouse Radio "B" batteries are made in two sizes. Type
22-M-2, Fig. 170, has a capacity of 1.2 ampere hours at 0.04 ampere.
It is designed to operate a receiving set having one detector and two
amplifier bulbs for three to five weeks between charges. The type
22-L-2 battery, Fig. 169, has a capacity of 4.5 ampere hours at 0.25
ampere.

Part No.   Type     Volts    Amp. Hours at 3 Amps.     Weight
                             Intermittent Rate

100110     6-HR-5    6        54 A.H.                  30 Lbs.
100111     6-HR-9    6       108 A.H.                  46 Lbs.
100112     6-HR-13   6       162 A.H.                  65 Lbs.
100135     8-HR-5    8        54 A.H.                  40 Lbs.
100136     8-HR-9    8       108 A.H.                  60 Lbs.
100137     8-HR-13   8       162 A.H.                  87 Lbs.
100145     6-HR-3    6        27 A.H.                  20 Lbs.

Part No.  Type      Volts     Capacity                Weight

100148    22-M-2    22        1.2 A.H. at .04 Amps.   6-1/4 Lbs.
100140     2-L-2    22        1.2 A.H. at 25 Amps.    19-3/4 Lbs.


PHILADELPHIA RADIO BATTERIES


  [Fig. 171 Philadelphia Radio "A" battery]

The Philadelphia Storage Battery Co. makes both "A" and "B" Radio
batteries. The "A" battery, Fig. 171, uses the standard diamond-grid
plates, and the "Philco Slotted Retainer" used in Philadelphia
starting batteries. The cases of the "A" batteries are made of
hardwood, finished in an ebonite black. Soft rubber insulating feet on
the bottom of the case prevent scratching any table or varnished floor
on which the battery may be set. The instructions for preparing the
Philadelphia "A" battery for service are similar to those given for
the starting and lighting batteries, given on page 228. For the
initial filling, 1.220 electrolyte is used, and the battery charged at
the following rates:


Initial and Recharge Charging Rate

Type      Initial Rate      Recharge Rate

56LAR     1.0               2
56RAR     2.0               3
76RAR     3.0               4.5
96RAR     4.0               6
116RAR    5.6               7.5
136RAR    6.0               9

The final gravity of the electrolyte should be 1.250. However, if the
owner insists on getting maximum capacity, the battery may be filled
with 1.250 electrolyte and balanced to 1.290 at the end of the charge.

  [Fig. 172 Philadelphia Radio "B" battery]

The Philadelphia Radio "B" battery, type 224-RB, Fig. 172, has 12
cells contained in a one-piece rubber case. It is shipped dry, and
requires no initial charge. To prepare it for service, the soft rubber
vent caps are removed and 25 c. c. of 1.250 electrolyte poured into
each cell.


U. S. L. RADIO BATTERY


  [Fig. 173 U.S.L. Radio "A" battery]

The U. S. L. Radio "A" battery, Fig. 173, uses 1/4 inch positives,
with 3/16 inch intermediate and 1/8 inch outside negatives. Port
Orford cedar separators are used which are four times as thick as the
usual starting battery separator. The case is made of hardwood, and is
varnished to match cabinet work. The electrolyte has a specific
gravity of 1.220. The heavy plates and separators and the low gravity
of the electrolyte are designed to give long life.

                 Ampere        Ampere Hour
         Plates  Hour          Capacity
          per    Capacity      (or intermittent
Type      Cell   @ 3 Amperes    use)              Dimensions      Weight

DXA-303-X  3     12            20                 5-3/16 x          18
                                                  7-1/4 x 9-1/4
DXA-305-X  5     40            60                 9-1/8 x 7-1/4     39
                                                  x 9-1/4
DXA-307-X  7     70            85                 11-3/4 x 7-7/16   48
                                                  x 9-1/4
DXA-309-X  9     98            115                14-3/8 x 7-7/16   59
                                                  x 9-1/4


PREST-O-LITE RADIO BATTERIES


The Prest-O-Lite Co. makes two lines of Radio "A" Batteries. First, an
inexpensive battery, Fig. 174, and a deluxe battery, Fig. 175, which
has a better finish and appearance. Both types have a mahogany
finished case with rubber feet to prevent damaging furniture. A bail
handle simplifies the carrying of the battery. Capacities range from
47 ampere-hours to 127 ampere-hours at a one ampere discharge rate.

  [Fig. 174 & 175 Presto-O-Lite Radio "A" battery]

Table of Prest-O-Lite Radio Batteries

          Hours Discharge at Rate of:
Type      1 Amp.   2 Amps.   3 Amps.   5 Amps.   10 Amps.

67 WHNR   47.5     21.7      13.6      7.5       3.0
69 WHNR   66       30        18.9      10.5      4.5
611 WHNR  82.8     38.5      24.3      13.5      6.0
67 KPNR   95       44.2      27.8      15.0      6.5
69 KPNR   127      61.5      38.5      21.5      9.5


UNIVERSAL RADIO BATTERIES


  [Fig. 176 Universal Type WR, Radio "A" battery]

The Universal Battery Co. manufacture three types of Radio "A" storage
batteries. Type WR, Fig. 176, has three sealed hard rubber jars
assembled in a hardwood case which is stained and finished in
mahogany. The separators are made of Port Orford cedar and are 1/8
inch thick, about twice the thickness of the separator used in
starting and lighting batteries. The plates also are much thicker than
the standard starting and lighting battery plate. The type WR battery
comes in three sizes. Types WR-5, WR-7, and WR-9, having capacities of
60, 85, and 105 ampere hours, respectively, at a 3 ampere rate.

The Universal type RR radio "A" battery, Fig. 177, is assembled in a
hard rubber combination case, which is a solid piece of rubber divided
into three compartments. This gives a compact, acid proof case. This
battery also comes in three sizes, types RR-5, RR-7, and RR-9, having
capacities of 60, 85 and 105 ampere hours, respectively, at a three
ampere discharge rate.

  [Fig. 177 Universal Type RR, Radio "A" battery]

  [Fig. 178 Universal Type GR, Radio "A" battery]

The Universal type GR radio "A" battery, Fig. 178, is assembled in
three sealed glass jars which are placed in a mahogany finished wooden
crate. This construction makes the cell interiors visible, enabling
the owner to detect troubles and to watch the action of the cells on
charge and discharge. The GR battery comes in two sizes, GR-5 and
GR-Jr., having respective capacities of 60 and 16 ampere hours at a 3
ampere discharge rate.


"DRY" STORAGE BATTERIES


During the past year or two, so-called "dry" starting and lighting
storage batteries have appeared on the market. This class includes
batteries having "dry," "semi-dry," and "jelly" electrolytes. The
claims made for these batteries are that there is nothing to evaporate
and that the periodical addition of water is therefore unnecessary,
that spilling and slopping of electrolyte is impossible, and that
injurious sulphation does not take place.

The "dry" storage battery is not a new idea, for as much as
thirty-five years ago, the Oerlikon Company of Switzerland
manufactured "dry" electrolyte storage batteries in commercial
quantities. These batteries were for a long time a distinct success
for work requiring only low rates of discharge. For high rates of
discharge the lack of diffusion, due to the absence of a liquid
electrolyte, reduces the capacity. The lack of diffusion will cause a
rapid drop in voltage when cranking the engine! and a slow recovery
after the engine begins to run under its own power.

The manufacturers of the "dry" storage batteries, of course, claim
that their batteries are more efficient and satisfactory than the
standard "wet" battery, but it has been impossible to get sufficient
data from the manufacturers to go into detail on the subject.

Several of the largest of "wet" battery manufacturers formerly made
"dry" storage batteries for lighting and ignition service, but when
starting motors came into use, discarded the "dry" batteries in favor
of the present "wet" storage batteries.


DISCHARGE TESTS


Discharge tests may be divided into four general classes:

(a) Brief High Rate Discharge Tests to determine condition of battery.
These tests are made for 15 seconds at a high rate.

(b) Lighting Ability Discharge Tests.

(c) Starting Ability Discharge Tests.

(d) "Cycling" Discharge Tests.


The 15 Seconds High Rate Discharge Test


The 1.5 seconds high rate discharge test is a valuable aid in
determining the condition of a battery, particularly where the
hydrometer readings give false indications, such as is the case when
electrolyte or acid is added to a cell instead of water to replace
evaporation. Only two or three percent of the battery capacity is
consumed by the test, and it is not usually necessary to recharge the
battery after making the test. The test must be made in conjunction
with hydrometer readings, as otherwise it might give false indications
itself. Both incoming and outgoing batteries may be tested, and the
method of testing depends upon whether the battery is coming in for
repairs, or is going out after having been charged, repaired, or
worked on in any way. In either case, the test consists of discharging
the battery at a high rate for a short time, and taking voltage
readings and making observations while the battery is discharging.

  [Fig. 179 Making a 20 seconds high rate discharge test]

Rates of Discharge. It is not necessary to have any definitely fixed
discharge rate. The rate should merely be high enough to reveal any
improperly burned joints, short-circuited cells, or cells low in
capacity for any reason. The discharge tester is suitable for all
batteries used on cars and trucks.

For an Incoming Battery. Take a hydrometer reading of each cell. If
the readings are all below 1.200 and are within 50 points of each
other, most likely all the battery needs is a bench charge, with a
possible adjustment of the gravity of the electrolyte at the end of
the charge. The discharge test should in this case be made after the
battery has been fully charged.

If the gravity readings are all above 1.200, or if the reading of one
cell differs from the others by 50 points or more, make the discharge
test, as shown in Fig. 179.

After fifteen seconds, read the voltage of each cell. If the cells are
uniformly low in voltage; that is, below 1.5 volts per cell, the
battery needs recharging. If the voltage readings of the cells differ
by 0.1.0 volt or more and the battery is fairly well charged, there is
something wrong in the cell having the low reading, and the battery
should be opened and examined. With a discharged battery the
difference in cell voltage will be greater, depending on the extent of
the discharge, and only experience can guide in drawing correct
conclusions. A short-circuited cell will give a very low voltage
reading. Remember that the actual voltage reading is not as important
in indicating a defective cell as the difference between the voltage
readings of the cells. A cell which gives a voltage which is 0.1 volt
or more less than the others is generally defective.

For Outgoing New, Charged, or Repaired Batteries. Just before putting
the battery into service, make the test as a check on the internal
condition of the battery, particularly if the battery has been
repaired or has stood for sometime since being charged. (It is assumed
that the battery has been charged and the gravity of the electrolyte
properly adjusted when the test is made.)

The battery should not show more than 0.10 volt difference between any
two cells at the end of 15 seconds, and no cell should show a voltage
less than 1.75 volts, and the voltage should remain fairly constant
during the test. If every cell reads below 1.75 volts, the battery has
not been completely charged. If one cell is more than 0.10 volt lower
than the others, or if its voltage falls off rapidly, that cell still
needs repairs, or is insufficiently charged, or else the top
connectors are not burned on properly. Top connectors which heat up
during the test are not burned on properly.


Lighting Ability Discharge Tests


These are tests continuing for 5 hours to a final voltage of 1.7 per
cell. These tests are not of as great an interest as the Starting
Ability Tests, description of which follows:


Starting Ability Discharge Tests


The Society of Automotive Engineers recommends two ratings for
starting and lighting batteries:

"Batteries for combined lighting and starting service shall have two
ratings. The first shall indicate the lighting ability and be the
capacity in ampere-hours of the battery when discharged continuously
at the 5 hour rate to a final voltage of not less than 1.7 per cell,
the temperature of the battery beginning such a discharge being 80
deg. Fahr. The second rating shall indicate the starting ability and
shall be the capacity in ampere-hours when the battery is discharged
continuously at the 20 minute rate to a final voltage of not less than
1.50 per cell, the temperature of the battery beginning such discharge
being 80 deg. Fahr."

The capacity in ampere-hours given by manufacturers is for a
continuous discharge for 5 hours. In the battery shop, however, the
"starting-ability" discharge test is the test which should be made,
though the conditions of the test are changed somewhat. To make this
test, the battery should be fully charged. Connect a rheostat to the
battery terminals and adjust the rheostat to draw about 100 amperes
from an 11 plate battery, 120 amperes from a 13 plate battery, 135
amperes from a 15 plate battery, 155 amperes from a 17 plate battery,
170 amperes from a 19 plate battery and so on. Continue the discharge
for 20 minutes, keeping the discharge current constant, and taking
voltage readings of each cell at the start, and at the end of 5, 10,
15, and 20 minutes. At the end of 20 minutes, if the battery is in
good condition, the voltage of each cell should not be less than 1.5,
and the temperature of the electrolyte in any cell should not exceed
95 degrees Fahrenheit, provided that the temperature at the start was
about 80 degrees.

The cell voltages should drop slowly during the test. If the voltage
begins to drop rapidly during the test, as shown by the current
falling off so rapidly that it is difficult to keep it at 100 amperes,
measure the cell voltages quickly to see which cells are dropping
rapidly. An example of a 100 ampere test on a good rebuilt cell with
eleven plates is as follows:

Voltage immediately after start of discharge, 1.88. After 5 minutes,
1.86 volts. After 10 minutes, 1.80 volts. After 15 minutes, 1.72
volts. After 20 minutes, 1.5 volts.

If the voltage of a cell begins to fall off rapidly before the twenty
minutes are up, but not before 15 minutes, the cell needs "cycling"
(charging and discharging) to bring it up to capacity.

If the voltage drops rapidly before the end of 15 minutes, the plates
are low in capacity, due to age, or some defect. It is not safe to
expect very good service from a cell which will not stand up for 20
minutes before de voltage begins to drop rapidly.

If the rapid voltage drop begins very much before 20 minutes, it is
very doubtful whether the battery will give good service. Comparisons
of the results of tests with the service which the battery gives after
installed on the car will soon enable the repairman to tell from the
results of the tests just what to expect from any battery.

The "starting-ability" test should be made on all batteries which have
been rebuilt whenever there is time to do so and on all batteries
about which there is any doubt as to what service they will give.
After the test, the batteries should be put on the line again and
charged before sending them out.

The rates of discharge given here for the "starting-ability" tests may
be varied if experience with a particular make of battery shows some
other rate to be better. The important thing is to use the same rate
of discharge for the same make and type of battery at all times. In
this way the repairman will soon be able to distinguish between good
and bad batteries of a particular make and type.

Cadmium Tests may be made during the Starting Ability Discharge Tests.
See page 174.


"Cycling" Discharge Tests


New batteries, or rebuilt batteries which have had new plates
installed, or sulphated batteries which will not "come up" on charge,
should be discharged when they have "come-up," as far as they will go.
In some cases it is necessary to charge and discharge them several
times before they will be ready for service. This charging and
discharging is often called "cycling" the battery.

New batteries are generally "cycled" at the factory before sending
them out. The forming charge generally does not convert all the pastes
into active material and the battery using plates which have been
treated in the forming room is put through several discharges and
charges after the battery is fully assembled. In service on a car, the
battery is being "cycled" constantly and there is generally an
increase in capacity after a battery is put on a car. Positive plates
naturally increase in capacity, sometimes up to the very clay when
they fall to pieces, while negatives tend to lose capacity with age.

Batteries which are assembled in the service station, using new
plates, generally require several cycles of charge and discharge
before the specific gravity will rise to 1.280 before the positives
will give 2.4-2.5 volts on a Cadmium test, before the negatives will
give a reversed voltage reading of 0.175 to 0.20 volt on a Cadmium
test, and before a satisfactory "starting-ability" or "breakdown" test
can be made.

A battery which has been abused by failing to add water to replace
evaporation, by allowing to remain in a partially or completely
discharged condition for sometime, or which has been allowed to become
sulphated in any other way, will generally require "cycling" before it
will "come-up" to a serviceable condition.

The rates for a "cycling" discharge should be such that the battery
will be discharged during the daytime, the discharge being started in
the morning, and the battery being put back oil the charging line in
the evening in order that it may be charging during the night. The
rate of discharge should be somewhat higher than the rate used when
the plates are formed. Two or three amperes per positive plate in each
cell will generally be satisfactory.


Discharge Apparatus


A simple discharge rheostat is shown in Fig. 180. The terminal on the
end of the cable attached to the right hand terminal of the battery
shown in the illustration is movable, and it may be clamped at any
point along the coils of wire so as to give various currents. The wire
should be greased lightly to prevent rusting.

  [Fig. 180 Simple high rate discharge rheostat]

Another simple apparatus consists of a board on which are mounted six
double contact automobile lamp sockets which are all connected in
parallel. A pair of leads having test clips attached is brought out
from the sockets for fastening to the battery terminals. Lamps of
various candlepower may be turned into the sockets to obtain different
currents.

Discharge tests are helpful in the case of a battery that has lost
capacity. The battery is first fully charged, and is then discharged
at the 5 hour rate. When the voltage of the battery has fallen to 1.7
volts per cell (measured while the battery is discharging) a Cadmium
test is made to determine whether the positives or negatives are
causing the lack of capacity. For further descriptions of the Cadmium
Test see Page 174.

In reviving sulphated batteries, it is sometimes necessary to charge
and discharge the battery several times to put the active material in
a healthy condition.

Discharge tests at a high rate are very valuable in diagnosing the
condition of a battery. A description of such tests will be found on
Page 267. For making the heavy discharge tests a rheostat of the
carbon plate type is suitable. With such a rheostat currents from 25
to more than 200 may be drawn from a six volt battery, and a smooth,
even variation of a current may be obtained from the minimum to the
maximum values. Such a rheostat is on the market and may be purchased
complete with ammeter and leads for attaching to the battery.


PACKING BATTERIES FOR SHIPPING


Batteries which are shipped without electrolyte need merely have
plenty of excelsior placed around them in a strong crate for
protection from mechanical injury.

Batteries which are shipped filled with electrolyte must be protected
from mechanical injury and must also be packed so that it is difficult
to turn the crate upside down and thus allow the electrolyte to run
out. A very popular crate has been the so-called "dog-house," with a
gable roof such as is actually used on dog-houses. The idea of such a
roof is that it is impossible to place the crate with the roof down,
since it will tip over if this is done. However, if these crates are
placed side by side, it is a very simple matter to put a second row of
crates on top of them, turning the second row up-side-down, as shown
in Fig. 181, and allowing the electrolyte to run out. The men who load
freight or express-cars have often shown great skill and cunning in
packing "dog-house" crates in other ways so as to damage the
batteries. Many have attained a high degree of perfection in breaking
the crates.

  [Fig. 181 "Dog-house" crates for shipping batteries]

Some sort of a roof on a battery crate is required by law, the idea
being to make it difficult to turn the crate up-side-down. Perhaps the
best crate would be one with a flat top marked "This Side Up," but
such a crate would not comply with the law.


  [Fig. 182 Steps for construction of a crate for shipping
   battery]

A better form of crate than the "dog-house" and one which complies
with the law, is shown in Fig. 182. The top of each end piece is cut
at an angle, the peak on one end being placed opposite the low point
of the opposite end piece. Fig. 182 shows the steps in the
construction of the crate.

1. The case should be built of strong lumber (11/2 inch preferably),
and of ample size to allow packing with excelsior top, bottom, sides
and ends to a thickness of two or three inches. Nail strongly.

2. When the case is complete (except cover) place a thick, even layer
of excelsior (or packing straw) in the bottom and set in *he battery
right side up. Lay paper (preferably paraffined) over top of battery
to keep it clean, then pack tightly with excelsior sides and ends.

3. Now lay sufficient packing material on top of the battery so that
cover will compress it tightly, stuffing it under cover boards as they
are put on.

The extended boards at bottom, and the gable roof are provided to
prevent the battery from being tipped over; extensions of sides for
carrying. Box should be plainly labeled: "HANDLE WITH CARE. DAMAGES
CLAIMED IF TIPPED ON SIDE." In addition to the address of destination,
as given in shipping instructions be sure to mark with name of shipper
for identification upon arrival. When shipping by freight, the proper
freight classification in the United States is "Electric Storage
Batteries, Assembled." When shipping by express in the United States,
"Acid" caution labels must be attached to each package.


STORING SEPARATORS


Separators which have been given the chemical treatment necessary to
remove the substances which would cause trouble in the battery, and to
make the wood porous, must be kept wet and never be allowed to become
dry. A lead lined box, or large earthenware jars may be used as
containers. Put the separators in the container and then pour in
enough very weak electrolyte to cover the separators. This electrolyte
may be made of I part of 1.220 electrolyte to 10 parts of distilled
water, by volume. Be very careful to have the container absolutely
clean and to use chemically pure acid and distilled water in making
the weak electrolyte. Remember that impurities which are picked up by
the separators will go into the battery in which the separators are
placed. Therefore, keep the separator tank in a clean place and keep a
cover on it. Have your hands clean when you take separators out of the
tank to place in a battery, and do not put the separators on a dirty
bench before inserting them between plates. The best thing to do is to
hold the separators in one hand and insert them with the other, and
not lay them on any bench at all.


REINSULATION


Separators are the weakest part of a battery and wear out while the
other parts of a battery are still in good condition. Good plates are
often ruined by weakened separators causing short-circuits. Many
batteries which have to be junked after being in service about a year
would have given considerable service if they had been reinsulated.

Generally the separators of one cell wear out before those of the
other cells. Do not, however, reinsulate that cell alone. The
separators in the other cells are as old as those which have worn out,
and are very near the breaking down point. If you reinsulate only one
cell, the owner will naturally assume that the other cells are in good
condition. What happens? A month or so later one of the other cells
"goes dead." This does not have a very soothing effect on the owner,
who will begin to lose confidence in you and begin to look around for
another service station.

If you explain frankly that it is useless to reinsulate only one cell
of a battery and that the other cells will break down in a short time,
the customer will want you to reinsulate all the cells. A somewhat
higher bill for reinsulating all the cells at once will be more
agreeable than having the cells break down one at a time within a
month or two.

In the case of the customers who come in regularly for testing and
filling service, you will be able to tell when the separators are
wearing out. When you find that a battery which has been in service
about a year begins to run down frequently, and successive tests made
in connection with testing and filling service show that the generator
is not able to keep the battery charged, advise the owner to have the
battery reinsulated. Do not wait for the battery to have a dead cell.
Sell the owner on the idea that reinsulation will prevent the
possibility of his battery breaking down when he may be out on a tour,
and when it may be necessary to have his car towed in to a service
station. If you allow the battery to remain on the car when it begins
to lose its charge, the owner will not, of course, suspect that
anything is wrong, and if his battery one day breaks down suddenly,
lie will very likely lose confidence both in you and the battery,
since he has been bringing in his car regularly in order to have his
battery kept in good shape. The sudden failure of his battery will,
therefore, make him believe that you do not know your business, or
that the battery is a poor one.

New separators will give every battery which is a year old a new lease
on life. If you explain to a customer that he will get a much longer
period of service from his battery if he has it reinsulated when the
battery is a year old, you should have no trouble in getting the job,
and the subsequent performance of the battery will show that you knew
what you were talking about.


SAFETY FIRST FOR THE BATTERY REPAIRMAN


1. Do not work on an empty stomach-you can then absorb lead easily.

2. Keep your fingers out of your mouth when at work.

3. Keep your finger nails short and clean.

4. Do not chew tobacco while at work. In handling tobacco, the lead
oxides are carried to your mouth. Chewing tobacco does not prevent you
from swallowing lead.

5. When you leave the shop at night, and before eating, wash your
face, hands, and arms with soap, and clean your nose, mouth, and
finger nails.

6. Do not eat in the repair shop.

7. Drink plenty of good milk. It prevents lead poisoning.

8. Use Epsom Salts when constipated. This is very important.

9. Bathe frequently to prevent lead poisoning.

10. Leave your working clothes in the shop.

11. It is better not to wear a beard or mustache. Keep your hair
covered with a cap.

12. Before sweeping the shop dampen the floor to keep down the dust.

13. Do not drink beer or whisky, or any other alcoholic liquors. These
weaken your system and make you more susceptible to lead poisoning.

14. In handling lead, wear gloves as much as possible, and wash and
dry the gloves every day that you wear them.

15. Wear goggles to keep lead and acid out of your eyes.

16. When melting lead in a hydrogen flame, as in burning on the top
connectors, the fumes given off may be blown away by a stream of air.
The air supply to the flame may be tapped for this purpose.

17. The symptoms of lead poisoning are: gums darken or become blue,
indigestion, colic, constipation, loss of appetite, muscular pain. In
the later stages there is muscular weakness and paralysis. The hands
become limp and useless.

18. Wear rubber shoes or boots. Leather shoes should be painted with a
hot mixture of equal parts of paraffine and beeswax.

19. Wear woolen clothes if possible. Cotton clothing should be dipped
in a strong solution of baking soda and dried. Wear a flannel apron
covered with sacking.

20. Keep a bottle of strong ammonia handy. If you should spill acid on
your clothes, apply some of the ammonia immediately to neutralize the
acid, which will otherwise burn a hole in your clothes.

21. Keep a stone, earthenware, or porcelain jar filled with a solution
of washing soda or baking soda (bicarbonate of soda). Rinse your hands
in this solution occasionally to prevent the acid from irritating them.

22. If you should splash acid in your eye, wash it out immediately
with warm water, and drop olive oil on the eye. If you have no olive
oil at hand, do not wait to get some, but use any, lubricating oil, or
vaseline.


TESTING THE ELECTRICAL SYSTEM


"Out of sight, out of mind," is a familiar saying. But when does it
hold true?

What about the battery repairman? Are the batteries he repairs "out of
sight, out of mind?" Does his responsibility end when he has installed
a battery on a car? Suppose he put a battery in first class shape,
installs it on a car, and, after a week or two the battery comes back,
absolutely dead? Is the battery at fault, or is the repairman to
blame for neglecting to make sure that the battery would be given a
reasonably good chance to give good service and receive fair treatment
from the other part of the electrical system?

The actual work on the battery is finished when the battery cables are
fastened to the battery terminals. But real battery SERVICE does not
end there. The battery is the most important part of the electrical
system of a car, but it is only one part, and a good battery cannot be
expected to give satisfactory service when it is connected to the
other parts of the electrical system without making sure that these
parts are working properly, any more than a man wearing new, shoes can
step into a mud puddle and not have his shoes covered with dirt.

The battery functions by means of the current which flows through it
by way of the cables which are connected to its terminals. A battery
is human in many respects. It must have both food and exercise and
there must be a proper balance between the food and the exercise. Too
much food for the amount of exercise, or too much exercise for the
amount of food consumed will both lead to a lowering of efficiency,
and disease frequently results. A battery exercises when it turns over
the starting motor, furnishes energy to the lamps, or operates the a
ignition system. It receives food when it is charged. Proper attention
to the electrical system will result in a correct balance between food
and exercise, or in other words, charge and discharge.

The electrical equipment of a car consists of five principal parts:

1. The Battery.
2. The Ignition System.
3. The Starting Motor.
4. The Generator.
5. The Lighting System.

The normal course of operation of this system is as follows:

Starting. The ignition switch is closed, and connects the ignition
system to the battery. The starting switch is then closed, connecting
the starting motor to the battery. The battery sends a heavy current
through the starting motor, causing the motor to turn over, or "crank"
the engine. The motion of the engine pistons draws a mixture of air
and gasoline vapor into the cylinders. At the proper instant sparks
are made to jump between the points of the spark plugs, igniting the
air and gasoline vapor mixture, forming a large amount of gas. This
gas expands, and in doing so puts the engine into motion. The engine
begins to run under its own power and the starting switch is opened,
since the starting motor has performed the work required of it, and
has nothing further to do as long as the engine runs.

The engine now operates the generator. The generator begins to build
up a voltage as the engine speed increases. When the voltage of the
generator has risen to about 7-7.5, the generator is automatically
connected to the battery by the cutout (also known as reverse-current
relay, cut-out relay, or relay). The voltage of the generator being
higher than that of the battery, the generator sends a current through
the battery, which "charges" the battery. As long As the engine
continues to run above the speed at which the generator develops a
voltage higher than that of the battery, a charging current will
normally flow through the battery. When the ignition switch is opened
the engine can no longer develop any power and consequently stops
running. When the decreasing engine speed causes the generator speed
to drop to a point at which the generator voltage is less than that of
battery, the battery sends a reverse, or discharge current through the
cutout and generator, thereby causing the cutout to open and
disconnect the generator from the battery.

Lights. When the engine is not running, the battery furnishes current
to the lights. This is a discharge current. When the engine runs at a
speed which is greater than that at which the the cutout closes, the
generator furnishes current for the lights, and also for the ignition
system, in addition to sending a charging current through the battery.

From the foregoing description, we see that the battery is at rest, is
discharging, or charging under the following conditions:

Engine Not Running, Lamps Off, Ignition Off. Under these conditions
all switches are open, and hence no current should be passing through
the battery. If a current is found to be passing through the battery
under these conditions, it is a discharge current which is not doing
any work and is caused by a defective cutout, defective switches, or
grounds and short-circuits in the wires, cables, or apparatus
connected to the battery.

Starting the Engine. A heavy discharge current is drawn from the
battery. This current should not flow more than 10 seconds. If the
starting motor does not crank the engine or cranks it too slowly, the
motor or the cables and switch connecting the motor to the battery are
defective, assuming that the battery is large enough and is in a good
condition. If the starting motor cranks the engine, but the engine
does not begin to run under its own power within ten seconds, the
starting system is not at fault, and the starting switch should be
opened.

Engine Not Running, All Lamps On. A discharge current flows from the
battery which is equal to the sum of the currents drawn by lamps when
connected to the battery separately. If the current is greater than
this sum, trouble is present.

Engine Running, Lamps Off. The generator sends a charging current into
the battery and also supplies current to the ignition system (except
when a magneto is used). If the generator does not send a charging
current through the battery there is trouble in the generator, or in
the parts connecting the generator to the battery (assuming the
battery to be in a good condition). If the generator sends a current
through the battery, it may be of the correct value, it may be
insufficient, or it may be excessive. A normal current is one which
keeps the battery fully charged, but does not overheat it or cause
excessive gassing. An insufficient current is one which fails to keep
the battery charged. An excessive charging current is one which keeps
the battery charged, but which at the same time overheats the battery
and causes excessive gassing. The excessive current may also overheat
the generator, while a normal or insufficient charging current will
not injure the generator.

It is possible, but not probable, that the generator may be sending
current through the battery in the wrong direction, so as to discharge
it instead of charging it. This will happen if a very badly discharged
battery is installed with the connections reversed. If a fully or even
partly charged battery is installed with its connections reversed, the
battery will generally reverse the polarity of the generator
automatically, and the battery will be charged in the proper
direction, although the current flow in the charging circuit is
actually reversed.

Engine Running, Lamps On. Under these conditions, the generator should
supply the current for the lights, and still send a charging current
of 3 to 5 amperes through the battery. This means that the current
drawn from the battery when the engine is not running and the lights
are all turned on should be at least several amperes less than the
charging current which the generator sends into the battery when the
engine is running and the lamps are turned off.


Tests to Be Made by the Repairman


The battery repairman can, and always should, make a few simple tests
which will tell him whether the various conditions of operation are
normal. This should be done as follows:

1. Install the battery carefully (see page 236), and connect the
negative battery cable to the negative battery terminal. Now tap the
positive battery cable on the positive battery terminal. If a snappy
spark is obtained when this is done, some of the switches are open or
are defective, the cutout is stuck in the closed position, or there
are grounds or short-circuits in the parts which are permanently
connected to the battery.

Even though no spark is obtained when you tap the positive battery
cable on the positive battery terminal, there may be some trouble
which draws enough current from the battery to cause it to run down in
a short time. To detect such trouble, connect a voltmeter (which has
sufficient range to indicate the battery voltage) between the positive
battery cable and the positive battery terminal. (Cable is
disconnected from the terminal.) If the voltmeter now gives a reading
equal to the voltage of the battery, there is some condition causing a
current leakage from the battery, such as a cutout stuck in the closed
position, defective switches which do not break the circuits when in
the open position, or grounds or short-circuits in the cables and
wires connected to the battery.

If the voltmeter pointer does not move from the "0" line on the scale,
complete the battery connections by fastening the positive battery
cable to the positive battery terminal, and make the test described in
Section 2. If the voltmeter pointer moves from the "0" line, and gives
a reading equal to the battery voltage, connect the voltmeter
permanently between the positive battery cable and the positive
battery terminal and make a general inspection of the wiring, looking
for cut or torn insulation which allows a wire or cable to come in
contact with the frame of the car, or with some other wire or cable,
thereby causing a ground or short-circuit. Old, oil-soaked insulation
on wires and cables will often cause such trouble. If a general
inspection does not reveal the cause of the current leakage, proceed
as follows:

Closed Cutout, or Defective Cutout Windings.  (a) If the cutout is
mounted outside the generator, remove the cover from it and see if the
points are stuck together. If they are, separate them and see if the
voltmeter pointer returns to the "0" line. If it does, you have found
the trouble. The points should be made smooth with 00 sandpaper. See
that the moving arm of the cutout moves freely and that the spring
which tends to hold the arm in the open position is not weak or broken.

If the voltmeter pointer does not return to the "0" line when the
cutout points are separated, or if the points were not found to be
stuck together, disconnect from the cutout the wire which goes to the
ammeter or battery. If this causes the voltmeter pointer to return to
the "0" line, the cutout is defective and a new one should be
installed, unless the trouble can be found by inspection and repaired.

If the voltmeter pointer does not return to the "0" line when the
battery or ammeter wire is disconnected from the cutout, see paragraph
(d).

(b) If the cutout is mounted inside the generator, disconnect from the
generator the wire which goes to the ammeter or indicator. If this
causes the voltmeter pointer to return to the "0" line, the cutout
points are stuck together or the cutout is defective, and the
generator should be taken apart for inspection. If this does not cause
the voltmeter pointer to return to the "0" line, replace the wire and
see paragraph (d).

(c) If no cutout is used and connections between the generator (or
motor-generator) and the battery are made by closing the ignition or
starting switch, such as is the case on Delco and Dyneto
motor-generators, and some Delco generators, disconnect from the
generator or motorgenerator the wire that goes to the ammeter or
indicator. If this causes the voltmeter pointer to return to the "0"
line, the switch which connects the generator or motor-generator to
the ammeter or indicator is defective. If the voltmeter pointer does
not return to the "0" line, replace the wire and consult paragraph (d).

(d) Defective Starting Switch. Disconnect from the starting switch the
cable that goes to the battery. If one or more smaller wires are
connected to the same terminal as the heavy cable, disconnect them
also and hold their bare ends on the bare end of the heavy cable. If
this causes the voltmeter pointer to return to the "0" line, the
starting switch is defective. If the voltmeter pointer does not return
to the "0" line, replace the cable and wires on the starting switch
terminal and proceed as follows:

Defective Switches. See that the ignition and lighting switches are in
their "OFF" positions. If they are not, open them and see if the
voltmeter pointer returns to the "0" line. If it does, you have found
the trouble. If it does not, disconnect from the switch (or switches,
if there are separate lighting and ignition switches), the feed wire
which supplies current to the switch from the battery. If this causes
the voltmeter pointer to return to the "0" line, the switches are
defective. If the pointer does not return to the "0" line, replace the
wires on the switch and consult the next paragraph.

If there are other switches which control a spot light, or special
circuits, such as tonneau lamps, or accessories, such as gasoline
vaporizers, electric primers, etc., make the same tests on these
switches. If no trouble has been found, see paragraph (e).

(e) Grounds or Short-Circuits in Wiring. Disconnect from each terminal
point in the wiring system the wires which are connected together at
that point. Also remove fuses from the fuse blocks. If the voltmeter
pointer returns to the "0" line when a certain wire or fuse is
removed, there is a ground or short-circuit in the wire or in the
circuit to which the fuse is connected.

(f) Turn on the Lights. Remove the voltmeter and complete the battery
connection. Note how much current is indicated on the ammeter mounted
on the instrument panel of the car as the different lamps are turned
on. In each case the ammeter should indicate "discharge." Should the
ammeter indicate "charge" the battery connections have been reversed,
or the ammeter connections are reversed. The driver will tell you
whether the ammeter has been reading "charge" or "discharge" when the
lamps were turned on. This is a good way to check your battery
connections.

If the car has no ammeter, or has an indicator which is marked "ON" or
"OFF," or "Charge" or "Discharge," an ammeter may be connected in
series with the battery by disconnecting the cable from the positive
battery terminal and connecting the ammeter to the cable and to the
terminal, and the readings obtained from this meter.

The amperes indicated on the ammeter should be the greatest when the
main headlamps are burning bright. By comparing the readings obtained
when the different lighting combinations are turned on, it is
sometimes possible to detect trouble in some of the lighting lines.

3. Start the Engine. Before you do this, be sure that the cables are
connected directly to the battery terminals, and that no ammeter or
voltmeter is connected in series with the battery, as the heavy
current drawn by the starting motor would ruin the instruments very
quickly. An ammeter may be left connected in series with the battery,
providing that a switch is used to short-circuit the meter while
starting the engine. A meter having a 500 ampere scale may be left
connected in series with the battery while the engine is being
started, but for the tests which are to be made a 25 ampere scale
should be used.

The engine should start within ten seconds after the starting switch
is closed. If more time than this is required, carburetor adjustments,
position of the choke lever, etc., should be looked after. Continued
cranking of the engine will run the battery down very quickly, and the
chances are that the car will not be run long enough to allow the
generator to recharge the battery. Make whatever adjustments are
necessary to reduce the cranking time to ten seconds, or advise the
owner to have them made, warning him that otherwise you will not be
responsible if the battery runs down very quickly.

4. When the engine has started, set the throttle lever so that the
engine runs As slowly as possible. The ammeter (either that on the
instrument panel, or a special test ammeter connected in series with
the battery) will indicate several amperes discharge, this being the
current taken by the ignition system.

Now speed up the engine gradually. At an engine speed corresponding to
a car speed of 7 to 10 miles per hour in high (if there is any
difficulty in estimating this speed, drive the car around the block
while making this and the following tests) the ammeter pointer should
move back to, or slightly past, the "0" line, showing that the cutout
has closed. If the ammeter needle jumps back and forth and the cutout
opens and closes rapidly, the polarity of the battery and that of the
generator are not the same. This condition may be remedied by holding
the cutout points closed for several seconds, or by short-circuiting
the "Battery" terminal on the cutout with the "Generator" terminal on
the cutout.

After a slight movement of the ammeter pointer indicates that the
cutout has closed, speed up the engine gradually. When the engine
speed corresponds to a car speed of 18-25 miles per hour in "high,"
the current indicated on the ammeter should reach its maximum value
and the pointer should then stop moving, or should begin to drop back
toward the "0" line as the speed is increased.

For average driving conditions, the maximum charging current should
not exceed 12 to 14 amperes for a 6 volt, 11 to 13 plate battery, and
6 to 7 amperes for a 12 volt battery. (These currents should be
obtained if "constant-current" generators, such as the "third brush,"
"reversed-series," or vibrating current regulators are used. The
"third brush" type of generator is used on more than 99 per cent of
the modern cars. Some cars use a "constant-voltage" regulated
generator, such as the Bijur generator, having a voltage regulator
carried in a box mounted on the generator. On all cars using a
"constant-voltage" generator, the charging rate when the battery is
fully charged should not exceed five amperes for a six volt
generator). If the generator has a thermostat, such as is used on the
Remy generators, the charging rate will be as high as 20 amperes until
the generator warms up, and then the charging rate will drop to 10-12
amperes, due to the opening of the thermostat points, which inserts a
resistance coil in series with the shunt field.

If the charging current reaches its maximum value at 18-25 miles per
hour, and shows no increase at higher speeds, decrease the engine
speed. When the engine is running at a speed corresponding to a car
speed of about 7 miles per hour, or less, the cutout should open,
indicated by the ammeter indicating several amperes discharge, in
addition to the ignition current, for an instant, and then dropping
back to the amount taken by the ignition system.

Now turn on the headlights (and whatever lamps are turned on at the
same time) and speed the engine up again. The ammeter should indicate
some charging current at engine speeds corresponding to the usual
speed at which the car is driven. If it does not, the charging current
should be increased or smaller lamps must be installed.


Troubles


The operation of the electrical system when the engine is running may
not be as described in the foregoing paragraphs. Troubles may be found
as follows:

1. Cutout does not close until engine reaches a speed in excess of 10
miles per hour. This trouble may be due to the cutout or to the
generator. If the ammeter shows a charging current of three amperes or
more as soon as it closes, the cutout is at fault. The thing to do in
such a case is to adjust the cutout. First see that the movable
armature of the cutout moves freely and does not bind at the pivot. If
no trouble is found here, the thing to do is to decrease the air gap
which exists between the stationary and movable cutout points when the
cutout is open., or to decrease the tension of the spring which tends
to keep the points open. On most cutouts there is a stop which the
cutout armature strikes when the cutout opens. By bending this stop
the air-gap between the points may be decreased. This is the
adjustment which should be made to have the cutout close earlier,
rather than to decrease the spring tension. Some cutouts have a spiral
spring attached to the cutout armature. Others have a flat spring. On
still others, the spring forms the connection between the armature and
the cutout frame. In the first two types, the spring tension may be
decreased, but wherever possible the air-gap adjustment should be made
as described.

If the cutout closes late, and only about an ampere of charging
current is indicated on the ammeter, and the cutout points are fairly
clean and smooth, the trouble is generally in the generator.

The generator troubles which are most likely to exist are:

a. Dirty commutator.
b. Dirty brush contact surface.
c. Loose brushes.
d. Brushes bearing on wrong point of commutator (to set brushes
properly, remove all outside connections from generator, open the
shunt field circuit, and apply a battery across the main brushes.
Shift the brushes until the armature does not tend to rotate in either
direction. This is, of course, a test which must be made with the
generator on the test bench).
e. Loose connections in the shunt field circuit.

The foregoing conditions are the ones which will generally be found.
More serious troubles will generally prevent the generator from
building up at all.

2. Cutout does hot open when engine stops. This condition is shown by
a discharge current of about 5 amperes when the engine has stopped.
(In Delco systems which have no cutout, an even greater discharge will
be noted as long as the ignition switch remains closed.) This trouble
is generally due to cutout points stuck together, a broken cutout
spring, or a bent or binding cutout armature.

3. Cutout does not open until ammeter indicates a discharge of three
or more amperes (in addition to the ignition discharge). This may be
remedied by increasing the spring tension of the cutout, or removing
any trouble which causes the cutout armature to bind. On many cutouts
the armature does not actually touch the core of the cutout winding
when the points are closed, there being a small piece of copper or
other non-magnetic metal on the armature which touches the end of the
cutout and maintains a small air gap between the core and armature,
even when the points are closed. The opening action of the cutout may
be changed by filing this piece of non-magnetic material so as to
decrease the air gap, or pinching it with heavy pliers so as to make
it stand farther out from the cutout armature and thus increase the
air gap between the armature and core when the points are closed.

Decreasing this air gap will cause the cutout to open late, and
increasing it will cause the cutout to open early.

4. Cutout will not close at any engine speed. If cutout does not close
the first time the engine speed is increased, stop the engine. This
condition may be due to a defective cutout, an open-circuit in the
charging line, a ground or short-circuit between the cutout and the
generator, or a defective generator. To determine whether the cutout
is defective, remove the wires from it and hold together the ends of
the wires coming from the generator, and the one going to the ammeter.
Start the engine. If no other trouble exists, the ammeter will
indicate a charging current at speeds above 8-10 miles per hour. If no
current is obtained, stop the engine. If the cutout trouble consisted
of an open circuit in one of its windings, or in the points not
closing, due to dirt or a binding armature, or if there is an
open-circuit in the charging line, the generator will, of course, have
been running on open-circuit. This will cause the fuse in the shunt
field circuit to blow if there is such a fuse, and if there is no such
fuse, the shunt field coils may be burned open, or the insulation on
the field coil wires may have become overheated to a point at which it
burns and carbonizes, and causes a short-circuit between wires. Such
troubles will, of course, prevent a generator from building up when
the cutout wires are disconnected and their ends held together.

If there is a ground in the cutout, or between the cutout and the
generator, the generator will very likely be unable to generate (if a
"one-wire" system is used on the car). If there is some defect in the
generator-such as dirty commutator, high mica, brushes not touching,
commutator dirty, or loose brushes, brushes too far from neutral,
grounded brushes, brushes not well ground in, wrong type of brushes,
grounded commutator or armature windings, short-circuited commutator
or armature windings, open-circuited armature windings, grounded field
windings, short-circuited field windings, open-circuit or poor
connections in field circuit, one or more field coil connections
reversed, wrong type of armature or field coils used in repairing
generator, generator drive mechanism broken-then the generator will
not build up.

If no charging current is, therefore, obtained when the generator and
ammeter wires are disconnected from the cutout and their ends held
together, there may be a ground or short-circuit in the cutout
windings or in the circuit between the generator and the cutout, or
the generator may be defective, due to having been operated on
open-circuit, or due to troubles as described in the foregoing
paragraph. The presence of a ground or short in the circuit between
the generator and cutout or in the cutout may be determined by
disconnected the wire from the generator, disconnecting the battery
(or ammeter) wire from the cutout, and running a separate extra wire
from the generator to the wire removed from the cutout. Then start the
engine again. If a charging current is obtained, there is a ground or
short either in the cutout or in the circuit between the cutout and
the generator. (It is also possible that the failure of the generator
to build up was due to poor brush contact in the generator. The use of
the extra wire connected the generator directly to the battery, thus
magnetizing the generator fields and causing generator to build up. If
poor brush contact prevented the generator from building up, closing
the cutout by hand will often cause the generator to start charging.
If you can therefore cause the generator to build up by holding the
cutout points closed by hand, or by shorting across from the generator
terminal to the battery terminal of the cutout, it is probable that
the generator brushes are not making good contact). The cutout may be
tested by stopping the engine, replacing the battery (or ammeter) wire
on the cutout, and holding the end of the extra wire on the generator
terminal of the cutout. If a charging current is then obtained, the
cutout is 0. K. and the trouble is between the cutout and the
generator.

5. An excessive current is obtained. If a third brush generator is
used, look for loose or dirty connections in the charging line, dirty
cutout points, dirty commutator, dirty brushes (especially the brush,
or brushes, which is Dot connected to one end of the field winding),
brushes loose, brushes not well ground in, and any other conditions
which will cause a high resistance in the charging line. It is
characteristic of third brush generators that their current output
increases if there is an increase in resistance in the charging
circuit. If no troubles such as those enumerated above are found, the
third brush may need adjusting.

Generators using vibrating current or voltage regulators will give an
excessive output if the points need adjusting or if the regulating
resistance is short-circuited.

Generators using reversed series regulation will give an excessive
output if there is a short-circuit in the series field coils.

6. Low charging current is obtained. This may be due to adjustment of
the regulating device, to high resistance in the shunt field circuit
in case of a third brush generator. In case of generators using other
kinds of regulation, loose connections, dirty commutator and brushes,
etc., will cause low charging current.

7. Generator charges up to a certain speed and then stops charging.
The trouble is caused by some condition which causes the brushes to
break contact with the commutator, especially in the case of a "third"
brush. High mica, loose brush spring, or a commutator which has been
turned down off-center may cause the trouble. This trouble most
frequently occurs on cars using third brush motor-generators having a
3 to 1 or more speed ratio between them and the engine. These
motor-generators operate at such high speeds that high mica and a
commutator which is even slightly off center have a much greater
effect than the same conditions would cause in separate generators
which operate at much lower speeds. The remedy for this trouble is to
keep the mica under-cut, and to be very careful to center the armature
in the lathe when taking a cut from the armature. In turning down the
commutators of high speed motor-generators, special fittings should be
made by means of which the armature may be mounted in its own
ball-bearings while the commutator is turned down.


ADJUSTING GENERATOR OUTPUTS


The repairman should be very slow in adjusting generator outputs. Most
cases of insufficient or excessive charging current are due to the
troubles enumerated in the foregoing paragraphs, and not due to
incorrect adjustment of the regulating device. Before changing the
adjustment of any generator, therefore, be sure that everything is in
good condition. The third brush generator, for instance, will have an
excessive output if the brushes are dirty, loose, or not well seated
on the commutator. The use of a third brush which is too wide, for
instance, will change the output considerably. A high resistance third
brush will decrease the output, while a low resistance brush will
increase the output. On the other hand, an increase in the resistance
of the charging circuit will cause an increase in the output of a
third brush generator, which is just the opposite to what is
ordinarily expected. Such an increase in resistance may be due to
loose or dirty connections, dirty cutout contact points, corroded
battery terminals and so on. Remember also that the third brush
generator sends a higher current into a fully charged battery than it
sends into a discharged battery. It is, therefore, essential that a
fully charged battery be on the car when the output of a third brush
generator is adjusted.

There are two things which determine whether any change should be made
in the charging rate on the car, viz: Driving, Conditions and the
Season of the Year.

Driving Conditions. A car which makes short runs, with numerous stops,
requires that the starting motor be used frequently. This tends to run
the battery down very quickly. Moreover, such a car usually does not
have its engine running long enough to give the generator an
opportunity to keep the battery charged, and to accomplish this, the
charging rate should be increased.

A car which is used mostly at night may need a higher charging rate,
especially if short runs are made, and if the car stands at the curb
with its lights burning. Long night runs will generally call for only
a normal charging rate, since the long charging periods are offset by
the continuous use of the lamps.

A car used on long daylight runs should generally have the charging
rate reduced, because the battery is charged throughout such runs with
no discharge into lamps or starting of motor to offset the continued
charge. If the lamps are kept lighted during such runs, the normal
charge rate will be satisfactory, because the lamp current will
automatically reduce the current sent into the battery.

In the winter time, engines must be cranked for a longer time before
they will start, the battery is less efficient than in warm weather,
and lights are burning for a greater length of time than in summer.
Such conditions require an increase in the charging rate, especially
if the car is used on short runs. Oil long runs in the winter time,
the normal charging rate will generally be satisfactory because the
long charging period will offset the longer cranking period.

In the summer time, engines start more easily than in winter, and
hence require less cranking. The lamps are used for only short periods
and the battery is more efficient than in winter. A lower charging
rate will, therefore, keep the battery charged. Long tours in the
summer time are especially likely to result in overcharged, overheated
batteries, and a reduced charging rate is called for.


How and When to Adjust Charging Rates


A correct charging rate is one which keeps a battery fully charged,
but does not overcharge it, and which does not cause either the
generator or the battery to become overheated. The only way to
determine whether a certain charging rate is correct on any particular
car is to make an arrangement with the car owner to bring in his car
every two weeks. On such occasions hydrometer readings should be taken
and water added, if necessary, to bring the surface of the electrolyte
up to the proper level. The hydrometer readings will show whether the
generator is keeping the battery charged, and if a change in the
charging rate is necessary, the necessary adjustments may be made. If
a customer does not bring in his car every two weeks, call him up on
the phone or write to him. The interest which you show in his battery
by doing this will generally result in the customer giving you all his
repair business, and he will also tell his acquaintances about your
good service. This will give you considerable "word of mouth"
advertising, which is by far the best form of advertising and which
cannot be bought. It must be earned by good battery service.

Adjusting a third brush generator. The best rule to remember for
changing the output of a third brush machine is that to increase the
output, move the third brush in the direction in which the commutator
rotates, and to decrease the output, move the third brush in the
opposite direction. Move the third brush only 1/16 inch and then
sandpaper the brush seat with 00 sandpaper. Allow the generator to run
for about twenty minutes to "run-in" the brush. Then vary the speed to
see what the maximum charging rate is. If the change in the charging
rate is not sufficient, move the third brush another 1/16 inch and
proceed as before until the desired charging rate is obtained.

Adjusting Vibrating Regulators. The output of generators which use a
vibrating regulator is adjusted by changing the tension of the spring
fastened to the regulator arm. In many cases this adjustment is made
by means of a screw which is turned up or down to change the spring
tension. In other cases a hook or prong is bent to change the spring
tension. Where a coil spring is used, lengthening the spring will
decrease the tension and lower the output, while shortening the spring
will increase the tension and raise the output.

Vibrating regulators are of the "constant" current or the
"constant-voltage" types. The constant current regulator has a winding
of heavy wire which carries the charging current. When the charging
current reaches the value for which the regulator is set, the
electromagnet formed by the coil and the core on which it is wound
draws the regulator armature toward it and thereby separates the
regulator points, which are in series with the shunt field. A
resistance coil, which is connected across the regulator points and
which is short-circuited when the points are closed, is put in series
with the shunt field when the points separate. This reduces the shunt
field current, causing a decrease in generator voltage and hence
current output. As the current decreases, the pull of the
electromagnet on the regulator armature weakens and the spring
overcomes the pull of the electromagnet and closes the regulator
points. This short-circuits the resistance coil connected across the
regulator points and allows the shunt field current to increase again,
thereby increasing the generator output. This cycle is repeated at a
high rate of speed, causing the regulator points to vibrate rapidly.

The action of a vibrating "constant-voltage" regulator is exactly the
same as that of the "constant current" regulator, except that the coil
is connected across the generator brushes. The action of this coil
therefore depends on the generator voltage, the regulator points
vibrating when the generator voltage rises to the value for which the
regulator is set.

Adjusting Reverse-Series Generators. The regulation of the output of
this type of generator is accomplished by means of a field winding
which is in series with the armature, and which therefore carries the
charging current. These series field coils are magnetically opposed to
the shunt field coils, and an increase in charging current results in
a weakening of the field flux. A balanced condition is reached at
which no increase of flux takes place as the generator speed
increases, the tendency of the increased shunt field current to
increase the total flux being counterbalanced by the weakening action
of the flux produced by the series field current.

To increase the output of a reverse series generator, it is necessary
to weaken the opposing series field flux. The only way of doing this
is to short-circuit the series field coils, or connect a resistance
across them. To decrease the output of a reverse series generator, a
resistance coil may be connected in series with the shunt field
winding. Neither of these schemes is practicable, and hence the
reverse series generator may be considered as a "non-adjustable"
machine. Under-charging may be prevented by using the starting motor
and lights as little as possible, or by giving the battery a bench
charge occasionally. Over-charging may be prevented by burning the
lights whenever the engine is running, or leaving the lights turned on
over night.

Other forms of regulation have been used on the older cars, but the
majority of the cars now in use use one of the four forms of
regulation described in the foregoing paragraphs. If adjustments need
to be made on some car having a system of-regulation with which the
battery man is not familiar, the work should be done in a service
station doing generator work.

If generator outputs are changed because of some special operating
condition, such as summer tours, the rate should be changed to normal
as soon as the usual driving conditions are resumed.


TESTING AND FILLING SERVICE


Every man expects to be paid for his work, since his purpose in
working is to get money. Yet there are numerous instances in every
line of work requiring work to be done for which no money is received.
The term "Free Service" is familiar to every repairman, and it has
been the cause of considerable discussion and dispute, since it is
often very difficult to know where to draw the Tine between Free
Service and Paid Service.

The term "Free Service" might be abolished with benefit to all
concerned. In the battery business "Free Inspection" service is a
familiar term. It is intended to apply to the regular addition of
distilled water by the repairman and to tests made at the time the
water is added. Since the term "Inspection" might be Misinterpreted
and taken to apply to the opening of batteries for examination, the
term "Testing and Filling Service" should be used instead of "Free
Inspection Service."

Battery makers furnish cards for distribution to car owners. These
cards entitle the holder to bring in his battery every two weeks to
have distilled water added if necessary, and to have his battery
tested without paying for it. This service requires very little time,
and should be given cheerfully by every service man.

"Testing and Filling Service" is an excellent means of becoming
acquainted with car owners. Be as pleasant and courteous to the
"Testing and Filling" customer as you are to the man who brings in a
battery that needs repairs. For this customer will certainly give you
his repair business if you have been pleasant in giving the Testing
and Filling Service.

A thoroughly competent battery man should be put in charge of the
Testing and Filling Service, since this man must meet the car owners,
upon whom the service station depends for its income. Customers are
impressed, not by an imposing array of repair shop equipment, but by
the manner of the men who meet them. These men will increase the
number of your customers, or will drive trade to competitors,
depending on the impression they leave in the minds of the car owners.

Every service station owner should persuade all the car owners in the
vicinity of the station to come in regularly for the free testing and
filling service, and when they do come in they should be given
cheerful, courteous service. Each "testing" and "filling" customer is
a prospective paying customer, for it is entirely natural that a car
owner will give his repair work to the battery man who has been taking
care of the testing and filling work Oil his battery. When a new
battery is needed, the "testing" and "filling" customer will certainly
buy it from the man who has been relieving him of the work of keeping
his batteries in good shape.

Car owners who depend on your competitor for their "testing and
filling" service will not come to you when their battery needs
repairing, or when they need a new battery. You may be convinced that
you handle a better make of battery than your competitor does, but
your competitor's word will carry far more weight than yours with the
man who has been coming to him for testing and filling. Good testing
and filling service is, therefore, the best method of advertising and
building up your business. The cost of this service to you is more
than offset by the paying business it certainly brings, and by the
saving in money spent for advertising. Remember that a boost by a
satisfied customer is of considerably greater value to your business
than newspaper advertising.

A careful record should be kept of every battery which is brought in
regularly for testing and filling service. If a test shows that one or
more cells are low in gravity, say about 1.220, this fact should be
recorded. If the gravity is still low when the battery comes in again
for test, remove the battery and give it a bench charge. The customer
should, of course, pay for the bench charge and for the rental battery
which is put on the car in the meantime.

Battery manufacturers generally furnish cards to be used in connection
with the testing and filling service, such cards being issued to the
customers. A punch mark is made every time the battery is brought in,
If the owner neglects to come in, this is indicated by the absence of
a punch mark, and puts the blame for any trouble caused by this
neglect on the owner if any cell shows low gravity, a notation of
that fact may be made opposite the punch mark for the date on which
the low gravity was observed. If the low gravity is again found the
next time the battery is brought in, the battery should be removed and
given a bench charge. If the bench charge puts the battery in good
shape, and the subsequent gravity readings are high, no trouble is
present. If, however, the low gravity readings begin to drop off
again, it is probable that new separators are required, especially if
the battery is about a year old.

The logical course of events in the testing and filling service is to
keep the battery properly filled (at no cost to the customer), give
the battery an occasional bench charge (for which the customer pays),
reinsulate the battery when it is about a year old (for which the
customer pays), and sell the customer a new battery when the old one
is worn out. If some trouble develops during the lifetime of the
battery which is not due to lack of proper attention, the customer
should pay to have the repairs made. From this the battery man will
see how the Testing and Filling Service pays. The way to get business
is to have people come to your shop. Become acquainted with them,
treat them right, and you need not wonder where the money is to come
from.


SERVICE RECORDS


In order to run a repair shop in an orderly, business-like manner, it
is necessary to have an efficient system of Service Records. Such a
system will protect both the repairman and the customer, and simplify
the repairman's bookkeeping. For a small service station a very simple
system should be adopted. As the business grows, the service record
system must necessarily become more complicated, since each battery
will pass through several persons' hands. Battery manufacturers
generally furnish service record sheets and cards to their service
stations, and the repairman who has a contract with a manufacturer
generally adopts them. The manufacturers' service record systems are
often somewhat complicated, and require considerable bookkeeping.

For the smaller service station a single sheet or card is most
suitable, there being only one for each job, and carbon sheets and
copies being unnecessary. Such a service record has three essential
parts: (a) The customer's claim check. (b) The battery tag. (c) The
record card. Fig. 183 shows a service record card which is suitable
for the average repair shop. Part No. I is the customer's claim check,
Part No. 2 the battery tag, and part No. 3 the record card, and is 5
inches by 8 inches in size. The overall size of the entire card is 5
inches by 12 inches. Parts I and 2 are torn off along the perforated
lines marked (A).

When a battery comes in the three parts are given the same number to
identify them when they have been torn apart. The number may be
written in the "No." space shown on each part, or the numbers may be
stamped on the card. The record should not be made out as soon as a
customer comes in, but after the battery has been examined and tested
and the necessary work determined. Put the customer's name on parts 2
and 3. Record the address, telephone, etc., in the proper spaces on
part 3. Having determined by test and inspection what is to be done,
fill out the "WORKCOSTS" table on part 3, putting a check mark in the
first column to indicate the work to be done and the material needed.
Figure up the cost while the customer waits, if this is possible.
Explain the costs to the customer, and have him sign Contract No. 1.
If you do this there can never be any argument about the bill you hand
the customer later If the customer cannot wait, or if he is well known
to you and you know lie will not question your bill, have him sign
Contract No. 2. In either case, the terms printed on the back of the
card authorize the repairman to make whatever repairs he finds to be
necessary, and bind the customer to pay for them. Find out whether the
customer will call, whether you are to deliver the battery, or whether
you are to ship it, and put a check mark in the proper space at the
right of the "WORK-COSTS" table. Mark the battery with the chalk whose
color is indicated, and you will know how to dispose of the battery
when the repairs are completed.

Fill out the claim check and give it to the customer, tearing it off
along the perforated lines. Fill out the battery tag, indicating after
"Instructions" just what is to be done.

  [Fig. 183 Front & Back of the Battery Service Card]

Make a sketch of the top of the battery in the space provided, dip the
tag in the paraffine dip pot (see page 182) and tack the card on the
battery. File part 3 in a standard 5 by 8 card index file. To the
right of the "WORK-COSTS" table are spaces for entering the date on
which the work is completed, the date the customer is notified and the
date the battery goes out. These dates are useful in keeping a record
of the job. When the job is finished and the rental comes in, enter
the costs in the "COSTS" table, and note the date the bill was paid,
in the space marked "PAID."

  [Fig. 184 Rental battery card to be tied on car of customer]

File all the 5 by 8 cards (Part 3) in alphabetical order in a "dead"
ticket file, in either alphabetical or numerical order. With this file
you can build up an excellent mailing list of your customers. You can
note how many new customers you are securing and how many customers
are not coming back. The latter information is very valuable, as it
enables you to find out what customers have quit, and you can go after
them to get their repair business again.

When a rental is put on a card, the card shown in Fig. 184 may be tied
to the car where it is easily seen. This will serve as a reminder to
the customer and will help advertise your shop to those who ride in
the car.

Each rental battery should have a number painted on it in large white
letters, or should have attached to it at all times a lead tag on
which is stamped a number to identify the battery. To keep a record of
the rental batteries, a card or sheet similar to that shown in Fig.
185 may be used. Each time the rental is put on a car, a record is
made of this fact on the card. Each rental battery has its own card,
and reference to this card will show at once where the battery is.
Each card thus gives a record of the battery. The number of the rental
is also written on the Stock Card shown in Fig. 183, but the purpose
of putting the number on these cards is merely to make sure that the
battery is returned when the customer's battery is replaced on the car
and to be able to figure out the rental cost quickly and add it to the
time and material costs in repairing the customer's battery.

The Record Card shown in Fig. 183 does not help you locate any
particular rental battery. For instance, suppose that rental battery
No. 896 is out and you wish to know who is using it. You may, of
course, look over the "Battery Tags" which are tied to the batteries
which are being repaired in the shop, or you may examine the file
containing the record cards, but this would take too much time. But if
you refer to the rental file you can determine immediately where
rental battery No. 896 is, since the cards in this file should be
arranged numerically.

The rack on which rental batteries are placed should have a tag
bearing the same number as the rental battery tacked to the shelf
below the place provided for the battery. Each rental battery should
always be placed in the same place on the shelf. You can then tell at
a glance which batteries are out.

A good plan, and one which will save space, is to write the number of
the rental battery on the customer's claim check, and when repairs on
his own battery are completed, to set his battery in the place
provided on the rental rack for the rental which he is using. When he
comes in for his battery, you can tell at a glance whether his battery
is ready by looking at the place where the rental he is using is
normally placed on the rental rack. If a battery is there you will
know that it is his battery, and that it is ready for him.

  [Fig. 185 Rental Battery Stock Card]

You could, of course, look through the batteries on the "Ready Rack,"
but this would take more time, since the numbers of the batteries on
this rack will always be different, and you would have to look through
all the batteries on the "Ready Rack" before you would be able to tell
whether any particular battery were ready. By putting a customer's
battery in place of the rental he is using, you will have only one
place to look at in order to know whether his battery is ready.


========================================================================

CHAPTER 13.
BUSINESS METHODS.


Success in this day and age cannot be attained without a well
thought-out plan of action. There is no business which does not demand
some sort of system of management. The smallest business must have it,
and will go to ruin without it. Hence every battery service station
proprietor should see to it that his affairs are systematized --
arranged according to a carefully studied method. Most men look upon
"red-tape" with contempt and in the sense of a mere monotonous and
meaningless routine, it merits all the contempt poured upon it. Hard,
fast and iron-clad rules, which cease to be a means, and become an
end, prove a hindrance rather than a help. But an intelligent method,
which adapts itself to the needs of the business, is one of the most
powerful instruments of business. The battery man who despises it will
never do anything well. It does not matter how clever he is, how good
a workman he is, how complete his knowledge of batteries, if he
attempts to run his business without a plan, he will eventually come
to grief.


Purchasing Methods.


Every battery service station proprietor is eager to build up his
business, and improve the character of his trade, because this in turn
means that he will be assured of larger sales to a good class of
customers. And it is at once evident that there are a number of
requirements that affect this question of building up a business, one
of the first in importance being that of purchasing.

One of the first things with which the battery man is faced is the
question of what, where, and in what quantities to purchase. The
philosophy of correct purchasing consists in getting the right
materials, in proper quantities, at a low price, and with as little
cost for the doing of it as possible. The purchasing problem should be
a most interesting and important subject to the proprietor of every
service station, because the policy pursued with regard to purchasing
will not only largely govern the economy of all his expenditures,
except rent and payroll, but it will also control his selling
policies. Goods are sold, and services rendered only because some one
wants to buy. The customer's purchasing problems govern the
proprietor's selling problems. To sell properly, it is necessary to
meet the requirements of those who buy.

Correct purchasing is not merely a matter of "buying." The buying
itself has but little to do, after all, with the question of real
economy in this part of the business. The proprietor's purchasing
policy should not cease when the purchase order is

  [Fig. 186 Stock Record]

made out, but should continue after the goods have been delivered,
received and inspected. He should see that they are properly stored,
that they are put to the use intended, and that they are used
efficiently. This can be accomplished to good advantage by the use of
the Stock Record illustrated in Fig. 186.

When goods are received, each item should be entered on these Stock
Record cards, keeping in mind always that the requirements of a
"perpetual" or "going" inventory of this kind are that a separate
account be kept with each kind or class of stock, and not alone with
each class, but with each grade of each class.

For example, if a quantity of batteries were received, it would not
suffice to have one card only for the entire quantity, unless they
should happen to be all of the same type and make. It should be
understood that these cards are a record of all articles coming into
stock, and all articles going out of stock in the way of sales or
otherwise, with an individual card for each kind, grade, style or size
of stock carried on hand.

From the purchase invoices covering stock received, an entry is made
in the column headed "Received", to the proper account, showing date,
order number, quantity and price.

Each sales tag is used to make the entries in the columns headed
"Disbursed", in which the date, tag number, quantity, price, and the
balance quantity on hand are shown.

If this is done daily, for all the sales tags of the particular day,
and the cards on which the "disbursed" entries were made are kept
separate from the balance of the cards, it is an easy matter to arrive
at the cost of all sales for each day, The advantage of having this
daily information will be explained and illustrated in following
paragraphs.


The Use and Abuse of Credit.


The question of the proper use of credit is closely allied with the
purchasing of goods. A great many business failures can be traced
directly to overexpanded credit. Any battery service station
proprietor who does not place a voluntary limit on the amount of
credit for which he asks is, to say the least, running a very great
business risk. The moment he expands his credit to the limit, he
leaves himself with no margin of safety, and a sudden change in
business conditions may place him in a serious situation.

Commercial agencies usually call this condition a lack of capital. The
real cause, however, is not so much lack of capital as it is too much
business on credit. This does not mean that credit should not be
sought; or that all business should be done on the capital actually
invested in the concern. Credit is necessary to commercial life. Very
few business concerns are so strong financially as to be able to do
without credit.

Credit should be sought and used intelligently, and it is not a hard
matter for any battery service station proprietor to keep his credit
good. All that is necessary is to take a few precautions, and observe
in general the principles of good business. The first requisite, of
course, is to accept no more credit than the business will stand.
Sometimes it is possible to secure enough credit to ruin a business.
Its present condition and future prospects may appear so good as to
warrant securing all the credit possible under the circumstances.

It requires courage to limit the growth and the temporary prosperity
of a business by keeping down the credit accepted. It is very hard to
refuse business. It is difficult not to make extensions when there is
enough business in sight to pay for the extensions. But the acid test
of whether or not you should extend and borrow is not the amount of
business that can be done, but the amount of money that can be spared.
The mere fact that you have the money or can get it does not in the
least mean that it should be spent.

And the reason for this is that, in order to keep your credit good,
you must meet all obligations promptly. Nothing has a more chilling
effect on any business than failure to meet all indebtedness when due.
As soon as additional time is requested in which to meet obligations,
your credit rating begins to contract; and if, at the same time, your
credit has been overexpanded the business is placed in a most
difficult position. More than one concern has gone to the wall when
faced with this combination.


Proper Bookkeeping Records.


The principal difficulty in this matter of the proper use of credit
will lie in poor bookkeeping records, making it impossible for the
proprietor to know very much about his financial position or operating
condition day by day and week by week and month by month.

Many service station proprietors figure what they owe once a year
only, when they inventory, and many do not keep a permanent record
even then; and usually those who are neglectful in this regard are the
ones who owe the most, proportionately, who do not take their
discounts, and who do not progress.

The following table covers the average discounts allowed in various
lines. If you study it, and find out how much it costs you to lose
discounts, you will at once realize the necessity for the proper sort
of bookkeeping records.

1. 1% cash, 30 days net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12%   per year
2. 2% cash, 30 days net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24%   per year
3. 3% cash, 30 days net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36%   per year
4. 5% cash, 30 days net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60%   per year
5. 8% cash, 30 days net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96%   per year
6. 1% 10 days, 30 days net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18%   per year
7. 2% 10 days, 30 days net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36%   per year
8. 3% 10 days, 30 days net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54%   per year
9. 5% 10 days, 30 days net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90%   per year
10. 8% 10 days, 30 days net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 144%   per year
11. 1% 10 days, 60 days net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14.4% per year
12. 2% 10 days, 60 days net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28.8% per year
13. 3% 10 days, 60 days net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  43.2% per year
14. 5% 10 days, 60 days net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  72%   per year
15. 8% 10 days, 60 days net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115.2% per year

Then there is the matter of expenses; rent, wages, insurances, taxes,
depreciation, freight and express, and all the other miscellaneous
items that go to make up the total of your cost of doing business.
Expenses eat up a business unless controlled. They ought to be so
analyzed that you are able to place your finger on items which appear
too large, or uncalled for, or which need explanation.


A Daily Exhibit of Your Business.


In order to accomplish this, you ought to keep a record similar to
that shown by Fig. 187--a Daily Exhibit of your business.

The advantage of this record is that it will give any battery man
daily information as to the following facts of his business:

1. The amount of stock on hand.
2. The amount of gross profit.
3. The percentage of gross profit.

It will give monthly information as to:

1. The expense and percentage of expense.
2. The actual net profit.
3. The percentage of net profit.

Such information will help you to locate exactly when and where your
losses come; during what months and from what causes. It will enable
you to turn losing months this year into profitable months next year;
to tell whether your losses were due to a too great expense account,
or to too low gross profits.

The percentage columns on the sheet are the most important, because
only by percentages can you make proper comparisons, and know just how
your business is headed. You cannot guess percentages; you must have a
way of knowing continually what they are, in order to be certain of
getting the right return on your investment.

  [Fig. 187a "Daily Exhibit" form]

  [Fig. 187b "Daily Exhibit" form, continued]

In analyzing this Daily Exhibit, you will note that it is ruled for
five weeks and two extra days, in order to provide for any one and all
months of the year. The various columns are provided so that the
entries in them will give a clear-cut story of the actual state of
your affairs, daily, weekly, and monthly. Each column will be
considered in the order in which it appears on the form.

First Column--"Merchandise on Hand."
In starting this record the first day, the figures entered in this
column must be an actual physical inventory of your stock on hand,
priced and extended at cost. Do not total this column.

Second Column--"New Goods Added to Stock."
The figures entered in this column should be the total value of all
new goods received from manufacturers or jobbers on the particular
day. If you return any articles to the seller immediately upon
receipt, and before putting them into your stock, deduct such goods
from the invoices and enter only the net amount in this column. This
column should be totaled every week and every month.

Third Column--"Goods Returned by Customers;--Deduct from Sales."
The total value of all goods returned by customers extended at the
prices charged customers should be entered in this column daily. Every
week and every month this column is totaled.

Fourth Column--"Cost of Goods Returned;--Deduct from Cost of Goods
Sold."
The cost of all goods returned by customers should be entered in this
column. The cost prices can always be secured from the Stock Record
cards, as previously explained. Total this column every week and every
month.

Fifth Column--"Goods Returned to Manufacturers."
Sometimes there is occasion to return merchandise after it has been
put into stock. In such cases, the money value of the articles sent
back to manufacturers or jobbers should be entered in this column.
This does not mean such goods as were returned on the day received,
and were deducted from the seller's invoice, and at no time have
appeared in the second column, "New Goods Added to Stock," but only to
such merchandise as was originally entered in the second column, and
later returned to the manufacturer. This column should be totaled
every week and every month.

Sixth Column--"Goods Sold, Less Goods Returned."
Enter here total of selling prices on sales tags for each day, after
deducting amount in the third column. Total this column every week and
every month.

Seventh Oolumn--"Cost of Goods Sold, Less Cost of Goods Returned."
The total of the sales extended at cost prices for each day, minus the
amount showing in the fourth column, should be entered in this column.
It should be totaled every week and every month.

Eighth Column--"Gross Profits."
To arrive at the figures to be entered in this column deduct the
amount in the seventh column from the amount in the sixth column.
Total this column every week and every month.

Ninth Column--"Per Cent to Sales."
This percentage should be figured every day, and every week and every
month, and is arrived at by dividing the figures in the eighth column
by the figures in the sixth column. It will pay you to watch this
column closely. You will be astonished at the way it varies from day
to day, week to week, and month to month. If you watch it closely
enough, you will soon learn a great deal more about your business than
you ever knew before. You do not need to total this column.

Tenth Column--"Accounts Receivable."
On the day the Daily Exhibit is first started, the figures for this
column must be taken from whatever records you have kept in the past.
Do not total this column.

Eleventh Column--"Collections."
Every day you collect any money from those customers who run charge
accounts with you, enter the amount collected in this column. Total it
every week and every month.

Twelfth Column--"Cash Sales."
Every day enter the amount of cash sales in this column, and total it
every week and every month.

Thirteenth Column--"Charge Sales."
The amount of daily sales made to those customers who do not pay cash
but run a charge account should be entered in this column. Every week
and every month this column should be totaled.

General Calculations.
To arrive at the amount of "Merchandise on Hand" after the first day,
which is, as has been previously explained, an actual physical
inventory, add the amounts showing in the first and second columns,
and deduct from this total the sum of the fifth and seventh columns.
Enter this result in the first column for the next succeeding day.
Continue as above throughout the entire month.

After the first day the figures in "Accounts Receivable" column are
obtained by adding together the amounts showing in the tenth and
thirteenth column and deducting from this total the amount in the
eleventh column. This balance will be entered in the tenth column for
the next day, the same procedure being followed for each day
thereafter.

"Merchandise on Hand" after the close of business on the last day of
the month should be entered in the first column on the line marked
"Month Total." This same amount will be carried forward to the first
column of next month's sheet and entered on the line of the particular
day of the week on which the first of the month falls.

Following the "Month Total" are the "Year to Date" and "Last Year to
Date." These figures are important for purposes of comparison. Arrive
at total for "Year to Date" by adding the total for the present month
to the total for "Year to Date" found on the previous month's sheet.
The figures for "Last Year to Date" are taken directly from the sheet
kept for the same month last year. It is, of course, evident that this
cannot be done until one year's records have been completed.


Expenses and Profits.


Under the heading "Summary" at the bottom of the sheet, provision has
been made for finding out how much net profit YOU have made for the
month.

On the line marked "Gross Profits" enter the "Month Total" figures in
the eighth column. Below this enter all the various items of expense
as follows:

(1) Advertising: By advertising is meant such copy, signs, etc., which
may be prepared and used for the purpose of keeping the public
informed as to your ability to serve them--in other words, any space
which is used for general publicity purposes, such as for instance,
your card in the classified telephone directory, or blotters, folders,
dodgers which you may have printed up and distributed.

Do not load this account with church programs, contributions to the
ball team, tickets to the fireman's ball and the like. These are
donations, and not advertising.

(2) Electricity: All bills for electrical current will be charged to
this account.

(3) Freight: Charges for all freight and express will be made to this
account.

(4) Insurance: The total yearly insurance should be divined by twelve,
to obtain the amount to be charged to this account monthly.

(5) Proprietor's salary: Many battery service station proprietors do
not charge their own living as an expense. That's a serious mistake,
of course. If those same men should hire a manager to run their
service station, the manager's salary would naturally be charged to
expense. The amount of money withdrawn from the business by the
proprietor should therefore be charged to expense.

(6) Rent: The amount of money you pay monthly for rent should be
charged to this account. If, on the other hand, you own your own
building, charge the business with rent, the same as if you were
paying it to someone else. Every business should stand rent; besides,
the building itself should show itself a profitable investment. Charge
yourself just as much as you would anyone else; don't favor your
business by undercharging, nor handicap it by overcharging.

(7) Supplies: The cost of all supplies, small tools and miscellaneous
articles which are bought for use in the business and not for sale
should be charged to this account.

(8) Taxes: The yearly amount of taxes paid should be divided by
twelve, in order to arrive at the monthly proportion to be charged to
this account.

(9) Wages: The amount of wages paid to employees should be charged to
this account. Care should be taken to determine the actual amount for
the month, if wages are paid on a daily or weekly wage rate.

(10) Miscellaneous: Any expenses of the business not listed above will
be charged to this account. This may include such items as donations,
loss on bad accounts, and such like items of expense. You may itemize
these into as many headings as you desire, but for the purposes of the
Daily Exhibit combine all of them under "Miscellaneous Expense."

All these expense items are then added together, and this total is
entered on the line marked "Total Expenses."

Deduct "Total Expenses" from "Gross Profit" to arrive at "Net Profit."

To arrive at the totals for "This Year to Date," carry the figures
forward from the previous month's sheet and add figures for present
month.

The figures for "Last Year to Date" will be found on the sheet for the
corresponding month of last year, and are copied in this column.

All percentages should be figured on sales. The figures shown on each
line in the "Amount" columns under the headings "This Month," "This
Year to Date" and "Last Year to Date" should be divided by the "Month
Total" of the sixth column, shown above, i. e., "Goods Sold, Less
Goods Returned."

When you take inventory, the amount of stock should equal "Merchandise
on Hand," as shown by the Daily Exhibit. But there will generally be a
discrepancy, varying with the size of your stock, and that discrepancy
will represent the amount of goods gone out of your station without
being paid for; sold for cash and not accounted for; sold on credit
and not charged, and the like. It's worth something to know exactly
what this amounts to. The place for this information is under
"Inventory Variations" on the sheet.

The space headed "Accounts Payable" is provided for recording, on the
last day of every month, just what you owe for accounts and for notes,
and also the same information for the corresponding date of last year.


Invaluable Monthly Comparative Information.


You see now that by the use of the Daily Exhibit you have a running
history of your business by days, weeks and months. But this is hardly
sufficient for a clear view of your business, since you will want some
record which will tell you what the year's business has been, and how
it varied from month to month.

  [Fig. 188. Statistical and Comparative Record]

This is provided for in the Statistical and Comparative Record,
illustrated by Fig. 188, on which the amount of sales, cost of sales,
gross profit, expenses and net profit are entered for each month of
the year. All the figures for entry in this record are taken directly
from the Daily Exhibit at the end of the month, which makes the work
of compiling it a very easy task.

The advantages of a record of this kind can hardly be overstated. The
figures in the upper part of this statement will show which months
have been profit payers and which have not, while from the figures in
the lower part of the report you are able to determine the percentage
any group of expenses bears to sales, and are thus in position to
subsequently control such items.

Do not let the fear of doing a little bookkeeping work prevent you
from keeping these records. They should go a long way toward solving
the problems which the average proprietor faces today:

1. Selling his goods and services without a profit.
2. Failure to show sufficient net profit at the end of the year.
3. Constantly increasing cost of doing business.

You may think at first glance that it will require a great deal of
extra work to keep these records, but in this you are mistaken. They
are very simple and easy to operate. The American Bureau of
Engineering, Inc., will advise you where to obtain these forms.


=======================================================================

CHAPTER 14.
WHAT'S WRONG WITH THE BATTERY?


When a man does not feel well, he visits a doctor. When he has trouble
on his car, he takes the car to a service station. What connection is
there between these two cases? None whatever, you may say. And yet in
each instance the man is seeking service. The term "Service Station"
generally suggests a place where automobile troubles are taken care
of. That does not mean, however, that the term may not be used in
other lines of business. The doctor's office is just as much a
"Service Station" as the automobile repair shop. The one is a "Health
Service Station" and the other is an "Automobile Service Station." The
business of each is to eliminate trouble.

The battery repairman may think that he cannot learn anything from a
doctor which will be of any use to his battery business, but, as a
matter of fact, the battery man can learn much that is valuable from
the doctor's methods of handling trouble. The doctor greets a patient
courteously and always waits for him to tell what his symptoms are. He
then examines the patient, asking questions based on what the patient
tells him, to bring out certain points which will help in making an
accurate diagnosis. Very often such questioning will enable the doctor
to determine just what the nature of the illness is. But he does not
then proceed to write out a prescription without making an
examination. If he did, the whole case might just as well have been
handled over the telephone. No competent physician will treat patients
from a distance. Neither will he write out a prescription without
making a physical examination of the patient. The questioning of the
patient and the physical examination always go together, some
questions being asked before an examination is made to give an
approximate idea of what is wrong and some during the examination to
aid the doctor in making an accurate diagnosis.

The patient expects a doctor to listen to his description of the
symptoms and to be guided by them in the subsequent examination, but
not to arrive at a conclusion entirely by the description of the
symptoms. A patient very often misinterprets his pains and aches, and
tells the doctor that he has a certain ailment. Yet the doctor makes
his examination and determines what the trouble is, and frequently
find a condition which is entirely different from what the patient
suspected. He then prescribes a treatment based on his own conclusions
and not on what the patient believes to be wrong.

Calling for Batteries. A doctor treats many patients in his office,
but also makes his daily calls on others. Similarly, the battery
repairman should have a service truck for use in calling for
customers' batteries, especially where competition is keen. Some car
owners cannot bring their cars to the repair shop during working
hours, and yet if they knew that they could have their battery called
for and have a rental battery installed, they would undoubtedly have
their battery tested and repaired more frequently. In some instances a
battery will be so badly run down that the car cannot be started, and
the car is allowed to stand idle because the owner does not care to
remove his battery, carry it to a service station and carry a rental
battery with him. Batteries are heavy and generally dirty and wet with
acid, and few people wish to run the risk of ruining their clothes by
carrying the battery to a shop. The wise battery mail will not
overlook the business possibilities offered by the call for and
deliver service, especially when business is slow. A Ford roadster
with a short express body will furnish this service, or any old
chassis may be fitted up for it at a moderate cost. Of course, you
must advertise this service. Do not wait for car owners to ask whether
you will call for their batteries. Many of them may not think of
telephoning for such service, and even if they do, they might call up
some other service station.


When Batteries Come In


What does a man expect when he brings his battery to the battery
service-station? Obviously lie expects to be greeted courteously and
to be permitted to tell the symptoms of trouble which he has observed.
He furthermore expects the repairman to examine and test the battery
carefully before deciding what repairs are necessary and not to tell
him that he needs new positives, new separators, or an entirely new
battery without even looking at the battery.

When a car is brought to your shop, you are the doctor. Sonic part of
the mechanism is in trouble, and it is your duty to put yourself in
charge of the situation. Listen to what the customer hp to say. He has
certainly noticed that something is wrong, or he would not have come
to you. Ask him what he has observed.

He has been driving the car, starting the engine, and turning on the
lights, and certainly has noticed whether everything has been
operating as it should. The things he has noticed were caused by the
trouble which exists. He may not know what sort of trouble they
indicate, but you, as the battery doctor can generally make a fairly
accurate estimate of what the trouble is. You should, of course, do
more than merely listen to what the customer says. You can question
him as to how the car has been used, just as the doctor, after
listening to what a patient has to say, asks questions to give him a
clue to what has caused such symptoms.

The purpose of the preliminary questioning and examination is not
merely to make an accurate diagnosis of the troubles, but to establish
a feeling of confidence on the part of the customer. A man who owns a
car generally possesses an average amount of intelligence and likes to
have it recognized and respected. Your questioning and examination
will either show the customer that you know your business and know
what should be done, or it will convince him that you are merely
putting up a bluff to hide your ignorance.

What the customer wants to know is how much the repairs will cost,
and how soon lie may have his battery again. Estimate carefully what
the work, will cost, and tell him. If a considerable amount of work is
required and you cannot estimate how much time and material will be
needed, tell the customer that you will let him know the approximate
cost later, when you have gone far enough with the work to be able to
make an estimate. If you find that the battery should be taken off,
take it off without any loss of time and put on a rental battery. If
there is something wrong outside of the battery, however, it will be
necessary to eliminate the trouble before the car leaves the
shop, otherwise the same battery trouble will occur again. If there is
no actual trouble outside the battery, and if the driving conditions
have been such that the battery is not charged sufficiently while on
the car, no actual repairs are necessary on the electrical system. The
customer should be advised to drive in about every two weeks to have
his battery tested, and occasionally taken off and given a bench
charge. It is better to do this than to increase the charging rate to
a value which might damage the generator or battery.

Adopt a standard method of procedure in meeting, a customer and in
determining what is wrong and what should be done. If the customer is
one who brings his car in regularly to have the battery filled and
tested, you will: be able to detect any trouble as soon as it occurs,
and will be able to eliminate it before the battery is seriously
damaged. A change in the charging rate, cleaning of the generator
commutator or cutout contact points, if done in time, will often keep
everything in good shape.

With a new customer who has had his battery for sometime, you must,
however, ask questions and make tests to determine what is wrong.
Before sending the customer away with a new, rental, or repaired
battery, test the electrical system as described on page 276.

The most important transaction and one which will save you
considerable argument and trouble is to get everything down in black
and white. Always try to have the customer wait while you test the
battery. If you find it necessary to open the battery do this in his
presence. When he leaves there should be no question as to what he
shall have to pay for. If more time is required to determine the
necessary work, do not actually do the work without getting in touch
with the owner and making a written agreement as to what is to be done
and how much the cost will be. The Service Record shown in Fig. 183
may be used for this purpose.

The following method of procedure is suggested as a standard. Follow
it closely if possible, though in some cases, where the nature of the
trouble is plainly evident, this will not be necessary any more than a
doctor who sees blood streaming from a severe cut needs to question
the patient to find out what is wrong.

It may not always be necessary to ask all the questions which follow,
or to ask them in the order given, but they cover points which the
repairman should know in order to work intelligently. Some of the
information called for in the questions may often be obtained without
questioning the customer. Do not, however, hesitate to ask any and all
questions covering points which you wish to know.

1. Greet the customer with a smile.

Your manner and appearance are of great importance. Be polite and
pleasant. Do not lose your temper, no matter how much cause the
customer gives you to do so. A calm, courteous manner will generally
cool the anger of an irate customer and make it possible to gain his
confidence and good will. Do not argue with your customers, Your
business is to get the job and do it in an agreeable manner. If you
make mistakes admit it and your customer will come again. Keep your
clothes neat and clean and have your face and hands clean. Remember
that the first glimpse the customer has of the man who approaches him
will influence him to a very considerable extent in giving you his
business or going elsewhere. Do not have a customer wait around a long
time before he receives any attention. If he grows impatient because
nobody notices him when he comes in, it will be hard to gain his
confidence, no matter how well you may afterwards do the work.

2. What's the Trouble?

Let the customer tell you his story. While listening, try to get an
idea of what may be wrong. When he has given you all the information
he can, question him so that you will be able to get a better idea of
what is wrong.

(a) How long have you had the battery? See page 242.

(b) Was it a new battery when you bought it?

(c) How often has water been added?

(d) Has distilled water been used exclusively, or has faucet, well, or
river water ever been used? Impure water may introduce substances
which will damage or even ruin a battery.

(e) Has too much water been added? If this is done, the electrolyte
will flood the tops of the jars and may rot the upper parts of the
wooden case.

(f) How fast is car generally driven? The speed should average 15 M.
P. H. or more to keep battery charged.

(g) How long must engine be cranked before it starts? This should not
require more than about 10 seconds. If customer is in doubt, start the
engine to find out. If starting motor cranks engine at a fair speed,
engine should start within 10 seconds. If starting motor cranks engine
at a low speed, a longer cranking time may be required. The low
cranking speed may be due to a run-down or defective battery, to
trouble in the starting motor or starting circuit, or to a stiff
engine. To determine if battery is at fault, see "Battery Tests,"
below.

(h) Has the car been used regularly, or has it been standing idle for
any length of time? An idle battery discharges itself and often
becomes damaged. If car has been standing idle in cold weather, the
battery has probably been frozen.

(i) Has it been necessary to remove the battery occasionally for a
bench charge?

(j) Has battery ever been repaired? See page 322.


Battery Tests


1. Remove the vent plugs and inspect electrolyte. If the electrolyte
covers the plates and separators to a sufficient depth, measure the
specific gravity of the electrolyte. If the electrolyte is below the
tops of the plates and separators, see following section No. 2.

If all cells read 1.150 or less, remove the battery and give it a
bench charge.

If the specific gravity readings of all cells are between 1.150 and
1.200, and if no serious troubles have been found up to this point,
advise the owner to use his lights and starting motor as little as
possible until the gravity rises to 1.280-1.300. If this is not
satisfactory to him, remove the battery and give it a bench charge.

If the specific gravity readings are all above 1.200, or if the
gravity reading of one cell is 50 points (such as the difference
between 1.200 and 1.250, which is 50 "points") lower or higher than
the others (no matter what the actual gravity readings may be), make
the 15 seconds high rate discharge test on the battery. See page 266.
If this test indicates that the internal condition of the battery is
bad, the battery should be removed from the car and opened for
inspection. If the test indicates that the internal condition of the
battery is good, the specific gravity of the electrolyte needs
adjusting. The difference in specific gravity readings in the cells is
due to one of the following, causes:

(a) Water added to the cell or cells which have low gravity to replace
electrolyte which had been spilled or lost in some other manner.

(b) Electrolyte added to the cell or cells which have high gravity to
replace the water which naturally evaporates from the electrolyte.

(c) Trouble inside the cell or cells which have low gravity. The high
rate discharge test will show whether there is any internal trouble.

If any cell shows a gravity above 1.300, remove the battery, dump out
all the electrolyte, fill battery with distilled water and put the
battery on charge.

If the gravity of one or more cells is 50 points less than the others,
water has been used to replace electrolyte which has been spilled or
lost in some other manner, or else one or more jars are cracked. A
battery with one or more cracked jars usually has the bottom parts of
its wooden case rotted by the electrolyte which leaks from the jar. If
you are not certain whether the battery has one or more cracked jars,
see that the electrolyte covers the plates in all the cells one-half
inch or so, and then let the battery stand. If the electrolyte sinks
below the tops of the plates in one or more cells within twenty-four
hours, those cells have leaky jars and the battery must be opened, and
new jars put in.

If the low gravity is not caused by leaky jars, give the battery a
bench charge and adjust the level of the electrolyte.

2. If you found electrolyte to be below tops of plates in all the
cells, the battery has been neglected, or there mail be leaky jars.
Add distilled water until the electrolyte covers the plates to a
depth of about one-half inch.

(a) If it requires only a small amount of water to bring up the level
of the electrolyte, remove the battery and give it a bench charge. See
page 198. Only a brief charge may be necessary. Ask the driver when
water was added last. If more than 1 month has passed since the last
filling, the upper parts of the plates may be sulphated, and the
battery should be charged at a low rate.

(b) If it requires a considerable amount of water to bring up the
level of the electrolyte, and the bottom of the wooden battery case
shows no signs of being rotted, the battery has been neglected and has
been dry for a long time, and the plates are mostly likely badly
damaged. Open the battery for inspection.

(c) If only one cell requires a considerable amount of water to bring
up the level of its electrolyte, and the bottom of the wooden battery
ease shows no sign of being rotted, that cell is probably "dead," due
to in internal short-circuit. To test for "dead" cells, turn on the
lamps and measure the voltage of each cell. A dead cell will not give
any voltage on test, may give a reversed voltage reading, or at the
most will give a very low voltage. A battery with a dead cell should
be opened for inspection.

(d) If the bottom part of the wooden battery case is rotted, and a
considerable amount of water had to be added to any or all cells to
bring up the level of the electrolyte, the battery has leaky jars and
must be opened to have the leaky jars replaced by good ones.

If there is any doubt in your mind as to whether any or all jars are
leaking, fill the cells with distilled water and let the battery stand
for twelve to twenty-four hours. If at or before the end of that time
the electrolyte has, fallen below the tops of the plates in any or all
cells, these cells have leaky Jars and the battery must be opened and
the leaky jars replaced with good ones. The electrolyte which leaks
out will wet the bench or on which the battery is placed and this is
another indication of a leaky jar.


General Inspection


In addition to the tests which have been described, a general
inspection as outlined below will often be a great help in deciding
what must be done.

1. Is battery loose? A battery which is not held down firmly may have
broken jars, cracked sealing compound around posts or between posts
and separators, and active material shaken out of the grids. There may
also be corrosion at the terminals.

2. Are cables loose? This will cause battery to be in a run down
condition and cause failure to crank engine.

3. Is there corrosion at the terminals? This will cause battery to be
in a run-down condition and cause failure to start engine. Corrosion
is caused by electrolyte attacking terminals. A coating of vaseline on
the terminals prevents corrosion.

4. Is top of battery wet? This may be due to addition of too much
water, overheating of battery, cracks around posts and between posts
and cover, electrolyte thrown out of vents because of battery being
loose, or electrolyte or water spilled on battery. Such a condition
causes battery to run down.

5. Is top of case acid soaked? This is caused by leaks around posts or
between covers and jars, flooding of electrolyte due to overheating or
due to addition of too much water, or by electrolyte spilled on covers.

6. Is lower part of case acid soaked? This is caused by leaky jars.

7. Are ends of case bulged out? This may be due to battery having been
frozen.

This general inspection of the battery can be made in a few seconds,
and often shows what the condition of the battery is.


Operation Tests


Two simple tests may be made which will help considerably in the
diagnosis.

Turn on the lights. If they burn dim, battery is run down (and may be
defective) and battery needs bench charge or repairs. If they burn
bright battery is probably in a good condition.

With the lights burning, have the customer or a helper step on the
starting switch. If the lights now become very dim, the battery is run
down (and may also be defective), or else the starting motor is
drawing too much current from the battery.


Trouble Charts


For the convenience of the repairman, the battery troubles which may
be found when a car is brought in, are summarized in the following
tables:


All Cells Show Low Gravity or Low Voltage


A. Look for the following conditions:


1. Loose or dirty terminals or cell connectors. This may reduce
charging rate, or open charging circuit entirely. Remedy: Tighten and
clean connections.

2. Corrosion on terminals or cell connectors caused by acid on top of
battery due to over-filling, flooding, defective sealing, lead scraped
from lead-coated terminals, and copper wires attached directly to
battery. A badly corroded battery terminal may cause the generator,
ignition coil, and lamps to burn out because of the high resistance
which the corroded terminal causes in the charging line. It may reduce
charging rate, or open charging circuit entirely. Remedy: Remove cause
of corrosion. Clean corroded parts and give coating of vaseline.

3. Broken terminals or cell connectors. These may reduce charging rate
or open charging circuit entirely. Remedy: Install new parts.

4. Generator not charging. Remedy: Find and remove cause of generator
not charging (see page 284).

5. Charging rate too low. Remedy: If due to generator trouble, repair
generator. If due to incorrect generator setting change setting. If
due to driving conditions increase charging rate.

6. Acid or moisture on top of battery due to defective sealing,
flooding, spilling electrolyte in taking gravity readings, loose vent
plugs. This causes corrosion and current leakage. Remedy: Find and
remove cause.

7. Tools or wires on battery causing short-circuits. Remedy: Tell
customer to keep such things off the battery.

8. Short-circuits or grounds in wiring. Remedy: Repair wiring.

9. Cutout relay closing late, resulting in battery not being charged
at ordinary driving speeds. Remedy: Check action of cutout. See page
282.

10. Excessive lighting current, due to too many or too large lamps.
Remedy: Check by turning on all lamps while engine is running. Ammeter
should show three to five amperes charge with lamps burning. In winter
the charging rate may have to be increased.


B. Question Driver as to following causes of low gravity and low
voltage:

1. Has water been added regularly?

2. Has impure water, such as faucet, well, or river water ever been
added to battery?

3. Has too much water been added?

4. Has electrolyte been spilled and replaced by water?

5. Has battery been idle, or stored without regular charging?

6. Is car used more at night than in daytime? Considerable night
driving may prevent battery from being fully charged.

7. Is starter used frequently?

8. What is average driving speed? Should be over 15 M. P. 11.

9. How long is engine usually cranked before starting-? Cranking
period should not exceed 10 seconds.


C. If battery has been repaired. The trouble may be due to:


1. Improperly treated separators used.

2. Grooved side of separators put against negatives instead of
positives.

3. Separator left out.

4. Cracked separator.

5. Positives used which should have been discarded.

6. Bulged, swollen negatives used.

7. Poor joints due to improper lead-burning.


D. Battery Troubles which may exist:


1. Sulfated plates.

2. Buckled Plates.

3. Internal Short-circuits.

4. Cracked Jars.

5. Clogged Separators.



Gravity Readings Unequal


1. Acid or moisture on top of battery, due to defective sealing,
flooding, spilling electrolyte, loose vent plugs. This causes current
leakage. Remedy: Find and remove cause.

2. Tools or wires on battery, causing short-circuits. Remedy: Tell
driver to keep such things off the battery.

3. Electrolyte or acid added to cells giving the high gravity readings.

4. Electrolyte spilled and replaced by water in cells giving low
readings.

5. Grooved side of separators placed against negatives in cells giving
the low readings.

6. Separator left out, cracked separator used, hole worn through
separator by buckled plate or swollen negatives, or separators in
some cells and new ones in others.

7. Old plates used in some cells and new ones in others.

8. Impurities in cells showing low gravity.

9. Shorted cell, due to plates cutting through separators.

10. Cracked jar.

11. Oil some of the older cars a three wire lighting system was used.
If the lights are arranged so that more are connected between one of
the outside wires and the center, than between the other outside wire
and the center, the cells carrying the heavier lighting load will show
low gravity.

12. On some of the older cars, the battery is made of two or more
sections which are connected in series for starting and in parallel
for charging. Oil such cars the cells in one of the sections may show
lower gravity than other cells due to longer connecting cables, poor
connections, corroded terminals, and so on. Such a condition AN-ill
often be found in the old two section Maxwell batteries used previous
to 1918.


High Gravity


This is a condition in which the hydrometer readings would indicate
that a battery is almost or fully-charged, but the battery may fail to
operate the starting motor. If the lights are burning while the
starting switch is closed, they will become very dim. The gravity
readings may be found to be above 1.300.

The probable causes of this condition are:

1. Electrolyte or concentrated acid added instead of water.

2. One of the numerous "dope" solutions which have been advertised
extensively within the past two years. Never use them. If customer
admits having used such a "dope" warn him not to do so again.


Low Electrolyte

Probable Causes:

1. Water not added.

2. Electrolyte replaced in wrong cell after taking gravity readings.

3. Cracked jars.

4. Battery overcharged, causing loss of water by overheating and
excessive gassing.


Probable Results:

1. Sulfated Plates.

2. Carbonized, dry, cracked separators.

3. Considerable shedding.


Battery Overheats

Probable Causes:

1. Water not added regularly.

2. Impure water used.

3. Impure acid used.

4. Battery on hot place on car.

5. Alcohol or other anti-freeze preparation added.

6. Excessive charging rate.

7. Improperly treated separators.

8. Battery over-charged by long daylight runs.


Probable Results:

1. Sulfated Plates.

2. Burned, Carbonized Separators.

3. Buckled Plates.

4. Excessive Shedding.


Electrolyte Leaking Out at Top

Probable Causes:

1. Too much water added.

2. Battery loose in box.

3. Cracks in sealing compound due to poor sealing, or cables pulling
on terminals, or due to poor quality of sealing compound, or good
quality compound which has been burned.

4. Vent plugs loose.

Probable Results:

1. Upper portion of case rotted by acid.

2. Electrolyte low.

3. Plates sulphated.

4. Upper parts of separators dry.


Summary

1. When May a Battery Be Left on the Car?

(a) When you find that the specific gravity of all cells is more than
1.150, the voltage of each cell is at least 2, the voltage doe's not
drop when the lights are turned on, or the lights do not become very
dim when the engine is cranked with the starting motor, there are no
loose terminals or connectors, the sealing compound is not broken or
cracked so as to cause a "slopper," the electrolyte covers the plates,
the box is not rotted by acid, and there are no broken jars.

These conditions will exist only if battery has been well taken care
of, and some trouble has suddenly and recently arisen, such as caused
by a break in one of the battery cables, loosening of a cable
connection at the battery or in the line to the starting motor.

2. When Should a Battery Be Removed From Car?

(a) When you find broken sealing compound, causing the battery to be a
"slopper."

(b) When you find inter-cell connectors and terminals loose, corroded,
or poorly burned on.

(c) When you find box badly rotted by acid, or otherwise defective.

(d) When you find a cracked jar, indicated by lower part of case being
acid soaked, or by low electrolyte, or find that electrolyte level
falls below the tops of the plates soon after adding water.

(e) When you find a dead cell, indicated by very low or no voltage,
even on open circuit.

(f) When specific gravity of electrolyte is less than 1.150, or
gravity readings of cells vary considerably.

(g) When battery voltage drops to about 1.7 or less per cell when
lamps are turned on, or lamps become very dim when the starting motor
is cranking the engine, or the high rate discharge test shows that
there is trouble in the cells.

(h) When you find that electrolyte is below tops of plates, and it
requires considerable water to bring it up to the correct height.

(i) When battery overheats on charge, or discharge, although battery
is not located in hot place, charging rate is not too high and lamps
and accessories load is normal.

(j) When battery is more than a year old and action is not
satisfactory.

(k) When a blacksmith, tinsmith or plumber has tried his hand at
rebuilding the battery. Such a battery is shown in Fig. 189.

(1) When ends of care are bulged out.

3. When Is It Unnecessary to Open a Battery?

(a) When the only trouble is broken sealing compound. The battery
should be resealed.

(b) When loose, corroded, or poorly burned on terminals and connectors
have merely resulted in keeping battery only partly charged and no
internal troubles exist. The remedy is to drill off the connectors, or
terminals, and re-burn them.

(c) When the external condition of battery is good, and a bench
charge, see page 198 (with several charge and discharge cycles if
necessary) puts battery in a good condition, as indicated by voltage,
cadmium, and 20 minute high rate discharge test.

4. When Must a Battery Be Opened?

(a) When prolonged charging (72 hours or more) will not cause gravity
or voltage to rise. Such trouble is due to defective plates and
separators.

(b) When battery case is badly acid soaked. A slightly acid soaked
case need not be discarded, but if the damage caused by the acid has
been excessive, a new case is needed. Plates may also be damaged.

(c) When one or more jars are cracked. New jars are needed. The plates
may also be damaged.

(d) When one or more cells are "dead," as indicated by little or no
voltage, even on open circuit. New plates (positives at least) may be
required.

(e) When battery is more than a year old and action is unsatisfactory.
(Battery will not hold its charge.) Battery may have to be junked, or
new separators may be required. Every battery should be reinsulated at
least once during its lifetime.

(f) When a blacksmith, tinsmith, or plumber have tried to repair a
case, Fig. 189.

  [Fig. 189. A Blacksmith and Tinsmith Tried Their Hands on This Case,
  Lower Part Enclosed in Tin, Strap Iron, Covered with Friction Tape,
  Around The Top]

(g) When the ends of case are bulged. A new case is needed. If the
battery has been frozen it should generally be junked. There are some
cases on record of a frozen battery having been thawed out and put in
serviceable condition by a long charge at a low rate followed by
several cycles of discharge and recharge. Generally, at least, a new
case, jars, and positives are required.

NOTE: New separators should always be installed, whenever a battery is
opened for repairs, unless the separators already in the battery are
new, and the trouble for which the battery was opened consists of a
leaky jar, a separator left out, or some other trouble which does not
require pulling the plates out of mesh.


====================================================================

CHAPTER 15.
REBUILDING THE BATTERY.



How to Open a Battery

  [Fig. 190 Battery to be opened]

A battery is open when its plates have been drawn out of the hard
rubber jars. All parts are then exposed, and accessible for inspection
and repairs. In an assembled battery, the top of each cell is closed
by a hard rubber cover. Leakproof joints are made between these covers
and the rubber jars and the wooden case by means of sealing compound
which is poured in place while in a molten condition, and joins the
covers to the jars and which hardens as it cools. The joints between
the covers and the posts which project through the covers are in many
batteries made with sealing compound. The cells are then connected to
each other by means of the cell connectors, also called
"top-connectors," or simply "connectors." These connectors are joined
to the lead posts, to which are connected the plate groups by fusing
with a flame, and melting in additional lead to make a joint.

In opening a battery, we must first disconnect the cells from each
other, and then open the joint made by the sealing compound between
the covers and the jars and case. The plates may then be lifted out of
the jars, and the battery is open. The steps necessary to open a
battery follow, in the order in which they must be taken.

1. Clean the Battery. Set the battery on the tear down rack. See that
the vent plugs are all tight in place. Then clean the outside of the
battery. Remove the greater part of the dirt with a brush, old
whisk-broom, or a putty knife. Then put the battery in the water,
using a stiff bristled brush to remove whatever dirt was not removed
in the first place. A four-inch paint brush is satisfactory for this
work, and will last a year or more if taken care of. If water will not
remove all the dirt, try a rag wet with gasoline.

2. Drilling Off the Connectors and Terminals. When you have cleaned
the outside of the battery as thoroughly as possible, set the battery
on the floor near your work bench. Make a sketch of the top of the
battery, showing the exact arrangement of the terminals and
connectors. This sketch should be made on the tag which is tied to the
battery. Tic this tag on the handle near the negative terminal of the
battery or tack it to the ease. Then drill down over the Center of the
posts. For this you will need a large brace with a heavy chuck, a
drill the same size as the post (the part that goes down into the
battery), a large screw driver, a center punch, and a hammer.

  [Fig. 191 Drilling post and cell connector]

With the center punch, mark the exact centers of the tops of the posts
and connectors. Then drill down about half way through the connectors
and terminals until you cut through the part of the connector which is
welded to the post. When you can see a seam between the post and
connector you have drilled through the welded part. See Figs. 191 and
192.

Now pry off the connectors with the screw driver, as shown in Fig.
193. Lay a flat tool such as a chisel or file on the top edge of the
ease to avoid damaging the ease when prying off the connectors.

If any connector is still tight, and you cannot pry it off with a
reasonable effort, drill down a little deeper, and it will come off
easily, provided that the hole which you are drilling is exactly over
the center of the post and as large as the post. There are five things
to remember in drilling the connectors and posts:

  [Fig. 192 Connector drilled to correct depth]

(a) Be sure that the hole is exactly over the center of the post.

(b) Do not drill too deep. Make each hole just deep enough so that the
connector will come off easily. Fig. 192 shows a cross section of a
post and connector drilled to the proper depth. Notice that you need
not drill down the whole depth of the connector, because the bottom
part is not burned to the post.

(c) Be sure that the drill makes the right sized hole to permit the
connectors and terminals to be removed easily when drilled half way
through. An electric drill will do the work much faster than a hand
brace.

(d) Protect the edge of the battery box when you pry up the connectors
with a screw driver.

(e) Remove your drill after the hole is well started and see whether
the hole is in the center of the post. Should you find that it is off
center, tilt the drill, and with the end of the drill pointing the
center of the post as you drill, gradually straighten the drill. This
will bring the hole over the center of the post.

Having removed the connectors, sweep all the lead drillings front the
top of the battery into a box kept for lead drillings only. Fig. 194.
When this box is full, melt the drillings and pour off in the burning
lead mould.

  [Fig. 193 Prying off cell connector]

Post Seal. If the post seal consists of a lead sealing nut, this may
be removed now. With some types of batteries (Willard and U. S. L.),
drilling the connectors also breaks the post seal. With other
batteries, such as the Vesta, Westinghouse, Prest-0-Lite, Universal,
it is more difficult to break the post seal.

  [Fig. 194 Brushing lead drillings into box]

On these batteries, therefore, do not break this seal before drawing
out the plates. You may find that it will not be necessary to separate
the groups, and the post seal will not have to be broken at all,
thereby saving yourself considerable time on the overhauling job.

3. Heating Up the Sealing Compound. Having disconnected the cells from
each other by removing the cell connectors, the next step is to open
the joint made by the sealing compound between the covers and jars.
Fig. 195 shows the battery ready for this step. When cold, the
compound is a tough substance that sticks to the cover and jar, and
hence it must be heated until it is so soft that it is easily removed.
There are several methods by means of which compound may be heated.
These are as follows:

Steam. This is the most popular, and undoubtedly the best means of
heating the compound, and in the following instructions it will be
assumed that steam has been used. The battery is either placed in a
special box in which steam is sent, or else steam is sent directly
into each cell through the vent tube. In the first method the compound
is heated from the outside, and in the second it is heated from the
inside of the cell.

  [Fig. 195 Battery ready for steaming]

  [Fig. 196 Drawing up an element]

If the battery is placed in the steaming box, about ten minutes will
be required for the steam to heat up the sealing compound. For
batteries which use but very little compound, less time is required.
if steam is sent directly into the cells through the vent tubes, five
to seven minutes will generally be enough. The covers must be limp and
the 1 compound must be soft before turning off the steam.

Hot Water. The electrolyte is poured out of the battery, which is then
inverted in a vessel of hot water. This method is slower than the
others, and is more expensive because it requires a larger volume of
water to be heated.

Hot Putty Knife and Screwdriver. The compound may be dug out with a
hot putty knife. This is a slow, unsatisfactory method in most
instances, especially in those batteries which use a considerable
amount of sealing compound. With some batteries using only a small
quantity of compound, a heated putty knife may be run around the
inside of the jar between the jar and the cover. This will break the
joint between the cover and the jar, and allow the plates to be lifted
out. The compound is then scraped from covers and inside of jars,
heating the knife or screwdriver whenever it cools off.

Lead Burning Flame. Any soft lead burning flame may be used. Such a
flame may be adjusted to any desired size. Where steam is available, a
flame should, however, never be used. The temperature of the flame is
very high, and the covers, jars, case, posts, and vent plugs may be
burned and made worthless. Even for the expert repairman, a flame is
not as satisfactory as steam.

The Gasoline Torch. This is the most unsatisfactory method, and should
not be used if possible. The torch gives a hot, spreading flame and it
is difficult to prevent the covers, jars, case, etc., from being
burned. Do not use a gasoline torch if you can possibly avoid doing
so. Alcohol torches are open to the same objections, and are not
satisfactory, even in the hands of a highly skilled workman.

If a flame is used for heating the compound, be sure to blow out with
a hand bellows or compressed air any gas that may have gathered above
the plates, before you bring the flame near the battery.

Electric Heat. Special electric ovens for softening sealing compound
are on the market. The heating element is brought close to the top of
the battery. Where electric power is cheap, this method may be used.
Otherwise it is rather expensive.

  [Fig. 197 Resting element on jar to drain]

When the sealing compound has been softened, place the battery on the
floor between your feet. Grasp the two posts of one cell with pliers,
and pull straight up with an even, steady pull. If the battery has
been steamed long enough, the plates will come up easily, carrying
with them the cover (or covers, if the batter has upper and lower
covers) to which the compound is sticking, as shown in Fig. 196. Do
not remove the plates of the other cells until later.

Rest the plates on the top of the jar just long enough to allow most
of the acid to drain from them, Fig. 197. If you have removed the post
seal, or if the seal consists of compound (old Philadelphia
batteries), pry off the covers now with a screw driver. Otherwise,
leave the covers in place while cleaning off the compound.

While the plates are resting on the jars to drain, scrape the compound
from the covers with a warm screw driver or putty knife, Fig. 198.
Work quickly while the compound is still hot and soft, and comes off
easily. As the compound cools it hardens and sticks to the covers and
is removed with difficulty. If the battery has sealing compound around
the posts, this should also be removed thoroughly, both from the cover
and from the post.

When you scrape the compound from the covers, do a good job. Do not
scrape off most of it, and then leave pieces of it here and there.
Remove every bit of compound, on the tops, edges, sides, and bottoms
of the covers. If you need different sized putty knives or screw
drivers to do this, use them. The time to remove all the compound is
while it is still hot, and not after it has become hard and cold. If
the battery has single covers, the compound can be removed very
quickly. If the battery is of the old double-cover type, the job will
take more time, since all the compound should be scraped from both top
and bottom covers, Fig. 199.

  [Fig. 198 Removing compound from cover]


As soon as you have removed the compound from the covers of the first
cell, serape away the compound which may be sticking to the top and
inside walls of the jar, Fig. 200. Here again you must do a good job,
and remove all of this compound. If you do not do it now, you will
have to do it when you try to put the plates back into the jar later
on, as compound sticking to the inside walls of the jar will make it
difficult, and even impossible to lower the plates into the jar.

Now draw up the plates of the next cell. Rest the plates on the top of
the jar just long enough to drain, and then lift off the covers, and
remove all of the compound, from cover, posts, and jar, just as you
did in the first cell. The third cell, (and the others, if there are
more than three cells) are handled just as you did the first one.

Remember that you should lose no time after you have steamed the
battery. Hot compound is soft and does not stick to the covers, jars,
and posts and may therefore be removed quickly and easily. Cold
compound is hard, and sticks to the covers. Draw out the plates of
only one cell at a time, and clean the compound from the cover, posts
and jar of that one cell before you draw out the plates of the other
cells. In this way, the compound on the covers of the other cells will
remain hotter than if all the plates of the battery were drawn out of
the jars before any of the compound was removed from the covers. You
should have all the plates drawn out, and all the compound removed
within five minutes after you draw up the plates.

  [Fig. 199 Removing sealing compound from double cover]

Throw away the old compound. If is very likely acid-soaked and not fit
for further use.


What Must Be Done with the Battery?


The battery is now open, and in a condition to be examined and
judgment pronounced upon it. The question now arises, "What must be
done with it!" In deciding upon this, be honest with your customer,
put yourself in his place, and do just what you would like to have him
do if he were the repairman and you the car owner. The best battery
men occasionally make mistakes in their diagnosis of the battery's
condition, and the repairs necessary. Experience is the best teacher
in this respect, and you will in time learn to analyze the condition
of a battery quickly.

Handle every cell of a battery that comes in for repairs in the same
way, even though only one dead cell is found, and the others are
apparently in good condition. Each cell must be overhauled, for all
cells are of the same age, and the active materials are in about the
same condition in all the cells, and one cell just happened to give
out before the others. If you overhaul only the dead cell, the others
cells are quite likely to give out soon after the battery is put into
service again.

  [Fig. 200 Removing compound from top of jar]

It is absolutely necessary for you to have a standard method in
working on battery plates. You must divide your work into a number of
definite steps, and always perform these steps, and in the same order
each time. If you have a different method of procedure for every
battery, you will never be successful. Without a definite, tangible
method of procedure for your work you will be working in the dark, and
groping around like a blind man, never becoming a battery expert,
never knowing why you did a certain thing, never gaining confidence in
yourself.

It is impossible to overemphasize the importance of having a standard
method of procedure and to stick to that method. Careless, slip-shod
methods will please your competitor and give him the business which
belongs to you.

1. Examine plates to determine whether they can be used again Rules
for determining when to discard or use old plates follow.

2. If all plates of both positive and negative groups are to be
discarded, use new groups.

The question as to whether the old negatives should be used with new
positives has caused considerable discussion. If the negatives are old
and granulated, they should of course be discarded. Remember that the
capacity of negatives decreases steadily after they are put into
service, while the capacity of positives increases. Putting new
positives against negatives which are rapidly losing capacity is not
advisable. However, trouble often arises in a battery whose negatives
still have considerable capacity, and such negatives may safely be
used with new positives.

If you feel that a battery will not give at least six months more
service after rebuilding with the old negatives, put in all new
plates, or sell the owner a new battery, allowing him some money on
the old battery. But if you really believe that the negatives still
have considerable capacity, put in new positives if required. If all
new plates are used, proceed as directed in this chapter, beginning at
page 348.

3. If you find that only some of the plates are to be discarded, or if
you are not certain as to the condition of the plates, eliminate any
short circuits which may exist, and give the battery a preliminary
charge, as described later, before you do any work on the plates.
Plates that are fully charged are in the best possible condition for
handling, and you should make it an ironclad rule that if some of the
plates can be used again always to charge a battery before you work on
the plates, no matter what is to be done to them. If both positives
and negatives are to be discarded, the preliminary charge should not,
of course, be given, but if only the negatives, or the negatives and
some or all of the positives are to be used again, give this
preliminary charge. Very few batteries will come to your shop in a
charged condition, and an exhausted battery is not in a good condition
to be worked on. Charge the whole battery even though only one cell is
in a very bad condition. This is a method that has been tried out
thoroughly in practice, not in one or two cases, but in thousands.
Batteries in all sorts of conditions have been rebuilt by this method,
and have always given first class service, a service which was
frequently as good, if not better than that given by new batteries.


Examining the Plates


Place an element on a block of wood as shown in Fig. 201. Carefully
pry the plates apart so that you can look down between them and make a
fair preliminary examination. Whenever possible, make your examination
of the plates without separating the groups or removing the old
separators. This should be done because:

(a) Very often the active material is bulged or swollen, and if you
pull out the old separators and put in new ones before charging, the
element spreads out so at the bottom that it cannot be put back into
the jars without first pressing in a plate press. Pressing a complete
element with the separators in place should never be done if it can
possibly be avoided. If it is done the separators should be thrown.
away after you have charged the battery, washed and pressed the
negatives, and washed the positive.

  [Fig. 201 Element on block for examination]

(b) If you put in new separators before giving the battery the
preliminary charge, the new separators may pick up any impurities
which may be on the plates, and will probably be cracked by forcing
them between the bulged and sulphated plates. If, however, the old
separators are covered with sulphate, it is best to throw them away
and put in new separators before giving the battery its preliminary
charge, because such separators will greatly hinder the flow of the
charging current. In batteries using rubber sheets in addition to the
wooden separators, remove all the wooden separators and leave the
rubber sheets in place between the plates. Where only wooden
separators are used in a battery, these may be thrown away and
perforated rubber separators used for the preliminary charge. Rubber
separators may be used again. See (a) above about precautions against
pressing a complete element.

  [Fig. 202 Separating the groups]

If you are not absolutely certain as to the condition of the plates,
draw out a few separators. If separators stick to the plates, loosen
them by inserting a putty knife blade between them and the plates.
Removing a few separators will permit you to separate the groups
before removing the rest of the separators. To separate the groups,
grasp a post in each hand, as, in Fig. 202, and work them back and
forth, being careful not to injure the posts, or break off any plates.
With the groups separated, the remaining separators will either fall
out or may be easily pushed out with a putty knife. Ordinarily, the
groups may be separated in this way if the elements have thirteen
plates or less.

The natural thing to do at this point is to decide what must be done
to the plates, and we therefore give a number of rules to help you
determine which are to be junked, and which are to be used again.
Study these rules carefully, and have them fixed firmly in your mind
so that you can tell instantly what must be done with the plates.

  [Fig. 203 Positives from frozen vehicle cell, showing active
   material sticking to separator]


When to Put In New Plates


1. If one or more jars are cracked and leak, and positive plates have
been ruined by freezing, as shown in Fig. 203, and if upon drawing out
the separators, and separating the positive and negative groups the
active material drops out of the grids, the only way to put the
battery in a good condition is to put in new positives, and new jars
and case if necessary.

Make a careful estimate of

1. (a) Cost of new jars.
2. (b) Cost of new plates.
3. (c) Cost of new case if needed.
4. (d) Cost of labor required.

Try to have the owner present while you are opening his battery. If,
however, he could not wait, and has left, call him up and tell him
what the total cost will be, and if he has no objections, go ahead
with the job. If he is not entirely satisfied with your price, try to
get him to come to your shop. Show him the battery, explain its
condition, tell him just what must be done with it, and explain how
you made your estimate of the cost of the whole job. If you do this.
there will never be any misunderstanding as to cost. Tell him the cost
of a new battery, and let him decide if lie wants one. If the cost of
repairing is almost as much as the price of a new battery. advise him
to buy a new one, but allow him to make the decision himself. He will
then have no cause for complaint.


  [Fig. 204 and 205 Show Diseased Negatives. The Large Ones Only
   Eight Months Old. Active Material, Granulated and Blistered]


2. If the battery is more than two years old, and the active material
on the negative plates is granulated (grainy appearance), Figs. 204
and 205, and somewhat disintegrated; if the plates are weak and
brittle around the edges, and several grids are cracked, Fig. 206, and
the plates have lost a considerable amount of active material; and if
the case has been rotted by the acid, the battery should be junked.

  [Fig. 206 Weak and cracked positives]

Call up the owner, and tell him he needs a new battery. If he does not
seem pleased, ask him to come to your shop. Then show him his battery,
and explain its condition. If you are courteous and patient, you will
sell him a new battery. Otherwise he will never return.

  [Fig. 207 Buckled plates, and Fig. 208 An unusually bad case
   of buckling]

3. If the positive plates are badly distorted from buckling, as in
Figs. 207 and 208 discard them, for they will cut through new
separators, if put into commission again, ill from two to six months.

4. A battery which has has been dry and badly sulphated at some past
period of its life will have the dry portions covered with a white
sulphate, the acid line being clearly distinguishable by this white
color, as shown at A and B in Fig. 201. If the plates are otherwise
in good shape and you wish to use them, give them the "water cure"
described on page 349.

  [Fig. 209 Corroded, bulged and sulphated negatives.
   Disintegrated, rotten positives.]

  [Fig. 210 Disintegrated positives.]

5. Rotten and disintegrated positive plates, Figs. 209 and 210, must
be replaced with new plates. The plates have fallen to pieces or break
at the slightest pressure. Disintegrated plates are an indication of
impurities or overcharging, providing the battery is not old enough to
cause disintegration normally,--say about two years. The lead grid is
converted into peroxide of lead and becomes soft. As a result, there
is nothing to support the paste, and it falls out. Better put in new
negatives also.

6. Batteries with high gravity or hot electrolyte have burned and
carbonized separators, turning them black and rotting them, the
negative paste becomes granulated and is kept in a soft condition, and
gradually drops from the grids on account of the jolting of the car on
the road. Fig. 211 shows such a battery.

7. Dry, hard, and white, long discharged, and badly sulphated plates,
Figs. 201 and 209, are practically ruined, though if the trouble is
not of long standing, the plates may be revived somewhat by a long
charge at a very low rate, using distilled water in place of the
electrolyte, and then discharging at a current equal to about
one-eight to one-tenth of the ampere hour capacity of the battery at
the discharge board. Charge and discharge a battery a number or times,
and you may be able to put a little "pep" into it. In charging
sulphated plates, use a low charging rate, and do not allow gassing
before the end of the charge, or a temperature of the electrolyte
above 110°F.

  [Fig. 211 Side and end view of element from traveling
   salesman's battery]

8. If a battery case is not held down firmly, or if the elements are
loose in the jars, the plates will jump around when the car is in
motion. This will break the sealing compound on top of the battery,
and cause the battery to be a slopper. The active materials will be
shaken out of the grids, as shown in Fig. 212, and the plates will
wear through the separators. New plates are required.

9. If Battery Has Been Reversed. Often the plates of such a battery
disintegrate and crumble under the slightest pressure. If the reversal
is not too far advanced, the plates may be restored (See page 81), but
otherwise they should be discarded. This condition is recognized by
the original negatives being brown, and the original positives gray.

From the foregoing explanations, you see that most of the trouble is
with the positives:

(a) Because the positive active material does not stick together well,
but drops off, or sheds easily.

(b) Because the positives warp or buckle, this causing most of the
battery troubles.

(c) Because the positive plate is weaker and is ruined by freezing.


When the Old Plates May be Used Again


1. If one or more plates are broken from the plate connecting straps,
or the joint between any strap and the plate is poorly made. If plates
are in good condition, reburn the plate lugs to the straps.

  [Fig. 212]

  Fig. 212. Element from a "Slopper." Element was Loose in Jar and
  Jolting of Car Caused Paste to Fall Out.


2. Straight Rebuild. If the general condition of the battery is good,
i.e., the plates straight or only slightly buckled, only a slight
amount of shedding of active material, no white sulphate oil either
plate, the grids not brittle, active material adhering to and firmly
touching the grids, the positive active material of a dark chocolate
brown color and fairly hard (as determined by scratching with blade of
a pocket knife), the negative active Material dark gray in color and
not blistered or granulated, and the plates not too thin, make a
straight rebuild. To do this, charge the battery, remove any sediment
from the bottom of the jar, wash and press the negatives, wash the
positives, clean the parts, insert new separators, and reassemble as
directed later. The only trouble may be cracked sealing compound, or a
broken jar. Broken jars should, of course, be replaced.

  [Fig. 213 Badly bulged negatives. Such plates must be pressed]

3. Badly bulged negative plates, Fig. 213, cause lack of capacity
because the active material is loose, and does not make good contact
with the grids. If the active material is not badly granulated (having
a grainy appearance) the plates call be used again. Sulphated
negatives have very hard active material, and will feel as bard as
stone when scratched with a knife. Hard negatives from Which active
material has been falling ill lumps Oil account of being
overdischarged after having been in in undercharged condition may be
nursed back to life, if too much of the active material has not been
lost.

4. The formation of an excessive amount of sulphate may result in
cracking the grids, and the active materials falls out in lumps. Such
plates may be put in a serviceable condition by a long charge and
several cycles of charge and discharge if there is not too much
cracking or too much loss of active material.

5. Positives which are only slightly warped or buckled may be used
again.

6. When the only trouble found is a slight amount of shedding.
Positive active material must be of a dark chocolate brown color and
fairly hard. Negatives must be a dark gray.

7. When the plates are in a good condition, but one or more separators
have been worn or out through, or a jar is cracked.

If the battery is one which will not hold its charge, and plates seem
to be in a good condition, the trouble is very likely caused by the
separators approaching the breaking down point, and the repair job
consists of putting in new separators or "reinsulating" the battery.


What To Do With the Separators


It is the safest plan to put in new separators whenever a battery is
opened, and the groups separated. Separators are the weakest part of
the battery, and it is absolutely essential that all their pores be
fully opened so as to allow free passing of electrolyte through them.
Some of the conditions requiring new separators are:

1. Whenever the pores are closed by any foreign matter whatsoever. Put
in new separators whether you can figure out the cause of the trouble
or not. The separator shown in Fig. 201 is sulphated clear through
above the line B, and is worthless. The separator shown in Fig. 203
should not be used again.

2. When the separators have been cut or "chiseled off" by the edge of
a buckled plate, Fig. 214.

3. When a buckling plate or plate with bulged active material breaks
through the separator, Fig. 214.

  [Fig. 214]

  Fig. 214. Separators Worn Thin and Cut Through on Edges by Buckled
  Plates. Holes Worn Through by Bulged Active Material, Center One Shows
  Cell Was Dry Two Thirds of the Way Down.


4. When a battery has been used while the level of the Fig. 214.
Separators Worn Thin and Cut Through on Edges by Buckled Plates. Holes
Worn Through by Bulged Active Material. Center One Shows Cell Was Dry
Two Thirds of the Way Down electrolyte has been below the tops of the
plates, or the battery has been used in a discharged condition, and
lead sulphate has deposited on the separators, Fig. 201.

  [Fig. 215 Rotted separators]

5. When a battery has been over-heated by overcharging or other
causes, and the hot acid has rotted, burned and carbonized the
separators, Fig. 215.

6. When a battery has been damaged by the addition of acid and the
separators have been rotted, Fig. 215.

7. Separators which are more than a year old should be replaced by new
ones, whether plates are defective or not.

When you have put in new separators, and put the battery on charge,
the specific gravity of the electrolyte may go down at first, instead
of rising. This is because the separators may absorb some of the acid.
If the battery was discharged when you put in the new separators, the
lowering of the specific gravity might not take place, but in most
cases the specific gravity will go down, or not change at all.


Find the Cause of Every Trouble


The foregoing rules must be studied carefully and be clearly tabulated
in your mind to be able to tell what to put into commission again and
what to discard as junk. It will take time to learn how to
discriminate, but keep at it persistently and persevere, and as you
pass judgment on this battery and that battery, ask yourself such
questions as: What put this battery in this condition? Why are the
negative plates granulated? Why are the positive plates buckled? What
caused the positive plates to disintegrate? Why are the separators
black? Why is the case rotten when less than a year old? Why did the
sealing compound crack on top and cause the electrolyte to slop? Why
did one of the terminal connectors get loose and make a slopper? Who
is to blame for it, the car manufacturer, the manufacturer of the
battery, or the owner of the car? Why did this battery have to be
taken off the car, opened up and rebuilt at 5 months old, when the
battery taken off a car just the day before had been on for 30 months
and never had been charged off the car but once? There is a reason;
find it. Locate the cause of the trouble if possible, remove the
cause; your customer will appreciate it and tell his friends about it,
and this will mean more business for you.


Eliminating "Shorts"


If you have decided that some or all of the plates may be used again,
the next thing to do is to separate any plates that are touching, and
put the battery on charge. It may be necessary to put in new
separators in place of the defective ones. Examine the separators
carefully. Whenever you find the pores of the separators stopped up
from any cause whatsoever, put in new separators before charging.

1. Sometimes the negative plates are bulged or blistered badly and
have worn clear through the separators, Fig. 214, and touch the
positives. In cases of this kind, to save time and trouble, separate
the groups, press the negatives lightly, as described later, assemble
the element with new separators, and it is ready for charging.

2. There is another case where the groups must be separated and new
separators inserted before they will take charge, and that is where
the battery has suffered from lack of water and has sulphated clear
through the separators, Fig. 201. The separators will be covered with
white sulphate. Chemical action is very sluggish in such cases.

If you find that the separator pores are still open, leave the
separators in place and proceed to separate the plates that are
touching. How? That depends on what insulating material you have
available that is thin enough. If nothing else is available, take a
piece of new dry separator about 3/8 inch to 1/2 inch square, or a
piece of pasteboard the same size. Use a screw driver or putty knife
to separate the plates far enough to insert the little piece of
insulation as in Fig. 216. Free all the shorts in this way, unless you
have some old rubber insulators. In this case, break off some narrow
strips 3/4 inch wide or less, put two together and repeat the
operation as above, using the rubber strips instead of the pieces of
separator. Insert down 1/2 inch or so and bend over and break off.
Occasionally the Lipper edges of the plates are shorted, in which case
they must be treated the same way.

  [Fig. 216 Clearing short circuits]

  [Fig. 217 Cleaning scale from posts before replacing connectors
   temporarily for charge]


Charging


When you have in this way cleared all the "shorts" in the elements
place the elements back in the jars in the same position as they were
when you opened the battery, and add enough distilled water to the
electrolyte to cover the plates to a depth of one-half inch.

If the negatives are badly sulphated (active material very hard), they
will charge more quickly if all the old electrolyte is dumped out and
the cells filled with distilled water before putting the battery on
charge. This "water cure" is the best for sulphated negatives and will
save many plates that could otherwise not be used again. Make it a
rule to replace the old electrolyte with distilled water if negatives
are sulphated.

  [Fig. 218]

  Fig. 218. Tapping Connectors in Place.
  Preparatory to Charging After Battery
  Has Been Opened and Shorts Removed


The next operation is to put the battery on charge. Grasp each post in
the jaws of a pair of gas pliers and work the pliers back and forth,
Fig. 217, so as to remove the scale and allow the connecting straps to
make good contact. Now take a knife and cut off the rough edges left
in the connecting straps by the drill. Taper the edge, if necessary to
go on post. Turn the connectors upside down and pound gently in
position, Fig. 218, to make a good connection. Temporary charging
connections may also be made by burning lead strips on the posts. This
being properly done, the battery is ready for charging. Check up the
connections to be sure they are correct.

Now put the battery on charge, and charge at a low rate. Do not allow
the temperature of any cell to rise above 110°F. Continue the charge
until the electrolyte clears up, and its specific gravity stops rising
and the plates have a normal color over their entire surface. Fully
charged positive plates have a chocolate brown color, and fully
charged negative plates have a dark gray color. By holding an electric
light directly over a cell, and looking down, the color of both
negatives and positives may be determined. Do not take the battery off
charge until you have obtained these results, although it may be
necessary to continue the charge for two, three, four, or five days.
In this preliminary charge it is not necessary to bring the gravity up
to 1.280, because the electrolyte is not to be used again, and the
plates will become charged completely, regardless of what the gravity
is. The essential thing is to charge until the electrolyte becomes
perfectly clear, the gravity stops rising, and the plates have the
right color. The Cadmium test may be used here to determine when the
plates are charged. If the gravity rises above 1.280 during the
preliminary charge, adjust it to 1.280 by drawing out some of the
electrolyte and adding distilled water. The battery must stay on
charge until you have the desired conditions. If one cell does not
charge,--that is, if its specific gravity does not rise,--you have
probably not freed all the shorts, and must take the element out of
the jar again and carefully inspect it for more shorts.

Right here is where one of the most important questions may be asked
about rebuilding batteries. Why must you free the shorts and put the
battery on charge? Why not save time by putting in all new separators,
sealing the battery, burning on the cell connectors, and then putting
it on charge? If you have ever treated a battery in this way, what
results did you get? Why did you have a badly unbalanced gravity of
electrolyte? How could you know what specific gravity electrolyte to
put in each cell? Perhaps one was charged, one only half charged, and
the other dead. Suppose the dead cell had impurities in it. How could
you get rid of them? Suppose the battery showed poor capacity on test,
what would you do?


Washing and Pressing the Negatives


To continue the actual work on the battery. The battery being fully
charged,--the electrolyte clear, the plates of normal color, the
specific gravity no longer rising,-- remove it from the charging bench
and put it on the work bench. Draw each element and let drain as in
Fig. 197.

  [Fig. 219 Nesting plates]

Here again the labeled boxes described on page 183 come in handy.
Separate one group, remove the separators, and put one group in each
end of box to keep clean. Separate another group, And nest the plates,
Fig. 219, the negative with the negative, and positive with positive.
Separate the third element and put groups in the boxes. Pour the old
electrolyte out of the jars, and wash out the jars as described on
page 360. You now have the plates in the best possible shape for
handling. Take the boxes containing the plates to the sink. Have the
plate press and the plate press boards ready for use.

If, for any reason, you are called away from your work at this point
to be gone for five minutes, do not leave the fully charged negatives
exposed to the air, as they will become very hot. Cover them with
water. A one-gallon stone or earthenware jar will hold the negative
plates of a 100 ampere hour battery if you nest two of the groups. You
may also put negatives back in jars from which they were taken, and
fill with water.

Now hold a negative group under the faucet, and let a strong stream of
water run down over each plate so as to wash it thoroughly, and to
remove any foreign matter from the plate surfaces. All negative groups
must be handled in exactly the same way so as to get the same results
in each case.

After you have washed the first group, place it on edge on a clean
board with the post down and pointing away from you, and the bottom of
the group toward you. Now insert plate press boards which are slightly
larger than the plates, and of the exact thickness required to fill
the spaces between plates, Fig. 113. For the standard 1/8 inch plates,
a 5-16 inch board, or two 1/8 inch boards should be placed between
plates.

The 1/8 inch boards are actually more than 1/8 inch thick, and will
give the proper spacing. For thin plates, use 1/4 inch boards. Do not
push the plate press boards more than 1/8 inch above the tops of the
plates, and be sure that the boards cover the entire plates. Put a
board on the outside of each end plate of the group. In this way
insert the plate press boards in each of the three negative groups.

Then place each negative group on the lower jaw of the plate press
with the post of each group pointing toward you. Three groups may be
pressed at one time. Bring the top edges of the transite boards flush
with the front edge of the lower jaw of the press, so that no pressure
will be applied to the plate lugs. See Fig. 114. Pressure applied to
the plate lugs will break them off.

Now screw down the upper jaw of the press as tightly as you can with
the handwheel, so as to put as much pressure on the plates as
possible. Leave the plates in the press for about five minutes. Then
remove them from the press, take out the boards, and replace the
plates in the battery jar from which they were removed, and cover with
water. They may also be placed in a stone or earthernware jar and
covered with water, especially if there is any work to be done on the
jars or case of the battery. If the spongy lead of the negatives is
firm, they may be reassembled in the battery as soon as they have been
pressed. If, however, the spongy lead is soft and mushy, keep the
negatives covered with water for 12 to 24 hours. This will make them
hard and firm. Then remove them from the water and dry them in the
air. In drying, the plates will become heated and will steam. As soon
as you notice any steaming, dip the plates in water until they are
cool. Then remove them from the water and continue the drying process.
Each time the negatives begin to steam as they dry in the air, dip
them in the water until they are cool.

When the negatives are dry, they are ready to be reassembled in the
battery and prepared for service. Negatives treated in this way will
give good service for a much longer time than they would if not
treated in this way. The spongy lead has been made firm and elastic.
If you have other negatives in your shop which are not in use, treat
them in the same way and put them away for future use, to use as
rental batteries. Always put them through the same process:

1. Charge them fully.

2. Press them in the plate press to force the spongy lead back into
the grids.

3. Soak them in water, if the spongy lead is soft and mushy, for 12 to
24 hours, or even longer until the spongy lead is firm. Dry them in
the air, dipping them in water whenever they begin to steam and become
heated. This will give you negatives that will give excellent service
and have a long life. Many negatives treated in this way will be good
for fifteen months to two years of additional service. The rental
batteries should be assembled in the same way as those you are
rebuilding for the owners.

The importance of pressing negatives cannot be exaggerated. Always
press the negatives of the batteries which you rebuild. Do not do it
to half, or three-fourths of the negatives, but to all of them. The
work takes but a few minutes, and the time could not be put to better
advantage. The spongy lead of the negatives swells and bulges out and
makes very poor contact with the grids as a battery becomes
discharged. This results in a loss of capacity, gradual sulphation of
the loose active material, corrosion of the grids, failure of the
gravity to rise high enough on charge, overheating of the battery on
charge, gassing before the sulphate is reduced to active material with
breaking off and roughening of the active material, and makes the
battery lazy and sluggish in action. The spongy lead must make good
contact with the grids if the battery is to have a long life and give
good service.

No amount of charging will cure a negative with bulged, swollen active
material. Once this material becomes bulged nothing but pressing will
put it back where it belongs, and until it is pressed back into the
grids the plates are in a poor condition for service. Even if the
bulging is but very slight, the plates must be pressed.


Washing Positives


If you intend to use some of the positives, they should now be washed.
If you intend to use all new positives, throw away the old ones, of
course. The positives should not be held under the faucet as the
negatives were, because the stream of water will wash out much of the
positive active material. Rinse the positives a number of times in a
jar of clean water by moving them up and down in the water. This will
remove impurities from the surfaces of the plates and wash off any
foreign or loose materials. After rinsing each positive group, replace
it in the box.

Never attempt to straighten badly buckled positives, as the bending
cannot be done successfully, and the active material will not have
good contact with the grids. Positives cannot be pressed as negatives
can, because the positive active material lacks the elasticity and
toughness of the negative spongy lead. Slightly buckled positives may
sometimes be straightened by bending them lightly all around the edges
with a pair of thin, wide nosed pliers. This should be done very
carefully, however, and the straightening done gradually. If the
plates cannot be straightened in this way and the separators do not
lie perfectly flat against them without pinching at the corners, the
plates should be discarded, and new ones used in their place.

This is all the work to be done on the old plates, and those which are
to be used again are ready to be reassembled in the battery. The
process of treating the plates should be followed in every battery
that you rebuild, and the same steps should always be taken, and in
the same order. With one Standard method of rebuilding batteries you
will do uniformly good work and satisfy all your customers. The
essential thing for the success of your battery business is to learn
the Standard method and use it. Do not rush a battery through your
shop, and leave out some of the steps of the process, even though the
owner may be in a hurry. If you have a good stock of rental batteries
you can put one on his car and keep it there until you have done as
good a job of rebuilding on his battery as you possibly can. Remember
that the Standard method which has been described has not simply been
figured out as being a good method. This method has been worked out in
the actual rebuilding of thousands and thousands of batteries of all
makes and in all conditions, and has produced batteries full of life
and power, ready to give one to two years more of good, reliable
service.


Burning on Plates


When you put new plates into a battery, or find some of the plates
broken from the connecting strap, it will be necessary to burn the
plates to the strap. Frequently you will find plates which are
otherwise in a good condition broken from the connecting straps. This
is most likely to happen when the plates have been cast on to the
connecting strap instead of being burned on. These plates must be
burned on.

New plates are frequently necessary. From pages 339 to 346 you see
that new plates are required under the following conditions:

(a) Positives. Ruined by freezing; weak and brittle from age, large
part of active material shed; badly buckled; rotten and disintegrated
by impurities; reversed. Positives in a reasonably good mechanical
condition can be restored to a good electrical condition by charging.

(b) Negatives. Active material granulated, bulged and disintegrated;
charged while dry; positives disintegrated by impurities; ruined by
overcharging; badly sulphated because allowed to stand idle, or used
while discharged; much active material lost, and that which is left
soft and mushy; negatives reversed by charging battery backwards.

When making plate renewals, never install plates of different design
in the same group. Always use plates of the type intended for the
battery. The battery should first be fully charged, as already
explained. If all the plates in a group are to be discarded, clamp the
post in a vise, being careful not to crack the hard rubber shell if
one is on it, or to damage the threads on Posts such as the Exide or
to draw up the vise so tightly as to crush the post. Then saw off all
the old plates with a new coarse toothed hacksaw, a sharp key hole
saw, or any good saw which has a wide set, close to the post. This
separates the entire group of plates from the post in one short
operation. This method is much better than the one of sawing the
plates off below the connecting strap, and sawing or punching the old
plate ends out of the strap. See page 217 for instructions for welding
plates to the straps.


Work on the Jars


The work on the jars consists of removing any sediment which may have
collected, washing out all dirt, and replacing leaky jars. The removal
of sediment and washing should be done after the preliminary charge
has been given and the old electrolyte poured out unless the
preliminary charge was given with distilled water in the jars. The old
electrolyte need not be poured down the sewer, but may be kept in
stone or earthenware jars and used later in making electrical tests to
locate leaky jars.


Testing Jars


Remove all sealing compound from the jar by means of a hot putty
knife, finishing by wiping with a gasoline soaked rag. Inspect each
jar carefully under a strong light for cracks and leaks. If you know
which jar is leaky by having filled each cell with water up to the
correct level, when you made the first examination of the battery, and
then having it allowed to stand over night to see if the electrolyte
in any cell has dropped below the tops of the plates, no tests are
necessary, but if you are in doubt as to which jar, if any, is leaky,
you must make tests to determine which jar is leaky. If you know that
there is no leaky jar, because of the bottom of the case not being
acid eaten and rotted, it is, of course, not necessary to test the
jars.

One test consists in filling the jar within about an inch of the top
with old or weak electrolyte, partly immersing the jar in a tank which
also contains electrolyte, and applying a voltage of 110 or 220
between the electrolyte in the jar and the electrolyte in the tank in
which the jar is partly immersed. If current Vows, this indicates that
the jar is leaky.

  [Fig. 220 Testing jar for leaks, using a 15-watt lamp in series
   with test circuit]

Fig. 220 shows the principle of the test. A suitable box,--an old
battery case will do--is lined with sheet lead, and the lead lining
is connected to either side of the 110 or 220 volt line. The box is
then partly filled with weak electrolyte. The jar to be tested is
filled to within about one inch of the top with weak electrolyte. The
jar is immersed to within about an inch of its top in the box. The top
part of the jar must be perfectly dry when the test is made, or else
the current will go through any electrolyte which may be wetting the
walls of the jar. A lead strip or rod, which is connected to the other
side of the 110 or 220 volt line, through a lamp as shown, is inserted
in the jar. If there is, a leak in the jar, the lamp will burn, and
the jar must be discarded. If the lamp does not light, the jar does
not leak.

Instead of using a lead lined box, a stone or earthenware jar may be
used. A sheet of lead should be placed in this jar, being bent into a
circular shape to fit the inside of the jar, and connected to one side
of the line. The lead rod or sheet which is inserted in the jar may be
mounted on a handle for convenience in making the test. The details of
the testing outfit may, of course, be varied according to what
material is available for use. The lamps should be suitably mounted on
the wall above the tester.

  [Fig. 221 Testing jar for leaks, using a voltmeter in series
   with test circuit]

This test may be made by using a voltmeter instead of lamps, as shown
in Fig. 221. If a voltmeter is used, be especially careful to have the
part projecting above the liquid perfectly dry. A leaky cell will be
indicated by a reading on the meter equal to the line voltage.

  [Fig. 222 Testing jar for leaks, using secondary of Ford ignition
   coil, or any other vibrator ignition coil]

A third method uses a Ford ignition coil, as shown in Fig. 222. A leak
will be indicated by a spark, or by the vibrator making more noise
than it ordinarily does. Instead of using the Ford coil, as shown in
Fig. 222, the test may be made as shown in Fig. 223. Fill the jar to
within an inch of the top with electrolyte and immerse one of the high
tension wires in the electrolyte. Attach the other high tension wire
to a wire brush, comb, or rod having a wooden handle and rub it over
the outside of the jar. A leak is shown by a spark jumping to the jar.

  [Fig. 223 Testing jar for leaks, using secondary of Ford ignition
   coil, or any other vibrator ignition coil]

The test may also be made without removing the jar. If the lead lined
box be made two feet long, the entire battery may be set in the box so
that the electrolyte in the box comes within an inch of the top of the
battery case. Fill each jar with weak electrolyte and make the test as
before. If this is done, however, remove the battery immediately after
making the test and wipe the case dry with a cloth. To make the test
in this way, the case must be considerably acid eaten in order to have
a circuit through it to the jar.


Removing Defective Jars


The method of removing the jars from the case depends on the battery.
In some batteries the jars are set in sealing compound. To remove a
jar from such a battery, put the steam hose from your steamer outfit
into the jar, cover up the top of the jar with rags, and steam the jar
for about five minutes. Another way is to fill the jar with boiling
hot water and let it stand for fully five minutes. Either of these
methods will soften the sealing compound around the jar so that the
jar may be pulled out. To remove the jar, grasp two sides of the jar
with two pairs of long, flat nosed pliers and pull straight up with an
even, steady pull. Have the new jar at hand and push it into the place
of the old one as soon as the latter is removed. The new jar should
first be steamed to soften it somewhat. Press down steadily on the new
jar until its top is flush with the tops of the other jars.

Some batteries do not use sealing compound around the jars, but simply
use thin wooden wedges to hold the jars in place, or have bolts
running through opposite faces of the case by means of which the sides
are pressed against the jars to hold them in place. The jars of such
batteries may be removed without heating, by removing the wedges or
loosening the bolts, as the case may be, and lifting out the jars with
pliers, as before. New jars should be steamed for several minutes
before being put in the case. When you put jars into such batteries,
do not apply too much pressure to them, as they may be cracked by the
pressure, or the jar may be squeezed out of shape, and the assembling
process made difficult.

  [Fig. 224 Washing sediment from Jars. Water supply controlled
   by foot valve]


Repairing the Case

The case may be repaired with all the jars in place, or it may be
necessary to remove the jars. If the case is to be junked and the jars
used again, the case may simply be broken off, especially if there is
much sealing compound around the jars.

Empty the old acid from the jars, take the case to the sink and wash
out all the sediment, Fig. 224. With the pipe shown in Fig. '14, you
have both hands free to hold the case, as the water is controlled by'
a foot operated spring cock.

If the case is rotten at top, patch it with good wood. If the top and
bottom are so rotten that considerable time will be required to repair
it, advise the owner to buy a new case. Sometimes the top of the case
can be greatly improved by straightening the side edges with a small
smoothing plane, and sometimes a 1/2 inch strip or more fitted all
along the edge is necessary for a good job. Handles that have been
pulled, rotted, or corroded off make disagreeable repair jobs, but a
satisfactory job can be done unless the end of the case has been
pulled off or rotted. Sometimes the handle will hold in place until
the battery is worn out by old age if three or four extra holes are
bored and countersunk in the handle where the wood is solid, and
common wood screws, size 12, 1/2 or 5/8 inch long used to fasten the
handle in place. Sometimes it will be necessary to put in one half of
a new end, the handle being fastened to the new piece with brass bolts
and nuts before it is put into place. Sometimes you can do a good job
by using a plate of sheet iron 1-16 inch thick, and 4 inches wide, and
as long as the end of the case is wide. Rivet the handle to this plate
with stovepipe, or copper rivets, and then fasten the plate to the
case with No. 12 wood screws, 1/2 inch long.

If the old case is good enough to use again, soak it for several hours
in a solution of baking soda in water to neutralize any acid which may
have been spilled on it, or which may be spilled on it later. After
soaking the case, rinse it in water, and allow it to dry thoroughly.
Then paint the case carefully with asphaltum paint.


REASSEMBLING THE BATTERY


Reassembling the Elements


Take a negative group and put it on edge on a board, with post away
from you, and lower edge toward you. Mesh a positive in the negative
group. The groups are now ready for the separators. Take six moist
separators from your stock. Slip one into position from the bottom in
the middle of the group, with the grooved side toward the positive
plate, spreading the plates slightly if necessary. Take another
separator, slip it into position on the opposite side of the positive
against which your first separator was placed. In this way, put in the
six separators, with the grooved side toward the positives, working
outward in both directions from the center, Fig. 225. The grooves
must, of course, extend from the top to the bottom of the plate. Now
grasp the element in both hands, and set it right side up on the
block, giving it a slight jar to bring the bottoms of the plates and
separators on a level.

  [Fig. 225 Inserting separators]

Now grasp the element in both hands, and set it right side up on the
block, giving it a slight jar to bring the bottoms of the plates and
separators on a level.

Next take a cover, and try it on the posts, Fig. 226. Pull the groups
apart slightly, if necessary, before inserting any more separators, so
that the cover fits exactly over the posts, Fig. 227. See that the
separators extend the same distance beyond each side of the plates.
You may take a stick, about 10 inches long, 1 1/2 inches wide, and 7/8
inch thick, and tap the separators gently to even them up. A small
wood plane may be used to even up the side edges of wood separators.
If you put in too many separators before trying on the cover, the
plates may become so tight that you may not be able to shift them to
make the cover fit the posts or you may not be able to shift the
separators to their proper positions. It is therefore best to Put in
only enough separators to hold the groups together and so they can be
handled and yet remain in their proper position when set up on the
block. Without separators, the posts will not remain in position.

  [Fig. 226 Trying on a cover]

  [Fig. 227 Shifting groups to make cover fit]

With the element reassembled, and the remaining separators in their
proper positions, see that all the plates are level on bottom, and no
foreign matter sticking to them. Place the element in box shown in
Fig. 219 to keep clean. Reassemble the other elements in exactly the
same way, and put them in the box. The elements are now ready to be
put in the jars.


Putting Elements in Jars


Steam the jars in the steamer for about five minutes to soften them
somewhat, so that there will be no danger of breaking a jar when you
put in the elements.

With the case ready, look for the "+", "P" or "POS" mark on it. (Cases
which are not marked in this way at the factory should be marked by
the repairman before the battery is opened.) Place the case so that
this mark is toward you. Grip an element near the bottom in order to
prevent the plates from spreading, and put it in the jar nearest the
mark, with the positive post toward you, next to the mark. Put an
element in the next jar so that the negative post is toward you. Put
an element in the third jar so that the positive post is toward you,
and so on. The elements are correctly placed when each connecting
strap connects a positive to a negative post. If the case has no mark
on it, reassemble exactly according to the diagram you made on the tag
before you opened the battery. Set the jars so that the posts are
exactly in line so that the cell connectors will fit.

  [Fig. 228 Tightening a loose element by placing a separator
   against outside negative]

If an element fits loosely in the jar, it must be tightened. The best
way to do this is to put one or more separators on one or both sides
of the elements before putting it in the jar, Fig. 228. If you leave
the elements loose in the jars, the jolting of the car will soon crack
the sealing compound, and you will have a "slopper" on your hands.

If element fits very tight, be sure that the corners of the plate
straps have been rounded off and trimmed flush with outside negatives.
Be sure also that there is no compound sticking to the inside of jars.
Take care not to break the jar by forcing in a tight fitting element
when the jar is cold and stiff.


Filling Jars with Electrolyte or Putting on the Covers


With all the elements in place in the jars, one of two things may be.
done. First, the jars may be filled with electrolyte and the covers
then sealed on, or the covers may first be sealed on and the jars then
filled with electrolyte. Each method has its advantages and
disadvantages. If the jars are first filled with electrolyte, acid may
be splashed on the tipper parts of the jars and sealing made very
difficult.

On the other hand, if the electrolyte is first poured in, the charged
negatives will not become hot, and sealing compound which runs into
the jar will be chilled as soon as it strikes the electrolyte and will
float on top and do no harm. If the covers are sealed before any
electrolyte is added, it will be easier to do a good sealing job, but
the negatives will heat up. Furthermore, any sealing compound which
runs into the jar will run down between the plates and reduce the
plate area.

If care is taken to thoroughly dry the upper parts of the jars, add
the electrolyte before sealing on the covers.

Use 1.400 Acid

If you have followed the directions carefully, and have therefore
freed all the shorts, have thoroughly charged the plates, have washed
and pressed the negative groups, have washed the positives, have then
added any new plates which were needed, and have put in new
separators, use 1.400 specific gravity electrolyte. This is necessary
because washing the plates removed some of the acid, and the new
separators will absorb enough acid so that the specific gravity after
charging will be about 1.280.

The final specific gravity must be between 1.280 and 1.300. In measuring
the specific gravity the temperature must be about 70°F., or else
corrections must be made. For every three degrees above 70°, add one
point (.001) to the reading you obtain on the hydrometer. For every three
degrees under 70°, subtract one point (.001) from the reading you obtain
on the hydrometer. For instance, if you read a specific gravity of 1.275
and find that the temperature of the electrolyte is 82°F., add
((82-70)/3 = 4)four points (1.275 + .004), which gives 1.279, which is
what the specific gravity of the electrolyte would be if its temperature
were lowered to 70°. The reason this is done is that when Ave speak of an
electrolyte of a certain specific gravity, say 1.280, we mean that this is
its specific gravity when its temperature is 70°F. We must therefore make
the temperature correction if the temperature of the electrolyte is much
higher or lower than 70°F.


Putting on The Covers


This operation is a particular one, and must be done properly, or you
will come to grief. Get the box containing the covers and connectors
for the battery you are working on; take the covers, and clean them
thoroughly. There are several ways to clean them. If you have gasoline
at hand, dip a brush in it and scrub off the compound. The covers may
also be cleaned off with boiling water, but even after you have used
the hot water, it will be necessary to wipe off the covers with
gasoline. Another way to soften any compound which may be sticking to
them, is to put the covers in the Battery Steamer and steam them for
about ten minutes. This will also heat the covers and make them limp
so that they may be handled without breaking.

If the covers fit snugly all around the inside of the jars so that
there is no crack which will allow the compound to run down on the
elements, all is well and good. If, however, there are cracks large
enough to put a small, thin putty knife in, you must close them. If
the cracks are due to the tops of the jars being bent out of shape,
heat the tops with a soft flame until they are limp, (be careful not
to burn them). Now, with short, thin wedges of wood, (new dry
separators generally answer the purpose), crowd down on the outside
edges of the jar, until you have the upper edge of jars straight and
even all around. If the jars are set in compound, take a hot
screwdriver and remove the compound from between the jar and case
near the top. If the cracks between cover and jar still remain, calk
them with asbestos packing, tow, or ordinary wrapping string. Do not
use too much packing;--just enough to close the cracks is sufficient.
When this is done, see that the top of the case is perfectly level, so
that when the compound is poured in, it will settle level all around
the upper edge of the case.


Sealing Compounds


There are many grades of compounds (see page 149), and the kind to use
must be determined by the type of battery to be sealed. There is no
question but that a poor grade used as carefully as possible will soon
crack and produce a slopper. A battery carelessly sealed with the best
compound is no better.

The three imperative conditions for a permanent lasting job are:

1. Use the best quality of the proper kind of compound for sealing the
battery on hand.

2. All surfaces that the compound comes in contact with must be free
from acid and absolutely clean and dry.

3. The sealing must be done conscientiously and all details properly
attended to step by step, and all work done in a workmanlike manner.

With respect to sealing, batteries may be divided into two general
classes. First, the old type battery with a considerable amount of
sealing compound. This type of battery generally has a lower and an
upper cover, the vent tube being attached or removable, depending on
the design. The compound is poured on top of the lower cover and
around the vent tube, and the top covers are then put on. Most of the
batteries of this type have a thin hard rubber sleeve shrunk on the
post where the compound comes in contact with it; this hard rubber
sleeve usually has several shallow grooves around it which increase
its holding power. This is good construction, provided everything else
is normal and the work properly done with a good stick-, compound.
There are a few single cover batteries with connecting straps close to
top of covers, and the compound is poured over the top of the straps.
See Fig. 262.

The second general type consists of single one-piece cover batteries
that have small channels or spaces around the covers next to the jars
into which the sealing compound is poured. This type of battery is the
most common type.

  [Fig. 229 Pouring compound on lower covers]

Compound in bulk or in thin iron barrels can be cut into small pieces
with a hatchet or hand ax. To cut off a piece in hot weather, strike
it a quick hard blow in the same place once or twice, and a piece will
crack off. Directions for properly beating sealing compound will be
found on page 150.


Sealing Double Cover Batteries


The following instructions apply to batteries having double covers.
These are more difficult to seal than the single cover batteries. If
you can seal the double cover batteries well, the single cover
batteries will give you no trouble.

Always start the fire under the compound before you are ready to use
it, and turn the fire lower after it has melted, so as not to have it
too hot at the time of pouring. If you have a special long nosed
pouring ladle, fill it with compound by dipping in the pot, or by
pouring compound from a closed vessel. If you heat the compound in an
iron kettle, pour it directly into pouring ladle, using just about
enough for the first pouring. The compound should not be too hot, as a
poor sealing job battery will result from its use. See page 150.

Before sealing, always wipe the surfaces to be sealed with a rag wet
with ammonia or soda solution, rinsed with water, and wiped dry with a
rag or waste. If you fail to do this the compound will not stick well,
and a top leak may develop. Then run a soft lead burning flame over
the surfaces to be sealed, in order to have perfectly dry surfaces.
Remember that sealing compound will not stick to a wet surface.

  [Fig. 230 First pouring of sealing compound]

  [Fig. 231 Cooling compound with electric fan]

Pour compound on the lower covers, as in Fig. 229. Use enough to fill
the case just over the tops of the jars, Fig. 230. Then pour the rest
of the compound back in compound vessel or kettle. To complete the
job, and make as good a job as possible, take a small hot lead burning
flame and run it around the edges of case, tops of jars, and around
the posts until the compound runs and makes a good contact all around.
If you have an electric fan, let it blow on the compound a few minutes
to cool it, as in Fig. 231. Then the compound used for the second
pouring may be hotter and thinner than the first.

Fill the pouring ladle with compound, which is thinner than that used
in the first pouring, and pour within 1/16 inch of the top of the
case, being careful to get in just enough, so that-after it has
cooled, the covers will press down exactly even with the top of the
case, Fig. 232. It will require some experience to do this, but you
will soon learn just how much to use.

As soon as you have finished pouring, run the flame all around the
edges of the case and around the post, being very careful not to
injure any of the vent tubes. A small, hot-pointed flame should be
used. Now turn on the fan again to cool the compound.

  [Fig. 232 Second pouring of sealing compound]

While the compound is cooling, get the cell connectors and terminal
connectors, put them in a two-quart granite stew pan, just barely
cover with water, and sprinkle a tablespoon of baking soda over them.
Set the stew pan over the fire and bring water to boiling point. Then
pour the water on some spot on a bench or floor where the acid has
been spilled. This helps to neutralize the acid and keep it from
injuring the wood or cement. Rinse off the connectors and wipe them
dry with a cloth, or heat them to dry them.

  [Fig. 233 Pressing covers down to make them level with top
   of case]

Now take the top covers, which must be absolutely clean and dry, and
spread a thin coat of vaseline over the top only, wiping off any
vaseline from the beveled edges. Place these covers right side up on a
clean board and heat perfectly limp with a large, spreading blow torch
flame. Never apply this flame to the under side of the top covers. The
purpose is to get the covers on top of the battery absolutely level,
and exactly even with the top of the case all around it, and to have
them sticking firmly to the compound. There is not an operation in
repairing and rebuilding batteries that requires greater care than
this one, that will show as clearly just what kind of a workman you
are, or will count as much in appearance for a finished job. If you
are careless with any of the detail, if just one bump appears on top,
if one top is warped, if one cover sticks above top of case, try as
you may, you never can cover it up, and show you are a first-class
workman. See that you have these four conditions, and you should not
have any difficulty after a little experience:

  [Fig. 234 Pressing covers down around posts to make them
   flush with top of case]

1. You must have just enough compound on top to allow the top covers
to be pressed down exactly even with upper edge of case.

2. The top covers must be absolutely clean and have a thin coat of
vaseline over their top, but none on the bevel edge.

3. A good sized spreading flame to heat quickly and evenly the tops to
a perfectly limp condition without burning or scorching them.

4. Procure a piece of 7/8-inch board 1-1/2 inches wide and just long
enough to go between handles of battery you are working on. Spread a
thin film of oil or vaseline all over it.

Having heated the covers and also the top surface of the compound
until it is sticky so that the covers may be put down far enough and
adhere firmly to it, place the covers in position. Then press the
covers down firmly with a piece of oiled wood, as in Fig. 233,
applying the wood sidewise and lengthwise of case until the top of
cover is exactly even with the top of the case. It may be necessary to
use the wood on end around the vent tubes and posts as in Fig. 234, to
get that part of the cover level. If the compound comes up between
covers and around the edges of the case, and interferes with the use
of the wood, clean it out with a screwdriver. You can then finish
without smearing any compound on the covers.

  [Fig. 235 Wiping bottom of spoon filled with sealing
   compound]

  [Fig. 236 Filling cracks around covers with sealing
   compound]

When you have removed the excess compound from the cracks around the
edges of the covers with the screwdriver, take a large iron spoon
which has the end bent into a pouring lip, and dip up from 1/2 to 2/3
of a spoonful of melted compound (not too hot). Wipe off the bottom of
the spoon, Fig. 235, and pour a small stream of compound evenly in all
the cracks around the edges of the covers until they are full, as in
Fig. 236. Do not hold the spoon too high, and do not smear or drop any
compound on top of battery or on the posts. No harm is done if a
little runs over the outside of the case, except that it requires a
little time to clean it off. A small teapot may be used instead of the
spoon. If you have the compound at the right temperature, and do not
put in too much at a time, you will obtain good results, but you
should take care not to spill the compound over covers or case.

  [Fig. 237 Final operation of cleaning off excess compound]

After the last compound has cooled,--this requires only a few
minutes,--take a putty knife, and scrape off all the surplus
compound, making it even with the top of the covers and case, Fig.
.237. Be careful not to dig into a soft place in the compound with the
putty knife. If you have done your work right, and have followed
directions explicitly, you have scraped off the compound with one
sweep of the putty knife over each crack, leaving the compound smooth
and level. You will be surprised to see how finished the battery looks.

Some workmen pour hot compound clear to the top of the case and then
hurry to put on a cold, dirty top. What happens? The underside of the
cover, coming in contact with the hot compound, expands and lengthens
out, curling the top surface beyond redemption. As you push down one
corner, another goes up, and it is impossible to make the covers level.


Sealing Single Cover Batteries


Single cover batteries are scaled in a similar manner. The covers are
put in place before any compound is poured in. Covers should first be
steamed to make them soft and pliable. The surfaces which come in
contact with the sealing compound must be perfectly dry and free from
acid. Before pouring in any compound, run a soft flame over the
surfaces which are to be sealed, so as to dry them and warm them.
Close up all cracks between Jars and covers as already directed. Then
pour the cover channels half full of sealing compound, which must not
be too thin. Now run a soft flame over the compound until it flows
freely and unites with the covers and jars. Allow the compound to
cool.

For the second pouring, somewhat hotter compound may be used. Fill the
cover channels flush with the top of the case, and again run a soft
flame over the compound to make it flow freely and unite with the
covers, and to give it a glossy finish. If any compound has run over
on the covers or case, remove it with a hot putty knife.


Burning-on the Cell Connectors


With the covers in place, the next operation is to burn in the cell
connectors. Directions for doing this are given on page 213. If you
did not fill the jars with electrolyte before sealing the covers, do
so now. See page 364.


Marking the Battery


You should have a set of stencil letters and mark every battery you
rebuild or repair. Stamp "POS," "P," or "+" on positive terminal and
"NEG," "N," or on negative terminal. Then stamp your initials, the
date that you finished rebuilding the battery, and the date that
battery left the factory, on the top of the connectors. Record the
factory date, and type of battery in a book, also your date mark and
what was done to the battery. By doing this, you will always be able
to settle disputes that may arise, as you will know when you repaired
the battery, and what was done.

To go one step farther, keep a record of condition of plates, and
number of new plates, if you have used any. Grade the plates in three
divisions, good, medium and doubtful. The "doubtful" division will
grow smaller as you become experienced and learn by their appearance
the ones to be discarded and not used in a rebuilt battery. There is
no question that even the most experienced man will occasionally make
a mistake in judgment, as there is no way of knowing what a battery
has been subjected to during its life before it is brought to you.


Cleaning and Painting the Case


The next operation is to thoroughly clean the case; scrape off all
compound that has been spilled on it, and also any grease or dirt. If
any grease is on the case, wipe off with rag soaked in gasoline.
Unless the case is clean, the paint will not dry. Brush the sides and
end with a wire brush; also brighten the name plate. Then coat the
case with good asphaltum paint. Any good turpentine asphaltum is
excellent for this purpose. If it is too thick, thin it with
turpentine, but be sure to mix well before using, as it does not mix
readily. Use a rather narrow brush, but of good quality. Paint all
around the upper edge, first drawing the brush straight along the
edges, just to the outer edges of rubber tops. Now paint the sides,
ends and handles, but be careful not to cover the nameplate. To
finish, put a second, and thick coat all around top edge to protect
edge of case. Paint will soak in around the edge on top of an old case
more easily than on the body of the case as it is more porous.


Charging the Rebuilt Battery


With the battery completely assembled, the next step is to charge it
at about one-third of the starting or normal charge rate. For
batteries having a capacity of 80 ampere hours or more, use a current
of 5 amperes. Do not start the charge until at least 12 hours after
filling with electrolyte. This allows the electrolyte to cool. Then
add water to bring electrolyte up to correct level if necessary. The
specific gravity will probably at first drop to 1.220-1.240, and will
then begin to rise.

Continue the charge until the specific gravity and voltage do not rise
during the last 5 hours of the charge. The cell voltage at the end of
the charge should be 2.5 to 2.7, measured while the battery is still
on charge. Make Cadmium tests on both positive and negatives. The
positives should give a Cadmium reading of 2.4 or more. The negatives
should give a reversed reading of 0.175. The tests should be made near
the end of the charge, with the cell voltages at about 2.7. The
Cadmium readings will tell the condition of the plates better than
specific gravity readings. The Cadmium readings are especially
valuable when new plates have been installed, to determine whether the
new plates are, fully charged. When Cadmium readings indicate that the
plates are fully charged, and specific gravity readings have not
changed for five hours, the battery is fully charged. If you have put
in new plates, charge for at least 96 hours.

Measure the temperature of the electrolyte occasionally, and if it
should go above 110°F., either cut down the charging current, or take
the battery off charge long enough to allow the electrolyte to cool
below 90°F.


Adjusting the Electrolyte


If the specific gravity of the electrolyte is 1.280 to 1.300 at the
end of the charge, the battery is ready for testing. If the specific
gravity is below or above these figures, draw off as much electrolyte
as you can with the hydrometer. If the specific gravity is below
1.280, add enough 1.400 specific gravity electrolyte with the
hydrometer to bring the level up to the correct height (about 1/2 inch
above tops of plates). If the specific gravity is above 1.300, add
a-similar amount of distilled water instead of electrolyte. If the
specific gravity is not more than 15 points (.015) too low or too
high, adjust as directed above. If the variation is greater than this,
pour out all the electrolyte and add fresh 1.280 specific gravity
electrolyte.

After adjusting the electrolyte, continue the charge until the gravity
of all cells is 1.280-1.300, and there is no further change in gravity
for at least two hours. Then take the battery off charge and make a
final measurement of the specific gravity. Measure the temperature at
the same time, and if it varies more than 10° above or below 70°,
correct the hydrometer readings by adding one point (.001 sp. gr.) for
each 3 degrees above 70°, and subtracting one point (.001 sp. gr.) for
each 3 degrees below 70°. Be sure to wipe off any electrolyte which
you spilled on the battery in adjusting the electrolyte or measuring
the specific gravity. Use a rag dipped in ammonia, or baking soda
solution.


High Rate Discharge


Whenever you have time to do so, make a 20-minute high rate discharge
test on the rebuilt battery, as described on page 266. This test will
show up any defect in the battery, such as a poorly burned joint, or a
missing separator, and will show if battery is low in capacity. If the
test gives satisfactory results, the battery is in good condition, and
ready to be put into service, after being charged again to replace the
energy used by the test.


================================================================

CHAPTER 16.
SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS.


EXIDE BATTERIES

Exide batteries may be classified according to their cover
constructions as follows:

1. Batteries with single flange covers, as shown in Figs. 15 and 238.
This class includes types DX, LX, LXR, LXRV, PHC, XC, XX, and XXV.

  [Fig. 238 Exide Battery, partly disassembled]

2. Batteries with double flange covers, as shown in Fig. 242. This
class includes types MHA, KZ, KXD, LXRE, and XE. The cover
constructions are-described in Chapter 3.

All Exide batteries, except types KXD, LXRE, and XE, have burned-in
lead top connectors. All types have a removable sealing nut around
each post to make a tight joint between the post and cell cover, as
described on page 19. Formerly some Exide batteries had cell
connectors which were bolted to the cell posts, but this construction
is now obsolete. Types KXD, LXRE, and XE have cell connectors made of
flexible, lead coated copper strips.

Types DX, LX, LXR, LXRV, MHA, PHC, XC, XX, and XXV have been designed
and built to meet the requirements of starting, lighting and ignition
service for passenger automobiles and power boats.

Types KXD, LXRE, and XE have been especially developed to meet the
requirements of the starting, lighting and ignition service on motor
trucks and tractors.

Type KZ has been produced particularly for motorcycle lighting and
ignition service.

  [Fig. 239 Exide Battery with Single Flange Cover]


Type Numbers


The type of an Exide battery is stamped on the battery name plate.
Thus, on one of the most popular Exide batteries is marked Type
3-XC-13-1. Other Exide batteries have different numerals and letters
in their type numbers, but the numerals., and letters are always
arranged in the same order as given above. The first numeral gives the
number of cells. The letters give the type of cell. The numerals
following the letters give the number of plates per cell. The last
numeral indicates the manner of arranging the cells in the battery
case. Thus, in the example given above, 3-XC-13-1 indicates that there
are three cells in the battery, that the type of cell is XC, that each
cell has 13 plates, and that the cells are arranged according to
method No. 1, this being a side to side assembly.


Methods of Holding Jars in Case


Two methods of holding Exide jars in the battery case are used:

1. Types MHA, KXD, LXRE, and XE have the jars separated by horizontal
wooden spacers, there being two spacers between adjoining jars.
Running horizontally between these two spacers are tie bolts which
pass through the case. These bolts are tightened after the jars are
placed in the case, thus pressing the sides of the case against the
jars and holding them in, place.

Types KXD, LXRE, and XE, in addition to the tie bolts, are secured in
the case by sealing compound beneath and around the jars. Each cell is
provided with two soft rubber buffers which are V shaped, and are
placed over the ridges in the bottom of the jars, thereby minimizing
the effect of shocks on the plates and separators which rest on the
buffers.

2. In types DX, LX, LXR, LXRV, PHC, XC, XX, and XXV, there are no
spacers between adjoining jars, and the jars simply fit tight in the
case. Should they not fit tight enough to hold them in place securely,
thin boards are inserted between the jars and the case to pack them in.

Type KZ has the three sets of plates in one jar, having three
compartments, with a three compartment cover.


Opening Exide Batteries


1. Drilling Off the Top Connectors. Do this as described on page 329.
For type KZ batteries use a 3/8 inch drill. For all other types use a
5/8 inch drill.

2. Removing Plates from Jars. Follow the general instructions on page
333.

Types DX, LX, LXR, LXRV, PHC, XC, XX, and XXV. In opening these
batteries, all of which have the single flange cover, you may remove
each cell complete from the case, and then draw out the plates; or you
may draw out the plates without taking out the jars. To remove the
complete cell, heat a thin bladed putty knife and work it down all
around the outside of the jar. Then lift out the complete cell by
pulling steadily on the cell posts with two pairs of gas pliers. The
battery should be placed on the floor when you do this, and you should
stand with one foot pressed against the side of the case.

If you do not wish to remove the complete cells, or should the jars
fit too tight in the case, unseal the covers and remove the plates
according to the instructions given on page 333.

Types KZ and MHA. These batteries have the double flanged cover.
Several methods may be used in removing the plates from the jars. In
each case, the top of the cell is cleaned, gas blown out of the vent
holes, and the sealing nuts removed before opening the cells.

  [Fig. 240 Removing double flange exide cover]

First, a flame may be used to soften the sealing compound which is
placed in the slot formed by the two flanges of the cover. If you wish
to use a flame, first remove each complete cell from the case,
loosening the tie bolts that pass through the case to release the
jars. Then hit out each complete cell. Now get two strong boards which
are about one fourth inch longer than the height of the jar. See Fig.
240. Support the jar on these boards by resting the lower edge of the
sides of the cover on the top edge of the boards. Then run a moderate
flame around the outside of the flange until the cover is soft, and
the compound melting. Then press down on the cell posts with your
thumbs, and the jar and plates will drop free of the cover. The
plates are then drawn out and rested on the top of the jars to drain,
as usual.

Another method is to remove the cells from the case and put them in
the battery steamer for ten minutes as described on page 332. Instead
of first taking the complete cells out of the case and then steaming
them separately, you may steam the entire battery for about ten
minutes, and then draw out the plates and cover of each cell with gas
pliers without removing the jars. This method must be used in opening
types KXD, LXRE, and XE, which have sealing compound under the jars.


Work on Plates, Separators, Jars, and Case


Having opened the battery, follow the instructions given on pages 335
to 361 for examination of plates and separators, and all work on
plates, jars, separators, and case.


Reassembling Plates


  [Fig. 241 Upsetting threads to prevent nut from turning]

First slip the positive and negative groups together without
separators. Then wipe the posts with a rag moistened with ammonia,
rinse them with water, and dry thoroughly with a clean rag. Next slip
the soft rubber washers over the posts and place the cover in
position. Lubricate the lead sealing nuts with graphite that has been
mixed to a paste with water. Do not use grease or vaseline to
lubricate these nuts. Then put on the sealing nuts and tighten them
partly with your fingers.

You are now ready to insert the separators as directed on page 361.
Types MHA, PHC, KXD, KZ, LXR, LXRE, LXRV, XX, and XXV have, in
addition to the usual wooden separators, perforated rubber sheets,
which should be placed against the grooved side of each wooden
separator before inserting, and insert with rubber sheet against the
positives.

Make a careful examination to see that you have not left out any
separators.

When the separators are all in place, even them up on each side. Then
tighten the sealing nuts with the special Exide wrench. When you have
turned the nuts down tight, lock them in place by driving a center
punch on the threads on the post just above the nut, Fig. 241. This
will damage the thread and prevent the nut from turning loose.


Putting Plates In Jars


The next step is to lower the plates into the jars, as described on
page 362. In types KXD, LXRE, and XE be sure to first replace the two
soft rubber buffers in the bottom of the jar, one over each ridge.


Filling Jars With Electrolyte


As soon as you have an element in place in the jar, fill the jar with
electrolyte of the proper strength, as described on page 364, to
prevent the separators and plates from drying. The negatives,
especially, must be covered with electrolyte to prevent them from
heating and drying.


Sealing Exide Battery Covers

  [Fig. 242 Laying "worm" of sealing compound]

  [Image: Chart showing capacity of Exide batteries]

For Types DX, LX, LXR, LXRV, PHC, XC, XX, and XXV, which have the
single flange type of cover, slowly heat the sealing compound until it
runs, but do not get it so thin that it will run down into the cell
between the cover and jar. Then pour it into the channel between cover
and jar walls. Allow it to cool and finish it off flush with a hot
knife. When pouring, be sure the compound is liquid and not lumpy, as
in such a case a poor seal will result. A glossy, finished appearance
may be given to the compound by passing a flame over it after the job
is finished.

For Types KXD, KZ, LXRE, MHA, and XE, which have the double flange
type of cover, have ready a string or worm of sealing compound about
3-16 inch in diameter, made by rolling between boards some of the
special compound furnished for the purpose. The cover may or may not
have been attached to the element, depending on how repairs have been
made. In either case the procedure is the same as far as sealing is
concerned. Assuming the element is attached, stand it upside down,
with the cover resting upon two strips, Fig. 242. Lay the string of
compound all around the cover channel. Now turn right side up and
insert in the jar, taking care that the jar walls enter the cover
channels at all points. Apply heat carefully to the edges of the cover
and gently force cover clown. If too much compound has been used, so
that it squeezes out around the cover, scrape off the excess with a
hot knife while forcing cover down.


Putting Cells In Case


When the covers have all been sealed, put the cells in the case,
taking care to put the negative and positive posts in their proper
positions, so that each cell connector will connect a positive to a
negative post.

In Types MHA, KXD, LXRE, and XE, which have wooden spacers between the
cells, take care that the spacers are in position and then, after
cells are in place, tighten the tie bolts with a screw driver to clamp
the jars.

In Types DX, LX, LXR, LXRV, SX, XC, XX, and XXV the cells should fit
tight in the case; pack them in with thin boards if necessary.


Burning on the Cell Connectors


See instructions on pages 213 to 216.


Charging After Repairing


See also instructions on page 373.

Not sooner than ten to fifteen hours after filling battery with
electrolyte, add electrolyte to restore level if it has fallen.


U. S. L. BATTERIES


The instructions for rebuilding batteries which have already been
given, pages 328 to 374, apply also to all U. S. L. batteries. In
working on the old U. S. L. batteries, illustrated in Fig. 243, draw
out the electrolyte down to the tops of the plates so that the
electrolyte is below the lower end of the vent tube. Then blow out any
gas which may have collected under the cover with compressed air or
bellows. Never fail to do this, as there is only a small vent hole in
the cover through which the gas can escape, the vent tubes extending
down into the electrolyte when the cells are properly filled.

  [Fig. 243 Cross section of old type USL battery]

  [Fig. 244 Cross section of new type USL battery]

Fig. 244 shows the new U. S. L. cover construction. Note that the
special cell filling device is no longer used. U. S. L. batteries have
lead bushings moulded into the cover. These bushings fit around the
posts, and are burned to the posts and top connectors, Figs. 243 and
244, thus giving leak proof joints between the cover and the posts. In
burning on the connectors, melt bottom edge of hole first, then top of
post and cover bushing, and melt in your burning lead slowly.

  [Image: Chart showing capacity of USL batteries, Page 1]

  [Image: Chart showing capacity of USL batteries, Page 2]


PREST-O-LITE BATTERIES


  [Fig. 245 Old type Prest-O-Lite battery with lead bushings
   that screw up into cover]

Some of the old Prest-O-Lite batteries have a lead bushing around the
post, Fig. 245, similar to the U. S. L. batteries. This will make a
perfectly tight seal, provided that you screw the bushing up tight.
The new types of Prest-O-Lite batteries have a "Peened" post seal,
special instructions for which follow.

The general instructions for rebuilding batteries given on pages 328
to 374 apply to Prest-O-Lite batteries in every respect. The "Peened"
post seal is, however, a special construction, and directions for
working on this seal are as follows:

  [Fig. 246 Prest-O-Lite Element Locked]

All Prest-O-Lite batteries designated as Types WHN, RIJN, BHN, JFN,
KPN, and SHC, have a single moulded cover which is locked directly on
to the posts of the element. This feature is the result of forcing a
solid ring of lead from a portion of the post, projecting above the
cover, down into a deep chamfer in the top of the cover. Figs. 246 and
247 show this construction.

This construction makes a solid unit of the cover and element, which
does away with the sealing compound, washers, nuts, etc., for making
the acid tight seal around the posts.

The locking operation requires some special instructions and shop
equipment for assembly and all repairs which involve removal from and
replacement of the cover on the element.

The majority of battery repairs such as renewal of jars, separators,
straightening of plates, and removal of sediment, can be made without
separating the cover and element. In such cases the connectors are
drilled off, compound is softened and removed from around the covers
and the complete unit is removed from the cell. It may be handled
throughout the repair as a unit, and the cover serves as a bridge to
hold the plates of both groups in line just as they remain in the jar.

  [Fig. 247 Sectional view of Prest-O-Lite battery with peened
   post seal]

However, where the cover is broken or must be replaced for other
reasons, when plates have to be renewed, or the posts have been broken
off below the cover, the element and cover must be separated.

All the apparatus and special tools which are used in connection with
the locking, as well as the building-up, unlocking (freeing), and
rebuilding, of the posts in all Prest-O-Lite battery types are grouped
together and collectively termed the type "N" Post Locking Outfit.

This outfit, complete, is carried in stock at all Prest-O-Lite
warehouses under the part number 27116. Each of the individual parts
or tools also has a separate part number and may be bought separately.

Prest-O-Lite Type "N" Post Locking Outfit

Arbor Press (complete with following 12 parts)                        27115
Main Casting                                                          27114
Latch                                                                 27107
Bed Plate                                                             27113
Lever                                                                 27108
Rack                                                                  27211
Washer                                                                27112
Pinion Shaft                                                          27110
Pinion                                                                27109
Latch Pin                                                             27111
*Special CLN & KPN Spacer                                             27233
*Special CLN & KPN Latch                                              27232
*Special CLN & KPN Bed Plate                                          27234
Large Peening Tool (9-21 RHN, WHN, BHN, SHC, KPN, CLN; 11-17 JFN)     27101
Small Peening Tool (7-WHN, RHN, SHC; 9-JFN)                           27100
Peening Tool for small terminal posts in which are east threaded
   brass inserts (Columbia)                                           27105
Large Post Freeing Tool                                               27103
Small Post Freeing Tool                                               27102
No. 8 Post Freeing Tool (13/16" diameter straight post)               27123
[1] Large Post Re-Builder
   (9-21 RHN, WHN, BHN, SHC, KPN, CLN; 11-17 JFN)                     27005
[1] Small Post Re-Builder (7-WHN, RHN, SHC; 9-JFN)                    27004
[2] Ford Positive Post Builder                                        27006
[2] Ford Negative Post Builder                                        27224
2 No. 8 Post Builder (13/16" diameter straight post)                  27225
Style "B" Prest-O-Lite Torch, with six feet of red gum tubing        A-3116
Automatic Reducing Valve                                              A-427
COMPLETE TYPE "N" OUTFIT including all parts above                    27116

* The CLN and KPN Spacer block, bent Latch and Bed Plate are special
parts used only in the Arbor Press when it is especially assembled to
lock CLN or KPN posts.

[1] The Re-Builder is used to build up posts before attempting to lock
on the cover. The replacing of the metal cut away from the original
diameter of the post when the jar cover was removed is necessary to
the correct operation of the Peening Tool.

[2] The Builder is used to build up posts, after they have been locked
and shaped by the Peening Tool, to a size large enough to take some
special terminal. For example, the Ford Positive Post Builder is used
in building up posts, locked by the Large Peening Tool, to the proper
size to take the Ford positive terminal.

The Automatic Reducing Valve delivers the gas from the P-O-L tank at a
uniform pressure of 3 pounds per square inch, whether the tank is
full, half empty, or nearly empty, and regardless of the volume of gas
used. The volume or flow of gas is regulated by the key.

The style "B" torch mixes the pure acetylene from the gas tank with
the proper amount of air necessary to an efficient heating flame.

The heating flame is conducted or delivered to the Peening Tool by the
short length of brass tubing known as the Torch-Holder, over which the
"B" Torch is pressed by hand in completing the assembly.

  [Fig. 248 Special Prest-O-Lite Peening Press]

Both the "B" Torch and the Automatic Reducing Valve are absolutely
essential to the use of the Prest-O-Lite gas tank for heating the
Peening Tool.

Prest-O-Lite gas tanks, style A, B, C, or E, may be used in connection
with the Automatic Reducing Valve, as shown in Fig. 248. To use a
welding size gas tank it is necessary to insert a "W to A" Adapter
between the tank and Reducing Valve. This Adapter can be purchased
from the Prest-O-Lite Co., Inc.

The Arbor Press when received by the Service Station is fully
assembled, ready for mounting and operation with all P-O-L locked post
types except CLN and KPN.

Mount the Press in a vertical position (Fig. 248) in a convenient
place and at an accessible height on a wall or post. Holes are
provided in the Press for mounting by lag screws or bolts. The
position of the Peening Tool should be well below the level of the
eyes, to prevent serious injury from a possible spattering of
overheated lead.

Screw the proper size Peening Tool into the bottom of the Press rack,
as shown in Fig. 248. The Torch-Holder must be removed from the
Peening Tool to do this; it should be immediately replaced.

In using the Press to lock CLN or KPN posts it is necessary to remove
the Bed Plate and the Latch, and replace these parts with the Special
Bed Plate and Special Latch provided for this purpose, using the
spacing block or Spacer (also provided) between the Special Bed Plate
and the bottom of the Press.

  [Fig. 249 Reaming Prest-O-Lite peened post to remove cover]

Connect the "B" Torch to the Peening Tool. The Torch is merely pressed
by the hand over the Torch-Holder.

Connect the Torch with the Automatic Reducing Valve on the gas tank by
the rubber tubing, and turn on the gas and light. The flame should be
blue and hot.

Allow the Peening Tool to become just hot enough to melt the end of a
piece of 50-50 solder. Do not allow it to get any hotter than this.
The tool is then ready for use. The flame may be left on while the
Tool is in use. In case the Tool becomes too hot turn the flame off
and allow it to cool to the proper temperature before using.


To Remove Cell Covers from Elements


Drill off cell connectors and terminals as usual. Insert the proper
size Freeing Tool (or reamer), furnished with the outfit, in an
ordinary hand-power drill press or bit-and-brace. With this reamer
remove the ring of metal or flange on the post, thereby releasing the
cell cover. Fig. 249. The Freeing Tool should not be used in a
power-driven press, as slow speed is essential to prevent breaking
cell covers. To get the best results, center the Freeing Tool over the
post, gradually forcing it down, at the same time keep it turning
slowly until the ring of metal which locks the post in the cover has
been removed. A little machine oil should be put on the metal directly
under the tool for this operation. After the metal ring has been
removed, the cover can be easily lifted off the posts, Fig. 250.

  [Fig. 250 Removing Prest-O-Lite cover]

  [Fig. 251 Building up posts on Prest-O-Lite element]

The use of the Freeing Tool in removing the cell cover cuts away a
certain amount of metal from the diameter of the posts. Before these
posts can be relocked by the Peening Tool in replacing the cell cover
they must be built up in size or diameter again so that there will be
enough lead to insure a tight joint.


To Rebuild Posts


Thoroughly clean the post. Place the proper Post Re-Builder so that it
rests on the shoulder of the post, and run in enough new lead to fill
the Re-Builder. Fig. 251. Be sure and bring the lead surface of the
post into fusion before the new lead is run in, to insure a strong
post.

To build a smooth, solid post, be sure that the post is thoroughly
clean; then use a hot flame.


To Lock or Peen Posts


(1) Assemble positive and negative groups without separators, and
paint the posts (just above the shoulder) with hot sealing compound.

(2) Prepare the cell covers by immersing them in hot water until they
are flexible.

(3) Place a warmed cover over the posts of the two assembled groups
(the elements). Fig. 252.

  [Fig. 252 Replacing Prest-O-Lite cover on built-up posts]

(4) Slide the element over the Bed Plate directly under Peening Tool,
with the bottom of the plate connectors resting on the Bed Plate. (See
Fig. 253).

(5) Pull down the Latch to hold the Bed Plate in alignment.

(6) Center the post with Peening Tool. Then force the Peening Tool
down slowly until it has covered about two-thirds of the distance to
the cover. Pause in this operation to allow the metal of the post to
become heated; then force tool the rest of the distance. Raise the
Peening Tool slightly and force down again.

(7) Release the Latch, withdraw and reverse the element, and repeat
operations 4, 5 and 6 on the other post.

(8) The assembled groups are now ready to receive separators.

  [Fig. 253 Peening Prest-O-Lite post with special peening press]


Precautions in Post Locking Operations


1--Be sure all covers are warmed until they are flexible before
attempting to assemble.

2--Be sure that the Peening Tool is not too hot. If it is, the post
will melt away and be ruined. A very hot tool sometimes causes
dangerous spattering of hot lead.

3--Be sure that the post is centered with the Peening Tool before
forcing the Tool down on the post.

4--Be sure the cover has been forced down, so that it rests on the
shoulder of the post, before releasing.


General Instructions


In breaking in a new Peening Tool it is advisable to squirt several
drops of machine oil inside the Tool, as well as putting some oil on
the top of the post, before forcing the hot Tool down over the post.
This will prevent the Tool from sticking to the post.

If the Peening Tool should stick to the post, force the Tool down
again, being certain that the cover is slightly compressed. Sticking
of the Peening Tool indicates either that the Tool has not yet been
broken in, or that there is not sufficient compression in the cover to
free the Tool on releasing the pressure on the lever of the Press.

To repair the 13/16" diameter straight terminal post, the Ford
positive terminal post, the Ford negative terminal post, it is good
practice to remove the cover in the usual manner, then cut the upper
portion of the posts off and rebuild them with the large Post
Re-Builder. Reassemble the element and cover in the recommended manner
and then use the proper Post Builder to burn the post to its original
size.


Standard Types of Prest-O-Lite Starting, Lighting and Ignition
Batteries

  [Image: Chart for Prest-O-Lite starting batteries, 6-volt]

  [Image: Chart for Prest-O-Lite starting batteries, 12-volt]

  [Image: Chart for Prest-O-Lite starting batteries, 16-18-24
   and 30-volt]

  [Image: Chart for Prest-O-Lite special heavy duty truck
   batteries for starting and light; Chart for 6-volt
   lighting and ignition types]



THE PHILADELPHIA DIAMOND GRID BATTERY


Old Type

  [Fig. 254 Cross section of old type Philadelphia diamond grid
   battery]

Figs. 254 and 255 show the construction of the old type Philadelphia
Diamond Grid. Battery. Figs. 254 and 256 show the diamond shaped grid
from which the battery derives its name. It is claimed that this
construction gives a very strong grid, holding the active materials
firmly in place, and giving a large amount of contact surface between
the grid and the active material.

Figs. 254 and 255 show the old type battery, and give the details of
the cover, terminal posts, vent plug, and so on. The post seal is made
tight by pouring the compound into the cover well so that it flows in
around all of the petticoats on the post.

  [Fig. 255 Cross section old type Philadelphia Diamond Grid]

This construction increases the distance that the acid must travel
along the post, in order to cause a leak, about two and one-half times
the vertical distance on a smooth post. The hard rubber washer which
fits around the post acts as a lock to prevent the post from turning.
This applies especially to the two terminal posts to which the cables
are attached. The washer is intended to prevent any strain in the
cable from turning the post and breaking the seal between the post and
the compound.


New Development in the Philadelphia Battery


  [Fig. 256 Cross section new type Philadelphia battery]

  [Fig. 257 New type Philadelphia Diamond Grid Battery]

Rubber Lockt Seal Covers. During the last few years there has been a
marked tendency in the battery industry to do away with the use of
sealing compound for making a joint between the cell cover and the
terminal posts and to substitute a mechanical seal of some kind at
this joint. The Philadelphia Storage Battery Co. has developed the
"Rubber Lockt". cover seal, the construction of which is shown in
detail in Figs. 256 and 257. On the cell posts there is a. flange
which supports the cover, and above this there is a recessed portion
into which is slipped a soft rubber sleeve or bushing. This portion of
the post is made with a ridge extending around the post and with the
rubber sleeve forming a high point over which a corresponding locking
edge in the terminal hole of the cover is snapped. This construction
makes a joint which is flexible and at the same time acid tight.
Vibration tends to push the cover down on the supporting flanges, as
the post diameter is smaller below the locking edge. The design is
simple, both from the assembly and the repair standpoint, as no tools
are required for either operation. In the assembly operation the
groups are lined up so that the post centers are correct and, after
wetting the soft rubber sleeves, the cover is snapped in place with a
quick downward push. See Fig. 258. In removing the covers, catch under
each end with the fingers and pull upward, at the same time pressing
with the thumbs on the top of the posts. See Fig. 259.

  [Fig. 258 Replacing cover of Philadelphia Diamond Grid Battery]

  [Fig. 259 Removing cover of Philadelphia Diamond Grid Battery]

Rubber Case Batteries. Another development of recent years consists of
the replacing of the wood case and rubber jars by a one-piece
container of hard rubber with compartments for the elements The
Philadelphia Storage Battery Co. has developed the Diamond Rubber
case, which combines strength and lightness with an attractive
appearance. See Fig. 260. One of the troubles experienced with the
earlier designs of the rubber case was the bulging of the end, due to
the pull of the battery hold down rod on a small handle attached to
the center of the end. In the Philadelphia battery this has been
overcome by the use of a wide handle which snaps into openings in the
end of the case in such a way that the pull on the handle is
transferred to the sides. Another feature of this type handle is that
it is a separate piece snapped into the case without the use of any
metal insert in the rubber case, and if the handle should break, it
can be replaced at small expense without the use of any tools.

  [Fig. 260 Philadelphia Diamond Grid Battery with rubber case]

The Philadelphia vent plug is of the bayonet type, and is tightened by
a quarter turn. The plug simply has a small vent hole in the top, and
may either be taken out or left on while battery is charging.


The Philadelphia Separator


The Philadelphia separator is made of quarter sawed hardwood. It has a
hard resinous wood in which the hard and soft portions occur in
regular alternating vertical layers. The soft layers are porous, and
permit the diffusion of the acid from plate to plate. The hard layers
give the separator stiffness and long life. The alternating hard and
soft layers are at right angles to the surface of the separator, so
that the electrolyte has a direct path between plates.

The methods of repairing Philadelphia Diamond Grid batteries are no
different from those already given, on pages 328 to 374.

When the elements of the old type batteries have been assembled and
returned to the jars, put the covers in place, and pour the compound
around the edges of the cover, and in the post wells. The old compound
must be removed from the petticoats on the posts before new compound
is poured in. The compound must be warm and thin enough to flow around
and fill up the petticoat spaces on the posts in order to get a good
seal. When the post wells are full of compound, and while compound is
still warm, put on the square sealing washers and press them down so
that the holes in the washers fit closely around the octagonal part of
the posts.


THE EVEREADY STORAGE BATTERY


It is claimed by the manufacturers that the sulphate which forms in
the Eveready battery during discharge always remains in the porous,
convertible form, and never crystallizes and becomes injurious, even
though the battery is allowed to stand idle on open circuit for a
considerable length of time. Due to this fact, the Eveready battery is
called a "Non-Sulphating Battery."

The manufacturers state that Eveready batteries which have stood idle
or in a discharged condition for months do not suffer the damages
which usually result from such treatment, namely: buckling, and
injurious sulphation. The plates do become sulphated, but the sulphate
remains in the porous, non-crystalline state in which it forms.
Charging such a battery at its normal rate is all that is necessary to
bring it back to its normal, healthy condition. Due to the excessive
amount of sulphate which forms when the battery stands idle or
discharged for a long time, it is necessary to give the battery 50
percent overcharge to remove all the sulphate and bring the battery
back to a healthy working condition. The colors of the plates are good
guides as to their condition at the end of the charge. The positives
should be free from blotches of white sulphate, and should have a dark
brown or chocolate color. The negatives should have a bright gray or
slate color.


Description of Parts


Eveready plates are of two general types. Plates of the R type are
each provided with two feet on lower ends, the positive set and the
negative set resting on two separate pairs of bridges in the jars,
thereby preventing the sediment which accumulates on top of bridges
from short circuiting a cell.

Plates of the M type, instead of having feet, are cut away where they
pass over the bridges of the opposite group. See Fig. 261. This
construction secures a greater capacity for a given space, and gives
the same protection against short circuit from sediment as the foot
construction does, since the same amount of sediment must accumulate
with either type of plate to cause a short circuit.

  [Fig. 261 Type "M" Eveready grid]

The separators used in Eveready batteries are made of cherry wood
because it is a hard wood which will resist wear, is of uniform
texture, even porosity, and has a long life in a given degree and
condition of acid.

Eveready cherry wood separators go to the repair man in a dry
condition, as they do not require chemical treatment. Separators when
received should be soaked in 1.250 specific gravity acid for four days
or longer in order to expand them to proper size and remove natural
impurities from the wood. After being fully expanded they should be
stored moist as previously described. Stock separators may be kept
indefinitely in this solution and can be used as required. Fig. 262
shows the top construction in the Eveready battery.

  [Fig. 262 Eveready Battery, cell connectors covered by compound]

Cell connectors are heavily constructed and are sealed over solidly
with a flexible sealing compound, Fig. 262. Two types of cell
connectors are used-the crescent and the heavy or "three way" type.


Repairing Eveready Batteries


To properly open and re-assemble an Eveready battery, proceed as
follows:

1. Take a hot putty knife and cut the compound from the top of each of
the inter-cell connectors until the entire top of the connector is
exposed.

2. Center punch tops of cell connectors and terminal posts.

3. Drill off cell connectors. In drilling off crescent cell connector
use 1/2 inch drill, and for heavy type connector use 5/8 inch drill.

Drill deep enough, usually 3/8 to 1/2 inch, until a seam between
connector and post is visible around lower edge of hole. Having
drilled holes in both ends of connector, heat connector with soft
flame until compound adhering to it becomes soft. Then take a 1/2 inch
or 5/8 inch round iron or bolt, depending on connector to be removed,
insert in one of the holes, and pry connector off with a side to side
motion, being careful not to carry this motion so far as to jam
connector into top of jar.

4. After connectors have been removed, steam and open the battery, as
described on pages 332 to 335.

5. Examine plates, and handle them as described on pages 335 to 355.
Remember, however, that Eveready plates which show the presence of
large amounts of sulphate, even to the extent of being entirely
covered with white sulphate, should not be discarded. A battery with
such plates should be charged at the normal rate, and given a 50
percent overcharge.

6. Before re-assembling plate groups preparatory to assembling the
battery, take negative and positive plate groups and build up the
posts with the aid of a post builder to their original height.

Assemble groups in usual manner, taking care that posts on straps are
in proper position relative to group in adjoining cell, so that cell
connectors will span properly. Eveready batteries use a right and left
hand strap for both positive and negatives, making it necessary to use
only one length of cell connector.

7. After inserting assembled plate groups into battery in their proper
relation as to polarity, heat rubber covers to make them fairly
pliable and fit them over posts and into top of jar, pressing them
down until they rest firmly on top of plate straps. See that covers
are perfectly level and that vent tubes are perpendicular and all at
same height above the plates.

8. Heat compound just hot enough so that it will flow. Pour first
layer about one quarter inch thick, being careful to cover entire jar
cover. Take a soft flame and seal compound around edges of jar and
onto posts.

9. Now proceed to burn on top connectors. Cell connectors need only be
cleaned in hole left by post, and top of each end.

10. While burning in cell connectors the first layer of compound will
have cooled sufficiently to permit the second layer to be applied.
This should be done immediately after burning on connectors and while
they are still hot. Also heat the terminal posts, as compound will
adhere to hot lead more readily than to cold.

Start second layer of compound by pouring it over cell connectors and
terminal posts, first filling in with sufficient compound to bring
level just above the tops of jars. Apply flame, sealing around edges
of wood case, being particularly careful to properly seal terminal
posts. Let this layer cool thoroughly before applying third layer.

11. The third layer of compound should be applied in the same way as
second layer, pouring on connectors and terminal posts first, and
filling in to the level of top of wood ease. The spaces between bars
of cell connectors will fill and flow over properly if second layer
has been allowed to cool and if cell connectors have not been burned
up too high. In sealing last layer with flame, care should be taken
not to play flame on compound too long as this hardens and burns the
compound. Burned compound has no flexibility and will crack readily in
service, thus causing the battery to become a "slopper." In pouring
compound be sure to have battery setting level so that compound will
come up even on all edges of case. Do not move battery after pouring
last layer until thoroughly cool.

Before installing battery on car be sure that no compound, etc., has
been allowed to get onto taper of terminal post, as this will make a
poor connection. If this has happened, clean with medium grade
sandpaper.


VESTA BATTERIES


  [Fig. 263 Vesta grid with 3-piece isolator]

Vesta Isolators. The Vesta plate embodies in its design devices which
are intended to hold the plates straight and thus eliminate the
buckling and short-circuiting which form a large percentage of battery
trouble. Fig. 263 shows clearly the construction of the old type of
plate. Each isolator used in the old type of plate consists of two
notched strips of celluloid, with a plain celluloid strip between
them. The notches are as wide as the plates are thick, the teeth
between the notches fitting into the spaces between plates, thus
holding the plates at the correct distances apart. The plain celluloid
strip holds the notched strips in place. At each corner of the Vesta
plate is a slot into which the isolator fits, as shown in Fig. 263.
Since the teeth on the two notched pieces of each isolator hold the
plates apart, they cannot "cut-out" or "short-out" by pinching
through the wooden separators, or "impregnated mats" as they are
called by the Vesta Company.

The celluloid of which the isolators are made are not attacked by the
electrolyte at ordinary temperatures. At higher temperatures, however,
the electrolyte slowly dissolves the isolators. The condition of the
isolator, therefore, may be used to determine whether the temperature
of the electrolyte has been allowed to rise above 100° Fahrenheit.


The Vesta Type "D" Battery


The appearance of a group of the new Type "D" construction is shown in
Fig. 265, where Type "C" and Type "D" groups are illustrated side by
side for purposes of comparison. It will be seen that the "D" isolator
is of one piece only (shown separately in Fig. 266). The material is a
heavy hard rubber stock which will be no more affected by acid or by
electrical conditions in the cell than the hard rubber battery jar
itself. The indentations on the two edges of isolator engage in hook
shaped lugs on plate edges (Fig. 267 shows these clearly) and lock the
plates apart fully as efficiently as the three-piece construction.

  [Fig. 264 Cross section, Vesta Isolator Battery, type C]

There are a number of important advantages which have been gained by
the new method of isolation. The illustration (Fig. 265) shows how the
"D" isolator permits the separators to completely cover and project
slightly beyond the edges of the plates, whereas in the old
construction there is an edge just above the isolators where the
plates are not covered. This improvement means protection against
shorts due to flaking, always so likely to occur during the summer
"overcharging" season. Overcharging is, of course, a form of abuse,
and Type "D" batteries are designed to meet this sort of service.
Another great advantage gained is in the arrangement of lugs, It will
be noted that the positive isolator hooks are in alignment, as are the
negative hooks, but that these two rows, of opposite polarity, are
separated from each other by the full width of the isolator; whereas
in the Type "C" construction the outer edges of the plates, of
opposite polarity, were separated only by the usual distance between
plates.

  [Fig. 265 Vesta elements: showing old 3-piece celluloid isolator and
   new one-piece hard rubber isolator]

  [Fig. 267 Vesta plates type U and DJ]

  [Fig.268 Inserting Vesta hard rubber isolator]

The new isolator is simple to insert and remove. Being made of hard
rubber, it will soften and become pliable if a sufficient degree of
heat is applied. The heat required is approximately 150° to 160°F., a
temperature far above that reached by any battery cell, even under the
most extravagant condition of abuse, but readily attained in the shop
by means of a small flame of any kind-even a match will do in an
emergency. The flame (which should be of the yellow or luminous
variety, as the blue flame tends to scorch the rubber) is played
lightly over the isolator a few seconds. The rubber becomes soft and
is then removed by inserting under the end of the isolator any narrow
tool, such as a small screw driver, a wedge point, chisel, etc., and
prying gently. In replacing isolators, a small hot plate is convenient
but not at all necessary. The isolators are placed on the hot plate,
or held in a luminous flame, until soft enough to bend. They are then
bent into an arched shape, as shown in Fig. 268, and quickly fitted
into place under the proper lugs. The regular isolator spacing tool is
convenient and helpful in maintaining the plates at uniform intervals
while this operation is carried out. The job is completed by pressing
down the still warm isolator with any handy piece of metal having a
flat edge that will fit the distance between the lugs (Fig. 269). The
shank of a screw driver does splendidly for this work. The pressure
causes the isolator to straighten out, and the indentations fit snugly
under the respective hooks on the plates. At the same time the contact
with the cold metal chills the rubber to its normal hard condition. It
is especially to be noted that the entire operation of isolator
removal and replacement can be carried out with none but the commonest
of shop tools.

  [Fig. 269 Pressing down Vesta hard rubber isolator]

  [Fig. 270 Complete vesta battery]

All of the "U" size batteries have been changed to Type "D," so that
all "CU" types are superseded by corresponding "DU's." Type "D" will
not be used on cells of sizes "L," "H," or "A", all of which remain of
the "C" or three-piece isolator construction. Type "S" remains old
style as before.


Type "DJ"


The Vesta Company has added a new plate size, produced in the "D"
style (one-piece) isolator only, and known as "DJ."

This plate is one-half inch higher than the "U," as shown in Fig. 267.
It has 10 per cent more capacity. "DJ" batteries are available in all
forms corresponding with "CU" types, and can be obtained by merely
changing the type form name in ordering, as for example, to replace
form 150, 6-DJ11-Y-150. The overall height of the completed battery
is, of course, one-half inch more, and the "DJ" should therefore be
ordered only when this additional height space is available in the
battery compartment of the car.


Vesta Separators


The Vesta separators, or "mats," are treated by a special process. The
Vesta Company considers its "mats" a very important feature of the
battery. See page 15.


Vesta Post Seal


A lead collar fits over each post to hold the cover tight against the
soft rubber gasket underneath. This collar is not screwed or burned on
the post, but is simply pressed down over the post, depending for its
holding power upon the fact that two lead surfaces rubbing against
each other tend to "freeze," and unite so as to become a unit. The
connector rests upon the upper race of the collar, and also helps to
hold it down in its proper position. Fig. 270 shows the complete
battery with the lead collar, and the large vent plug.

In rebuilding Vesta batteries having the lead collars, the cover
should be left in place when working on the plates, if possible. If,
however, it is necessary to separate groups, and the lead collars must
be removed, this is done as shown in Fig. 271. A few blows on the side
of the collar with a light, two ounce hammer expands the lead collar
several thousands of an inch so that the collar may be removed.

  [Fig. 271 Expanding lead collar of Vesta battery with light
   hammer]

  [Fig. 272 Placing soft rubber gasket over post of Vesta battery]

In replacing the covers, the lead collar must be forced down over the
post, and special pressure tongs are required for this purpose. Before
driving on the old collar, the post should be expanded slightly by
driving the point of a center-punch into the shoulder on the post.
Instead of expanding the shoulder a new collar may be used.

Fig. 272 shows the soft rubber gasket being placed over the post, and
shows the construction of the cover with its recess to fit the gasket.

Fig. 273 shows the lead collar being placed over the post after the
cover is in place.

Fig. 274 shows the special long lipped tongs required to force the
collar down on the post shoulder. One lip of the tongs has a hole into
which the post fits. The necessary driving force may be obtained by
applying pressure to the ends of the lips of the tongs With an
ordinary vise. This forces the cover down on the rubber gasket to make
the acid-tight seal.

  [Fig. 273 Placing lead collar over post of Vesta battery]

  [Fig. 274 Pressing lead collar over post of Vesta battery]


WESTINGHOUSE BATTERIES


Westinghouse batteries have a special seal between covers and posts,
as shown in Fig. 275. A lead foundation washer (J) is set around the
post. A "U" shaped rubber gasket, (K) is then forced between the cover
and post, with the open end up. The lips of this gasket are tapered,
with the narrow edge up. A tapered lead sleeve (L) is then forced
between the lips of gasket (K), thereby pressing the inner lip against
the post and the outer lip against the cover.

  [Fig. 275 Westinghouse battery, partly dis-assembled]

The lead sleeve is held in place by broaching or indenting the collar
on taper lead sleeve into the posts.

To break the seal, a hollow reamer or facing tool, fitted into a drill
press or breast drill, is slipped over the post. A few turns will
remove that part of the sleeve which has been forced into the post.
Remove sealing compound around cover, remove group from cell. The
cover can then be lifted off and if any difficulty is experienced, it
can easily be removed by prying up cover with screwdriver. After
removing the cover, the tapered lead sleeve and "U" shaped gasket can
be removed. If these instructions are followed, the "U" shaped gasket
and taper lead sleeves can be used when battery is reassembled.

With the addition of the foregoing instructions on the post seal, the
standard directions for rebuilding batteries given on pages 328 to 374
apply to Westinghouse batteries.


Westinghouse Plates


In any given size, the Westinghouse battery has two more plates per
cell than the usual 1/8 inch plate battery. It has the same number of
plates as the 3/32 inch thin plate battery, but the thickness of the
plates is about half-way between the 1/8 inch and 3/32 inch plates.

The Westinghouse negative grids, Fig. 276, have very few and small
bars, just enough to hold the active material. It is slightly thinner
than the positive but has the same amount of active material, due to
the design of the grids. The condition of Westinghouse negatives
should not be determined by cadmium readings as these plates may be
fully charged and yet not give reversed cadmium readings.

  [Fig. 276 Westinghouse positive and negative plates]

Aside from the special instructions given for the Westinghouse Post
Seal, the Standard Instructions for Rebuilding Batteries, given on
pages 328 to 374 may be used in rebuilding Westinghouse batteries.


TYPES OF WESTINGHOUSE BATTERIES


Type "A" Batteries


The type "A" series was designed to fit the battery compartment in
certain rather old models of cars. Owing to a lack of space this
series is not of as efficient design as the "C" and "B" series. It
does have the Westinghouse Post Seal, however.

Type "A" batteries are not recommended for use when "B" or "C"
batteries can be used.

                 Ampere
                 Hours          Ampere      Ampere    Length     Weight
                 at Usual       Rate for    Rate for  in Inches  in
Type   Part No.  Lighting Rate  20 Minutes  5 Hours   L.         Pounds


6-A-11 100071    64             68          9.1       8          38
6-A-13 100072    79             82          11.0      9-1/8      42
6-A-15 100073    94             96          12.8      10-1/4     46
6-A-17 100074    109            109         14.6      11-9/16    52
6-A-21 100075    139            136         18.2      14-3/16    63
6-A-25 100076    169            164         22.0      17         75
12-A-7 100077    34             41          5.5       10-7/16    48
12-A-11 100078   64             68          9.1       14-15/16   70
12-A-17 100079   109            109         14.6      22-1/16    102


Plates

Width   Height   Thickness

5-5/8   4-1/8    .098


Type "B" Batteries


The type "B" series of batteries has been designed for use on a number
of cars now in service that do not have a sufficient headroom in the
battery compartment for type "C."

Type "B" batteries carry all of the features of the type "C." Due to
the fact that the plates of necessity must be somewhat shorter than in
the type "C" batteries their efficiency from the point of ampere hours
per pound of weight is slightly less than the type "C" series.

                 Ampere
                 Hours          Ampere      Ampere    Length     Weight
                 at Usual       Rate for    Rate for  in Inches  in
Type   Part No.  Lighting Rate  20 Minutes  5 Hours   L.         Pounds

6-B-7   100031    41             44          6.6       5-3/4      30
6-B-9   100032    59             66          8.8       6.7/8      36
6-B-11  100033    77             82          11.0      8          41
6-B-13  100034    95             99          13.2      9-1/2      47
6-B-15  100035    114            115         15.4      10-1/4     52
6-B-17  100036    132            131         17.6      11-9/16    57
6-B-19  100037    150            148         19.8      12-7/8     60
6-B-21  100038    168            164         22.0      14-3/16    68
6-B-23  100039    186            181         24.2      15-1/2     75
6-B-25  100040    205            197         26.4      17         82
12-B-7  100041    41             49          6.6       10-7/16    54
12-B-9  100042    59             66          8.8       12-11/16   66
12-B-11 100043    77             82          11.0      14-15/16   78
12-B-13 100044    95             99          13.2      17-3/16    91
12-B-15 100045    114            115         15.4      19-7/16    102
12-B-17 100046    132            131         17.6      22-1/16    113


Plates

Width   Height   Thickness

5-5/8   4-3/4    0.1


Type "C" Batteries


The type "C" series of batteries is the Westinghouse standard. The
outside dimensions and capacity are such that some one of this design
may be used in a majority of cars now in service. The Westinghouse
design was built around this type and it should be used for
replacement or new equipment.

Type "C" batteries are provided with the Westinghouse Post Seal
wherever possible.

                 Ampere
                 Hours          Ampere      Ampere    Length     Weight
                 at Usual       Rate for    Rate for  in Inches  in
Type   Part No.  Lighting Rate  20 Minutes  5 Hours   L.         Pounds

6-C-7   100001    45             54          7.3       5-7/8      34
6-C-9   100002    65             73          9.7       7          39
6-C-11  100003    85             91          12.1      8-1/8      44
6-C-13  100004    105            109         14.6      9-1/4      50
6-C-15  100005    125            127         17.0      10-3/8     56
6-C-17  100006    145            145         19.4      11-11/16   63
6-C-19  100007    165            163         21.8      13         70
6-C-21  100008    185            181         24.3      14-5/16    77
6-C-23  100009    205            199         26.7      15-5/8     85
6-C-25  100010    225            218         29.2      17-1/8     93
12-C-7  100011    45             54          7.3       10-9/16    59
12-C-19 100012    65             73          9.7       12-13/16   72
12-C-11 100013    85             91          12.1      15-1/16    84
12-C-13 100014    105            109         14.6      17-5/16    96
12-C-15 100015    125            127         17.0      19-8/16    110


Plates

Width   Height   Thickness

5-5/8   4-1/4    0.1 inch


Type "E" Batteries


The type "E" series was designed for replacement work on a few old
model cars now in service where a narrow, high battery was necessary.
The design is not as efficient as the "B" and "C" lines, due to a lack
of space and further, it has been necessary to omit the Westinghouse
Post Seal for the same reason.

                 Ampere
                 Hours          Ampere      Ampere    Length     Weight
                 at Usual       Rate for    Rate for  in Inches  in
Type   Part No.  Lighting Rate  20 Minutes  5 Hours   L.         Pounds

6-E-13  100058    79             82          11.0      9-1/8      40
6-E-15  100062    94             96          12.8      10-1/4     44
6-E-17  100065    109            109         14.6      11-9/16    50
6-E-21  100067    139            136         18.2      14-3/16    62
12-E-11 100088    64             68          9.1       14-15/16   70
12-E-13 100060    79             82          11.0      17-3/16    79
12-E-15 100069    94             96          12.8      19-7/16    90
18-E-9  100070    49             54           7.3      15-5/16    75


Plates

Width   Height   Thickness

4-1/8   5-5/8    .098


Type "H" Batteries


The type "H" battery is built with heavier plates than the type "C"
and "B" batteries for use in cars where the necessary increased space
is available and where the weight per ampere output is not a
consideration. Under the same use the battery will give a greater life
than the type "C" or "B" battery having the same positive area.

This battery has a greater space between the plates than the "C" or
"B" battery and will therefore have less internal discharge when
standing on open circuit, and is more desirable for miscellaneous use
where open circuit discharge is of consideration.

                 Ampere
                 Hours          Ampere      Ampere    Length     Weight
                 at Usual       Rate for    Rate for  in Inches  in
Type   Part No.  Lighting Rate  20 Minutes  5 Hours   L.         Pounds

6-H-17 100089     61             74          9.9       7-3/4      35
6-H-9  100090     88             89          13.2      9-1/4      43
6-H-11 100091     115            124         16.5      11-1/2     55
6-H-13 100092     143            149         19.8      12-5/8     36
6-H-15 100093     170            173         23.2      14-5/16    70
6-H-17 100094     197            109         26.5      16         79


Plates

Width   Height   Thickness

5-5/8   5        .19


Type "J" Batteries


The type "J" battery is an extremely heavy construction battery with
thick plates, and it was designed primarily for use on trucks and
other vehicles of this type where there is excessive vibration and
other possibility of mechanical abuse. This battery will give a
greater life than either the "H", "C" or "B" battery with the same
plate area. It is provided with wood separators and rubber sheets.

This battery has a greater space between the plates than the "C" or
"B" battery and will therefore have less internal discharge when
standing on open circuit, and is more desirable for miscellaneous use
where open circuit discharge is of consideration.

                 Ampere
                 Hours          Ampere      Ampere    Length     Weight
                 at Usual       Rate for    Rate for  in Inches  in
Type   Part No.  Lighting Rate  20 Minutes  5 Hours   L.         Pounds

6-J-5  100095     38             55          7.35      6-7/16     38
6-J-7  100096     68             82          11.0      8-1/8      40
6-J-9  100097     98             110         14.7      10-3/8     50
6-J-11 100098     128            137         18.4      11-7/8     60
6-J-13 100099     159            165         22.1      13-3/4     69
6-J-15 100100     189            192         25.7      15-5/8     84
6-J-17 100101     220            220         29.4      17-1/2     96


Plates

Width   Height   Thickness

5-5/8   5        .19


Type "0" Batteries


The "0" type battery sacrifices some capacity in obtaining a rugged
strength. It is a special battery made only with nineteen plates per
cell where the percentage of sacrificed capacity is not great as
compared with the twenty-one plate "C" type. It fills the same space
as does a 6-C-21. It has greater life and strength. It has less
capacity but it is built for conditions requiring less capacity than a
twenty-one plate cell.

                 Ampere
                 Hours          Ampere      Ampere    Length     Weight
                 at Usual       Rate for    Rate for  in Inches  in
Type   Part No.  Lighting Rate  20 Minutes  5 Hours   L.         Pounds

6-O-19  100143    185            185         24.5      13-11/16   68


Plates

Width   Height   Thickness

5-5/8   5-1/4    .123


Type "F" Batteries


There is only one type "F" battery. It is of big heavy construction
exactly the same dimensions as the battery used for a number of years
on the Cadillac and certain other cars. This battery is heavier than
type "C" of the same capacity and it has a greater life.

                 Ampere
                 Hours          Ampere      Ampere    Length     Weight
                 at Usual       Rate for    Rate for  in Inches  in
Type   Part No.  Lighting Rate  20 Minutes  5 Hours   L.         Pounds

6-F-13 100086     150            160         21.2      17-11/16   79


Plates

Width   Height   Thickness

4-3/4   5-1/4    .17


WILLARD BATTERIES


Since 1912, when the Willard Storage Battery Co. began to manufacture
storage batteries for starting and lighting work, various types of
Willard batteries have been developed. The original Willard starting
and lighting batteries used two-piece, or "double" covers. These are
shown in the cuts used to illustrate the sealing of double-cover
covers in the preceding chapter, and no further description will be
given here. The doublecover batteries are no longer made, but the
repairman will probably be called upon to repair some of them. The
instructions given in the preceding chapter should be used in making
such repairs.

Following the double cover batteries came the single cover battery, of
which a number of types have been made. One type used a rectangular
post, and was very difficult to repair. Fortunately, this type was not
used extensively, and the battery is obsolete.


Willard Batteries With Compound Sealed Posts


The oldest type single-cover Willard battery which the repairman will
be called upon to handle is the compound sealed post type, illustrated
in-Fig. 277. This battery includes types SEW, SER, SJW, SL, SLR, SM,
SMR, STR, SXW, SXR, SP, SK, SQ, EM, and EMR. As shown in Fig. 277,
there is a well around each post which is filled with: sealing
compound. On the under side of the cover is a corresponding well which
fits into the post well, the sealing compound serving to make the seal
between the cover and the post.

  [Fig. 277 Willard Battery cross section]

Aside from this post seal, no special instructions are required in
rebuilding this type of Willard battery. A 3/4 inch drill is needed
for drilling off the connectors. When the plates have been lifted out
of the jars, and are resting on the jar to drain, and while the
compound and cover are still hot, remove the cover by placing your
fingers under it and pressing down on the posts with your thumbs.

With a narrow screw driver or a knife, clean out all of the old
compound from the wells around the posts, and also remove the compound
from the under side of the cover which fits into the post wells.

In reassembling the battery first try on the covers to see that they
will fit in the post wells. Then remove the covers again and heat them
with a soft flame. Then heat the post wells perfectly dry with a soft
flame. Pour the post wells nearly full of compound, and quickly press
the cover into position.


Willard Batteries With Lead Inserts In Covers


The types SJWN and SJRN Willard batteries have lead inserts in the
cover post holes, as shown in Mg. 278, the inserts being welded to the
posts. For removing the connectors and for separating the post from
the cover insert, the Willard Company furnishes special jigs and
forms. The work may also be done without these jigs and forms, as will
be described later.

When the special jigs and forms are used, the work is done, as follows:

1. Place Willard drill jig Z-72 (Fig. 279) over the connector, and
with a 13/16 inch drill, bore down far enough to release the connector
from the post (Fig. 279).

  [Fig. 278 lead insert used on Willard Batteries; Fig. 279
   Willard  Drill Jig Z-72; Fig. 279 Willard Drill Jig Z-72 and
   how it is used]

2. File off the post stub left by drilling. This will give a flat
surface on top of the cover insert and will make it easier to center
the drill for the next operation.

3. With a 57/64 inch drill, and Willard jig Z-94 (Fig. 280), drill
down to release the post from the cover insert.

  [Fig. 280 Willard Jig Z-94; Fig. 281 Willard Post-Builder Z-93]

4. In reassembling, build the post up to a height of 1-5/16 inches
above the top of the plate strap, using Willard post builder Z-93
(Fig. 281).

5. After removing the post builder, bevel the top edge of the post
with a file, as indicated at "A" (Fig. 281). Then replace plates in
the jars.

6. File off tops of cover inserts at "A" (Fig. 282), to a height of
3/16 inch above the cover. Also remove any roughness on surface "B"
caused by pliers when cover was removed.

  [Fig. 282 Willard Battery cross section of cover insert;
   Fig. 283 Willard burning form Z-87 and how it is used]

7. Put on the covers so that their tops will be 1/32 inch above the
top edge of the jars, tapping them lightly with a small hammer.

8. Place Willard burning form Z-87 (Fig. 283) over the post and cover
insert and burn the post to the insert.

9. Remove form Z-87 and thoroughly brush off the top of the post stub.
Then build up the stub post, using Willard burning form Z-88 on the
positive posts and form Z-89 on the negative posts (Fig. 284).

  [Fig. 284 Willard burning forms Z-88 and Z-89]

10. Now seal the covers with sealing compound as usual, and burn on
the connectors.

11. If the terminal posts are made for clamp terminals, build up the
posts by using Willard burning form Z-90, for the positive posts and
Z-91 for the negative posts (Fig. 285).

  [Fig. 285 Willard burning forms Z-90 and Z-91]

To work on the post seals of Willard types SJWN and SJRN without the
special Willard jigs and forms:

1. Remove the connectors and terminals as usual.

2. Saw off the posts close to the covers, taking care not to injure
the covers; This will separate the posts from the cover inserts, and
the covers may be removed.

3. In reassembling, Ale off the top of the cover insert at "A" (Fig.
292).

4. Put covers on so that their tops will be 1/32 inch above the top
edge of the jars, tapping the covers lightly with a small hammer.

5. Brush the top of post and cover insert perfectly clean. Now make a
burning form consisting of a ring 1-1/8 inside diameter and 1-5/8 inch
outside diameter and 3/16 to 1/4 inch high. Set this over the stub
post and cover. With a hot lead burning flame melt the top of the post
and cover insert together. Then melt in lead up to the top of the
special burning form (Fig. 286). Then remove the form.

  [Fig. 286 Cross section Willard Battery Posts Types SJWN and SJRN]

6. Set post builders on the part of the posts which has been built up
and build up the posts as usual, Fig. 286. Then burn on the connectors
and terminals.


Willard Gasket Type Batteries


Fig. 287 shows this type of construction, used on types SJRG and SLWG.

Fig. 288 shows the seal in detail. A soft rubber gasket is slipped
over the post, and the cover is pushed down over the gasket. For
removing the covers, have a cover removal frame made as shown in Fig.

289. Fasten the frame to a solid wall or bench so that it will
withstand a strong pull. In rebuilding this type of battery proceed as
follows:

  [Fig. 287 Willard Gasket Seal Battery cross section]

1. Drill off the connectors and terminals, leaving the post stubs, as
high as possible, since the only way of removing the plates is by
grasping the post stubs with pliers.

  [Fig. 288 Details of Willard Gasket Seal]

2. Steam the battery to soften the sealing compound and lift out the
plates as usual.

3. To remove covers. Saw the post stubs off flush with the covers.
Place the element in the cover removal frame (Fig. 289) and pull
steadily on the element. A little swaying motion from side to side may
help in loosening the covers. If any of the gaskets remain on the
posts when the covers are removed, replace them in the cover and
thoroughly dry the inside with a rag.

  [Fig. 289 Cover removal frame for Willard Gasket Seal Battery]

4. To replace covers. With a rag or tissue paper wipe off the posts
and then dry them thoroughly with a soft flame.

With a 3/4 inch bristle bottle brush apply a thin coating of rubber
cement to the inside surfaces of the gaskets. Do this to one cover at
a time and apply the cover quickly before the cement dries. The cement
acts as a lubricant, and without it, it will be impossible to replace
the covers.


Willard Separators


Fig. 290 shows the Willard Threaded Rubber Separator which is made of
a rubber sheet pierced by thousands of threads which are designed to
make the separator porous. This separator is not injured by allowing
it to become dry, and makes it possible for the Willard Company to
ship its batteries fully assembled without electrolyte or moisture,
the parts being "bone-dry."

  [Fig. 290 Willard threaded rubber separator]


UNIVERSAL BATTERIES


Types. The Universal Battery Co. manufactures batteries for (a)
Starting and Lighting, (b) Lighting, (c) Ignition, (d) Radio, (e)
Electric Cars and Trucks, (f) Isolated, or Farm Lighting Plants, and
(g) General Stationary Work.

Construction Features. The Universal Starting and Lighting Batteries
embody no special or unique constructions. The boxes are made of hard
maple, lock cornered and glued. The jars have single rubber covers.
The separators are made of Port Orford white cedar wood, this wood
being the same as that used in some of the other standard makes of
batteries. The space between the covers and connectors is sufficient
to permit lifting the battery by grasping the connectors.

  [Fig. 291 Universal Battery Cover cross section]

Fig. 291 shows the Universal Co. Post Seal construction. A soft rubber
washer (A) is first slipped over the post. The cover (B) is then put
in place, and rests on the washer (A) as shown. A second washer (C) is
then slipped over the post, resting on the upper surface of the
shoulder of the cover. The lead sleeve washer (D) is then forced down
over the post, pressing washer (C) down on the cover, and pressing the
cover down on washer (A). The two rubber washers serve to make a leak
proof joint between post and cover. The lead sleeve-washer (D)
"freezes" to the post, and holds cover and washers in position.

In rebuilding Universal batteries the cover need not be removed unless
it is desired to replace plate groups. To remove the cover, after the
cell connectors have been drilled off, drill down through the
post-stub until the drill has penetrated to the shoulder (E). This
releases the seal and the cover may be lifted off. To save time, the
post-stub may be cut off flush with the top of the cover with a hack
saw after the cell connectors have been drilled off. The drill is then
used as before to release the grip of the washer. Using a drill to
release the grip of the washer makes it necessary to build up the
posts when the battery is reassembled. Instead of using an ordinary
twist drill, a special hollow drill may be obtained from the Universal
Battery Co. This drill cuts away the lead sleeve gasket without
injuring the post. If an ordinary drill is used, a 3/4 inch drill is
required for the seven plate battery and a 13/16 inch drill for all
other sizes.


ONE-PIECE BATTERY CONTAINERS


The standard practice in battery assembly has always been to place the
plates of each cell in a separate, hard rubber jar, the jars being set
in a wooden box or case. Each six-volt battery thus has four
containers. When a wooden case is used, jars made of rubber, or some
other nonporous, acid-resisting material are necessary.

  [Fig. 292 One-piece battery container]

Wooden cases have been fairly well standardized as to the kinds of
wood used, dimensions, constructional features, and to a certain
extent, the handles. The disadvantage of both the wooden case and the
iron handles is that they are not acid proof. Acid-proof paint
protects them from the action of the acid to a certain extent, but
paint is easily scraped off, exposing the wood and iron to the action
of the acid. It is practically impossible to prevent acid from
reaching the case and handles, and corroded handles and rotted cases
are quite common.

A recent development is a one-piece container which takes the place of
the jars and wooden case. Such a container is made of hard rubber or a
composition of impregnated fibre which uses a small amount of rubber
as a binder. These cases are, of course, entirely acid proof, and
eliminate the possibility of having acid soaked and acid rotted cases.
Painting of cases is also eliminated. The handles are often integral
parts of the case, as shown in Fig. 292, being made of the same
material as the case.

The repairman should not overlook the possibilities of the one-piece
containers. In making up rental batteries, or in replacing old cases,
the one-piece containers may be used to advantage. These containers
are suitable for Radio batteries, since they have a neater appearance
than the wooden cases, and are not as likely to damage floors or
furnishings because the acid cannot seep through them.


THE TITAN BATTERY


The Titan Battery is built along standard lines, as far as cases,
plates, separators, and jars are concerned. The ribs of the grids not
arranged at right angles but are arranged as shown in Fig. 293. Each
pellet of active material is supported by a diagonal rib on the
opposite face of the grid.

  [Fig. 293a Titan Battery grid]
  [Fig. 293b Titan Post Seal construction]

The Titan Post Seal is shown in Fig. 293. A soft rubber gasket (G) is
slipped over the post, and rests on a shoulder (F) on the post. The
cover has a channel which fits over the gasket and prevents the gasket
from being squeezed out of place when the cover is forced down on the
gasket. The post has two projections (DD), as shown, the lower surface
of each of which is inclined at an angle to the horizontal. A lock nut
(H), which has corresponding projections (IJ) is slipped over the post
as shown at (0), and is given a quarter turn. The top surfaces of the
projections on the lock-nut are inclined and as the locknut is turned,
the projections on the post and nut engage, and the cover is forced
down on the gasket (G). To lock the nut in place, a lock washer (L) is
then slipped over the post, the projections (MM) fitting into spaces
(KK) between the projections on the post and nut, thus preventing the
nut from turning. A special wrench is furnished for turning the
lock-nut. The cell connectors rest on the tops of the lock washers and
keep them in place.

The overhauling of Titan batteries should be done as described on
pages 328 to 374.


========================================================================

SECTION 3.

========================================================================

CHAPTER 17.
FARM LIGHTING BATTERIES SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS.


Although the large Central Station Companies are continually extending
their power lines, and are enlarging the territory served by them, yet
there are many places where such service is not available. To meet the
demand for electrical power in these places, small but complete
generating plants have been produced by a number of manufacturers.
These plants consist of an electrical generator, an engine, to drive
the generator, and a storage battery to supply power when the
generator is not running. The complete plants are called "House
Lighting," "Farm Lighting," or "Isolated" plants.

The batteries used in these plants differ considerably from the
starting batteries used on automobiles. The starting battery is called
upon to deliver very heavy currents for short intervals. On the car
the battery is always being charged when the car is running at a
moderate speed or over. The battery must fit in the limited space
provided for it on the car, and must not lose any electrolyte as the
car jolts along over the road. It is subjected to both high and low
temperatures; and is generally on a car whose owner often does not
know that his car has such a thing as a battery until his starting
motor some day fails to turn over the engine. All starting batteries
have wooden cases (some now use rubber cases), hard rubber jars, and
sealed on covers. The case contains all the cells of the battery.
Automobile batteries have, therefore, become highly standardized, and
to the uninformed, one make looks just like any other.

Farm lighting batteries, on the other hand, are not limited as to
space they occupy, are not subjected to irregular charging and
discharging, do not need leak proof covers, and are not called upon to
delivery very heavy currents for short periods. These facts are taken
advantage of by the manufacturers, who have designed their farm
lighting batteries to give a much longer life than is possible in the
automobile battery. As a result the farm lighting battery differs from
the automobile battery in a number of respects.

Jars. Both glass and rubber are used for farm lighting battery jars,
and they may or may not have sealed-in covers. Fig. 294 shows a glass
jar of an Exide battery having a hard rubber cover, and Fig. 295 shows
a Prest-O-Lite glass jar cell having a cover made of lead and
antimony. Unsealed glass jars, such as the Exide type shown in Fig.
324, generally have a plate of glass placed across the top to catch
acid spray when the cell is gassing. Each jar with its plates and
electrolyte forms a complete and separate unit which may easily be
disconnected from the other cells of the battery by removing the bolts
which join them. In working on a farm lighting battery, the repairman,
therefore, works with individual cells instead of the battery as a
whole, as is done with automobile batteries.

  [Fig. 294 Exide "Delco Light" farming lighting cell with
   hard rubber cover]

Batteries with sealed jars are generally shipped completely assembled
and filled with electrolyte, and need only a freshening charge before
being put into service, just as automobile batteries which are shipped
"wet" are in a fully charged condition when they leave the factory and
need only a charge before being installed on the car.

  [Fig. 295 Prest-O-Lite farm lighting cell with lead-antimony
   cover]

Jars that are not sealed are set in separate glass trays filled with
sand, or sometimes the entire battery is set in a shallow wooden box
or tray filled with sand. This is necessary because the absence of a
sealed cover allows acid spray to run down the outside of the jar and
this acid would, of course, attack the wooden shelf and make a dirty,
sloppy battery. Batteries using jars without sealed covers cannot be
shipped assembled and charged, and hence they require a considerable
amount of work and along initial charge to put them in a serviceable
condition.

  [Fig. 296 Exide farm lighting cell with sealed glass jar]

Farm lighting battery jars are less liable to become cracked than
those of automobile batteries because they are set in one place and
remain there, and are not jolted about as automobile batteries are.
Cracked jars in farm lighting batteries are more easily detected as
the jar will be wet on the outside and the acid will wet the shelf or
sand tray on which the jar rests.

Batteries with sealed rubber jars are normally assembled four cells in
a case or tray, with a nameplate on each tray which gives the type and
size of cell. The cells are connected together with lead links which
are bolted to the cell posts by means of lead covered bolt connectors.

  [Fig. 297 Combination wood and rubber separator used in
   Delco-Light and Exide Farm light cell]

Plates. Since farm lighting batteries are not required to deliver very
heavy currents at any time, the plates are made thicker than in
starting batteries, this giving a stronger plate which has a longer
life than the starting battery plate.

All makes of starting batteries use the Faure, or pasted plate. This
type of plate is also used in many farm lighting batteries, but the
Plante plate (see page 27) may also be used. The Exide "Chloride
Accumulator" cell, Fig. 323 uses a type of positive plate called the
"Manchester" positive as described on page 497.

Separators. Grooved wooden separators are used in some farm lighting
batteries, while others use rubber separators, or both rubber and
wooden separators. Some use wooden separators which are smooth on both
sides, but have dowels pinned to them.

Electrolyte. In a starting battery the specific gravity of the
electrolyte of a fully charged cell is 1.280-1.300, no matter what the
make of the battery may be. In farm lighting batteries, the different
types have different values of specific gravity when fully charged.
The usual values are as follows:

(a) Batteries with sealed glass jars 1.210 to 1.250

(b) Batteries with open glass jars 1.200 to 1.250

(c) Batteries with sealed rubber jars 1.260 to 1.280

A brief discussion of specific gravity might be helpful at this point.
In any lead acid battery current is produced by a chemical action
between the active material in the plates and the water and sulphuric
acid in the electrolyte. The amount of energy which can be delivered
by the battery depends on the amount of active material, sulphuric
acid, and water which enter into the chemical actions of the cell. As
these chemical actions take place, sulphuric acid is used up, and
hence there must be enough acid contained in the electrolyte to enter
into the chemical actions. The amount of water and acid in the
electrolyte may be varied, as long as there is enough of each present
to combine with the active material of the plates so as to enable the
cell to deliver its full capacity. Increasing the amount of acid will
result in the plates and separators being attacked and injured by the
acid. Increasing the amount of water dilutes the acid, giving a lower
gravity, and preventing the Acid from injuring plates and separators.
This results in a longer life for the battery, and is a desirable
condition. In starter batteries, there is not enough space in the jars
for the increased amount of water. In farm lighting batteries, where
the space occupied by the battery is not so important, the jars are
made large enough to hold a greater amount of water, thus giving an
electrolyte which has a lower specific gravity than in starting
batteries.

Take a fully charged cell of any starting battery. It contains a set
of plates and the electrolyte which is composed of a certain necessary
amount of acid and a certain amount of water. If we put the plates of
this cell in a larger jar, add the same amount of acid as before, but
add a greater amount of water than was contained in the smaller jar,
we will still have a fully charged cell of the same capacity as
before, but the specific gravity of the electrolyte will be lower.

Charging Equipment. Automobile batteries are being charged whenever
the car is running at more than about 10 miles per hour, regardless of
what their condition may be.

In farm lighting outfits, the charging is under the control of the
operator, and the battery is charged when a charge is necessary. There
is, therefore, very much less danger of starving or overcharging the
battery. The operator must, however, watch his battery carefully, and
charge it as often as may be necessary, and not allow it to go without
its regular charge.

The generator of a farm lighting outfit is usually driven by an
internal combustion engine furnished with the outfit. The engine may
be connected to the generator by a belt, or its shaft may be connected
directly to the generator shaft. A switchboard carrying the necessary
instruments and switches also goes with the outfit. The charging of
farm lighting batteries is very much like the charging of automobile
batteries on the charging bench, except that the batteries are at all
times connected to switches, by means of which they may be put on the
charging line.

Some plants are so arranged that the battery and generator do not
provide current for the lights at the same time, lights being out
while the battery is charging. In others the generator and battery, in
emergency, may both provide current. In others the lights may burn
while the battery is being charged; in this case the battery is
sometimes provided with counter-electromotive force cells which permit
high enough voltage across the battery to charge it and yet limit the
voltage across the lamps to prevent burning them out or shortening
their life. In some cases the battery is divided into two sets which
are charged in parallel and discharged in series.

Relation of the Automobile Storage Battery Man to the Farm Lighting
Plant. Owners and prospective owners of farm lighting plants generally
know but little about the care or repair of electrical apparatus,
especially batteries, which are not as easily understood as lamps,
motors or generators. Prospective owners may quite likely call upon
the automobile battery repair man for advice as to the installation,
operation, maintenance, and repair of his battery and the automobile
battery repairman should have little trouble in learning how to take
care of farm lighting batteries. The details in which these batteries
differ from starting batteries should be studied and mastered, and a
new source of business will be opened.

Farm lighting plants in the vicinity should be studied and observed
while they are in good working order, the details of construction and
operation studied, the layout of the various circuits to lamps,
motors, heaters, etc., examined so as to become familiar with the
plants. Then When anything goes wrong with the battery, or even the
other parts of the plant, there will be no difficulty in putting
things back in running order.


Selection of Plant


"Farm Lighting Plant" is the name applied to the small electric plant
to be used where a central station supply is not available. Such a
plant, of course, may be used for driving motors and heating devices,
as well as operating electric lights, and the plant is really a "Farm
Lighting and Power Plant."

Make. There are several very good lighting plants on the market and
the selection of the make of the plant must be left to the discretion
of the owner, or whomever the owner may ask for advice. The selection
will depend on cost, whether the plant will fill the particular
requirements, what makes can be obtained nearby, on the delivery that
can be made, and the service policy of the manufacturer.

Type. Plants are made which come complete with battery, generator,
engine, and switchboard mounted on one base. All such a plant requires
is a suitable floor space for its installation. Other plants have all
parts separate, and require more work to install. With some plants,
the generator and engine may be mounted as a unit on one base, with
battery and switchboard separate.

The type of jar used in the battery may influence the choice. Jars are
made of glass or rubber. The glass jars have sealed covers, or have no
covers. The rubber jars generally have a sealed cover. The glass jar
has the advantage that the interior may be seen at all times, and the
height of the electrolyte and sediment may be seen and the condition
of the plates, etc., determined by a simple inspection. This is an
important feature and one that will be appreciated by the one who
takes care of the battery. Jars with sealed covers, or covers which
although not sealed, close up the top of the jar completely have the
advantage of keeping in acid spray, and keeping out dirt and
impurities. Open jars are generally set in trays of sand to catch
electrolyte which runs down the outside walls of the jars. The open
jars have the advantage that the plates are very easily removed, but
have the disadvantage that acid spray is not kept in effectually,
although a plate of glass is generally laid over part of the top of
the jar, and that dirt and dust may fall into the jar.

Size. The capacity of storage battery cells is rated in ampere hours,
while power consumed by lights, motors, etc., is measured in watt
hours, or kilowatt hours. However, the ampere hour capacity of a
battery can be changed to watt hours since watt hours is equal to

   Watt hours = ampere hours multiplied by the volts

If we have a 16 cell battery, each cell of which is an 80 ampere hour
cell, the ampere hour capacity of the entire battery will be 80, the
same as that of one of its cells, since the cells are all in series
and the same current passes through all cells. The watt hour capacity
of the battery will be 32 times 80, or 2560. The ampere hour capacity
is computed for the 8 hour rate, that is, the current is drawn from
the battery continuously for 8 hours, and at the end of that time the
battery is discharged. If the current is not drawn from the battery
continuously for 8 hours, but is used for shorter intervals
intermittently, the ampere hour capacity of the battery will be
somewhat greater. It seldom occurs that in any installation the
battery is used continuously for eight hours at a rate which will
discharge it in that time, and hence a greater capacity is obtained
from the battery. Some manufacturers do not rate their batteries at
the 8 hour continuous discharge rate but use the intermittent rate,
thus rating a battery 30 to 40 percent higher. Rated in this way, a
battery of 16 cells rated at 80 ampere hours at the 8 hour rate would
be rated at 112 ampere hours, or 3584 watt hours.

In determining the size of the battery required, estimate as nearly as
possible how many lamps, motors, and heaters, etc., will be used.
Compute the watts (volts X amperes), required by each. Estimate how
long each appliance will be used each day, and thus obtain the total
watt hours used per day. Multiply this by 7 to get the watt hours per
week. The total watt hours required in one week should not be equal to
more than twice the watt hour capacity of the battery (ampere hours
multiplied by the total battery voltage) at the eight hour rate. This
means that the battery should not require a charge oftener than two
times a week.

The capacity of a battery is often measured in the number of lamps it
will burn brightly for eight hours. The watts consumed by motors,
heaters, etc., may be expressed in a certain number of lamps. The
following table will be of assistance in determining the size of the
battery required:


                                      Watts      Equivalent Number
No.   Type of Appliance               Consumed   of 20 Watt Lamps


1     16 candle power, Mazda lamp      20          1
2     12 candle power, Mazda lamp      115         3/4
3     Electric Fan, small size         75          4
4     Small Sewing machine motor       100         5
5     Vacuum cleaner                   160         8
6     Washing machine                  200         10
7     Churn, 1/6 h.p.                  200         10
8     Cream Separator, 1/6 h.p.        200         10
9     Water pump 1/6 h.p.              200         10
10    Electric water heater, small     350         18
11    Electric toaster                 525         26
12    Electric stove, small            600         30
13    Electric iron                    600         30
14    Pump, 1/2 h.p.                   600         30

From the foregoing table we can determine the current consumption of
the various appliances:

                  Amps at 32     Amps at 110
No.     Watts     Volts          Volts

1       20        0.625          0.18
2       15        0.47           0.14
3       75        2.34           6.80
4       100       3.125          0.90
5       160       5.00           1.44
6       200       6.25           1.80
7       200       6.25           1.80
8       200       6.25           1.80
9       200       6.25           1.80
10      350       11.00          3.20
11      525       16.4           4.77
12      600       18.75          5.40
13      600       18.75          5.40
14      600       18.75          5.40

The following tables show how long the battery will carry various
currents continuously:

  [Images:  various charts/tables]


Location of Plant


The various appliances should be placed as near to each other as
possible. The lights, of course, must be placed so as to illuminate
the different rooms, barns, etc., but the power devices should be
placed as close as possible to each other and to the plant. The
purpose of this is to use as little wire as possible between the plant
and the various appliances so as to prevent excessive voltage drop in
the lines.


Wiring


The wires leading to the various appliances should be large enough so
that not more than one or two volts are lost in the wires. To obtain
the resistance of the wire leading to any appliance, use the following
equation:

Knowing the resistance of the wire, and the total length of the two
wires leading from the plant to the appliance, the size of the wire
may be obtained from a wiring table.

Rubber insulated copper wire covered with a double braid should
preferably be used, and the duplex wire is often more convenient than
the single wire, especially in running from one building to another.
Wiring on the inside of buildings should be done neatly, running the
wires on porcelain insulators, and as directly to the appliance as
possible. The standard rules for interior wiring as to fuses,
soldering joints, etc., should be followed.


Installation


(See also special instructions for the different makes, beginning page
460.)

The room in which the plant is installed should be clean, dry, and
well ventilated. It should be one which is not very cold in winter, as
a cold battery is very sluggish and seems to lack capacity. If
possible, have the plant in a separate room in order to keep out dirt
and dust. If no separate room is available, it is a good plan to build
a small room in a corner of a large room. Keep the room clean and free
of miscellaneous tools and rubbish.

If the entire plant comes complete on one base, all that is necessary
is to bolt the base securely to the floor, which should be as nearly
level as possible. If the battery is to be installed separately, build
a rack. Give the rack several coats of asphaltum paint to make it acid
proof. The location of the battery rack should be such that the rack
will be:

(a) Free from vibration.

(b) At least 3 feet from the exhaust pipe of engine.

(c) Far enough away from the wall to prevent dirt or loose mortar from
dropping on the cells.

Figs. 298 and 299 illustrate two types of battery racks recommended
for use with farm light batteries. The stair-step rack is most
desirable where there is sufficient room for its installation. Where
the space is insufficient to make this installation, use the two-tier
shelf rack. The racks should be made from 1-1/2 or 2 inch boards.

  [Fig. 298 "Stair-Step" rack for farm lighting battery]

The cells may be placed on the battery rack with either the face or
the edges of the plates facing out. The latter method requires a
shorter battery rack and is very desirable from the standpoint of
future inspections. In very dark places, it is more desirable to have
the surface of the plates turned out to enable the user to see when
the cells are bubbling during the monthly equalizing charge. Either
method is satisfactory.

All metal parts such as pipes, bolt heads, etc., which are near the
battery should be given at least three coats of asphaltum paint. Care
must be taken not to have an open flame of any kind in the battery
room, as the hydrogen and oxygen gases, given off as a battery charges
may explode and cause injury to the person and possible severe damage
to the battery. When making an installation, it is always a good plan
to carry the following material for taking care of spillage and
broken jars:

1. 1 Thermometer
2. 2 Series Cells
3. 6 Battery Bolts and Nuts
4. 1 Hydrometer Syringe
5. 2 Gallons distilled water
6. 1 Jar Vaseline
7. 1 Gallon 1.220 specific gravity electrolyte

  [Fig. 299 Installation of a Delco-Light plant, showing two-tier
   shelf rack for battery]

When a battery arrives at the shipping destination, the person lifting
this shipment should remove the slats from the top of each crate and
inspect each cell for concealed damage, such as breakage: Should any
damage be discovered, it is important that a notation covering this
damage be made and signed by the freight agent on the freight bill.
This will enable the customer or dealer to make a claim against the
railroad for the amount of damage. If a notation of this kind is not
made before the battery is lifted, the dealer will be forced to stand
the expense of repairing or replacing the damaged cells.

When removing cells from a crate, avoid lifting them by the terminal
posts as much as possible. This causes the weight of the electrolyte
and jar to pull on the sealing compound between the jar and cover, and
if the sealing is not absolutely tight, the jar and electrolyte may
fall from the cover. A cell should never be carried using the terminal
posts as handles. The hand should be put underneath the jar.

Sometimes a battery will arrive with electrolyte spilled from some of
the cells. If spillage is only about one-half to one inch down on the
plates of three or four cells, this spillage may be replaced by
drawing a little electrolyte out of each cell of the other full cells
in the set. Oftentimes several cells will have electrolyte extending
above the water line, which will aid greatly in making up any loss in
other cells. After all cells have been drawn on to fill up the ones
that are spilled, the entire set may then have its electrolyte brought
up to the water line by adding distilled water.

Very carefully adjust spillage of pilot cells (Delco), as it is very
important that the specific gravity of the pilot cells be left as
near 1.220 as possible.

In case the spillage is more than one inch below the top of plates or
glass broken, remove cell and install a new cell in its place. The
spilled or broken cell must not be used until given special treatment.


Connecting Cells


Before connecting up the cells the terminals should be scraped clean
for about 11/2 inches on both sides. An old knife or rough file is
suitable for doing this work. After the terminals are thoroughly
brightened, they should be covered with vaseline. The bolts and nuts
used in making the connections on the battery should also be coated
with vaseline. The vaseline prevents and retards corrosion, which is
harmful to efficient operation.

If a new battery is to be installed in parallel with one already in
service, connections should be made so that each series will consist
of half new and half old cells. The pilot cells for the new battery
should be placed in one series and that for the old battery in the
other, unless local conditions may make some other arrangement
desirable.

A drop light must always be provided to enable the user to inspect his
battery, particularly when giving the monthly equalizing charge.


Initial Charge


When a battery is connected to the plant, it should be given a proper
INITIAL CHARGE before any power or lights are used.

Batteries shipped filled with electrolyte are fully charged before
leaving the factory. As soon as a storage battery cell of any type or
make is taken off charge and stands idle for a considerable length of
time, some of the acid in the electrolyte is absorbed by the plates,
thereby lowering the gravity and forming sulphate on the plates. This
process is very gradual, but it is continuous, and unless the acid is
completely driven out of the plates by charging before the battery is
used, the battery will not give as good service as the user has a
right to expect. Due to the time required in shipment, the above
action has a chance to take place, which makes it necessary to give
the initial charge.

The initial charge consists of charging the battery, with the power
and light switch open, until each cell is bubbling freely from the top
to bottom on the surface of the outside negative plates and both pilot
balls are up (Delco-Light), and then CONTINUING THE CHARGE FOR FIVE
HOURS MORE. If the battery has no pilot cells, measure the specific
gravity of the electrolyte of each cell, and continue the charge until
six consecutive readings show no increase in gravity.

As an accurate check on giving the initial charge properly
(Delco-Light), we strongly recommend that hourly hydrometer readings
of both pilot cells be taken after both balls are up, the charge to be
continued until six consecutive hourly readings show no RISE in
gravity.

Due to the fact that it is impossible to hold each cell in a battery
to a definite maximum gravity when fully charged, there is likely to
be a variation of from ten to fifteen points in the specific gravity
readings of the various cells. It should be understood, however, that
the maximum gravity is the gravity when the cells are fully charged
and with the level of the solution at the water line. For example,
with each cell in a battery fully charged and therefore at maximum
gravity and with the level at the proper height, some cells may read
1.230, one or two 1.235, several 1.215 and 1.210. All of these cells
will operate efficiently, and there should be no cause for alarm. An
exception to this is the pilot cell of the Delco-Light Battery.

If this check on the initial charge is properly made, it assures the
service man and dealer that the battery is in proper operating
condition to be turned over to the user. Negligence in giving the
initial charge properly may result in trouble to both user, service
man and dealer.

The initial charge may require considerable running of the plant,
depending upon the state of charge of the cells when installed.


Instructing Users


During the time the initial charge is being given, the service man
should instruct the user on the care and operation of the plant and
battery.

The best way to give instructions to the user is to tack the
instruction cards on the wall near the plant in a place where the user
can read them easily.

Proceed to read over the plant operating card with the user. Read the
first item, go to the plant, explain this feature to the user and
allow him to perform the operation, if the instruction calls for
actual performance.

Remember, the user is not familiar with the plant and battery, and the
actual performance of each operation aids him to retain the
instructions.

After the first item has been covered thoroughly, proceed to the
second, etc. During the course of instruction, the user will often
interrupt with questions not dealing directly with the point being
explained. The service man should keep the user's attention on the
points he is explaining. When the service man has finished explaining
both plant and battery instruction cards, he should answer any points
in question which the user wants explained.

When the monthly equalizing charge is explained to the user, the
service man should always take the user to the battery and show him a
cell bubbling freely. This is necessary in order that the user may
recognize when the cells are bubbling freely at the time he gives the
monthly equalizing charge.

Impress upon the user the importance of inspecting each cell when
giving the monthly equalizing charge to see that every cell bubbles
freely. If a cell fails to bubble freely at the end of the equalizing
charge, the user should inform the service man of this condition
immediately.

Caution the user against the use of an open flame near the plant or
battery at any time. The gas which accumulates in a cell will explode
sufficiently to break the glass jar if this gas is ignited by a spark
or open flame.


Care of the Plant in Operation


(See also special instructions for the different makes, beginning page
460.)

The battery repairman should be able not only to repair the batteries,
but should also be able to keep the entire plant in working order, and
suggestions will be given as to what must be done, although no
detailed instructions for work on the generator, engine, and
switchboard will be given as this is beyond the scope of this book.

Battery Room. The essential things about the battery room are that it
must be clean, dry, and well ventilated. This means, of course, that
the battery and battery rack must also be kept clean and dry. A good
time to clean up is when the battery is being charged. Clean out the
room first, sweeping out dirt and rubbish, dusting the walls, and so
on. Both high and low temperatures should be avoided. If the battery
room is kept too hot, the battery will become heated and the hot
electrolyte will attack the plates and separators. Low temperatures do
no actual harm to a charged battery except to make the battery
sluggish, and seem to lack capacity. A discharged battery will,
however, freeze above 0° Fahrenheit. The battery will give the best
service if the battery room temperature is kept between 60° and 80°
Fahrenheit.

Do not bring any open flame such as a lantern, candle or match near a
battery and do not go near the battery with a lighted cigar, cigarette
or pipe, especially while the battery is charging. Hydrogen and oxygen
gases form a highly explosive mixture. An explosion will not only
injure the battery, but will probably disfigure the one carrying the
light, or even destroy his eyes.

It is a good plan to keep the windows of the battery room open as much
as possible.

Engine. The engine which drives the generator requires attention
occasionally. Wipe off all dirt, oil or grease. Keep the engine well
lubricated with a good oil. If grease cups are used, give these
several turns whenever the engine is run to charge the battery. Use
clean fuel, straining it, if necessary, through a clean cloth or
chamois, if there is any dirt in it. The cooling water should also be
clean, and in winter a non-freezing preparation should be added to it.
Do not change the carburetor setting whenever the engine does not act
properly. First look over the ignition system and spark plug for
trouble, and also make sure that the carburetor is receiving fuel. If
possible, overhaul the engine once a year to clean out the carbon,
tighten bearings and flywheel, remove leaky gaskets, and so on.

Generator. Keep the outside of the generator clean by wiping it
occasionally with an oiled rag. See that there is enough lubricating
oil in the bearings, but that there is not too much oil, especially in
the bearing at the commutator end of the generator. Keep the
commutator clean. If it is dirty, wipe it with a rag moistened
slightly with kerosene. The brushes should be lifted from the
commutator while this is being done. Finish with a dry cloth. If the
commutator is rough it may be made smooth with fine sandpaper held
against it while the generator is running, and the brushes are lifted.

The surfaces of the brushes that bear on the commutator should be
inspected to see that they are clean, and that the entire surfaces
make contact with the commutator. The parts that are making contact
will look smooth and polished, while other parts will have a dull,
rough appearance. If the brush contact surfaces are dirty or all parts
do not touch the commutator, draw a piece of fine sandpaper back and
forth under the brushes, one at a time, with the sanded side of the
paper against the brush. This will clean the brushes and shape the
contact surfaces to fit the curve of the commutator. Brushes should be
discarded when they be come so short that they do not make good
contact with the commutator. See that the brush holders and brush
wires are all tight and clean. Watch for loose connections of wires,
as these will cause voltage loss when the generator is charging the
battery. Watch for "high mica," which means a condition in which the
insulation between the segments projects above the surface of the
commutator, due to the commutator wearing down faster than the
insulation. If this condition arises, the mica should be cut down
until it is slightly below the surface of the commutator. An old hack
saw blade makes a good tool for this purpose. A commutator may have
grooves cut in by the brushes. These grooves do no harm as long as the
brushes have become worn to the exact shape of the grooves. When the
brushes are "dressed" with sandpaper, however, they will not fit the
grooves, and the commutator should be turned down in a lathe until the
grooves are removed.

A steady low hum will be heard when the generator is in operation.
Loud or unusual noises should be investigated, however, as a bearing
may need oil, the armature may be rubbing on the field pole faces, and
so on.

Watch for overheating of the generator. If you can hold your hand on
the various parts of the generator, the temperature is safe. If the
temperature is so high that parts may be barely touched with the hand,
or if an odor of burned rubber is noticeable, the generator is being
overheated, and the load on the generator should be reduced.

Switchboard. Clean off dirt and grease occasionally. Keep switch
contacts clean and smooth. If a "cutout" is on the board, keep its
contacts smooth and clean. If the knife switch blades are hard to
move, look for cutting at the pivots. Something may be cutting into
the blades. If this is found to be the case, use a file to remove all
roughness from the parts of the pivot. See that no switches are bent
or burned.

Keep the back of the board clean and dry as well as the front. See
that all connections are tight. Keep all wires, rheostats, etc.,
perfectly clean. A coat of shellac on the wires, switch studs, etc.,
will be helpful in keeping these parts clean.


Care of Battery


Cleanliness. Keep the battery and battery rack clean. After a charge
is completed, wipe off any electrolyte that may be running down the
outsides of the jars. Wipe all electrolyte and other moisture from the
battery rack. Occasionally go over the rack with a rag wet with
ammonia or washing soda solution. Then finish with a dry cloth. Paint
the rack with asphaltum paint once a year, or oftener if the paint is
rubbed or scratched.

If sand trays are used, renew the sand whenever it becomes very wet
with electrolyte. Keep the terminals and connectors clean. Near the
end of a charge, feel each joint between cells for a poor connection.
Watch also for corrosion on the connections. Corrosion is caused by
the electrolyte attacking any exposed metals other than lead, near the
battery, resulting in a grayish deposit on the connectors or bolts at
the joints. Such joints will become hotter than other joints, and may
thus be located by feeling the joints after the battery has been
charged for some time. Corrosion may be removed by washing the part in
a solution of baking soda.

Be very careful to keep out of the cells anything that does not belong
there. Impurities injure a cell and may even ruin it. Do not let
anything, especially metals, fall into a cell. If this is done
accidentally, pour out the electrolyte immediately, put in new
separators, wash the plates in water, fill with electrolyte having a
gravity about 30 points higher than that which was poured out, and
charge. The cell may be connected in its proper place and the entire
battery charged. Vent plugs should be kept in place at all times,
except when water is added to the electrolyte.

Keep the Electrolyte Above the Tops of the Plates. If the battery has
glass jars, the height of the electrolyte can be seen easily. If the
battery has sealed rubber jars, the height of the electrolyte may be
determined with a glass tube, as described on page 55. In most
batteries the electrolyte should stand from three-fourths of an inch
to an inch above the plates. Some jars have a line or mark showing the
proper height of the electrolyte. A good time to inspect the height of
the electrolyte is just before putting the battery on charge. If the
electrolyte is low, distilled water should be added to bring it up to
the proper level. Water should never be added at any other time, as
the charging current is required to mix the water thoroughly with the
electrolyte.

Determining the Condition of the Cells. The specific gravity of the
electrolyte is the best indicator of the condition of the battery as
to charge, just as is the case in automobile batteries, and hence
should be watched closely. It is not convenient or necessary to take
gravity readings on every cell in the battery on every charge or
discharge. Therefore, one cell called the "Pilot" cell should be
selected near the center of the battery and its specific gravity
readings taken to indicate the state of charge or discharge of the
entire battery. Delco-Light batteries each have two pilot cells with
special jars. Each of these has a pocket in one of its walls in which
a ball operates as a hydrometer or battery gauge. One pilot cell
contains the pilot ball for determining the end of the charge, and
other pilot cell containing the ball for determining the end of the
discharge. See Fig. 294.

Hydrometer readings should be taken frequently, and a record of
consecutive readings kept. When the gravity drops to the lowest value
allowable (1.150 to 1.180, depending on the make of battery) the
battery should be charged.

Once every month voltage and gravity readings of every cell in the
battery should be taken and recorded for future guidance. These
readings should be taken after the monthly "overcharge" or "equalizing
charge" which is explained later. If the monthly readings of any cell
are always lower than that of other cells, it needs attention. The low
readings may be due to electrolyte having been spilled and replaced
with water, but in a farm lighting battery this is not very likely to
happen. More probably the cell has too much sediment, or bad
separators, and needs cleaning. See special instructions on Exide and
Prest-O-Lite batteries which are given later.

There are several precautions that must be observed in taking gravity
readings in order to obtain dependable results. Do not take gravity
readings if:

(a) The cell is gassing violently.

(b) The hydrometer float does not ride freely. If a syringe hydrometer
is used, the float must not be touching the walls of the tube, and the
tube must not be so full that the top of the float projects into the
rubber bulb at the upper end of the tube.

(c) Water has been added less than four hours before taking the
readings. A good time to take readings is just before water is added.

The hydrometer which is used should have the specific gravity readings
marked on it in figures, such as 1.180, 1.200, 1.220 and so on.
Automobile battery hydrometers which are marked "Full," "Empty,"
"Charged," "Discharged," must not be used, since the specific
gravities corresponding to these words are not the same in farm
lighting batteries as in automobile batteries and the readings would
be incorrect and misleading. If the manufacturer-of the battery
furnishes a special hydrometer which is marked "Full," "Half-Full,"
"Empty," or in some similar manner, this hydrometer may, of course, be
used.

Temperature corrections should be made in taking hydrometer readings,
as described on page 65. For Prest-O-Lite batteries, 80 degrees is the
standard temperature, and gravity readings on these batteries should
be corrected to 80 degrees as described on page 461.

Gravity readings should, of course, be taken during charge as well as
during discharge. The readings taken during charge are described in
the following sections on charging.


Charging


(See also special instructions for the different makes, beginning page
460.)

Two kinds of charges should be given the battery, the "Regular"
charge, and the "Overcharge" or "Equalizing Charge." These will be
spoken of as the "Regular" charge and the "Overcharge." The Regular
charge must be given whenever it is necessary in order to enable the
battery to meet the lighting or other load demands made upon it. The
overcharge, which is merely a continuation of a regular charge, should
be given once every month. The overcharge is given to keep the battery
in good condition, and to prevent the development of inequalities in
condition of cells.

When to Charge. Experience will soon show how often you must give a
regular charge in order to keep the lights from becoming dim. When the
voltage reading, taken while all the lamps are on has dropped to 1.8
volts per cell a Regular charge is necessary. When the specific
gravity of the pilot cell indicates that the battery is discharged, a
Regular charge is necessary. It is better to use the specific gravity
readings as a guide, as described later.

A good plan, and the best one, is to give a battery a Regular charge
once every week, whether the battery becomes discharged in one week's
time or not. A regular charge may be required oftener than once a
week. Every fourth week give the Overcharge instead of the Regular
charge.

If a battery is to be out of service, arrangements should be made to
add the necessary water and give an overcharge every month, the
Regular charges not being necessary when the battery stands absolutely
idle.

Overcharge. Charge the battery as near as practicable at the rate
prescribed by the manufacturer. If the manufacturer's rate is not
known, then charge at a rate which will not allow the temperature of
the electrolyte to rise above 110° Fahrenheit, and which will not
cause gassing while the specific gravity is still considerably below
its maximum value. One ampere per plate in each cell is a safe value
of current to use. A battery having eleven plates in each cell should,
for example, be charged at about 11 to 12 amperes.

Watch the temperature of the pilot cell carefully. This cell should
have an accurate Fahrenheit thermometer suspended above it so that the
bulb is immersed in the electrolyte. If this thermometer should show a
temperature of 110°, stop the charge immediately, and do not start it
again until the temperature has dropped to at least 90'. Feel the
other cells with your hand occasionally, and if any cell is so hot
that you cannot hold your hand on it measure its temperature with the
thermometer to see whether it is near 110'. A good plan is to measure
the temperature of the electrolyte in every cell during the charge. If
any cell shows a higher temperature than that of the pilot cell, place
the thermometer in the cell giving the higher reading, and be guided
by the temperature of that cell. You will then know that the
thermometer indicates the highest temperature in the entire battery,
and that no other cell is dangerously hot when the thermometer does
not read 100 degrees or over. Another point in the selection of a pilot
cell is to determine if any particular cell shows a gravity which is
slightly less than that of the other cells. If any such cell is found,
use that cell as the pilot cell in taking gravity readings while the
battery is on discharge and also on charge. No cell will then be
discharged too far.

When all cells are gassing freely, continue the charge at the same
current until there is no rise in the specific gravity of the pilot
cell for one to two hours, and all cells are gassing freely throughout
the hour. Then stop the charge.

After the overcharge is completed, take gravity readings of all the
cells. A variation of about eight to ten points either above or below
the fully charged gravity after correction for temperature does not
mean that a cell requires any attention. If, however, one cell
continually reads more than 10 points lower then the others, the whole
battery may be given an overcharge until the gravity of the low cell
comes up. If the cell then does not show any tendency to charge up
properly, disconnect it from the battery while the battery is
discharging and then connect it in again on the next charge. If this
fails to bring the gravity of the cell up to normal, the cells should
be examined for short circuits. Short circuits may be caused by broken
separators permitting the active material to bridge between the
plates; the sediment in the bottoms of the jars may have reached the
plates, or conducting substances may have fallen in the cells.

Broken separators should be replaced without loss of time, and the
cells cleaned if the sediment in the jars is high.

Regular Charge. A Regular Charge is made exactly like an Overcharge,
except that a Regular Charge is stopped when cells are gassing freely,
when the voltage per cell is about 2.6, and when the specific gravity
of the pilot cell rises to within 5 points of what it was on the
previous Overcharge. That is, if the gravity reading on the Overcharge
rose to 1.210, the Regular Charge should be stopped when the gravity
reaches 1.205.

Partial or Rapid Charge. If there is not enough time to give the
battery a full Regular Charge, double the normal charging rate and
charge until all the cells are gassing, and then reduce to the normal
rate. Any current which does not cause excessive temperature or
premature gassing is permissible, as previously mentioned. If a
complete charge cannot be given, charge the battery as long as the
available time allows, and complete the charge at the earliest
possible opportunity.


Discharge


Do not allow the battery to discharge until the lights burn dim, or
the voltage drops below 1.8 per cell. The specific gravity is a better
guide than the lamps or voltage. The gravity falls as the battery
discharges, and is therefore a good indicator of the condition of the
battery. Voltage readings are good guides, but they must be taken
while the battery is discharging at its normal rate. If the load on
the battery is heavy, the voltage per cell might fall below 1.8 before
the battery was discharged. Lamps will be dim if the load on the
battery is heavy, especially if they are located far away from the
battery. The specific gravity readings are therefore the best means of
indicating when a battery is discharged.

Overdischarge. Be very careful not to discharge the battery beyond the
safe limits. Batteries discharging at low rates are liable to be
overdischarged before the voltage gives any indication of the
discharged condition. This is another reason why hydrometer readings
should be used as a guide.

A battery must be charged as soon as it becomes discharged. It is, in
fact, a good plan, and one which will lengthen the life of the
battery, to charge a battery when it is only about three fourths
discharged, as indicated by the hydrometer. Suppose, for instance,
that the specific gravity of the fully charged battery is 1.250, and
the specific gravity when the battery is discharged is 1.180. This
battery has a range of 1.250 minus 1.180, or 70 points between charge
and discharge. This battery will give a longer life if its discharge
is stopped and the battery is put on charge when the gravity falls to
1.200, a drop of 50 points instead of the allowable 70.

Allowing discharged battery to stand without charge. A battery should
never be allowed to stand more than one day in a discharged condition.
The battery will continue to discharge although no current is drawn
from it, just as an automobile battery will. See page 89. The battery
plates and separators will gradually become badly sulphated and it
will be a difficult matter to charge the battery up to full capacity.


Battery Troubles


Farm lighting batteries are subject to the same general troubles that
automobile batteries are, although they are not as likely to occur
because the operating conditions are not as severe as is the case on
the automobile. Being in plain view at all times, and not being
charged and discharged irregularly, the farm lighting battery is not
likely to give as much trouble as an automobile battery. Neglect, such
as failure to keep the electrolyte up to the proper height, failure to
charge as soon as the battery becomes discharged, overdischarging,
allowing battery to become too hot or too cold, allowing impurities to
get into the cells, will lead to the same troubles that the same
treatment will cause in an automobile battery, and the descriptions
of, and instructions for troubles in automobile batteries will apply
in general to farm lighting batteries also.

When a battery has been giving trouble, and you are called: upon to
diagnose and remedy that trouble, you should:

1. Get all the details as to the length of time the battery has been
in service.

2. Find out what regular attention has been paid to its upkeep;
whether it has been charged regularly and given an overcharge once a
month; whether distilled water has been used in replacing evaporation
of water from the electrolyte; whether impurities such as small nails,
pieces of wire, etc., have ever fallen into any cell; whether battery
has ever been allowed to stand in a discharged condition for one day
or more; whether temperature has been allowed to rise above 110 deg. F.
at any time; whether electrolyte has ever been frozen due to battery
standing discharged in very cold weather.

3. Talk to the owner long enough to judge with what intelligence he
has taken care of the battery. Doing this may, save you both time and
subsequent embarrassment from a wrong diagnosis resulting from
incomplete data.

4. After getting all the details that the owner can supply, you will
probably know just about what the trouble is. Look over the cells
carefully to determine their condition. If the jars are made of glass
note the following:

(a) Height of sediment in each jar.

(b) Color of electrolyte. This should be clear and colorless. A
decided color of any kind usually means that dirty or impure water has
been added, or impurities have fallen into the cell. For discussion of
impurities see page 76.

(c) Condition of plates. The same troubles should be looked for as in
automobile batteries. See pages 339 to 346. An examination of the
outside negatives is usually sufficient. The condition of the
positives may also be determined if a flash light or other strong
light is directed on the edges of the plates. Look for growths or
"treeing" between plates.

(d) Condition of separators. See page 346.

If cells have sealed rubber jars, proceed as follows:

(a) Measure height of electrolyte above plates with glass tube, as in
Fig. 30. If in any cell electrolyte is below tops of plates that cell
is very likely the defective one, and should be filled with distilled
water. If a considerable amount of water is required to fill the jar
it is best to open the cell, as the plates have probably become
damaged. If the jar is wet or the rack is acid eaten under the jar,
the jar is cracked and must be replaced.

If you have not found the trouble, make the following tests, no matter
whether glass or rubber jars are used:

(a) Measure specific gravity of each cell. If any cell is badly
discharged it is probably short-circuited, or contains impurities and
had better be opened for inspection.

(b) Turn on all the lamps and measure the voltage of each cell. If any
cell shows a voltage much less than 1.8 it is short-circuited or
contains impurities, and should be opened for inspection.

(c) Examine the connections between cells for looseness or corrosion;
and examine the connections between the battery and the generator,
going over cables, switches, rheostats, etc. Make sure that you have a
complete and closed charging circuit between the generator and the
battery.

(d) If cutout is used on the switchboard, see that its contact points
are smooth and clean, and that they work freely.

(e) Run the generator to see if it builds up a voltage which is
sufficient to charge the battery, about 42 volts for a 16 cell battery.
If the generator is not working properly, examine it according to
directions on page 451. Check up the field circuit of the generator to
be sure that it is closed. A circuit-tester made of a buzzer and
several dry cells, or a low voltage lamp and dry cells, or a hand
magneto is convenient for use in testing circuits. Test armature
windings and field coils for grounds.

By the foregoing methods you should be able to determine what is to be
done. The following rules should also help:

Cleaning and renewal of electrolyte is necessary when:

(a) Sediment has risen to within one-half inch of the bottom of the
plates.

(b) Much foreign material is floating in the electrolyte, or
electrolyte is of a deep brown color.

Replacement of parts is necessary when

(a) Separators are cracked or warped. See page 346 for Separator
troubles.

(b) Plates are defective. See rules on pages 339 to 346.


PREST-O-LITE FARM LIGHTING BATTERIES

  [Fig. 300 Element from Prest-O-Light farm light cell]

The Prest-O-Lite battery which is designed for use in connection with
farm lighting plants is known as the FPL type. Cells of 7, 9, 11, 13
and 15 plates are made, the number of plates being indicated by
putting the figure in front of the type letters. A seven plate cell is
thus designated as a 7 FPL cell, which has an 80 ampere hour capacity
at the 8 hour continuous discharge rate.

The FPL cell, the construction of which is shown in Figs. 295, 300,
301, 302 and 303, has a sealed glass jar with a lead antimony cover.
The cover construction is shown in detail in Figs. 301 and 302.
Insulation between the posts and cover is provided by a hard rubber
bushing, a hard rubber washer, and a soft rubber washer. The bushing
is shaped like a "T" with a hole drilled in the stem. The stem of the
bushing fits down into the post hole in the cover, the flange at the
top testing on the raised portion of the cover around the post hole.
The post has a shoulder a little less than halfway up from its lower
end. Upon this shoulder is placed the hard rubber washer, and upon the
hard rubber washer is placed the soft rubber washer. This assembly is
fastened to the cover by the "peening" process used in Prest-O-Lite
automobile batteries as described on page 386. This forces the soft
rubber washer tightly against the cover so as to make a leak proof
joint-between the bushing and cover. The ring of lead formed around
the posts by the peening process supports the posts, plates, and
separators, which therefore are suspended from the cell cover. The
plate straps extend horizontally across the tops of the plates, and
thus also act as "hold-downs" for the separators. The separators are
held up by two rectangular rubber bridges which fit Mito slotted
extension lugs cast into the lower corners of the outside negative
plates. An outside negative having these extension lugs is shown in
Figure 303.

  [Fig. 301 Cover of Prest-O-Light farm lighting cell]

  [Fig. 302 Parts of Prest-O-Light farm lighting cell: nut,
   stud, terminal, hard rubber bushing]

  [Fig. 303a Parts of Prest-O-Light farming light cell: glass
   jar, rubber jar, rubber cell connector, glass cell connector]

  [Fig. 303b Parts of Prest-O-Light farm lighting cell: positive
   plate and outside negative plate]

  [Fig. 303c Parts of Prest-O-Light farm lighting cell: long
   lead jumper, jumper, separator, short lead jumper]

Specific Gravity of Electrolyte. The values of the specific gravity of
Prest-O-Lite farm lighting batteries are as follows:

Battery fully charged reads 1.250
Battery three-fourths charged reads 1.230
Battery one-half charged reads 1.215
Battery one-fourth charged reads 1.200
Battery discharged completely reads 1.180

These readings are to be taken with the electrolyte at a temperature
of 80° Fahrenheit. Readings taken at other temperatures should be
converted to 80°. To convert readings at a lower temperature to the
values they would have at 80°, subtract one point for every two and
one-half degrees temperature difference. For example, suppose a cell
reads 1.225 gravity at 60°. To find what the gravity would be if the
temperature of the electrolyte were 80° divide the difference between
80° and 60° by 2-1/2, or 80° minus 60° divided by 21/2 equals 8. The
gravity at 80° would therefore be 1.225 minus .008, or 1.217, which is
the value of specific gravity to use. If the specific gravity is read
at a higher temperature than 80°, divide the difference between 80°
and the temperature at which the gravity reading was taken by 21/2,
and add the result to the actual gravity reading obtained. If, for
example, the gravity were 1.225 at 100°, the gravity at 80° would be
1.225 plus .008, or 1.233.

Charging Rates. The normal charging rate to be used in giving
Prest-O-Lite batteries a regular charge or overcharge are as follows:

Battery      Charging Rate

5 F.P.L.     5.0 amps.
7 F.P.L.     7.5 amps.
9 F.P.L.     10.0 amps.
11 F.P.L.    12.5 amps.
13 F.P.L.    15.0 amps.
15 F.P.L.    17.5 amps.


Rebuilding Prest-O-Lite Farm Lighting Batteries


Opening the Cell.

1. Make sure that the cell is as fully charged as possible. Since it
is not very convenient to charge a single cell, a good time to open a
cell for cleaning and repairing is immediately after the battery has
been given an overcharge. See page 455.

2. Disconnect the cell from the adjoining ones.

3. Heat a thin bladed putty knife and insert it under the edge of the
lead-antimony cover to melt the sealing compound. Run the knife all
round the cover, heating it again if it should become too cool to cut
the compound readily.

4. Grasp the lead posts above the cover and lift up gradually. This
will bring up the cover, plates, and separators.

5. Place the plates on a clean board for examination. Use the
instructions given on pages 339 to 346. Do not keep the plates out of
the electrolyte long enough to let them dry, and the negatives heat
up. If you cannot examine the plates as soon as you have removed them
immerse them in 1.250 acid contained in a lead or non-metallic vessel
until you can examine them.

6. In renewing the electrolyte, pour in as much new 1.250 acid as
there was old electrolyte in the jar. (It is assumed that the
electrolyte was up to the lower ridge of the glass jar before the cell
was opened.) The new electrolyte must not have a temperature above
100 degrees when it is poured into the jar.

7. The separators can be pulled out easily when the plates are laid on
their sides. All that is necessary is to remove the small rubber
bridge at the bottom corners of the plates. The separators can then be
pulled out. If the old separators are to be used again brush off any
material that may be adhering to them, and keep them wet with 1.250
acid until they are replaced between the plates. Any separators that
show cracks or holes, or that split while being replaced between the
plates should be thrown away and new ones used.

8. It is not necessary to remove the sediment from the bottom of the
jar unless it is within one half inch of the bottom of the plates. If
the sediment is to be removed, carefully pour off the clear
electrolyte into a lead, hard rubber, or earthenware jar, if the
electrolyte is to be used again.

9. If one or two of the plates in either positive or negative groups
need to be replaced it is best to burn a new plate to the strap
without removing the peened cover. This is done by blocking under the
row of plate lugs with metal blocks after cutting off old plate and
cleaning the surface of strap. Insert new plate, the lug of which has
been cut about 1/4 inch short, to allow for new metal. Choosing small
oblong iron blocks of suitable size, build a form about the plate lug
which fits same well. Now with a torch and burning lead fuse the new
plate onto the old strap. When cool remove and test joint by pulling
and slightly twisting the plate at the same time.

Sometimes one group of a starting and lighting battery may be in
sufficiently good condition to pay to combine it with a new group, but
this condition will very rarely, if ever, be met in farm lighting
cell service. We advise the replacement of the complete cell element
if either group is worn out, for the cost of repairs and of new group
will probably not be warranted by the short additional life which the
remaining old group will give.

10. Putting Repaired Cell Back into Service. After having finished all
necessary cleaning, replacement, or repairs, remove all old sealing
material, return the element with attached lead cover to the cell jar.
It is not necessary to reseal the cover to the jars this sealing is
essential only for insurance against breakage or leakage in shipment.

Add through the vent plug opening sufficient cool acid of 1.250 Sp.
Gr. to reestablish the proper electrolyte level, which means that the
electrolyte is brought up to the lower moulded glass ridge near the
top of jar.

Connect the cell with any other repaired cells and charge at normal
rate already indicated under "charging rates" until dell voltage reads
2.5 or above, at 80°. The positive to cadmium voltage should be at
least 0.10 volts less than cell voltage itself. When this condition is
obtained cell may be replaced in operating circuit with others and
should give satisfactory service.


EXIDE FARM LIGHTING BATTERIES.


Exide Farm lighting Batteries are made with sealed glass jars, open
glass jars, and sealed rubber jars, each of which will be described.


Batteries with Sealed Glass Jars.


Two types with sealed glass jars are made, these being the Delco Light
Type, and the Exide type.

1. Delco-Light Type. This type is shown in Fig. 294. The cell shown is
a pilot cell, there being two of these in each battery as explained
below.

These cells are made in two sizes, the KXG-7, 7 plate, 80 ampere hour
cell, and the KXG-13, a 13 plate, 160 ampere hour cell. These cells
are assembled into a 32 volt, 16 cell battery, or a 110 volt, 56 cell
battery.

The plate groups are supported from the cover, the weight being
carried by the wooden cover supports as shown in Fig. 294. The strap
posts are threaded, and are clamped to the cover and supports by means
of alloy nuts, just as is the case in Exide automobile batteries.

A hard rubber supporting rod or lock pin extending across the bottoms
of the plates holds the separators in position and prevents the plates
from flaring out at the bottom. A soft rubber bumper fastened on each
end of the rod acts as a cushion to prevent jar breakage in shipping.

The hard rubber cover overlaps the flanged top of the jar, to which it
is sealed with special compound.


Battery Gauges and Instruments for Testing.


Every set of Delco-Light batteries has either one or two cells
equipped with a pilot ball. Such a cell is known as a PILOT CELL. Fig.
294.

Pilot Cells are used to indicate to the USER the approximate state of
charge or discharge of the battery.

The pilot ball is a battery gauge which is UP or DOWN, depending upon
the state of charge of the battery.

Very high temperature affects the operation of the pilot ball. This
accounts for-the fact that occasionally a battery will be charged and
the pilot ball will be at the bottom of the pocket. A few hours later,
after the electrolyte has cooled, the pilot ball will rise to the top.

We urge that the user be made to feel that the pilot ball is an
excellent gauge and a good signal to watch in connection with the care
and operation of his Delco-Light plant and battery. (Further mention
will be made of the pilot ball in connection with the subject of
proper operation.)

It is necessary that the maximum specific gravity of pilot cells be as
near 1.220 as possible. Any great variation higher or lower will
affect the operation of the pilot balls. Therefore, every effort
should be made to adjust the maximum specific gravity of pilot cells
to 1.220 when placed in service.

Batteries equipped with one pilot cell contain a white pilot ball
which will be up when the specific gravity of the electrolyte is
approximately 1.185. This ball will drop DOWN when the specific
gravity falls a little below 1.185.

In other words, the pilot ball will float at a specific gravity of
1:185 or higher, and will sink at a specific gravity lower than 1.185.

Therefore, when the pilot ball is UP, the battery is more than half
charged. When the pilot ball is DOWN, the battery is more than half
discharged.

Batteries equipped with two pilot cells have one cell which contains a
white ball and the other cell a white ball with a blue band.

The plain white ball will be UP when the specific gravity is
approximately 1.175. The blue band ball will be UP when the specific
gravity is approximately 1.205.

When both balls are UP, the battery is charged. When DOWN, the battery
is discharged. The blue band ball will drop soon after the battery
starts on discharge, or, in other words, when the specific gravity
falls below 1.205. The white ball will remain UP until the specific
gravity falls below 1.175.


The Ampere-Hour Meter


The ampere-hour meter, Fig. 304, is an instrument for indicating to
the user the state of charge of the battery at all times and serves
to-stop the plant automatically so equipped, when the battery is
charged. (Further mention will be made of the ampere hour meter on
page 471.)

In order to check the speed of the ampere-hour meter, use the
following rule: On charge, the armature disc should give 16
revolutions in 30 seconds, with a charging rate of 15 amperes; on
discharge, the armature disc should give 20 revolutions in 30 seconds,
with a discharging rate of 15 amperes.

  [Fig. 304 Delco-Light Ampere-Hour Meter]


Hydrometers


The standard hydrometer for service men is known as the Type V-2B.

A special type hydrometer showing three colored bands in place of
numbers has been designed for users.

The bands are red, green and black. When the hydrometer test shows the
bottom of the red band in the electrolyte, the battery, whether in
glass or rubber jar, is discharged. When the top of the green band is
out of the electrolyte, the glass jar battery is charged. The top of
the black band out of the electrolyte indicates the rubber jar battery
is charged.


When and How to Charge Battery


Plants with Average Loads


Loads of legs than ten (10) amperes can be taken directly from the
battery, until:

1. The large hand on the ampere-hour meter reaches 12, or

2. Both pilot balls are down, or

3. Hydrometer test shows bottom of red band in the electrolyte.

If any or all of the three gauges listed above show the battery
discharged, the plant should be started and operated continuously
until the battery is charged, as indicated by:

1. Ampere-hour meter hand at FULL, or

2. Both pilot balls UP, or

3. Hydrometer test shows top of FULL band out of electrolyte.

(NOTE: Any one or all of the above three items may indicate battery
charged. Meter hand at FULL would necessitate both balls UP. If both
balls are not up, set hand back and charge to bring them up; then set
hand at FULL.)

Should the user be operating for two or three hours with a seven or
eight-ampere load, it would be more efficient to run the plant to
carry this load. This only applies for those cases where the battery
is partly discharged.


Carry Heavy Loads Greater Than 10 Amperes.


If there is a constant load of 10 amperes or more, the plant should be
started up when the heavy load comes on. When the heavy load is off,
the plant may be stopped, but it would be entirely satisfactory to
allow the plant to continue to run until "Charged," as indicated by:

1. Ampere-hour meter hand reaches FULL, or

2. Both pilot balls are UP, or

3. Hydrometer test shows top of FULL band out of electrolyte.

In any case, plant should be run until battery is "Charged" at least
once a week.

Always Start Charging When Battery Gauges Indicate Battery Discharged.

On ampere-hour meter plants, when the hand is at FULL, the plant
cannot be operated on account of the ignition circuit being broken.

In such cases allow load to be taken from the battery until the hand
travels back sufficiently to allow the plant to run.

Occasionally the plant and battery are used to carry continuous loads
of from 10 to 15 amperes each night, with practically no day load.
This condition necessitates running the plant to carry the load, but
at the same time the battery is continually receiving from 10 to 15
amperes charge, with the result that the battery may receive too much
charging. This would be indicated by the battery bubbling freely every
time the plant is operated. To prevent this condition, the user should
be instructed to carry the load off the battery frequently enough to
prevent continual bubbling.


Where Small Load Is Used.


There are many installations where the battery capacity is sufficient
to last several weeks. On installations of this kind it is advisable
to charge the battery to FULL at least once a week.

The dealer or service man should use his own judgment on the preceding
instructions as to which is best suited for the different conditions
encountered.

Regularly on the first of each month, regardless of whether or not the
battery has been used, a special charge, called the Equalizing Charge,
should be given. This charge should be given as follows: The battery
should be charged until EACH cell is bubbling freely from top to
bottom on surface of the outside negative plates and then the charge
should be continued for TWO MORE HOURS.

The monthly equalizing charge is a NECESSARY precautionary measure to
insure that the user will bring each cell in the battery up to maximum
gravity at least once a month. It also provides a means on the
ampere-hour meter plants to set the ampere-hour meter hand at FULL
when the battery is FULL.

The users should be cautioned to inform the service man or dealer
immediately if any cell fails to bubble at the end of an equalizing
charge, when all others are bubbling freely. This will enable the
service man to inspect such cells for trouble and remedy same before
the trouble becomes serious. (See further information under inspection
and repairs.)


INSPECTION TRIPS


Undercharging or injurious sulphation is the most common trouble
encountered. Undercharging causes the plates to blister and bulge, and
in place of good gray edges on the negative plates and good brown
color edges on the positive plates, the edges will show a faded color,
with very little brown color showing on the edges of the positive
plates.

Overcharging is not so evident on inspection, except that in such
cases the active material from the positive plates, which is brown in
color, will be thrown to the bottom as sediment more rapidly than the
sediment would accumulate due to normal wear.

Heavy usage on a battery will also cause considerable sediment in the
bottom of the cells, so that it is necessary to investigate carefully
whether it is overcharging or overwork. A few questions as to method
of operation and load requirements will aid in deciding the cause of
excessive sediment. (See When and How to Charge, page 468.)


Sediment Space Filled.


When the space below the plates is filled up with sediment and
touching the plates, the cell becomes short-circuited and will
deteriorate very rapidly. It will be noticed, however, that the
sediment is heaped in the middle of the cell. If the cells are
unbolted and unshaken, it will level the sediment and leave a space
between the sediment and plates. It is very important that the
sediment be shaken down before the cell becomes short-circuited. This
will very often prolong the life of the battery a number of months.
When the sediment space is completely filled, approximately all the
active material will be out of the positive plates.

A thorough study should be made as to the general condition of the
battery and method of operation before forming an opinion or
suggesting any change in method of operation.


Check Ampere-Hour Meters


On plants which have ampere-hour meters, the meter should be checked
as to its speed on discharge, and also check position of the meter
hand at the time of inspection, to see if it checks with the specific
gravity and the pilot balls. (See Ampere Hour Meter, page 467.)

It will generally be found that when a battery is sulphated, it is
operating in very low specific gravity, or, in other words, the
charges have not been carried far enough to drive all the acid out of
the plates.

A battery that is not receiving quite enough charge may not as a whole
become "sulphated," but several cells might become considerably weaker
than the others and become "sulphated," causing trouble in these
particular cells. Such cells will not bubble freely, or possibly not
at all, when the other cells are bubbling freely. Therefore, a few
questions to the user will generally help in locating the low cells.

Cells that are in trouble, or which soon will be, can very easily be
picked out by making a few tests on the battery. Therefore, on all
inspections, regardless of the age of a battery, it is suggested that
the following tests be made: Take a specific gravity reading of all
cells and note if there are any cells much lower than the others. Amy
cells having a specific gravity of 30 points lower than the average
will generally be found to be in trouble, unless these cells happen to
be low from having had spillage in shipment, replaced with water.
(This condition, however, should not exist in future installations if
the spillage is properly taken care of, as has been explained on page
482.)


Voltage Readings


After taking a specific gravity reading, a voltage reading of each
cell should be taken. Voltage readings taken on open circuit are of no
value, so while taking these readings the battery should be on
discharge, having at least a discharge of 15 amperes. A good way to
get this discharge is to hold the starting switch in and set mixing
valve lever at lean point or wide open.

A low or defective cell will show a voltage reading .10 to .20 volts
lower than the other cells on discharge, while a reversed cell will
show a reading in the reversed direction when on discharge, especially
on heavy discharge.

The voltage readings are a sure check if taken in connection with the
specific gravity. When you have low specific gravity and low voltage
on the same cells, it is a sure indication of low cells. These cells
should be inspected for the probable cause of their being low.
Shorting of the lugs at bottom of plates and moss bridging across at
bottom of the elements, or possibly a split separator, will generally
be the main trouble.

When any of these conditions exist, it is best to take the low cells
back to your shop for repairs.

When there is absolutely no indication why the cells are low, they can
be cut out of the battery on discharge and put in on charge, until
they come up.

The following is a good example of readings taken on a battery with a
10-ampere discharge and having four low cells, 4, 8, 11 and 16. The
battery had been giving poor service, due to insufficient charging:

Cell No.     Specific Gravity     Volts
1               1.200             1.98
2               1.180             1.95
3               1.205             1.98
4               1.150             1.75
5               1.190             1.95
6               1.195             1.98
7               1.200             1.98
8               1.130             1.70
9               1.200             1.95
10              1.205             1.98
11              1.100             1.40
12              1.190             1.95
13              1.180             1.95
14              1.195             1.98
15              1.190             1.95
16              0.000             zero or
                                    reversal


The main thing to consider in checking voltage readings is the
variation from the average. The average voltage readings will vary,
depending on the state of charge of the battery when the readings are
taken.


REPAIRS


To repair, the following equipment is necessary:

1. Portable lead burning outfit.
2. A suitable blow torch.
3. Standard sealing nut wrench.
4. File (shoemaker's rasp).
5. Pair of pliers.
6. Putty knife.
7. Pair of tin snips.
8. Wooden blocks to support elements while being worked upon.
9. Good supply of battery parts consisting of:
   KXG-13 Glass jars
   KXG-13 Pilot jars
   KXG-13 Positive groups
   KXG-13 Negative groups
   KXG-13 Round rods
   KXG-13 Vent plugs
   Sealing nuts
   Rubber gaskets
   Wood separators
   KXG-13 Rubber covers
   KXG-7 Round rods
   Lead pins
   Carboy electrolyte (including retainer).
   KXG-7 Pilot jars
   KXG-7 Glass jars
   KXG-7 Positive groups
   KXG-7 Negative groups
   Outside negative plates
   KXG-7 Rubber covers
   Emergency repair straps


Disassembling a Cell


The glass jar battery covers are sealed to the jars by sealing
compound, which may be softened very easily with a blow-torch.

When a blow-torch or an open flame is used for softening the sealing
compound, the vent plug MUST be removed before applying a flame. It is
also important to blow into the vent after the plug has been removed
in order to expel any gas that may have collected in the space above
the electrolyte in the cell.

If the gas is held in place by leaving the vent plug in, it is apt to
explode when an open flame or intense heat is applied to the cover.,

Removing covers may be greatly facilitated by suspending the cell by
the terminals, as shown in Fig. 305. Care should be taken to make this
suspension so that the bottom of the jar will not be more than two
inches above the table. A pad of excelsior should be placed under it
to avoid breaking the glass jar when it drops.

  [Fig. 305 Softening sealing compound, Delco-Light cell]

After the sealing compound has been sufficiently softened, the cover
may be loosened by inserting a hot putty knife, as shown in Fig. 306,
There is no danger of breaking the cover by this operation if the
cover has been sufficiently warmed. After the jar of electrolyte has
dropped, the element should be removed from the jar and carefully
placed across the top of it, so that the solution upon the plates will
drain back into the jar. (See Fig. 307.)

  [Fig. 306 Removing Delco-Light cell cover]

  [Fig. 307 Draining element, Delco-Light cell]

  [Fig. 308 Removing cover of Delco-Light cell]

  [Fig. 309 Removing lock pin, Delco-Light cell]

After element has drained, place on wooden blocks, as shown in Fig.
308, and remove cover. Clean the sealing compound from the cover and
jar immediately with a putty knife. Turn element upside down with
posts through holes in bench and remove lead pin and rubber bumper and
withdraw, lock pin. (Fig. 309.) The separators may then be withdrawn
from the group. (Fig. 310.)

  [Fig. 310 Removing separatots, Delco-Light cell]

  [Fig. 311 Assembling separators, Delco-Light cell]


Assembling


Place the positive and negative groups upside down with posts through
holes in bench and slide in separators. The wood and rubber separators
are inserted as follows: The rubber separator is placed against the
grooved side of the wood separator, and the two are then slipped
between the negative and positive plates with the rubber separator
next to the positive plate. (See Fig. 311.)


Inserting Locking Pin


A rubber bumper is pinned on one end of the lock pin by means of a
lead pin, and the lock pin is then slipped into place with the lock
pin insulating washer placed between the outside negative plates and
the wood separators. (See Fig. 312.)

A rubber bumper is then slipped over the other end of the lock pin and
secured by a lead pin.

Place element on wooden blocks and fasten cover, as shown in Fig. 313.

  [Fig. 313 Fastening cover, Delco-Light cell]

  [Fig. 314 Preparing cover for sealing, Delco-Light cell]


Sealing Covers


Be sure all old sealing compound and traces of electrolyte are removed
from the cover. Heat sealing compound until it can be handled like
putty, roll out into a strip about 1/2 inch in diameter, place strip
of compound around inside edge of cover (Fig. 314) and heat to melting
point with blow-torch. The top of jar should also be heated to insure
a tight seal. Compound can be melted in a suitable vessel and a 1/2
inch strip poured around cover.

When sealing compound and jar have been heated sufficiently, turn jar
upside down (Fig. 315) and carefully place jar over element and press
gently into compound. (Do not press hard.) Immediately place jar and
element upright, and press cover firmly into place. (Press hard.)
Finally, tighten sealing nuts. The cell is now ready for the
electrolyte.

  [Fig. 315 Sealing jar of Delco-Light cell]


Filling Cell with Electrolyte


Repaired cells should be filled with electrolyte of 1.200 specific
gravity, or with water, as the case may require.

Standard Delco-Light electrolyte of 1.220 specific gravity may be
purchased from the Delco Light distributor. The 1.220 electrolyte
should be reduced to 1.200 by adding a very small amount of distilled
water. This should be thoroughly mixed by pouring the solution from
one battery jar into another. The 1.200 specific gravity electrolyte
may then be added to the newly assembled cell until flush with the
water line.


Charging


The completed KXG-13 cell should be placed on a 12-ampere charge and
kept on charge until maximum gravity has been reached. A KXG-7 cell
should be charged at a 6-ampere rate.


Adjusting Gravity of Electrolyte


If the maximum gravity is above 1.220, draw off some of the
electrolyte and refill to water line with distilled water. The charge
should then be continued for at least one hour to thoroughly mix the
electrolyte before taking another hydrometer reading. It may be
necessary to repeat this operation.

If the maximum gravity is below 1.220, pour off the electrolyte into a
glass jar or a suitable receptacle, and then refill the cell with
1.220 electrolyte. Charge for one hour to thoroughly mix the solution
before checking readings.

NOTE: Gravity readings in adjusting the electrolyte should always be
taken in connection with thermometer readings, making necessary
temperature corrections. This is particularly important in adjusting
electrolyte in pilot cells.


HOW TO REPAIR DELCO-LIGHT CELLS


Treating Broken Cells


Whenever a shipment of batteries is received in which any of the jars
have been broken, the first thing to do is to carefully remove the
elements from the broken jars to prevent damage to the plates or
separators. These elements should be placed in distilled water to
prevent further drying. The plates will not be damaged in any way and
can be restored to a healthy condition by charging in 1.200 specific
gravity at a 12-ampere rate for the 13-plate cell or, 6-ampere rate
for the 7-plate cell, until maximum gravity is reached. (See Charging
and Adjustment of Electrolyte, explained on page 481.)


Treating Spilled Cells


If the spillage is more than one inch below the water level, it should
be replaced by electrolyte of 1.200 specific gravity and charged to
maximum gravity.


Treating Badly Sulphated Cells That Have Been in Service


When cells are removed from an installation to make repairs, they are
usually badly sulphated, which means that considerable acid is in the
plates.

In charging such cells, use distilled water in place of electrolyte,
as this will allow the acid to come out of the plates more readily.
The KXG-13 cells should be charged at about 12 amperes and the KXG-7
cells at 6 amperes. Cells badly sulphated when charged at the low rate
will require from 50 to 100 hours to reach maximum gravity. Extreme
cases will require even longer charging.

In case it is impossible to read the gravity after the cells have been
on charge a sufficient length of time, pour out the solution and use
1.220 specific gravity.

The charge should then be continued further to insure that maximum
gravity has been reached.

CAUTION: Should the temperature of the electrolyte approach 110° F.,
the charging rate should be reduced or the charge stopped until the
cell has cooled.


Treating Reversed Cells


A complete battery may be reversed if the battery is completely
discharged and its voltage is not sufficient to overcome any residual
magnetism the generator might have. Under such conditions the negative
plates will begin to discolor brown and the positive turn gray. Such a
case would be extremely rare.

The remedy is to first completely discharge the cells to get rid of
the charge in the wrong direction. Then short-circuit them. (Connect a
wire across the terminals.) Then charge them in the right direction at
a low rate. (12 amperes for a KXG-13 cell, or 6 amperes for a KXG-7
cell.) Charge until the specific gravity reaches a maximum. If the
battery is operated reversed for any length of time, the negatives
will throw off their active material and become useless.

A single cell may become reversed by gradually slipping behind the
rest of the cells in a set, due to insufficient charging, until it
becomes so low that it will reverse on each discharge. This condition
cannot be corrected by giving the regular charge, but it will be
necessary to give an equalizing charge, continuing the charge until
the cell is in normal condition. (Be sure to make temperature
corrections when taking hydrometer readings.) If the cell appears to
require an excessive amount of charge to restore it to condition, it
should be removed and taken to the repair shop for a separate charge.

If the cell has been allowed to operate in a reversed condition to
such an extent that the entire material of the negative plates has
turned brown, both positive and negative groups should be discarded.


Removing Impurities


Impurities, such as iron, salt (chlorine) or oil, may accidentally get
into a cell, due to careless handling of distilled water.

Iron is dissolved by sulphuric acid and the positive plates become
affected, change color (dirty yellow) and wear rapidly. The cell
becomes different from the rest in gravity, voltage and bubbling. The
remedy is to discard the electrolyte as soon as possible, flush the
plates and separators in several changes of water, thoroughly wash the
jar, use new electrolyte and then proceed in same manner as explained
for the treatment of badly sulphated cells, page 482.

Chlorine has an effect about as described for iron, and is evident by
the odor of chlorine gas. The remedy is the same as for iron.

Oil in the electrolyte, if allowed to get into the pores of the
plates, will fill them and lower the capacity very much. It affects
negative plates much more than positives. Probably the only remedy in
this case is new plates.

Impurities of any nature should be removed as quickly as possible.


Clearing High Resistance Short Circuits


A high resistance short is caused by the sediment falling from the
plates and lodging between the positive and negative lugs. As a rule
this condition will occur only when severe sulphation is present in
the plates.

A cell in this condition can be repaired by removing the element and
clearing the short circuit. The wood separators should then be
withdrawn and replaced by new ones. Lock pin insulating washers.
should be installed land the element reassembled in the jar and
charged to maximum gravity.


Clearing Lug Shorts


Short-circuited lugs are caused by excessive sulphation. The outside
negative bulges and the bottom lug bends over and touches the adjacent
positive lug. This can be remedied by removing both outside negative
plates and burning on new plates which have already been charged and
inserting lock pin insulating washers.


Putting Repaired Cells Back in Service


When placing a new or repaired cell in a battery which is in service,
connect in the cell at the beginning of a charge. This will insure
that the new or repaired cell is started off in good condition,
because this charge is of the nature of an initial charge to these
cells.


Charging Outside Negative Plates


Individual negative plates are always received dry, which makes it
necessary to charge them before using. The best way to charge such
plates is as follows: Set up 7 loose negative plates in a KXG-13 jar
together with a good positive group, using KXG separators to prevent
the plates touching. Then stretch a piece of wire solder across the
lugs at the top of the negative plates and solder the wire to the
plates. Fig. 316. The jar may then be filled with 1200 specific
gravity and the plates charged at a 12-ampere rate until maximum
gravity is obtained. Never use negative plates unless they have been
treated as described above. After the charge is completed, the
negative plates may be placed in distilled water and kept until ready
for use. Always be sure to give a charge to maximum gravity after
burning on new negative plates to an element.

  [Fig. 316 Preparing outside negatives for charging]


Pressing Negative Plates


After badly sulphated cells are recharged, it is sometimes advisable
to remove the elements and, press the negative plates, as explained on
page 351. Care should be taken to prevent the negative plates from
drying out while making repairs, in order to avoid the long charge
necessary for dried negative plates.

The battery should be charged to maximum gravity before attempting to
press the plates.

It is not necessary and will do no good to press the positive plates.

In some cases the active material may be nearly all out of the outside
negative plates and the inside negatives may be in good condition, in
which case new charged plates should be burned on. (Fig. 322.)


Salvaging Replaced Cells


When it has been necessary to replace cells which have been in
service, the elements can very often be saved and assembled again and
used as replacement cells in batteries which are several years old. In
no case should the cells be used as new cells.

The positive plates may be allowed to dry out, but the negatives
should be kept in distilled water and not allowed to dry out in the
least. They should not be kept this way indefinitely, but should be
assembled and charged as soon as possible.

Do not attempt to repair groups or plates which have lost as much as
half of the active material in wear, or which have the active material
disintegrated and falling out. Such plates should not be used. This
does not apply to small bits of active material knocked out
mechanically and amounting to an extremely small percentage of the
whole. Abnormal color indicates possible impurity, and such plates
should be washed and used with caution. Badly cracked or broken plates
should be replaced with new plates or plates from other groups.

Before new negative plates are used they should be fully charged. (See
Charging Negative Plates, page 484.)

Always use new wood separators when assembling repaired cells.

When cells have been operated reversed in polarity to such an extent
that the active material of the negative plates has turned brown, both
positive and negative groups may have to be replaced.


Repairing Lead Parts


The portable carbon burning outfit used for battery repairs is
operated from the battery itself, making it possible to make repairs
at the user's residence without using a gas flame.

This outfit can be secured from the Delco-Light Company, Dayton, Ohio,
and consists of a carbon holder with cable, clamp, and one-fourth inch
carbon rods. Six cells are usually required to properly heat the
carbon. If it is completely discharged an outside source must be used.
For this purpose a six-volt automobile battery is suitable, or a tray
of demonstrating batteries, one terminal being connected to the
connection to be burned, the other to the cable of the burning tool. A
little experience will soon demonstrate the number of cells necessary
to give a satisfactory heat. The cable is connected by means of the
clamp to a cell in the battery, the required number of cells away from
the joint to be burned. Care should be taken that contact is made by
the clamp, the lead being scraped clean before the connection is made.
The carbon should be sharpened to a long point like a lead pencil and
should project not more than 2 inches from the holder. (Fig. 317.)

  [Fig. 317 Repairing broken post, Delco-Light cell]

After being used a short time, the carbon will not heat properly, due
to a film of scale formed on the surface. This should be cleaned off
with a file.

In case of lead burning, additional lead to make a flush joint should
not be added until the metal of the pieces to be joined has melted.
The carbon should be moved around to insure a solid joint at all
points.

In case a post is broken off under the cover, proceed as follows: To
make repairs take an old group and cut off the post about one-half way
down. Saw off the post to be repaired to such a length that when the
new post is burned on the length of the post will be approximately the
same length as the original post.


Repairing Broken Posts.


Make a half circle mould out of a piece of tin or galvanized iron, as
shown in Fig. 317. Burn solid the side of the post facing up, file it
around and then turn the group over, place the form on the burned side
and proceed to complete the burning operation.

Caution:

1. Always use clean lead.

2. Do not clean the lead and let it stand for any length of time
before starting to burn. If it is allowed to stand it will oxidize and
prevent a good burning operation.

3. Burn with an are and not with a red hot carbon.


Burning on Straps


Place the strap to be burned in a vise and split the end through the
center and then bend the two halves over to form a foot, as shown in
Fig. 318. Make a mould out of a piece of tin or galvanized iron and
place this mould around the post to which this strap is to be burned.
(Fig. 319.) Then proceed to burn the post and strap together.

  [Fig. 318 Splitting end of strap, Delco-Light cell]

When a union is made between the strap and the post a small amount of
new clean lead should be burned on the top of the foot to reinforce
this point. Care should be taken not to get the mould too high, as
this will cause trouble in getting the carbon down to the foot and the
post.


  [Fig. 319 Burning on negative strap, Delco-Light cell]

  [Fig. 320 Auxiliary strap, Delco-Light cell]

  [Fig. 321 Positioning auxiliary strap, Delco-Light cell]


How to Eliminate Burning on Straps by Use of an Auxiliary Strap


A very good way to repair broken straps without the burning operation
is to use the auxiliary strap shown in Fig. 320. This strap is slipped
over the post of the terminal or strap which is broken and the sealing
nut is then clamped down on the strap, as shown in Fig. 321. These
straps may be obtained from the Delco-Light Distributors or from the
Delco-Light factory at Dayton, Ohio.


Burning on New Plates


  [Fig. 322 Burning on outside negative plate, Delco-Light cell]

When it is necessary to burn on new plates, carefully clean with a
file the lead on both the plate and the common strap to which all
plates of the group are attached. Block up the plate with thin boards
or wood separators until it is spaced the proper distance from the
adjacent plate. Care should be taken to see that the side and bottom
edge of the plate to be burned on is in line with the other plates of
the group. Proceed to burn on the plate by drawing a small blaze or
are and do not attempt to burn with just a glowing carbon. (Fig. 322.)

If only a glowing carbon is used the result will be a smeary mass and
in the majority of cases will not hold, due to the fact that it is not
welded but simply attached in one or two points.

The principle of lead burning is to weld or burn two parts into one
solid mass and not merely attach one to the other.


Keeping Wood Separators In Stock


No wood separators should be used except those furnished by the
Delco-Light Company. These should be kept in distilled water, to which
has been added 1.220 electrolyte in the proportion of one part to ten
parts of water. It is advisable whenever possible to use new
separators when making repairs on a cell. Separators which have been
in service are liable to be damaged by handling.


Freezing Temperature of Electrolyte


The freezing temperatures of electrolyte in the Delco-Light batteries
depends upon the specific gravity of the battery. The Delco-Light
battery fully charged, with a specific gravity of 1.220, should not
freeze above a temperature of 30 degrees below zero. Since, however,
the freezing point rises very rapidly with a decrease in specific
gravity, special care should be taken to keep batteries charged when
temperatures below zero are encountered. The following table shows
freezing temperatures of several different gravities of electrolyte.

Specific Gravity       Freezing Point

1.100                  19° F. above zero.
1.150                   5° F. above zero.
1.175                   6° F. below zero.
1.200                  16° F. below zero.
1.220                  31° F. below zero.

At the temperature given, the electrolyte does not freeze solid, but
forms a slushy mass of crystals, which does not always result in jar
breakage.


Care of Cells in Stock


Frequently a Dealer or Distributor will have several sets of new
batteries in stock for five or six months. In this case, the cells
should be given a freshening charge before putting into service. This
charge should consist of charging the cells to maximum gravity.

Cells received broken in transit or cells sent in for repairs should
be repaired and charged as soon as possible and put into service
immediately. This eliminates the possibility of the cells standing
idle over a long period in which they would need a freshening charge
before they could be used.

However, if such cells must be kept in stock, they can be maintained
in a healthy condition by keeping on charge at a one fifth ampere rate
for 13-plate cells and one-tenth ampere rate for 7-plate cells.


Taking Batteries Out of Commission


If a battery is not to be used at all for a period not longer than
about 9 months, it can be left idle if it is first treated as follows:
Add sufficient water to bring the electrolyte up to the water line in
all cells and then give an equalizing charge, continuing the charge
until the specific gravity of each cell is at a maximum, five
consecutive hourly readings showing no rise in gravity. As soon as
this charge is completed, take out the battery fuse and open up one or
two of the connections between cells so that no current can be taken
from the battery. Have vent plugs in place to minimize evaporation.

If the battery is to be taken out of commission for a longer time than
9 months, the battery should be fully charged as above and the
electrolyte poured off into suitable glass or porcelain receptacles.
The plates should immediately be covered with water for a few hours to
prevent the negatives heating, after which the separators should be
removed, the water poured out of the jars, and the positive and
negative groups placed back in the jar for storage. Examine the
separators. If they are cracked or split they should be thrown away.
If in good condition they should be stored for further use in a
non-metallic receptacle and covered with water, to which has been
added electrolyte of 1.220 specific gravity, in the proportion of one
part electrolyte to ten of water by volume.


Putting Batteries Into Commission After Being Out of Service


When putting batteries into commission again, if the electrolyte has
not been withdrawn, all that is necessary is to add water to the cells
if needed, replace connections, and give an equalizing charge.

If the electrolyte has been withdrawn and battery disassembled, it
should be reassembled, taking care not to use cracked, split or
dried-out separators, and then the cells should be filled with the old
electrolyte, which has been saved, provided no impurity has entered
the electrolyte. After filling, allow the battery to stand for 12
hours and then charge, using 6 amperes for KXG-7 size and 12 amperes
for the KXG-13 size. Charge at this rate until all cells start gassing
freely or temperature rises to 110° F. Then reduce the charging rate
one-half, and continue at this rate until the specific gravity is at a
maximum, five consecutive hourly readings showing no rise in gravity.
At least 40 hours will be required for this charge. To obtain these
low rates with the Delco-Light plant, lights or other
current-consuming devices must be turned on while charging.


General Complaints from Users and How to Handle Them.


1. Pilot balls do not come up.

This condition may be caused by

(a) Battery discharged.
(b) Weak electrolyte caused by spillage in shipment.
(c) Defective ball.

Question the user to determine whether the ball will not come up if
the pilot cell is bubbling freely. Weak electrolyte or a defective
ball will require a service trip to determine the one which is
responsible for the ball not rising. (See page 470.)

2. Lights dim-must charge daily.

This condition may be caused by

(a) Discharged battery.
(b) Loose dirty connections in battery or line.
(c) Low cells in battery.

The user should be questioned to determine whether the battery is
being charged sufficiently. In case the user is positive the battery
is charged, the next probable trouble would be that there were some
loose or dirty connections in either plant or battery. Have the user
check for loose connections. Should it be necessary to make an
inspection trip, instruct the user to give battery an equalizing
charge so the battery will be fully charged when the inspection is
made.

Low cells can be checked by asking the user if all of the cells bubble
freely when equalizing charge is given. In case user claims several
cells fail to bubble, an inspection trip would be necessary to
determine the trouble. (See page 470.)

3. Cells bubbling when on discharge.

This complaint would indicate a reversed cell. (See page 483.)

4. Cells overflowing on charge.

This would mean that the cells were filled too high above water lines.

5. Engine cranks slowly but does not fire.

This would indicate over-discharged battery. Explain to user how to
start plant under this condition.

6. Plant will not crank.

This might be caused by

(a) Blown battery fuse.
(b) Battery over-discharged.
(c) Loose or broken connection on battery or switchboard.


OTHER EXIDE FARM LIGHTING BATTERIES


The Exide type is shown in Figure 296. The plates are held in position
both by the cover and by soft rubber support pieces in the bottom of
the jar. The support pieces are provided with holes in which
projections on the bottom of the plates are inserted. The cover is of
heavy moulded glass. The separators are of grooved wood in combination
with a slotted rubber sheet (Fig. 297). The strap posts are threaded
and are clamped to the cover by means of alloy nuts. The cover
overlaps the top of the jar to which it is sealed with sealing
compound. The method of sealing and unsealing is practically the same
as in the Exide Delco-Light Type.


Batteries with Open Glass Jars


Batteries with open glass jars, in addition to the conducting lug,
have two hanging lugs for each plate. The plates are hung from the jar
walls by these hanging lugs, as shown in Figs. 323 and 324. The plate
straps, instead of being horizontal are vertical and provided with a
tail so that adjacent cells may be bolted together by bolt connectors
through the end of the tail.

1. The Exide Cell is shown in Fig. 324. It has a grooved wood
separator between each positive and negative plate. The separators are
kept from floating up by a glass "hold-down" laid across the top. The
separators are provided at the top with a pin which rests on the
adjoining plates. The pins together with the plate glass hold-downs
keep the separators in Position.

To remove an element it is simply necessary to unbolt the connectors,
remove the glass cover and hold-down and lift wit the element.

2. The Chloride Accumulator cell is shown in Fig. 323. It differs from
the Exide only in type of plates and separators. The positive plates
are known as Manchester positives and have the active material in the
form of corrugated buttons which are held in a thick grid, as shown in
Fig. 325. The buttons are brown in color, the same as all positive
active material.

The separators, instead of being grooved wood, am each a sheet of wood
with six dowels pinned to it.

The element is removed the same as in the Exide type.

  [Fig. 323 Exide chloride accumulator cell with open glass jar,
   and Fig. 324 Exide cell with open glass jar]


Batteries with Sealed Rubber Jars


1. The Exide cell is shown in Fig. 326. It is assembled similar to
Exide starting and lighting batteries, except that the plates are
considerably thicker, wood and rubber separators are used, and the
terminal posts are shaped to provide for bolted instead of burned-on
connection. The method of sealing and unsealing the cells is the same
as in Exide starting and lighting batteries.

All instructions already given for glass for cells apply to rubber jar
cells except for a few differences in assembling and disassembling.

Care should be taken to keep the water level at least 1/2 inch above
plates at all times as the evaporation is very rapid in rubber jar
cells.

The temperature should be watched on charging to prevent overheating.
Never allow temperature to go above 110° F.

Unlike the glass jar cells the sediment space in the rubber jar is not
sufficient to take care of all the active material in the positive
plates. On repairs, therefore, always clean out the sediment and
prevent premature short circuits.

  [Fig. 325 Manchester positive plates, and
   Fig. 326 Exide cell with sealed rubber jar]


WESTINGHOUSE FARM LIGHTING BATTERIES


Jars. Westinghouse Farm Lighting Battery jars are made of glass, with
a 5/16 inch wall. The jars are pressed with the supporting ribs for
the elements an integral part from a mass of molten glass. A heavy
flange is pressed around the upper edge to strengthen the jar.

Top Construction. A sealed-in cover is used similar to that used in
starting and lighting batteries. The opening around the post hole is
sealed with compound.

Plates. Pasted plates are used. The positives are 1/4 inch thick, and
the negatives 3/16 inch. Posts are 13/16 inch in diameter.

Separators. A combination of wood and perforated rubber sheets is used.


Opening and Setting-Up Westinghouse Farm Lighting Batteries


  [Fig. 327 Westinghouse farm lighting cell]

It is preferable that the temperature never exceed 100 deg. Fahrenheit
nor fall below 10 deg. in the place where the battery is set up. If
the temperature is liable to drop below 10 degrees the battery should
be kept in a fully charged condition.

1. Remove all excelsior and the other packing material from the top of
the cells. Take cells out carefully and set on the floor. Do not drop
or handle roughly. Be sure to remove the lead top connectors from each
compartment.

2. Cells should be placed 1/4 inch apart. Also, cells should be placed
alternately so that positive post of one cell is adjacent to negative
post of the next cell. Positive post has "V" shape shoulder and the
negative post has a square shoulder.

3. Grease all posts, straps and nuts with vaseline.

4. Connect positive posts of each cell to negative post of adjacent
cell, using top connectors furnished. Top connectors are made so as to
fit when connection is made between positive post of one cell and
negative post of next cell. Use long connector between end cells of
upper and lower shelves.

5. With all connections between cells in position, join the remaining
positive post with a connection marked "Positive" leading from the
electric generator. Do likewise with the remaining negative post.

6. If liquid level in any cell is 1 inch or more below the "Liquid
Line" on side of glass jar, some liquid has been spilled and must be
replaced. This should be done by an experienced person.

7. Immediately after installation operate electric generator and
charge battery until gas bubbles rise freely through the liquid in all
cells. A reading with the hydrometer syringe which is furnished with
the battery should be taken, When the hydrometer float reads between
1.240 and 1.250, the battery is fully charged.

8. The time required to complete the charging operation mentioned
above may vary from one to several hours, depending upon the length of
time the battery has been in transit. During the charge the
temperature of the cells should not be permitted to rise above 110
deg. Fahrenheit. If this condition occurs discontinue the charge or
decrease the charge rate until cells have cooled off.

9. When charge is complete replace vent plugs.


The Relation Between Various Sizes of Westinghouse Farm Light
Batteries and Work to be Done


The size of the battery furnished with complete farm lighting units
vary greatly. Sometimes the battery size is varied with the size of
the engine and generator, while again the same size of battery may be
used for several sizes of engines and generators. In making
replacements, while it is always necessary to retain the same number
of cells, it is not necessary to retain the same size of cells.

Usually increasing the cell size increases the convenience to the
owner and prolongs the life of the battery to an amount which warrants
the higher cost.

With a larger battery, danger of injury through overcharging is
lessened, the load on the battery is more easily carried and the
engine and generator operate less frequently.

In order to give an idea of various battery capacities, below is a
table showing the number of 32 volt, 25-watt lamps which may be
lighted for various lengths of time from sixteen cells. The number of
hours shows the length of time that the lamps will operate.


Table A

Type     3 Hours     5 Hours     8 Hours

G-7      22 Lamps    14 Lamps    10 Lamps
G-9      28 Lamps    19 Lamps    13 Lamps
G-11     32 Lamps    24 Lamps    15 Lamps
G-13     41 Lamps    29 Lamps    19 Lamps
G-15     47 Lamps    33 Lamps    22 Lamps
G-17     54 Lamps    38 Lamps    25 Lamps

Note:--Based on 32-Volt 25-Watt Lamps.

For example--The table shows opposite G-7 that, with the battery
fully charged, twenty-two lamps may be lighted for three hours,
fourteen lamps for five hours and ten lamps for eight hours, by a
sixteen cell G-7 battery, without operating the engine and generator.

Motors for operating various household and farm appliances are usually
rated either in horsepower or watts. The following table will give a
comparison between horse-power and watts as well as the number of
25-watt lamps to which these different sizes of motors and appliances
correspond.


Table B

H.P. of Motor     No. of Watts     Corresponding No. of
                                   25-Watt Lamps

1/8                  93               4
1/4                 185               7
1/2                 373              15
3/4                 559              22
1 H.P.              746              30

From table B it will be seen, for example, that a one horsepower motor
draws from the battery 373 watts or the same power as do fifteen
25-watt lamps. Then referring to table A, it will be found that a G-11
battery could operate 15 lamps or this motor alone for 8 hours.

Due to the fact that a motor or electric appliance may become
overloaded and therefore actually use many more watts than the name
plate indicates, it is not advisable to operate any motor of over 1/4
H. P. or even an appliance of over 186 watts on the G-13 or smaller
sizes unless the engine and generator are running.

It is safe, however, to operate motors or other appliances up to 375
watts on the G-15 or G-17 batteries without operating the engine and
generator.


WILLARD FARM LIGHTING BATTERIES


  [Fig. 328 Willard Farm Lighting Cell]

The Willard Storage Battery Co. manufactures farm lighting batteries
which use sealed glass jars, or sealed rubber jars. Those using the
sealed glass jars include types PH and PA. The sealed rubber jar
batteries include types EM, EEW, IPR, SMW, and SEW. Both types of
batteries are shipped fully charged and filled with electrolyte, and
also dry, without electrolyte. The following instructions cover the
installation and preparation for service of these batteries.


Glass Jar Batteries. Fully Charged and Filled With Electrolyte


Each sixteen cell set of batteries is packed in two shipping crates.

One crate, which is stenciled "No. 1" contains:

* 8 Cells.
* 18 Bolt Connectors.
* 1 Hydrometer Syringe.
* 1 Instruction Book.

The other crate which is stenciled "No. 2" contains: 8 Cells

(NOTE:--If the batteries are re-shipped by the manufacturer or
distributor, care must be exercised to see that they are sent out in
sets.)


Unpacking


Remove the boards from the tops of the shipping crates and the
excelsior which is above the cells.

To straighten the long top connector, grasp the strap firmly with the
left hand close to the pillar post and raise the outer end of the
strap until it is in an upright position. Do not make a short bend
near the pillar post. Lift the cells from the case by grasping the
glass jars. Do not attempt to lift them by means of the top connectors.

Clean the outside of the cells by wiping with a damp cloth.


Inspection of Cells.


Inspect each cell to see if the level of the electrolyte is at the
proper height. This is indicated on the jar by a line marked LIQUID
LINE.

If the electrolyte is simply a little low and there is no evidence of
any having been spilled (examine packing material for discoloration)
add distilled or clean rain water to bring the level to the proper
height.

If the liquid does not cover the plates and the packing material is
discolored, it indicates that some or all of the electrolyte has been
lost from the cell either on account of a cracked jar or overturning
of the battery.

If only a small quantity of electrolyte is lost through spilling, the
cell should be filled to the proper height with electrolyte of the
same specific gravity as in the other cells. This cell should then be
charged until the gravity has ceased rising. If all the electrolyte is
lost write to the Willard Storage Battery Co., Cleveland, Ohio, for
instructions.


Connecting the Cells


Each cell of the type PH battery is a complete unit, sealed in a glass
jar. The cells are to be placed side by side on the battery rack so
that the positive terminal of one cell (long connecting strap) can be
connected to the negative terminal (short strap) of the adjacent cell.

Join the positive terminal of one cell to the negative terminal of the
adjacent cell and continue this procedure until all the cells are
connected together. This will leave one positive and one negative
terminal of the battery to be connected respectively to the positive
and negative wires from the switchboard. The bend in the top connector
should be made about one inch above the pillar post to eliminate the
danger of breakage at the post.

In tightening the bolts do not use excessive force, as there is
liability of stripping the threads.

Give the battery a freshening charge before it is put in service. Type
PH cells have a gravity of 1.250 when fully charged, and 1.185 when
discharged.


Willard Glass Jar Batteries Shipped "Knock-Down."


Each sixteen cell set of Batteries consists of:

  16 Glass Jars.
  16 Positive Groups.
  16 Negative Groups.
  16 Covers.
  16 Vent Plugs.
  32 Lead Collars.
  32 Lead Keys.
  32 Soft Rubber Washers.
  32 Hard Rubber Rods.
  64 Hard Rubber Nuts.
  18 Bolt Connectors.
  Wood Insulators (the quantity depends upon the size of the cells).
  Sealing Compound.
  Hydrometer.
  Instruction Books.

Electrolyte is not supplied with batteries shipped in a knockdown
condition.

Examine all packing material carefully and check the parts with the
above list.


Cleaning the Glass Jars


Wash the glass jars and wipe them dry.


Preparing the Covers


Wash the covers and scrub around the under edge to remove all dust.
After they are thoroughly dry place them upside down on a bench.

Melt the sealing compound and pour it around the outer edge to make a
fillet in the groove.


Assembling the Element and Separators


Place the plates of a positive group between the plates of a negative
group and lay the element thus formed on its edge, as shown in Fig.
329.

  [Fig. 329 Inserting Separators, Willard farm lighting cell]

  [Fig. 330 and Fig. 331 Fastening cover to posts, Willard farm
   lighting cell]

Next insert a wood separator between each of the positive and negative
plates.

Next insert the hard rubber rods through the holes in the lugs of the
end negative plates, and screw on the nuts. Do not screw the nuts so
tight as to make the plates bulge out at the center. The rod should
project the same amount on each side of the element.

Place the element in a vertical position.

The cover can now be placed over the posts. Slip a rubber washer and a
lead collar over each post. The two key holes in the lead collar are
unequal in size. The collar must be placed over the post so that the
end which measures 3/16 inch from the bottom of the holes to the end
of the collar will be next to the rubber washer. Dip the lead key in
water and then put it through the holes, having the straight edge of
the key on the bottom side. This operation can easily be done by using
a pair of tongs (see Figs. 330 and 331) to compress the washer. After
the keys are driven tight they can be cut off with a pair of end
cutters and then smoothed with a file.


Sealing Element Assembly in Jar


  [Fig. 332 Sealing Element Assembly, Willard farm lighting cell]

Turn the element upside down and place over a block of wood so that
the weight is supported by the cover. (See Fig. 332.)

Heat the sealing compound by means of a flame (a blow torch will
answer the purpose), and place the jar over the element, as shown in
Fig. 331. The jar should be firmly pressed down into the compound.
With a hot putty knife, clean off any compound which has oozed out of
the joint. The assembled cell can now be turned to an upright position.

In case it is necessary to remove a cover, heat a wide putty knife and
run it around the edge between the cover and the glass jar. This will
soften the compound so that the cover can be pried off.

If it is necessary to remove the cover from the posts, the keys must
be driven out by pounding on the small end, as the keys are
tapered-and the holes in the lead collars are unequal in size.



Filling with Electrolyte


Fill the cells with 1.260 specific gravity electrolyte at 70° F. to
the LIQUID LINE marked on the glass jars. (About I inch above the top
edge of separators.) Allow the cells to stand 12 hours, and if the
level of the electrolyte has lowered, add sufficient electrolyte to
bring it to the proper height.


Initial Charge


Connect the positive terminal (long strap) of one cell to the negative
terminal (short strap) of the adjacent cell and continue this
procedure until all the cells are connected together. This will leave
one positive and one negative terminal to be connected respectively to
the positive and negative wires from the charging source.

The bends in the top terminal connectors should be made about one inch
above the pillar posts to eliminate the danger of breakage at the post.

In tightening the bolts, do not use excessive force, as there is
liability of stripping the threads.

After the cells have stood for 12 hours with electrolyte in the jars,
they should be put on charge at the following rates:

Type    Amperes

PH-7      4
PH-9      5
PH-11     6-1/4
PH-13     7-1/2
PH-15     9
PH-17     10

They should be left on charge continuously until the specific gravity
of the electrolyte reaches a maximum and remains constant for six
hours. At this point, each cell should be gassing freely and the
voltage should read about 2.45 volts per cell, with the above current
flowing.

Under normal conditions it will require approximately 80 hours to
complete the initial charge. The final gravity will be approximately
1.250. If the gravity is above this value, remove a little electrolyte
and add the same amount of distilled water.

If the gravity is too low, remove a little of the electrolyte and add
the same amount of 1.400 specific gravity acid and leave on charge as
before.

After either water or acid has been added, charge the cells three
hours longer in order to thoroughly mix the solution, and if at the
end of that time the gravity is between 1.245 and 1.255, the cells are
ready for service.

It is very important that the initial charge be continued until the
specific gravity reaches a maximum value, regardless of the length of
time required. The battery must not be discharged until the initial
charge has been completed.

If it is impossible to charge the battery continuously, the charge can
be stopped over night, but must be resumed the next day.

It is preferable to charge the battery at the ampere rate given above,
but if this cannot be done, the temperature must be carefully watched
so that it does not exceed 110° F.


Wilard Rubber Jar Batteries Shipped Completely Charged and Filled with
Electrolyte


Immediately upon receipt of battery, remove the soft rubber nipples
and unscrew the vent plugs.

The soft rubber nipples are to be discarded, as they are used only for
protection during shipment. Inspect each cell to see whether the
electrolyte is at the proper height.

If the electrolyte is simply a little low and there is no evidence of
any having been spilled (examine packing material for discoloration),
add distilled water to bring the level to the proper height.

If electrolyte does not cover the plates and the packing material is
discolored, it indicates that some or all of the electrolyte has been
lost from the cell, either on account of cracked jar or overturning of
the battery.

If only a small quantity of electrolyte is lost through spilling, the
cell should be filled to the proper height with electrolyte of the
same specific gravity as in the other cells. This cell should then be
charged until the gravity has ceased rising, If all the electrolyte is
lost, write to the Willard Storage Battery Co., Cleveland, Ohio, for
instructions.

Place batteries on rack and connect the positive terminal of one crate
to the negative terminal of the next crate, using the jumpers
furnished.

The main battery wires from the switch board should be soldered to the
pigtail terminals, which can then be bolted to the battery terminals.
Be sure to have the positive and negative battery terminals connected
respectively to the positive and negative generator terminals of
switchboard.

Before using the battery, it should be given a freshening charge at
the rate given on page 510.

The specific gravity of the rubber jar batteries is 1.285-1.300 when
fully charged, and 1.160 when discharged.


Willard Rubber Jar Batteries Shipped Dry (Export Batteries)


Batteries which have been prepared for export must be given the
following treatment:

Upon receipt of battery by customer, the special soft rubber nipples,
used on the batteries for shipping purposes only, should be removed
and discarded.

Types SMW and SEW batteries should at once be filled to bottom of vent
hole with 1.285 specific gravity electrolyte at 70° F.

In mixing electrolyte, the acid should be poured into the water and
allowed to cool below 90° F. before being put into the cells. If
electrolyte is shipped with the battery, it is of the proper gravity
to put into the cells.

Immediately after the batteries are filled with electrolyte, they must
be placed on charge at one half the normal charging rate given on page
510, and should be left on charge continuously until the specific
gravity of the electrolyte stops rising. At this point, each cell
should be gassing freely and the voltage should read at least 2.40
volts per cell with one-half the normal charging current flowing.

If during the charge the temperature of the electrolyte in any one
cell exceeds 105° F., the current must be reduced until the
temperature is below 90° F. This will necessitate a longer time to
complete the charge, but must be strictly adhered to.

Under normal conditions it will require approximately 80 hours to
complete the initial charge. The final gravity of the types SMW and
SEW will be approximately 1.285. If the gravity is above this value,
remove a little electrolyte and add same amount of distilled water
while the battery is left charging (in order to thoroughly mix the
solution), and after three hours, if the electrolyte is within the
limits, the cell is ready for service. If the specific gravity is
below these values, remove a little electrolyte and add same amount of
1.400 specific gravity electrolyte. Leave on charge as before. The
acid should be poured into the water and allowed to cool below 90° P.
before being used. The batteries are then ready for service.


Installing Counter Electromotive Force Cells


Counter EMF cells, if used with a battery, are installed in the same
manner as regular cells. They are connected positive to negative, the
same as regular cells, but the negative terminal of the CEMF group is
to be connected to the negative terminal of the regular cell group.
The positive terminal of the counter CEMF group is then to be
connected to the switchboard.

  [Image: Table of charge and discharge rates for different types
   of batteries, Willard farm lighting batteries]


========================================================================

Definitions and Descriptions of
Terms and Parts


Acid. As used in this book refers to sulphuric acid (H2SO4), the
active component of the electrolyte, or a mixture of sulphuric acid
and water.

Active Material. The active portion of the battery plates; peroxide of
lead on the positives and spongy metallic lead on the negatives.

Alloy. As used in battery practice, a homogeneous combination of lead
and antimony.

Alternating Current. Electric current which does not flow in one
direction only, like direct current, but rapidly reverses its
direction or "alternates" in polarity so that it will not charge a
battery.

Ampere. The unit of measure of the rate of flow of electric current.

Ampere Hour. The product resulting from multiplication of amperes
flowing by time of flow in hours, e.g., a battery supplying 10 amperes
for 8 hours gives 80 ampere hours. See note under "Volt?" for more
complete explanation of current flow.

Battery. Two or more electrical cells, electrically connected so that
combination furnishes current as a unit.

Battery Terminals. Devices attached to the positive post of one end
cell and the negative of the other, by means of which the battery is
connected to the car circuit.

Bridge (or Rib). Wedge-shaped vertical projection from bottom of
rubber jar on which plates rest and by which they are supported.

Buckling. Warping or bending of the battery plates.

Burning. A term used to describe the operation of joining two pieces
of lead by melting them at practically the same instant so they may
run together as one continuous piece. Usually done with mixture of
oxygen and hydrogen or acetylene gases, hydrogen and compressed air,
or oxygen and illuminating gas.

Burning Strip. A convenient form of lead, in strips, for filling up
the joint in making burned connections.

Cadmium. A metal used in about the shape of a pencil for obtaining
voltage of positive or negative plates. It is dipped in the
electrolyte but not allowed to come in contact with plates.

Capacity. The number of ampere hours a battery can supply at a given
rate of current flow after being fully charged, e.g., a battery may be
capable of supplying 10 amperes of current for 8 hours before it is
exhausted. Its capacity is 80 ampere hours at the 8 hours rate of
current flow. It is necessary to state the rate of flow, since same
battery if discharged at 20 amperes would not last for 4 hours but for
a shorter period, say 3 hours. Hence, its capacity at the 3 hour rate
would be 3x2O=60 ampere hours.

Case. The containing box which holds the battery cells.

Cell. The battery unit, consisting of an element complete with
electrolyte, in its jar with cover.

Charge. Passing direct current through a battery in the direction
opposite to that of discharge, in order to put back the energy used on
discharge.

Charge Rate. The proper rate of current to use in charging a battery
from an outside source. It is expressed in amperes and varies for
different sized cells.

Corrosion. The attack of metal parts by acid from the electrolyte; it
is the result of lack of cleanliness.

Cover. The rubber cover which closes each individual cell; it is
flanged for sealing compound to insure an effective seal.

Cycle. One charge and discharge.

Density. Specific gravity.

Developing. The first cycle or cycles of a new or rebuilt battery to
bring about proper electrochemical conditions to give rated capacity.

Diffusion. Pertaining to movement of acid within the pores of plates.
(See Equalization.)

Discharge. The flow of current from a battery through a circuit,
opposite of "charge."

Dry. Term frequently applied to cell containing insufficient
electrolyte. Also applied to certain conditions of shipment of
batteries.

Electrolyte. The conducting fluid of electro-chemical devices; for
lead-acid storage batteries it consists of about two parts of water to
one of chemically pure sulphuric acid, by weight.

Element. Positive group, negative group and separators.

Equalization. The result of circulation and diffusion within the cell
which accompanies charge and discharge. Difference in capacity at
various rates is caused by the time required for this feature.

Equalizing. Term used to describe the making uniform of varying
specific gravities in different cells of the same battery, by adding
or removing water or electrolyte.

Evaporation. Loss of water from electrolyte from heat or charging.

Filling Plug. The plug which fits in and closes the orifice of the
filling tube in the cell cover.

Finishing Rate. The current in amperes at which a battery may be
charged for twenty-four hours or more. Also the charging rate used
near the end of a charge when cells begin to gas.

Flooding. Overflowing through the filling tube.

Forming. Electro-chemical process of making pasted grid or other
plate, types into storage battery plates. (Often confused with
Developing.)

Foreign Material. Objectionable substances.

Freshening Charge. A charge given to a battery which has been standing
idle, to keep it fully charged.

Gassing. The giving off of oxygen gas at positive plates and hydrogen
at negatives, which begins when charge is something more than half
completed-depending on the rate.

Generator System. An equipment including a generator for automatically
recharging the battery, in contradistinction to a straight storage
system where the battery has to be removed to be recharged.

Gravity. A contraction of the term "specific gravity," which means the
density compared to water as a standard.

Grid. The metal framework of a plate, supporting the active material
and provided with a lug for conducting the current and for attachment
to the strap.

Group. A set of plates, either positive or negative, joined to a
strap. Groups do not include separators.

Hold-Down. Device for keeping separators from floating or working up.

Hold-Down Clips. Brackets for the attachment of bolts for holding the
battery securely in position on the car.

Hydrogen Flame. A very hot and clean flame of hydrogen gas and oxygen,
acetylene, or compressed air used for making burned connections.

Hydrogen Generator. An apparatus for generating hydrogen gas for lead
burning.

Hydrometer. An instrument for measuring the specific gravity of the
electrolyte.

Hydrometer Syringe. A glass barrel enclosing a hydrometer and provided
with a rubber bulb for drawing up electrolyte.

Jar. The hard rubber container holding the element and electrolyte.

Lead Burning. Making a joint by melting together the metal of the
parts to be joined.

Lug. The extension from the top frame of each plate, connecting the
plate to the strap.

Maximum Gravity. The highest specific gravity which the electrolyte
will reach by continued charging, indicating that no acid remains in
the plates.

Mud. (See Sediment.)

Negative. The terminal of a source of electrical energy as a cell,
battery or generator through which current returns to complete
circuit. Generally marked "Neg." or "-".

Ohm. The unit of electrical resistance. The smaller the wire conductor
the greater is the resistance. Six hundred and sixty-five feet of No.
14 wire (size used in house lighting circuit) offers I ohm resistance
to current flow.

Oil of Vitriol. Commercial name for concentrated sulphuric acid (1.835
specific gravity). This is never used in a battery and would quickly
ruin it.

Over-Discharge. The carrying of discharge beyond proper cell voltage;
shortens life if carried far enough and done frequently.

Paste. The mixture of lead oxide or spongy lead and other substances
which is put into grids.

Plate. The combination of grid and paste properly "formed." Positive$
are reddish brown and negatives slate gray.

Polarity. An electrical condition. The positive terminal (or pole) of
a cell or battery or electrical circuit is said to have positive
polarity; the negative, negative polarity.

Positive. The terminal of a source of electrical energy as a cell,
battery or generator from which the current flows. Generally marked
"Pos." or "+".

Post. The portion of the strap extending through the cell cover, by
means of which connection is made to the adjoining cell or to the car
circuit.

Potential Difference. Abbreviated P. D. Found on test curves.
Synonymous with voltage.

Rate. Number of amperes for charge or discharge. Also used to express
time for either.

Rectifier. Apparatus for converting alternating current into direct
current.

Resistance. Material (usually lamps or wire) of low conductivity
inserted in a circuit to retard the flow of current. By varying the
resistance, the amount of current can be regulated. Also the property
of an electrical circuit whereby the flow of current is impeded.
Resistance is measured in ohms. Analogous to the impediment offered by
wall of a pipe to flow of water therein.

Rheostat. An electrical appliance used to raise or lower the
resistance of a circuit and correspondingly to decrease or increase
the current flowing.

Rib. (See Bridge.)

Ribbed. (See Separator.)

Reversal. Reversal of polarity of cell or battery, due to excessive
discharge, or charging in the wrong direction.

Rubber Sheets. Thin, perforated hard rubber sheets used in combination
with the wood separators in some types of batteries. They are placed
between the grooved side of the wood separators and the positive plate.

Sealing. Making tight joints between jar and cover; usually with a
black, thick, acid-proof compound.

Sediment. Loosened or worn out particles of active material fallen to
the bottom of cells; frequently called "mud."

Sediment Space. That part of jar between bottom and top of bridge.

Separator. An insulator between plates of opposite polarity; usually
of wood, rubber or combination of both. Separators are generally
corrugated or ribbed to insure proper distance between plates and to
avoid too great displacement of electrolyte.

Short Circuit. A metallic connection between the positive and negative
plates within a cell. The plates may be in actual contact or material
may lodge and bridge across. If the separators are in good condition,
a short circuit is unlikely to occur.

Spacers. Wood strips used in some types to separate the cells in the
case, and divided to provide a space for the tie bolts.

Specific Gravity. The density of the electrolyte compared to water as
a standard. It indicates the strength and is measured by the
hydrometer.

Spray. Fine particles of electrolyte carried up from the surface by
gas bubbles. (See Gassing.)

Starting Rate. A specified current in amperes at which a discharged
battery may be charged at the beginning of a charge. The starting rate
is reduced to the finishing rate when the cells begin to gas. It is
also reduced at any time during the charge if the temperature of the
electrolyte rises to or above 110 deg. Fahrenheit.

Starvation. The result of giving insufficient charge in relation to
the amount of discharge, resulting in poor service and injury to the
battery.

Strap. The leaden casting to which the plates of a group are joined.

Sulphate. Common term for lead sulphate. (PbSO4.)

Sulphated. Term used to describe cells in an under-charged condition,
from either over-discharging without corresponding long charges or
from standing idle some time and being self discharged.

Sulphate Reading. A peculiarity of cell voltage when plates are
considerably sulphated, where charging voltage shows abnormally high
figures before dropping gradually to normal charging voltage.

Terminal. Part to which outside wires are connected.

Vent, Vent Plug or Vent-Cap. Hard or soft rubber part inserted in
cover to retain atmospheric pressure within the cell, while preventing
loss of electrolyte from spray. It allows gases formed in the cell to
escape, prevents electrolyte from spilling, and keeps dirt out of the
cell.

Volt. The commercial unit of pressure in an electric circuit. Voltage
is measured by a voltmeter. Analogous to pressure or head of water
flow through pipes. NOTE.--Just as increase of pressure causes more
volume of water to flow through a given pipe so increase of voltage
(by putting more cells in circuit) will cause more amperes of current
to flow in same circuit. Decreasing size of pipes is increasing
resistance and decreases flow of water, so also introduction of
resistance in an electrical circuit decreases current flow with a
given voltage or pressure.

Wall. Jar sides and ends.

Washing. Removal of sediment from cells after taking out elements;
usually accompanied by rinsing of groups, replacement of wood
separators and renewal of electrolyte.

Watt. The commercial unit of electrical power, and is the product of
voltage of circuit by amperes flowing. One ampere flowing under
pressure of one volt represents one watt of power.

Watt Hour. The unit of electrical work. It is the product of power
expended by time of expenditure, e.g., 10 amperes flowing under 32
volts pressure for 8 hours gives 2560 watt hours.


========================================================================

Index

A

Acetic acid from improperly treated separators 77
Acetylene and Compressed Air Lead-burning Outfit147
Acid Carboys 184
Acid. Handling and mixing 222
Acid. How lost while battery is on car 57
Acid. How to draw, from carboys 184
Acid should never be added to battery on car 57
Acid used instead of water 57
Active materials. Composition of 13
Active materials. Effect of quantity, porosity, and arrangement of, on
capacity 42
Active materials. Resistance of 49
Age codes 242
Age of battery. Determining 242
Age of battery. Effect of, on capacity 47
Alcohol torch lead-burning outfit 148
Applying pastes to grids 11
Arc lead-burning outfit 148
Audion bulb for radio receiving sets 253

B

Battery box should be kept clean and dry 51
Battery carrier 173
Battery case (see Case).
Battery steamer 158
Battery truck 173
Battery turntable 170
Bench charge 198 to 210
Bench charge. Arrangement of batteries for 200
Bench charge. Charging rates for 201
Bench charge. Conditions preventing batteries from charging 206
Bench charge. Conditions preventing gravity from rising 207
Bench charge. If battery becomes too hot 205
Bench charge. If battery will not hold a charge 208
Bench charge. If battery will not take half a charge 205
Bench charge. If current cannot be passed through battery 206
Bench charge. If electrolyte has a milky appearance 206
Bench charge. If gravity rises above 1.300 205
Bench charge. If gravity rises long before voltage does 205
Bench charge. If new battery will not charge 205
Bench charge. If one cell will not charge 205
Bench charge. If vinegar-like odor is detected 205
Bench charge. Leave vent-plugs in when charging 209
Bench charge. Level of electrolyte at end of 203
Bench charge. Painting case after 203
Bench charge. Specific gravity at end of 203
Bench charge. Specific gravity will not rise to 1.280 204
Bench charge. Suggestions for 209
Bench charge. Temperatures of batteries during 202
Bench charge. Time required for 203
Bench charge. Troubles arising during 204
Bench charge. Voltage at end of 203
Bench charge. When necessary 198
Bins for stock parts 158
Book-keeping records 302 (Omitted)
"Bone-dry" batteries. Putting into service 229
Boxes for battery parts 183
Buckling 72
Buckling. Caused by charging at high rates 73
Buckling. Caused by continued operation in discharged condition 73
Buckling. Caused by defective grid alloy 73
Buckling. Caused by non-uniform current distribution 73
Buckling. Caused by overdischarge 73
Buckling does not necessarily cause trouble 73
Burning. (See Lead-Burning.)
Burning-lead mould 164
Burning rack 162
Business methods 299 to 312 (Omitted)

C

Cadmium. What it is 176
Cadmium leads. Connection of, to voltmeter 179
Cadmium readings affected by improperly treated separators 181
Cadmium readings. Conditions necessary to obtain good negative-cadmium
readings 210
Cadmium readings do not indicate capacity of a cell 175
Cadmium readings on short-circuited cells 180
Cadmium readings. Troubles shown by, on charge 206
Cadmium readings. When they should be taken 176
Cadmium test 174
Cadmium test. How made 175
Cadmium test on charging battery 181
Cadmium test on discharging battery 180
Cadmium test set. What it consists of 177
Cadmium test voltmeter 178
Calling for repair batteries 314
Capacity. Effect of age of battery on 47 and 89
Capacity. Effect of plate surface area on 42
Capacity. Effect of clogged separators on 88
Capacity. Effect of incorrect proportions of acid and acid in
electrolyte on 88
Capacity. Effect of low level of electrolyte on 88
Capacity. Effect of operating conditions on 44
Capacity. Effect of quantity and strength of electrolyte on 42
Capacity. Effect of quantity, arrangement, and porosity of active
materials on 42
Capacity. Effect of rate of discharge on 44
Capacity. Effect of reversal of plates on 89
Capacity. Effect of shedding on 88
Capacity. Effect of specific gravity on 43
Capacity. Effect of temperature on 46
Carbon-arc lead-burning outfit 148
Carboys 184
Care of battery on the car 51 to 68
Care of battery when not in service 67
Carrier for batteries 173
Case. Cleaning and painting, after repairs 372
Case manufacture 22
Case. Painting, after bench charge 203
Case. Repairing 360
Case. Troubles indicated by rotted 319
Case troubles 83
Cases. Equipment for work on 98 and 170
Casting plate grids 9
Cell connector mould 168
Cell connectors. Burning-on 213
Cell connectors. Equipment for work on 98
Cell connectors. How to remove 329
Changing pastes into active materials 12
Charge. (See Bench Charge.)
Charge. Changes at negative plates during 30 and 39
Charge. Changes at positive plates during 30 and 40
Charge. Changes in acid density during 39
Charge. Changes in voltage during 38
Charge. Loss of, in an idle battery 89
Charge. Preliminary, in rebuilding batteries 349
Charge. Trickle 239
Charging bench133 to 139
Charging bench. Arrangement of batteries on 200
Charging bench. Temperature of batteries on 202
Charging bench. Working drawings of 134 to 139
Charging circuits. Drawings of 105
Charging connections. Making temporary 220
Charging. Constant potential 111
Charging equipment for farm lighting batteries 439
Charging equipment for starting batteries 100
Charging farm lighting batteries 455
Charging. Lamp-banks for 101
Charging. Motor-generators for 106
Charging rate. Adjusting 287
Charging rate. Checking 283
Charging rate. Governed by gassing 112 and 202
Charging rate. How and when to adjust 289
Charging rates for bench charge 112 and 201
Charging rates for new Exide batteries 226
Charging rates for new Philadelphia batteries 228
Charging rates for new Prest-O-Lite batteries 234
Charging rates on the car 283
Charging rebuilt batteries 373
Charging. Rheostats for 101
Chemical actions and electricity. Relations between 31
Chemical changes at the negatives during charge 30
Chemical changes at the positives during charge 30
Chemical changes at the negatives during discharge 29
Chemical changes at the positives during discharge 29
Chemical changes in the battery 27 to 31
Composition of jars 16
Composition of plate grids 9
Compound. Scraping, from covers and jars 334
Compressed air and hydrogen lead-burning outfit 147
Compressed air and illuminating gas lead-burning outfit 149
Condenser for making distilled water 160
Connections. Making temporary, for charging 220
Connectors. (See Cell Connectors.)
Connector troubles 84
Constant-potential charging 111
Construction of plate grids 10
Convenient method of adding water 56
Corroded grids 77
Corroded grids. Caused by age 78
Corroded grids. Caused by high temperatures 78
Corroded grids. Caused by impurities 78
Corrosion 321
Covers. Eveready 17
Covers. Exide 19 and 21
Covers. Functions of 16
Covers. Gould 17
Covers. How to remove 331
Covers. Philadelphia diamond grid 16
Covers. Prest-O-Lite 18 and 19
Covers. Putting on the 365
Covers. Sealing 366
Covers. Single and double 16
Covers. Steaming 332
Covers. U.S.L. 18 and 20
Covers. Vesta 18
Covers. Westinghouse 417
Covers. Willard 19
Credit. Use and abuse of 301 (Omitted)
Cutout. Checking action of 282?
Cycling discharge tests 269

D

Dead cells. Causes of 87
Delco-Light batteries 466
Delco-Light batteries. Ampere-hour meter for 467 and 471
Delco-Light batteries. Burning-on new plates of 492
Delco-Light batteries. Burning-on new straps for 488
Delco-Light batteries. Care of cells of, in stock 493
Delco-Light batteries. Charging, after reassembling 481
Delco-Light batteries. Charging outside negatives of 484
Delco-Light batteries. Clearing high resistance shorts in 484
Delco-Light batteries. Clearing lug shorts in 484
Delco-Light batteries. Dis-assembling 474
Delco-Light batteries. Gauges and instruments for testing 466
Delco-Light batteries. General complaints from users of 495
Delco-Light batteries. Hydrometers for 468
Delco-Light batteries. Inspection trips 470
Delco-Light batteries. Pressing negatives of 485
Delco-Light batteries. Putting repaired cells into service 484
Delco-Light batteries. Re-assembling 477
Delco-Light batteries. Removing impurities from 483
Delco-Light batteries. Repairing broken posts of 487
Delco-Light batteries. Repairing lead parts of 486
Delco-Light batteries. Salvaging replaced cells of 486
Delco-Light batteries. Taking, out of commission 494
Delco-Light batteries. Treating broken cells of 482
Delco-Light batteries. Treating spilled cells of 482
Delco-Light batteries. Treating reversed cells of 483
Delco-Light batteries. Use of auxiliary straps with 492
Delco-Light batteries. When and how to charge 468
Discharge apparatus 270
Discharge. Changes at negative plates during 37
Discharge. Changes at positive plates during 37
Discharge. Changes in acid density during 35
Discharge. Chemical actions at negative plates during 29
Discharge. Chemical actions at positive plates during 29
Discharge. Effects of rates of, on capacity 44
Discharge. Voltage changes during 32
Discharge tests. Cycling 269
Discharge tests. Fifteen seconds 266
Discharge tests. Lighting ability 267
Discharge tests. Starting ability 267
Distilled water. Condenser for making 160
Dope electrolytes 59 and 199
Double covers. Sealing 366
Dry shipment of batteries 24
Dry storage 240
Dry storage batteries 265

E

Earthenware jars 184
Electrical system. Normal course of operation of 277
Electrical system. Testing the 276
Electrical system. Tests on, to be made by the repairman 279
Electrical system. Troubles in the 284
Electricity and chemical actions. Relation between 31
Electrolyte. Adjusting the 373
Electrolyte below tops of plates. Causes and results of 319 and 323
Electrolyte. Causes of milky appearance of 206
Electrolyte. Composition of 199 and 222
Electrolyte. Correct height of, above plates 55
Electrolyte. Effect of circulation of, on capacity 44
Electrolyte. Effect of low 67
Electrolyte. Effect of quantity and strength of, on capacity 42
Electrolyte. Freezing points of 67
Electrolyte. Leaking of, at top of cells 324
Electrolyte. Level of, at end of bench charge 203
Electrolyte. Resistance of 43 and 48
Electrolyte troubles. High gravity 85
Electrolyte troubles. High level 85
Electrolyte troubles. Low gravity 85
Electrolyte troubles. Low level 85
Electrolyte troubles. Milky appearance 85
Element. Tightening loose 363
Elements. Re-assembling 361
Equipment for discharge tests 270
Equipment for general work 98
Equipment for general work on connectors and terminals 98
Equipment for handling sealing compound 149
Equipment for lead-burning 97
Equipment for work on cases 98 and 170
Equipment needed in opening batteries 97
Equipment which is absolutely necessary 96
Eveready batteries. Claimed to be non-sulphating 401
Eveready batteries. Description of parts 404
Eveready batteries. Rebuilding 405
Examining and testing incoming batteries 317
Exide farm lighting batteries 466 to 498
Exide radio batteries 257
Exide starting batteries. Age code for 243 (Age code chart omitted)
Exide starting batteries. Burning-on cell connectors of 382
Exide starting batteries. Capacities of 381 (Chart omitted)
Exide starting batteries. Charging, after repairing 382
Exide starting batteries. Methods of holding jars of, in case 377
Exide starting batteries. Opening of 377
Exide starting batteries. Putting cells of, in case 382
Exide starting batteries. Putting jars of, in case 382
Exide starting batteries. Putting new, into service 225
Exide starting batteries. Re-assembling plates of 379
Exide starting batteries. Sealing single covers of 380
Exide starting batteries. Type numbers of 377
Exide starting batteries. Types of 375
Exide starting batteries. Work on plates, separators, jars, and cases
of 379

F

Farm lighting batteries 435 to 510
Farm lighting batteries. Care of, in operation 453
Farm lighting batteries. Care of plant of, in operation 450
Farm lighting batteries. Charging 453? or (455)
Farm lighting batteries. Charging equipment for 439
Farm lighting batteries. Determining condition of cells of 453
Farm lighting batteries. Difference between, and starting batteries 435
Farm lighting batteries. Discharge rules for 457
Farm lighting batteries. Exide 466
Farm lighting batteries. Initial charge of 448
Farm lighting batteries. Installation of plant 445
Farm lighting batteries. Instructing users of 449
Farm lighting batteries. Jars used in 436
Farm lighting batteries. Loads carried by 443 (Charts omitted)
Farm lighting batteries. Location of plant 444
Farm lighting batteries. Overcharge of 455
Farm lighting batteries. Power consumed by appliances connected to 442
Farm lighting batteries. Prest-O-Lite 460
Farm lighting batteries. Selection of plant 440
Farm lighting batteries. Separators for 438
Farm lighting batteries. Size of plant required 442
Farm lighting batteries. Specific gravity of electrolyte of 438
Farm lighting batteries. Troubles with 458
Farm lighting batteries. When to charge 455
Farm lighting batteries. Wiring of plant for 444
Filling and testing service 291
Flames for lead-burning 211
Floor. Care of 188
Floor grating for shop 188
Floor of shop 186
Forming plates 11
Freezing points of electrolyte 67

G

Gassing causes shedding 74
Gassing. Charging rate governed by 112 and 202
Gassing. Definition of 31
Gassing. Excessive, causes milky appearance of electrolyte 86
Gassing of sulphated plates 40 and 75
Gassing on charge 37? and 202
Granulated negatives 78
Granulated negatives. Caused by age 78
Granulated negatives. Caused by heat 78
Gravity. (See Specific Gravity).
Grids. Casting 9
Grids. Composition of 9
Grids. Corroded 77
Grids. Effect of age on 78 and 80 and 342? (344)
Grids. Effect of defective grid alloy on 73
Grids. Effect of impurities on 77 and 78 and 80 and 342
Grids. Effect of overheating on 78 and 80 and 342?
Grids. Resistance of 48
Grids. Trimming 10

H

Handling and mixing acid 222
Heating of negatives exposed to the air 78
High rate discharge testers 181
High rate discharge tests 266 and 267 and 374
Home-made batteries 25
Hydrogen and compressed air lead-burning outfit 147
Hydrogen and oxygen lead-burning outfit 146
Hydrometer. What it consists of 60
Hydrometer readings. Effect of temperature on 65
Hydrometer readings. How to take 61

I

Idle battery. Care of 67
Idle battery. How it becomes discharged 89
Idle battery. How it sulphates 70
Illuminating gas and compressed air lead-burning outfit 149
Impurities 76
Impurities which attack the plates 77
Impurities which cause self-discharge 76
Incoming batteries. Examining and testing 317
Incoming batteries. General inspection of 320
Incoming batteries. Operation tests on 320
Incoming batteries. When it is necessary to open 326
Incoming batteries. When it is necessary to remove from car 325
Incoming batteries. When it is unnecessary to open 325
Incoming batteries. When it is unnecessary to remove from car 324
Installing battery on the car 236
Internal resistance 48 to 50
Isolators 408
Inspection to determine height of electrolyte 55

J

Jars. Construction of 16
Jars. Filling with electrolyte 364
Jars for farm lighting batteries 436
Jars. Manufacture of 16
Jars. Materials used for 16
Jars. Removing defective 359
Jars. Testing, for leaks 356
Jars. Work on 356
Jar troubles caused by explosion in cell 83
Jar troubles caused by freezing 83
Jar troubles caused by improperly trimmed groups 83
Jar troubles caused by loose battery 82
Jar troubles caused by rough handling 82
Jar troubles caused by weights placed on top of battery 83

K

(No Entries)

L

Lead burning cell connectors 213
Lead burning. Classes of 211
Lead burning. Equipment for 97 and 143
Lead burning. General instructions for 210 to 220
Lead burning plates to straps 217
Lead burning terminals 213
Lead burning. Safety precautions for 213
Lead melting pots 220
Lead mould 164
Lead moulding instructions 220
Light for shop 187 and 190
Loose active material 75
Loose active material caused by buckling 76
Loose active material caused by overdischarge 75
Loss of capacity 88
Loss of charge in an idle battery 89
Lugs. Extending plate 219

M

Manufacture of batteries 9 to 26
Manufacture of batteries. Assembling and sealing 23
Manufacture of batteries. Auxiliary rubber separators 15
Manufacture of batteries. Cases 22
Manufacture of batteries. Casting the grid 9
Manufacture of batteries. Composition of the grid 9
Manufacture of batteries. Covers 16
Manufacture of batteries. Drying the pasted plates 12
Manufacture of batteries. Forming the plates 12
Manufacture of batteries. Home-made batteries 25
Manufacture of batteries. Jars 16
Manufacture of batteries. Materials used for separators 14
Manufacture of batteries. Mixing pastes 11
Manufacture of batteries. Paste formulas 11
Manufacture of batteries. Pasting plates 11
Manufacture of batteries. Philco slotted retainer 15
Manufacture of batteries. Post seal 16
Manufacture of batteries. Preparing batteries for dry shipment 24
Manufacture of batteries. Separators 14
Manufacture of batteries. Terminal connections 25
Manufacture of batteries. Treating separators 14
Manufacture of batteries. Trimming the grid 10
Manufacture of batteries. Vent plugs 22
Manufacture of batteries. Vesta impregnated mats 15
Mechanical rectifier 131
Melting pot for lead 220
Mercury-Arc rectifier 129
Milky electrolyte 206
Motor-generators 106 to 112
Motor-generators. Care of 110
Motor-generators. Operating charging circuits of 109
Motor-generators. Sizes for small and large shops 106
Motor-generators. Suggestions on 108
Moulding instructions 220
Moulding materials 220
Moulds. 164 to 170
Moulds for building up posts 165
Moulds for burning lead sticks 164
Moulds for cell connectors 168
Moulds for plate straps 167 and 169
Moulds for terminal screws 168

N

Negative plates. Changes at, during charge 39
Negative plates. Changes at, during discharge 37
Negatives. Bulged 79
Negatives. Granulated 78
Negatives. Heating of, when exposed to the air 78
Negatives with roughened surface 79
Negatives with softened active material 79
Negatives with hard active material 79
Negatives. Washing and pressing 351
New batteries. Putting, into service 224
Non-sulphating Eveready batteries 402

O

Open-circuits 86
Open-circuits. Caused by acid on soldered joints 86
Open-circuits. Caused by broken terminals 86
Open-circuits. Caused by poor lead burning 86
Opening batteries. Equipment needed in 97
Opening batteries. Heating sealing compound 332
Opening batteries. Instructions for 328
Opening batteries. Pulling elements out of jars 333
Opening batteries. Removing connectors and terminals 329
Opening batteries. Removing post-seal 331
Opening batteries. Scraping compound from covers 334
Opening batteries. When necessary 326
Opening batteries. When unnecessary 325
Operating conditions. Effect of, on capacity 44
Overdischarge causes sulphation 69
Oxides used for plate pastes 11
Oxygen and acetylene lead burning outfit 143
Oxygen and hydrogen lead burning outfit 146
Oxygen and illuminating gas lead burning outfit 146

P

Packing batteries for shipping 271
Painting case after bench charge 203
Paraffine dip pot 182
Paste formulas 11
Pastes. Applying to grids 11
Patent electrolytes 59
Philadelphia radio batteries 260
Philadelphia starting batteries. Age codes for 243
Philadelphia starting batteries. Old type post seal for 398
Philadelphia starting batteries. Putting new, into service 228
Philadelphia starting batteries. Rubber cases for 401
Philadelphia starting batteries. Rubber-Lockt seal 399
Philadelphia starting batteries. Separators for 402
Plante plates 27
Plante's work on the storage battery 27
Plate burning-rack 162
Plate lugs. Extending 219
Plate press 171
Plate strap mould 167 and 169
Plate surface area. Effect of, on capacity 42
Plate troubles 69
Plates. Burning, to straps 217 and 355
Plates charged in wrong direction 81 and 343
Plates. Examining, after opening battery 337
Plates. Sulphated 342
Plates. When old, may be used again 344
Plates. When to put in new 339
Positives. Buckled 80 and 341
Positives. Changes at, during charge 40
Positives. Changes at, during discharge 37
Positives. Frozen 80 and 339
Positives. Rotted, and disintegrated 80 and 341
Positives. Washing 354
Positives which have lost considerable active material 80
Positives with hard active material 81
Positives with soft active material. 80
Post builders 165
Post building instructions 218
Post seal 17
Post seal. Exide 19
Post seal. Philadelphia 399
Post seal. Prest-O-Lite 386
Post seal. Titan 434
Post seal. Universal 430
Post seal. U.S.L. 18
Post seal. Vesta 413
Post seal. Westinghouse 417
Post seal. Willard 424 to 428
Posts. Burning, to plates 217
Pots for melting lead 220
Pressing plates 171
Piest-O-Lite farm lighting batteries 460
Prest-O-Lite farm lighting batteries. Descriptions 460
Prest-O-Lite farm lighting batteries. Opening cells 464
Prest-O-Lite farm lighting batteries. Putting repaired cell into
service 465
Prest-O-Lite farm lighting batteries. Rebuilding 464
Prest-O-Lite farm lighting batteries. Specific gravity of electrolyte
461
Prest-O-Lite radio batteries 262
Prest-O-Lite starting batteries. Age code for 244 (Omitted)
Prest-O-Lite starting batteries. Peening instructions for 395
Prest-O-Lite starting batteries. Old style covers for 386
Prest-O-Lite starting batteries. Peened post seal for 386
Prest-O-Lite starting batteries. Peening posts of 391 and 394
Prest-O-Lite starting batteries. Peening press for 390
Prest-O-Lite starting batteries. Post locking outfit for 388
Prest-O-Lite starting batteries. Putting new into service 233
Prest-O-Lite starting batteries. Rebuilding posts of 393
Prest-O-Lite starting batteries. Removing covers from 392
Prest-O-Lite starting batteries. Tables of 396 (Omitted)
Primary cell 5
Purchasing methods 299 (Omitted)
Putting new batteries into service 224

Q

(No entries)

R

Radio audion bulb 253
Radio batteries 252
Radio batteries. Exide 257
Radio batteries. General features of 255
Radio batteries. Philadelphia 260
Radio batteries. Prest-O-Lite 262
Radio batteries. Universal 263
Radio batteries. U. S. L. 261
Radio batteries. Vesta 256
Radio batteries. Westinghouse 259
Radio batteries. Willard 257
Radio receiving sets. Types of 252
Rebuilding batteries 328 (to rest of chapter 15)
Rebuilding batteries. Adjusting electrolyte 373
Rebuilding batteries. Burning-on cell connectors 371
Rebuilding batteries. Burning-on plates 355
Rebuilding batteries. Charging rebuilt batteries 373
Rebuilding batteries. Cleaning 329
Rebuilding batteries. Cleaning and painting the case 372
Rebuilding batteries. Determining repairs necessary 335
Rebuilding batteries. Eliminating short-circuits 348
Rebuilding batteries. Examining the plates 337
Rebuilding batteries. Filling jars with electrolyte 364
Rebuilding batteries. Heating sealing compound 332
Rebuilding batteries. High rate discharge test 374
Rebuilding batteries. Marking the repaired battery 372
Rebuilding batteries. Preliminary charge 349
Rebuilding batteries. Pressing negatives 351
Rebuilding batteries. Pulling plates out of jars 333
Rebuilding batteries. Putting elements in jars 362
Rebuilding batteries. Putting on the covers 365
Rebuilding batteries. Reassembling the elements 361
Rebuilding batteries. Removing connectors and terminals 329
Rebuilding batteries. Removing defective jars 359
Rebuilding batteries. Removing post seal 331
Rebuilding batteries. Repairing the case 360
Rebuilding batteries. Scraping compound from covers and jars 334
Rebuilding batteries. Sealing double covers 366
Rebuilding batteries. Sealing single covers 371
Rebuilding batteries. Testing jars 356
Rebuilding batteries. Tightening loose elements 363
Rebuilding batteries. Using 1.400 acid 364
Rebuilding batteries. Washing negatives 351
Rebuilding batteries. Washing positives 354
Rebuilding batteries. When old plates may be used again 344
Rebuilding batteries, When to put in new plates 339
Rebuilding batteries. Work on jars 356
Rectifier. Mechanical 131
Rectifier. Mercury are 129
Rectifier. Stahl 132
Rectifier. Tungar 113
Reinsulation 274
Relations between chemical actions and electricity 31
Rental batteries. General policy for 251
Rental batteries. Marking 249 and 296
Rental batteries. Record of 251
Rental batteries. Stock card for 297 (Omitted very simple chart)
Rental batteries. Terminals for 248
Reversed plates 81 and 89
Reversed-series generator. Adjusting 290

S

S. A. E. ratings for batteries 45
Safety first rules 275
Safety precautions during lead-burning 213
Screw mould .... 168
Sealing around the posts 17
Sealing compound. Composition of 150
Sealing compound. Equipment for handling 149
Sealing compound. Heating with electricity 333
Sealing compound. Heating with gasoline torch 333
Sealing compound. Heating with hot water 332
Sealing compound. Heating with lead burning flame 333
Sealing compound. Heating with steam 332
Sealing compound. Instructions for heating properly 150
Sealing compound. Removing with hot putty knife 332
Secondary cell 5
Sediment. Effect of excessive 87
Separator cutter 171
Separator troubles 81 and 346
Separators for farm lighting batteries 438
Separators. Improperly treated, cause unsatisfactory negative-cadmium
readings 181
Separators. Putting in new 274
Separators. Storing 273
Separators. Threaded rubber 430
Service records 293
Shedding 74
Shedding caused by charging only a portion of the plate 75
Shedding caused by charging sulphated plate at too high a rate 74
Shedding caused by excessive charging rate 74
Shedding caused by freezing 75
Shedding caused by overcharging 74
Shedding. Normal 74
Shedding. Result of 74
Shelving and racks 152
Shipping batteries 271
Shop equipment 95
Shop equipment for charging 100
Shop equipment for general work 98
Shop equipment for lead-burning 97
Shop equipment for opening batteries 97
Shop equipment for work on cases 98
Shop equipment for work on connectors and terminals 98
Shop equipment which is absolutely necessary 96
Shop floor 186 187?
Shop layouts 187? 189 to 196
Shop light 190? 191
Short-circuits. Eliminating 348
Single covers. Scaling 371
Sink. Working drawings of 144 and 145
Specific gravity at end of bench charge 203
Specific gravity. Changes in, during charge 39
Specific gravity. Changes in, during discharge 35
Specific gravity. Definition of 60
Specific gravity. Effect of, on capacity 43
Specific gravity in farm lighting cells 438
Specific gravity. Limits of, during charge and discharge 43
Specific gravity rises above 1.300 205
Specific gravity rises long before voltage on charge 205
Specific gravity should be measured every two weeks 60
Specific gravity. What determines, of fully charged cell 438
Specific gravity. What different values of, indicate 60
Specific gravity. Why 1.280-1.300 indicates fully charged cell 43
Specific gravity will not rise to 1.280 204
Specific gravity readings. Effect of temperature on 65
Specific gravity readings. How to take 61
Specific gravity readings. If above 1.300 318 and 323
Specific gravity readings. If all above 1.200 318
Specific gravity readings. If below 1.150 in all cells 318 and 321?
Specific gravity readings. If between 1.150 and 1.200 in all cells 318
and 321?
Specific gravity readings. If unequal 318 and 322
Specific gravity readings. Troubles indicated by 63
Stahl rectifier 132
Starting ability discharge test 267
Steamer 158
Steps in the use of electricity on the automobile 1
Storage battery does not "store" electricity 6
Storage cell 5
Storing batteries dry 240
Storing batteries wet 239
Strap. Burning plates to 217
Strap mould 167 and 169
Sulphate. Effect of, on voltage during discharge 32
Sulphation. Caused by adding acid 72
Sulphation. Caused by battery standing idle 70
Sulphation. Caused by impurities 72
Sulphation. Caused by low electrolyte 71
Sulphation. Caused by overdischarge 69
Sulphation. Caused by overheating 72
Sulphation. Caused by starvation 71

T

Temperature. Cause of high, on car 324
Temperature corrections in specific gravity readings 65
Temperature. Effect of, on battery operation 66
Temperature. Effect of, on capacity 46
Temperature of batteries on charging bench 202
Terminal connections 25
Terminals. Burning-on 213
Terminals for rental batteries 248
Testing and examining incoming batteries 317
Testing and filling service 291
Testing the electrical system 276
Third brush generator. Adjusting 289
Threaded rubber separators 430
Time required for bench charge 203
Titan batteries 432
Titan batteries. Age code for 245 (Omitted)
Treating separators 14
Trickle charge 239
Trimming plate grids 10
Trouble charts 321
Troubles arising during bench charge 204
Troubles. Battery 69
Trucks for batteries 173
Tungar rectifier. Battery connections of 127
Tungar rectifier. Four battery 119
Tungar rectifier. General instructions for 126
Tungar rectifier. Half-wave and full-wave 114 and 115
Tungar rectifier. Installation of 126
Tungar rectifier. Line connections of 127
Tungar rectifier. One battery 117
Tungar rectifier. Operation of 128
Tungar rectifier. Principle of 113
Tungar rectifier. Ten battery 120
Tungar rectifier. Troubles with 128
Tungar rectifier. Twenty battery 122
Tungar rectifier. Two ampere 116
Tungar rectifier. Two battery 118
Turntable for batteries 170

U

Universal radio batteries 263
Universal starting batteries 430
Universal starting batteries. Construction features of 430
Universal starting batteries. Putting new, into service 431
Universal starting batteries. Types 430
U. S. L. radio batteries. 261
U. S. L. starting batteries. Age code for 246
U. S. L. starting batteries. Special instructions for 382
U. S. L. starting batteries. Tables of 384 (Omitted)
U. S. L. vent tube construction 20

V

Vent plugs should be left in place during charge 209
Vent tube construction 20
Vesta radio batteries 256
Vesta starting batteries 408
Vesta starting batteries. Age code for 246246
Vesta starting batteries. Isolators for 408
Vesta starting batteries. Post seal 413
Vesta starting batteries. Putting new, into service 227
Vesta starting batteries. Separators 413 and 415
Vesta starting batteries. Type D 409
Vesta starting batteries. Type DJ 412
Vibrating regulators. Adjusting 290
Vinegar-like odor. Cause of 205
Voltage. Causes of low 321
Voltage changes during charge 38
Voltage changes during discharge 32
Voltage, limiting value of, on discharge 34
Voltage of cell. Factors determining 34
Voltage of a fully charged cell 203
Voltage readings at end of bench charge 203
Voltage readings on open circuit worthless 177
Voltaic cell 4

W

Wash tank. Working drawings of 144
Water. Condenser for distilled 160
Westinghouse farm lighting batteries 498
Westinghouse radio batteries 259
Westinghouse starting batteries 417
Westinghouse starting batteries. Age code for 247247
Westinghouse starting batteries. Plates for 418
Westinghouse starting batteries. Post seal for 417
Westinghouse starting batteries. Putting new, into service 231
Westinghouse starting batteries. Type A 418
Westinghouse starting batteries. Type B 419
Westinghouse starting batteries. Type C 420
Westinghouse starting batteries. Type E 420
Westinghouse starting batteries. Type F 423
Westinghouse starting batteries. Type H 421
Westinghouse starting batteries. Type J 422
Westinghouse starting batteries. Type 0 422
Wet batteries. Putting new, into service 225
Wet storage 239
What's wrong with the battery 313 to 327
When it is unnecessary to open battery 325
When may battery be left on car 324
When must battery be opened 326
When should battery be removed from car 325
Willard farm-lighting batteries 502
Willard radio batteries 257
Willard starting batteries. Age code for 247
Willard starting batteries. Bone-dry 24
Willard starting batteries. Putting new, into service 229
Willard starting batteries with compound sealed post 424
Willard starting batteries with gasket post seal 428
Willard starting batteries with lead cover-inserts 424
Willard threaded-rubber separators 430
Working drawings of bins for stock 158
Working drawings of charging bench 134 to 139
Working drawings of flash-back tank 147
Working drawings of shelving and racks 153 to 157
Working drawings of shop layouts 189 to 196
Working drawings of steamer bench 161
Working drawings of wash tank 144 and 145
Working drawings of work bench 140 and 141

X Y Z

(No entries under X, Y or Z)


A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W XYZ

Index

(Table of) Contents




========================================================================

A VISIT TO THE FACTORY


THE following pages show how Batteries are made at the Factory. The
illustrations will be especially interesting to Battery Service
Station Owners who have conceived the idea that they would like to
manufacture their own batteries.

A completed battery is a simple looking piece of apparatus, yet the
equipment needed to make it is elaborate and expensive, as the
following illustrations will show. Quantity production is necessary in
order to build a good battery at a moderate cost to the car owner, and
quantity production means a large factory, elaborate and expensive
equipment, and a large working force. Furthermore, before any
batteries are put on the market, extensive research and
experimentation is necessary to develop a battery which will prove a
success in the field. This in itself requires considerable time and
money. No manufacturer who has developed formulas and designs at a
considerable expense will disclose them to others who desire to enter
the manufacturing field as competitors, nor can anyone expect them to
do so.

If the man who contemplates entering the battery manufacturing
business can afford to develop his own formulas and designs, build a
factory, and organize a working force, it is, of course, perfectly.
proper for him to become a manufacturer; but unless he can do so, he
should not attempt to make a battery.

The following illustrations, will of course, be of interest to the man
who repairs batteries. A knowledge of the manufacturing processes will
give him a better understanding of the batteries which he repairs. The
less mystery there is about the battery, the more efficiently can the
repairman do his work.

[Photo: Casting Exide Grids]
[Photo: Pasting Exide Plates]
[Photo: Casting Small Exide Battery Parts]
[Photo: Forming Exide Positive Plates]
[Photo: Burning Exide Plates Into Groups]
[Photo: Cutting and grooving Exide wood separators]
[Photo: Charging Exide batteries]
[Photo: Mixing paste for Prest-O-Lite batteries]
[Photo: Moulding Prest-O-Lite Grids]
[Photo: Inspecting Prest-O-Lite grids for defects]
[Photo: Prest-O-Lite pasting room]
[Photo: Pasting Prest-O-Lite plates]
[Photo: A corner of Prest-O-Lite forming room]
[Photo: General view of Prest-O-Lite assembly room]
[Photo: Power operated Prest-O-Lite peening press]
[Photo: Inspecting Prest-O-Lite separators]
[Photo: Inserting separators in Prest-O-Lite plate elements]
[Photo: Final inspection of Prest-O-Lite batteries]
[Photo: Prest-O-Lite experimental laboratory]
[Photo: Laboratory tests of oxides for Vesta batteries]
[Photo: Moulding Vesta grids]
[Photo: Preparing Vesta plates for the forming room]
[Photo: Burning Vesta plates into groups.  Assembling groups with
        isolators.]
[Photo: Vesta acid mixing room]
[Photo: Checking and adjusting cell readings of Vesta batteries on
        development charge]
[Photo: Final assembly inspection of Vesta batteries]
[Photo: Trimming Westinghouse grids]
[Photo: Pasting Westinghouse plates]
[Photo: Burning Westinghouse plates into groups]
[Photo: Packing Westinghouse batteries for shipment]
[Illustration: AMBU Official Service Station]