[Illustration: Fauna, W. Australia]

CHAPTER X.

_WESTERN AUSTRALIA._


_Monday, May 9th._--At 3 A.M. carried away the clew of the mainsail,
and at 7 A.M. set more sail. At 10 A.M. we made West Cape Howe,
Western Australia, our first land since leaving the Allas Strait. It
was with great joy and relief, as well as with, I think, pardonable
pride in Tom's skill as a navigator, that I went on deck to see these
rock-bound shores. It was certainly a good landfall, especially
considering the difficulties which we had met with on account of the
chronometers. The instrument which for years has been considered the
most trustworthy suddenly changed its rate, and has been losing three
seconds in the twenty-four hours. The navigators have been taking
great pains. Observations have been frequent. Fifteen sights were
taken daily, in three sets of five at three different periods.

Tom's estimated average run of 1,000 knots per week under sail has
come out pretty well, and my own daily estimates of the run have been
also surprisingly near the mark. In fact, Tom thinks them rather
wonderful, considering that they have been arrived at simply by
watching and thinking of the vessel's ways all day and part of the
night, and often without asking any questions.

At 11 A.M. we lowered the mainsail and raised the funnel. At noon we
had run 190 miles, and were half a mile to the northward of Eclipse
Island, the barometer standing at 30·19, and the thermometer at 59°.
At one o'clock we passed inside Vancouver's Ledge. The coast seemed
fine and bold, the granite rocks looking like snow on the summit of
the cliffs, at the foot of which the fleecy rollers were breaking in a
fringe of pale green sea, whilst on the other side the water remained
of a magnificent deep ultramarine colour.

About two o'clock we rounded Bald Head, soon after which the
harbour-master of King George Sound and a pilot came on board, and
were the first to welcome us to Western Australia. Over the lowland on
one side we could see a P. & O. steamer, with the Blue Peter flying.
Accordingly we sealed up all our mails and hurried them off, having
previously hoisted the signal to ask if they could be received. By
four o'clock we were at anchor in King George Sound, which reminded us
much of Pictou in Nova Scotia.

Albany is a clean-looking little town, scarcely more than a village,
built on the shore of the bay, and containing some 2,000 inhabitants.
We were soon in the gig, on the way to the P. & O. steamer 'Shannon'
to see our old friend Captain Murray. After looking round the familiar
decks, and having tea on board, we exchanged good wishes for a fair
voyage, and rowed ashore, landing on a long wooden pier.

Carriages are not to be hired in Albany, but we found an obliging
carter, who had come to fetch hay from the wharf, and who consented to
carry me, instead of a bundle of hay, up to the house of Mr. Loftie,
the Government Resident. We have decided to remain a week in order to
give me a chance of recruiting; besides which the 'Sunbeam' needs a
little painting and touching-up to make her look smart again after all
the hard work and buffetings she has gone through.

Most of the party stayed on shore to dinner, for the kitchen-range on
board the 'Sunbeam' has got rather damaged by the knocking about of
the last few days. I went back, however, in my primitive conveyance as
far as the end of the pier, and then returned straight on board,
feeling very tired with even so short an expedition. In the course of
the afternoon a large sackful of letters and newspapers from England
was delivered on board, much to our delight.

_Tuesday, May 10th._--A busy morning with letters and telegrams. Dogs
are not allowed to land in any part of Australia until they have
performed six months' quarantine, but I was able to take mine ashore
at Quarantine Island, which we found without much difficulty with the
aid of a chart. A little before one o'clock we landed at the pier,
where Mr. Loftie met us, and drove us to the Residency to lunch. It
was a great treat to taste fresh bread and butter and cream once more,
especially to me, for these are among the few things I am able to eat.
After lunch several ladies and gentlemen came to call on us.

I was sorry to hear that a terrible epidemic of typhoid fever seems to
be ravaging this little town. Built as it is on the side of a hill
overlooking the sea, and with a deliciously invigorating air always
blowing, Albany ought to be the most perfect sanatorium in the world.
Later in the afternoon I went for a drive with Mrs. Loftie all round
the place, seeing the church, schools, and new town hall, as well as
the best and worst parts of the town. It was no longer a mystery why
the place should be unhealthy, for the water-supply seems very bad,
although the hills above abound with pure springs. The drainage from
stables, farm-buildings, poultry yards, and various detached houses
apparently has been so arranged as to fall into the wells which supply
each house. The effect of this fatal mistake can easily be imagined,
and it is sad to hear of the valuable young lives that have been cut
off in their prime by this terrible illness.

In the course of our drive we passed near an encampment of aborigines,
but did not see any of the people themselves. We also passed several
large heaps of whales' bones, collected, in the days when whales were
numerous here, by a German, with the intention of burning or grinding
them into manure. Formerly this part of the coast used to be a good
ground for whalers, and there were always five or six vessels in or
out of the harbour all the year round. But the crews, with their usual
shortsightedness, not content with killing their prey in the ordinary
manner, took to blowing them up with dynamite, the result being that
they killed more than they could deal with, and frightened the
remainder away.

The steward's report on the resources of the place from a marketing
point of view is more curious than encouraging. There is no fresh
butter nor milk to be had, except through the kindness of a few
private individuals. Mutton abounds, but there is very little beef or
veal. Good York hams are to be procured from England only. Fruit and
vegetables are brought down from Perth or come over from Adelaide, and
the most eatable salt butter is brought from Melbourne.

[Illustration: Kingia]

_Wednesday, May the 11th._--It had been settled that to-day should be
devoted to an excursion to the forests which are now being opened up
by the new line of railway in course of construction. The special
train of ballast-trucks which had been provided for us was to have
started at ten o'clock, soon after which hour we landed, some delay
having been caused at the last moment by the receipt of a message
requesting us to send ashore every rug we possessed, in order to make
the truck in which we were to travel as comfortable as possible. The
required wraps and furs had accordingly to be got up from the hold,
where they had lain for months past. On landing we found a pleasant
party assembled to receive us, including the engineer of the new line,
Mr. Stewart, and his wife. In due course we were all seated on two
long planks, back to back, in open trucks, behind an engine and
tender. We commenced our journey by slowly passing the enclosures,
gardens, and courts adjoining the houses of the town. About
three-quarters of a mile out of Albany we stopped to water the engine
at a primitive trough in a cutting about twelve feet deep--the deepest
on the whole line, which in the main is laid over a surface as flat
as a pancake.

The morning was simply perfect--one of those days which make mere
existence a pleasure; the air felt light and invigorating, the sun was
bright and warm; all seemed so different from the damp muggy air or
fierce burning sunshine of which we have had so much experience
lately.

Our route lay over a sort of moorland, sprinkled with rare ericas such
as we carefully preserve in greenhouses at home. Other flowers there
were, too, in abundance, and of many kinds, including scarlet
bottle-brushes, large white epacris, and mimosa covered with yellow
balls of blossom. The trees seemed to consist chiefly of white gum,
peppermint, and banksias, and all looked rather ragged and untidy. One
great feature of the vegetation was what are called the 'black-boys'
(_Xanthorrhea_), somewhat resembling tree-ferns, with a huge black
pineapple stem, at the top of which grows a bushy tuft of grass-like
foliage.

About nine miles out we came to a broad stretch of water known by the
very prosaic name of 'Nine-mile Lake.' It looked lovely this bright
morning, with the opposite hills and a fine group of blue gum-trees
sharply mirrored in its glassy surface. The train stopped for a few
minutes to enable us to admire the view and to take some photographs.
In the course of another mile or so we quitted the main line to Perth,
and proceeded along a branch line leading into the heart of the
forest. The undergrowth was nowhere very thick, and where it had been
cleared by burning, fine grass had sprung up in its place. As we left
the moorland and got into the real forest of grand gum-trees the scene
became most striking. The massive stems of many of the eucalypti were
between thirty and forty feet in circumference and over a hundred feet
in height. The glimpses which we caught between these tall trees of
Torbay, with the waves breaking in huge rollers on the shore or in
angry surf against the steep cliffs of Eclipse Island, were quite
fascinating.

We steamed slowly along the lightly ballasted line--only laid
yesterday, and over which no engine has yet travelled--two men running
on in front to tap the rails and joints, and to see that all was safe.
About three-quarters of a mile of rail is laid each day. It is being
built on what is called the land-grant system; that is to say, for
every mile completed the Government give the railway company 6,000
square acres of land, to be chosen at the completion of the line by
the company's agent, the Government reserving to themselves the right
of alternate frontage to the railway. The distance from Albany to
Beverly (a town standing about 120 miles equidistant from Perth and
Fremantle, which will be the terminus of the line, at any rate for the
present) is 220 miles. The line was commenced and should have been
carried on from both ends, but the contractors find it much cheaper to
work only from the Albany end. It ought to be a very cheap line, for
it requires scarcely any earthworks and no rock-cuttings or bridges,
the soil being loose and gravelly with a granite foundation. There are
few rivers to cross; and timber for the sleepers is to be had in
abundance, and of the best quality, from the trees which must
necessarily be cut down to clear the forest for the passage of the
line. The entire road was to have been completed in three years from
the time of commencement; but it will probably be finished in about
two, as a good deal of the work is already done.

[Illustration: Black-Boys]

We were taken by another branch line to some saw-mills, where the
sleepers for the railway are prepared. Here some of us got into a
light American buggy drawn by a fine strong pair of cart-horses, in
which conveyance we took our first drive through the bush. To me it
seemed rather rough work, for in many places there was no track at
all, while in others the road was obstructed by 'black-boys' and by
innumerable tree-stumps, which the horses avoided or stepped over
most cleverly. Still the wheels could not be expected to show quite so
much intelligence, and we consequently suffered frequent and violent
jolts. From the driver--a pleasant, well-informed man--I learnt a good
deal respecting the men employed on the line. There are about 130
hands, living up here in the forest, engaged in hewing down, sawing,
and transporting trees. These, with the women and children
accompanying them, form a population of 200 souls suddenly established
in the depths of a virgin forest. They have a school, and a
schoolmaster who charges two shillings a week per head for schooling,
and has fourteen pupils. He was dressed like a gentleman, but earns
less than the labourers, who get ten shillings a day, or 3_l._ a week,
the best hands being paid regularly under all conditions of weather,
and only the inferior labourers receiving their wages for the time
during which they are actually at work. There are four fine teams of
Australian-bred horses, and a spare pair for road or bush work.
Communication with Albany, the base of operations, is of course
maintained by means of the line, some of the navvies even coming from
and returning thither each day in the trucks. The married men who live
in the forest have nice little three-roomed cottages, and those I went
into were neatly papered and furnished, and looked delightfully clean
and tidy. The single men generally live in a sort of tent with
permanent walls of brick or wood, and mess at a boarding-house for
eighteen shillings a week. This seems a good deal for a labourer to
pay for food alone, but it really means five good meals a day. The
little colony has a butcher attached to it, from whom meat of the
finest quality may be purchased at sixpence per pound, all but the
prime parts being thrown away.

The rest of the party having walked up the line, I waited for them at
the house of the District Manager, who with his wife received me most
hospitably. On the walls of the apartment I was interested to notice
the portraits of some of those who had been connected with my
father-in-law in business, and who are now in the employ of Messrs.
Miller, the contractors for this line.

As soon as Mr. Stewart and the rest of the party had joined us, we
proceeded to the saw-mills and watched some great logs of jarrah being
cut into sleepers. There were no elephants to assist in the operation
as in Burmah, so that all the work had to be done by steam, with a
little help from men and horses. Quantities of fragrant rose-coloured
sawdust, used for stable litter, were lying about. Tons of wood not
large enough for sleepers were being burned in order to get rid of it.
It seemed a terribly wasteful proceeding, but there was more material
than was wanted, and space after all was the great thing needed.

From the saw-mills we penetrated further into the forest, in order to
see more large trees cut down, hewn into logs, and dragged away. Some
of the giants of the forest were really magnificent. We followed a
double team of sixteen horses drawing a timber-cart composed of one
long thick pole between two enormous wheels some seven or eight feet
in diameter. Above these wheels a very strong iron arch is fastened,
provided with heavy chains, by means of which and with the aid of an
iron crowbar, used as a lever, almost any weight of timber can be
raised from the ground. The apparatus is called a 'jinka.' The men
engaged in the work sit upon the pole with the greatest _sangfroid_ as
it goes bumping and crashing through the forest, striking up against
big trees, or knocking down small ones; sometimes one wheel and
sometimes another high on the top of a stump, or sometimes both wheels
firmly fixed in one of the numerous deep holes. The scene was
altogether most picturesque, as well as interesting; and it must be
remembered that the top of each stump was larger than the surface of a
large dining-table. The trees were from eighty to one hundred feet in
height, all their branches springing from near the summit, so that the
shadows cast were quite different from those one is accustomed to see
in an ordinary wood. The day was brilliant, the sun shining brightly,
and the blue sky relieved by a few white fleecy clouds moving softly
before a gentle air. The timber-cutters were of fine physique, with
brawny limbs and sunburnt faces.

We watched the adventures of one enormous log. A team of fourteen
horses were yoked to a strong chain attached by large hooks to a trunk
of such vast proportions that it seemed as if all the king's horses
and all the king's men could never make it stir an inch. Twice the
effort was made, and twice it failed. First, the hooks slipped off the
end, and as the horses were pulling and tugging with all their might,
directly the weight was removed away they went helter-skelter down the
steep hill, up which they had just climbed with so much difficulty,
being utterly unable to stop themselves on the steep slippery ground.
Next time the chain broke as the horses were straining every muscle,
and the same tantalising process was repeated with even more striking
effect. The whole of the long team of the fifteen horses (for they had
added another this time) became hopelessly entangled, two of the poor
animals either falling or getting hampered and knocked down in their
headlong gallop. The third time the log was got into position; the
'jinka,' with only one horse attached to it, was brought close, the
pole was lowered, and the levers applied with such force that they not
only raised the log but very nearly the unfortunate horse also into
the air. When all was satisfactorily arranged, the other horses were
attached to the jinka, and away they all went merrily down the hill,
but only to come into collision with a big tree. The horses had again
to be taken out, and harnessed this time to the other end of the
jinka, so as to pull it in the opposite direction. At last the big log
reached the saw-mills in safety, about the same time as we got there
ourselves. We visited the village shop, which appeared to be well
supplied with useful stores, and also the butcher's and carpenter's
shops, and the smithy. They have never seen a clergyman or doctor up
here, but by railway there is easy communication with the town if
necessary. In the course of our rambles we heard the disheartening
intelligence that, owing to some misunderstanding, our train had
already gone back to Albany, taking with it not only our luncheon, but
all the wraps. We proceeded, however, to the trysting-place, only to
be greeted by blank looks of disappointment as each new arrival
received the unpleasant news that the report of the train's erratic
proceeding was only too well founded. Everybody was tired, cold, and
hungry, and the conversation naturally languished. At last Mr.
Stewart, who had been down the line to reconnoitre, brought back the
welcome news that the distant snort of the engine could be heard. In
due course it arrived, and the baskets and boxes containing the
much-desired food were transferred from the truck to the bank and
quickly unpacked by willing hands. Never, I am sure, was a luncheon
more thoroughly appreciated than this in the depths of an Australian
forest. The wraps, too, were most acceptable, for the air became keen
directly after the early sunset. When we started on our return
journey, taking back two truck-loads of workmen with us, it really
seemed bitterly cold. Care had also to be taken to shelter ourselves
from the shower of sparks from the wood fire of the engine, which flew
and streamed out behind us like the tail of a rocket. We went back
much more quickly than we had come, and stopped nowhere, except to
take in a fresh supply of wood and water and to drop some of our
passengers at their wayside residences.

Tab started off on horseback early this morning for Kendenup, a large
station about forty miles inland, where we are to join him to-morrow,
having been invited to stay for a day or two and judge for ourselves
what station life is like. We accordingly sent all our luggage ashore
to-night, in readiness for an early start in the morning.

_Thursday, May 12th._--Half-past nine was the hour appointed for our
departure, and soon afterwards we were all assembled on the pier,
where we were met by a little group of friends who had come to see us
off. Mr. Roach, the landlord of the 'White Hart,' was to drive us in a
comfortable-looking light four-wheeled waggonette with a top to it,
drawn by a pair of Government horses. The latter are generally used
for carrying the mails or for the police service, but the Governor had
telegraphed orders that they were to be lent to us for this
expedition, as we could not have made it without them. Mabelle, Mr.
des Graz, and Mr. Pemberton packed in behind, whilst I climbed up in
front next the driver. There was a little difficulty at first in
starting, but once that was overcome it was indeed a case of 'off.' We
galloped four miles without stopping or upsetting, the one fact being
perhaps quite as wonderful as the other. Up hill, down dale, round
corners, over stumps, along rough roads, through heavy sand--on we
went as hard as our horses could gallop. Fortunately there is not much
traffic on the road, and during this mad career we only met two men
walking and passed one cart.

About seven miles from Albany we had to climb a long steep incline,
called Spearwood Hill, from the top of which we had a fine view over
Albany, King George Sound, and the lighthouse on Breaksea Island.
There were a great many flowers and a few trees quite unknown to us in
the bush. Some of the blossoms were extremely pretty, but it was
hopeless to think of stopping to gather them, for our horses were
warranted not to start again under half an hour at least. They went at
a good pace, however, passing another cart, and one colonist on
horseback, very much encumbered with parcels, but not sufficiently so
to prevent him from politely making room for us.

Chorkerup Lake Inn, our first change, fifteen miles from Albany, was
reached in rather less than ninety minutes. It is a long, low,
one-storeyed wooden building, but everything was scrupulously clean.
In a few minutes the table was covered with a spotless cloth, on which
fowls, home-cured bacon, mutton, home-made bread, potted butter,
condensed milk, tea, Bass's beer, and sundry other articles of food
and drink were temptingly displayed. We could not help regretting the
absence of fresh milk and butter; and it does seem wonderful that
where land is of comparatively little value, and where grass springs
up in profusion the moment that land is cleared, people should not
keep a cow or two, especially when the family comprises numerous small
children, and there is a constant though scanty stream of passing
travellers to provide for, whose number will be increased when the
railway passes within a couple of miles of the inn.

Just as we were starting I discovered that the old smith living close
by had been engaged on one of my father-in-law's contracts in South
Wales, and had worked for four years in the Victoria Docks in London.
He was delighted to exchange greetings with us; and it was quite
touching to hear his protestations that he 'did not want nothing at
all, only just to shake hands,' which he did over and over again,
assuring me of his conviction that our visit was 'certain to do a
power of good to the colony.' I suppose he gave us credit for having
inherited, or at all events profited by, some of my dear
father-in-law's good qualities.

The next stage was a long and weary one of another fifteen miles,
mostly through heavy sand. Luckily, we had rather a good pair of big
black horses this time, which took us along well. It was a fine warm
afternoon, like a September day in England; but the drive was
uneventful, and even monotonous except for the numberless jolts. We
only met one cart and passed two houses, one of which was uninhabited
and falling into decay. We also passed a large iguana, a huge kind of
lizard about two feet long, lying sunning himself on the road. The
aborigines eat these creatures, and say they are very good; and I have
heard that white people have also tried them successfully. Their eggs
are delicious, and when roasted in hot embers taste just like baked
custard. They lay from twenty to thirty in the large ant-heaps which
one constantly meets with in the bush, and which when rifled, in
January or February, yield a rich harvest of these eggs. A shrub very
much like dogwood, with a lilac flower rather like a large thistle,
but with the leaves turned back, was plentiful, and is a valuable
product, horses being able to live upon it for many weeks without
water, though it does not look especially succulent. We saw beautiful
parrots of all colours flying across the road, besides magpies and
'break-of-day' birds, a species of magpie. Our driver was very
obliging in pointing out everything of interest, including the
Pongerup and Stirling Ranges in the blue distance.

At the end of the thirty-one miles we came to one of the advanced
railway villages inhabited by the pioneers of civilisation. It was
very like the one we visited yesterday; in fact, I suppose they are
all similar, experience having taught that a certain style of
arrangement is the most convenient.

[Illustration: A Breakdown in the Bush]

A couple of miles further brought us--in two hours forty minutes from
Chorkerup--in sight of a tidy little house and homestead standing in
the midst of a small clearing, surrounded by haystacks and sheds, and
really looking like a bit of the old country.

Right glad we all were to get out and stretch our weary limbs after
the shaking and jolting of the last sixteen miles; and still more
welcome was a cup of good tea with real cream, home-made bread, and
fresh butter, offered with the greatest hospitality and kindness, in a
nice old-fashioned dining-room. Everything was exquisitely clean, and
nicely served. The sitting-room contained several books, and the
bedrooms all looked comfortable. The outside of the house and the
verandah were covered with woodbines, fuchsias, and Maréchal Niel
roses, whilst the garden was full of pink and white oxalis and other
flowers. I ought, in sheer gratitude, to add that the mistress of this
pretty hostelry absolutely refused all payment, and indeed sent out
her two nice daughters to gather some roses and other flowers for a
nosegay for me.

If it had been difficult to reach this inn from the high road, it
seemed ever so much more difficult to get away from it by quite
another route. It was like leaving the palace of the Sleeping Beauty,
so dense was the forest and so impossible to find the ancient track,
already quite overgrown. A little perseverance, however, brought us
once more to the main road, along which we bowled and jolted at a
merry pace for about ten miles. We met four wagons, drawn by four
horses each, and laden with sandal-wood, guided, or rather left to
themselves, by a Chinaman. It was with great difficulty that we
succeeded in passing the first three wagons, and in getting out of our
way the fourth collided with a tree, which, I thought, _must_ bring it
to a standstill; but no: after prodigious exertion on the part of the
horses, and a great straining of harness and knocking about of
woodwork, it crashed slowly on, breaking the tree--which was a
tolerably thick one--completely in two, and carrying part of it away.

At the end of the ten miles we again turned off the main road at a
point where a solitary pillar-post and parcel-box stood by the
wayside, and once more plunged into the intricacies of a by-track.
Lucky it was that we had saved the daylight, for some of the holes
were deep enough to have upset any trap, and there was a steep hill,
which our driver seemed to view with great apprehension, though I do
not fancy we should think much of it in East Sussex. Soon after this
we came to a large homestead and farm, near which a number of sheep
were folded. On the opposite bank stood a substantial-looking wooden
house, surrounded by a verandah and by a clump of trees, in the middle
of what might have been an English park, to judge from the grass and
the fine timber; and after crossing a small creek we reached the
hospitable door of Kendenup Station.

[Illustration: TREE-FERNS, AUSTRALIA]

It had turned bitterly cold after leaving Mount Barker, and I realised
the value of the warning which our Albany friends had given as to the
treacherous character of the Australian climate at this time of year.
In fact I felt thoroughly chilled, and quite too miserably ill to do
justice to any of the many kindnesses prepared, except that of a
blazing wood fire.

Tab seemed to have spent a pleasant morning riding through the bush
after kangaroos, of which plenty had been seen, but none killed. The
very beauty of the day interfered with the sport, for the air was so
still and clear that the kangaroos heard and saw the hunters long
before they could get within shot. After supper the gentlemen went out
to hunt opossums by moonlight, and shot two, literally 'up a
gum-tree.' Opossum-hunting does not seem great sport, for the poor
little animals sit like cats on the branch of a tree, with their long
tails hanging down, and are easily spied by a dog or a native.

_Friday, May 13th._--It was a very cold night, the thermometer falling
to freezing-point. Woke at six, to find a bright, clear, cold morning,
with a sharp wind blowing from the south, which is of course the
coldest quarter in this part of the world. At seven a delicious cup of
tea was brought up, and at eight we breakfasted, the table being
charmingly decorated with fresh flowers and fruit. Afterwards a stroll
round the house, gardens, and orchard, and a gossip over the fire,
occupied the early part of the morning very agreeably.

The difficulty of housekeeping here must be extreme. It is almost
impossible to keep servants in the far-away bush; they all like to be
near a town. I would earnestly advise everybody thinking of going to
any out-of-the-way part of our colonies to learn to a certain extent
how to do everything for himself or herself. Cooking, baking, and
washing, besides making and mending, are duties which a woman may very
likely have to undertake herself, or to teach an untrained servant to
perform. I should be inclined to add to the list of desirable
accomplishments riding, driving, and the art of shoeing and saddling a
horse in case of emergency; for the distances from place to place are
great, and the men are often all out on the run or in the bush.

About half-past nine Mr. Hassall took me for a drive round the station
and clearing. We saw the remains of the old gold-workings, not two
hundred yards from the house. Up to now they have been unprofitable,
but hopes are entertained that, with better machinery for crushing the
quartz, larger results may be obtained. At present the expense of
working is so great that the gold is not found in paying quantities.

From the deserted gold-field we drove through some enclosed land where
corn and 'straw-hay' had been grown, but had been given up because it
did not pay. Then through more enclosures for cattle and sheep, and
finally over some virgin land, across what might have been an English
park if it had not looked so untidy from many of the trees having been
'rung'--an ugly but economical method of felling timber, by cutting a
deep furrow round the bark so as to stop the circulation, and thus
cause the tree to die. Then we crossed a now dried-up river, and
climbed the opposite bank of a creek, to a point from which we had a
lovely view of the distant Stirling Range.

I was interested to hear that, with the aid of a foreman from Suffolk,
the system of rotation of crops had been tried here with great
success, as far as production went. Never were such wheat and
'straw-hay' crops seen in the colony; but, after all, the farm did not
pay, for flour from South Australia could be purchased cheaper; and as
teams are constantly going into Albany with loads of sandal-wood and
wool, the carriage out costs very little.

I was told that the land here only carries one sheep to ten acres. On
these extensive sheep-walks good dogs are much wanted; but they are
very rare, for the tendency of the present breed is to drive and harry
the sheep too much. They have one good dog on the run here, who knows
every patch of poison-plant between Kendenup and the grazing-ground,
and barks round it, keeping the sheep off it, till the whole flock has
safely passed. This poison-plant--of which there are several kinds,
some more deadly than others--is the bane of the colony. They say that
sheep born in the colony know it, and impart their knowledge to their
lambs, but that all imported sheep eat it readily and die at once.

The homestead is a nice, large, comfortable place with plenty of room
for man and beast, including any stray bachelors and other wayfarers,
who claim hospitality almost as a right in these isolated localities.
Adjoining the homestead is a well-stocked store, at which everything
can be bought, from lollypops to suits of clothing, and from which the
shepherds obtain most of their supplies. There are also enclosures for
wild horses, which are numerous, and are occasionally hunted and
captured. Last night two were brought into the station. Of course
every accommodation is provided for the care and treatment of sheep in
the various stages of their existence, including the means of washing
and shearing them. An orchard and fruit-garden close by yield tons of
fruit every year for the merest scratching of the soil. To obtain
labour is the difficulty. The birds, especially parrots, are terrible
enemies to the fruit-crops. In the early morning one may see a tree
laden with splendid fruit just ready to be gathered, and in an hour
later the whole may be on the ground--not eaten, but simply thrown
down, bruised and spoilt, by the birds. Although the thermometer fell
to freezing-point last night, we had pomegranates at dessert which had
been grown and ripened in the open air. Oranges and lemons grow well,
and vines flourish, wine-making having been already tried with fair
success in Western Australia.

Arrangements had been made for a kangaroo-hunt to-morrow. I should
dearly like to see one; but it is impossible to remain for it, as not
only is Tom expecting us to return, but I feel much too weak and ill
to think of riding. It was therefore settled that Mabelle, Tab, and
Mr. Pemberton should stay, and Mr. des Graz and I return to Albany. A
black boy was despatched on horseback to Mount Barker with sundry
telegrams to make arrangements for staying at Albany over next Monday
night, when it is proposed to give a ball in our honour. Posts are so
few and far between in Western Australia, and indeed in many other
parts of the continent, that telegrams generally take the place of
letters. The cost of a message is very moderate within the limits of
each colony, but terribly dear when once those limits are passed.

At twelve o'clock the waggonette came to the door, and I resumed my
place in front, well wrapped up, for it was raining hard. We left the
buggy to bring on the others to-morrow, and started on our way, full
of regret at having to leave so soon, and of gratitude for the
kindness and hospitality we had received.

Just before leaving, we had an opportunity of seeing a native lad
throw a boomerang--or kylie, as they are called here. I could not have
believed that a piece of wood could have looked and behaved so exactly
like a bird, quivering, turning, flying, hovering, and swooping, with
many changes of pace and direction, and finally alighting close to the
thrower's feet.

The horses were tired, and our progress was therefore somewhat slow as
far as Mount Barker, where Mrs. Cooper--the hostess--again received us
cordially, quickly lighted a fire, and made me comfortable in front of
it. Then she produced a regular country lunch, ending with a grape
tart, plenty of thick cream, and splendid apples and pears. I gave her
some books in remembrance of our little visit; and she finally sent me
away rested and refreshed, with a present of fresh butter and flowers.

[Illustration: Boomerangs or Kylies]

It was nearly dark by the time we left Chorkerup--indeed, scarcely
light enough to distinguish the kind landlady's white apron as she ran
out to greet us. Such a warm welcome as she gave us! and such a good
meal of poached eggs, cutlets, bacon, and all sorts of good things, in
spite of our protests that we wanted only a cup of tea! Her children
had gathered me a beautiful nosegay of bush flowers, and she put up
some bunches of 'everlastings,' for which this part of the world is
famous, and which are said to keep fresh for years.

I settled down as best I could in the back of the waggonette before
the horses were put in, so as to be quite ready for the actual start,
which was a work of time and difficulty; for the horses at first
absolutely refused to move forward, though they kept alternately
rearing, kicking, plunging, and standing stubbornly still. At the end
of half an hour's efforts our coachman, who had been exhorted to stick
tight in expectation of a flying start, gave up the attempt, and the
horses were removed. After some discussion the least tired of the past
pair and the least wicked of the present were put in, and off we went,
with a jerk and a jolt, and many injunctions to stick to the road.
This was easier said than done; for when we came to the camp-fires of
the lumberers whom I had seen at work yesterday, the glare frightened
our horses, and caused them to swerve off the road, and dash into the
bush by the side. This happened more than once; but even on the road
itself the jerks and jolts were so bad that we were forced to go
slowly, so that we only reached Albany at half-past eight instead of
at six o'clock, and found everybody very anxious about us. Tom and
Baby waited on the pier until past seven, when cold and hunger drove
them back to the yacht.

_Saturday, May 14th._--When I awoke this morning the fever and ague
from which I had been suffering had all disappeared, and, though still
very tired, I felt decidedly better for the change and the bush life.
I am convinced there is nothing like a land journey to restore a
sea-sick person after a voyage. The news which greeted me on arriving
last night had not been cheering, for several of our men were ill with
feverish colds.




[Illustration: Getting under way]

CHAPTER XI.

_ALBANY TO ADELAIDE._


_Saturday, May 14th._--It was a cold showery morning when we landed,
to photograph a party of natives, and see them throw boomerangs and
spears. They were the most miserable-looking objects I ever beheld;
rather like Fuegians. The group consisted of two men, dressed partly
in tattered European clothes, and partly in dirty, greasy
kangaroo-skins heaped one on the top of another, and two women in
equally disreputable costumes. One of the latter had a piccaninny hung
behind her in an opossum-skin, the little hairy head and bright
shining eyes of the child peeping out from its shelter in the
quaintest manner. Although the poor creatures were all so ugly, we did
our best to take some photographs of them, using a pile of sandal-wood
bags as a background. Then we drove up to the cricket-ground to see
them throw their boomerangs or kylies, which they did very cleverly.
One of the kylies was broken against a tree, but most of the others
flew with unerring precision. The spears were thrown from a flat oval
piece of wood, in size and shape something like the blade of a paddle,
which sent them forward with great accuracy and velocity. The natives
have formed a small encampment not far from here, where they live in
the most primitive fashion, very dirty, and quite harmless. Their
nearest neighbour tells me that they come daily to her house for water
and scraps, but that they never attempt to steal anything or cause her
any annoyance.

We next visited two curio shops, kept by Webb and Gardiner. Webb is
rather a clever naturalist, and corresponds with Dr. Hooker; he sent a
good many botanical specimens from this neighbourhood to the Colonial
Exhibition last year. There were some beautiful feathers of the male
and female cockatoo, a few stuffed birds, and a good many weapons,
some of which we bought. At Gardiner's we found more native weapons,
which he buys in the bush and then sets the natives to work to repair.
Fortunately for us, he had only recently returned from one of his
expeditions, and we were therefore able to pick up some of the
specimens in the condition in which he had found them, all rough and
broken from the effects of recent fights. The spear-heads and teeth
are generally made of flint or granite, or old bottle-glass, fastened
to the shaft with kangaroo sinews and the gum of the 'black-boy.' The
tomahawks have double edges fastened on in the same manner. The knives
are like one-sided spear-heads, with a short handle attached. The flat
paddle-shaped pieces of wood by means of which they throw their
spears are called womaras. There were also numerous specimens of
kylies, and curious message-sticks about ten or twelve inches long,
made from the thigh-bone of the kangaroo, and sharply pointed at one
end. A sort of hieroglyph or rude writing is scratched upon them, and
they are used to convey messages from one place to another. We bought
some opossum-skins and rugs of various sorts, and admired the
beautiful live birds, including parrots and cockatoos.

From three to five o'clock I was 'at home' on board the 'Sunbeam.' The
afternoon had improved, and was bright and sunny. I think our guests
were pleased with their visit.

Tab, Mabelle, and Mr. Pemberton returned this afternoon. They seemed
to have had a most enjoyable though fatiguing day, having breakfasted
at seven o'clock, and started before eight. They saw some twenty or
thirty kangaroos, of which they only killed three. At half-past one
they set out for Albany, and drove the forty-two miles, through Mount
Barker and Chorkerup. Mabelle brought me back some bush flowers, very
beautiful and interesting when closely examined, especially the blue
holly, a plant with a holly-like leaf and a blue pea-shaped flower.
Two or three varieties of blue erica, tiny heaths, and epacris were
also very pretty. It is curious how all, even the smallest of the bush
flowers, run to bottle-brush just as readily as the great banksias and
eucalypti, and what strange little bottle-brushy appendages they all
have.

[Illustration: An Aboriginal]

Mabelle also brought some beautiful black cockatoos' feathers. Those
of the male bird have a band of brilliant scarlet right across them,
which looks so artificial that when a fan made of these feathers was
sent lately to New Zealand nobody would believe that it had not been
cleverly painted. The female bird has a light yellow and fawn-coloured
tail, more delicate in colour though not so brilliant as her mate's
plumage. We saw a great flight of black cockatoos yesterday. These
seemed to have white in their tails instead of red. Cockatoos are very
affectionate and loyal to one another--a fact of which those who kill
or capture them take advantage; for if they succeed in wounding a bird
they tie it up in a tree, where, so long as it continues to cry, not
one of its companions will leave it, but will hover around, allowing
themselves to be shot rather than desert a comrade. It is a great pity
these handsome birds devour the grain so terribly that settlers are
obliged to wage a war of extermination against them. Very different is
the behaviour under similar circumstances of the kangaroo, in whom I
have in consequence lost much of my interest. When hard pressed the
doe will take her offspring out of her pouch and fling it to the dogs
to gain time for her own escape. The meat of the joeys, as the young
ones are called, is by far the best, and tastes something like hare,
though it is rather tough and stringy. The flesh of the older animals
is more like that of red deer. Both require to be well basted, and
eaten with red currant jelly, to make them at all palatable.

_Sunday, May 15th._--Such a lovely day--more like an ideal May morning
in England than an Australian winter's day. We attended service in a
picturesque ivy-covered edifice.

After lunch a great many workpeople and others came on board, by
invitation, to see the yacht, as it was impossible for them to visit
it on any other day. The blue waters of the Sound looked quite gay
with the little flotilla of boats coming and going.

At three o'clock we all went ashore in the steam-launch, most of the
party intending to climb up the hill to the signal-station to look at
the view. My own destination was Quarantine Island, where I sat on the
sands in the delicious sunshine, while the dogs ran about and the
children gathered flowers. It seems a nice, healthy, breezy little
place, with a well-planned lazaretto, capable of accommodating a small
number of invalids, and a convenient cottage for the custodian and his
wife, whom we could see out in their boat fishing. While we were on
shore, the men in our boat, with the assistance of two boathooks, but
even then with considerable difficulty, captured an octopus about
three feet across; a horrid-looking monster, which tried to cling to
everything near with its round suckers and long feelers.

_Monday, May 16th._--Tom took me ashore to enable me to keep a
driving engagement; but he was suffering from a chill, and felt very
unwell. Although anxious to try the efficacy of his universal
panacea--exercise--he was ultimately obliged to abandon the experiment
and to return on board.

I enjoyed my drive immensely, for it was a bright sunny morning, with
a soft air blowing. The buggy was comfortable; the horses went well;
and Mr. Young, who drove me, was full of interesting information.
After passing the cemeteries, we went by a rough road through the
bush, where much of the vegetation was new and strange. Then we
crossed the extreme end of a large fresh-water lake, and shortly
afterwards emerged from the bush on to the shore of a fine bay, called
Middleton Beach, along the edge of which, by the side of the curling
breakers, we drove over a firm white sand, admiring the effect of the
dark blue sea, changing to a delicate pale green before breaking on
the shore. On the way back I was shown a small corrugated iron house,
with an outbuilding attached, in the middle of a considerable
clearing, the owner of which proposes to supply the town of Albany
with garden and dairy produce. I wish him every success, and hope that
he will include eggs and poultry in his scheme; for the only eggs
which we have been able to procure have been six in number, and have
cost threepence each. These, too, were only supplied as a special
favour, because I was 'sick.'

Tom dragged himself on shore again in the afternoon, but did not
remain long, as we had to receive more visitors, who had been
prevented from coming yesterday.

At seven o'clock Mr. and Mrs. Loftie and Mr. Young came to dinner, and
Tom being too ill to appear, I had to do my best to entertain them.
After dinner, having seen the invalids made as comfortable as
possible, we started, well wrapped up--for it was bitterly cold--for
the dance at the Court-House, which is built on so steep a hill that,
although the building is three storeys high towards the sea, yet by
entering at the back the level of the top storey is at once reached.
The dancing had just begun, and it proved a most cheery little ball.
All present were hearty, kindly, and genial.

[Illustration: The Port Watch]

_Tuesday, May 17th._--A lovely morning, perfectly calm. Tom much
better, and anxious to be off. Mails and farewell messages were
accordingly sent on shore, and Mr. Loftie came off with parting words
of kindness and farewell, and laden with flowers. Precisely at eleven
o'clock, with signals of 'Good-bye' and 'Thanks' hoisted at the main,
we steamed out of the snug harbour where we have passed such a
pleasant week and have received so much kindness. The pilot soon
quitted us, and we were once more on the broad ocean. The wind outside
was dead ahead, and the heavy rollers tumbling in foreboded a still
heavier swell as we got further away from the land. In fact, Tom more
than once asked me if we had not better put back. As it was too rough
to steam, a certain amount of snug sail was set; and, close-hauled, we
steered as near our course as circumstances would permit.

There are a good many invalids on board among the crew and servants,
the symptoms in each case being very similar. This morning the two
maids, two stewards, and three of the men had more or less succumbed
to 'malarial colds'--nothing serious, the doctor says, but very
uncomfortable. It is quite certain that many more are now laid up than
we ever had on the sick-list in the tropics; but the sudden change
from heat to cold may of course account for this state of things.

_Wednesday, May 18th._--The wind was rather more favourable; but,
although close-hauled, we were nearly two and a half points off our
course, the head-sea running very high. Although the air was warm I
remained in my cabin all the morning, feeling wretched and
uncomfortable. At noon we had run 110 miles--100 under steam and 10
under sail--and were in lat. 35° 44´ S., long. 119° 53´ E., Kangaroo
Island being 820 miles distant. The total distance now accomplished
since we left England is 9,236 miles under sail, and 7,982 under
steam, making a total of 17,218 miles.

I was called upon deck once during the day to see a whale with a fin
on its back. Gray, in his book on Western Australia, says that this
kind of whale lives principally on the large phosphorescent medusæ.
The evening was cold, as usual, and I was glad to go below early.
Venus rose brilliantly, but so red that several on board thought it
must be the port light of a ship astern; though how any vessel could
have suddenly got there they could not make out. Soon afterwards
shouts were heard on first seeing what Tom described as lamps of light
or fireballs astern. These turned out to be the luminous medusæ which
Gray speaks of, and which were much larger and more brilliant than any
we had yet seen.

_Thursday, May 19th._--Wind fair, but head-swell still continuing. I
had a very busy morning below, writing journal and letters. At noon we
had run 120 miles under sail, and were then in lat. 36° 12´ S., long.
122° 4´ E. In the afternoon we took some photographs of Tom in his
R.N.A.V. uniform, the Guard of Honour, ourselves, the Court, &c., on
the occasion of Neptune's visit when we crossed the line. Sundry
unsuccessful attempts were made to photograph the animals, but they
seemed to be suffering from a severe attack of the fidgets. To see
'Jenny Jenkins,' the monkey, in her new blue jumper with 'Sunbeam
R.Y.S.,' embroidered by Mabelle, and 'Mr. Short,' the black-and-tan
terrier, playing together, is really very pretty; they are so quick
and agile in their movements that it is almost impossible to catch
them. 'Mrs. Sharp,' the white toy terrier, in her new jersey, a
_confection_ of Muriel's, occasionally joins in the frolic; though her
condescension is not much appreciated, for she is rather too quick
with her teeth. The photograph of the Guard of Honour was spoiled by a
passing whale, to which Tom suddenly drew everybody's attention by
pointing to it with his drawn sword. The monster left a greasy wake
behind him, as he swam lazily along, blowing slightly.

Towards evening the air became very cold, and the wind not quite so
fair. A splendid sunset threw a lovely glow on the sails. Later on the
sea continued to go down, and I was able to make my first appearance
at dinner at sea for many a long day past, but only as a spectator
even now.

_Friday, May 20th._--Another fine clear day; but the horrid easterly
swell is as bad as ever, and with such a light wind we seem to feel it
more. A busy morning with journal and letters.

At noon we had come 148 miles under sail, and Kangaroo Island was now
546 miles distant; we were in lat. 36° 25´ S., long. 125° 13´ E.

_Saturday, May 21st._--A pouring wet morning, with every appearance of
continued rain. Later on the weather cleared, though heavy squalls
came up at intervals until noon, when it turned quite warm, bright,
and sunny.

[Illustration: Running Down--Easting]

In the afternoon the wind freshened considerably, and our speed
improved in proportion. The heavy head-swell having gone down,
everyone on board felt more comfortable. Advantage was taken of the
lull to get a few photographs of the engineers, cooks, and others. A
nautical entertainment had been fixed for 6 P.M.; but unfortunately
that hour was selected to gybe the ship, so that it was 6.30 before
the entertainment commenced. There was but a small audience; which
seemed a pity, for the performance was exceptionally good.

[Illustration: Cracking on]

The wind continued to freshen, and by 11 P.M. we were tearing through
the water before a fair breeze, but knocking about a good deal more
than was pleasant.

_Sunday, May 22nd._--From midnight until 6 A.M. the state of things
was wretched in the extreme. Sails flapping, the cry of the sailors
continually heard above the howling of the wind, and much water on
deck. Then I went to sleep, waking again at seven to find it blowing
half a gale of wind, which rapidly increased to a whole gale. At noon
we were in lat. 35° 55´ S., long. 132° 7´ E., having run 206 miles
under sail.

We had service at 11.15, and again at four o'clock. In the morning
there was no congregation; partly because of the rough weather, and
partly because we had sailed so well that nobody realised how much
faster the time was to-day than it had been yesterday, and we were
therefore all behindhand. In the afternoon I went on deck for a short
time, but found it so cold that I could not remain; for, although the
wind was right aft, the gale blew fierce and strong. Tom had a very
anxious time of it, literally flying along a strange coast, with on
one hand the danger of being driven ashore if the weather should
become at all thick, and on the other the risk of getting pooped by
the powerful following sea if sail were shortened. At 11 P.M. we met a
large sailing-ship steering to the southward; which was felt to be
very satisfactory, showing as it did that we were on the right track.

_Monday, May 23rd._--Precisely at 7 A.M. we made the lights of Cape
Borda or Flinders, on Kangaroo Island, about twelve miles ahead,
exactly where Tom expected to find it, which was a great relief to
everybody on board, after our two days of discomfort and anxiety. At
noon we had run 265 miles, and should have done much more had we not
been obliged to shorten sail in the night.

In the afternoon the yacht passed between Kangaroo and Althorpe
Islands, the coast of the former being very like the white cliffs
between Dover and Folkestone. It was extremely cold, and after my
night of neuralgic pains I did not dare to go out on deck, and had to
content myself with observing everything through the windows of the
deck-house. In the evening we made Troubridge and all the other lights
on the way up to Glenelg, and after some deliberation Tom decided to
heave-to for the night, instead of sailing on to the anchorage of Port
Adelaide.

_Tuesday, May 24th._--By 6 A.M. we were on deck, endeavouring to
ascertain our precise position, and about seven a steam-launch came
bustling towards us, whose occupants hailed us with cordial welcomes
to South Australia. Directly they came alongside, our small deck-house
was crowded with visitors, who presented us in the name of the
Holdfast Bay Yacht Club with a beautifully illuminated and kindly
worded address. So anxious had they been to give us a warm and early
welcome, that they had been on the look-out for us all night, while we
had been waiting outside so as to arrive by daylight. It seems that
the signalmen on Cape Borda had made out our number yesterday when we
were more than seven miles off, so clear is the dry air of these
regions. Our early guests were naturally hungry and cold; and a large
party soon sat down to a hastily prepared breakfast. It was
excellently supplemented, however--to us seafarers especially--by a
large basket of splendid fruit which our friends had brought off with
them. Presently the Mayor of Glenelg and his daughter arrived, full,
like everybody else, of kindly plans for our amusement while here.

Having come to an anchor off Glenelg, Tom and Tab went up to Adelaide
to attend the Birthday _levée_, and I landed later with the rest of
the party at the long wooden pier.

The first appearance of Glenelg from the sea is very like that of
Deauville, the town appearing to consist of semi-detached houses
standing in the midst of gardens and trees, with a pretty background
of hills. There seemed to be no small houses or streets--an impression
which was confirmed by closer inspection. In fact, Glenelg is
essentially a fashionable seaside place; and though there are a few
excellent shops, most of the supplies must come from Adelaide, seven
miles off, to which a steam-tram runs every half-hour, taking twenty
minutes for the journey. The carriage-road crosses the tramway and
the railway line to Melbourne at intervals. The country is quite
flat, the road passing between fields now beautifully green. We saw
the suburb of Goodwood a little way off, and soon afterwards the tall
spires of the churches and the towers of the public buildings of
Adelaide appeared. To-day being a general holiday in honour of the
Queen's birthday, the houses in the city were decked with flags and
the shops closed, which gave it rather a Sunday-like appearance. The
streets are fine and wide, especially King William Street. We drove to
Government House, a comfortable residence surrounded by a nice
English-looking garden.

[Illustration: Proclamation-Tree, Glenelg]

It was very pleasant to meet our friend the Governor, Sir William
Robinson, again. After lunch we drove off to the races in two open
carriages, with an escort of police, passing through a pretty part of
the city, where charming little villas nestle in the midst of detached
gardens. The racecourse itself is extremely pretty, and commands a
fine view. The grand-stand is a fine building, with the Governor's box
in the centre. The Cup had just been run for, but we saw a capital
hurdle-race, over a course three miles long, with some very stiff
flights of rails, about which there was no give-and-take. Then came a
good flat race, three out of five horses coming in neck and neck. We
drove back to Government House to tea, and then returned to Glenelg,
where we had left the two little ones.

On the pier we found awaiting us an unfortunate reporter, who had been
hunting Tom down all day to try and interview him, but had always
managed to arrive everywhere just too late. We took him off with us
and gave him some dinner, for which he was very grateful after his
hard wearying day. Presently Tom and Mabelle arrived, and directly
afterwards a boat came alongside with another reporter. More
unfortunate even than the first, he had sat at the semaphore, halfway
between here and Port Adelaide, all night, and then, not knowing where
to go, had oscillated between the two places all day, telegraphing in
various directions for information.

_Wednesday, May 25th._--At half-past ten o'clock we started on an
excursion into the picturesque mountains which lie behind Glenelg, Mr.
Stock driving us in his nice little American buggy, drawn by a capital
pair of horses. The rest of the party followed in a waggonette. Our
way at first lay through the suburbs of Glenelg. The houses which we
passed had a well-to-do appearance, with scarcely any shops or
workmen's dwellings to be seen. The road soon began to ascend, and
before long became steep. As we climbed upwards towards Belair the
view became so lovely that it was impossible to resist the temptation
of adding to our collection by pausing to photograph the scene. Our
first stopping-place was the Blackwood Hotel, where we found a capital
luncheon. The air felt pure and bracing, the sun shone brightly, and
the scenery had a thoroughly English character, with pretty hedgerows,
and little streams crossed by modern bridges, all of which reminded us
pleasantly of the old country. What was less familiar was an
unprotected railway crossing which intersected the road close by, and
over which a train passed rapidly, and, as it seemed to us, with
dangerously insufficient warning.

After driving for some distance along the crest of the hill, we dipped
once more into the valley by another road quite as steep and more
tortuous than the last. From this road the views were even more
charming than those which we had previously admired; for beneath us
lay a complete panorama of Adelaide and its suburbs, covering part of
the rich plain at the foot of the opposite blue hills, and skirted by
the north arm of the Port river. The little horses went well, and,
although the road was rough and in many places steep, trotted merrily
on until we reached the pier at Glenelg. Here we found a group of
sixty or seventy visitors to the 'Sunbeam' waiting to be conveyed on
board in the steam-launch, which had to perform several journeys to
the shore before her task was accomplished.

_May 25th._--About noon we got under way and steamed up towards Port
Adelaide, stopping for a time off the semaphore in order to visit the
Japanese corvette 'Ryujo,' and the South Australian gunboat
'Protector.' The coast reminded me of that outside Liverpool, near the
mouth of the Mersey; well-built watering-places, piers, and sandy
beaches--a very paradise for bathers--completing the resemblance.
Largs Bay is a particularly healthy spot, and possesses an hotel which
is said to be the best in South Australia. At the semaphore also a
compact little township has been established, which boasts a mayor and
corporation.

Further on nothing except sand and bushes could be seen; and a little
higher we got into a narrower channel, and passed a few boats and
small craft, every one of which had some sort of flag or bunting
flying in our honour. The shouts of warm greeting increased as we
approached the town, till at last it was difficult to turn quickly
enough from side to side and respond to the waving hands and cheers
and shouts of cordial welcome to the new country. The pier and wharves
were densely crowded, and we were scarcely abreast of them before the
Mayor (Mr. S. Malin) and Corporation came on board with an address
saying how glad they were to see us in their waters. This visit was
followed by another from Commodore Honey, Mr. Justice Bundey, and
other gentlemen representing the South Australian Yacht Club. All this
was very pleasant and gratifying; though I must confess that such
unexpected kindness produced that familiar feeling known as a lump in
my throat. It is always rather touching to hear any one else cheered
enthusiastically, and when those nearest and dearest to one are
concerned, it is naturally doubly trying.

[Illustration: 'Protector' Gunboat]

After a hurried inspection of the yacht by our visitors, and a hasty
tea, we were obliged to say 'good-bye' to our newly-made friends, for
we had to catch the five-o'clock train, and there was no time to
spare. In fact, we nearly missed it, and I am afraid we must have
presented an undignified spectacle to the numerous idlers who had
turned out to look at us--I in a waggonette heaped with bags and
bundles, and the others flying along the street. Passing through the
pleasant country, we arrived at the North Terrace station, and reached
Government House a few minutes later. In the evening there was a
dinner party and a reception, which brought what had been a most
agreeable, but for me a very tiring, day to a close.




[Illustration: Sunset]

CHAPTER XII.

_ADELAIDE._


_Friday, May 27th._--We breakfasted punctually at nine o'clock, and I
drove afterwards with the Governor to see a collection of furs which
were to be sold by auction. They were chiefly from Tasmania, and
comprised a good many excellent specimens. From the fur-shop we went
to the Exhibition buildings, where we were met by Sir Herbert Sandford
(the British Commissioner), Sir Samuel Davenport, Mr. Jessop, and
others. The building is light, airy, and well designed; and when
filled, as it promises to be, with natural products, manufactured
goods, and works of art, will doubtless be well worth a visit. I wish
we could return for the opening, as we have been most kindly pressed
to do; but unfortunately our motto always seems to be 'Forward!' and
we are due in Melbourne on June 9th, and at Mount Gambier on the 16th;
so that if we linger for every inducement I fear we shall never get
through the programme of our voyage.

From the Exhibition the Governor took me for a drive all round the
city, past handsome and substantial public buildings and through wide
and clean streets. The system of park-lands, or reserves of open
spaces between the blocks of buildings, appears to be excellent, both
from a picturesque and a sanitary point of view.

We lunched at North Adelaide with Mr. Justice Bundey, and saw the
beautiful view from his house. On arriving, I was given a basket of
pink roses grown out of doors, which recalled delightful memories of
an English June, although in Australia the present month really
corresponds to our own November.

Tom had to rush off to meet Mr. Bray, and to attend the annual meeting
of the South Australian Geographical Society, where he made a
speech.[2] Among other people present at the meeting, he was
introduced to the Australian explorer, Mr. David Lindsay, who returned
about six months ago from a journey of thirteen months right across
the continent, from Adelaide to a point a little to the south-east of
Port Darwin. The expedition was most difficult and trying--much more
so than it would have been in any ordinary year, on account of the
drought. The thermometer sometimes stood at 125° in the shade, and
could not register the heat in the sun! The explorers were obliged to
travel by day, in order that they might see and report upon the
country. They were once seven days without water, and constantly ran
very short of it. The journey was made entirely with camels, and the
intelligence of these animals seems to have been extraordinary. One
day the party were, as usual, very short of water, and Mr. Lindsay's
favourite camel seemed almost exhausted. Fortunately his rider chanced
to notice smoke in the distance, which, he knew, indicated the
presence of blacks, and consequently water. Merely turning the camel's
head in the right direction, he let the reins fall on its neck, and
the creature carried him to the desired spot, although it took five
hours to traverse the distance--fourteen miles. After a little drink
and a short rest of four hours he was able to proceed sixteen miles
further, to a spot where he rested quietly for three or four days, by
the side of a stream.

[Footnote 2: See Appendix.]

_Saturday, May 28th._--We had several visitors in the early morning,
among whom was Brigadier-General Owen, who brought plans for the
defences of Adelaide for Tom to examine. Mr. Millar also called to
make arrangements about our projected trip to Silverton.

At half-past eleven we proceeded by train to Port Adelaide, where we
were received by the Mayor (Mr. Malin) and Corporation, and taken to
see the new municipal buildings. Afterwards we had lunch in the
town-hall; and later on some of the party took a drive round the town
and saw the museum, which, though small, is interesting, a large
flour-mill, and several other buildings. By the 2.50 train we left for
Adelaide, and had to dress with unheard-of rapidity in order to be
present at the Governor's reception, which was attended by several
hundred people. Fortunately it was a lovely day, and we were able to
take advantage of the mild spring-like temperature to stroll about the
pretty garden and listen to the pleasant strains of the police bands.

_Sunday, May 29th._--This morning we went to the Anglican cathedral at
half-past ten, and heard a most beautiful choral service, including a
'Te Deum' by Gounod. This being Whit Sunday, the interior of the
church was prettily decorated. Service over, we drove to the residence
of the Chief Justice, where zoology and botany are combined in a small
space, for the semi-tropical garden in front of his house is lovely,
while in the spacious grounds at the back much care is given to rare
and curious pets. The interior of the house is a perfect museum of
beautiful specimens of Japanese art and curios of all kinds.

[Illustration: Adelaide]

_Wednesday, June 1st._--A very agreeable luncheon at the Mayor of
Adelaide's house, and afterwards to the town-hall, where we received a
formal welcome from the Adelaide Town Council. Kind speeches and warm
acknowledgments, followed by an organ recital. The instrument superb
and admirably played. By 4.45 train to Cockburn to visit the
celebrated Broken-Hill Silver Mine at Silverton.

_Thursday, June 2nd._--Our special train reached Cockburn at eight
o'clock this morning. We breakfasted at the running-sheds, and were
afterwards driven over to Broken-Hill, which we reached at two
o'clock, and descended the mine both before and after luncheon. We
went down what is called M'Culloch's Shaft, at a point where the mine
is 216 feet deep, and were greatly interested in seeing the process of
extracting the ore. The latest weekly returns from this mine show a
production of 46,000 ounces of silver.

_Friday, June 3rd._--This morning we descended another shaft and
inspected a different part of the mine, in which the ores differ
greatly from those we saw yesterday, and consist chiefly of kaolin.
After reaching the surface we visited the assaying offices, and
watched the experiments for testing the richness of ores.

The afternoon's drive to Silverton was very pleasant. After changing
horses, we went on over plains covered with salt-bushes. The plucky
little horses did their work excellently, and landed us at Cockburn at
6.30 P.M. Thence, after another change of horses, we continued our
journey to Thackaringa, where we rejoined the railway.

_Saturday, June 4th._--On the return journey from Silverton to
Adelaide I stopped during the early hours of this morning at Terowie
to see my cousin Herbert Woodgate, and thoroughly enjoyed, in spite of
sleepiness and fatigue, the sight at his house of so many objects
which brought back memories of old days. The walls were covered with
pictures of Swayslands, the dear old place in Kent of Herbert's
father--where I spent many happy hours of childhood, and where Mr.
Burnand used often to come and coach us all in charades and amateur
theatricals. There were also many pictures of Penshurst Place, and of
the old village church, whose beautiful chime of bells I so well
remember, and where I have 'assisted' at more than one pretty wedding.
It all brought back many mingled memories of joy and sorrow. Nothing
could have been kinder than our welcome. I was quite sorry when we had
to turn out again and trundle down to the train and be off once more
to Adelaide, where we arrived at half-past twelve P.M.

We were met at the station and carried off to lunch at Government
House, and afterwards had to dress as quickly as possible to go to the
meet of the hounds. The day was fine and pleasant, and it was very
enjoyable driving down in the Governor's mail-phaeton, and seeing the
other vehicles of all sorts and kinds proceeding in the same
direction. The drivers of these vehicles were so regardless of all
considerations of time, place, and speed, that I began to think
hunting on wheels, or even going to a meet on wheels, was far more
dangerous than riding across country.

I am not sure that I should enjoy my time in Australia so much if I
had not a certain belief in _kismet_; for travelling out here is
certainly very full of risk. What with unbroken horses, rickety carts,
inexperienced drivers, rotten and ill-made harness put on the wrong
way, bad roads, reckless driving, and a general total indifference to
the safety of life and limb, a journey is always an exciting, and
sometimes a risky, experience. A little excitement is all very well;
but when it becomes absolutely dangerous, a little of it goes a long
way. I dislike seeing a horse's hoofs quite close to my head, with a
trace or two trailing in the dust, or to hear the ominous crack of
splinter-bar or bolt; yet these are things of daily and hourly
occurrence in our bush drives. I must say I was fully confirmed in my
opinion that driving was more dangerous than riding when the hunt
commenced. A man in scarlet went first with a little bag of aniseed,
and was followed by about 150 people on foot, and as many more either
on horseback or in vehicles. The drag was so arranged that many of the
jumps could be seen from a ridge near. The clever way in which little
horses of all sorts and kinds, well bred and underbred, with all sorts
of weights on their backs, jumped high timber fences without touching
them, was wonderful to behold. Some of the obstacles were even worse
than timber, for they were made of four wires stretched between timber
posts with a solid rail at top. The last fence of all, after twenty
minutes' run through a fairly heavy country, measured four feet two;
and yet not a horse out of the fifty or sixty who jumped it even
touched it in the least. I noticed that one or two of the riders were
very careless of the hounds, who had to crouch under the fences until
the horses had jumped over them. Afterwards I drove with the children
to 'The Olives,' a pretty house with a lovely garden, full of fragrant
violets, where a large party was assembled to meet us at tea.

[Illustration: _Stypandra umbellata_]

_Monday, June 6th._--Resumed work upon my Ambulance paper at an early
hour this morning. Not having a secretary to help me, I find the work
really hard; for my arm is often so bad that I can hardly use it. I
had a very busy morning, and after breakfast went to the Zoological
Gardens, where we were met by Sir Thomas Elder and others. I was
amused to see four little leopard cubs crouched in a row on a plank,
looking in their dark corner like owls. From the Zoological Gardens we
drove to the Botanical Gardens, and were met there by Dr. Schonburg,
the director, who showed us all the plants, and especially pointed out
the different species of eucalypti, which I am most anxious to
understand, for they are a large 'family.' Everything here, whether
called banksia or anything else, seems to run to bottle-brush just as
in Western Australia. Antipodean botany is puzzling to the new
arrival. The museum at the Botanical Gardens is excellently arranged,
both for the exhibition of specimens and for the information of
visitors.

Mrs. Hay sent her carriage for us at one o'clock, and we went out to
lunch at her pretty country place, where we met a large party. We had
to hurry back directly afterwards to attend the Ambulance Meeting, at
which the Governor kindly presided. It was held at Government House,
and was well attended. I found it a great effort to read the paper I
had prepared. There were few speakers. Everything, however, went off
well, and I earnestly hope our afternoon's work may bear good, useful
fruit. There was a dinner-party in the evening at Government House,
followed by a small reception and some nice music.

_Tuesday, June 7th._--In spite of my Ambulance meeting being over, the
force of habit was so strong upon me that I awoke before four. At
half-past ten I went to a small gallery of excellent pictures, over
which we were shown by the gentlemen in charge. We afterwards went
through the School of Art and saw the pupils at work.

At half-past eleven Mr. D. Lindsay, the Australian explorer, came with
his aboriginal servant, Cubadjee, whom he had brought from some place
in the interior. This youth, it seems, is considered the short member
of his family; but, although only seventeen years old, he is six feet
five inches in height, while his elder brother, they declare, is seven
feet six inches, and the rest of the family are equally tall. Cubadjee
made fire for us with two pieces of wood (a process of which I had
often heard), by rubbing a piece of wood with holes bored in it
against another piece, quickly producing sparks, which easily ignited
a piece of paper, and left a certain amount of black powder.

At 12.30 I went with Mr. Riches to the Treasury to see the nuggets
which had been collected by the Local Government to be shown at the
Exhibition. Some of them were fine specimens, especially the last
great find at Teetulpa--a solid alluvial lump of gold. There was also
a splendid piece of gold quartz, brought in only yesterday from Mount
Pleasant. We next visited the post-office, and were shown all over
that establishment by Mr. Todd, the Postmaster-General. There I saw
for the first time the working of a large telephone exchange, where at
least half a dozen ladies sat with their mouth and ears alternately
applied to the instruments, either to speak or to listen. The
telegraph-room was also interesting. Only a few years ago the
telegraph service cost per week some seven or eight pounds, whereas
now the expenditure amounts to twice as many thousands. Mr. Todd had
himself been with the expedition to establish the great European
telegraph line that runs right through Southern, Central, and Northern
Australia to Port Darwin. He told us an amusing story of the natives'
notion of the work they were engaged on: 'What big fool white man is,
putting up fence! cat will run underneath.' Mr. Todd is a great
electrician, as well as a talented meteorologist, and his tables of
winds and probable weather, to be seen in the central hall of the
post-office, must be of great value to shipowners.

On our way to the station we called in at the Lower House, and heard
Mr. Playford make his speech on the no-confidence vote. From the Lower
we went to the Upper House, where another gentleman was advocating, as
strongly as Mr. Playford has been denouncing, the Government loans.

[Illustration: On the Murray River]

Many friends met us at the station, including the Mayor, the Speaker,
the Chief Justice, and several others. Two carriages had been reserved
for us in the Melbourne Express. The railroad climbs up the same hills
among which we have taken so many pleasant drives during our stay
here. The views of Mount Lofty and Mount Barker from the carriage
window were lovely, and I was quite sorry when darkness prevented me
from seeing any more of the landscape.

We arrived at Murray Bridge soon after six, and were met by Tab and
Mr. Reid, and all walked up to a snug hotel. The beds were
comfortable, and I managed to keep up a fire of mallee roots all
night, for it was bitterly cold.

_Wednesday, June 8th._--I awoke at two, and as it proved impossible to
go to sleep again, I wrote and read until daybreak. At a little
before nine we went down to the bank to meet Mr. Macfarlane and his
daughters, who had come forty miles down the Murray in their pretty
little steam-launch to take us to their station lodge, eight miles
from Wellington. They had started before four this morning, Mr.
Macfarlane steering all the way. The launch is a Clyde-built boat, and
is very fast. We passed through pretty scenery on our way up the
river, and after a time came to a station to which many acres have
been added by reclaiming the swamps which lie on either side of the
river. There chanced to be two guns on board the launch, and as we
steamed along, the gentlemen amused themselves by occasional shots at
the numerous black swans, coots, and ducks.

We voyaged for some miles between banks fringed with willows, the
original cuttings of which had been brought by an old French settler
from Napoleon's grave in St. Helena. The trees have grown
marvellously; and I hear that this year the avenue, if it may be so
called, is to be extended some miles further up the stream.

At about one o'clock we arrived at the landing-pier, where we found
one of the capacious trading-boats, of which we have met many on the
river. It is a regular pedlar's store on a large scale, where one
might buy dresses of the latest fashion, cloaks and bonnets, besides
all sorts of medicines for man and beast, groceries, and stores of
every kind. A most useful institution it must be to isolated toilers
on the banks of the Murray.

On reaching Wellington Lodge we were first shown a shearing-house with
every convenience for folding the sheep in thousands. After the
shearing operations are completed the sheep are let out into little
pens, so that it can be at once seen whether a man has done his work
well or ill. We saw all the processes and modes of packing the wool,
of which Mr. Macfarlane is justly proud; for I believe his system has
been adopted in almost all the wool-producing countries of the world.
Leaving the wool-sheds, we went to the stables, which were full of
young horses; and here we were shown a 'buckboard'--a wonderful
Australian conveyance. It is as light as a feather, and is capable of
carrying a great deal of luggage or farm produce, besides the driver
and one passenger. This particular buckboard almost came to grief
yesterday with Mr. Macfarlane, who had gone out shooting with one of
his daughters. He had left the carriage to get nearer his game, when
the horses took fright and ran away, tearing round and round a field;
a trace broke, and the light trap nearly touched the fence at every
turn. The young girl stuck pluckily to her post, and at last succeeded
in pulling the horses up.

Through a door in the wall of the stable yard we passed into a
beautiful garden full of violets, mignonette, scarlet geraniums, and
late autumn flowers; besides gooseberries, raspberries, currants, and
other English fruits; while overhead stretched a long trellis covered
with fine Muscatel vines from which some late bunches of grapes were
still hanging.

[Illustration: A Buckboard]

Wellington Lodge itself proved to be a comfortable dwelling, with
rooms opening into a garden, bright and gay with sunshine and
flowers. The view over the plains was full of life, and the paddocks
were well stocked with cattle and horses. After an excellent luncheon
of good things produced upon the station, we spent a pleasant time
looking over a capital collection of photographs, some of which Mr.
Macfarlane very kindly gave us. Then we went into the garden, strolled
round the stables, saw some of the young stock, and were shown what a
buck-jumper could do. After a few preliminary curvets and bounds, the
gates of the yard were opened and the animal was allowed to 'go' like
an arrow from a bow for three miles. His first leap was over a very
stiff gate more than five feet high, which he took like a bird, and
was soon out of sight.

Having dined, we returned to the railway, and took up our quarters in
a boudoir-car attached to the express train, timed to arrive at
Ballarat at six o'clock to-morrow morning.

_Ballarat: Thursday, June 9th._--After an excellent night in a
luxurious sleeping-carriage I was called at seven. A little before
eight the Mayor of Ballarat and others were announced, and I had to
settle with them the programme for the day whilst the others were
making their toilettes. At 8.30 we left the station for Craig's Hotel,
where we found breakfast prepared in a comfortable room. Tom and the
doctor had arranged to arrive at half-past ten. They had parted from
us at Port Adelaide on the 3rd instant, and had gone by sea in the
'Sunbeam' to Melbourne, which they reached on the 6th, after a quick
but stormy passage. Tom remained a couple of days at Melbourne--just
long enough to be present at the opening of the Parliament, and also
at the annual banquet of the Public Service Association, at both of
which functions he was glad to be able to assist. On the 9th he
embarked again, took the yacht on to Geelong, and came by train to
meet us here. We were just in time to receive the Mayor at half-past
eleven, and then we all went together to the town-hall, where the
Corporation, the Mayoress, and a number of ladies were kindly waiting
for us. After looking over the building we drove first to the Albion
Lode Mine; but as no preparation had been made for our descent, we
went on to the Star of the East Mine, where, after putting on real
miners' clothes, we went down in the cage with Mr. Carroll and several
other directors who had come to meet us. The directors asked me to
christen a new lode the 'Lady Brassey,' but I suggested that the name
should be the 'Sunbeam,' and this they eventually adopted. I was
afterwards glad to hear that the next day they struck gold. There was
a good deal of walking to be done in the mine, and I was very tired
when we got to the surface, at about three o'clock, having been
underground more than two hours. But there was still the crushing and
separating machinery to be seen. This proved to be much the same as we
saw in use in Cornwall last year for dealing with the tin ore.

[Illustration: Ballarat]

It was past three before we got back to the hotel, tired and hungry.
Much as we were in need of refreshment, we were not allowed to take
it in peace, for interviewer after interviewer kept coming in. At
last, in despair, we ordered three hansoms and went for a drive round
the town and environs, which looked wonderfully beautiful in spite of
the wintry season and the gloomy day.

We dined at the _table d'hôte_. Tom and the doctor arrived later.
Tom's eye was very bad, and had to be bandaged up, and altogether he
looked very unwell.

_Friday, June 10th._--Miss Cornwall, the discoverer and part owner of
the Midas Mine, came early this morning with her father and one or two
other gentlemen--directors of the mine--to take us to see it. The
drive through the town was pleasant, and we admired its fine public
buildings and beautiful avenues of trees. It was a long drive to the
mine through Dowling Forest, a picturesque spot with large trees
growing amid park-like scenery; marred, however, by _débris_ of
abandoned mines, or little red flags and heaps of rubbish, which
marked the camps of new explorers. Miss Cornwall made the way
interesting by telling us the history of the various mines we passed.
One story was about a mine known to be very rich, but which had never
paid more than its working expenses. The reason for this
unsatisfactory condition of affairs could not be discovered for a long
time; but at last one man 'peached,' and was followed by the police to
a public-house, where he met four of his fellow-diggers. Although they
had all been carefully searched before leaving the mine, a more
rigorous examination by the police produced fifteen ounces of gold on
each man, the gold being valued at 4_l._ per ounce.

[Illustration: Miners' Camp]

Arrived at the mine, we donned our mining costumes and climbed to the
top of a high mound, where the crushing apparatus stood. The contents
of one of the huge cylinders had been kept especially for us to see,
and the miners now proceeded to run it out, with the result that a
good proportion of small nuggets was obtained. This was by no means
the last process. There would be two or three further washings. We
next went down the mine--in a cage, as is usual--and had to walk
through the workings, for there were no trucks or trolleys. The
operations have been successful, and the character of the ground leads
to the belief that large nuggets may yet be found in the river bed.
After going through a great many of the levels I felt tired, and sat
down, and, to amuse myself, proceeded to scratch in the side of the
heading in order to fill a little pannikin, which Miss Cornwall said
each of the children and I were to have to wash out in the
old-fashioned miner's way. Each pannikin was marked and sent to the
top in charge of one of the 'head gangers.' Many of the miners were
Cornishmen who had emigrated from the old country, and were bringing
up their sons to their own calling in this wonderful new land. They
have a saying here that a Cornish miner is the best miner in the
world, and the only one better is a Cornish man's son. The meaning of
this is that you cannot begin a calling too early in life, and that an
intimate, though perhaps unscientific, knowledge of the various strata
is of the utmost importance in mining operations.

On returning to the surface the air seemed frightfully cold in
comparison with the warm atmosphere of the mine; and I shivered and
shook, as I sat by a little heap of _débris_, and washed out my
pannikin of dirt. But I only obtained about half an ounce of small
gold nuggets, which, however, the experienced say, denote the
proximity of a bed of very much larger specimens.[3] It seemed
delightful to get into the warm shelter of the office, put on our
wraps again, and enjoy the lunch so kindly provided for us. We drank
success to the Midas Mine and all connected with it, specially to the
energetic discoverer, principal shareholder, and manageress--Miss
Cornwall.

[Footnote 3: In connection with Lady Brassey's visit to the Midas
Mine, the following extract from the _Melbourne Argus_ of June 14th
may be of interest:--'The nugget obtained in the Midas Company's mine,
on the Dowling Forest Estate, Ballarat, on June 11th, has been named
the "Lady Brassey." It was found within two feet of the spot in the
drive from which a dish of stuff was washed by her Ladyship when she
visited the mine the previous day, and it has since been shown to her
in Melbourne, and by her leave has been named after her. Its weight is
167 oz., and it consists almost entirely of pure gold. Together with
the rest of the gold obtained from the mine last week (117 oz.) the
nugget will be exhibited in the window of Messrs. Kilpatrick & Co.,
jewellers, Collins Street. The Midas Company was only registered in
October 1885, since which time the gold won has realised a total of
5,400 oz. The Company began operations with 500_l._ and has not had to
make a single call.']

Immediately after lunch Tom and I were obliged to leave, as we wished
to call on the Bishop. There was only just time to do this and catch
the train to Geelong, at which place we arrived at about half-past
six. We were met at the station by Mr. Bartlett (one of the numerous
sons of the Mr. Bartlett who was so long with Mr. Brassey in France,
Spain, and other parts of the world), and soon found ourselves on
board the yacht again, which looked, as usual, pleasant and homelike
after our short absence.

_Saturday, June 11th._--I was up early, and tried to rouse the other
people up too, so as to be ready to receive the Mayor and Corporation,
who arrived punctually, accompanied by their ladies. The presentation
of the address of welcome took some time, and then we had to go ashore
and drive round the town of Geelong to admire its public buildings and
natural beauties. Tom went first, with the principal members of the
Corporation, in a break drawn by four horses, and I followed with the
children in other carriages. We drove first to the skating-rink,
through nice broad streets with good houses on each side. There we
were shown an excellent collection of New Guinea curiosities belonging
to a German explorer. From the skating-rink we drove through fine
streets to the Botanical Gardens, where we were given beautiful
nosegays, and there met the rest of the party, who were being taken
round by the curator. The gardens, and especially the houses, seem
admirably planned. I noticed an ingenious arrangement of water-pipes
leading to the top of the tree-ferns, by which the parasites growing
on them are kept constantly moist.

When we had thoroughly explored the gardens we bade adieu to the Mayor
and our friends on shore, and went off to the yacht. We reached
Hobson's Bay at dusk, and arrived at Government House in the middle of
dinner!




[Illustration: Exhibition Buildings, Melbourne]

CHAPTER XIII.

_VICTORIA._


_Sunday, June 12th._--The Government House of the colony of Victoria
is an enormous building, surrounded by an extensive park, situated on
the top of a small hill, which commands a fine view over Melbourne and
its suburbs. There is a complete suite of private apartments in the
house, besides rooms for many guests, and splendid reception,
banqueting, and ball rooms.

_Monday, June 13th._--My cold is still bad; and although Tom is also
far from well, he went to the town-hall this morning to receive a
deputation from the Victorian Branch of the Imperial Federation
League. The morning was a busy one until it became time to go down to
the yacht to lunch and to receive the officers of the naval forces and
Naval Brigade. Miss Cornwall and her father came later, bringing the
nugget with them which had been found on Friday not more than two feet
from the place where I was scratching. It is to be named after me. It
is looked upon as the forerunner of other and larger ones. Miss
Romilly also arrived, and we all returned to Melbourne in the evening.

_Tuesday, June 14th._--After a bad night I had to receive many
interviewers. Amongst those who called was a gentleman from the
Woman's Suffrage Society, who wished to elicit some expression of my
opinion, as he understood that I was strongly in favour of woman's
suffrage. He seemed disappointed when I told him he was mistaken, and
that I thought women already did govern the world more or less,
whereas if we had votes we should probably not have nearly as much
power as we now possess without any undue fuss being made about it.

Mabelle went down with Miss Romilly to see her off to England by the
'Bengal.' Tom took the children for a walk, but it was still too wet
for me to venture out, except in a close carriage. In the afternoon I
went with the Governor to the fine public library, where we were met
by Sir George Verdon and some other gentlemen. It is a splendid
building, and the arrangements are most excellent. A student can get
any book he requires, on almost every subject, without the least
trouble. From the library we drove to the picture-gallery, which
contains a small but excellent collection, partly selected and sent
out by Sir Frederick Leighton. Then we went to the museum, where we
found many New Guinea and Fijian curiosities. Ugly objects are here
arranged so as to look pretty, and I gathered many hints for the
future arrangement of my own museum at home.

Tom and Mabelle had not intended starting for Mount Gambier until
to-morrow, but they found to-day that it was absolutely necessary to
leave by the 4.5 train if they wished to arrive in time for the
opening of the new railway from Mount Gambier to Narracoorte.

_Wednesday, June 15th._--I spent a busy morning reading, writing,
receiving interviewers, and trying on my fancy dress for the Jubilee
Ball. Lunch was early in consequence of Sir Henry and Lady Loch having
to lay the foundation-stone of the Genevieve Ward of the hospital. I
did not go to the ceremony, although I discovered afterward that I had
been expected. The ladies of the committee sent me a lovely bouquet
which they had intended to present, ornamented with a little stuffed
bird bearing a tiny model of the 'Sunbeam' on its back. I had a hard
afternoon's work until tea-time, when my friend Mrs. Fairfax, the
Admiral's wife, arrived with Miss Dundas.

[Illustration: Victoria Defence Fleet]

_Thursday, June 16th._--Sir Henry Loch, Mrs. Fairfax, and Miss Dundas
went to the Mint this morning to see the first of the new sovereigns
struck, but I was not able to accompany them. Everyone seems to agree
that the likeness of her Majesty which is to appear upon the coins is
not at all good. The weather was showery all day, and bitterly cold in
the afternoon when we went to assist at the stone-laying of the
Wesleyan College, where many speeches were made, Sir Henry Loch's
being a really brilliant oration. There was again an early dinner
to-night, to allow of our all going afterwards to the Bijou Theatre to
see Madame Majeroni in 'Wanda.'

_Saturday, June 18th._--Tom, Tab, and Mabelle returned to-day from
Mount Gambier. I must use Tom's description of the expedition.

'We made another excursion from Melbourne on June 14th, to attend the
opening of the railway connecting the district of Mount Gambier, in
South Australia, with the direct line from Adelaide to Melbourne. We
travelled to Wolseley by the ordinary train, the journey occupying
from 4 P.M. on June 14 until an early hour on the following morning.
There we waited several hours for the special train from Adelaide; and
Mount Gambier was not reached until a late hour in the evening.

'Mount Gambier is a pleasing town of 5,000 inhabitants, in the centre
of a district of rich volcanic soil, thrown up over a sandstone
formation by the eruptions of a former period, when the surrounding
mountains were active volcanoes. The two principal craters are now
filled with lakes of great depth, appropriately named, from their
beautiful colouring, the Blue Lake and the Green Lake. Looking
outwards from the craters, a vast and fertile plain expands on all
sides, bounded by the ocean on the south, and by distant chains of
hills on the north. Here and there the plain is studded with other
cones, as distinctly defined as those of Mount Gambier, but on a
smaller scale.

'I will not enter in detail upon all the incidents of the opening of
the railway. We were greeted by the school children with a stirring
rendering of the National Anthem. We travelled a short distance on the
line, and were banqueted in the evening. I replied for the visitors,
and preached federation. In the interval between the opening of the
railway and the banquet we went out to see a run with the Mount
Gambier drags. The timber fencing would be thought desperate riding in
an ordinary English hunting-field. The doubles in and out of a road
are decidedly formidable.

'We visited the Wesleyan Chapel at Mount Gambier. The minister
described the excellent organisation which enables him to give
effective spiritual supervision over a wide district. In the afternoon
travelled by special train to Narracoorte. Had some interesting
conversation on the land question. From the railway traffic point of
view monopolies in land were severely criticised. Where tracts of
100,000 or 200,000 acres are in the hands of a single proprietor, the
district does not progress as in cases where the land is subdivided
into smaller holdings. The large proprietor concentrates his energies
on sheep. The owner of a small tract finds it pays to give a larger
proportion of his land to arable cultivation. Subdivision of land
encourages population. Monopoly in land has the contrary effect. If
the increase of numbers, under good conditions as to standard of
living, be one of the aims of government, it follows that
concentration of ownership and occupation is contrary to public
policy. The objection disappears where satisfactory arrangements are
made for letting the land on liberal terms. In this case the large
proprietor is a provider of capital, for which he receives interest,
in the form of rent, readily accepting a lower rate than a labourer,
with slender security to offer, would be compelled to pay if he were
the borrower of money instead of the hirer of land.'

The party from Mount Gambier, though rather tired, were able to come
on board the yacht with us about one o'clock. We had quite a large and
pleasant lunch on board, and an 'At home' in the afternoon, when
upwards of two hundred people came to tea.

The yacht was berthed alongside the graving-dock pier at Williamstown,
which made it easy of access. In spite of the agonising pain which
Tom was suffering from an inflamed eye, he insisted on going to the
Seamen's Meeting, and actually managed to make a good speech, though
he scarcely knew what he was saying at the time. The party at dinner
this evening included several members of the Government, among whom
was Mr. Deakin, who has just returned from attending the Colonial
Conference in London.

[Illustration: Lancers and Soudan Contingent]

_Monday, June 20th._--The day of the grand volunteer review (the
beginning of the festivities in Jubilee week) dawned bitterly cold, as
indeed one must expect in midwinter. I got leave from the Doctor, with
great difficulty, for Tom to go to it in a closed carriage; for he was
still suffering much from his eyes. Lady Loch drove with me to the
ground in an open carriage, and of course we had an excellent place
close to the saluting-flag, and were able to admire the march past of
the troops. They seemed an excellent and well-drilled body of men. The
Lancers and the Royal Naval Brigade especially attracted attention.
All the party went to the military tournament in the evening except
Tom and I, who stayed at home with Lady Loch. The wind was very high
and keen to-day, and seemed to increase in violence towards evening.

_Tuesday, June 21st._--During the night it blew half a gale, and the
wind incessantly shook all the little lamps which are to be used at
the Jubilee illuminations to outline the frames of the windows,
producing discordant and sleep-dispelling noises.

At half-past ten the day's celebration began with the Governor's
_levée_, which was tremendously crowded by all sorts and conditions of
men. There were two black chiefs from Fernshaw. Lady Loch first
presented her address to the Governor from the ladies of Victoria, and
then hundreds of other loyal addresses followed from all parts of the
colony. There was considerable confusion, and the scene, as we looked
down from the gallery at the end of the ball-room, was very animated
and amusing. Directly after the _levée_ came a grand lunch given by
the Mayor. I went for a long drive, first to St. Kilda, and then on to
the Convent of the Good Shepherd, which enabled me to form a very fair
idea of the suburbs of Melbourne. I was particularly struck with the
enormous width of the roads. Such space appears to us unnecessary, but
I am told it is needed for the occasional passage of mobs of cattle.
We met one large mob of, I should think, more than five hundred head,
driven by half a dozen men with long stock whips. The stock-men
appeared to travel comfortably, for some buggies followed laden with
their simple camp equipment.

_Wednesday, June 22nd._--At twelve to-day the children and I paid a
visit to the law courts, where we were met by Mr. Justice Kernford,
who, being engaged in court himself, deputed Mr. Sheriff Read to show
us round. The courts seem well arranged, and the rooms are much more
handsomely furnished than similar places in England. The library
attached to the courts was filled with books of reference. There are
smaller rooms for consultations with clients. There were also one or
two large reception-rooms, in which hung some portraits of former
Governors and Judges.

We had an early dinner, and then all dressed for the ball; assembling
first in the large private hall a little before nine, where we formed
ourselves into a procession. The costumes were so rich and correct in
their details that the sight must have been very pretty as we passed
through the crowds of spectators (who had been arriving for hours, and
had filled the public reception-rooms), and took up our positions on
the daïs.

For the first few minutes the crowding was tremendous, as everybody
wished to shake hands with the Governor and Lady Loch. In course of
time, however, the throng began to clear away, and for the rest of the
evening it was possible not only to walk about but to dance in perfect
comfort. It was a magnificent spectacle, and the arrangements seemed
admirably conceived and carried out, the Fountain Court, covered in by
a temporary structure, being perhaps the prettiest of all. At one
o'clock the doors of the supper-room were thrown open. Not long after
supper Sir Henry and Lady Loch and I retired; but I believe that many
of the people did not get away until five o'clock. The illuminations
were beautiful, especially among the shipping, both at Williamstown
and Port Melbourne, and the little 'Sunbeam' made herself as gay as
she could with red and blue lights.

_Thursday, June 23rd._--The event of to-day was the christening of the
central hall of the Parliament Houses, to be henceforward known as the
'Queen's Hall.' An immense number of people had assembled. The daïs,
to which the Governor, Lady Loch, and we ourselves were led, had been
placed at the foot of Mr. Marshall Wood's fine statue of her Majesty,
and everything was arranged to ensure a splendid _coup d'oeil_; but
all the details of the ceremony have been so fully described in the
newspapers that I need not repeat them here. It was worth coming all
the thousands of miles we have traversed by sea and land to have the
opportunity of witnessing such loyal enthusiasm.

Directly after we left the hall I hurried on board the 'Sunbeam' to
receive a couple of hundred guests, and had only just time to get back
to Government House to dine and dress for the State Concert at the
Exhibition building, which was densely crowded. The combined musical
societies, under the skilful leadership of Mr. Herz, opened the
proceedings by singing the 'Old Hundredth,' in which the audience
joined with great heartiness. This was followed by a grand Jubilee
Ode, composed by Dr. Mackenzie, and by several excellently rendered
solos, among the performers being Mr. Beaumont, the tenor, whose
'Death of Nelson' brought the house down, and Miss Amy Sherwin, 'the
Australian nightingale,' whose rendering of 'The Harp that once,'
'Within a Mile of Edinboro' Town,' and 'Home, Sweet Home' was simply
perfect.

_Friday, June 24th._--To-day a demonstration of schoolchildren, said
to be the largest gathering of the kind ever held in the colony, took
place in the Exhibition building. Twenty thousand children must have
been there; and as they each wore a rosette and carried a little flag,
the scene looked gay as a summer garden. Of course there were the
usual loyal anthems; and besides the cheers in the programme the
children did a good deal of happy shouting on their own account. The
Bishop of Melbourne gave them an excellent address, and all the
arrangements were admirably and carefully carried out.

_Saturday, June 25th._--Awoke early after a fairly good night, and
set to work at once on my correspondence, which accumulates terribly
in spite of my efforts to answer every letter as it arrives. I made
many futile attempts to write up my journal, but was interrupted by
numerous interviewers, especially by secretaries of charitable
societies, anxious to get some share of the proceeds derived from
showing the 'Sunbeam.'

[Illustration: Selectors]

Precisely at twelve o'clock we started for the races at Caulfield. The
road lay for several miles through prosperous-looking suburbs
consisting of villas and a multitude of small wooden houses with
corrugated iron verandahs and roofs. However convenient this material
may be for such purposes, it does not add to the beauty of the
landscape. Bungalows in India, and indeed all over the East, look
picturesque and pretty, with their deep wooden verandahs, which must
surely be much cooler than these corrugated iron houses, said to be
hot in summer and cold in winter.

We arrived at the racecourse at about a quarter to one. The heavy rain
of last night had swamped the place, and though luckily the course was
not flooded, it was very heavy going, and a great deal of the ground
close to the course seemed quite under water. I heard a story of a
lady having to _swim_ her horse over a field during this morning's
run! It was bitterly cold, and we all felt glad of the excitement
caused by the appearance of the jockeys, mounted on nice-looking
horses. I fixed my mind on horse number twelve on the card, and
thought he looked extremely well as he cantered past the stand. The
poor animal kept up bravely till near the end, when he caught his foot
in a hurdle, while going at a fearful pace, and fell, breaking his
off-leg so badly that he had to be shot on the spot. His jockey
escaped with only a severe shaking. I had no idea until I came here
what steeplechase riding was like in Australia. To-day, just before
the first race came off, an ambulance-carriage was driven into the
centre of the ground and took up a central position so as to be able
to quickly reach any part of the course. I was assured that it was not
at all unusual for two or three jockeys to be injured in one race.
Another significant and permanent adjunct of the Caulfield racecourse
is the neat little hospital, provided with every possible medical and
surgical appliance for remedying injuries to the human frame. There
are eight beds in the hospital, and I was told that they had at times
been all filled with serious cases. Such a state of things degrades
the good old national sport of steeplechasing to the level of Spanish
bullfights, where the _toreadors_ hear Mass before going into the
ring. It is not wonderful that these dreadful accidents happen, for
some of the fences are truly fearful, consisting of a big tree cut
into four or five pieces, nailed firmly one on top of the other to a
height of four feet six inches. This arrangement precludes all
possibility of the fence yielding if the horse touches it. The
argument in favour of this fence is that it represents the real fence
of the country, and that horses are accustomed to jump it. The
accidents, which are nearly as frequent and as bad in the flat races,
occur generally from the tremendous number of starters. To-day there
were thirty-two in one race and forty-seven in another, and some of
the worst casualties were caused by one horse falling and others
tumbling over him.

At half-past two we left, for the Governor had to open the bazaar in
aid of the Convalescent Home in the place of Lady Loch, who was unable
to leave her room. We drove to the Exhibition building, which did not
look half so pretty as yesterday when it was filled by the children.
However, everything went off well according to the programme, and
after one or two short speeches, and a few pieces on the organ, we
made the tour of the bazaar, and tried to find amid the quantities of
pretty things something to buy, which is always a difficult matter.
From the Exhibition building Mr. des Graz and I proceeded to the yacht
at Williamstown, whither she had been obliged to return on account of
the rough weather off Sandridge. My telegram had not been received,
and I had to wait at the station, until a civil greengrocer
volunteered to drive me down to the pier alongside of which the yacht
was berthed. After the spacious rooms of Government House the
'Sunbeam' cabins looked very small, but they are snug and bright. When
one is so many thousands of miles away from England the various little
treasures scattered about them remind me of home and its happy
associations, and I feel not utterly cut off from the scenes I love so
well.

We were packed up ready to go to Sir W. Clarke's charming place at
Sudbury, when we received a telegram saying that in consequence of a
death in his household he could not receive us; so all our plans have
to be changed. Tom joined me on board the yacht shortly before
midnight, after a pleasant evening at the banquet given by the
Melbourne branch of the Imperial Federation League.[4]

[Footnote 4: See Appendix.]

_Tuesday, June 28th._--I was awakened early by the pattering of rain
on the deck, and on looking through the portholes I could not see
three yards ahead for the curtain of wet mist which seemed to hang
before them. Tom was anxious that we should give up our projected
journey, for he was much afraid of the risk I should run from the cold
and damp. But, just as I always in England go to a meet on a fine day
because it _is_ fine, and on a wet day because I hope it will clear
up, I determined to start now. I was already dressed by ten o'clock,
when the Governor, and a few others whom Tom had invited to accompany
him as far as the Heads, arrived. The fog was still so dense that the
deputy harbour-master would not allow the yacht to be unmoored; and
after waiting some time, the Governor returned to Melbourne, whither I
also went by the 10.45 train. Tom--who had settled to take the yacht
round to Sydney--had to postpone his departure, as it was impossible
to move out; and we afterwards learned that many accidents happened
during the fog. From Spencer Street Station we drove across to Princes
Bridge Station, and thence proceeded at a snail's pace--still on
account of the fog--out of the city, till we got to Mitcham, when it
began to clear. A few minutes afterwards the sun came out brilliantly
like an English summer's day, and when we reached Lilydale it really
felt quite hot.

Messrs. Cobb & Co. had sent a Tom Thumb sort of coach and a buggy,
into which our numerous party could by no means squeeze. However, we
packed both vehicles as full as possible, and sent for another
conveyance, familiarly known as a 'Tip-up,' its narrow wheels making
it liable to upset except on good roads.

About three o'clock we reached St. Hubert's, a pretty house, the owner
of which is now in England with his family. One of his sons remains to
manage the estate. We were soon comfortably established in pleasant
rooms looking on to a sunny verandah. The view from our windows was
perfectly enchanting, stretching away over the distant mountains, now
covered with snow. A tremendous swamp lies between the house and the
foot of the range, which accounts for the heavy mist that rises at
sunset. My room was delicious with a blazing fire, and after lunch we
went round the cellars with our kind host, and saw all the interesting
and various processes of wine-making. Mr. de Castella has introduced
the best methods of preparation, as practised in Europe, and has
succeeded in producing wines of a quality equal to the finest supplied
from the French and German vineyards. By the time we had finished our
tour of inspection it was cold and dark, and after dinner we all went
early to bed.

_Wednesday, June 29th._--We were called at half-past six, and soon
after nine made a start, in two coaches, on a cold and wintry morning,
for Black Spur. Our way first lay through the vineyards, which were
not in their best looks, having only just been scarified, as the
process is called. It means cutting off the branches and reducing the
vines to small and ugly bushes, destitute of leaves at this season. On
our way we passed a large 'selection' belonging to Mr. McNabb, who is
a great judge of prize cattle and stock of all kind, and who, like
many other Scotchmen in the colony, seems to have prospered in
everything he puts his hand to. Further on we came to Koordal, a
'reserve' for the aboriginals. It has a nice house, and the land is
good. The aboriginals are rapidly dying out as a pure race, and most
of the younger ones are half-breeds. Even in this inclement weather it
was sad to notice how little protection these wretched beings had
against its severity. We passed a miserable shanty by the side of the
road, scarcely to be called a hut, consisting merely of a few slabs of
bark propped against a pole. In this roadside hovel two natives and
their women and piccaninnies were encamped, preferring this frail
shelter to the comfortable quarters provided for them at Koordal. The
condition of the men of the party contrasted very unfavourably with
their appearance when they presented themselves under the charge of
Captain Traill, the Governor's A.D.C., at his Excellency's Jubilee
_levée_ last week. To-day they looked like the veriest tramps, and
were most grateful for a bit of butterscotch for the baby and the
shilling apiece which we gave them after an attempt at conversation.

From Healesville we rattled merrily over an excellent road, the
scenery improving every mile, till we reached the picturesque little
village of Fernshaw, a tiny township on the river Watt. Important as
an absolutely pure water supply is to a city like Melbourne, where the
present provision is anything but satisfactory, we could not help
regretting that this hamlet and several others must be cleared away in
the course of the next two years, in order to provide space for the
gathering-ground of the city's drinking water. The increased
facilities for travel afforded by the railway, now nearly completed to
Healesville, will, however, enable people to make new settlements on
the other line of hills further from Black Spur. The memory of
Fernshaw will always linger pleasantly, and I rejoice that I have seen
it before it is swept off the face of the earth by the requirements of
the big city near it.

[Illustration: Ferns]

From Fernshaw up the Black Spur must be a perfectly ideal drive on a
hot summer's day, and even in midwinter it was enchanting. The road is
cut through a forest of high eucalyptus-trees, varying from 100 to 450
feet in height, and from twenty to fifty, and even seventy, feet in
girth. At intervals roaring torrents rush down gullies overgrown with
tree-ferns, and full of dicksonia-antarcticas and alsophilas. To-day
they looked very curious; for, instead of growing as usual, with their
fronds erect or nearly level, all were bent down by the weight of the
late heavy fall of snow, so that they resembled graceful umbrellas and
parasols. So fairy-like was the sylvan scene that I half expected to
see the curved branches open softly and disclose naiads or
wood-nymphs. I had always been told that these fern-gullies were
charming, but I never thought anything could be half so lovely as this
romantic ravine. If only the sunlight could have glanced through the
trees and thrown some shimmering sunbeams on the bright green leaves,
it would have been even more delightful. After climbing up the hill
by a steep but good road we arrived at Myrtle Gully, called after the
trees which grow there. They are quite different from our idea of
myrtles, though their dark and glossy leaves contrast finely with the
lighter green of the young tree-ferns and the blue-green of the
eucalypti. My botanical ideas are getting quite confused and upset in
Australia, and I must study the new forms with the assistance of some
kind director of gardens. It is necessary to understand the
classification of these plants, for the common names are entirely
deceptive and utterly opposed to one's preconceived ideas of the
species to which they belong.

We climbed up to the summit of the hill, and on our way saw some
rail-splitters at work. These men are peculiar to Australia, and I
cannot but think they do harm to the country. On payment of a fee of
1_l._ a year they are allowed to go into the forests and kill the
finest trees by 'ringing' them. Often the trees thus dealt with are
left to die as they stand and disfigure the forest. In this way an
enormous quantity of valuable timber seems to be uselessly destroyed.
The rail-splitters remind me of squirrels, who nibble off nuts before
they are ripe, and then take a dozen away to their winter's nests; or
of a vixen, who will bite the heads off twenty chickens and only carry
one back to her cubs.

On our return to the comfortable inn at Fernshaw we found cheerful
fires ready to welcome us. This inn is very prettily situated. At the
back runs the river Watt, brawling over its stones like the veriest
Scotch salmon-trout stream. It is full of excellent imported trout,
which flourish well in these antipodean waters and attain a weight of
six or seven pounds. Across the river is thrown a primitive bridge,
consisting of the trunk of a big tree cut in halves. Very slippery and
slimy it looked, and I did not feel inclined to attempt the perilous
passage. Near the inn were some extremely nice gardens with the
trunks of old tree-ferns filled with flowers, producing a pretty
effect as rustic flower-pots.

[Illustration: A Forest Bridge]

Precisely at half-past two we started on our homeward journey, and
with the exception of a few minutes' stay at Healesville to water the
horses, and at the blacks' camp to have a little more chat with them,
we did not stop anywhere on the way. Since morning the blacks had
turned their huts right round, for the wind had shifted and they
wanted shelter from its severity.

At 5.15 we reached St. Hubert's, just saving the daylight over the
last seven miles of bad road. We all felt better for our pleasant
expedition, though the violent joltings of the road and the bumpings
of the coach were decidedly fatiguing.

_Thursday, June 30th._--We were called at half-past six, and hastily
got up to pack off the luggage before setting off at eight, on a fine
though misty morning. We had a delightful drive to the station at
Lilydale, after bidding a regretful adieu to picturesque St. Hubert's.

Once in the suburbs of Melbourne, it was necessary to crawl along at a
snail's pace on account of the numerous express trains running into
the city at this early hour. We did not reach the terminus until
nearly eleven o'clock, and were glad to drive quickly to Menzie's
Hotel for breakfast. A large mail arrived for us from Wellington, as
well as heaps of letters and telegrams. At half-past twelve Mabelle
and I went to the Botanical Gardens, where Mr. Guilfoyle, the
superintendent, met us, and was good enough to allow me to drive all
round the gardens. He kindly explained the arrangement of the plants,
clearing away many botanical difficulties which have puzzled me ever
since I landed in Western Australia. I do not think I ever saw so
well-arranged and beautiful a garden as this, and never have I had so
intelligent and kind a _cicerone_ as Mr. Guilfoyle. There is a
beautiful lake in the gardens, well stocked with different species of
wild-fowl. We drove all over the exquisitely kept lawn, yet the
carriage-wheels appeared to make no impression. The grass grows from a
mixture of buffalo and other kinds of grass-seeds--a combination which
produces a velvet-like sward about three inches in depth, and
apparently incapable of injury. At one part of the gardens where the
carriage could not possibly penetrate, Mr. Guilfoyle had thoughtfully
provided a chair and two men to carry me through the fern-gully. This
rivals what we saw at Fernshaw yesterday, and I was able to observe
what I could not well see there--the undergrowth of smaller ferns and
the parasitic ferns growing on the trunks of others. I was quite sorry
to leave. Mr. Guilfoyle sent us away laden with interesting botanical
specimens, and gave Mabelle and me each a sweet-smelling bouquet of
daphnes and white camellias.

We lunched at Government House. After bidding good-bye to H.E. and
Lady Loch, from whom we have received so much kindness, we went to
Menzie's Hotel, calling on our way at Cole's Book Arcade, which is one
of the sights of Melbourne. A most curious place it is; consisting of
a large arcade three stories high, about the length of the Burlington
Arcade in London, though perhaps rather wider. The whole place from
top to bottom is one mass of books, arranged in different styles, some
according to price and some according to subject. It was crowded with
intending purchasers, as well as with readers who apparently had not
the slightest intention of purchasing, and who had only gone there to
while away a leisure hour, and to listen to the band, which discoursed
sweet music to them whilst they read.

After strolling through this wonderful arcade, we collected the
luggage from the hotel and sent it off to the station, following
ourselves in time to catch the 4.55 train to Seymour.

_Friday, July 1st._--We left by the 9.30 train for Shepparton, in
pouring rain, passing through a flat rich grazing country, which
seemed well stocked with sheep. The grass looked luxuriant, and must
be excellent for dairy produce. The fences were different from any we
had seen before, made of felled trees laid lengthwise all round the
paddocks. As may easily be imagined, they form a formidable obstacle
for young horses, many of which were running in the paddocks. All this
was interesting, but the beauties of the distant landscape were quite
blotted out by the rain and mist. However, when we crossed the
Goulbourn, the sun began to try and peep through the clouds, which had
hitherto hidden everything from our view. Shepparton is a rapidly
growing township, with 2,000 inhabitants. A few years ago there was
not a single house in the place.

[Illustration: NORTH HEAD, SYDNEY HARBOUR]

[Illustration: Sydney Harbour]

The township of Shepparton, like all Australian settlements, is
arranged in square blocks, the houses consisting chiefly of four- or
six-roomed cottages of one story, built of wood or corrugated iron. At
present the whole place appears to be under water, but its inhabitants
say that in summer it is beautiful, and the pasturage certainly looks
excellent. In the course of our drives we went to Mr. and Mrs.
Robinson's house. There I met some ladies and gentlemen interested in
ambulance work, to whom I said a few words and gave some papers. I
hope they will communicate with the head-centre at Melbourne, and
obtain permission to establish a branch-centre here. Everybody seems
to agree that it would be most useful, as the doctors are few and far
between, and there are only five medical men to an area of 1,000
square miles! We left by the 4.30 train for Seymour, Mr. Rose driving
me to the station in his carriage with his pretty pair of ponies. They
are said to be perfectly quiet, and I suppose they are, according to
Australian ideas; but they did not come up to my notion of docility.
Besides sundry kicks and buck-jumps, they had both legs over the
splinter-bar once, one leg over the pole twice, and another leg over
the traces, which fortunately came unfastened, or in the regular
kicking match which ensued some mischief would have been done. I
expected every minute that the little carriage would have been broken
to pieces, and that we should have been landed at the bottom of the
quagmire over which the road appeared to run.

Seymour was reached at 6.30, just in time to change into the express,
and at Albury we were again transferred, at 10.30 P.M., into Lord
Carrington's carriage, sent up from Sydney for us.




[Illustration: Banksias, &c., New South Wales]

CHAPTER XIV.

_NEW SOUTH WALES._


_Saturday, July 2nd._--When I awoke in the morning I saw a landscape
of a very different character from the scenery of Victoria, showing
that we were getting into a warmer climate.

Our train was late, and all were glad when Sydney was at last reached
and we found ourselves driving swiftly to Government House. The way
lay through crowded streets resembling the Hammersmith Road beyond
Kensington. There were some pretty views of the harbour down the
narrow streets through which we drove on the way to Government House,
a building in the Gothic style.

The afternoon was so fine that everybody longed to be out of doors,
and I enjoyed a stroll in the gardens--from which there is a lovely
view of the harbour--immensely. I had heard so much of it that I had
fully expected to be disappointed, but it more than fully realised all
my preconceived ideas of its attractions. The water was crowded with
small boats, and the Volunteers, disappointed in the non-arrival of
the 'Sunbeam,' were taking their exercise in Macquarrie Fort. So deep
is the water beneath what is called the Tarpeian Rock that the big
ships of the Orient Line, the P. & O., and other giant traversers of
the ocean, can easily lie alongside. We spent a quiet evening, and
were glad to go to bed early after our recent short and disturbed
nights. Before retiring, however, arrangements were made for a
steam-launch to meet Tom in the 'Sunbeam' on his way in from the
Heads, and to tell him to stop at Watson's Bay, as the Volunteers
wished to go out to meet him. Saturday afternoons and Sundays are
their only possible days, and if he were to wait for Monday it would
be a serious disappointment to hundreds of people. Large numbers were
waiting about this afternoon on the look-out for the 'Sunbeam,' and
they seemed much disappointed that she did not come in.

_Sunday, July 3rd._--After a refreshing night I awoke, and was soon at
the window enjoying the view over the harbour. The morning was misty,
but the effects of light and shade were most beautiful. At 10.30 the
Governor and Lady Carrington, with their children, his Excellency's
staff, Colonel St. Quintin, myself and others, went on board the
steam-launch and steamed down the harbour towards Watson's Bay. The
views on every side were charming, both looking _up_ the harbour
towards Parramatta and also in the direction of the Circular Quay,
where the big mail steamers lie. The shores of the various little
creeks and inlets were studded by fine houses with pretty gardens
stretching down to the blue waters of the harbour. We passed Clark's
Island, which is the quarantine station for dogs, Darling Head being
the quarantine station for human beings, and then we saw the 'Sunbeam'
lying at anchor in the little inlet called Watson's Bay. The gig was
soon sent alongside, and we were speedily on board. I was delighted to
see Tom looking so much better, though he was still obliged to wear a
pair of green spectacles. After a somewhat lengthy inspection of the
yacht Lord and Lady Carrington and party returned to town, and we had
service on board.

Precisely at half-past two, as agreed, we weighed anchor, and
proceeded slowly up the harbour under steam. Not seeing anything of
the boats, which were also to leave Sydney at 2.30, we steamed as
slowly as possible in order not to meet them too soon. A very pretty
sight it was when we beheld the Volunteers approaching in two regular
lines of boats, accompanied by crowds of people in small sailing and
rowing boats, as well as launches and steamers, all apparently
perilously overloaded with passengers.

When the Volunteers reached the yacht they all tossed their oars and
stood up and saluted. Then the commanding officers came alongside, and
we received them on board. It really was a lovely sight, and my only
wish was to be, like the famous bird, in two places at once--namely,
where I was, to help to entertain the Volunteers and thank them for
their warm and kindly welcome, and on shore to look at the dear old
'Sunbeam' surrounded by the mosquito fleet, through which she had
considerable difficulty in making her way without doing any damage. It
took some time for all the officers and men to come on board to have
some refreshment and look over the yacht, and it was therefore rather
late before the commanding officer rowed us ashore in his gig. We
landed at the man-of-war steps, close to Government House, where a
large crowd had assembled to give us another welcome. They formed a
little lane for us to pass through, cheering lustily, and smiling and
nodding as if they were glad to see us. There was nothing formal or
obtrusive about their welcome. It was, in truth, a real, warm, honest
greeting from friends across the sea, and it touched both Tom and
myself deeply. All such demonstrations invariably give me a choking
sensation in my throat, and I was not altogether sorry when we had
made our way through the crowd of kindly welcomers and reached the
steep pathway leading to Government House. Halfway up we could stop
and survey the scene, and I was able to partially gratify my wish to
see the yacht from the shore with the boats around it.

After a short rest we had another quiet evening, Tom coming to dinner,
but returning to sleep on board the yacht. I went to bed early to try
and nurse a bad and rapidly increasing cold, caught during the wet
journey between Melbourne and Sydney.

_Monday, July 4th._--I awoke at five, and wrote letters. The doctor
would not hear of my going out as my cold was no better.

It continued foggy all day, and the children had to content themselves
with skating and battledore and shuttlecock in the verandahs. Lord
Carrington, Tom, and Mabelle went for a long walk, calling on Cardinal
Moran, and paying visits to the picture-gallery, the Anglican
cathedral, and other places; and after an early dinner at 6.45 all the
party went to the meeting of the Royal Humane Society. I was bitterly
disappointed at being unable to attend, and perhaps do something to
encourage the friends of the St. John Ambulance Association.

_Tuesday, July 5th._--Awoke early, and had a busy morning. The day
proved lovely, so I was allowed to walk in the garden. After lunch we
started in a carriage-and-four for a long but most delightful drive to
the South Head. We passed through the far-extending suburbs of Sydney
with their good houses and gardens. It was very charming to have the
occasional glimpses of the many inlets and creeks of the harbour.
Farther on we reached the real bush, full of flowers, the ground being
covered with the red and white epacris, and with various banksias,
hoyas, and other flowers. At the South Head the view of the city,
through the light veil of smoke and fog which hung over the landscape,
and beyond the lighthouse on the other side over the ocean, was very
fine.

[Illustration: Summer Hill Creek]

There was a large and pleasant party at dinner, and in the evening an
'At home,' at which I was interested to meet several Sussex people.
The world is very small after all!

_Wednesday, July 6th._--I had a busy morning, and at noon went on
board the yacht, returning by three o'clock to meet Mr. Montefiore at
the large picture-gallery. Thence we went to look at Mr. Bray's
collection of curiosities from New Guinea and the Islands, and spent a
pleasant and instructive hour. Some of our party returned to
Government House for an early dinner, while Tom, Mabelle, and others
went on board the yacht to entertain the officers of the Naval
Volunteer force which has been established in Sydney, on the model of
the corps which Tom was instrumental in raising at home. At eight
o'clock I went down to the shore and looked at the Volunteers drilling
in the open. They certainly are a splendid body of men, and their
drill is quite wonderful. I have never seen such good cutlass drill
anywhere, and I have 'assisted' at many similar inspections.

_Thursday, July 7th._--To-day we called on the Mayor, and were taken
all over the fine buildings which are being erected as a memorial of
the Centenary of New South Wales. Afterwards we visited the
Picturesque Atlas Printing Office, and watched the processes of
printing, engraving, lithographing, &c. Dinner was again early, and
after it, Lady Carrington, Mabelle, Mr. Egerton, and others went to a
Zerbini quartette, whilst Lord Carrington, Tom, and the remainder of
the party set off to a shoeblacks' concert, the performers at which
had originally been some of the roughest ragamuffins in the city.

_Tuesday, July 12th._--The morning was pouring wet. Tom started at
half-past nine to meet Mr. Inglis, who had arranged to conduct him
round the docks at Cockatoo Island and over the 'Vernon'
reformatory-ship, an institution which owes its origin to Sir Henry
Parkes. He was much interested with what he saw on board the 'Vernon.'
The most hopeless characters do not seem beyond the reach of the
wholesome influence of the band.

At 1.45 some friends came on board the 'Sunbeam' to lunch, and
directly afterwards people began to arrive for an 'At home,' which
lasted until 5 P.M. Luckily the weather cleared a little, or I do not
know what we should have done to amuse our guests. There were a few
gleams of sunshine at intervals, which served to dry the awnings and
to make things look more cheerful and comfortable.

At five o'clock we all went to the Legislative Council and heard Mr.
Watts speak, and then to the Legislative Assembly, where a debate was
also going on. We were afterwards shown over the Chambers and their
libraries by Sir Henry Parkes. I admired the dining-room, which was
much prettier than that of our own House of Commons. From its balcony
there is a magnificent view of Sydney town and harbour. The libraries
seemed well furnished with books and looked thoroughly comfortable. It
is the oldest Parliament House south of the Line, having been built
early in the century. The members all seemed wonderfully fresh and
untired, considering that it was 7.30 A.M. before the House rose this
morning. The powers of human endurance are possibly strengthened by
the fine climate.

_Wednesday, July 13th._--I had, as usual, a busy morning, and left at
eleven o'clock, with Tom, Mabelle, and Captain Gascoigne, to lunch on
board the German man-of-war 'Bismarck.' Captain and Mrs. Bosanquet and
several officers were there; and we had a pleasant party, enlivened by
the strains of an excellent band. We had to hurry away directly
afterwards to be in time for the meeting which the Governor had kindly
convened at Government House in connection with the St. John Ambulance
Association. The meeting, held in the drawing-room, was well attended
and successful. That over, there was only scant time to rest before an
early dinner, after which we went to a meeting of the Geographical
Society at the Freemasons' Hall, where Mr. Bevan the explorer gave us
an interesting account of his fourth and latest voyage to New Guinea.
These explorations were undertaken, the first in a Chinese junk, the
second in a big cutter, the third in a schooner, and the last in the
steamer 'Victory.'

_Thursday, July 14th._--The children and Tom went out riding, and I
had a busy morning with Mr. Wright, working until half-past eleven,
when I went with Mr. Bevan to see some interesting New Guinea
curiosities at the establishment of Messrs. Burn and Philps, the
enterprising firm who sent him out to make his explorations. Tom had
made an appointment with Captain Hammill to visit the Goodenough
Sailors' Home, but, having a great deal to do on board the 'Sunbeam,'
he asked me to go on his behalf and meet the manager and the committee
of the institution. We had great difficulty in finding the place, and,
after driving half over Sydney without discovering its whereabouts,
went to the town-hall for information, and were there directed to two
houses--Trafalgar House, and the Goodenough Home, established by Sir
Anthony Hoskins when he was out here as Commodore. The houses in both
cases are small, but look beautifully clean.

Mr. Shearston, the manager, seems a perfect enthusiast, and too much
cannot be said in praise of his self-denial. He has given up the whole
of his private house, except one bedroom and the tiniest little scrap
of an office, for the purposes of the Home. Truly the promoters of the
movement deserve every assistance in their good work; and it makes one
feel inclined to help them to secure the new site so urgently
required, when it is seen how earnestly they labour in the good cause
themselves. They not only take in good characters, but go into the
streets at night and pick up sailors, no matter how intoxicated they
may be. They put them to bed, and endeavour to send them back to
their ships in the morning, so far recovered as to escape reprimand
and perhaps dismissal. The inspection of this institution took some
time, and on our way back we passed the proposed new site for the
Home.

Captain Hammill and Mr. Bevan lunched with us on board the 'Sunbeam,'
and later on the yacht was shown to a large number of people. After
Lady Carrington's 'At home' in the afternoon, Tom, Tab, and Captain
Gascoigne went to dine at the Yacht Club, and we had a quiet dinner,
after which I did a good deal more work with Mr. Wright.

_Friday, July 15th._--An early start had to be made this morning in
order to meet Sir Henry Parkes at the station at nine o'clock. Tom,
Baby, and I were the only members of the party who turned up, and we
found that Mr. Salomons and the Chinese Commissioners had been invited
to accompany us. Precisely at nine we left the station in a
comfortable saloon carriage, and, passing through the suburbs of
Sydney, reached Parramatta at 9.30. This is one of the oldest
townships in New South Wales. Conspicuous in the landscape rise the
double spires of its handsome church, which is more than a hundred
years old. The township has for years past derived considerable
importance from its wool trade and manufactures; and has now an
excellent fruit trade, which has sprung up quite lately.
Fruit-orchards surround the town, and the orange groves look bright
and green and beautiful with their shiny leaves and globes of golden
fruit. It was almost accidentally that oranges were first grown here.
The unexpected success of the first few orange-pips, which grew and
prospered amazingly, led to the industry being taken up, and splendid
orange groves now surround the town.

[Illustration: Waterfall Gully]

After leaving Parramatta our way still lay through orchards and
vineyards, until we reached Seven Hills Grove, commanding a beautiful
view. Thence we went on to Blacktown, which takes its name from the
large number of aboriginals who formerly lived in the neighbourhood;
but they are now almost extinct. At intervals we either crossed or ran
alongside of the old bullock-track, now a good high road, to Bathurst.
Bathurst can now be reached in a few hours from Sydney. In the old
times it took four days to get there by coach, and much longer, of
course, by bullock team! We crossed a large river, the Nepean, passing
through some charming fern-gullies, and soon afterwards reached the
zigzags of the railway. They are so abrupt, that instead of the train
turning round, it is alternately pulled and pushed up the steep
incline. This seems to me a dangerous plan, and it certainly does not
economise labour or steam force. It was interesting to find at one of
the stations that the engine-driver who was taking the train up had
worked for Mr. Brassey for many years in France and elsewhere, had
married Tom's nurse, and had danced with me at the ball given in the
engine-sheds at Shrewsbury at the great _fête_ on the occasion of our
marriage. At another place where we stopped the station-master for
many years occupied a similar position at Aylesford, near my
brother-in-law's place. They were both anxious to come and see the
yacht, and I was rather amused to hear at lunch that while we were
going up the mountain they had immediately returned to Sydney and had
gone on board.

The view from Springwood is beautiful, and close by lies Sassafras, or
'Flying Fox' Gully, so called from the number of flying foxes found
there. We next passed Falconberg, Sir Henry Parkes's place, and went
on to Lawoon, where we stopped a short time, and where a man brought
us some curious little black snakes--great pets at present. Not far
from here are the beautiful Wentworth Falls, and the views became
superb; I had not expected anything half so lovely. Distant glimpses
of undulating forests were interrupted by abrupt sandstone cliffs, so
steep that it was impossible not to believe a large stream ran beneath
them. There is no river here, however, although the many small creeks
and rivulets make beautiful falls, tumbling over the sandstone cliffs
through luxuriant creepers and tropical ferns. It is impossible to
exaggerate the beauty of the scene. The charm of the landscape was the
really Indian blue of the distant hills, from which they derive their
name of Blue Mountains. It is not a blue haze, but a vivid blue, with
tints varying from darkest indigo to palest cerulean blue; but the
colour is everywhere intense, and there are no half-tones. Perhaps one
of the most attractive views is that just before reaching Katoomba,
nearly 3,500 feet above the sea-level. The train was stopped before
reaching the station to let us admire the distant landscape. I should
have liked to stay for hours.

[Illustration: Katoomba]

Further on is Blackheath Hill, from which the view is said to be the
finest in the whole of the Blue Mountains, though some maintain that
the outlook from the big zigzag near Lithgow Down is still finer. On
the return journey we had to wait nearly half an hour at Blackheath,
and as I was not able to walk far I utilised the time by taking
photographs. But no sun-picture can ever give the least idea of this
scenery. Its finest effects require the brush of the painter. On our
return journey the noonday sun had dispersed the mists, and all the
delicate details of the more distant landscapes were brought clearly
into view. We travelled at a terrible pace, and the sharpness of the
curves threatened every moment to send the train off the line. These
sudden turns and jerks had the effect of making us all rather
uncomfortable, and poor Baby and I felt quite sea-sick. The sensation
was the same as when the ship makes a deep curtsy and seems to leave
you behind as she dips into the waves!

There is a branch line at Katoomba to the Yenoolan or Fish River
Caves, which I should have liked to have visited had there been more
time. I had to console myself with the reflection that I had seen the
caves at Adelsberg, Neptune's Caves in Sardinia, the caves at
Moulmein, and other vast limestone caves in various parts of the
world.

After passing Sir Alfred Stephen's magnificent place we reached
Falconberg, and by this time I felt so tired that I was truly glad of
my carrying-chair. I do not think I could have walked even the short
distance between the station and the house. Arrived there, I was
obliged to ask leave to lie down instead of going to see the beautiful
fern-glens with the rest of the party. It was a great disappointment.
I was able, however, to enjoy the lovely distant view from the
verandah, as well as the closer view of the rocky sandstone cliffs and
fern-clad gullies; and I could hear the mocking note of the rarely
seen lyre-bird, the curious cachinnation of the laughing jackass, and
the occasional distant note of the bell-bird. Even this brief rest
amidst these pleasant surroundings refreshed me greatly, and I felt
much better when later on we resumed our journey. The engine-driver
was told to go slowly round the sharp curves, and we were spared a
repetition of the unpleasant experience of the morning. We arrived in
Sydney a little after six, feeling much indebted to Sir Henry Parkes
for his great kindness.

There was no time to think of rest, for I had to dress immediately and
go with Tom, Mabelle, and others to the Ambulance meeting at the
town-hall. It was a very good one, and afterwards the committee of the
Williamstown and Port Melbourne Sailors' Home presented me with a
testimonial, in order, as they said, to express their gratitude for
what we have been able to do for them. Tom and Mabelle went on from
the meeting to Mrs. Tooth's ball.

_Saturday, July 16th._--I awoke feeling so tired that Dr. Hoffmeister
made me remain in bed till the middle of the day in order to keep
quiet, though I contrived to get through much work with pen and
pencil.

Lunch was ordered early, and a little after two we went on board the
yacht to receive the ladies of the Wollahra centre of the St. John
Ambulance Association, to whom, according to previous arrangement, I
presented certificates. At half-past three the contractors who gave
Tom the charming picnic up the Hawkesbury River last Saturday[5] came
on board with their wives and lady friends, and were soon followed by
the members of the Royal Sydney Yacht Club and their friends. The
boys' band from the 'Vernon' played extremely well during the
afternoon, the music and brilliant sunshine adding cheerfulness to the
proceedings. When the general company had left, the boys had a hearty
meal of tea and cake, and were delighted at being shown over the
yacht.

[Footnote 5: See Appendix.]

Tom and I were obliged to hurry away at half-past four in order to see
the Naval Brigade at exercise, under the command of Captain Hixson. A
very interesting sight it proved to be. Their drilling and marching
past were admirable, as were also their volley and file firing; while
the rapidity with which they formed into rallying squares to resist
cavalry was really marvellous. Towards the close of the proceedings it
was growing dusk, and the bright-coloured tongues of flame from the
rifles showed sharply against the dark blue sky. Tom presented the
medals to the men and made them a speech; and after all was over we
returned to Government House.

_Sunday, July 17th._--Tom and Mabelle went on board H.M.S. 'Nelson' at
10.30 A.M. for church-service, and then on to H.M.S. 'Opal,' where
they met Admiral and Mrs. Fairfax, and Captain and Mrs. Bosanquet, and
a few other friends.

[Illustration: Cook's Monument, Botany Bay]

The day turned out so lovely that I was persuaded to go round the
Botanical Gardens in a bath-chair. I admired immensely the taste with
which these gardens are laid out, and the skill with which a great
portion of the site has been reclaimed from the sea. What seems so
puzzling in this climate is the existence of tropical, semi-tropical,
and temperate plants side by side. I saw violets, geraniums, roses,
strelitzias, in full bloom, some growing under the shade of palms from
Ceylon, Central Africa, and the warmest parts of North Australia,
while others flourished beneath the bare branches of the oak, beech,
birch, and lime trees of the old country.

In the afternoon I had intended to go to the cathedral with Lady
Carrington, but felt so unwell that I was obliged to lie down for a
time, and then sit in the sun and try to recruit. I had, however, to
go to bed at five; but I made an effort and got up again at seven in
order to appear at our last dinner at this charming house, where we
have spent so many happy days and received so much kindness. After
dinner we had a long talk over new and old times, and all felt quite
sad at the prospect of the inevitable parting which must come
to-morrow.




[Illustration: Signal Station, Newcastle]

CHAPTER XV.

_NEW SOUTH WALES (continued)._


_Monday, July 18th._--Lovely sunrise--the last we shall see, alas! in
this beautiful place. Very busy; rather a worrying morning; so much to
settle and arrange. Did some final shopping with the children. Met
Lord Shaftesbury at lunch. Went off to the 'Sunbeam,' feeling quite
sad that the moment of departure had at last arrived. The Admiral came
on board 'Sunbeam' at the last moment, bringing some violets as a
farewell offering. Sailed slowly away, and gradually lost sight of the
Heads in the darkness.

_Tuesday, July 19th._--At half-past twelve Tom came below to announce
our arrival off the port of Newcastle. The wind had been so fresh and
fair that we made a smart run of seven hours, sighting the lights at
Nobby Head at about half-past ten. Our head was then put off the land,
and we hove to, to wait for the tug. This is a process which to the
old salt seems a pleasure nearly equal to that of going ashore, at all
events to dropping anchor in a well-sheltered harbour. Though I
certainty cannot call myself an inexperienced sailor, it appears to me
to be the acme of discomfort. Even in a heavy gale it affords but
slight relief from the storm-tossed motion of the ship. On the present
occasion it was a change from pleasantly gliding along through the
water at a speed of nine or ten knots an hour to a nasty pitching
motion which made us all very wretched. Everything began to roll and
tumble about in a most tiresome manner; doors commenced to bang,
glasses to smash, books to tumble out of their shelves, and there was
a general upset of the usually peaceful equilibrium of the yacht. So
unpleasant was this, that I suggested to Tom that, instead of waiting
outside for the reception tug, we should get up steam and go into
harbour at daylight so as to have a few hours' rest. This we did, and
glided into the harbour precisely at 5.30 A.M., anchoring just off the
railway-pier, and quite taking the good people of Newcastle by
surprise. The town presented a great contrast to its namesake at home,
for the morning dawned bright and lovely, with hardly a smoke-wreath
to intercept the charming view. We looked out on a noble river with a
busy town on its banks and low hills in the background.

About eight o'clock the chairman of the reception committee,
Lieutenant Gardner, of the Royal Naval Brigade, came on board to
arrange the order of the proceedings. Everybody was most kindly
anxious to show us everything there was to be seen, but Tom thought
the lengthy programme would be too much for my strength, and suggested
that the original arrangement should be adhered to. Punctually at
half-past ten the Mayor and Corporation came on board to give us a
cordial welcome and present an address. At 11.15 we embarked in two
steam-launches and went up the harbour, which looked gay and
beautiful, the port being crowded with shipping. We were told,
however, that it is not nearly so full as it used to be a year or two
ago. They say that bad times have affected this like every other
place, and that only a quarter of the number of vessels are in harbour
now, compared to the returns of this time last year.

[Illustration: Kangaroo-foot (_Arrigozanthus_)]

Our first visit was to the hydraulic cranes, by which a ship can take
in a thousand tons of coal in ten hours. From the cranes we went a
little further up the harbour, to the landing-place, where a dense
crowd eagerly awaited us. Carriages were in readiness, but Tom rather
upset the plans by his usual wish to walk instead of going in state in
a coach. I fear he severely tried the lungs and legs of his
entertainers by taking them at a brisk pace up a steep hill to the
high-level reservoir. As soon as I got into the carriage a basket of
fragrant violets was given to me by the school children of Lampton,
one of the collier townships in the neighbourhood. We drove past the
reserve and up to the reservoir, from which there is a fine view of
the town and surrounding country. We stayed a long time at the top of
the breezy hill watching the dark blue waves turn to pale green as
they curled their white-crested heads into great rollers and dashed
against the steep cliffs of the many little headlands and promontories
of the bay. Looking in another direction, the view extends over the
rich alluvial plain which surrounds Newcastle, thickly studded with
houses and colliery townships. One new colliery has been started quite
close to the shore, and not improbably it will be carried, like the
old Botallack mine in Cornwall, right under the sea, where the richest
seam of coal runs. While we were taking in the characteristic features
of the landscape the sun became so powerful, in spite of a cold wind,
that umbrellas and sunshades were found necessary.

After leaving the reservoir we drove through another quarter of the
town. Every house had at its door a smiling group of people who
greeted us warmly. Leaving the town, we went on to Nobby Head. The
position is fortified, and garrisoned with a company of the Permanent
force. From this point the town is better seen than from the
reservoir, and there is a good prospect of the entrance to the
harbour. Though it was comparatively calm to-day, the waves rolled in
with great force; and it is said that in bad weather the sea is
perfectly frightful. Just inside the Heads, not thirty yards from the
shore, a small black buoy marks the spot where a steamer went down
with every soul on board, not only in sight of land, but actually in
port. While Tom was inspecting we rested in the signal-station and
talked to the signalman.

On leaving the fort we drove to Mr. Black's wool-shed, where the
various processes of dumping and preparing the wool for shipment were
explained to us. It is wonderful to see how the bulk of a bale can be
reduced by hydraulic pressure. The shed is perfectly empty at this
moment, but in a few weeks it will be at its fullest, for the shearing
season has already commenced. To-day its ample space was utilised to
hold a large luncheon-party, at which a number of ladies and gentlemen
were present. The speeches at this banquet, though short, were good.
Having partaken of their hospitable entertainment, we were conducted
by our kind hosts into a train which was waiting, literally, at the
door of the shed, and were taken off, more or less through the streets
of the town, to the Newcastle Colliery Company's Works.

As soon as we cleared the suburbs the country became very pretty, and
the place where we left the train, to descend the coal-mine, was
really quite romantic, and entirely different to what one sees in the
Black Country at home. There were several charmingly designed
triumphal arches for us to pass under, all made of semi-tropical
flowers and palms. The contrast between these flowers and plants and
the brisk keen mountain air, blowing cold and fresh in spite of the
hot sun, was remarkable. After admiring the beauty of the various
specimens of flowers, and inspecting the works at the pit's
mouth--where men were hard at work filling skips and emptying them
into trucks waiting for their loads--some of the party got into the
cage and descended 400 or 500 feet into the bowels of the earth. A few
of the ladies declared they felt nervous; but there was really nothing
to make them so except the total darkness. Arrived at the bottom, we
found many miners with candles stuck in the front of their hats, and
carrying lamps of the simplest construction, a piece of waste stuck
into the spout of an ordinary can filled with what is called China oil
(a decoction of mutton fat), waiting to light us on our darksome path.
Several trucks were ready prepared, into one of which I got with the
children, and we started, a large and merry party. On our way in we
met all the miners coming out, for they leave off work at 3.30 in
order to be at the pit's mouth at four, only working eight hours a
day.

All mines bear a greater or less resemblance to each other, whether
they contain black diamonds, like the one in which we then found
ourselves, white diamonds, gold, silver, tin, copper, gypsum, or any
other mineral. There is the same descent in a cage, the same walk
through workings--higher or lower, as the case may be--or ride in a
trolly or truck along lightly-laid rails, and the same universal
darkness, griminess, and sloppiness about the whole affair, which
render a visit, however interesting, somewhat of an undertaking. This
mine seemed to contain a particularly good quality of coal, and the
sides shone and glistened in the lamplight as we passed along them.
Our walk through the levels of pit 'B' was much longer than I had
expected, and must have been quite half a mile. The temperature was
always over 80°, the atmosphere sometimes very bad, and the walking
rather uneven. Thousands, not to say millions, of cockroaches of
portentous size enlivened if they did not add to the pleasure of the
walk. We passed a great many horses, in good condition, going back to
their stables for the night. They are, it is said, very happy down in
the pit; so much so, that when during the Jubilee they were taken up
for three days' holiday, there was the greatest difficulty in
preventing them from returning to the pit's mouth, at which men had to
be stationed to drive them back for fear they might try to put
themselves into the cages and so tumble down the shaft. Horses very
quickly adapt themselves to circumstances; and I dare say the garish
light of day was painful to their eyes, and that they were anxious to
return from the cold on the surface of the ground to the even
temperature of 80° in the pit.

Our walk was a long and weary one, and I felt thankful when we
approached the pit's mouth and could breathe cooler and purer air.
Our hosts were anxious that I should go a little further; but I could
not do so, and sank down into a chair to rest. The others went on, as
I thought, to see some other workings; but I afterwards heard that
they soon reached a beautiful room hollowed out of the solid coal,
with sides like ebony, and sparkling with black diamonds. The walls
were decorated with arches and cleverly arranged geometrical patterns,
formed of the fronds of various kinds of Adiantium, an inscription
with cordial words of welcome being traced in the same delicate
greenery. In the centre stood a table with light refreshments of
various kinds. The entertainment afforded the opportunity for
speeches, in which the rapid development of the mining industry of
this district was detailed in telling figures, and mutual sentiments
of kindness were most cordially conveyed. At the pit's mouth crowds of
women and children had assembled to see us, and a little further off a
train was drawn up, filled by ladies and gentlemen who had preferred
to wander about park-like glades, while their more energetic friends
had made the descent into the coal-mine. The united party--numbering,
I should think, nearly one hundred--next proceeded on board the
'Sunbeam,' for a very late five-o'clock tea and a hasty inspection of
the vessel. At an early hour I retired to rest, utterly worn out.

_Wednesday, July 20th._--Contrary to my usual habit of awaking between
four and five o'clock, I was sound asleep when tea was brought at 5
A.M.; and I should dearly have liked to have slept for two or three
hours longer, so completely was I exhausted by yesterday's hard work.
But it could not be; and after a cup of tea, and a little chat over
future plans, I set to work sorting papers, and putting names in
books, to be given to our kind hosts of yesterday, in remembrance of
our visit. At 7.15 we entered the boat which was waiting alongside,
and proceeded to the shore, Tom, as usual, pulling an oar. Poor 'Sir
Roger,' who has been explosively happy during the past two days at
having us on board again, made a desperate effort to stow himself away
in the boat, which, unhappily, could not be allowed on account of the
quarantine regulations. It seems very hard that the poor doggies can
never have a run on shore whilst we are in Australian waters. Their
only chance of change and exercise consists in being sent in a boat to
some quarantine island for an hour or two.

Arrived at the landing-place, Mr. Gardner, to whom we were much
indebted for making our visit to Newcastle so very pleasant, was
waiting to take us to the station. We started punctually at the time
fixed, and passed through a dull but fertile-looking country, until we
reached West Maitland, where I received a charming present of a basket
of fragrant flowers. About twelve o'clock we were glad to have some
lunch in the train. At Tamworth Mr. King met us with his little girl,
who shyly offered me a large and lovely bouquet of violets.

From Tamworth the country became prettier and the scenery more
mountainous. At one station there was quite a typical colonial
landscape: park-like ground heavily wooded with big gum-trees, and a
winding river with a little weir, where one felt it might be quite
possible to catch trout. The country continued to improve in beauty,
and we saw on all sides evidences of its excellence from a squatter's
point of view. At one place a herd of splendid cattle were being
driven along the road by a stockman, and we passed many large flocks
of sheep. About eight Armadale was reached.

The line from Armadale to Tenterfield is the highest in Australia, and
is considered a good piece of engineering work. It is in that respect
a great contrast to the line over the Blue Mountains, where the
engineers had a comparatively easy task in following the tracks of the
old bullock-road.

The country round Tenterfield is something like the New Forest, with
fine trees and a good many boggy bottoms. About fourteen or fifteen
miles from here the local 'Ben Lomond' rises to a height of 4,500
feet. In the clear starlight night we had occasional glimpses of its
deep glens and rocky peaks.

[Illustration: Cattle crossing the Darling River]

_Thursday, July 21st._--The train reached Tenterfield about one
o'clock this morning, and we drove straight to the Commercial Hotel,
where we found comfortable rooms and blazing fires. Everything looked
clean and tidy, and a cold supper awaited belated travellers, of whom
there were many besides ourselves. I was awakened at 7.30 A.M. by the
sun shining gloriously through the windows of my room. The air felt
delightfully fresh, reminding one of a lovely spring morning in
England about April. Soon after eleven came Mr. Walker, of
Tenterfield, who had kindly called to show us everything worth seeing
in the township near his station. His is a large holding, even for
Australia, 300 square miles in extent, and stretching fourteen miles
in one direction and eighteen in another.

After lunch all the party except the children, who were out riding,
started in two waggonettes for Tenterfield Station. The township of
Tenterfield, like all new Australian towns, is laid out in square
blocks, with corrugated iron houses, and various places of worship for
different denominations. The views of the country around are pleasing,
and the land looks fairly fertile, and is well wooded, with distant
mountains seen through purple haze. We first went to the settlement at
the station, where we saw a good thoroughbred horse, 'Cultivator,' who
has done well in racing both at home and in the colonies; 'Lord
Cleveland' (son of the 'Duke of Cleveland'), a good coach-horse with
fair action, eighteen hands high; and a little cart-horse with sloping
shoulders, short bone between fetlock and knee, and square back like a
thoroughbred shorthorn bull.

From the stables we went to look at the old store which in days gone
by used to be sufficient for the needs of the whole neighbourhood for
a hundred miles round. Then we proceeded to the wool-shed, built of
corrugated iron, the wooden shed having been burnt down. Mr. Walker
has about 70,000 head of cattle usually, and from 50,000 to 100,000
sheep, but his stock is somewhat reduced this year on account of the
long drought. He has 300 thoroughbred Berkshire pigs, besides some
wonderful milch cows and a fine Jersey bull. The cows are much wilder
here than they are at home, and Mr. Walker has a most ingenious
contrivance for securing the animals for milking. They are driven
through a large gate into a passage, which gets narrower and narrower
until it reaches a point where the cow can be secured.

[Illustration: Sheep crossing River]

After looking at the station buildings we went into the house, a
comfortable cottage residence with a nice verandah all round, and what
must be a pretty garden in summer. Even now it is full of violets, and
some fine specimens of English trees--oaks, elms, limes, and pines.
After tea we went for a second drive all round the township, and up
some low hills to get a view of the town from a distance and of the
mountains from a different point of view. Next we took a few
photographs, and should have taken more had not the focussing-glass of
the camera got broken. Then we drove back into the town, and, I think,
round almost every street, and saw all the public buildings, which are
indeed creditable to such a new and rising township. We dined again at
the _table d'hôte_, and after dinner Mr. and Mrs. Walker called with
all sorts of stuffed birds and beasts and other curiosities, which
they had kindly brought as a remembrance of our visit. They took off
Mabelle to a concert, for which the superior of the convent had sent
to beg my patronage in the morning. I could not promise to be present,
and was much startled during dinner to hear that old-fashioned English
institution, the crier, going round with his bell and lustily
announcing that a concert 'was to be held this evening under the
patronage of Lady Brassey and the Honourable two Miss Brasseys.' He
kept walking up and down shouting this out until the concert
commenced, and when he disappeared the Salvation Army appeared upon
the scene with a brass band, the sounds of which are still ringing in
my ears as I am trying to write this, preparatory to going to bed
betimes to secure some rest before an early start in the morning.

_Friday, July 22nd._--This was evidently not to be a night of rest for
me. Between one and two I was awakened by the first arrivals by the
mail train. At three o'clock people began to get up and go away, and
we could fully appreciate how Australian buildings let in every sound.
Between four and five the bugle sounded to call the gallant New South
Wales Light Horse to parade. At five o'clock _I_ was called. It was a
cold, bright morning, with a hard frost, and as soon as my fire and
lamps were lighted I got up and began preparing for the journey. We
heard much galloping of horses in the early morning, and soon
gentlemen in scarlet uniforms began to appear from various parts. We
waited until a quarter to seven, and then, as our proffered escort did
not turn up, we had to go to the station without it, for fear of
missing the train. Five gallant members of the troop joined us on the
way. The commanding officer wore blue undress uniform, and the others
were in scarlet. It was amusing, on our way to the station, to see
late-comers galloping furiously along the road, and it needed a little
judicious delay to enable the scattered troopers to collect themselves
and form into line. At the station we met our old friends the Chinese
Commissioners, looking very curious in travelling-gowns over their
national costumes.

[Illustration: Off the Track]

In spite of the strict injunctions we had received to be punctual to
seven o'clock, it was 7.15 before the train started. We passed through
a pretty but barren country, and reached Warrangarra, on the frontier,
in about three-quarters of an hour. There I saw the most
extraordinary-looking coaches, dating, I should think, from the time
of Queen Elizabeth, with enormous reflecting-lamps, which produced a
curious effect in the day, but doubtless are useful for
bush-travelling at night. No sooner had we alighted from the train
than--I cannot say to my surprise, for familiar faces are always
turning up in unexpected places--the grandson of an old wheelwright at
Catsfield came to speak to me, inquiring first after our family and
then after his own belongings at home. I was able to give him good
news, and to tell him of the alterations going on at Normanhurst,
where he had worked for a long time. He has been out here four years,
and did very well until last year, when times became so bad; but
things are looking up again, and he told me he had four months'
certain work before him, and a very good chance of an opening in the
new township as the railway approaches completion. He looks
exceedingly well, and says his wife and children also enjoy excellent
health. He consulted me about taking the advice of his relations and
going home. I told him I thought it would be a great pity to do so at
present. Working men in the colonies have a good time if they can only
keep sober and are honest and industrious. Indeed those in the old
country can scarcely form an idea of how superior the working man's
condition is out here. Of course there are quite as many
ne'er-do-wells here as in the old country, and I fear that the policy
of the Government rather encourages this class, and that there is
trouble in store in the near future. The so-called unemployed are
mostly utter loafers, who will not give a good day's work for a fair
day's wage. They refuse to work for less than eight shillings a day,
and many of them if offered work at that price only dawdle about for a
few hours and do really nothing.




[Illustration: Rockhampton Lilies]

CHAPTER XVI.

_QUEENSLAND._


At Warrangarra Station we left the train and stepped through the rail
fence which divides New South Wales from Queensland. A walk of about
two hundred yards brought us to the Queensland train, where we found a
comfortable carriage prepared for our reception. The Chinese
Commissioners were in another carriage, and we proceeded as far as
Stanthorpe, where they were met by a great many of their
fellow-countrymen and carried off to see the extensive tin mines close
to the township, where 600 Chinamen are employed. From Stanthorpe we
went on climbing up till we reached Thulunbah, upwards of 3,000 feet
above the level of the sea. Thence we went on to Warwick, which was
reached about 12.40. Here a dear little boy appeared at the station
and handed me a large and beautiful bunch of violets. It is very
pleasant to receive flowers from people whom I have never before seen,
and who only know my books.

After leaving Warwick we entered on the tract of country known as the
Darling Downs, and a splendid stretch of land it is, covered with
magnificent stock, both sheep and cattle looking well even now after
the long summer drought. How much better they will look in a few
weeks' time when the new grass has had time to grow can scarcely be
imagined. The first station we passed through was one of the largest
private stations on the downs; the next was called the Clifton
Station, and belongs to a company. Edenvale Station could be seen in
the distance; and on the opposite side stretched a large station
belonging to Mr. Tyssen, whose landed estates are valued at five
millions. This extensive table-land looks something like the prairies
of South America, only with more trees and fewer undulations. The
occasional fires we met with on our way heightened the resemblance. On
reaching Tawoomba, one of the largest and pleasantest towns in this
neighbourhood, a lady came to the carriage door and gave me another
bunch of violets. The violets of Australia have more perfume than any
we grow in England; certainly they are more fragrant than those one
gets on the Riviera.

From Tawoomba the railway rapidly descends, dropping as much as 1,300
feet in ten miles. The scenery somewhat resembles that of the Blue
Mountains, and is even more beautiful. The exquisite effects produced
by the waning daylight lent a peculiar charm to this landscape. The
forest close to us looked dark and sombre, whilst the valley further
off was bathed in sunlight, and in the dim distance the mountains over
which we had passed early in the day faded into a delicious pale blue
chiaroscuro. The banks beneath or above us were cleft by little
gullies, with struggling rivulets, edged by delicate ferns and strange
plants. The railway stations even seemed prettier and more homelike
than any we have yet seen in Australia. They were surrounded by
gardens, and quite overgrown with creepers. The line must have been
expensive to make, and evidently required great engineering ability.
A more direct line could perhaps have been constructed which would
have saved heavy gradients and much rock-cutting.

[Illustration: Fern Forest]

At Helidon Mr. Laidby joined the train. He had been late for the train
at Tawoomba and had ridden down to Helidon, the train taking one hour
and a quarter to do the twelve miles. I was sorry to hear that he and
his mother had been summoned from Brisbane to see a brother who was
some 400 miles off in the bush suffering terribly from rheumatic
fever. The sick man had been carried to a civilised place by some
bushmen, who were nursing him day and night. I am happy to say he is
now in a fair way to recovery. Mrs. Laidby is already a great
supporter of the St. John Ambulance Association, and declares herself
more than ever convinced of its utility.

I caught a severe cold on my arrival at Brisbane, and have been in bed
for three days. I have therefore nothing to chronicle, and shall
accordingly make use of Tom's diary for that time:--

'_July 20th._--Returned on board the "Sunbeam," and cast off from the
buoy, making sail for Brisbane with a fresh breeze from the
north-west.

'_July 21st-22nd._--We continued under sail with variable winds and
generally fine weather. The chief features of the fine stretch of
coast between Newcastle and Brisbane are the Boughton Islands, Cape
Hawke, a densely wooded promontory rising to the height of 800 feet,
and the Solitary Islands, a detached group scattered over a space of
22 miles in a north and south direction, at a distance of four to six
miles from the shore. A light is exhibited from the south Solitary,
and a signal establishment is kept up. We communicated with this
isolated port. An islet adjacent to the south Solitary Island is
remarkable for a large natural arch, which the ceaseless breaking of
the sea has opened through the rock.

'Passing north from the Solitaries we again closed with the coast at
Cape Byron. The scenery is magnificent. The coast range attains to a
great elevation. Mount Warning, the loftiest peak, rises to a height
of 3,840 feet, and is visible fully sixty miles. It was our guiding
mark in the navigation of the coast for a space of twenty-four hours.
At Danger Point the boundary line between Queensland and New South
Wales descends to the coast from the high summits of the Macpherson
Range.

'_July 23rd._--At noon we were off the entrance to the narrow channel
which divides Stradbroke Island from Moreton Island, tearing along at
twelve knots an hour, under lower canvas only, with a strong wind off
the land and smooth water. It was a splendid bit of yachting. We
passed a steamer which had come out with the Mayor and a large party
from Brisbane to meet us. They welcomed us to Queensland with hearty
cheers, to which we cordially responded. We stood in close under the
land and followed the high coast of Moreton Island. Its northern
extremity is a fresh, verdure-clad, and well-wooded point of land, on
which stands a lighthouse. On this sunny, breezy day the scenery of
this fine coast was quite beautiful.

'Off the north end of Moreton Island we took a pilot, and proceeding
under steam arrived at 10 P.M. off Government House, Brisbane, a
distance of 50 miles from Cape Moreton. The navigation from the bar of
the river to Brisbane, a distance of 25 miles, is extremely intricate.
Everything has been done which it is possible to do, by leading lights
at frequent intervals, to assist the pilots; but we passed a steamer
of the British India Company--which had entered the river an hour
ahead of the 'Sunbeam'--aground on a bank, from which she was not
floated until after a delay of two days.'

_Monday, July 25th._--In the afternoon drove to 'One-tree Hill,' a
richly-wooded height, commanding a splendid view of Brisbane, and of
the far-extending range of mountains running parallel with the coast.
On our return to Government House the horses bolted, the carriage was
smashed to pieces, one of the horses was fearfully injured, and we had
a narrow escape from a fatal accident.

_Tuesday, July 26th._--After a busy morning, went on board the
Queensland Government gunboat. The Governor, Mr. and Mrs. de Burgh
Persse, and one or two others, came to lunch on board the 'Sunbeam,'
and I had an 'At home' afterwards.

_Wednesday, July 27th._--We all rose early and started by the 9.30
train, with the Governor, Sir Samuel Griffith, the Mayor, and a large
party, for the first Agricultural Show ever held at Marburg. The train
ran through a pretty country for about an hour, to Ipswich, an
important town, near which there is a breeding establishment for
first-class horses. On reaching the station we were received by a
number of school children, who sang 'God save the Queen' and then
presented Mabelle and me each with a lovely bouquet. After some little
discussion over arrangements we were packed into various carriages and
started off, the Governor's carriage of course leading the way. The
horses of our carriage appeared somewhat erratic from the first, and
soon we were nearly brought to a standstill against the trunk of a
large tree. Fortunately the eucalyptus has so soft a bark that it tore
off, and we did not break anything. We shaved the next big tree in our
road by a hair's-breadth, and then discovered that the reins were
coupled in an extraordinary manner. Having rectified this mistake, we
proceeded on our way rejoicing; but again we were on the point of
colliding with a monarch of the forest, when one of our own sailors
who was on the box of the carriage seized the reins and pulled the
horses round. Tom remarked that it was rather stupid driving. The man
who was driving (a German) said, 'Not at all, sir: the horses have
never been in harness before.' When the other carriages came up we
changed into a less pretentious vehicle, drawn by quieter horses.

'Marburg is an interesting German settlement, formed in the last
twenty years. The settlers have, by the most laborious efforts, cut
down the dense scrub with which this part of the country was covered.
Their frugality, their patience under many privations, and their
industry have been rewarded. They grow maize, sugar, tobacco, and
vegetables, but their cattle seem to be the most thriving and
successful part of their business. In some seasons want of water, and
in every season the heavy rainfall at the period when the grain is
coming to maturity, are serious drawbacks to agriculture in this
district. On the whole, it may be said that Queensland is far more
adapted to be a pastoral than an agricultural country.'

Every house in the neat little settlement was decorated, and many
triumphal arches had been erected. An incident of a somewhat comic
nature occurred at the Show. An address was being presented to the
Governor by a man on horseback, who dropped his reins to give more
emphasis to his delivery, and his horse, finding itself free, began to
nibble the reins of the horses attached to the Governor's carriage. A
general scrimmage seemed imminent, of which the man on horseback took
not the least notice. He went on reading the address with the most
imperturbable countenance, until two Volunteers rushed to the horses'
heads and separated them. The Show was duly opened by the Governor,
and we waited to see some of the animals tried. Luncheon was served in
a sort of half-house, half-tent, and some very good though short
speeches were made. We drove back by another road to Rosewood in order
to enable us to see more of the scenery of this fine country.

But our adventures were not over for the day. In going down a steep
hill our driver did not allow quite enough room, and caught the back
of one of the long low German waggons which are used in this district.
The hind wheels came off, and a woman and child who were seated in the
waggon were thrown into the road shrieking and screaming. Fortunately
they proved to be more frightened than hurt, and the waggon having
been repaired and the child and its mother comforted with pictures
and sugar-plums which I happened to have with me, they went on their
way, and we reached the station a few minutes late, but picked up our
time before getting back to Brisbane. After a hasty dinner I had to be
off to an Ambulance meeting kindly convened by the Mayor. Considering
the short notice given, the meeting was a wonderful success. Tom, Lady
Musgrave, and Mabelle went on to the Liedertafel Concert afterwards,
and the rest of the party to the Jubilee Singers' entertainment, both
of which were excellent.

[Illustration: German Waggon]

_Thursday, July 28th._--Was called early, and passed a very busy
morning. At ten o'clock I went for a drive in Mr. Stevenson's drag to
his house at Fernberg, from which there is a good view over Brisbane
and its surroundings. Münie came with me, and the rest of the party
rode in the same direction, but went further than we did. At twelve we
received an address, very prettily decorated with seaweed, from the
Sailing Club of Brisbane. We were to have embarked in the 'Sunbeam' at
half-past twelve, but unfortunately two tubes of the boiler had burst,
and we had to wait for some time while they were being repaired. When
we started the people assembled on the high banks cheered us all the
way down. But we were a good deal delayed by the faulty tubes, and did
not leave the mouth of the river till dusk. The scenery of the bank on
each side is pleasing, and we all enjoyed the sail down.

_Friday, July 29th._--We sailed merrily all night and all to-day, with
a fair fresh breeze; but there was a considerable roll, and having
been on shore so long, we more or less felt the motion. During the
night the question of stopping at Maryborough was definitely settled,
and we sailed _out_side Sandy or Fraser Island instead of _in_side it.
This prevented us from accepting the kind and hospitable invitation of
the Mayor and inhabitants of the township. At noon we had run 204
knots, and were able to shape our course more towards land, the water
becoming smoother with every knot we made. We saw Elliott Island,
where if it had been calm it would have been very nice to stop. It
swarms with turtle and sea-birds of every kind, which are reported to
be perfectly tame, as the island is seldom visited. Cape Bustard was
made later on, and we had a quieter evening; but about 10 P.M. the
yacht began to roll again heavily, the wind having shifted a little,
obliging us to alter our course.

[Illustration: Turpentine-Tree]

_Saturday, July 30th._--At 5 A.M. we dropped anchor in Keppel Bay, but
had to wait for the tide to rise. We landed in the course of the
morning in the 'Gleam,' the 'Flash,' and the 'Mote,' and made quite a
large party, with dogs, monkey, and photographic apparatus. We found a
convenient little landing-place, and looked over the telegraph station
and post-office, which are mainly managed by the wife of the
signalman, Aird, an honest Scotchman, who knew me from my books, and
was very anxious to give us a real hearty welcome to his comfortable
little house. The first thing he offered us each was a tumbler of
delicious new frothy milk, the greatest possible treat. After sending
off a telegram or two, and posting some letters, I was carried up to
the lighthouse where the custom-house officer lives, and from which
there is a fine view over land and sea. When the tide rose we returned
on board, and about half-past two all the inhabitants of the station
came on board to see the yacht of which they had read and heard so
much, and which they were glad to see, as they said, 'with their own
eyes.' At half-past three our visitors returned ashore, and we had to
start up the river. A little higher up, the harbour-master of
Rockhampton met us, bringing many telegrams from various people in
that town as well as in Brisbane, all sent with the object of making
our visit pleasant.

[Illustration: _Crinum asiaticum_]

We arrived at Rockhampton at 9.30 P.M. The cold I caught at the last
Ambulance meeting has been gradually increasing, and became so bad
to-day that I was obliged to go to bed early and take strong measures
to try and stop it; so that when the Mayor of Rockhampton came on
board to welcome us I was not visible, nor did I see the Naval
Volunteers who were waiting on the bank to receive Tom. It is very
pleasant to find how warmly he is welcomed everywhere as the
originator and founder of the Naval Volunteer movement.

_Sunday, July 31st._--I stayed on board all day, so cannot describe
Rockhampton from my own knowledge of it. The others all went to
church; Mr. Ballard, Dr. and Mrs. Macdonald, and Mr. Thompson, the
owner of the opal-mines at Springsure, came to lunch, the latter
bringing some curious specimens from his quarries. We had service at
six o'clock, after which I was glad to go to rest.

_Monday, August 1st._--A busy morning, as usual, before starting. We
left at 10 A.M. in three waggonettes (or four-wheel buggies, as they
are called here) for Mount Morgan, each vehicle being drawn by four
horses. Our party occupied two of the waggonettes, and the sailors and
luggage filled the third. After passing through the clean and tidy
town of Rockhampton, the streets of which, though wide, cannot be
called picturesque, we entered on a long stretch of road. I never saw
anything so gorgeous as the _Thunbergia venusta_ and _Bougainvillea_,
now in full bloom, which hid most of the verandahs with a perfect
curtain of rich orange and glorious purple. The hospital is a fine
building on the top of the hill; the grammar-school and several other
good-sized public buildings give the whole place a well-to-do air. We
crossed a bridge spanning an arm of a lagoon covered with a curious
little red weed, out of which rose a splendid lotus lily, known as the
Rockhampton Lily. The blossoms are blue, red, and white, and rear
their graceful heads above the water in a conspicuous manner, growing
sometimes as large as a breakfast-saucer. It was a beautiful morning,
and had I not felt unwell with bronchitis, from which I have so long
been suffering, I should have enjoyed the drive immensely. About seven
miles out we came to a large poultry farm, but I am afraid the venture
had not proved successful, for the farm looked neglected. Quite a
little crowd had assembled in the verandahs of the inn and adjoining
store, and the people had hoisted a Union Jack in our honour.

About halfway up the hill we were glad to pull up at a creek to water
the horses and sit in the shade. This was just before reaching the
'Crocodile' inn, where several coaches were waiting to change horses.
Soon afterwards we passed several mines, or rather reefs, with queer
names, such as the 'Hit or Miss,' the 'Chandler,' and the 'Hopeless,'
arriving in due time at the Razor-Back Hill. It is indeed well named;
for, steep as we had found the little pitches hitherto, this ascent
was much more abrupt, and might well be likened to the side of a
house. Everybody was turned out of the carriages except me, and even
with the lightest buggies and four good strong horses, it seemed as if
the leaders _must_ tumble back into the carriage, so perpendicular was
the ascent in some places. On one side of the road a deep precipice
fell away, and when we passed a cart or met a heavily laden dray
coming down from the mines we seemed to go dangerously near the side.
Altogether, the drive would not have been a pleasant one for nervous
people. Bad and steep as the present road is, however, it cuts off a
great piece of the hill, and is quite a Queen's Highway compared to
the old road. Having at last reached the summit of the hill and
breathed our panting horses, we went on through a park-like country,
more or less enclosed, which led to the Mount Morgan territory.

Here the most conspicuous building is the hotel, erected by the
company for the convenience of the many visitors to the works.
Although not yet finished, it is quite a pretty house, and will
accommodate a large number of guests. It stands close to a dam across
the mountain stream which flows through the valley, and has for a
foreground a refreshing lake and bathing-place, formed by the
arrested waters. We did not stop here, but crossed the creek and went
up to the company's office, where we were warmly welcomed by the
practical manager of the mines, Mr. Wesley Hall. The sun was now
intensely hot, and it was quite a relief to retire into the shade. I
felt very tired; but as they had kindly harnessed two fresh draught
horses into the buggy on purpose to take me to the top of the hill, I
considered myself bound to go; and off we started, passing enormous
stacks of stone taken from the top of the mountain. These blocks are
said to be full of ore, but have been allowed to lie so long exposed
to air and weather that many plants and creepers, and even some large
shrubs, are growing over them. As we climbed up the hills, which
became steeper and steeper at each turn, we passed works and furnaces
of every description, reaching at last a plateau, from which a fine
view opened out beneath us.

The township of Mount Morgan nestles in a pretty valley, and is
enclosed by round-topped hills, which are covered with trees. A mile
or two further we reached the foot of the steepest hill of all, where
the rest of the party found trucks waiting for them, worked by an
endless rope, going up and down. Into one of these they soon packed
themselves, and were speedily drawn to the top of the hill, while we
climbed slowly, and indeed painfully, up by a pretty country road,
eventually arriving at the shoot, at the bottom of which three drays
were standing. Into these, lumps of stone were being run as fast as
possible, and when filled they were taken down to the works, to be
quickly replaced by empty return drays. The stone looked exactly like
old ironstone, but we were told that it was the richest native gold
yet found, having been assayed as high as 99·8 per cent., and selling
readily for 4_l._ 4_s._ an ounce. To this was added the assurance that
half an ounce of gold per ton would pay all working expenses. The
blacksmith's forge stood a little further on, and then we came to a
very narrow woodland path, up which Tom and the sailors carried me in
turns, as far as another platform on the hill. Here were several
troughs leading to the larger shoot we had seen below, which kept it
constantly fed, and also the openings of long tunnels which had been
pierced into the very heart of the mountains. These shafts were merely
experimental, to make sure that the richness of the ore was not
superficial, but extended to a depth of some two hundred feet beneath
the ground on which we were standing. It was curious to hear these
statements, and look at the surrounding country, which was perfectly
free from the defacement of mining operations. The top of the
mountain, on a part of which we were standing, had originally been of
sugar-loaf form, but its extreme apex has been cut off, and quarrying
operations are now going on vigorously. Tons of valuable stone are
daily raised to the surface, from which large quantities of gold can
be extracted. One blast which took place while we stood there proved
nearly fatal to both me and 'Sir Roger.' The stone turned out to be
harder than the miners had anticipated, and the fragments blew further
than they should have done. One piece missed poor 'Sir Roger's' paw by
an inch; and another whizzed past my head within two inches; while a
smaller piece hit me on the shoulder with what the manager described
as a 'whacking sound,' making me feel quite faint for a few moments.

After strolling about picking up specimens, trying to learn from Mr.
Wesley Hall to distinguish between good and bad stone, their differing
qualities being to us novices extremely difficult to detect, we sat
down quietly to enjoy the view and try to realise the truth of the
wonderful stories we had been hearing, which seemed more fit to
furnish material for a fresh chapter of the 'Arabian Nights,' or to be
embodied in an appendix to 'King Solomon's Mines,' than to figure in
a business report in this prosaic nineteenth century. Mabelle and I
returned slowly to the hotel, which we found clean and comfortable.
While I was lying on the sofa, waiting for the others to arrive, a
regular 'smash-up' took place outside. Five horses yoked in a
timber-waggon (two and two abreast and one leading) were going down a
steep bank into the creek below, when the timber suddenly lifted and
came on the backs of the wheelers. The animals began kicking
violently, getting their legs among the timber; it was extremely
difficult to extricate them even with the help of a dozen powerful and
willing hands, though everyone near ran to the assistance of the
bewildered teamster, who seemed quite unable to cope with the
emergency.

Presently an old man--a most picturesque individual--passed slowly by,
surrounded by quite a pack of hounds, including lurchers, retrievers,
and even curs, as well as some very good-looking, well-bred greyhounds
and kangaroo-hounds. On inquiry I found that his business was to
patrol the place all night, and prevent intruders coming to take away
samples of Mount Morgan ore. The dogs are said to know their business
thoroughly, and contrive to be a terror to the neighbourhood without
seriously hurting anybody.

Australian up-country hotels are certainly not meant for rest. They
are always either built of corrugated iron, which conveys every sound,
or of wood, which is equally resonant. As a rule the partitions of the
rooms do not reach to the top of the roof, so that the least noise can
be heard from end to end of the building. There is always a door at
one extremity, sometimes at both, besides a wide verandah, up and down
which people stroll or lounge at pleasure. Every landlady appears to
have half-a-dozen small children, who add their contribution to the
day's noises in the shape of cries and shouts for 'mammy,' who, poor
soul, is far too busy to attend to them herself or to spare anyone
else to do so.

_Tuesday, August 2nd._--The crushing-mills and the machinery have to
be kept working all night, for of course the furnaces are never let
out; and before daybreak all the noises of the works began, so that we
were up early, and after breakfast went to the chlorination works with
Mr. Trinear, the assayer.

[Illustration: Ti-Trees]

The first thing shown us was the stone just as it came from the drays
we had watched at work yesterday. This was speedily crushed into
powder, baked, and mixed with charcoal. It then passed through another
process within the powerful furnaces, which separated the ore from the
rock and poured it forth, literally in a stream, golden as the river
Pactolus. I never saw anything more wonderful than this river of
liquid gold. A little phial held to the mouth of one of the taps
became just a bottle of gold in solution. By adding hydrochlorate of
iron the gold is precipitated in about seventy hours, and the water
can be drained off pure as crystal, without a vestige of gold
remaining in it. The gold itself is then mixed with borax, put through
a further smelting-process, and ultimately comes out in solid nuggets,
worth, according to the purity of the gold, from 300_l._ to 400_l._
each. The children were very pleased at being able to hold 1,200_l._
in their hands. Mr. Trinear told me that as the metal comes from the
furnaces mixed with charcoal they often obtain as much as 75, and he
had got as much as 86, per cent. of gold.

The Mount Morgan Gold Mining Company possess probably the most
productive gold-mine in the world. The discovery of the gold-bearing
rock, of which the whole mass of Mount Morgan is composed, was made
while searching for copper ore. The gold at Mount Morgan is obtained
from a lode of decomposed iron pyrites, partly underlying a bed of
quartz, and at various points cropping up to the surface. The original
discoverers of the ore, and the individuals who supplied the slender
amount of capital with which the company commenced operations, have
realised great fortunes.

At Mount Morgan the process known as chlorination has been developed
on a larger scale than has elsewhere been attempted. It is described
as follows:--

'The process of chlorination at Mount Morgan is a very interesting
one, and would well repay a visit of inspection by any who are
interested in the profitable and economic treatment of auriferous
ores. The tailings, as they come from the battery or from the dry
crusher, as the case may be, are first of all roasted in eight large
furnaces, each with a capacity of putting through eight tons in
twenty-four hours. The roasting of the ore in the first place is to
free it from the waters of crystallisation and to burn all organic
matter out of it. When it leaves the furnaces, it is turned out to
cool in a large space, between the furnaces and the chlorinising
barrels. When it has sufficiently cooled, it is taken on an inclined
tramway to the hoppers connected with the chlorination barrels, in
which the gas is generated by mingling chloride of lime with sulphuric
acid. Water only is added, and the barrels, which are perfectly
air-tight, are kept revolving until the gold is thoroughly
chlorinated, or, to speak plainly, put into a fluid state. Each barrel
contains a charge of about a ton of ore, and it is possible to get
through twelve charges in the twenty-four hours.

[Illustration: Mount Morgan]

'The period for which the barrels are made to revolve averages one and
a half hour. When this operation is over the contents of the barrels
are discharged into draining-vats, from whence the water and the
gold, put into a state of solution, are drained into charcoal filters
below. Charcoal possesses such an affinity for the chlorine that the
gold is rapidly deposited, and the charcoal is so laid in these
V-shaped filters that the golden fluid passes through layers,
gradually becoming finer towards the bottom, and thus practically all
the gold that is dissolved by the chlorine gas in the barrels is
caught in the charcoal. So effectual is the process that the refuse
from the draining-tubs will not assay more than a pennyweight or a
pennyweight and a half to the ton, while the water which drains off
from the charcoal filters is pumped back and goes through the process
a second time. The contents of the charcoal filters are conveyed
straight to the smelting-works. There the charcoal on which the gold
has been precipitated is first roasted in furnaces, and the residuum
smelted in the usual smelting-pots. After this it is run into ingots
of the purest gold.

'Chlorination was originally attempted in the United States. It has
been perfected at Mount Morgan. By the ordinary crushing and washing
process one ounce to the ton would be extracted from the rock quarried
at Mount Morgan. By chlorination every particle of gold is extracted.
The product sometimes reaches 17 oz. per ton. The average may be taken
at 5 oz. Half an ounce would cover expenses.'

The day turned out lovely, and if my cough had not been so bad, I
should have enjoyed the drive down from Mount Morgan. The pitches were
just as steep, but they were nearly all downhill, which made our
progress seem quicker and pleasanter. The country looked very pretty;
the ferns were quite lovely, and the lilies in full bloom. The
pleasure of the drive was further marred by the dreadful odours
arising from the decaying carcasses of unfortunate bullocks which had
been left by the roadside to die from exhaustion. Happily, there were
no such horrors at the pretty place where we paused to bait our
horses--the same at which we had stopped going up yesterday--and we
arrived at the railway hotel at Rockhampton at 2.5, and immediately
went on board the 'Sunbeam.'

In spite of heavy rain in the afternoon a great many ladies came to
see the yacht, and were followed later by the Naval Artillery
Volunteers, the Naval Brigade, and other visitors. At 6 P.M. Tom went
ashore, accompanied by the children, to review the Naval Brigade, with
which he was well pleased. After a hasty dinner at seven, we all went
to an Ambulance Meeting in the council-chamber of the town-hall. The
heat of the room seemed great on first entering it from the fresh air
outside, and I thought I should have fainted before I reached my chair
at the farthest end of the room. Presently, however, some doors were
opened, and matters improved. The meeting was very satisfactory, a
committee being appointed, and several doctors promising to help and
give lectures, while many of the people present gave in their names as
subscribers. From the Ambulance Meeting we went straight on to the
station, where the servants had rigged up very comfortable beds for
Baby and me in one and for Mabelle and Münie in another
railway-carriage, the gentlemen being provided for in two others. We
were soon in bed, and at ten o'clock started for Emerald and
Springsure. We should have been most comfortable but for the
piercingly cold draughts. The moon shone brilliantly, and I could see
from my cot the lightly wooded but flat pastures alternating with
miles and miles of bush, with here and there a log hut or a tin house
standing in its own little clearing, making an interesting picture as
we flew through the district.

_Wednesday, August 3rd._--There was still a bright moon, and as we
approached Emerald the country, seen by its light, looked most
picturesque. At Emerald, the rail to Springsure branches off from the
main line to Barceldine. In the early morning, as we were passing
Fernlee, where the Government line ends, our servants produced some
welcome tea. From there we ran on to Springsure, where our arrival
caused great excitement, for it was really the opening of the line,
ours being the first passenger train to arrive at the township. By
about half-past eight we were all dressed, and went to a comfortable
inn, some on foot and some in waggonettes, where we breakfasted.

After watching experiments with various horses, to see which were best
and quietest, we started in a couple of buggies for the opal-mines, or
rather opal-fields, of Springsure. We had not driven far when we came
to a fence right across the high road, and had to go some way round
over rough ground and across a creek to avoid it. This did not excite
any astonishment in the mind of the gentleman who drove us, and he
seemed to think it was a casual alteration owing to the new line; but
on a dark night the unexpected obstruction might prove inconvenient.
When the top of the hill where the opals are to be found was reached,
we all got out and set to work to pick up large and heavy stones with
traces of opals in them, as well as some fragments of pumice-stone
with the same glittering indications. We were shown the remnants of a
rock which had been blown up with dynamite to get at a magnificent
opal firmly imbedded in it. The experiment resulted in rock, opal, and
all being blown into fragments, and nothing more has ever been seen of
the precious stone. Our search not proving very successful, we
proceeded to the large sheep-station of Rainworth. This fine property
originally belonged to Mr. Bolitho, and I was told that it then
consisted of 300 square miles of country thoroughly well stocked, with
excellent buildings, and--what is to be most valued in this dry and
thirsty land--a running stream, which had never been known to be
empty, even in a ten years' drought. The question of water becomes a
serious consideration out here, where every full-grown beast is
supposed to drink and waste ten gallons of water a day. The drive to
the station was very pleasant. We passed a racecourse, where a little
race-meeting was going on. It looked a very simple affair, and we were
told that once a year all the sporting population in what Australians
call 'the neighbourhood,' extending for some hundred miles around,
assemble here to try their nags against one another.

We seem rather unlucky about accidents, for on our way down a steep
hill the horses suddenly became restive; and if it had not been that
our driver sent them spinning down one hill at full gallop, and up the
next, thus leaving them no time for kicking, and preventing the
carriage from ever touching them, we should probably have had a
repetition of our smash the other day. We did not see a single
kangaroo all the way, but passed a number of good-looking cattle and
horses. Years ago this country swarmed with game, and was so eaten up
that the ground looked as bare as your hand, the pasture being
undistinguishable from the roads. By a strenuous effort the settlers
killed 30,000 kangaroos on a comparatively small area on the Ekowe
Downs, the adjoining station to this, and thousands more died at the
fence, which was gradually pushed forward, in order to enclose the
sheep and keep out the marsupials.

By-and-by we arrived at a smart white gate in the fence, which a nice
little boy dressed in sailor costume, who had accompanied us from
Springsure, opened for us. These paddocks held some merino sheep. Some
fine timber had been left, so that the station looked more like an
English gentleman's estate than any place we have yet visited. We
jolted wearily over huge boulders and great slabs of rock, and went up
and down tremendously steep pitches in the roads, until at last we
arrived at Rainsworth, where we received the warmest welcome from Mr.
and Mrs. Todhunter. After luncheon I stayed in the verandah and
rested, whilst the rest of the party went out to look round the
station and the opal-fields.

The view from the verandah of the house up to the Rainsworth mountain
was remarkable, its most conspicuous feature being the peculiar-shaped
hill, 1,500 feet high, with its top cut off, leaving a table-land,
where what is called opal-glass is found. This substance resembles
opal in its consistency, except that it is white and transparent and
does not possess prismatic colours like imprisoned rainbows. Before we
left, Mrs. Todhunter kindly gave me some curious specimens of
limestone, stalactites, and stalagmites, picked up on the surface of
the black soil in the neighbourhood, besides two very curious little
iron balls, joined together like a natural dumb-bell. We left in good
time, and had an uneventful drive home. I felt curious to know the
value of this fine station, and was told it was 40,000_l._ This,
certainly, if correct, does not seem high for an extra-good station
with a comfortable house on it, besides stables, farm-buildings of
every possible kind, a well-stocked though rather neglected garden and
orchard, a large wool-shed some ten miles off, and a practically
inexhaustible supply of water. Besides all this, there are plenty of
well-fenced paddocks, containing 30,000 sheep, 200 bullocks, and some
horses; also drays and carts, and other farming implements.

On reaching Springsure we found some excitement prevailing on account
of a mob of a thousand cattle having passed near the town. These mobs
of cattle are obliged by law to travel six miles a day at least,
unless they have cows and young calves with them, when the compulsory
distance is less. They feed all the way on their neighbours' ground,
so to speak, and travel many thousands of miles, occupying months on
the journey. A clever stockman loses very few beasts on the way, and
such men command high wages. They often undertake the journey at
their own risk, and are paid only for the number of cattle actually
delivered. I was, as usual, too tired to go out again, but the rest of
the party set off to see the cattle-camp, and had a long walk over a
rough road; but they declared the sight well rewarded them for their
trouble. The cattle were preparing to settle down for the night;
whilst the camp-fires were just being lit, and beginning to twinkle in
the early twilight. On one side a brilliant red sunset glowed, and on
the other the moon was rising and shedding her silver light upon the
scene. It was so tempting to remain out that the sightseers were
rather late for dinner; after which we took up our old quarters in the
railway carriages, and started on our homeward journey. This proved
much more comfortable than the outward trip, for the railway officials
had kindly stopped nearly all the draughts.

[Illustration: The Ford]

_Thursday, August 4th._--I awoke about five, and was at once struck by
the strange appearance of the moon, which did not look so big as
usual, and had assumed a curious shape. I gazed at her in a lazy,
sleepy way for some time, until it suddenly occurred to me that an
eclipse was taking place, whereupon I roused myself and got my
glasses. I was very glad not to have missed this, to me, always most
interesting sight, especially as I had not the slightest idea that an
eclipse would occur this morning. The atmosphere was marvellously
clear, and I saw it to absolute perfection.

We reached Rockhampton about 6 A.M., and were put into a quiet siding
till eight, by which time we had dressed and were ready to go and
breakfast at the comfortable railway hotel. There was just time for a
satisfactory talk about arrangements for future movements before
eleven o'clock, when the Mayor arrived to take us, in quite a
procession of buggies, to the hospital. Here Doctor Macdonald met us,
and I was put into a chair and carried through the various wards of an
excellently planned and perfectly ventilated building. Everything
looked scrupulously clean, and the patients appeared happy and well
cared for. Several instances were pointed out to me by Doctor
Macdonald in which the St. John Ambulance would have been of great
use. I heard of one case of a man who had come down 200 miles with a
broken leg, no attempt having been made to bandage it up. The poor
fellow arrived, as may easily be imagined, with the edges of the bone
all ground to powder and the tissues surrounding it much destroyed.
Then there was another case of an arm broken in the bush, and the poor
man lying all night in great agony; and again of another stockman who
crushed his knee against a tree while riding an unbroken horse. The
instances are too numerous to mention where the knowledge of how to
make the best of the available means of relief and transport would
have saved much needless suffering. There were some good rooms for
convalescent patients, besides paying wards.

Everything looked bright, cheerful, and sunny except the ophthalmic
wards, which, if I may use such an expression, displayed an agreeable
gloom. Here, all was painted dark green, and the system of ventilation
seemed quite perfect, for air without light was admitted and the
temperature equalised, this being an important factor in bad cases.
Ophthalmia appears to be quite a curse in Australia, as we have
already found to our cost, through Tom's suffering from it. There were
nice shady verandahs to this part of the hospital, and comfortable
chairs for the patients to sit and lounge in, besides a pretty garden.
Not far off, in the compound, stood the various quarters for the
nurses and servants, and the dead-house, and dissecting-room, with
other necessary though painful adjuncts to a hospital. The doctor's
cheerful bungalow, also near, was surrounded by a pretty garden.

A rough drive over a bad road took us to the Botanical Gardens, which
are enclosed by the most charming fence I have ever seen; or rather by
a fence made beautiful by the luxuriant creepers growing over it. A
mass of the brilliant blossoms of the orange _Thunbergia venusta_,
purple _Bougainvilleas_, and ivory-white _Baumantia_ extended from end
to end and side to side. This fence encircled a lavish growth of palms
of all kinds and shapes and sorts and sizes, and many other tropical
plants, which quite overshadowed the common European shrubs. These
seem to flourish to perfection in winter here, and include verbenas of
all colours, and unusual size and brilliancy; a great profusion of
phloxes, the _Phlox Drummondi_ being a perfect weed, and scenting the
whole air. These taller flowers were intermixed with mignonette, musk,
and many dear old home favourites; while all one side of the garden
was taken up by a bush-house full of splendid palms. Ferns, various
_Alsophilas_, _Lycopodium scandens_, _Vanillas_, _Hoyas_, flourished
in great variety. Pink and red _Bougainvilleas_ were growing on
standards outside, among the orange-trees, and beyond lay lagoons
covered with the far-famed blue, red, and pink lotus-lilies of
Rockhampton.

The sun became very hot, and I was glad to be carried back to the
carriage and to drive straight to the boat, and so on board the yacht
to rest, while the remainder of the party went shopping in the town.
In the afternoon we all went in the steam-launch to see the Creek Meat
Canning Factory--a concern which has lately changed hands, and holds
some of the largest contracts in the world for supplying armies and
navies with tinned meat. The quality is excellent. Mr. Bertram, the
manager, met us at the pier, at which we had considerable difficulty
in landing, for the tide was low. After a little time and trouble we
managed to reach the shore, and went through the works, which are most
interesting. The manufactory stands on the bank of the river close to
a pretty lake embosomed amongst hills, and surrounded with paddocks,
where the cattle rest after being driven in from distant stations.

[Illustration: Native Weapons, Queensland]

We were all safe on board the yacht by 9 P.M., and at ten o'clock the
anchor was weighed. The night was fine, and we only stopped at
intervals to allow the pilot to reconnoitre, or to wait for a rise of
tide. This is a most curious river, and might well be made the scene
of a romance by some poetical person. It is only every ten or twelve
days that craft drawing over ten feet can get up or down the river,
and then only by the light of the moon. By day no large vessel can
reach Rockhampton.




[Illustration: Balloon Canvas]

CHAPTER XVII.

_THE EAST COAST._


_Friday, August 5th._--At 1.30 A.M. we anchored off Johnstone Point,
and at 8 o'clock we hove anchor and proceeded to the mouth of the
Fitzroy River. The pilot left us at 10.30, and we proceeded out to sea
under sail. There was a strong wind from the south-east, and I was
glad to stay in bed all day. We passed through the Cumberland Isles,
and Tom had a rather anxious night, as the navigation was very
intricate.

_Saturday, August 6th._--The morning broke clear and fine, the fresh
breeze still continuing. The scenery during the day was lovely, and I
was carried into the deck-house in order that I might enjoy it. The
views were more like the Inland Sea of Japan than the tropical
scenery, made up of cocoa-nut palms, tree-ferns, and coral islands,
which I had been looking for. The mountain shapes were very beautiful,
as were also the bays and inlets, and the varied colours of the land,
sea, and sky gave brilliancy and effect to the landscape. The east
coast of Australia at this season of the year is a perfect
cruising-ground for yachtsmen. The Great Barrier reef, extending for a
distance of 1,000 miles from Swain Reefs to Cape Yorke, protects the
coast from the heavy swell of the Pacific. The steady breezes from the
south-east are favourable for sailing, especially in the direction in
which we are steering.

At 4 P.M. we were off Pine Island, a small islet of the Percy group,
on which a light has been established. From Pine Island onwards to the
Whitsunday Passage the navigation recalls the experiences of many
pleasant summers on the west coast of Scotland. The inner route, which
we followed, passes between numberless rocks and islands. The Percy
Isles form a distinct group, extending twenty miles from north to
south, and eight miles from east to west. To the westward of the Percy
Isles a still larger group has received the collective name of
Northumberland, the several islands being distinguished by familiar
Northumbrian names. Advancing northwards, at a distance of some sixty
miles from the Percy group, the Cumberland, Sir James Smith, and
Whitsunday groups form a continuous archipelago on the eastern side of
the passage. The highest peaks attain an elevation little short of
1,000 feet. The islands are for the most part richly wooded. Some
peaks are clothed with timbers to the summit, others are smooth and
grassy, a few are bare of vegetation. The rocks are magnificent.
Paternoster rises sheer from the water to a height of more than 900
feet.

'Turning from the sea to the mainland, the coast-range at a short
distance inland forms a continuous barrier, varying in height from
3,000 to upwards of 4,000 feet. At Whitsunday Passage, through which
we passed on the afternoon of August 6th, the line of coast is broken
by Cape Conway, which, at its south-eastern extremity, rises to a
height of 1,637 feet. A chain of peaks extends northwards from Cape
Conway to Mount Drysander, and forms a fine amphitheatre of hills on
the western side of the Whitsunday Passage. On the eastern side is a
group of islands, of which Whitsunday, the largest, is eleven miles
long, while Whitsunday Passage is twenty miles in length. At its
narrowest part it is contracted to a breadth of two miles. On the
mainland side the passage opens out into the fine natural harbour of
Porte Molle. On the eastern side the line of shore is broken by the
bays of Whitsunday Island, and the channels which divide it from the
smaller islands, by which it is completely surrounded.'

Cape Gloucester was reached in about three hours after we had issued
from the Whitsunday Passage. Rounding the cape, we anchored for the
night close under the land.

_Sunday, August 7th._--The morning dawned clear and bright, and we
sent off two men in the dinghy to land on Gloucester Island. They took
the dogs for a run ashore, and I asked them to collect what they could
in the way of shells or greenery. They did not bring back much of
either, but reported that the island was very pretty and had a nice
sandy shore, with forests running down almost to the water's edge, and
quantities of parrots and parrakeets. We had church at half-past ten,
and directly after service went across to Bowen, anchoring a short
distance from H.M.S. 'Paluma.' Bowen is a small town, but the harbour
is spacious. The sea was rather rough, and we found some difficulty in
communicating with the shore; but after lunch all the party landed in
the large cutter. I was sorry to hear that Bowen is rapidly dwindling
and losing its trade; the inhabitants hope, however, to recover some
of their former vitality when once the network of railways is extended
to their little town. Later on the officers of the 'Paluma' came on
board, and seemed pleased to meet people lately from Europe; for they
have been on this station several years, surveying the Barrier Reef.
Our own shore party returned late, having much enjoyed their
expedition and the long walk. They had picked up a good many
curiosities, including one of the largest and finest hawksbill-turtle
shells I had ever beheld. It had been most carefully polished by a
lighthouse-keeper on one of the reefs, who had caught the creature
himself. A great many telegrams were received this evening, all
referring to the various kind arrangements proposed for us at
Townsville and elsewhere.

_Monday, August 8th._--Weighed anchor at daybreak, and were pushed
merrily forward by strong S.E. breezes. We sailed swiftly up the coast
as far as Townsville--a pretty-looking town of foreign appearance,
with its wharves and business-houses close down on the beach, whilst
the villas and private residences stand on the little nooks and
corners of a hill at the back. The officers of H.M.S. 'Myrmidon,'
which was lying in harbour, soon came on board to see us. They had
broken their rudder-head outside the Barrier Reef, where they too were
hard at work surveying, and had come into Townsville for repairs. The
anchorage proved rolly, there being no protection whatever, and I had
rather an uncomfortable night.

_Tuesday, August 9th._--At daybreak Tom moved the yacht out to the
shelter of Magnetic Island, where the coal-hulks lie, some six miles
off Townsville. There we kept boxing about all the morning, under the
mistaken idea that it was quite smooth. Meanwhile some supplies were
taken on board; but as I was not well enough to undertake the long
expeditions which had been planned, and the rest of the party declared
that it would not be possible to go without me, they were given up.
After landing and taking a walk through Townsville, the shore-going
people pronounced it to be quite as clean-looking and prosperous as
Bowen, but with more business going on. The town, which has a
population of 12,000, is built on a tongue of land between the sea and
Ross Creek. It consists of one main street containing banks, public
offices, counting-houses, and well-supplied stores and shops. The
bustle in the streets and the flourishing and prosperous appearance
everywhere were quite cheering. Townsville owes its prosperity to its
railway, which is already opened to a distance of two hundred miles
into the interior, and which has made it the port for a wide area of
pastoral country and for several promising gold-fields.

[Illustration: ABORIGINES IN CAMP]

[Illustration: Stowing Foretopsail]

The bay of Townsville is open, and the shoal water extends some two
miles from the beach. A breakwater is in course of construction, and
dredging operations are being prosecuted with energy, so that the
defects of the port will in course of time be remedied. We started
with the same strong trade-wind up the coast, passing through some
pretty picturesque islands and roads, hoping to anchor at Dungeness
for the night. Finding it impossible to get up there before dark, we
anchored in Challenger Bay, under shelter of Palm Island, shortly
after sunset. Soon after we had dropped anchor aboriginal blacks were
reported alongside, and on going on deck I saw two miserable-looking
objects in the frailest of boats. Indeed the craft looked like the
pictures of an ancient British coracle, and was so light and
unseaworthy that every wave washed into it. They had nothing for sale
except some commonplace and evil-smelling shells, which they were
anxious to exchange for tobacco and biscuits, evidently preferring
these commodities to money. We bought all the shells they had, and
they were so well satisfied with their bargain that they returned
later on with another bucketful of conchological curiosities, which
were also purchased. They looked most harmless individuals; but having
been warned by Captain Bridge never to trust the natives here, we
thought it better to set a double watch for the night, more as a
matter of precaution than from any fear of actual danger. Though they
may have the reputation of being friendly, and may be certified as
such in books of sailing directions and on the Admiralty charts, one
can never feel sure of their disposition. A trifling event may have
occurred since the last report was made which would alter the
disposition of the whole tribe towards Europeans. Some officers may
have landed to shoot, and walked over the crops of the natives without
apologising or offering them remuneration, not knowing that they had
done anything wrong. Drunken sailors may have landed, and so changed
the friendly attitude of the inhabitants to deadly enmity towards the
next arrivals. I honestly believe that a great many of the reported
outrages in the South Sea and other savage islands are due more to a
temporary misunderstanding between blacks and whites than to any
cold-blooded barbarity or love of bloodshed on the part of the
natives.

_Wednesday, August 10._--Some of the party went early ashore, and I
need scarcely say they were not molested in the slightest degree, and
only found a most harmless black camp of about twenty individuals,
with gins nursing their babies and men walking about. They brought off
a good collection of pectens, clams, helmets, conchs, pearl-oysters,
and large cowries, but the specimens were not very perfect. Also a
quantity of greenery in the shape of _Pancratiums_, _Logodium
scandens_, climbing _Lycopodium_, and a curious sort of fruit off a
palm, which grows in large cone-shaped clusters. They call it
breadfruit in these parts, and the natives eat it; but it certainly
does not look either inviting or eatable. One fruit weighed twelve,
and the other over eleven, pounds.

[Illustration: Queensland Natives]

Two more natives came alongside this morning. They had not the
slightest vestige of clothing; but two men, whom I saw over the side
later in the day, both sported hats, and one of them had on besides a
man-of-war shirt; the other wore a very short tunic cut low in the
neck and several rows of canary-coloured glass beads. We weighed at
eleven, and proceeded towards Dungeness under sail. I was carried up
into the deck-house to see the view, which was provokingly obscured by
mists and driving rain. We found some difficulty in making our way,
owing to the new buoys not having yet been entered on the Admiralty
chart. Fortunately, the officers of the 'Myrmidon' had warned Tom of
this fact, made more dangerous by the thick mist and fog. We
ultimately arrived at Dungeness in safety, taking everybody by
surprise, as no ship had ever been known to go through the southern
entrance of Hinchinbrook Channel before without a pilot. The pilot, a
nice old man, had been looking for us all day yesterday, as well as
all last night. As we did not appear, he must have gone home, thereby
losing the pleasure of conducting us into the harbour, but giving Tom
the gratification of bringing the vessel in through the channel
without taking a pilot.

_Thursday, August 11th._--When I awoke at eight Tab and Mr. des Graz
had already started on their shooting expedition, and at noon we also
set forth on an excursion up the Herbert River. Tom had caused a
comfortable bed to be rigged up for me in the gig, so that I was not
obliged to dress, but simply got out of one bed into another. The gig
was towed by the steam-launch, which also trailed the 'Flash' behind
in case we might want to land in any shallow place or get aground on a
sand or mud bank. After the first little fluster of moving was over it
was a great pleasure to me to be once more in the open air after being
shut up for what seems so long a time. It felt deliciously warm too,
the temperature being 74°. The scenery was beautiful--sandy shores,
green woods with high precipitous mountains in the background,
covered with shiny slate-like shale, which when moist shows up like a
mirror through the mist. The view so reminded me of Scotland that I
felt inclined to take up my glasses to look for deer among the craggy
peaks and corries. We passed the little pilot station of Dungeness,
and almost directly afterwards the hamlet of the same name. It bears
some resemblance to its English namesake, for it is situated on a
sandy spit of land, surrounded by mangrove swamps instead of grass
marshes. I noticed, too, that the people have the fever-stricken look
which is sometimes seen about Lydd and that part of the country. There
are only fifty-six inhabitants, men, women, and children. Dull as the
surroundings seemed, it is wonderful how bright and cheerful the
people who came on board yesterday seemed to be. The river, though
wider, put us very much in mind of the Kuching, in Borneo--the same
tropical vegetation and miles of unhealthy-looking mangrove swamps. We
passed several tidy-looking little settlements on the banks, some
picturesquely built of wood thatched with sugar-cane or palm-leaf,
while others were constructed of corrugated iron, which must be
frightfully hot in summer. The white people, so far as we could judge,
as we passed up and down the river, were suffering from the climate.
The Kanakas and Chinamen seemed more prosperous; and the few
aboriginals looked quite happy in their natural surroundings.

[Illustration: Cardwell School House]

The servants, with their usual ingenuity, managed to both cook and
serve an excellent lunch, in the boat, with only the assistance of the
'Darby and Joan' stove. About half-past two we reached the wharf of
the Halifax sugar-plantation, where our arrival disturbed a large
party of aboriginals, women and children, who were enjoying their
afternoon bath, splashing, jumping like a shoal of fish. Our party
(including the dogs) landed, and on their return said that the crop of
sugar looked very healthy, and the rolling and crushing stock of the
cane was in excellent order. The whole district is well adapted for
the cultivation of sugar. No less than 9,600 tons were produced in
1886. The growth is steadily increasing, and the country will sooner
or later become the centre of a large and prosperous trade.

For the cultivation of sugar on the Herbert both British and coloured
labour is employed--British workmen in the mills, the coloured people
in cutting the cane. Wages for Englishmen range from twenty-five
shillings upwards weekly. We spoke to some of the wives of the
workmen, several of whom are recent arrivals from Lancashire. Their
dwellings are of the simplest description, made of corrugated iron or
of straw, and scattered at haphazard in a clearing in the jungle or
on the banks of the river. These pioneers of cultivation have to lead
a hard life and bear many privations--circumstances in which the
colonising qualities of the Anglo-Saxon race always come to the front.

There was an hotel and a store, and, as is usual in this sort of
place, enormous piles of broken bottles and empty cases of tinned
meats, jams, &c. It breaks my heart to see the colonists, particularly
the children, living on condensed milk, tinned meats, and canned
fruits from America, when there is so much good pasture running to
waste all round the house. In the orchards the trees are literally
broken down from the weight of their crop, while quantities of fruit
which the boughs cannot support are given to the pigs and cattle.

[Illustration: Dead Crocodile on Snag]

We had to wait a little before starting on our homeward water-way, for
the tubes of the 'Trap's' boiler began to leak, and had to be
repaired. This delay gave us an opportunity of observing some of the
inhabitants, who came to the pier to see us. They looked smart and
clean and well-to-do--quite different from those we had noticed as we
ascended the river. We stopped to take one or two photographs of
tropical scenery and of various little stations on the way down the
river. We also paused to look at the body of a dead alligator which
had been caught in a snag. He was between five and seven feet long,
and a second rather larger one lay close by. From time to time we
caught sight of parties of blacks hidden amongst the rank vegetation
of the shores, and we saw some beautiful birds, particularly a
brilliant blue kingfisher, flashing about like a jewel in the
sunlight. There was another pretty little red-beaked bird; and an
enormous black crane, about four feet high, with white tips to his
wings, and a red and blue topknot, stalked about among the
lotus-lilies. One part of the river banks was covered by a dense
growth of pancratium lilies, scenting the whole air; while elsewhere a
tangled curtain of pink and violet ipomoea hung down from tall
trees. I may mention that the currents in the river are very strong,
and that we had several tropical showers in the course of the day.
Although I enjoyed my outing, I was thankful to get on board again and
lie down on my bed. Mr. and Mrs. Wardlaw came off later on, and
brought me some orchids and a telegram from Mr. Pennefather pressing
us to stay till to-morrow, so as to allow the gentlemen to have the
good day's shooting he had arranged for them; but want of time
rendered this pleasant plan impossible. The maids, stewards, and some
of the crew had gone on shore on Hinchinbrook Island, and brought back
a quantity of ferns, orchids, lilies, and shells, and an amusing
report of the blacks' camp which they had seen there. The children
were so delighted with the description the maids gave them of the
wonders on shore that they promptly took off their father and two
other gentlemen in the steam-launch to search for curiosities, hoping
to be fortunate enough to find some shells as beautiful and uncommon
as those the servants had brought back with them.

_Friday, August 12th._--An hour after midnight the sportsmen returned,
and Mr. Pennefather came to breakfast. He was much disappointed that
the party could not stay for another day's shooting, and talked of the
variety of game to be had--geese, ducks, widgeon, teal, coot, plover,
quail, swans, turkeys, and bitterns, to say nothing of cockatoos,
parrots, wallabys, kangaroos, and alligators. Yesterday the
engine-driver, being a sportsman himself, kindly stopped the train and
allowed them to have a shot, or rather several. They succeeded in
killing one poor lady wallaby with a dear little baby in her pouch,
which did not seem very young, and would therefore have been easy to
rear; but, unfortunately, they did not take possession of it and bring
it on board for a pet, to add to the little flock already brought up
by hand. Wallabys are quite easy to tame when caught as young as this
little creature, and are very gentle and affectionate. Arrived at the
factory, the shooting-party had lunch with Mr. Pennefather, and then
went out with their guns, but only succeeded in bagging a bandicoot,
two ducks, a widgeon, a plover, and a few other birds, making
altogether a somewhat nondescript bag.

Precisely at 9.30 we started under steam through the Rockingham
Channel, which separates Hinchinbrook, an island of magnificent
mountains, from the mainland. We are now well in the doldrums of the
Tropic of Capricorn, and the delicious fair strong trade-breezes we
have hitherto enjoyed have now deserted us, or rather we have sailed
through them. I do not think I ever saw anything finer than this
Rockingham Channel. The mountains on the mainland are high, and of
beautiful shapes, with points and rounded outlines, covered with
green foliage, whilst on the inner shore of the island of Hinchinbrook
there is a dense mass of tropical foliage clothing the hills up to
their highest tops. Where the scrub has been burnt, little patches of
ferns of a fresh light green colour have sprung up, and the leafy mass
is broken here and there by a perpendicular rock or a white lace-like
cascade. Every bay and little inlet has its own peculiar charm, and
occasionally a sharp spit of rock is thrust out into the sea. The
water to-day is as placid as it can possibly be, and reflects on its
surface as in a mirror all the beauties of the scenery. About twelve
o'clock we reached Cardwell, a collection of little tin houses,
looking from the ship as if they stood amid widely separated fields
and orchards. All the party but the Doctor and myself went on shore to
see the place. The people were all very kind, and our party were
entertained at the house of Mr. Walsh, the principal Government
official; and afterwards the chairman of the Local Board, on behalf of
the inhabitants, read and presented a neatly worded address to Tom,
who made a suitable reply. The party then returned on board, laden
with orchids, cocoa-nuts, and everything the township produces. The
few settlers were most hospitable, and expressed great pleasure at
seeing us. Whilst Tom and the others were taking their ramble at
Cardwell, Mr. Walsh came off to pay me a little visit; but directly
the shore party returned on board, at 2.30, we resumed our voyage
under steam towards Mourillyan. The channel was still lovely, with
islands on one side and the high mountains of the mainland on the
other. I do not know when we have had such a charming sail, and there
was a certain appropriateness in the surroundings on this 12th of
August. The general contour of the hills, the purple colouring of the
mountains, the Norfolk pines and other trees on some distant heights
(when you were not near enough to see how tropical was the foliage)
reminded me vividly of Scotland. What a pleasure lovely scenery is!
and what a delight to be able to travel and see it! I do not think I
have ever forgotten or shall forget a single really beautiful view I
have ever seen and admired. Those scenes are all clear and distinct,
put away in little pigeon-holes of memory. If my brain were only a
photographic camera, I could print them off as clearly on paper to-day
as in the long bygone years when I first saw them. All the incidents
and circumstances are still fresh in my recollection.

For the last few days the scenery has been an especial pleasure to me,
laid up as I am in the deck-house, where a comfortable bed has been
arranged for me, so high that I can look out of the window and have my
eyes delighted and my nerves soothed. I am very thankful that I can
thus enjoy the lovely coast, though I should much prefer being able to
take a more active part in the sight-seeing, orchid- and
shell-collecting, and general scrambling which ensues every day when
the rest of the party go for their pleasant walks on shore along sandy
beaches shaded by graceful palms, with tree ferns growing almost to
the water's edge. It is fortunate, perhaps, that this constant
malarial fever has made me feel too weak to care much about anything,
so that I am not tempted to long to do imprudent things. I was indeed
sorry when the shades of evening began to fall and prevented my seeing
anything beyond the mere outlines of the coast.

The distance to Mourillyan is only forty miles, and the entrance to
the harbour is extremely fine, though it was so dark that we could
hardly distinguish anything. Soon after we entered the harbour and
dropped anchor, Mr. Levinge, the manager of three large sugar-estates
in the neighbourhood, came on board, full of plans of pleasure for the
morrow. Unfortunately the programme which had been arranged was rather
more than I could undertake. I may be able to manage the eight miles
in a steam-tram through the jungle, to see the sugar-plantation,
crushing-mills, and lunch with the manager and hospitable proprietor
of the plantation; but I fear I shall not have strength or time to go
on to the Gundy Plantation, some miles off, up a branch of the
Johnstone River, and see the scenery there, which is said to be very
fine. The original idea was to go on in boats to Geraldton, close to
the mouth of the Johnstone River, where the yacht or a steam-launch
was to meet us and take us back to Mourillyan Harbour, about eight
miles off. We left it till the morning to decide what we should do,
and went to bed in good time so as to be ready for an early start if I
felt strong enough to attempt it.

[Illustration: The Train in the Bush]

_Saturday, August 13._--Woke just at daybreak. When I looked through
the porthole I found that this harbour of Mourillyan where we were
lying was one of the most picturesque I had ever seen. It is entirely
land-locked, except for the narrow passage through which we entered
last night. Both vegetation and landscape looked thoroughly tropical,
and two or three bungalows were perched amid the dense foliage on the
steep banks of the rising hillsides.

[Illustration: Zamoa Tree]

We were ready before our kind hosts, and it was quite eleven o'clock
before we landed and established ourselves in the steam-tram, ready
for a journey to the Mourillyan sugar-plantation. My long deck-chair
having been placed most comfortably in a sugar-truck, my journey was
luxuriously and easily performed, though, after the perfectly quiet,
smooth movement of the last few days, I rather felt the occasional
jolts and jars. I have travelled through tropical jungles in all parts
of the world, and though the scenery to-day was wanting in the
grandeur of the virgin forests of Brazil, and of the tangled masses of
vegetation of Borneo and the Straits Settlements, it had much special
beauty of its own. The variety of foliage was a striking contrast to
the monotonous verdure often seen in Australia. Some of the palms and
ferns were extremely beautiful, and so well grown that each might have
been a specimen plant in a greenhouse. What I call the umbrella palm,
but what they call here the cabbage palm--a sort of _Zamia
alsophila_--grew abundantly in groups. Wherever there was a clearing
we could see high trees, some with their bare white stems rising to
nearly a hundred feet before they branched out, while others were
completely covered, and almost killed, by masses of creepers whose
leaves, of every kind and shape--some large and broad like the
_Aristolochias_; others quite finely cut like _Logodiums_; others
sharp, pointed, and shiny; others again palmated--and of every shade
of green, gave a fine effect to the different peeps and vistas as we
glided along. Presently the clearings became more numerous, and we
passed a deserted village, surrounded by gardens, where some Chinese
had settled a few years ago and tried to make a living by supplying
ships with vegetables. They did not find the venture successful, and
have left the district. We passed several small tramways running at
right angles into the bush, with little huts adjoining, built of
rushes and thatched with sugar-cane. In these the men lived when sent
down to cut timber for the fences, furnaces, and sleepers for the
tramway, as it was pushed further and further up through the jungle.
'Sugar is a very expensive crop to start, for the work of clearing the
jungle is most laborious, and therefore costly. The expense of
cutting down timber for the first rough cropping is 10_l._ per acre.
The complete clearing and grubbing of roots for the purposes of
ploughing and permanent cultivation is not less than 20_l._ an acre.
The cost of clearing alone is thus 30_l._ an acre. The machinery of
the mills, of Scotch manufacture, cost more than 60,000_l._ Some 900
acres have been brought under cultivation. The total capital already
expended may be taken at 200,000_l._ The yield of sugar is from three
to five tons per acre. The price may be taken at 20_l._ per ton. The
production of sugar last year was 2,050 tons.'

'The successful results of labour imported from Java are a special
feature at Mourillyan. We heard an excellent character of the Javanese
workpeople. They are sturdy, and most docile. They are imported for a
term of three years, under strict engagements with the Dutch
Government. An advance of two to three pounds is given to each workman
before he leaves home. His fare costs 6_l._ to Queensland. His wages
are 30_s._ a month and found. The secret of success has been the
adoption of a system of supervision by Javanese sarongs. Javanese are
employed to drive locomotives, and for the management of the boilers
and most of the machinery in the mills.'

The proprietors of the plantation have 5,000 acres cleared already,
and will clear more as soon as they can raise sufficient capital. They
have already invested 250,000_l._ in the land, 20,000_l._ in the tram,
and 40,000_l._ in the mills, independent of the money they will
require for all sorts of contemplated improvements and additions. The
process of crushing is just the same as we saw in Trinidad. The carts
bring in the cane from the field, and it is passed through a series of
rollers to extract the juice, which is pumped up to a higher floor,
where it is received into vats, and then by different processes
converted into sugar of three kinds--white, medium white, and light
brown. The first-quality sugar is made white by being subjected to a
process of sulphur fumes, which produce beautiful glittering crystals.
It is said that this method of treating the sugar is not so
satisfactory as the old and rougher process. It seems to bleach the
crystallised particles without sufficiently removing the impurities.
The quality of the sugar is, however, excellent, and it commands a
high price in England.

From the mill I was carried through a clean and tidy-looking coolie
village to a comfortable house of the bungalow type, like those in
Mourillyan Harbour, inhabited by Mr. Nash, the proprietor of one of
the plantations, and Mr. Levinge, who had kindly arranged a luncheon
for us. Australian colonists are the most hospitable people in the
world. Their one idea seems to be to endeavour to do everything they
can for you, to give you the best of everything they possess. Nowhere,
in all our far-extending travels, have we received more true
hospitality. I had a comfortable sofa provided for me, whereon I lay
during lunch, and afterwards I rested in a chair in the verandah while
the others went to see more of the sugar plantation and mill.

About three o'clock we started back, and returned much quicker than we
came up, for which I was very thankful. Pleasant as the day had been I
was getting rather worn out. On our return to Mourillyan our
hospitable hosts accompanied us on board, and made an inspection of
the 'Sunbeam.' They could not stop long, as our Jersey pilot said we
had better be off before dark, the entrance to the harbour being very
narrow. It is, however, so well buoyed that when the new chart is
published there will be no difficulty in getting in or out at any time
of the day or night, with or without a pilot. In the night there are
two leading lights which show you the direct way in, the only danger
being at spring tides, when the tide sometimes runs eight or nine
knots an hour. The harbour looked lovely as we steamed away, and we
were quite sorry to leave the little haven of rest where we had spent
such a peaceful, comfortable day and night.

[Illustration: On the Johnstone River]

We were soon outside Mourillyan and past the picturesque mouth of the
Johnstone River. Judging from the photographs, the scenery of this
river must be very fine, for the sun-pictures represent several high
waterfalls pouring volumes of water over dark and perpendicular
basaltic rocks. One of the falls is said to be 300 feet high, and
there are several cascades with a fall of between 100 and 250 feet.
The light breeze from the S.E. carried us on famously. We soon saw the
Seymour Range; a little later we found ourselves off the mouth of the
Mulgrave River, and by midnight had passed through the narrow channel
which divides the Falkland Islands from the mainland at Cape Grafton.
We ladies retired early to bed, and even the children acknowledged to
being tired; but the gentlemen played whist on deck till a much later
hour. The nights are perfect now. The breeze is rather fresh by day
when not under the shelter of a protecting coast; but one must
remember that if the wind be fresh it is wafting us speedily on our
way, and we must not grumble, for we have turned the corner and are
now homeward-bound.

About three o'clock this morning we met a steamer going down the
coast, and, with the usual fatuity of steamships, she would not make
up her mind which way to go until she was close to us, and then ran
right across our bows. It is most extraordinary why steamships will
not get out of the way of sailing-ships at night. The matter is
entirely in their own hands, for the sailing-ship is comparatively
helpless. It is quite impossible for the officer on watch to tell at
what rate the approaching vessel is moving, and the steamer ought to
alter her helm the very instant a sailing-ship is perceived. Our pace
is rather rapid, particularly in light winds, and it is probable that
the steamer misjudged her distance from us. The more voyages I make
the more I feel that the melancholy little paragraphs one only too
often sees, headed 'Lost with all hands,' or 'Missing,' are nearly
always the result of accidents caused by a bad look-out and careless
steering. I often tell Tom it is his duty to report those cases which
come to his own knowledge. The instances have been numerous on this
voyage alone; but he is too kind-hearted to like to complain, which I
consider a mistaken view of humanitarianism.

_Sunday, August 14th._--I did not wake till late, and then found we
had just passed Cairns Harbour, which is said to be a wonderfully
rising place. The soil is good and suitable for sugar, and a railway
is being rapidly constructed which will open up the interior of this
part of Northern Queensland. The scenery is lovely, especially up the
Herberton River, where one of the most magnificent waterfalls in
Australia is to be seen.

[Illustration: Navigators]

We had service at eleven, but I was only able to listen to the hymns
from my cabin. At afternoon service at half-past four I heard every
word just as plainly from my bed on deck as I could have done had I
been below in the saloon. This has been one of the most perfect days
at sea I can remember, and I was carried up early on deck to admire
the beautiful coast, with the Macalister Range in the background. At
noon to-day we were in lat. 16° 37´ S., long. 145° 47´ E., stealing
quietly along under balloon canvas. At one o'clock we passed the
entrance to Port Douglas, another young and rising place. Early in the
afternoon we were abreast of the lighthouse on the Low Islands, which
returned our signals with creditable promptitude, and after sighting
Cape Kimberly we found ourselves abreast of the Daintree River, where,
I am told, there is some beautiful scenery. A little later Cape
Tribulation was passed, where Captain Cook ran his vessel ashore to
discover the amount of damage sustained after she had been aground on
a coral reef. They are now trying to recover her guns, which are so
overgrown by coral that it is likely to prove a difficult job. Divers
have been down and have absolutely seen the guns; but if they try to
dislodge them with dynamite the result may be the same as at
Springsure with the large opal--that they will be blown to pieces. It
is interesting to once more read Captain Cook's voyages on the scene
of some of his most important discoveries, and to think that many of
these peaks, bays, mountains, and inlets were named by him after some
more or less memorable incident. Cape Tribulation lies exactly under
the Peter Botte, a large and peculiarly shaped mountain. The whole
coast here is very like that of Cuba, especially the shape of its
mountains and the indentations of its coasts. The sunset was
magnificent, and made the mountains look quite volcanic as they rose
in the sky against the lurid light, producing red, yellow, and grey
tints such as one sees at Vesuvius, Etna, or Stromboli.

This afternoon, as we were looking over the side, Tom and I observed a
quantity of a brownish substance floating on the surface of the water.
We thought it might be either the outpouring of a neighbouring
volcano, or the spawn of some fish, sponge, coral, or algæ. We drew up
several buckets of this discoloured water, and on closer inspection
found the floating matter to be a small sponge which exists in larger
pieces at a considerable depth below, but on reaching the surface
changes to a sort of powder, which reunites again and forms a filmy
track for a long distance.




[Illustration: Thursday Island]

CHAPTER XVIII.

_EAST COAST (continued)._


_Monday, August 15th._--Last night was an anxious one for Tom, who was
up and down a good deal, and did not get to bed until 5.45 A.M.,
having hoisted the pilot-flag and left orders for the yacht to jog
about until the pilot came on board. It was half-past eight o'clock
before we were securely moored in the harbour, almost alongside of our
old friend the little 'Harrier.' Originally a yacht, she is now one of
her Majesty's ships, and is used for cruising from one island to
another. With 35 men on board, and guns and gear of all kinds, she is
not by any means the smart little craft she used to be; but she is in
thorough working order, and as good a sea-boat as ever.

Cooktown, in spite of the preponderance of iron houses and shops,
looks rather pretty from the sea, and is picturesquely situated in an
amphitheatre of hills, of which Mount Cook is the highest. Its small
port is formed by the mouth of the Endeavour River. There are abundant
indications that larger and more substantial buildings will rapidly be
substituted for the provisional structures of which Cooktown at
present consists. The population is about 2,500. The Palmer River
gold-diggings, and some recent discoveries of tin, which have
attracted a large number of miners, are the chief sources of
prosperity. A railway will shortly connect Cooktown with the
gold-mines. A section of thirty-two miles has been already opened. It
was a delicious day, and I enjoyed sitting under an awning until the
afternoon, when some of the party went on shore to play lawn-tennis,
whilst the Doctor, Münie and I went for a little drive, which did me
good, though it tired me at the time.

[Illustration: Cooktown]

_Tuesday, August 16th._--Awoke about seven, feeling much refreshed,
and went early on deck. Many visitors came on board, only a few of
whom I was able to see. All the rest of the party again landed, and at
twelve o'clock Tom and I went on board the 'Harrier.' I was carried on
deck, and then managed to get below to look at the new alterations.
Captain Pike had some pretty watercolour drawings and a good
collection of curios, picked up at various islands. These were
capitally arranged in the cabin, and looked very nice. He kindly gave
Mabelle and me some beautiful shells, as well as some gorgonias
growing on a pearl-shell. In the afternoon we went out for a drive. On
leaving the town we followed the same road as yesterday, after which
we came to a fairly good bush-road or track, running through a pretty
country, with some fine trees and a great variety of foliage. We
passed one or two nice stations, with comfortable, deep-verandahed
houses, and tidy gardens and orchards. Ultimately we plunged into the
regular bush, where the sandflies and mosquitoes began to trouble the
rest of the party; but my invaluable eucalyptus oil saved me. Nothing
could exceed the care our driver took of me; his chief anxiety was
that I should not suffer a single jolt beyond what the roughness of
the road necessitated. He came out here when he was twenty-one years
old, and rushed at once to the gold-fields; found 1,100_l._ in three
days, on an alluvial field 300 miles inland from Sydney; lost it two
days after, by putting it into a speculative mining concern which
failed the day after he parted with his money. He then became a
gentleman's coachman at Sydney, and had several other mining and
reefing adventures on some fields near the Johnstone River. All went
well with him until he had an attack of fever, which laid him up for
eighteen months, and not only absorbed all his own little savings but
that of his comrades, to whose kindness he was indebted for the
positive necessaries of life. Now he is coachman at the largest hotel
here, and as soon as he has scraped a little money together, intends
going off to the Croydon diggings, where I hope he will be fortunate,
and trust he will invest his hard-earned money more satisfactorily.
Owing to our late departure we had no time to stop, as we had
intended, to see the tomb erected over the remains of poor Mrs.
Watson, her child, and Ah Sam the Chinaman, who are buried here. The
story of their death is a sad one, and we listened with interest to
the circumstances as related by Mr. Fitzgerald; which are briefly
these.

Elizabeth Wilson, who came originally from Rockhampton, was the wife
of Mr. Watson, the owner of some small schooners engaged in the
bêche-de-mer trade, whose head establishment was at the Lizard Island.
Some time in 1881 she persuaded her husband to take one of his vessels
on a tour of inspection, leaving her with a child of two years old and
a couple of faithful Chinamen in charge of the Lizard Island. Mr.
Watson set forth very reluctantly, only yielding to his wife's
assurances that with firearms in the house, which she well knew how to
manage, she would be in no danger. Soon after her husband's departure,
however, the natives came across from the mainland in great force,
killed one of the Chinamen, and wounded the other. When it became dark
the brave woman hastened to provision one of the square iron tanks
used for boiling down the bêche-de-mer, and embarked in it with her
babe and wounded retainer. Nothing could be more clumsy than such a
craft, 4 feet long by 3 feet wide, and perhaps 1-1/2 feet high. She
put water-bottles on board, and with only a shawl for sail and an oar
to steer with set forth on the calm sea, towing, however, a little
dinghy behind, in case of her iron vessel proving too unmanageable.
The trade-wind carried the tank thirty miles out to sea to one of the
Hawick group; but she was prevented from landing there by the
threatening aspect of the blacks in possession. She drifted a little
further to a neighbouring island, where the spring tide carried the
tank up so far inland that she could not launch it again. This was the
more terrible, as a very few miles further would have brought her to
the lightship. There were no blacks on the island, to which the tank
had been carried. Mrs. Watson had sufficient provisions, but
apparently no water. They all must have died of thirst just before an
abundant rainfall. Three weeks later, when their bodies were
discovered, there were pools of fresh water around them. In the
meantime Mr. Watson called at the lightship and recognised his own
dinghy, which had drifted thither a few days before. He immediately
set out, accompanied by Mr. Fitzgerald, and soon reached the little
island, where he found his wife's body, one arm still clasping her
child, and the other hand holding a loaded revolver. Her diary lay
close by, and told the sad story almost up to the last moment. The
dead Chinaman lay near the tank. The bodies were put into rude shells
and taken to Cooktown, where they were buried. The poor woman's diary
and the tank are preserved in the Museum at Brisbane.

_Thursday, August 18th._--We gave Cape Sidmouth a wide berth and
passed Night Island, going close to Cape Direction and Restoration
Island, which latter is exactly opposite the narrow opening in the
Barrier Reef through which Bligh found his way in 1780, in an open
boat, after the Mutiny of the 'Bounty.' Bligh gave the name to
Restoration Island to commemorate his escape from the mutineers. A
little further to the north took us abreast of Providential Channel,
through which Captain Cook entered with the greatest difficulty in
1770. He arrived outside the Barrier Reef, rolling heavily to the
swell with no wind, and finding it impossible to descry a single
opening. Hope seemed at an end, when, providentially, Captain Cook
espied from his masthead what looked like deep water between two
rocks, through which he safely steered his vessel. From Restoration
Island to Cape Weymouth we were considerably exposed to the sea, and
rolled about a good deal until we got into the shelter of Weymouth
Bay. Passing Fair Cape, we reached Piper Island at about eight
o'clock, and anchored for the night, close to the lightship, alongside
which there was another small steamer. The last fourteen miles had to
be done in the dark. This was a time of great anxiety for Tom, for the
passage was narrow, being only about half a mile wide in places, and
the current was strong. It blew hard all night, and we longed for the
sheltered anchorage of last evening.

_Friday, August 19th._--Early this morning Tom and some of the
gentlemen went on board the 'Claremont' lightship. After breakfast we
landed on the reef. It is a bare heap of sand and coral, save on its
highest part, where a few tufts of coarse grass are growing. Here we
found a native of St. John, New Brunswick, brought up, as he told us,
by foreign parents, engaged in the business of collecting
bêche-de-mer, or dried sea-slugs, for which there is a large demand in
China.

[Illustration: Coral on Pearl-oyster]

This white man had in his employ thirty natives. He had five fine
boats, which are constantly at work inside the Great Barrier Reef. The
money embarked in this enterprise had been advanced by a bank at
Cooktown. Bêche-de-mer commands a high price. We were shown the
accumulated casks full of this unattractive edible, representing a
value of many hundreds of pounds. Lee, the head of this establishment,
was living in a shelter formed of tattered canvas and battered sheets
of corrugated iron, but he evidently possessed the power of command
and organisation, and was not without education. He produced the
Admiralty charts of the coast and Barrier Reef, with large additions
to the delineation of the reefs from his own explorations.

Bêche-de-mer is of various qualities. The best is worth 120_l._ per
ton, the next 100_l._, a third quality 90_l._, and a fourth from
80_l._ to as low as 30_l._ per ton. The bêche-de-mer is a curious kind
of sea-slug, rather like a sea cucumber. Its scientific name is
_Holothuria_. It makes excellent soup, which is very nourishing, and
is like the snail soup so much given to invalids in the south of
France. In Cooktown the Europeans eat it largely, while in China, as
trepang, it is a much-prized and high-priced delicacy.

We had a long and pleasant conversation with Lee, and Tom and I were
both much struck with him. Tom was anxious to purchase for me a pair
of large hawksbill turtle shells which he had seen earlier in the
morning on the lightship, but Lee absolutely refused to part with them
at any price. He said a man had done him a good turn in Cooktown, and
he had promised him the shells. We suggested that it was possible, as
the man was a resident of Cooktown, that he might get him another pair
and let us have these; but Lee was quite firm, and said, 'No, I have
given my word, and it would be very wrong to break it on any account
whatsoever.' His charts were most interesting, and his own discoveries
of new reefs and shoals were intelligently marked. I hope that for the
good of the navigating world they may some day be incorporated into an
Admiralty chart, but I trust not without due recognition of Lee's
work. He certainly deserves the greatest credit for the careful and
painstaking observations he must have made while cruising in his
little schooners about the Barrier Reef. Many a shipwreck may possibly
be prevented and many a life saved by his laborious and at present
unrewarded exertions. Just before we were going away it seemed to
suddenly dawn upon Lee that Tom was Lord Brassey. He asked the
question, and when an answer in the affirmative was given shook hands
most warmly, and was delighted when he was told that I was Lady
Brassey and that the children were my own dear ones. He had all our
history at his fingers' ends, and was extremely pleased to see the
'historical Sunbeam' and 'her spirited owners,' as he called us. Later
on in the morning he tried to come on board the yacht in his schooner,
but unfortunately missed the rope and so lost the opportunity of
seeing the vessel. I was interested to hear from him a confirmation of
our supposition that the island off which we anchored was the one on
which Eliza Watson's body was found.

We landed on the leeward side of the island, and on going to the
windward shore it was curious to notice the process by which these
islands gradually become covered with vegetation. The whole shore just
above high-water mark was covered with little seeds, beans, and
various other atoms of vegetation which had been dropped by birds or
cast up by the sea, and which in process of time will cover the island
with trees and shrubs. The island did not look much bigger than half a
dozen times the size of the yacht. At low spring tides the most
beautiful corals and shells are found.

The blacks we saw on shore were a good-looking set of men, the finest
in stature we have yet seen. Lee says he has to be most careful and
always 'sleep with one eye open,' as they are treacherous. They would
turn round on him at any moment if they saw a chance and did not know
he was well armed.

All the inmates of the lightship came on board the yacht, with which
they were much delighted. They said they could not have imagined
anything like it on the sea, and thought they must have got on dry
land without knowing it. We parted with mutual good wishes, and I have
no doubt that the visit of the 'Sunbeam' will be a pleasant little
incident, affording much material for conversation for weeks to come.
We did not forget to give them some Ambulance papers.

We weighed at 11.30, and anchored under the Piper Islands an hour
after sunset. Distance, eighty-five miles.

_Saturday, August 20th._--All hands were called at four, and we got
under weigh soon after, making Home Islands about seven. Thence we
passed through Shelbourne Bay, by Hannibal Islands, and so off Orford
Ness. The navigation here was very intricate, and necessitated much
trouble and attention on Tom's part, and the taking of endless cross
bearings and observations. At 11.50 we passed the s.s. 'Tannadice,'
and exchanged friendly greetings. All navigators owe the commander of
this ship gratitude for reporting the reef named after his vessel. It
lies in a most dangerous position, and would doubtless have brought
many a good ship to grief had it not been reported and charted. Soon
after we started this morning we very nearly got on another reef. The
wind blew fresh and fair, and the current ran strong. Tom chanced to
be engaged taking some observations, and so paid, for a few moments,
less attention than usual to the pace at which we were going; and in
this hazardous interval the yacht very nearly ran on a coral reef that
was only just a-wash.[6]

[Footnote 6: The temporary failure of the chart lamp was the real
cause of this alarm. The coast sheets for Northern Queensland are on a
very small scale, and it requires a strong light and young eyes to
read their figures and the infinitesimally small signs denoting
rocks.]

From Fern Island, an almost straight course through a narrow channel
hemmed in by rocks, reefs, shoals, and islets, brought us to the
entrance to the Albany Pass. The navigation is intricate, but the
scenery quite lovely; the land on either side of the Pass, whether on
the mainland or on the islands, being densely wooded. At Fly Point on
the mainland our attention was attracted by some curious-looking
projections on a hillside, which resembled an enlarged edition of
Stonehenge, in red sandstone. On looking through the glasses we
discovered that these projections were ant-hills of an extraordinary
peaked shape, some of them being many feet in height.

The entrance to Port Albany and Somerset is narrow; and the strong
tide and wind combined to knock up an unpleasant popple. At Somerset
on the mainland, and immediately opposite to our anchorage at Port
Albany, a pretty little station has been built, with a flagstaff in
front of the bungalow. On our arrival the flag which was hoisted was
dipped a great many times and a large bonfire was lighted, in order to
give us, I suppose, a really warm welcome.

_Sunday, August 21st._--The boat went ashore early this lovely morning
to the large house we had seen last night. The station belongs to Mr.
Jardine, a relative of the founders of the firm of Jardine, Matheson,
& Co., so well known in China as well as along this coast. The station
is for cattle, and they are gradually increasing its boundaries so as
to be able to supply Thursday Island and the neighbourhood with fresh
meat, of which they are lamentably in need at present. About
twenty-five years ago Mr. Jardine drove a mob of 700 cattle from
Rockhampton to this place. It took him and his party nearly two years
to accomplish the journey, and they had to fight the blacks on their
way.

The men who went ashore in the boat brought off some milk and new-laid
eggs. There is excellent water here. The supply is obtained from two
springs and a well, and as water is bad, scarce, and dear at Thursday
Island, many ships come here for it. Last Sunday there were sixteen
schooners in this little port. They are all away now at the reefs, but
are expected back next Sunday.

We had Litany at eleven o'clock. In the afternoon I landed with the
Doctor, and sat, or rather lay quietly, on the pleasant sandy shore
for an hour or two, while the Doctor and the sailors roamed about and
picked up many curious pieces of coral and some lumps of scoriæ, of
which the whole island seems to be formed. There is very little soil
beneath the volcanic matter, and it is wonderful how trees and plants
manage to grow in such luxuriant fashion. Some cocoa-nut trees have
been planted, which are doing exceedingly well, and I rested under
their shade, looking up at the sky through the long, pale green
leaves. The innumerable flies, ants, and sandflies were troublesome.
But what can be expected in a land where the ant-heaps are ten feet
high and twenty-four feet in circumference? While on his rambles with
one of our men the Doctor saw a large snake four or five feet in
length, which he vainly tried to kill; but the reptile escaped into a
crevice in the rocks amongst the brushwood.

Tom, Tab, and Mr. Wright, in the meantime, went over to the mainland
to pay a visit to Mr. Jardine. They found the sea rather rough in the
narrow crossing, and after a stiff clamber up the hillside arrived at
the house. Mr. Jardine was away, but his manager, Mr. Schramud, gave
them some interesting information about the pearl fishery, and spoke
of the trouble of establishing their station in old days. He took them
round the paddocks where the bullocks are kept, and then a little way
through the bush, where he showed them an encampment of aborigines
which was much better constructed than usual. The centre hut was
large, with nicely built walls and a substantial thatched roof of
coarse dry grass.

The hut was divided into two parts, one section containing two beds
slightly raised from the floor, and the other a few rough seats and a
table, upon which stood a broken lamp and a drum, apparently hollowed
out from a piece of wood. Mr. Schramud gave the drum to Tab, saying
that its peculiarity consisted in the fact that, though the natives
possessed no adzes or chisels, the wood was completely hollowed out,
and yet it must have been done with knives of the most inferior
description. He had often tried, unsuccessfully, to 'catch the natives
at work' as he expressed it, in order to watch their method of dealing
with such hard wood. On leaving the encampment the party returned to
the beach and came across in the cutter to the island, landing in the
nice little sheltered cove where the Doctor and I were established.

[Illustration: Drum from Murray Island]

Shortly afterwards the Doctor and Mr. Wright started across the hills
to meet the others, while Tom, Tab, and I returned, or rather tried to
get back, to the yacht in the gig and the cutter, but the tide had
fallen considerably, and the reef over which we had floated so gaily
on landing, was now showing all sorts of nasty little jagged heads and
rounded tops, both above and very near the surface of the water. It
was not without many bumps and jars, and a certain amount of risk of
finding ourselves firmly aground, that we fairly emerged into the open
sea; then a long pull, a strong pull, and a pull all together against
the swiftly running current brought us once more alongside the good
ship 'Sunbeam.'

The rest of the party had still greater difficulty in getting off, for
the tide was falling every minute, and the dinghy had to be sent off
to pick them up one by one and transfer them to the gig. They seemed
to have enjoyed their walk very much, and described the island as
being covered with scrub. They saw a few animals which, though wild
now, have evidently once been domesticated, and actually stumbled upon
a family of little pigs. They climbed over the hill at the back of the
landing-place and descended to the windward shore, where they found a
stretch of beautiful firm white sand, extending for some distance
along the coast, indented by many pretty little coves and bays, in
which however there was not much flotsam and jetsam to be collected.
Mr. Wright and the Doctor had also been to the windward beach, but by
a different route, which led them through a valley full of
extraordinary ant-hills. From their description this place must have
looked like a veritable city of tombs, something like the view of
Jerusalem from the Mount of Olives. I was sorry they had not taken a
camera with them, although we had already taken photographs of
isolated ant-hills. The Doctor saw another snake quite as large as the
first, but it also escaped before he could get within striking
distance of it. Perhaps it was just as well it did escape, as we heard
afterwards that they are venomous, in fact deadly. There is no cure
for their bite, and though they get out of your way if they can, when
once attacked, or if you chance to stand between them and their hole,
they fly at you most viciously, and their bite has generally fatal
results.

We had evening prayers on board at six, and after a quiet evening's
reading, went to bed rather early.

_Monday, August 22nd._--I sent ashore this morning, by the men who
went for the milk, a few books and Ambulance papers for Mr. Jardine,
in return for which he sent me several beautiful pearl-shells, some of
which had curious corals growing on them. Mr. Schramud paid us an
early visit. He was much interested in the Ambulance papers I had sent
him, and said he always had a good deal of amateur doctoring to do,
both for himself and others, when out in the bush. He gave me a vivid
description of how on one occasion his horse, usually a quiet animal,
first threw him against the trunk of a tree, breaking his leg in two
places, and then, instead of standing still for him to remount, bolted
off to the station, seven miles away. Mr. Schramud crawled to the
nearest tree, stripped some bark off with his knife, padded it as well
as he could with some portion of his garments, and with two straps
which he fortunately found in his pocket strapped his leg up, making
what he described as an excellent splint or cradle. He then proceeded
to drag himself on his hands and knees through the bush towards the
station, a terrible journey, for he had not a drop of water or food of
any kind with him. Some hours passed before the people at the station,
seeing his horse come home riderless and guessing an accident, set out
to trace the tracks of the horse through the bush by the light of a
lantern, and found him with much difficulty.

[Illustration: Hammer-headed Oyster]

We had great trouble in getting up our anchors this morning, for they
were fouled in every possible way, and it was nearly eleven before we
started and were fairly steaming through Albany Pass towards Cape
Yorke, on our way to the Thursday Island group. Cape Yorke has been
described as the seat of Government in these parts, but is a
melancholy looking place, and can never have been of any importance.
Tom did not quite like taking the inner and shorter channel to
Thursday Island, so we went to the north of Wednesday and Hammond
Islands, and arrived at the back of Goode Island, where there is a
signal-station and lighthouse, from which they signalled a kind
welcome and an offer of a pilot, which was declined with thanks. We
then rounded the island and proceeded to Normanby Sound close to
Friday Island, and, after a tremendous tussle with the tide, finally
reached Thursday Island and anchored in Normanby Sound just off Port
Kennedy, the name given to the capital of the island, after the late
Governor of Queensland.

Thursday Island is one of an extensive and intricate group. The chief
building material used in the settlement is corrugated iron,
embellished by verandahs supported on wooden posts and nattily
painted, making the little dwellings look both pretty and comfortable.
The Residency is a larger bungalow on the top of a little hill, and
half a dozen fairly good houses cluster round it. Then comes a row of
stores along the sea-face, and a few more houses stand at the back. A
soft sandy track runs in front of the stores, but there are no roads,
and consequently no vehicles, and no draught beasts. There is no
communication, except from the visits of occasional steamers, nor are
any provisions obtainable, except canned meat and fruits. The
vegetables are grown by the invaluable Chinese, on some of the islands
opposite. Even the water, of which the supply is scanty, is condensed.
The only servants available are people of colour. The ladies have to
do everything for themselves, and children of eleven and twelve years
are frequently trained by the force of circumstances to become as good
cooks and housemaids as many a well-paid servant at home. A gentleman
living here said to me the other day, 'How little do our sisters in
England know the way we live in some of the colonies! I am very glad
you have come out, Lady Brassey, for you will be able to describe, as
we cannot in letters, the really hard, rough life we lead here.' For
those who are well and strong, and can enjoy roughing it, constantly
knocking about in a small schooner from island to island, with often
nothing to eat except cocoa-nuts and yams, the life is not
intolerable; but for those who are delicate, and not able to bear
without suffering these conditions, it is indeed a very hard life. The
women who bravely face these hardships deserve all our admiration and
sympathy. In spite of the great difficulties, they manage to maintain
a high standard of education and refinement. Truly their lives read a
lesson to us all, and teach us how much there is to be thankful for,
and how little real cause we have to grumble at many things about
which we make a fuss.

[Illustration: Claremont Island Lightship]

Mr. Milman, the Resident, and Mr. Symes, the Commissioner of Customs,
called upon us soon after our arrival, and took the rest of the party
on shore to lawn-tennis, which must be a great resource here, for
there is no sport of any kind. Mr. Milman has made a good
tennis-court, and anybody who likes can play there every afternoon.
The society on Thursday Island consists of two resident ladies,
supplemented by occasional visitors, and six gentlemen. Besides this
handful of English, Mr. Hall lives on Prince of Wales' Island, and
Captain and Mrs. Stevens on Goode Island.

Mr. Milman was anxious to take us to Murray and Darnley Islands, in
his little steamer the 'Albatross,' but she is at present looking for
escaped convicts from New Caledonia, and it seems doubtful when she
will return. The story about these escaped convicts is rather
interesting. A boat's crew landed here the other day, with four men,
who stated they were shipwrecked mariners. They were all examined
separately, and told such inconsistent stories (even differing as to
whether their ship had one, two, or three masts), that suspicion was
aroused. Some were Italians, but one appeared to be a Frenchman,
though he pretended not to understand a word of the language. They are
undoubtedly escaped convicts from New Caledonia. Two own to having had
another man with them, and say that when they landed he disappeared.
The others will not acknowledge that the party was ever more than four
in number, but the blacks have since reported finding a body on the
beach twelve miles from where these men landed, near Somerset. There
are still five men wandering about, who were hospitably entertained
and furnished with food and clothes by Mr. Jardine, at Somerset,
before he knew who they were, and three others were compelled to go on
board the 'Claremont' lightship, through want of food, and were
promptly shipped off to gaol in Brisbane. The 'Albatross' was the
little steamer we saw lying alongside the lightship at Piper Island,
on the 19th inst. She was then on her way to search all the reefs and
islands for the five missing men. I hope it will not be long before
they are brought in, for, independent of any other crimes they have
committed, they must almost certainly have been guilty of a most
brutal murder, and have killed their own comrade. It is wonderful how
so many of these men escape. It is difficult to understand how they
can procure boats, provisions, and sufficient water for the voyage of
over 2,500 miles, that being about the distance from New Caledonia to
Rockhampton or Cooktown. The run between New Caledonia and Australia
is dead to leeward before the trade-winds.

[Illustration: The Last Mill in Australia]




[Illustration: Port Darwin]

CHAPTER XIX.

_PRINCE OF WALES' ISLAND._


_Tuesday, August 23rd._--I had a better night, and awoke feeling much
refreshed. Most of the party went early ashore to see what this
uninteresting town is like. Tom spent a busy morning with Mr. Milman,
going into statistics, fortification questions, and so forth. In the
afternoon we steamed across to the pearl-shell station on Prince of
Wales' Island, managed by Mr. Hall. He has a nice bungalow there, and
seems very busy and happy in his occupation, contriving to keep good
friends with all the 'boys,' as the coloured labourers from Manilla,
China, the South Sea Islands, and other places are called. These
'boys' are now busily occupied in unloading the shells from the boats
and cleaning and preparing them for the market, which latter process
we had come to see to-day. First we went to a small shed where about
half a dozen 'boys' were employed, some in chopping and scraping the
shells in order to reduce their weight, whilst others were washing and
cleaning them with brushes made from the outside of the cocoa-nut
husk, which, when split into strips, is excellent for the purpose, as
it scrapes and polishes the shells without scratching them. The boxes
stood ready outside for packing, each holding about two cwt. of
shells, valued at 11_l._ per cwt. The number of shells varies
according to their size, from sixty to sixty-five fitting into each
box. On a table in the middle of the shed the shells were being
quickly packed and nailed up, ready for exportation. They are just now
higher in price, on account of the disaster on the north-west coast of
Western Australia, which has temporarily crippled that rival station.
From the cleaning and packing shed we went to another, where the
diving apparatus is kept. This was sent out from England, and is
exactly the same as that in use everywhere, being made to fit tightly
round the ankles, wrists, and neck, with an immense superfluity of
space in the middle to hold a storage of air. Besides this heavy
dress, divers wear a belt with a large knife stuck into it, to cut
themselves free from any obstacle their ropes may get foul of, and
they also have a hook, to which their air-pipe is attached. In
addition to an enormous pair of leaden boots, two heavy pieces of lead
are suspended over their shoulders, one piece lying on their chest and
the other on their back. They descend with great rapidity, and can
walk, _with_ the current, on the bottom easily enough; but woe betide
them if the tender is not careful, for if their air-line catches in
anything it is absolutely impossible for them to make any headway
against the tide. Unless the men above are quick and clever enough to
repair the mistake promptly, they are lost.

Mr. Hall had kindly prepared tea for us at his house, but I wished to
return on board, and so deferred my visit until a future occasion. On
returning to our anchorage we had quite a business to stem the tide,
and took a long time to reach our destination. The others arrived in
time to go on shore and have a game of lawn-tennis, an amusement which
they all much enjoy, and which does them a great deal of good in the
intervals of their voyages. Mr. Milman dined with us and told me a
great many interesting things about his island, and afterwards the
gentlemen had some good games of whist. I have at last heard the real
story of the opals, for Mr. Milman's overseer was the first to bring
in a piece of opal off the Blackall station on the Listowel Downs, in
1869. The beautiful fragment stood on the mantelpiece for several
years before it was thought of any value, but at the time of the great
mining fever attention was attracted to the specimen, and it was sent
to a mineralogist, who pronounced it to be a fine and valuable opal.
The story struck me as being very similar to that told of the first
diamond found in South Africa; but doubtless there is a strong family
likeness in the early history of all gem-bearing districts.

_Wednesday, August 24th._--At ten o'clock this morning Mr. Milman came
on board, and we proceeded down the Sound to Goode Island, where we
anchored about half a mile from the shore. Tom, Tab, Mabelle, and Mr.
Milman landed at once, and walked up to the lighthouse to take a
bird's-eye view of this extensive archipelago and to discuss the best
method of defence, about which Mr. Milman was anxious to know Tom's
opinion. Later on I landed with the rest of the party, and we went to
see Captain and Mrs. Stevens, the former of whom is the manager of the
pearl-fishing station here. I then returned with Mrs. Stevens and her
children to lunch on board the yacht. Whilst I was still lying down to
rest I heard a bustle on deck as if the dinghy were being lowered, and
as I wanted to send a message on shore I called to them to stop. In
reply they told me that 'Sir Roger' was swimming off to the yacht, and
that not a moment must be lost in trying to save him. It did not tend
to calm my fears when Mrs. Stevens told me that the bay was perfectly
full of sharks, and that she herself had lost a fine dog not a month
ago under similar circumstances. Poor old 'Sir Roger' swam bravely
out, keeping his head well above the water; but what with the fear of
the strong current dashing him against the sharp coral reefs, and the
dread of seeing him dragged under by the snags of a ferocious shark, I
spent a bad quarter of an hour. At last I saw him pulled safely into
the boat. I have been so ill lately, and necessarily left so much
alone when the others were on shore, that my dog has become more than
ever a companion to me, and never leaves my chair or bed for an
instant if he can possibly help it. He had been fairly driven away
this morning to accompany Tom on his long walk to the lighthouse, for
I knew the outing would do him good. Halfway up the hill he refused to
follow any further, and bolted back, in a straight line, to the beach,
and had actually swum more than halfway to the yacht before he was
picked up. I should hardly have thought a dog could identify the
vessel at so great a distance.

Those of the party who had been left on shore came off to a late
lunch, and shortly afterwards we got up our anchor and steamed back
towards Thursday Island. This was again a work of great difficulty,
for the tide ran eight or nine knots an hour, and a stiff gale was
blowing against us. Once or twice, in the narrows, we positively stood
still for five or ten minutes at a time, and the chief engineer was
considerably chaffed about his beloved engines not moving the vessel
ahead at all. We reached our anchorage safely at half-past four, and
soon afterwards many people came off to the yacht. I was too tired to
see them, but I am told they appeared greatly interested in their
inspection. Some of our own party went ashore in the afternoon to
lawn-tennis, and Mr. Milman came back with them to dinner.

[Illustration: Darnley Island; the Shore]

_Thursday, August 25th._--We were to have been off, first at daybreak,
and then at 9 A.M. When Mr. Milman and Mrs. Hunt, the wife of the
missionary, whom we were going to convey to Darnley Island, appeared
on board, it was blowing a strong gale of wind nearly dead in our
teeth, and the voyage did not offer a very cheerful prospect. As we
had made all arrangements, we thought it better to proceed. At
half-past six we started, and, passing Ninepin Rock and Saddle Island,
soon found ourselves in a channel full of reefs, rocks, islands,
islets, and dangers seen and unseen, which made the navigation an
anxious task for Tom. He was ably assisted by Mr. Milman. It was a
most unpleasant morning, and, keeping quietly down in my berth, I
think I was better off than some of those on deck. After passing
Ninepin and Saddle Islands, and the three island-sisters, Poll, Bet,
and Sue, we made Cocoa-nut Island, one of the few high islands we have
seen to-day. During the afternoon the navigation continued to be
intricate, but shortly after sunset we made York Islands, under the
lee of the larger of which we anchored for the night in tolerably
sheltered water. The York Islands are two in number, connected with
each other at low water by a sandy spit. A semicircular reef four
miles long and nearly two miles broad extends along the south side of
the islands, the larger of which is one and a half mile long, and lies
towards the western end of the reef, while the other is on its
north-eastern extremity. There are only two white men living on York
Islands; one is an English gentleman, and the other bears the name of
Yankee Ned. He is the proud possessor of a telescope which, he
declares, belonged either to Captain Cook or Admiral La Pérouse. It
bears marks of great antiquity, but there is no name or descriptive
mark to show that it ever really was used by such distinguished
navigators. These two men have a very large bêche-de-mer station here,
which they manage with the aid of some natives, and make over
1,000_l._ a year out of it.

_Friday, August 26th._--The wind was blowing stronger than ever to-day
at daylight. We got under weigh at six as prearranged, but were no
sooner out of the shelter of the island than Tom came to ask if it
would not be better, on my account, to turn back, for we should have
fifty miles or more beating dead in the wind's eye to Murray Island,
besides which the weather was so thick that we should have some
difficulty in seeing the unsurveyed coral reefs through which we must
pass. The only objection to this course was that we had promised to
convey Mrs. Hunt to her new mission station at Murray Island. We
finally decided to proceed as far as Darnley Island, which we should
necessarily pass on the way to Murray Island; so, passing Campbell,
Stevens, and Nepean Islands, at which innumerable cross-bearings were
taken, we anchored off Darnley Island precisely at half-past ten. It
is very pretty as seen from the sea, with large groves of cocoa-nut
trees growing right down to the shore. On the higher ground the
cleared slopes of grass give it at a distance something of the look of
an English park. At half-past eleven we all landed, being only too
glad to have dry land once more beneath our feet, after the shaking
and tossing about of the last twenty-four hours. All our anxieties as
to Mrs. Hunt were relieved by seeing her husband's schooner, the
'Mary,' riding quietly at anchor in the bay. The difficulties of
landing were great, for the tide was low and the poor gig kept bumping
against the coral-reefs and rocks to such an extent that I was afraid
she would have a hole knocked in her bottom. However, some of the
natives came out to help us, and, wading waist-deep in the water,
guided us into a small channel, and from thence carried us one by one
ashore. I was borne in my chair straight to the house of the chief,
who is called King Jack, and who, with his wife, was anxious to
welcome and shake hands with us all. The flag flying before his trim
little cottage--red with a yellow cross--did not satisfy King Jack at
all, so we promised him a blue Jack for use on future festive
occasions.

At the back of the village a grove of cocoa-nuts waving in the strong
sea-breeze put me in mind of a South Sea island, such as we so often
landed on in going round the world in 1870. Even the dress of the
natives was just the same, consisting of the original long George II.
sack, brought out by the first missionaries, with its original shape
somewhat lost and altered by the lapse of long years and the variety
of hands through which the pattern has passed. We rested in the back
garden for some time. The chief's men climbed the trees and brought us
down fresh cocoa-nuts, giving us the milk and the nice creamy
substance which lines the shell when the nuts are quite young. This is
most delicious, and is a dainty one never has a chance of tasting in
England, for it is quite different to the dried-up and aged cocoa-nuts
to be procured from Covent Garden. We took some photographs of the
groups of natives and of the curious native boats, hollowed out of a
single trunk, which were lying pulled up on the shore before us. The
larger canoes are made from timber grown in New Guinea, which must be
much larger than any trees we saw growing on the island. After a
short delay I was carried by some native policemen through a little
village consisting of a few circular and oblong houses made of plaited
grass and thatch, all of which had been so familiar to one's eyes in
the South Seas. It was quite like old times to see these dwellings
again, and some of them were actually occupied by genuine South Sea
Islanders--Kanakas. The men of these islands are very similar in
appearance to that race, though I think the type here is finer.

[Illustration: Darnley Island]

At the end of the village stood the missionary's house, which was a
superior abode to the others. It has been built and is kept for the
use of white missionaries when they come over from the other islands.
The native teachers generally live in a little grass hut at the side,
and content themselves with gazing at the 'mansion'--a small dwelling,
consisting of only one main room and two side-rooms off it, with deep
verandahs all round. The native teacher is a well-educated Kanaka.
His wife is of the same race, and is pleasant and agreeable. She
seemed to keep her house, hut, and children very tidy. Our path led up
from here through banana and cocoa-nut groves, with an undergrowth of
sweet potatoes, to the top of a little hill about 150 feet high. Close
to the rather dilapidated native church we found a beautiful sward of
grass shaded by cocoa-nut trees, where we established ourselves to
rest and look at the view. After a time the others joined us, and we
took some photographs before lunch, and then the party went off in
different directions--some to the windward beach to see what shells
could be collected; but they were not very successful in their quest,
the violence of the waves having either killed or broken most of the
specimens found. Others went clambering up to the top of the high
hills; while Mr. Milman sat in my carrying-chair and held a sort of
open-air court. The natives formed a picturesque group on the grass
around him. He found out all the news of the place since he had last
been here, and inquired into the administration of justice in a sort
of pigeon-English somewhat difficult to understand.

There was only one crime to report. A poor woman had been guilty of
what they called 'telling tales'--namely, saying that the laws of
Murray Island were good, but that at Darnley Island they were '_very_
bad.' For this the old chief, King Jack, promptly fined her 200
cocoa-nuts, which, by the way, we bought for 10_s._, knowing what a
welcome addition they will prove to our own and the crew's diet, for
fresh vegetables are difficult to procure. Mr. Milman has taken the
precaution of planting these islands with cocoa-nuts, and he allows
the people to keep a certain number, so that there is a definite and
just way of punishing them if they offend against the law, by fining
them so many cocoa-nuts. The money paid for the cocoa-nuts goes into
the national exchequer; and although the amount realised is not large,
as may be imagined, it contributes to the cost of repairs or
improvements.

During the afternoon 'Sir Roger' performed some of his tricks for the
amusement of the assembled natives. Their delight was intense and
unbounded. Though he may have had a more crowded, he never had a more
enthusiastic, audience. The performance was repeated several times,
but the natives never seemed to weary of it. I thoroughly enjoyed the
trip to the island to-day, and found it delicious to lie lazily under
the shade of the cocoa-nut trees and listen to just as much or as
little as I liked of what was going on round me. The rustle of the
wind through the long leaves of the cocoa-nut trees is far more calm
and peaceful than even the murmur of the 'immemorial elms;' and the
glimpses of the sea, dotted by small islands and coral reefs, on which
the waves broke in beautiful creamy foam, were most lovely. About four
o'clock we went down again to the village, passing through tracts of
cultivated ground bearing crops of sweet potatoes. On our way we
paused to admire the church bell--an ancient dinner-bell, which hung
by a piece of string from the longest and scraggiest arm of a very old
and leafless tree. All the rest of the party were assembled on the
beach, and a brisk trade was being done in corals, shells, and
cocoa-nuts, paid for in tobacco, which the islanders much prefer to
money. The teacher's wife was made happy by the gift of a reel of
white cotton and a packet of needles, which will enable her to carry
out her dressmaking operations and repairs with much greater ease. Her
eyes quite glistened as she took them. Mr. Savage told me that the two
Regina birds-of-paradise tails which I bought to-day were obtained
from a native of New Guinea who lives on the island of Peram, at the
mouth of the Fly River. From this man's account, the birds must abound
there; but I cannot help regretting that the poor creatures should be
sacrificed merely to line the cloaks of rich ladies.

While we were up on the hill the crew had been engaged in procuring
water to replenish our fast-failing stock. They had had great labour
in bringing off the water, for the well is half a mile from the beach,
and the sea was very rough. We only got a ton after all, when we
should have liked a dozen or fourteen tons! Soon after our return on
board a number of boats followed us, laden with baskets of sweet
potatoes, yams, pumpkins, cocoa-nuts, shells, coral, &c. So great was
the supply that the deck of the ship soon became covered with native
produce, the owners of which, like all true savages, considered it a
matter of etiquette and dignity not to express the least surprise or
astonishment at anything they saw, although somewhat taken aback by
the pictures and large looking-glasses. They were very pleasant and
obedient, doing exactly what they were told without touching anything.

Though feeling much the better for my outing, I became tired, and was
glad to lie down and rest in the deck-house. The little mission
schooner, the 'Mary,' with a dove and olive-branch on her flag as a
message of peace, was tossing and rolling about in the most unpleasant
manner, exposing her keel at almost every wave, first to windward and
then to leeward. Her captain and crew, a fine, determined-looking set
of Kanaka men, did not seem to mind the sea at all. I pity poor Mr.
and Mrs. Hunt, who will have to make their voyage to Murray Island
to-morrow in the teeth of this heavy wind. Mrs. Hunt remained on
shore, but Mr. Hunt and Mr. Savage came on board to dinner; and from
Mr. Savage I heard a good deal of his work among the natives. The
station here is comparatively small, but at Murray Island a
training-school for native teachers has been established, that island
being somewhat larger than this, surrounded by live coral reefs, and
containing about 400 inhabitants. Their principal field of mission
operations among the natives appears to be in the Fly River in New
Guinea, which is a most unhealthy spot. Their work is now beginning
to be attended with a large measure of success. At first no attempt
was made to teach the Papuans English. The missionaries were the only
people who could communicate with the natives. The ignorance of
English proved a great drawback to all trade, and it has certainly
retarded for years to come the opening up of the country. Not only is
the climate bad, but the natives of New Guinea are treacherous, and
not to be depended on for a moment.

[Illustration: Curios from Murray Island]

Mr. Savage has been out here for two years, thirteen months of which
time he has lived entirely by himself. Mr. and Mrs. Hunt are now going
to inhabit Murray Island, with only one European carpenter as their
companion, while Mr. Savage will be stationed principally at the Fly
River. The mission receives all its supplies from England _viâ_
Thursday Island, from which place they are fetched in the little
schooner, built by the carpenter Bruce, who was formerly a
yacht-builder. The life of these good people appears to be one of
much self-abnegation. I hope with all my heart that the mission may
succeed, and that the devoted missionaries will be rewarded for their
self-denying exertions.

_Saturday, August 27th._--A grey morning, with the wind blowing
stronger than ever. Navigation in these seas is by no means easy.
During the night we had dragged our anchor a little, enough to get
unpleasantly near the shore; and just as we weighed, the sails did not
fill so quickly as they ought to have done, which caused the yacht to
pay off with her head _towards_ the shore instead of _off_ shore.
There was barely a ship's length between us and the reef. It was with
great difficulty, and only by promptly dropping the anchor, that we
prevented ourselves from running straight on to shore. On first
starting we thought we should only get to Bet Island, one of the three
sisters. These islets swarm with turtle, which lay their eggs on the
sandy shores all the year round. We were looking forward to turtle
soup, turtle eggs, and all sorts of delicacies, to make a pleasant
change in the monotony of our daily fare. The wind, however, blew so
fresh that, though close-reefed, we sailed from ten to twelve knots an
hour, which of course caused a considerable amount of motion.

At a little before noon to-day we were off Cocoa-nut Island. Later we
passed in succession the Bet, Sue, and Poll Islands, and the Ninepin
Rock, a curious-shaped little islet, though anything less like a
ninepin I cannot imagine. In the afternoon, by dint of hard driving,
we were able to reach a good anchorage in Flinders Channel, between
Horn and Wednesday Island. As an instance of the rapidity of our
sailing speed, I may mention that seven measured miles between the two
islands was done in rather less than half an hour; which, considering
we were close-hauled, was not bad work. We had a fairly quiet night,
though it was blowing a gale, and of course the ship tumbled and
rocked about a good deal.

_Sunday, August 28th._--As the tide was running very strong, it was
decided not to start until eleven o'clock. We therefore had prayers
before starting, and sailed slowly across to our old anchorage, which
we reached about midday.

In the afternoon I was carried ashore to see Mrs. Milman, who appears
to be a great invalid. She has two nice little girls, who look after
the house and save their mother a great deal of trouble. There was
another little girl there, a daughter of Canon Taylor, who had come up
from Cooktown on a visit.

The Residency is a pleasant house, open to every breath of wind that
blows; of which, according to our experience of these parts, there is
plenty. The inhabitants tell us that this is the normal condition of
the weather here during nine months of the twelve. No doubt these
breezes are health-giving, but the perpetual blowing of the wind must
be fatiguing. It roars and whistles and shakes the house like an
incessant hurricane. The three months during which there is no wind is
at the period of the north-east monsoon, and then the rain descends in
torrents. Life during this time of the year at Thursday Island is
described as being dreary indeed.

We returned on board at half-past five, and everybody but myself
landed again later, and went to church at half-past seven at the Court
House. Mr. Milman read prayers and a sermon, and Tom read the lessons.

[Illustration: In the Torres Straits]

[Illustration: ANT-HILLS, QUEENSLAND, AUSTRALIA]

_Monday, August 29th._--A very windy morning. Some pearl-merchants
came on board, bringing fine specimens of pearls, which seem quite as
costly here as in London. I bought some shells, more as specimens of
queer freaks of nature than for any intrinsic beauty or value they
possessed. In the afternoon we landed again on Thursday Island, and
Tom and I explored the little town, round which I was carried in a
comfortable chair. The place is larger than I expected, and the stores
seemed well furnished with dry goods of all kinds, besides tinned
meats, vegetables, and fruit; but there are no fresh provisions. A few
goslings, very like our wild geese, but not so big as a good-sized
duck, were running about, for which the owners asked 30_s._ apiece!
There were also some chickens to be bought for 10_s._ each. Some of
the houses are really not unsightly when seen from a distance, but
when you approach them the adjacent ground is found to be strewn with
straw, paper, old tins, broken bottles, and rubbish of every
description. I should like to have all the rubbish taken out to sea
and sunk, and then I would plant more trees and shrubs. At present
some miserable-looking cocoa-nuts, and a few hibiscus-bushes, with
their bright red blossoms, comprise everything in the way of
vegetation. On our way from the town to the Residency we passed Mr.
Symes's house. His mother very kindly came out to welcome us, and
asked us to go into their comfortable bungalow and have some tea,
which we were most thankful for. I was so tired. Mrs. Symes had a
married daughter and two nice little grandchildren living with her,
and we had a pleasant chat. She gave me what she says is an
infallible cure for bronchitis, and I only hope it may prove so. I
spoke to Mrs. Symes and her daughter, to whom I had previously sent
papers, about the Ambulance; and they appeared to be quite keen about
it, and promised to do all in their power to aid any classes that
might be established here. Continuing our walk we went to the
excellent lawn-tennis ground just below Mr. Milman's house. We could
only make a short stay, for the sun had set and it was rapidly getting
dark. The sea was rough going off, and I felt rather exhausted by the
time I arrived on board. Mr. Hall and Dr. Salter came to dinner, and
with the latter I had a long talk about the Ambulance. Dr. Salter is
quite willing to give the lectures, but there would be great
difficulty in bringing people together for the classes, for the tides
are strong and shifty, and so uncertain that one can never know till
the morning what they are going to be. The Doctor says the only chance
of inducing people to come will be to find out approximately the most
convenient day and hour and then hoist the signal on the flagstaff, so
that the inhabitants of the neighbouring islands may see it and attend
if they choose. Several of the masters and managers of the
pearl-shelling stations have promised to come themselves, and then to
try and pass on the knowledge they may acquire to their Malay,
Manilla, and other 'boys' who go out pearl-fishing and after
bêche-de-mer. The instructions will be useful to these people, for
accidents often happen, principally from their own carelessness. The
divers are sometimes hoisted up to the surface asphyxiated from want
of air, and requiring almost precisely similar treatment to the
apparently drowned. Only last week they had a man on board one of the
schooners very nearly dead, but still able to speak and move. Instead
of attempting to relieve him they brought him here, a distance of
fifteen miles; and by the time he arrived, of course the little spark
of life he had possessed was quite extinguished. If only a knowledge
such as that conveyed by the instructions given by the St. John
Ambulance Association can be spread here, particularly among the
people employed at the pearl-fishing stations, it will be most
valuable. There are a great many men engaged in the pearl trade in the
Torres Straits, New Guinea, and the numerous islands in the vicinity.
It is, of course, impossible to establish a centre here; but I hope
before I leave to set a class on foot, with Mr. Hall for the
secretary, as he is most enthusiastic on the subject. Tom and I will,
as usual in such cases, become life members, so as to give the
movement a start.

[Illustration: Church on Darnley Island]




APPENDIX.




PART I.

_VOYAGE FROM DARNLEY ISLAND TO PORT DARWIN, MAURITIUS, CAPE OF GOOD
HOPE, AND ENGLAND._

(By LORD BRASSEY.)


The pen having fallen from her hand, the task which a brave yet gentle
spirit was struggling so hard to complete must be accomplished by one
who does not possess her gifts. For obvious reasons, the description
of the remainder of the voyage will be compressed within the closest
limits.

The 'Sunbeam' sailed from Thursday Island on September 1st. For three
days the winds were favourable, from the eastward. The next two days
being calm, the voyage was pursued under steam.

On September 5th, in the evening, the 'Sunbeam' was navigated, not
without difficulty, through the intricate channels of Clarence Strait.
On the 6th, at an early hour the anchor was dropped off the settlement
of Palmerston. Our arrival at Port Darwin took place under such
circumstances as render it impossible to offer any description from
personal observation.

Palmerston, the name given to the settlement at Port Darwin, is
beautifully situated on wooded headlands, jutting out into the
harbour, in whose ample waters it is no figure of speech to say the
navies of Europe could be anchored. The buildings have been erected
with considerable taste. A fine esplanade has been laid out along the
sea front. The electric wire connects Palmerston with all the great
colonies of Australia. In constructing the overland telegraph from
South Australia, a great middle section of the continent was
discovered, capable of producing pasture for tens of millions of sheep
and millions of cattle and horses. The first section from the north,
of what will eventually be the Trans-Australian Railway, has been
commenced, and is being carried out with energy by Messrs. Miller, the
well-known Melbourne contractors for public works.

The total area of the northern territory of South Australia is 523,620
square miles. Within this vast expanse are stony wastes and waterless
tracts, vast rolling downs, wide grassy plains, rich alluvial flats,
large navigable rivers, and metalliferous areas, exceptionally rich in
tin, coal, copper, and silver. Thus far mining has been more
successful than agriculture. The Chinese have alone been able to
accomplish anything in cultivation. They have gathered harvests of
rice and sugar-cane from the limited areas which they have taken in
hand. On the banks of the rivers coffee could be grown in many places.

The climate is tropical, and malaria, with its fever and ague, is
prevalent. The mean temperature of the year is 75 degrees, and the
thermometer has never been seen lower than 68 degrees. The atmosphere
is dank, steamy, and heavy with moisture during the wet season, and
parching and malarial during the dry season.

From Port Darwin to the Cape of Good Hope, and thence to Sierra Leone,
the voyage lay for the most part within the zone of the South-east
Trades. Rodriguez Island was sighted on September 26th, and Mauritius
was reached on September 29th. It is a painful task to attempt to
describe scenes which would have been painted so much more effectively
by another. To give the daily life, which, needless to say, was very
sad, I will not attempt.

Mauritius is one of the few ports in which sailing ships still hold
the field against steamers. It was filled with a noble fleet. As a
mark of sympathy, which touched us deeply, their flags were hoisted at
half-mast as soon as our sad intelligence became known.

Viewed from the anchorage of Port Louis, the island of Mauritius
presents a scene of much beauty. A chain of peaks and craters of
picturesque and fantastic forms runs through the island from end to
end. The needle-shaped Peter Botte, 2,784 feet, and the Pouce, 2,707
feet, are conspicuous summits. All the mountains are of volcanic
formation. Their barren precipices are blue and purple, and their
vegetation, watered by frequent and abundant showers, is of the
richest green. The landscape displayed admirable effects of colour,
varying with every change from rain to sunshine.

The Botanical Gardens and the Observatory are the most interesting
objects which Port Louis offers to the passing traveller. The gardens
are lovely. The lakes, surrounded by palm trees and a most rich and
abundant tropical vegetation, are a charming feature. The fine and
rare specimens in the gardens included the Traveller's tree, abounding
in water, the Ruffia palm from Madagascar, the lettuce-headed palm,
the talipot palm, the Latania aurea from Rodriguez, and another
variety of latania from Round Island.

[Illustration: St. Louis, Mauritius]

The Observatory, under the supervision of Dr. Meldrum, is chiefly
devoted to meteorological and astronomical investigations. In addition
to these subjects, observations of the solar spots are taken daily,
and transmitted monthly to the Solar Physics Committee in London. The
transit of the moon has been observed with much success. Sea
observations from the log-books of vessels touching at Mauritius are
carefully recorded. The tracks and positions at noon of 299 tropical
cyclones, which swept over the Indian Ocean south of the equator from
1856 to 1886, have been laid down on charts, and are ready for
publication. The in-curving theory of cyclones, as worked out by Dr.
Meldrum, is now generally adopted, and it would appear that the rules
given for the guidance of ships in the Southern Indian Ocean have been
the means of saving much life and property.

On the second day of our short stay we paid a quiet visit to the
Acting Governor. The recent political convulsions in Mauritius, in
connection with Sir John Pope Hennessy, had by no means subsided.
During his leave of absence the Governor was being represented with
admirable tact and judgment by Mr. Fleming, who had already succeeded
in establishing amicable relations with both sides. Considerable
jealousies exist between the English and French residents in
Mauritius. They have been unfortunately aroused to an unprecedented
degree of violence by the proceedings of Sir John Pope Hennessy. The
mass of the population of Mauritius are of mixed race, descendants of
the coolies employed on the plantations. French--or rather
_patois_--speaking Creoles come next in point of numbers. The Chinese
are the universal shopkeepers.

Later in the day we ascended the Pouce. It commands a view over the
harbour of Port Louis and the interior of the island. The broad and
shallow valleys, green with sugar-cane, reminded us much of our own
South Downs. From the Pouce we drove to the residence of a relative,
who is the owner of extensive sugar-cane plantations. The staple
industry of Mauritius is the cultivation of sugar. More than 100,000
tons are annually exported. India and Australia are the chief markets.
The bounty on the production of sugar in France and Germany has driven
the sugar of Mauritius altogether out of Europe. Mauritius received a
great blow from the opening of the Suez Canal, but it still possesses
abundant resources. The wealth of the island may in some degree be
measured by its public revenue, which amounts to no less than
700,000_l._ a year.

Mauritius produces scarcely anything required for its own consumption.
It imports rice from India, grain from Australia, oxen from
Madagascar, and sheep from the Cape.

Our last morning at Port Louis was devoted to the defences and the
docks. Progress is being made with the improvement of existing
defences and the construction of new forts. The works are well
advanced, and the guns are promised shortly from home. Mauritius
possesses three graving-docks. The Albion Dock could be readily
enlarged to receive a ship of war. It would be a wise policy on the
part of the Government to assist in the work.

The passage from Port Louis to Algoa Bay occupied eleven days. To the
southward of the Trades, off the coast of Natal, a short but severe
gale from the south-west was encountered. The gale was followed by a
fresh breeze from the east, which carried the 'Sunbeam' rapidly to the
westward. In three days a distance of 797 miles was covered, with
winds from S.E. to N.E.

The 'Sunbeam' reached Port Elizabeth on October 12. The anchorage is
protected from all winds except those from the south-east. Port
Elizabeth from the sea has the aspect of a small Brighton. On landing
it presents many cheerful indications of prosperity in its pier,
railway station, municipal buildings, streets and shops, and last, but
not least in the estimation of the traveller, its excellently
appointed and hospitable club. The residential quarter is happily
situated on elevated ground, swept by refreshing breezes from the
ocean. A large space is covered with good houses and well-kept lawns.
The public gardens are a great feat of horticulture. The arid and
sterile soil has been converted by liberal irrigation into a green
oasis, containing groves of palms and a varied tropical vegetation.
Needless to say the work is the achievement of a Scotch gardener.

The prosperity of this active commercial centre is due to the trade
carried on with Kimberley, of which it is the port. The value of the
diamonds produced at Kimberley was estimated for 1883 at
2,359,000_l._; 1884, 2,562,000_l._; 1885, 2,228,000_l._; and 1886,
3,261,000_l._ These amounts will be exceeded in later returns. As yet,
the price per carat shows no tendency to decline. The work of mining
for diamonds gives employment to a large amount of well-paid labour.
Some 2,000 white _employés_ are engaged at an average wage of 5_l._
9_s._ per week. Twelve thousand coloured men are working under their
direction, their earnings exceeding 1_l._ per week.

Port Elizabeth is the chief _entrepôt_ for ostrich feathers. The value
of this article of export for 1886 was over half a million sterling.
The process of selling the feathers by auction is one of the most
singular business transactions at which it has been my lot to assist.
One of the buyers in attendance, on the occasion of our visit,
represents a London firm, and is said to be making an income of over
1,000_l._ per year. A spirited effort is being made to establish an
_entrepôt_ for the Cape wines at Port Elizabeth. We visited the
extensive cellars under the public market, where a company has opened
a business, which it is intended to conduct in accordance with the
most approved methods of treatment in the wine-growing districts of
Europe.

A day was spent at Port Elizabeth, and two days of rapid sailing
before an easterly wind brought the 'Sunbeam' into Table Bay on the
morning of October 15, just in time to gain the anchorage before one
of the hard gales from the south-east, which are not unfrequently
experienced at the Cape, set in. Between Port Darwin and the Cape the
distance covered was 1,047 knots under steam, and 5,622 knots under
sail. The average speed under steam and sail was exactly eight knots.
In the fortnight, October 13 to 27, 3,073 knots, giving an average
speed of nine knots an hour, were covered under sail alone, with winds
of moderate strength. Balloon canvas was freely used.

[Illustration: Off the Cape]

Table Mountain is admirably described by Hübner as a mighty buttress
confronting the restless billows of the Southern Ocean. It was
covered, on the morning of our arrival, with the graceful wreaths of
mist which have so often excited the admiration of travellers. A
strong south-east gale was blowing on the occasion. Table Mountain
presents to the dwellers in Cape Town a scene of beauty which changes
from hour to hour. Every veering of the wind brings some new yet ever
effective adjustment of a mantle of vapour, seldom cast aside, which
is sometimes silver, sometimes purple, and from time to time subdued
to a sombre tone by an approaching fall of rain.

In former years many and disastrous were the losses of life and
property in Table Bay. Gales from the N.W. and the NN.E. are frequent
in the winter, and blow occasionally with resistless fury. In the old
sailing days ships caught at anchor in the bay by one of these
terrible storms were doomed to destruction. By the enterprise of the
Colonial Government, and the skilful engineering of Sir John Coode, a
wide area of sheltered anchorage is now afforded. The breakwater has
been extended to a length of 560 yards, and a further extension is far
advanced, which will give a total length of breakwater of 1,500 yards.

A wet dock has been formed, capable of receiving the largest steamers
in the ocean mail service, and broad enough for an ironclad. The
principal dimensions are: length, 540 feet; breadth, 68 feet; depth,
26 feet. An outer harbour, 44 acres in extent, will be gradually
formed under the protection of the breakwater. When these works are
completed, Cape Town will afford advantages to shipping such as are
scarcely exceeded in any port of Great Britain.

Cape Town contains not a few buildings of which the inhabitants of an
older capital might justly be proud. The House of Assembly is a noble
structure. The admirably kept and beautifully situated Observatory,
the banks, the railway station, and the docks are all excellent. The
Botanical Gardens, and the shady avenue dividing them from Government
House, would be an adornment to the finest capital in Europe.

Considerable as are the attractions of Cape Town, they are far
exceeded by the charm of its picturesque suburbs, extending for some
miles along the foot of Table Mountain on its eastern side. The
country is richly wooded, chiefly with our own dear English trees, and
abounds with pleasant buildings, surrounded with gardens bright with
the flowers of the summer of our Northern latitudes. The scene recalls
the most favoured part of Surrey. The cantonments of the troops at
Wynberg, on a well-wooded plateau, have all the lovely features of an
English park.

We made an excursion with Sir Gordon Sprigg and his kind family to
Constantia, where the Government have purchased an old Dutch
manor-house, and are cultivating the vine under the superintendence of
Baron Von Babo, with the view of producing wines on the most approved
European principles. Our host has made one of those interesting and
honourable careers for which colonial life offers so many
opportunities to those who know how to use them. He began life in the
gallery of the House of Commons, as a reporter of debates, in the days
of Cobden. As Premier of a Colonial Parliament, he has had an
opportunity of applying the maxims of political wisdom gathered from a
close observation of our own Parliamentary proceedings.

Another excursion was made to Stellenbosch, a characteristic example
of the old Dutch towns of the Cape Colony. We were under the guidance
of Sir Gordon Sprigg, Mr. Hofmeyr, and Mr. Tudhope, the Colonial
Secretary. The journey from Cape Town occupied an hour by railway.
Stellenbosch is in many ways a perfect reproduction of a country town
in Holland. If we miss the canals, we have the domestic architecture,
the fine avenues running through the principal streets, and the Dutch
characteristics of the people. These features give to this distant
settlement in South Africa, not one of whose inhabitants probably has
ever visited Holland, a markedly national aspect.

On our arrival at Stellenbosch we were driven, under the guidance of
the Mayor, to the University, where a mixed staff of professors,
English and Dutch, are doing excellent work in education. We were
received by a guard of honour, furnished by the students' Volunteer
Corps. Having inspected the University buildings, we drove out to an
old Dutch farm, under a burning sun, and through a country in which
the foliage of the temperate and the tropical zones was closely
intermingled.

The farm we visited comprises an extensive range of buildings, with an
excellent dwelling-house, roomy stables, and the stores, filled with
butts of wine, which are characteristic of the district. The buildings
form a large quadrangle, surrounding a plot of grass shaded by noble
trees. The situation of the farm is very striking. It stands in a deep
valley, green, fertile, and well watered, but completely hemmed in by
mountains of volcanic formation some 4,000 feet in height, beautiful
in form, but entirely devoid of vegetation. Want of rain and the
phylloxera are constant anxieties at the Cape. We observed that the
field labourers were invariably men of colour. Their earnings do not
exceed one shilling per day.

Cape politics have been a fertile source of trouble and anxiety to the
British Government at home. With the necessarily imperfect knowledge
of local circumstances, it is impossible, from London, to deal in a
satisfactory manner with the relations between the Government of a
distant colony and neighbours so little known as the Boers, and
savages so rude as the Kaffirs and Zulus. Our errors of the past will
not be repeated, if only we resolve firmly not to fetter the
discretion of the local Governments, which, in pursuance of a wise
policy, we have called into existence.

[Illustration: St. Helena]

The visit of President Kruger, of the Transvaal, to President Brand,
of the Free State, was a prominent topic at the time of our visit. It
had led to the delivery of a speech by Mr. Kruger, in which he had
declared the determination of the Boers to preserve their complete
independence. In the Cape Colony people are more interested in the
establishment of railway communication with the new gold-fields
within the borders of the Transvaal than in the question of political
union. As yet a certain reluctance is manifested by the Boers to
establish railway communication with the Cape. An English company has
made a railway from Delagoa Bay to the Transvaal frontier, and the
line will shortly be extended to Pretoria. In the meanwhile the people
of the Cape Colony are desirous of extending their system of railways,
already 1,483 miles in length, into the interior. Considerable
discoveries of gold have recently been made within the limits of the
Transvaal, but close to the border, and all the workers at the mines
are Englishmen from the Cape Colony. There is no reason to doubt that
permission to establish railway communication with this newly
discovered gold-mining district will be ultimately granted.

Among the Boers of the Transvaal a large number are friendly to the
English. Once connected with the Cape by railway, and by a Customs
union, which has been much under discussion, the Cape Colony and the
Transvaal will be for all practical purposes of trade united. A
divided administration of government in a country of such wide extent
is an unmixed advantage.

It was particularly gratifying to hear from Mr. Hofmeyr, the head of
the Dutch party in the Cape Parliament, and a most able representative
of the Colony in the late Colonial Conference, how entirely satisfied
his people are to live under British rule as now conducted. The Dutch
colonists at the Cape have no personal relations with Holland. They
look back upon their former connection as an interesting historical
association; but the protection which England affords against the
occupation of the Cape by some other foreign power is a practical
boon, and one greatly valued. There is a party at the Cape which
regards with disfavour the dependence of the present Premier, Sir
Gordon Sprigg, on the Dutch vote, or, as it is called, the Africander
Bond. From another point of view we may hail with satisfaction the
success which an Englishman has achieved in winning the confidence of
the Dutch. While conducting the government to their satisfaction, he
is thoroughly loyal to his own nationality. Baron Hübner speaks in
discouraging tones of our position at the Cape. A much more cheerful
impression was conveyed by the present able Governor, Sir Hercules
Robinson, and by other eminent men whom I had an opportunity of
consulting.

Judging from such indications as came under our personal notice, the
native races, so far from being a source of weakness, are a great
strength to the colony. The Indians in North America, the Maoris in
New Zealand, the aborigines of Australia, have disappeared or dwindled
away before the white man. The Zulus and Kaffirs have proved
themselves capable of adopting and promoting civilisation. They show
in numerous instances a high appreciation of the blessings of
education. They are ready to labour on the farms, on the railways, and
in the mines. They are content to live under the rule of a superior
race.

[Illustration: Longwood, St. Helena]

Material prosperity has been greatly advanced by the discoveries of
gold, the opening up of gold-fields, and still more by the large
amount of wealth which has been derived from the exportation of
diamonds.

The 'Sunbeam' left Cape Town on October 24th. St. Helena was reached
on November 3rd. Like all the islands of the Atlantic, it is of
volcanic formation. It presents to the ocean on every side a
coast-line of precipices, sharp peaks, and gloomy chasms. The
contorted shapes of rock and mountain give a powerful impression of
the tremendous forces of nature in a period of volcanic activity. The
landing-place for St. Helena is under the lee of the island, at
Jamestown, a small town depending entirely on shipping.

Above Jamestown for some 2,000 feet the country is inexpressibly
sterile. At a higher level the soil is watered by the frequent showers
brought up from the ocean by the South-east Trades, and is covered
with a rich carpet of grass. In every sheltered dell the growth of
timber is abundant and varied, combining the trees of the tropics with
those of our cold English latitudes. The water-courses are
innumerable. The bed of every stream is filled, and every bank is
covered with lovely masses of arum-lilies. The scenery of the island
is most beautiful. The Acting Governor occupies a fine country house
surrounded by a noble park. It is sad to visit Longwood, and to
reflect on the intolerable weariness of such a place of confinement to
the victor in many battles, and the former arbiter of the destinies of
Central Europe.

A personal visit to St. Helena is necessary to appreciate the
facilities for the defence of the island. The landing-places are few,
and they are commanded by works of considerable strength. New works
are in progress which will give an extended range of fire to seaward.
The guns are not yet to hand. The expenditure recently authorised,
amounting to some 10,000_l._, appears fully justified in view of the
importance of St. Helena as a coaling station for the Cape route to
the East. As a sanatorium it might be of great value to the ships of
the African Squadron.

The 'Sunbeam' touched at Ascension on November 7th. This barren and
inhospitable volcanic island has presented a singularly unpromising
field of labour to the naval detachment which for many years has been
maintained there. Solid and capacious stores, extensive ranges of
buildings, miles of roads, the tanks, the hospitals on the seashore
and on the mountain, the farm on the peak--a green oasis crowning a
heap of cinders--attest the zeal of a succession of officers and men.
To the naval reformer they give occasion for reflections on the
considerable cost which has been thrown upon the country in the
creation of an establishment which has become practically useless
through the universal use of steam and the suppression of the slave
trade. In the present circumstances St. Helena offers unquestionably
superior advantages for all naval purposes. As a coaling station it is
in a better position, being approximately equidistant between the Cape
and Sierra Leone, and less exposed to rollers, which frequently
interrupt the coaling of ships at Ascension. It is repugnant to
abandon to utter ruin an establishment created with much labour and
expense. To this alternative, however, we must come, unless we are
prepared to put Ascension in a state of defence. The value of the
naval stores is not less than 50,000_l._, and the ample stock of coal
would offer an irresistible temptation to an enemy's cruiser. Three or
four long-range, armour-piercing guns, with a few machine-guns, would
give security against a _coup de main_. We should look to the fleet to
prevent an attack in force.

[Illustration: Ascension. Green Mountain]

Sierra Leone was reached on November 14th. In this section of the
voyage the distance under canvas was 3,327 knots, the average speed
7·7 knots, and the distance under steam 289 knots, with an average
speed of 7 knots. The South-east Trades were light, and balloon canvas
again proved extremely serviceable.

Sierra Leone is an important coaling station, halfway between England
and the Cape. The harbour is large and safe for ships of heavy
tonnage. The works of defence are in active progress. The cost is
estimated at 22,000_l._ for works and 15,000_l._ for armaments. It is
to be regretted that the armament is almost entirely composed of
muzzle-loading rifled guns. In addition to the works now in hand, a
battery is thought desirable to prevent an attack with long-range guns
from seaward. Having admitted Sierra Leone into the list of our
coaling stations of the first class, its defence should be made
complete against a powerful cruiser.

The British settlements on the West Coast of Africa date from 1672,
when the British African Company was first formed. The British
protectorate is estimated to extend over 3,000 square miles. Freetown,
the capital, is built on a peninsula about eighteen miles long.

The town is backed by mountains of considerable elevation, richly
wooded, and beautiful in outline. The streets are laid out with
regularity on ground sloping rapidly to the river. The houses are of
wood, and the roadways are unpaved. The population is 37,000. The
throng at the landing-place has a decided family resemblance to any
similar assemblage of the negro race in the West Indies. The general
aspect is cheerful and free from care. The washerwomen, in Manchester
print gowns of gorgeous colour, are conspicuous and grotesque
personages.

At Sierra Leone the Church of England is strongly supported by the
Church Missionary Society. It has a large body of adherents, and is
the see of a Bishop. It has a college, affiliated to the Durham
University, which has turned out coloured students of distinguished
ability. My friend Mr. Blyden, author of 'Christianity, Islam, and the
Negro Race,' is a distinguished leader of the higher culture among the
negro race.

The capabilities of the coloured races are nowhere seen to greater
advantage than at Sierra Leone. They supply the official staff of the
Government. A coloured barrister of marked ability is the leader of
the Bar, and makes a professional income of 3,000_l._ a year.

[Illustration: Sierra Leone]

The day seems drawing near when it will be no longer necessary to
send Englishmen to administer the government in a climate so often
fatal to the health of the European. The trade of Sierra Leone, in
common with that of the Gold Coast generally, consists mainly in the
exportation of the palm kernel, from which an oil much used in the
manufacture of soap and candles is extracted. Marseilles and Hamburg
are the chief centres of this business. The imports are mainly
Manchester goods and spirits. The trade has fallen off in recent years
owing to the constant warfare among the tribes bordering on the
colony.

The greatest excitement prevailed in Sierra Leone at the time of our
visit. An expedition was being sent to punish a neighbouring tribe for
frequent deeds of violence to British subjects. It achieved a rapid
success. The forces engaged consisted of the men of the West India
regiment and some seamen of the ships. Sir Francis de Winton was in
command, supported by Major Piggott and Captain Brown. Sierra Leone is
the headquarters of the West India regiment stationed on the West
Coast of Africa. Their number is 400. The barracks are a large and
airy range of buildings, in a commanding situation on the heights
above the town.

We breakfasted with the Acting Governor. An old fort has been adapted
as the official residence. Its thick walls, originally built as a
defence against the bullets of an enemy, give some protection from the
heat of the African sun. The wide ramparts afford a shady walk,
commanding lovely views of the town and harbour beneath, and the noble
amphitheatre of mountains above. Sierra Leone would be delightful but
for its climate and the fevers which it brings.

The 'Sunbeam' left Sierra Leone at sunset on November 15th under
steam. The North-east Trades were picked up in latitude 11° N. A call
of a few hours was made at Porto Praya on November 19th. The French
frigate of instruction for cadets, the 'Iphigénie,' a heavily rigged
ship of 4,000 tons displacement, had anchored on the previous day.
Porto Praya wears the air of decay so commonly observable in foreign
settlements under the Portuguese flag. The country is fertile, but
progress is checked by the great weight of taxation, the public income
being misapplied in keeping the unemployed in unprofitable idleness.
We noticed a considerable number of able-bodied men hoeing weeds in
the public square.

We found three kind Englishmen leading a life of exile, in charge of
the station of the West African Telegraph Company. St. Vincent, the
only island of the Cape de Verdes which has any trade, is a coaling
station much used by steamers on the South American route.

On the day after leaving Porto Praya the 'Sunbeam' lay becalmed under
the lee of St. Antonio. The anchorage used by us in 1876 was in view,
as was also the house and plantation of which a drawing is given in
my dear wife's 'Voyage in the Sunbeam.' There were many sad
reminiscences as the former track of the 'Sunbeam' was crossed. On
November 29th, without warning from the barometer, a strong gale
commenced from the east, and lasted without intermission for four
days. Under low canvas and close-hauled, the 'Sunbeam' gallantly
struggled forward, making 130 knots, on November 29th, and on the
three following days 112, 57, and 92 knots respectively. While hove-to
in this gale the canvas was severely punished. All the lower sails
were more or less damaged, and sail was reduced to storm trysails. Two
large barques were passed lying-to under lower main topsails and mizen
storm staysails. At dawn on December 2nd Fayal was sighted.

[Illustration: Barque Hove-to]

The gale was blowing dead on shore at Horta, and it was preferable to
run for shelter under the lee of the island. As we closed the land,
grand effects were produced by the clouds and mist driving before the
gale down the green slopes of the mountains to the dark cliffs of lava
and basalt, on which the mighty surges of the Atlantic were breaking
into foam. Late in the afternoon of December 2nd the 'Sunbeam' gained
the northern entrance to the channel which divides Fayal and Pico. An
attempt was made to reach Horta, but it was found that a heavy sea was
running into the anchorage. It was a pitchy night, and we determined
to wait outside till daylight, standing across to Pico under steam for
shelter from the wind and sea.

At dawn on the 3rd the moon was still shining on the northern face of
the noble mountain, towering in solitary grandeur to a height of 7,800
feet. The snowy peak stood up from its mantle of clouds, and took the
rosy hues of the morning. An hour's steaming carried us into the
anchorage at Fayal, where we remained through the day of December 3rd.
The passage from Sierra Leone to Fayal had been accomplished, with
adverse winds during a considerable part of the voyage, in 16-1/2
days, 2,005 knots being covered under sail at an average speed of 6·3
knots, and 460 miles under steam at an average speed of 6 knots.

[Illustration: Pico]

We found several sailing vessels at anchor in the roadstead of Horta.
One British vessel had come in for provisions, another to repair a
damaged rudder. A barque hailing from Boston was one of a line which
carries on a regular service under canvas between the Azores and
America. They depend chiefly on passengers, who make the cruise for
the sake of health. The Norwegian flag was represented by one most
crazy wooden ship, 70 years old, and by another of nearly equal
antiquity, and in a like condition of unseaworthiness. The captains of
both the Norwegians were hoping that the surveyors might condemn them
as unfit for further service.

[Illustration: Bearing up for Shelter]

Fayal offers especially favourable opportunities for the obsequies of
an unseaworthy ship insured beyond her value. The danger to life from
the attempt to navigate in vessels no longer fit to contend with storm
and tempest can only be removed by compelling the owners to bear some
share of the pecuniary risk.

The local prosperity depends mainly on shipping. Business is on the
decline. The opening of the Suez Canal, the introduction of powerful
iron and steel built ocean liners, which suffer comparatively little
from the effects of heavy weather, and, as the people of Fayal allege,
the legislation promoted by Mr. Plimsoll, which has withdrawn their
best customers, the weakly and unsound vessels, from active service at
sea, have combined to produce a marked diminution in the number of
ships calling at the port. The whalers under the United States flag
still make it their headquarters in the summer season. During the
present year nine have been seen at the anchorage at the same time.
Exciting chases in pursuit of the sperm whale sometimes take place in
the channel between Fayal and Pico. Numerous whale-boats are kept on
the island, and are instantly launched when a whale is seen near the
shore. A breakwater is now in progress at Horta, but the work is
proceeding with the customary _festina lente_ method of the
Portuguese.

Having taken in water and provisions, the voyage was resumed on the
evening of December 3rd, with a favourable wind from the SS.E. At
midnight the wind shifted suddenly to the north-east, and on the
following morning the 'Sunbeam' bore up, before a severe gale, for
shelter under the lee of Terceira. Late in the day the veil of
lowering clouds was drawn aside, and the sun descending to the west,
lighted up the landscape with a flood of golden light.

Terceira is of volcanic formation. Its highest ridges attain an
elevation of 4,000 feet. The crests of the hills are clothed with
forests of pine and rich pastures. At a lower level the indications of
laborious cultivation are seen in range upon range of terraced gardens
and vineyards. The island is densely inhabited, and the numerous white
houses give an air of cheerfulness and prosperity to the scene, which
recalls the more familiar charms of the Bay of Naples and the Straits
of Messina.

On December 5th, the gale subsided to a calm, and the voyage homewards
was commenced under steam. In a few hours the engines broke down, and
sail was made to a light breeze from the north-east. On the succeeding
days favourable winds were experienced from the westward. On the 11th
the wind shifted to the south-east, accompanied by drizzling rain and
fog, which rendered observations impossible, and which continued until
the Scilly Island lights were sighted in a fortunate lifting of the
haze, on the evening of the 12th. The run from the Scilly Islands to
Spithead was made at the rate of 11-1/2 knots an hour, before a
south-westerly gale.

The total distance from Fayal, including the call at Terceira, was
1,440 miles, of which sixty only were under steam. The average speed
was 7 knots. The 'Sunbeam' entered Portsmouth Harbour at noon on
December 14.




PART II.

(A) _ABSTRACT OF LOG OF 'SUNBEAM,' PREPARED BY THOMAS ALLNUTT
BRASSEY._

(B) _OUTLINE OF VOYAGE, REPRINTED FROM 'THE TIMES' OF DECEMBER
15TH, 1887._