RENEW! RENEW!!

Remember that every yearly subscriber, either new or renewing, sending
us $2, receives a splendid new map of the United States and
Canada--58×41 inches--FREE. Or, if preferred, one of the books offered
in another column. It is not necessary to wait until a subscription
expires before renewing.



1841.        1884.

THE PRAIRIE FARMER

PROSPECTUS FOR 1884.

SEE INDUCEMENTS OFFERED

SUBSCRIBE NOW.

For forty-three years THE PRAIRIE FARMER has stood at the front in
agricultural journalism. It has kept pace with the progress and
development of the country, holding its steady course through all these
forty-three years, encouraging, counseling, and educating its thousands
of readers. It has labored earnestly in the interest of all who are
engaged in the rural industries of the country, and that it has labored
successfully is abundantly shown by the prominence and prestige it has
achieved, and the hold it has upon the agricultural classes.

Its managers are conscious from comparison with other journals of its
class, and from the uniform testimony of its readers, that it is
foremost among the farm and home papers of the country. It will not be
permitted to lose this proud position; we shall spare no efforts to
maintain its usefulness and make it indispensable to farmers,
stock-raisers, feeders, dairymen, horticulturists, gardeners, and all
others engaged in rural pursuits. It will enter upon its forty-fourth
year under auspices, in every point of view, more encouraging than ever
before in its history. Its mission has always been, and will continue to
be--

To discuss the most approved practices in all agricultural and
horticultural pursuits.

To set forth the merits of the best breeds of domestic animals, and to
elucidate the principles of correct breeding and management.

To further the work of agricultural and horticultural organization.

To advocate industrial education in the correct sense of the term.

To lead the van in the great contest of the people against monopolies
and the unjust encroachments of capital.

To discuss the events and questions of the day without fear or favor.

To provide information concerning the public domain, Western soil,
climate, water, railroads, schools, churches, and society.

To answer inquiries on all manner of subjects coming within its sphere.

To furnish the latest and most important industrial news at home and
abroad.

To give full and reliable crop, weather, and market reports.

To present the family with pure, choice, and interesting literature.

To amuse and instruct the young folks.

To gather and condense the general news of the day.

To be, in brief, an indispensable and unexceptionable farm and home
companion for the people of the whole country.

The style and form of the paper are now exactly what they should be. The
paper used is of superior quality. The type is bold and clear. The
illustrations are superb. The departments are varied and carefully
arranged. The editorial force is large and capable. The list of
contributors is greatly increased, and embraces a stronger array of
talent than is employed on any similar paper in this country. We
challenge comparison with any agricultural journal in the land.

THE PRAIRIE FARMER is designed for all sections of the country. In
entering upon the campaign of 1884, we urge all patrons and friends to
continue their good works in extending the circulation of our paper. On
our part we promise to leave nothing undone that it is possible for
faithful, earnest work--aided by money and every needed mechanical
facility--to do to make the paper in every respect still better than it
has ever been before.



SPECIAL NOTICE

To each Subscriber who will remit us $2 00 between now and February 1st,
1884, we will mail a copy of THE PRAIRIE FARMER FOR ONE YEAR, AND ONE
OF OUR NEW STANDARD TIME COMMERCIAL MAPS OF THE UNITED STATES AND
CANADA--showing all the Counties, Railroads, and Principal Towns up to
date. This comprehensive map embraces all the country from the Pacific
Coast to Eastern New Brunswick, and as far north as the parallel of 52
deg., crossing Hudson's Bay. British Columbia; Manitoba, with its many
new settlements; and the line of the Canadian Pacific Railway, completed
and under construction, are accurately and distinctly delineated. It
extends so far south as to include Key West and more than half of the
Republic of Mexico. It is eminently adapted for home, school, and office
purposes. The retail price of the Map alone is $2.00. Size. 58x41
inches. Scale, about sixty miles to one inch.



READ THIS.

ANOTHER SPECIAL OFFER.

[Illustration]

"THE LITTLE DETECTIVE."

WEIGHS 1/4 OZ. TO 25 LBS.

Every housekeeper ought to have this very useful scale. The weight of
article bought or sold may readily be known. Required proportions in
culinary operations are accurately ascertained. We have furnished
hundreds of them to subscribers, and they give entire satisfaction.
During January, 1884, to any person sending us THREE SUBSCRIBERS, at
$2.00 each, we will give one of these scales, and to each of the three
subscribers Ropp's Calculator, No. 1.



The sorghum-growers of Kansas are invited to meet at Topeka, the second
Wednesday in February. The Kansas wool-growers meet on the 15th of this
month.


Do not forget the Mississippi Valley Horticultural Society meeting at
Kansas City, January 22-25. This will prove one of the important
horticultural events of the year.


If any of our friends have Vols. I to XIV, and the years 1861, 1863 to
1873, and 1875 to 1883, of THE PRAIRIE FARMER, they would like to
dispose of, we should be glad to hear from them.


The fifteenth annual exhibition of the Montana Agricultural, Mineral and
Mechanical Association, will be held at Helena, September 8th-13th,
1884. President, S.H. Crounse; Francis Pope, Secretary.


The twenty-fifth annual fair of the Linn County (Iowa) Agricultural and
Mechanical Society will be held on the fair grounds at Cedar Rapids,
September 9, 10, 11, and 12, 1884. C.G. Greene, Secretary, Cedar Rapids.


If you are in need of a first-class wind mill, find out all about the
Nichols' Centennial as advertised in our columns by Nichols & Daggett,
and see if you do not think it just fills the bill. It is strong,
durable, steady, and it takes and uses all the wind there is going.


Hon. E.B. David, member of the Illinois State Board of Agriculture from
Mercer county, made a brief call at THE PRAIRIE FARMER office last week.
From him we gathered the facts regarding the late meeting of the Board
mentioned elsewhere. Mr. David has long been a staunch friend of THE
PRAIRIE FARMER, and his call was a very welcome one.


Immigration at the port of New York fell off last year to the amount of
66,405 persons, or about 14-1/2 per cent from that of 1882. The total
number landed this last year was 388,342. The greatest decrease was from
Sweden and Russia. From England came 30,818; Ireland, 52,555; Germany,
164,036; Italy, 24,101; Norway, 11,536; Hungary, 11,448; Switzerland,
9,447; Denmark, 7,770; Bohemia, 4,652. Last year the arrivals were
182,893. It is not unlikely that there will be a greater falling off
this year for times are not sufficiently promising here to greatly
stimulate emigration from Europe.


The Crystal Palace Company, of London advertise the holding for six
months, from April 3 next, of an "exhibition of arts, manufactures, and
scientific, agricultural, and industrial products," and invite the
participation of American exhibitors. A court in a central position on
the main floor has been set aside for expected American contributions,
and the ordinary charge for space is two shillings per square foot. This
will probably seem a trifle steep to American exhibitors who are not
accustomed to pay for space in their own exposition buildings.


Last year was not a very surprising one in the matter of railway
extension within the limits of Illinois. The report of the Railway and
Warehouse Commissioners will show that but 135 miles of track were laid.
But there are 10,456 miles of track in use in the State. The companies
among these lines numbering sixty-four, operate 29,370 miles of road or
nearly 20,000 miles outside of Illinois. The total net income of these
companies was $81,720,256 and the dividends amounted to $36,374,474. In
1882 the dividends amounted to but $29,000,000. The average freight
charges in 1883 were 1.09 cents per mile, while the year before they
averaged 1.20 cents, hence it must follow that the amount of traffic
greatly increased over that of 1882.


A lecture course for farmers at the Nebraska Agricultural College, will
be given from February 4-15, by the regular instructors in the college.
One or more lectures will be given on the following topics: Breeds of
cattle and swine; breeding, improving, and care of stock; care of farm
machinery; health on the farm; adulteration of food; economical farming;
tame grapes; ensilage; what to feed; meteorology and plant growth;
sorghum-growth and manufacture; horticulture; principles of pruning; the
digestive organs of domestic animals; injurious insects. A number of
leading farmers of the State have been invited to lecture upon their
specialties. All the facilities of illustration and study owned by the
college will be at the disposal of the students attending the course.
These include several compound microscopes, a good agricultural
library, meteorological apparatus, six breeds of cattle and four of
swine, orchard, nursery, arboretum, vineyard, etc., etc. A limited
number will be boarded at the college farm for a price not to exceed
three dollars per week. Persons attending will be aided in securing
cheap board in the city. Persons expecting to attend or desiring further
information should write to S.R. Thompson, Dean Agricultural College,
Lincoln, Neb.


Some of our readers may wish to paste this item in their scrap books. It
cost to run the United States Government last year the sum of
$251,428,117, expended as follows: To supply deficiencies, $9,853,869;
legislative, executive, and judicial expenses, $20,332,908; sundry civil
expenses, $25,425,479; support of the army, $27,032,099; naval service,
$14,903,559; Indian service, $5,219,604; rivers and harbors,
$18,988,875; forts and fortifications, $375,000; military academy,
$335,557; post-office department, $1,902,178; pensions, $116,000,000;
consular and diplomatic service, $1,256,655; agricultural department,
$427,280; expenses District of Columbia, $3,496,060. The interest on the
public debt amounted to $59,160,131 and the amount of principal paid off
was $134,178,756. The receipts from internal revenue were $144,720,368,
and from custom duties $214,706,496.


The Minnesota State Horticultural Society will hold its seventeenth
annual meeting at the College of Agriculture, Minneapolis, four days,
beginning with January 15th, and with the Minnesota State Forestry
Association on the 18th. A cordial invitation is given to all persons
interested in horticulture and forestry to be present. A large number of
papers and reports are to be read, followed by discussions. These
reports are by persons who possess a thorough practical acquaintance
with the subjects presented, including such men as Peter M. Gideon, J.C.
Plumb, Dr. T.H. Hoskins, Prof. C.W. Hall, Prof. J.L. Budd, Dr. F.B.
Hough, H.J. Joly, J.F. Williams, and others. A number of premiums are
offered for apples, grapes, plants, and flowers, vegetables, seeds, and
miscellaneous objects. John S. Harris, of La Crescent, is President, and
Oliver Gibbs, Jr., of Lake City, is Secretary.




ILLINOIS STATE BOARD.


The Illinois State Board of Agriculture held a business session in
Springfield last week. All the members were present at one time or
another during the meeting. The premium list was revised for the fair of
1884. The premiums for speed were somewhat increased over last year. In
cattle sweepstakes classes it was decided that no animals can be allowed
to compete except the winners of a first prize in other classes in which
they had been entered, except in the case of the grand sweepstakes, to
which will be permitted animals not previously entered for any prize.

The Board is to make a laudable attempt to stimulate corn culture and to
benefit the corn growers of the State. It offers $100 for the best
bushel (ears) of corn grown in each of the three grand divisions of the
State, and a second prize of $50 for the next best sample in the three
divisions. The premium samples are to become the property of the Board,
and the winners of prize premiums must deliver on cars directed to the
agricultural rooms, Springfield, twenty-five bushels (ears) of same
variety that shall equal in merit the premium bushel. The winners of the
second premiums must send the samples and fifteen bushels of same
variety and of equal quality. The premiums will not be paid until the
comparisons of the premium corn with the larger lots are made by a
committee of the Board at its winter meeting in January next. The corn
thus donated to the Board will be distributed to farmers throughout the
State for planting in 1885.

Premiums are to be offered for tools, implements and appurtenances used
in the coal mining and handling industry of the State.

Premiums for poultry have been increased, and an expert will be selected
to do all the judging in the poultry department.

The chicken exhibit at the Fat Stock Show will not be continued.

The committee of dairymen appointed at the late meeting of the Illinois
Dairymen's Association did not present themselves at the State Board
meeting to confer about holding a dairy exhibit either at the State Fair
or the Fat Stock Show, as instructed to do. No explanation of the
failure was made. The State Board, however, to leave nothing undone to
establish its desire to meet the dairymen half way or more, appointed a
committee consisting of Messrs. David, Chester, and Griffith, to confer
with the DeKalb committee, in Chicago, at some convenient time to be
agreed upon.

It was decided to hold the next Illinois State Fair at Chicago the week
beginning September 8th, and the Fat Stock Show at the Exposition
Building, Chicago, beginning November 11th.




SORGHUM AT WASHINGTON.


Prof. Wiley, of the Department of Agriculture at Washington, will soon
issue his report upon the sorghum business of 1883. Newspaper
correspondents have been permitted to make a digest of the report. He
pronounces erroneous the prevalent impression that every farmer may
become his own sugar-maker. Sorghum, unlike sugar beet, contains various
non-crystallizable sugars, the separation of which demands much skill
and scientific knowledge. Sorghum-sugar will have to be made in large
factories. The existing factories have shown that it can be made, but
how profitably or unprofitably can not be stated by Prof. Wiley, who
suggests that farmers near factories may, in effect, make their own
sugar by raising the cane and trading it at factories for sugar. Cane
giving sixty pounds of sugar per ton ought to bring the farmer
thirty-five pounds, the rest of the sugar and molasses going to the
manufacturer to pay expenses and yield profit. The profitableness of
making sugar from sorghum depends largely on utilizing all waste
products. The scums and sediments make manure hardly inferior to guano.
Bagasse, or crushed cane, can be turned into manure by being thrown into
hog-pens, as at Rio Grande, N.J., or it will make a fair quality of
printing paper. It is not economical to burn it. If the manufacture of
sorghum-sugar is proved to be profitable, it will result in supplying to
a large extent our demand for sugar, but as sorghum makes a great deal
more molasses in proportion to sugar than sugar-cane does, the Professor
concludes that when there is enough sugar there will be a great deal
more molasses than can be disposed of.

Prof. Wiley has made experimentally some fair samples of rum and alcohol
from sorghum molasses. Under favorable circumstances one gallon of
molasses weighing eleven pounds would give 2.75 pounds absolute alcohol,
3.03 pounds of 90 per cent, and 5.5 whisky or rum. Thus each gallon of
molasses would give nearly half a gallon of commercial alcohol and two
thirds of a gallon of whisky or rum. As it has been abundantly proved,
he says, that sugar can be made from sorghum, the Government should make
no further experiments in this direction. Prof. Wiley has tried the
diffusion process, and finds it yields 20 per cent more sugar, but at a
somewhat higher cost than grinding. The Government, he thinks, should
purchase machinery for large experiments in the diffusion process, and
should raise its cane somewhere else than near Washington, as land there
is expensive and not adapted to the purpose. The Government should also
make arrangements with agricultural colleges or other agencies in
various States for experimenting with sorghum-culture to determine what
parts of the country are most favorable to the culture of
sugar-producing plants. Prof. Wiley suggests in each State the trial of
two acres divided into ten plots--five for sorghum, four for beets, and
one for corn--to test for purposes of comparison the general fertility
of the soil and the character of the season. The Government ought to
carry on for a series of years the process of selection of sorghum seed
in order to secure an improvement in the quality of the cane.




THE COLD SPELL.


The cold weather of last week seems to have extended over nearly the
entire North American Continent. Nothing for severity has been known to
equal it during a long series of years. East, West, North, and South it
was all the same, differing in degree of course, but uniformly colder
than scarce ever known in the same latitude.

The greatest loss to stock so far as heard from was in that in transit
to market. On some of the roads the losses were heavy. A dispatch from
Independence, Mo., says a train of fifteen cars, loaded with mules from
Texas via the Iron Mountain and Southern road, arrived there on the 5th,
when it was discovered that at least 100 of the mules had frozen to
death, and the others were in a freezing condition. The mules were two
years old and direct from grass. They had been three days without food.

Many trains arriving at Chicago had scores of frozen animals.

No great disaster is yet reported from the far West or from Minnesota
and Dakota. Still there must have been great suffering not only among
the dumb brutes, but among human beings as well. It is fortunate that
polar waves do not visit us more frequently.

The effect upon fruit, buds, trees, and shrubs is not yet ascertained.
It will be a marvel if many localities are not barren of fruit of nearly
all kinds next year.

THE PRAIRIE FARMER will be very glad if its readers will favor it with
their ideas and the results of their observations in regard to the
damage of all sorts done by the intense cold of the first week of the
year.




QUESTIONS ANSWERED.


William Miller and F. Myrick, Peotone, Ill.--1. What are the laws in
regard to drainage passed by the last Legislature? 2. Who is the Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court and who his associates?

Answer--1. This is a question probably neither lawyers nor judges in
Illinois are competent to answer. It you doubt it procure from the clerk
of your County Court a copy of the public laws of 1883 and read the
fifteen pages relating to drainage. 2. The Chief Justice of the United
States Supreme Court is M.R. Waite, and his associates are S.F. Miller,
S.J. Field, J.P. Bradley, J.M. Harlan. W.B. Woods, S. Mathews, H. Gray,
and S. Blatchford.

Samuel Snodgrass, Meade Co., Ky.--1. I have some large, old, and
apparently healthy, apple trees, but they are comparatively barren. What
can I do for them? 2. I have others which appear to be going to decay
and will soon die. Had I better anticipate their death by cutting them
down, or try to save them as I would like to do, for their associations
with the past.

Answer--1. We know no better course for you to take than to dig a deep
ditch all around the trees, say three feet wide and as many deep, and
just within the outer reach of the limbs, and fill this in with half the
earth removed and the other half made up of vegetable matter, ashes,
road dirt, and such manure from the barn and stable as you can spare.
Having done this make an arrangement about each tree that will retain
all the rainfall which comes down to the earth beneath and collect as
much more from the open spaces about as possible. 2. Your old and
decaying trees may be saved if decay has not gone too far. But the
remedy is an heroic one, and rather expensive as you will find. First
treat the decaying trees as described for the healthy ones, with the
exception you add a greater proportion of fertilizers and manure when
you fill in the ditch with half new material. Then (and all this work
should be done, as it can readily be done, in your latitude during the
cold months when vegetation is at a stand) give the old trees a thorough
pruning, even going as far as to remove 90 per cent of all the leaf and
fruit buds on the tree. Then wait for results, looking for nothing more
than a new growth of wood the first year, but fruitfulness thereafter
and a new lease of life. But remember as in the first place, care must
be taken to supply abundant water, indeed as much more as the average
rainfall, so much being absolutely necessary to afford the roots the
amount of manurial plant food, in solution, the new departure demands.
Every fruit-grower knows when a dwarf pear has borne a certain number of
crops, fruit buds cease to form and the tree becomes nearly barren. If
at this stage the dwarf is deprived of every bud, whether fruit or leaf,
and the limbs are left to resemble bare sticks, and at the same time the
earth about the roots is fortified with wood ashes and well rotted
manure, a handsome growth of branches will be made the first year and a
crop of fruit result the second. This, the writer has tried with
perfectly satisfactory results twice on the same dwarfs, and has others
which, having been submitted to this course of treatment, in the fall of
1882, made a handsome growth in 1883, and have set fruit buds for a good
crop in 1884. The life of an average apple tree in Illinois is scarcely
more than 35 or 40 years; but there is no doubt if, when they begin to
show signs of decrepitude or decay, they are treated as above, they may
be made to live and bear fruit for perhaps a hundred years.




AMERICAN ASH.


There are five well-known species of this genus (Fraxinus Americana),
and they occupy an important place as valuable timber trees. This is
especially true of the white ash, more commonly called the American ash.
Of this tree the late Arthur Bryant, Sr., said in his Book on Trees: "It
is one of the most valuable and worthy of culture for the quality of its
wood and the rapidity of its growth. When full grown it is one of the
largest of the trees of our forests. * * * * The prairie soils of Iowa
and Central and Northern Illinois are well adapted to the growth of the
white ash."




WAYSIDE NOTES.

BY A MAN OF THE PRAIRIE.


It is a strange and almost an unheard of thing for any one to say a good
word for the "tree peddler" but I am going to say it if it breaks the
heart of every horticultural baby in the land. Since a time to which the
memory of man runneth not back, the poor "tree peddler" has been abused
and maligned by horticultural speakers and writers. In conventions he
has been ridiculed and denounced. Every cross-road nursery-man not
possessed of stock sufficient to warrant a line of advertising even in
his local paper, nor business force enough to send an agent through his
own neighborhood to take orders for trees, has spoken in a horticultural
meeting or written a letter to his favorite paper, warning the farmers
against the wiles of the oily tongued fellow with colored fruit plates,
specimens of preserved fruits, and an order book for trees, shrubs, and
vines. And I think I have known of some of the big fish in the nursery
business who with one end of their tongues have lashed some other big
fish in the same business for employing irresponsible agents to sell
stock for them, while with the other end they were commanding a small
army of the same class of agents to go forth into all the world and
preach the gospel of tree planting and--sell trees. Others have sold and
continue to sell trees to peddlers without limit, for cash, and of any
and all varieties called for, while they denounced the system of
peddling in unmeasured terms. Now it is just as possible for a tree
peddler to be an honest man as it is for the man who grows trees to sell
to be honest. I do not say that all men belonging to either class are
honest. It would be equally absurd to say that all of either class are
dishonest. I despise the quack, the liar, the deceiver in any business,
and I have no respect or love for the man who will sell worthless
varieties of trees or wrongly named varieties, knowingly. Honesty here
as elsewhere is the best policy. But here is a fact, as I believe: It is
better to plant an inferior tree than none at all, and I know of
neighbors who would go down into their graves without ever planting a
tree if some persuasive peddler had not talked it into them to do so,
and these same neighbors now have quite respectable orchards. Here is
another fact: One half the orders sent to nursery-men by farmers during
the past twenty years have called for varieties utterly worthless for
the localities in which they were to be planted. And the tree peddler
often gratifies the purchaser by pretending to sell to him a sort which
he has made up his mind to have because he knows it was good in his old
home a thousand miles away. But the peddler, not having this variety,
and knowing that if he did have it it would prove worthless, substitutes
a Ben Davis or some other approved variety, and it goes into the ground
and in due time produces an abundance of excellent fruit. In this case
the peddler does a really good thing. If nursery-men will stop
propagating everything but varieties adapted to the country and the
markets, and many of them are doing this, the tree peddler will be
powerless for mischief--will in fact become a great public benefactor.
But so long as nursery-men will continue to grow and sell worthless
varieties, and so long as the people will remain in ignorance regarding
adaptability, so long will the dishonest peddler remain an unmitigated
nuisance and fraud. In brief these three things are wanted: Intelligent
and honest nurserymen; orchard planters who either know what varieties
are best for them to have, or who are willing to trust the selection to
the afore-mentioned intelligent and honest nursery-men; and third,
first-class talkers, intelligent as to varieties and methods of culture,
who buy only of the intelligent and honest nursery-men, to go through
the country and sell trees. It is unfortunate that it takes so many
words to express what I wanted to say, but I am done at last.



I have got it! Yes, all the ice I want is now white for the harvest in
our "artificial" pond. It is the only thing that reconciles me to this
fierce visit of polar weather. As soon as a trifle milder wave gets
along our way we shall carefully store away sufficient for the year's
use. By the way, where are the poor deluded woodchucks, muskrats, and
Old Settlers, who told us we were to bask in mild etherialness all
winter long? I am disgusted this morning, with the mercury at 30 degrees
below zero, and still going down, at the whole batch of them, and with
Vennor and Hazen, and all professionally weatherwise men and things. I
have heard of little real suffering in my neighborhood from the cold,
among either humans or brutes. Doubtless, when the weather moderates
and people get out to tell each other all about the cold spell, there
will be many true tales of intense suffering and more than the usual
romancing about the terrible week. And then the Oldest Inhabitant will
thaw out, and with all the self-satisfaction that superior age and
experience crown him with, will tell how much colder it was in such and
such a year, until we wish this little spell had sealed his memory and
mouth, for we do all take a great pride in living in a time that excels
all other times, albeit, if it be only in a storm or a freeze. But in
these things the early times of the Old Settler can never be excelled,
no matter in what century he flourishes. He is always master of the
situation. His experiences are like those of no other settler that ever
lived and died. With him, imagination has gradually usurped the place of
experience and its isothermal dips and dodges carry him through hotter
and through colder seasons than are marked down in any Standard Time
PRAIRIE FARMER, or any other map or chart in existence. But for this
weather business I should like to live next door to the Old Settler, for
he is generally truthful, good, kind, full of practical knowledge and
common sense.




LETTER FROM CHAMPAIGN.


We are having some very sharp winter weather, and sleighing as
uninterruptedly good since the 20th of December as I ever remember. This
morning, January 5th, the mercury reported 28 degrees below zero at 5:30
A.M., and 20 degrees below at 10 o'clock. This is the coldest since
January 29th, 1873, when 36 degrees below was recorded at the Industrial
University here, and 42 degrees below by the spirit thermometer at one
of the Jacksonville institutions. But the wind was west at that date,
and it is so to-day, showing our coldest weather comes from that
direction rather than from the northwest or north. The explanation I
suppose to be, those great fountains of cold storage, the Colorado
mountains, lie west and southwest of us, and are several hundred miles
nearer than the lower peaks and ranges northwest.



It is an interesting and important truth to know at this time that an
unexpected source for seed corn has been discovered here at home. It has
been ascertained by experiment and investigation that the early frosted
corn, which has been allowed to stand in the field, has a sound germ,
and though shrunken, will make fairly good seed, whereas corn which was
not frosted till late in October, and ripened in most respects, save
drying out, is wholly unfit for seed, having had the cells of the
kernels ruptured by the freezings it has been subjected to. This rupture
of cells the grain of the frosted corn escaped, having parted with the
surplus water of vegetation before hard weather set in. However, the
early frosted and shrunken cane fit for seed may be confined to this
county or neighborhood, or a narrow area, and therefore I advise every
one who thinks of making use of it to ascertain for himself, by the
usual methods, whether the germ is sound or not.



Several parties have written me--one from Missouri, another from
Indiana, and a third from Kentucky, that they have seed corn for sale,
cheap and in quantity. I have no doubt of it, and I have accordingly
advised each to advertise it in THE PRAIRIE FARMER, if they are really
desirous of selling, stating briefly what variety, where grown, and at
what price. I should be glad to advertise it for them gratuitously, but
the contract of THE PRAIRIE FARMER with its contributors contains a
clause to the effect that "they shall neither use its columns to grind
their own axes nor the axes of anybody else." With the recourse of early
frosted corn to go to, and the assistance of appropriately selected seed
from abroad, the gross mistakes and disappointments of 1883 are pretty
certain to be avoided in 1884.



No doubt many who are more or less familiar with the Reports on Hog
Cholera in the official publication of the Department of Agriculture,
ask themselves why Dr. Detmers is singled out by Frenchmen as the sole
authority on swine diseases, when his colleagues of the commission, Dr.
Salmon and Laws went nearly as far as he did in their extravagant
statements. But the prominence Dr. Detmers has obtained in the
estimation of Frenchmen is now explained in this: At a late sitting of
the French Academy of Sciences that eminent savant, Pasteur, referred to
him and his investigations in flattering terms. Giving an account of the
discovery of the microbe which causes the rouget of swine in France,
Pasteur said: "Respect for historic truth compels me to state, however,
that in the month of March, 1882, the microbe of the rouget was
discovered at Chicago, in America, by Professor Detmers, in a series of
investigations which did great honor to their author." With the
indorsement of one of the most eminent scientists in the world, before a
body equally distinguished, Dr. Detmers may find some compensation in
being singled out as the scape goat for an unfortunate commission which
has cost the country many millions.

    B.F.J.



REMEMBER _that $2.00 pays for_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER _one year, and the
subscriber gets a copy of_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER COUNTY MAP OF THE UNITED
STATES, FREE! _This is the most liberal offer ever made by any
first-class weekly agricultural paper in this country._




POULTRY NOTES.

Poultry-raisers. Write For Your Paper.


A DUCK FARM.


You will not find it on the map because it is not mentioned there, and I
shall not tell you where it is because I promised the little woman who
owns it, and who gave me permission to tell other women what she had
done, that I would not mention her name or the name of the place where
she lives and works. How did I happen to find her? I didn't find her; it
just happened--i.e., if anything ever happens in this queer old world of
ours. We bumped our heads together once in a railway accident, and we
have been firm friends ever since.

Her farm is only a bit of land, some thirty acres, but for the last five
years she has made from ten to twelve hundred dollars a year from it,
and most of the money came from the ducks. She sells eggs for hatching,
and ducks for breeding and for exhibition, but the main object is ducks
and feathers for market. She thinks ducks are less trouble and quite as
profitable as hens. She keeps twenty-four stock ducks, eight males and
sixteen females, through the winter. The ducks commence laying from the
middle of February to the first of March, and lay from 100 to 125 eggs
each in a season. The first laid eggs are set to get ducks to sell for
breeding stock and for the early summer market. For this purpose the
eggs from the ducks that are two or three years old are used, and when
hatched the ducklings from those eggs are marked by punching a small
round hole in the web of the feet. She thinks, and rightly, too, that
the eggs from the older ducks procure larger and more vigorous birds
than the first eggs from the young ducks.

As soon as the weather gets warm enough to ship without danger of
chilling on the way, she sells eggs for hatching at $3 per dozen, and
finds no difficulty in disposing of as many as she cares to spare at
that price. Her sales of eggs for hatching amount to about $100 yearly.
Besides the eggs used and sold for hatching she generally sends a
twenty-four-dozen case to New York just before Easter. These large,
finely-shaped, pure white eggs sell readily for Easter eggs, and bring
from forty to fifty cents per dozen.

From the eggs set on her own place during the season she raises from ten
to twelve hundred ducks each year. The ducklings are hatched from the
first of April up to about the first of August. Most of the ducklings
are raised by hen mothers, and she keeps some fifty hens for that
purpose. The hens are all pure Buff Cochins, and are kept until they are
two years and a half old. Besides raising two broods of ducks each
season, each hen pays her owner an average profit of seventy-five cents
a year from the sale of eggs for market. When fattened for market at the
end of the second season, these Cochin hens are large and heavy, and the
carcass of the old fowl generally sells for enough to pay for a pullet
to take her place. No chickens are raised on the farm; the pullets are
bought of a neighbor who keeps the Buff Cochins.

She aims to set several hens and the incubator at the same time; when
the eggs hatch the incubator ducklings are divided up among the hens;
one hen will care for twenty ducklings until they are old enough to care
for themselves. The eggs hatch well--those in the incubator quite as
well as those under hens, and when the incubator ducklings are once
mixed up with the others she finds it impossible to distinguish "which
from 'tother."

When the ducklings are ten or twelve hours old they are moved with the
mother hen to coops and safety runs, which are placed in an orchard near
the house. This orchard contains about four and a half acres, and the
coops are scattered over it a few rods apart. On the side of the orchard
that leads to the "pond lot," the bottom board of the fence is a foot
wide and comes close to the ground in order to keep the ducklings from
taking to the water too early in life.

When the ducklings are four weeks old the hens are taken away, but the
ducklings are kept in the orchard until they are six weeks old, or until
they are well feathered on the breast and under part of their bodies,
when they are turned into the pond lot, where they "take to the water
like ducks."

The pond lot contains nearly thirteen acres, five of which are covered
with water. Originally, this lot was a piece of low, rocky, bushy
pasture land, between two low ranges of hills. A stream of clear,
sparkling water, a famous trout brook, ran through the center. The woman
who proposed to raise ducks saw at once the advantage of such a
situation, and had a dam constructed near the upper end of the lot, and
later another was made lower down, so that the lot contained two large
ponds. Where the fences which separate my friend's land from that of her
neighbor cross the stream, water-gates are put in, which keep the ducks
from swimming out with the water; and the bottom boards of the fence
around the rest of the lot keep them from getting out that way. Two
well-trained dogs guard this lot at night, and woe to the two-footed or
four-footed prowler who intrudes.

The duck houses are simply long, low sheds--with the exception of the
one where the breeding stock is wintered, which is inclosed--placed on
the slope a few rods back from the water. They were built of refuse
lumber, and the cost was comparatively trifling. Connected with the
house for the breeding-stock is a small yard where the ducks are shut in
at night through the laying season. From the time when they are twelve
hours old till within twenty-four hours of the time when they are killed
for market, the ducklings are well fed with a great variety of food.
From the first meal until they are turned into the pond lot they are fed
every two hours between daylight and dark. "Little and often," is the
motto. Before they take to the water the ducklings are fed a little
cooked meat once each day, and doubtless this ration of meat has much to
do toward making the fine large ducks that my friend has a reputation
for raising. After they are turned into the pond lot the ducklings are
fed but three times a day till within two or three weeks of the time
when they are to be marketed; then they are confined in the fattening
yards and fed oftener.

The fattening yards are situated between the two ponds, and so arranged
as to inclose a portion of the stream.

The ducklings are marketed as fast as they reach a suitable age and
size. She commences sending them to market about the middle of June and
keeps it up till about the middle of September, when she quits till near
the middle of January. These prime young ducks, getting into market at a
time when such poultry is scarce, bring good prices--from 22 to 25 cents
a pound, dressed. By the time the price begins to decline she has
marketed all the earlier ones that she cares to spare, and the
later-hatched she keeps growing till mid-winter, when fine ducks are
again scarce and the price goes up. At Thanksgiving and during the
holidays when the markets are crowded with poultry of all kinds, she
holds on to her ducks, unless she has an order at an extra price.

At first my friend kept the Rouens; then she tried the Aylesburys, but
now she keeps only the pure Pekins, and is so well satisfied with them
that she has no desire to change for anything else. She says, "For
laying qualities, quick growth, great size, fine flesh and fine
feathers, the Pekins can not be excelled."

On her place I have seen six-weeks old Pekins that weighed six pounds a
pair alive, and those that dressed from three to four pounds each at ten
or twelve weeks. At five and six months her ducks dress from six to
eight pounds each. For the feathers, the best and finest of which are
carefully saved by themselves, my friend obtains forty cents per pound.

All the work connected with the duck-raising, except now and then some
heavy work which is necessary in the pond lot, is now performed by my
friend and her three children, a boy of fifteen, and two girls of
thirteen and eighteen.

There is a moral to this, but if you can't find it it will not do you
one bit of good.

FANNY FIELD.



CONSUMPTION CURED.

An old physician, retired from practice, having had placed in his hands
by an East India missionary the formula of a simple vegetable remedy for
the speedy and permanent cure of Consumption, Bronchitis, Catarrh,
Asthma and all throat and Lung Affections, also a positive and radical
cure for Nervous Debility and all Nervous Complaints, after having
tested its wonderful curative powers in thousands of cases, has felt it
his duty to make it known to his suffering fellows. Actuated by this
motive and a desire to relieve human suffering, I will send free of
charge, to all who desire it, this recipe, in German, French, or
English, with full directions for preparing and using. Sent by mail by
addressing with stamp, naming this paper.

W.A. NOYES, _149 Power's Block, Rochester, N.Y._



A GUILT frame--the prison window.




THE APIARY.


APIARY APPLIANCES.


In the last issue of THE PRAIRIE FARMER the "Italian and German Bees"
were described true as life, by that prince of writers, L.L. Langstroth.
After a careful perusal of the article named, in which the good and bad
traits of each race are delineated, any person ought to be able to
choose intelligently which bee is best, all things taken into
consideration, for him to procure.

In starting an apiary, there is another item of equal importance, and
that is what kind of dwellings should be erected for the occupants of
this future city. The wants of the future tenants should be considered;
provide them with all modern conveniences, as to pantry and larder, and
don't forget, as some architects do, that abodes should be ventilated as
well as warm. Some bee-masters prefer houses that are high between
ceilings, others low; some prefer large houses, many again those that
are smaller. The size has to be made according to the frame chosen.
There are five different sizes of movable frames now in use among
bee-keepers, and those are equally successful who use either size. The
Langstroth is more in common use than any other. Some object to it,
claiming that it is too shallow.

[Illustration]

In looking at the plates of the five different sizes of frames, an idea
is gained how minds differ. Each one has its advocates, and its votaries
claim that the frame they use is the very best for all purposes. We were
once looking out of the window of a friend's house on her neat,
well-kept apiary, and remarked what baby hives. And we found no fault
with the baby, when this lady showed us her beautiful white sections of
comb-honey, and ate her delicious peaches, canned, with extracted honey
for sweetening.

It must be fun to handle the little Gallup, but the Langstroth has an
advantage over all others; it consists in this: that it is most used,
and if a person desires to sell his hives and frames, he can more
readily do so. It is also easily obtained, as it is kept in stock by
supply dealers, and can be quickly sent forward when ordered, but if it
was an off size wanted, a delay would occur; some change might have to
be made in the machinery, and it would cost more, as well as the delay
occasioned, which, if in the midst of the honey harvest, might cause
great loss.

Other appliances of the apiary, to suit this frame, are kept by supply
dealers; such as extractors, comb-baskets, uncapping cans, etc. With any
of these frames a hive can be made large or small, by regulating the
number of frames. If the hives are bottomless, as many make them, a tall
hive can be made by tiering up, as is practiced by those who work for
extracted honey. The Adair frame was formerly used in a hive called the
"New Idea, or Non-swarming Hive." Its non-swarming qualities consisted
in its being a long hive, and if empty frames were always kept in front,
so that the bees had to pass through empty space to reach the brood
nest, they would not swarm.

Frames should be placed in a hive an inch and one-half from center to
center, and should have three-eighths of an inch space between them and
the hive. This last item was considered of enough importance to have a
patent issued for it. If the distance from the top of the frames to the
honey board, or between the frames and the hive, is less than
three-eighths of an inch, the bees will propolis it together, and if it
is more, they will build comb between.

    MRS. L. HARRISON.




WHAT SHOULD BE WORKED FOR.


As publishers, says the Weekly Bee Journal, we should,

1. Encourage planting bee-pasturage, that there may be, every season, a
crop of honey to gather, in order to make apiculture a certain
occupation.

2. Foster district and local societies to afford mutual instruction, and
strengthen fraternization.

3. Institute large and attractive honey and apiarian exhibits at all
fairs, to educate the community to the desirableness of a superior
product.

4. Cultivate a discriminating domestic market, to encourage superiority
and excellence.

5. Sell at all times, and in all places, an honest article under an
honest name.



BROWN'S BRONCHIAL TROCHES for Coughs and Colds: "I do not see how it
is possible for a public man to be himself in winter without this
valuable aid."--_Rev. R.M. Devens, Pocasset, Mass._



The Prairie Farmer

and

Youth's Companion

One Year, $3 for the two.

It is not required that both papers be sent to one address, nor to the
same post-office.

Address PRAIRIE FARMER PUB. CO., 150 Monroe Street, Chicago.



RAILROADS.

A MAN WHO IS UNACQUAINTED WITH THE GEOGRAPHY OF THIS COUNTRY WILL SEE BY
EXAMINING THIS MAP THAT THE

[Illustration]

CHICAGO, ROCK ISLAND & PACIFIC R'Y

By the central position of its line, connects the East and the West by
the shortest route, and carries passengers, without change of cars,
between Chicago and Kansas City, Council Bluffs, Leavenworth, Atchison,
Minneapolis and St. Paul. It connects in Union Depots with all the
principal lines of road between the Atlantic and the Pacific Oceans. Its
equipment is unrivaled and magnificent, being composed of Most
Comfortable and Beautiful Day Coaches, Magnificent Horton Reclining
Chair Cars, Pullman's Prettiest Palace Sleeping Cars, and the Best Line
of Dining Cars in the World. Three Trains between Chicago and Missouri
River Points. Two Trains between Chicago and Minneapolis and St. Paul,
via the Famous

"ALBERT LEA ROUTE."

A New and Direct Line, via Seneca and Kankakee, has recently been opened
between Richmond, Norfolk, Newport News, Chattanooga, Atlanta, Augusta,
Nashville, Louisville, Lexington, Cincinnati, Indianapolis and
Lafayette, and Omaha, Minneapolis and St. Paul and intermediate points.

All Through Passengers Travel on Fast Express Trains.

Tickets for sale at all principal Ticket Offices in the United States
and Canada.

Baggage checked through and rates of fare always as low as competitors
that offer less advantages.

For detailed information, get the Maps and Folders of the

GREAT ROCK ISLAND ROUTE,

At your nearest Ticket Office, or address

R.R. CABLE, Vice-Pres. & Gen'l M'g'r,

E. ST. JOHN, Gen'l Tkt. & Pass. Agt.

CHICAGO.



STANDARD BOOKS.

NOW READY FOR DISTRIBUTION.

VOLUMES ONE AND TWO
OF THE
NATIONAL REGISTER NORMAN HORSES

The most reliable, concise, and exhaustive history of the horse in
general, and by far the most complete and authentic one of the Norman
horse in particular, ever published in the United States.

PRICES:

Volume I.........................................$ 2.00

Volume II........................................  1.50

When the two volumes are sent in one package to one address, $3.00.
Sent, postpaid, on receipt of price.

Address your orders to

PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING CO., Chicago



REMEMBER _that_ $2.00 _pays for_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER _one year and, the
subscriber gets a copy of_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER COUNTY MAP OF THE UNITED
STATES, FREE! _This is the most liberal offer ever made by any
first-class weekly agricultural paper in this country._




SCIENTIFIC.


THE STAR OF BETHLEHEM.


"We have seen his star in the East," said the wise men. From what remote
region of antiquity may we suppose that this fancy came, that important
events to the world of man were heralded by marvelous phenomena of the
heavens? To the ignorant man, there can never be any world outside of
that with which he is concerned. So the primitive man had no use for
planets, comets, and the like, that were not in some way concerned with
his destiny. And we no doubt own our magnificent modern science of
astronomy to the quack system of astrology, which was only a device to
induce the heavenly bodies to minister to the importance and conceit of
man.

The accepted Scriptures tell us that the birth of the Savior of mankind
was heralded by the appearance of a remarkable star in the sky. Taking
this assertion to be true, it might be a matter of some interest to
consider what explanations have been made of this phenomenon. A large
majority of religious teachers, we admit, even to the present day, have
attempted no explanation whatever, but have settled the subject by
calling the star a miraculous appearance, concerning whose true nature
we can know nothing. But two solutions of the phenomenon have been given
by well-known astronomers, either of which, if accepted, will place the
miracle in the list of purely natural occurrences.

Kepler held that the Star of Bethlehem was simply a conjunction of the
planets. Astronomy, which, more fortunate than history, can bring
unimpeachable witnesses to its record of past events, assures us that
there was a remarkable conjunction, or rather three conjunctions of the
planets Jupiter and Saturn, in the year of Rome 747, or seven years
before the Christian era. It is now generally admitted that Christ was
probably born at least four years before the date fixed upon as the
first "year of our Lord," and remembering how much uncertainty hangs
about this date we might consider ourselves fully justified in placing
it, as Kepler did, in the year 7 B.C. This being granted, let us see how
the occurrence of the conjunctions in this year explains the miracle of
the "Star."

In the first place, note that the Magi, or Wise Men, of the East
(presumably the country of Chaldea) were the first to call attention to
the star as indicating the birth of the "King of the Jews." The
Chaldeans were devoted to astrology, and it is only reasonable to infer
that whatever remarkable appearance they saw in the sky, they would
endeavor to explain it by their astrological laws. On the 29th of May, 7
B.C., a conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn occurred, in the 20th degree
of the constellation Pisces, close to the first point of Aries; on the
29th of September of the same year, another conjunction of these planets
took place, in the 16th degree of Pisces; and on the 5th of December, a
third, in the 15th degree of the same sign. (These are not conjectures
or inferences, but known astronomical facts.) If we suppose that the
Magi, intent on their study of the heavens, saw the first of these
conjunctions, they actually saw it _in the East_, for on May 29, it
would rise three and one half hours before sunrise. It is not necessary
to suppose that the planets approached near enough to each other to
appear as one star, for they probably did not--it was their conjunctions
that gave their astrological significance. It plainly indicated to these
observers that some important event was impending, and what could be
more important than the birth of a great man? But where was this one to
appear? The sign Pisces was the most significant one for the Jews, for
according to astrological legend, in the year 2865 A.M. a conjunction of
Jupiter and Saturn in this sign had heralded the birth of Moses; the
proximity to Aries indicated that the hero foretold was of kingly
lineage; the Jewish expectation of a great king had become a well-known
story in Chaldea during the captivity, ergo, the inference was prompt
and sure, this conjunction indicated the birth of the expected King of
the Jews. That they might be among the first to do honor to so great a
personage as they believed this king to be, the wise men soon set out
for Judea. The journey probably took them five months or more. On their
way they witnessed the second conjunction, which no doubt only
strengthened their faith. If they performed the journey from Jerusalem
to Bethlehem at the time of the third conjunction, December 5, in the
evening, as the narration implies, the stars would be some distance east
of the meridian, and would seem to move from southeast to southwest, or
towards Bethlehem. Their standing over the house we may regard as an
additional statement that crept into the narration probably through its
repetitions.

Such is Kepler's explanation of the Star of Bethlehem. But before he had
given this to the world, indeed while he was an infant in his cradle,
Tycho Brahe had connected the phenomenon with that of one of the great
variable stars of the solar system.

The latter astronomer discovered, in 1572, what appeared to be a new
star in the constellation, Cassiopeia. It was a star of the first
magnitude when first perceived, and daily it increased in brilliancy,
till it out-shone Sirius, equaled Venus in lustre, and could be
perceived, even by the naked eye, at noonday. For nearly a month the
star shone; at first it had a white light, then a yellow, and finally it
was a bright red. Then it slowly faded, and in about sixteen months had
disappeared.

Amidst all the conjecture concerning this remarkable appearance, some
regarding it as a new world in process of creation, others as a sun on
fire, Tycho Brahe held to the belief, though unable to prove it, that it
was a star with a regular period of light and of darkness, caused
possibly by its nearness to, or distance from, the earth. When the
telescope was invented, forty years later, the accuracy of this theory
was known. At the spot carefully mapped out by Tycho Brahe, a telescopic
star was found, undoubtedly the same one whose brilliant appearance had
so startled the world in 1572. Upon this, astronomers began to study the
annals of their science for similar appearances, and found that a very
brilliant star had appeared and disappeared near the same spot in the
heavens in 1264, and also in 945. The inference was that this star had a
period of about three hundred years, and counting back, imagination
might place one of its periods of brilliancy very near the time of
Christ's birth. For this reason it received the name of the Star of
Bethlehem, and many have fully accepted the theory which makes this
variable luminary identical with the "Star of the East."

This second theory has especial interest just now, for if astronomical
calculations are correct, we may look for the reappearance of this
remarkable star during the coming year. If it does fulfill the
prediction of its return it must be reckoned as one of the most
noteworthy phenomena of the century.

For the benefit of amateur observers, who are as likely as any to be the
first to perceive this remarkable sight, we may say that Cassiopeia, the
constellation in which it will appear, lies very near the North Star.
You all know how to find the Polar Star by the pointers of the Great
Dipper; continue this line beyond about an equal distance, and you will
strike Caph, the largest star in Cassiopeia, or the Chair, so-called
because the stars form the outline of an inverted chair. Near one of
these the wandering luminary will probably flash out, "to amaze a
wondering world."

We may remark, in conclusion, that though there are quite a number of
variable stars, their nature and the cause of their changes are but
imperfectly understood. The Star of Bethlehem has no doubt an orbit,
which brings it much nearer the earth at some times than others. But
astronomers do not believe that the mere fact of distance explains all
changes. There is a star known as Mira, which for eleven months is
wholly invisible to the naked eye, then flames forth as a star of the
first magnitude, and is visible for a period of nearly three months,
fading at its close into darkness again. The star Algol, in the
constellation Perseus, is usually of the second magnitude, but every two
and a-half days it begins to decline in brilliancy, becomes very faint,
and remains thus for about three hours, and then waxes bright again.
Possibly this may be caused by the shadow of another star. In 1866 a
star of the eighth magnitude, in the Northern Crown, suddenly flamed up
into extraordinary brilliancy, remained thus for several months and
gradually subsided. This star was examined with the spectrum, and showed
lines of burning hydrogen. This led to the theory, now held, that the
increase in brilliancy of these stars is caused by the incandescence of
this gas. These fixed stars are all supposed to be suns of other
systems, and to be surrounded--like our sun--with envelopes of fiery
gases; from some cause not at all understood these gases may, at
regular periods, flame up with fiercer heat than usual, and produce this
appearance of greatly increased light. This is a very inadequate
explanation, no doubt, but it is the best that astronomers have yet been
able to devise in the matter.

    A.C.C.



OUR BOOKS.

Books Free!

Good books are valued by intelligent men and women more than silver and
gold. They are treasures in every home. They are to the mind what light
and heat are to plants. They

_Store the Mind with Useful Knowledge;_

the mind directs the hands. An intelligent man has an advantage over one
who is ignorant, whether he is a farmer, or mechanic, or merchant, and
is surer of success in his occupation. Think how

_Losses of Time and Money may be Saved_

by having some book at hand containing just the information desired in
some line of the rural industries. We offer an excellent opportunity for
any one to obtain BOOKS FREE for himself or family, and also for
societies, farmers' clubs, and associations to make additions to a
library, or to start one.

These books comprise standard works, and the latest and best books for

Farmers,    Stockmen,
  Dairymen,   Fruit-Growers,
    Gardeners,   Florists,
      Poultrymen,  Apiarists,
        Silk-Culturists,  Housekeepers,
          Architects,    Etc., Etc.

THE PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING COMPANY will give to any person,
association, or club, who will obtain and send subscribers to THE
PRAIRIE FARMER (including both new subscribers and renewals), at the
regular price of the paper ($2) each, any of the books contained in our
Book List on the following terms:

For THREE subscribers, books to the amount of $1.50.

For FOUR subscribers, books to the amount of $2.00.

For FIVE subscribers, books to the amount of $2.50.

For SIX subscribers, books to the amount of $3.00.

For SEVEN subscribers, books to the amount of $3.50.

For EIGHT subscribers, books to the amount of $4.00

For TEN subscribers, books to the amount of $5.00.

_For Twelve Subscriptions and Upward,_

A Dollar's Worth of Books for Every Two Subscriptions sent at $2.00
each.

All books given under these offers will be delivered at our office, No.
150 Monroe street.

If it is desired that they shall be forwarded by express, they will be
packed and delivered at the express office by us, the receiver to pay
cost of carriage.

Sent by mail to any part of the United States or Canada, the postage
will be seven cents on each dollar's worth of books.

It is necessary that parties to whom the books are given shall remit us
the postage before the books are sent.



A Dictionary Free!

This is no catchpenny affair, but a valuable lexicon. It is the popular

AMERICAN DICTIONARY,

on the basis of Webster, Worcester, Johnson, and other eminent American
and English authorities. It contains over 32,000 words, with accurate
definitions, proper spelling, and exact pronunciation; to which is added
a mass of valuable information. It is enriched with 400 illustrations.

REMEMBER,

every subscriber at the regular price of THE PRAIRIE FARMER gets this
Dictionary FREE, if preferred to our commercial map.



HERE IS ANOTHER.

ROPP'S CALCULATOR

And Account Book for 1884.

This is the most useful thing in the way of a memorandum book and
calculator ever issued. It is a work of nearly 80 pages of printed
matter and an equal number of blank leaves, ruled, for keeping accounts.
The contents include a vast array of practical calculations, 100,000 or
more in number, arranged for reference like a dictionary, so that a
farmer or business man may turn to the figures, and find the answer to
any problem in business.

There are three kinds. We use No. 3. Full leather; assorted colors, with
flap, slate pocket, and a renewable account book, ruled with divisions
or headings especially adapted to farmers' use. The retail price of this
book in leather is $1. We will send it FREE to every subscriber to THE
PRAIRIE FARMER who sends us $2. Or we will send THREE copies of No. 1,
the cheaper issue.



AND YET ANOTHER.

American Etiquette and Rules of Politeness.

It is the latest and best standard work recommended and endorsed by all
who have read it. The acknowledged authority. Beautifully and
appropriately illustrated; handsomely and substantially bound. It
contains 38 chapters, treating on all subjects relating to etiquette. We
send this book--plain edition, to any subscriber desiring it who sends
$2.00 for THE PRAIRIE FARMER year, or for two subscribers to THE PRAIRIE
FARMER at $2 each, we will send American Etiquette bound in English
cloth, burnished edges.

Our large and varied premium list will be issued in a few days. Send for
it.



MISCELLANEOUS.

TO PRESERVE THE HEALTH

Use the Magneton Appliance Co.'s

MAGNETIC LUNG PROTECTOR!

PRICE ONLY $5.

They are priceless to LADIES, GENTLEMEN, and CHILDREN with WEAK LUNGS;
no case of PNEUMONIA OR CROUP is ever known where these garments are
worn. They also prevent and cure HEART DIFFICULTIES, COLDS, RHEUMATISM,
NEURALGIA, THROAT TROUBLES, DIPHTHERIA, CATARRH, AND ALL KINDRED
DISEASES. Will WEAR any service for THREE YEARS. Are worn over the
under-clothing.

CATARRH, It is needless to describe the symptoms of this nauseous
disease that is sapping the life and strength of only too many of the
fairest and best of both sexes. Labor, study, and research in America,
Europe, and Eastern lands, have resulted in the Magnetic Lung Protector,
affording cure for Catarrh, a remedy which contains No DRUGGING OF THE
SYSTEM, and with the continuous stream of Magnetism permeating through
the afflicted organs, MUST RESTORE THEM TO A HEALTHY ACTION. WE PLACE
OUR PRICE for this Appliance at less than one-twentieth of the price
asked by others for remedies upon which you take all the chances, and WE
ESPECIALLY INVITE the patronage of the MANY PERSONS who have tried
DRUGGING THEIR STOMACHS WITHOUT EFFECT.

HOW TO OBTAIN This Appliance. Go to your druggist and ask for them. If
they have not got them, write to the proprietors, enclosing the price,
in letter at our risk, and they will be sent to you at once by mail,
post paid.

Send stamp for the "New Departure in Medical Treatment WITHOUT
MEDICINE," with thousands of testimonials,

THE MAGNETON APPLIANCE CO., 218 State Street, Chicago, Ill.

NOTE.--Send one dollar in postage stamps or currency (in letter at our
risk) with size of shoe usually worn, and try a pair of our Magnetic
Insoles, and be convinced of the power residing in our Magnetic
Appliances. Positively _no cold feet where they are worn, or money
refunded_.



PUBLICATIONS.

MARSHALL M. KIRKMAN'S BOOKS ON RAILROAD TOPICS.

DO YOU WANT TO BECOME A RAILROAD MAN

IF YOU DO, THE BOOKS DESCRIBED BELOW POINT THE WAY.

The most promising field for men of talent and ambition at the present
day is the railroad service. The pay is large in many instances, while
the service is continuous and honorable. Most of our railroad men began
life on the farm. Of this class is the author of the accompanying books
descriptive of railway operations, who has been connected continuously
with railroads as a subordinate and officer for 27 years. He was brought
up on a farm, and began railroading as a lad at $7 per month. He has
written a number of standard books on various topics connected with the
organization, construction, management and policy of railroads. These
books are of interest not only to railroad men but to the general reader
as well. They are indispensable to the student. They present every phase
of railroad life, and are written in an easy and simple style that both
interests and instructs. The books are as follows:

"RAILWAY EXPENDITURES--THEIR EXTENT,
OBJECT AND ECONOMY."--A Practical
Treatise on Construction and Operation.
In Two Volumes, 850 pages.                         $4.00

"HAND BOOK OF RAILWAY EXPENDITURES."--Practical
Directions for Keeping
the Expenditure Accounts.                           2.00

"RAILWAY REVENUE AND ITS COLLECTION."--And
Explaining the Organization of
Railroads.                                          2.50

"THE BAGGAGE PARCEL AND MAIL TRAFFIC
OF RAILROADS."--An interesting work
on this important service; 425 pages.               2.00

"TRAIN AND STATION SERVICE"--Giving
The Principal Rules and Regulations governing
Trains; 280 pages.                                  2.00

"THE TRACK ACCOUNTS OF RAILROADS."--And
how they should be kept. Pamphlet.                  1.00

"THE FREIGHT TRAFFIC WAY-BILL."--Its
Uses Illustrated and Described. Pamphlet.            .50

"MUTUAL GUARANTEE."--A Treatise on Mutual
Suretyship. Pamphlet.                                .50

Any of the above books will be sent post paid on receipt
of price, by

PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING CO.,
150 Monroe St.          CHICAGO, ILL.

Money should be remitted by express, or by draft check or post office
order.



CUT THIS OUT & Return to us with TEN CTS. & you'll get by mail A GOLDEN
BOX OF GOODS that will bring you in MORE MONEY, in One Month, than
anything else in America. Absolute Certainty. Need no capital. M. Young,
173 Greenwich St. N. York.



40 (1884) Chromo Cards, no 2 alike, with name, 10c., 13 pks, $1.
GEORGE I. REED & CO., Nassau, N.Y.




HOUSEHOLD.

    For nothing lovelier can be found
    In woman than to study _household_ good.--Milton.


HOW THE ROBIN CAME.


    Happy young friends, sit by me,
    Under May's blown apple-tree;
    Hear a story, strange and old,
    By the wild red Indians told,
    How the Robin came to me:

    Once a great chief left his son,--
    Well-beloved, his only one,
    When the boy was well-nigh grown,
    In the trial-lodge alone
    Left for tortures long and slow
    Youths like him must undergo,
    Who their pride of manhood test,
    Lacking water, food and rest,
    Seven days the fast he kept,
    Seven nights he never slept.
    Then the poor boy, wrung with pain,
    Weak from nature's overstrain,
    Faltering, moaned a low complaint;
    "Spare me, Father, for I faint!"
    But the chieftain, haughty-eyed,
    Hid his pity in his pride.
    "You shall be a hunter good,
    Knowing never lack of food;
    You shall be a warrior great,
    Wise as fox, and strong as bear;
    Many scalps your belt shall wear,
    If with patient heart you wait
    One day more!" the father said.
    When, next morn, the lodge he sought,
    And boiled samp and moose-meat brought
    For the boy, he found him dead.

    As with grief his grave they made,
    And his bow beside him laid,
    Pipe and knife, and wampum-braid--
    On the lodge-top overhead,
    Preening smooth its breast of red
    And the brown coat that it wore,
    Sat a bird, unknown before.
    And as if with human tongue,
    "Mourn me not," it said, or sung;
    "I, a bird, am still your son,
    Happier than if hunter fleet,
    Or a brave, before your feet
    Laying scalps in battle won.
    Friend of man, my song shall cheer
    Lodge and corn-land hovering near.
    To each wigwam I shall bring
    Tidings of the coming spring;
    Every child my voice shall know
    In the moon of melting snow,
    When the maple's red bud swells,
    And the wild flower lifts its bells.
    As their fond companion
    Men shall henceforth own your son,
    And my song shall testify
    That of human kin am I."

    Thus the Indian legion saith
    How, at first, the robin came
    With a sweeter life from death,
    Bird for boy, and still the same.
    If my young friends doubt that this
    Is the robin's genesis,
    Not in vain is still the myth
    If a truth be found therewith:
    Unto gentleness belong
    Gifts unknown to pride and wrong:
    Happier far than hate is praise--
    He who sings than he who slays.

    _--J.G. Whittier in St. Nicholas._




AFTER TWENTY YEARS.


The following tale of love and faithful waiting is told the New York
World by its Canton, Ohio, correspondent:

At the residence of Thomas Barker, three miles from this village, two
people were to-day made man and wife. William Craig left his pretty girl
sweetheart in a fit of jealous anger on the eve of Dec. 9, 1863,
returned a week or two since, found his betrothed still single and true,
and this afternoon the long deferred marriage was consummated. All the
surviving friends of their youth were present, and many half forgotten
associates came from neighboring towns and farms to join in the
merrymaking.

Twenty years ago Will Craig worked on his father's farm near here during
the day and spent his evenings at the residence of a farmer neighbor.
The attraction was Mary Barker, a pretty seventeen-year old girl. Craig
was deeply in love and so was Mary, but like many other girls she liked
to play the coquette occasionally.

Their wedding-day was set for Christmas, 1863, and the prospective bride
felt secure. One evening, however, the pretty Mary pushed her coquetry
too far. On December 7, 1863, Farmer Barker gave an old-fashioned
"sociable" in honor of his daughter's approaching wedding. Craig was
there, of course, but his happiness was marred by the presence of a
Pittsburg youth--a new comer. Mary allowed this young man to pay her
many attentions.

Craig was madly jealous. After all his attention he thought his
betrothed showed too much regard for his rival, and as she only laughed
at his pleadings he grew angry and threatened to leave. Her seeming
indifference made him desperate, and he declared:

"If you dance once more with that fellow you will not see me again for
twenty years."

"You couldn't leave me for even twenty hours if you tried ever so hard,"
she replied, and with a coquettish smile she went off to dance with his
rival.

Craig went home alone that night and the next day was missing. The most
careful search failed to reveal any trace of him. The old couple
continued to till the farm without the aid of the strong-armed son, and
at the neighbor's down the road pretty Mary Barker went about her
household labors with a demure air that told plainly how she regarded
her lover's disappearance. She refused to "keep company" in the
old-fashioned way with any of the young farmers who would willingly have
taken young Craig's place. She went out very little, kept a cat and grew
domestic in her habits. She had an abiding faith that Craig would
return, and to all entreaties would only shake her head and say: "I am
waiting for Will." The firm contour of the cheek grew somewhat less
rounded, the springing step less elastic, but she would not think of
marriage.

Friday, December 7, of this month (December) was just twenty years since
the disappearance of William Craig. In the twilight a bearded man of
forty came up the walk and as Miss Barker opened the door he put out
both hands and said:

"Mary, I have come again."

"I am sorry you waited so long Will," was the quiet reply, as she led
him into the house, where each told the story of the weary waiting, and
Christmas was fixed upon once more as the day for the wedding.

To the eager questions of old friends as to where he spent the time, he
told them, as he had already told his wife, how he had at once gone to
Philadelphia, enlisted in the army under an assumed name, then, after
the war, gone to Nebraska and taken up a tract of valuable land. This he
had diligently cultivated until at present he is in more than
comfortable circumstances. The Craigs will leave early in January for
their Nebraska home.




WILL READERS TRY IT.


The other day, says an exchange, we came across the following recipe for
making ink in an English archæological journal. Archæology is the
"science of antiquities," and surely this recipe is old enough to be
good. It occurred to us that during the summer vacation many of our boys
who are longing for something to do, might earn some money by
manufacturing some of this ink and selling it in their neighborhood. At
any rate the recipe is a good one and worthy of a trial by old folks as
well as young people. Here is the recipe, and the way it was discovered,
as told by a writer in Notes and Queries:

While examining a large number of MSS. of an old scribe some twenty
years ago, I was struck with the clearness and legibility of the
writing, owing in a great measure to the permanent quality of the ink,
which had not faded in the least, although many of the MSS. were at
least two hundred years old. It was remarkable, that the writer must
have been celebrated in his day for the excellence of his calligraphy,
for I met with a letter or two from his correspondents in which there
was a request for the recipe of the ink he used. I found his recipes,
which I copied, and from one of them, dated in 1654, I have, during the
last fifteen years, made all the ink I have used. The recipe is as
follows:

Rain water, one pint; galls, bruised, one and one-half ounces; green
copperas, six drachms; gum Arabic, ten drachms. The galls must be
coarsely powdered and put in a bottle, and the other ingredients and
water added. The bottle securely stoppered, is placed in the light (sun
if possible), and its contents are stirred occasionally until the gum
and copperas is dissolved; after which it is enough to shake the bottle
daily, and in the course of a month or six weeks it will be fit for use.
I have ventured to add ten drops of carbolic acid to the contents of the
bottle, as it effectually prevents the formation and growth of mold,
without any detriment to the quality of the ink, so far as I know.




THE SECRET OF LONGEVITY.


A French medical man who has just died at the age of one hundred and
seven, pledged his word to reveal the secret of his longevity, when no
more, for the benefit of others. It was stipulated, however, that the
precious envelope containing the recipe for long life was not to be
opened until he had been buried. The doctor's prescription, now made
known, is simple enough; and easy to follow; but whether it is as
available as he pretends, the Journal of Chemistry says, is extremely
doubtful. He tells his fellow-men, that, if they wish to live for a
century or more, they have but to pay attention to the position of their
beds. "Let the head of the bed be placed to the north, the foot to the
south; and the electric current, which is stronger during the night in
the direction of the north, will work wonders on their constitutions,
insure them healthier rest, strengthen their nervous system, and prolong
their days." It is, he adds, to scrupulous attention to the position of
his bed that he ascribes his longevity, the enjoyment of perfect health,
and the absence of infirmity.




HOW THE INVENTOR PLAGUES HIS WIFE.


A facetious chap connected with one of our daily newspapers gave the
following amusing burlesque on the trials of an inventor's wife:

"It is all very well to talk about working for the heathen," said one,
as the ladies put up their sewing, "but I'd like to have some one tell
me what I am to do with my husband." "What is the matter with him?"
asked a sympathetic old lady. "William is a good man," continued the
first, waving her glasses in an argumentative way, "but William will
invent. He goes inventing round from morning till night, and I have no
peace or comfort. I didn't object when he invented a fire escape, but I
did remonstrate when he wanted me to crawl out of the window one night
last winter to see how it worked. Then he originated a lock for the door
that would not open from midnight until morning, so as to keep burglars
out. The first time he tried it he caught his coat tail in it, and I had
to walk around him with a pan of hot coals all night to keep him from
freezing." "Why didn't he take his coat off?" "I wanted him to, but he
stood around till the thing opened itself, trying to invent some way of
unfastening it. That's William's trouble. He will invent. A little while
ago he got up a cabinet bedstead that would shut and open without
handling. It went by clockwork. William got into it, and up it went.
Bless your heart, he staid in there from Saturday afternoon till Sunday
night, when it flew open and disclosed William with the plans and
specifications of a patent washbowl that would tip over just when it got
so full. The result was that I lost all my rings and breastpin down the
waste pipe. Then he got up a crutch for a man that could also be used as
an opera-glass. Whenever the man leaned on it up it went, and when he
put it to his eye to find William, it flew out into a crutch and almost
broke the top of his head off. Once he invented a rope ladder to be worn
as guard chain and lengthened out with a spring. He put it round his
neck, but the spring got loose and turned it into a ladder and almost
choked him to death. Then he invented a patent boot heel to crack nuts
with, but he mashed his thumb with it and gave it up. Why, he has a
washtub full of inventions. One of them is a prayerbook that always
opens at the right place. We tried it one morning at church, but the
wheels and springs made such a noise that the sexton took William by the
collar and told him to leave his fire engines at home when he came to
worship. The other day I saw him going up the street with a model of a
grain elevator sticking out of his hip pocket, and he is fixing up an
improved shot tower in our bed-room."




RECIPES.

A hot shovel held over furniture removes white spots.

A paste of equal parts of sifted ashes, clay, salt, and a little water
cements cracks in stoves and ovens.

Fried potatoes: Chop fine cold boiled potatoes; heat some butter in a
frying pan and put the potatoes in. A few minutes before taking them
from the fire stir in some well beaten eggs. Serve hot.

Sardines picked up fine, and mixed with cold boiled ham also minced
fine, and all well seasoned with a regular Mayonnaise dressing, make a
delicious filling for sandwiches.

Rye Bread: Make sponge as for wheat bread; let it rise over night; then
mix up with rye flour, not as stiff as wheat bread. Place in baking
pans; let rise, and bake half an hour longer than wheat bread.

One of the best ways to cure sore throat is as follows: Wring a cloth
out of salt and cold water, and keeping it quite wet bind tightly about
the neck. Cover this with a dry cloth. It is best to use this remedy in
the night.

A delicious hot sauce for puddings is made of six tablespoonfuls of
sugar, two of butter, and one egg; beat the butter, sugar, and the yolk
of the egg together, then add the white beaten to a froth; lastly stir
in a tea-cupful of boiling water and a teaspoonful of vanilla.

A Dish for Breakfast: Take six good cooking apples, cut them in slices
one-fourth of an inch thick; have a pan of fresh, hot lard ready, drop
the slices in and fry till brown; sprinkle a little sugar over them and
serve hot.

A little curry-powder in chopped pickle gives a delicious flavor to it.
A tablespoonful of the powder to four quarts of pickle is about the
right quantity to use, unless you like to use the curry in place of
pepper; then at least twice this quantity should be put in.

A good way to extract the juice of beef for an invalid is to broil the
beef on a gridiron for a few minutes, and then squeeze the juice from it
with a lemon-squeezer. Put a little salt with it. This may be given, as
the sick one prefers, cold or hot, or it may be frozen, and given in
small lumps.

Rolls: Flour, two quarts; sugar, one tablespoonful; one half cup of
yeast; one pint of scalded milk, or water if milk is scarce, and a
little salt. Set to rise until light; then knead until hard, and set to
rise, and when wanted make in rolls. Place a piece of butter between the
folds and bake in a slow oven.

For Earache.--A writer in the Druggists' Circular says: "The remedy
which I here offer has, after repeated trials, never failed to afford
almost instant relief. It is perfectly simple, easy of application,
costs but little, and can be procured at any drug store: Olive oil, 1
ounce; chloroform, 1 drachm. Mix, and shake well together. Then pour
twenty-five or thirty drops into the ear, and close it up with a piece
of raw cotton to exclude the air and retain the mixture."



THE PRAIRIE FARMER AND YOUTH'S COMPANION

ONE YEAR, $3 FOR THE TWO

It is not required that both papers be sent to one address, nor to the
same post-office.

Address Prairie Farmer Pub. Co.,

150 Monroe Street Chicago.




PAMPHLETS, ETC., RECEIVED.


Gunnison, Colorado's Bonanza County, by John K. Hallowell, Geologist,
Denver, Col. Price 50 cents, postpaid.

Midland Florida: The Eden of the South. By "Carl" Webber, New York.

United States Consular Reports, No. 35, for November, 1883.

The Saskatchewan Fife Wheat: Its history, from its first importation
from the Saskatchewan Valley, in Manitoba, six years ago, till the
present time. By W.J. Abernethy.

Price list of Huntsville nurseries, Huntsville, Ala.

Oscar Close, Greendale. Catalogue of nurseries, Worcester, Mass.

Price list of L.R. Bryant's cider vinegar works, Princeton, Ill.

Vich's Floral Guide. Here it is again, brighter and better than ever;
its cover alone, with its delicate tinted background and its dish of
gracefully arranged flowers, would entitle it to a permanent place in
every household. The 1884 edition is an elegant book of 150 pages, three
colored plates of flowers and vegetables, and more than 1,000
illustrations of the choicest plants, flowers, and vegetables, with
directions for growing. The price, only 10 cents, can be deducted from
the first order sent for goods. Rochester, N.Y.

The Great Rock Island Cook Book, dedicated to the women of America,
Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific Railway. This book contains a selection
of the most useful recipes and other valuable information in the
culinary art. It will be found especially valuable for the young
housekeepers, as they can hardly fail to become good cooks with such a
guide.

Buist's Almanac and Garden Manual for 1884, Philadelphia. This little
book is in its fifty-sixth year, and is one of the best of its kind
published. It contains a full descriptive list (with cuts) of all kinds
of vegetables, and many kinds of flowers.

Report of the crops of the year, December, 1883. Department of
Agriculture, Washington, D.C.

The Household Magazine for January comes to us in its usual bright,
readable form. It is an unusually good number and will be enjoyed by the
ladies.

Catalogue of Clydesdale and Cleveland Bay horses. Imported and bred by
the Door Prairie Live Stock Association, Door Village, La Porte, Ind.



REMEMBER _that_ $2.00 pays _for_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER _one year and, the
subscriber gets a copy of_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER COUNTY MAP OF THE UNITED
STATES, FREE! _This is the most liberal offer ever made by any
first-class weekly agricultural paper in this country._




OUR YOUNG FOLKS.


THE CITY CAT.


    He is gaunt and thin, with a ragged coat,
      A scraggy tail, and a hunted look;
    No songs of melody burst from his throat
      As he seeks repose in some quiet nook--
    A safe retreat from this world of sin,
      And all of its boots and stones and that--
    For the life of a cat is a life of din,
                If he is a city cat.

    He is grumpy and stumpy, and old and gray,
      With a sleepy look in his lonely eye,
    (The other he lost at a matinee--
      Knocked out by a boot from a window high.)
    Wherever he goes, he never knows--
      Quarter or pause in the midnight spree,
    For the life of a cat is a life of blows,
                If he is a city cat.

    He is pelted by boys if he stirs abroad,
      He is chased by dogs if he dares to roam.
    His grizzled bosom has never thawed
      'Neath the kindly blare of the light of home.
    His life's a perpetual warfare waged
      On balcony, back yard fence, and flat;
    For the life of a cat is a life outraged,
                If he is a city cat.

    The country cat is a different beast.
      Petted, well-housed, demure, and sleek;
    Three times a day he is called to feast,
      And why should he not be quiet and meek?
    No dreams of urchins, tin cans, and war,
      Disturb his sensuous sleep on the mat;
    Ah! cat life is a thing worth living for,
                If he isn't a city cat.

    And even when dead, the cat
      With strident members uneasy lies
    In some alley-way, and seems staring at
      A coming foe with his wild wide eye,
    Nobody owns him and nobody cares--
      Another dead "Tom," and who mourns for that,
              If he's only a city cat.

    --_Providence Press._




AMUSING TRICKS.


THE FRUIT CANDLE.

Procure a good, large apple or turnip, and cut from it a piece of the
shape to resemble the butt-end of a tallow candle; then from a nut of
some kind--an almond is the best--whittle out a small peg of about the
size and shape of a wick end. Stick the peg in the apple and you have a
very fair representation of a candle. The wick you can light, and it
will burn for at least a minute. In performing you should have your
candle in a clean candlestick, show it plainly to the audience, and then
put it into your mouth, taking care to blow it out, and munch it up. If
you think best, you can blow the candle out and allow the wick to cool,
and it will look, with its burned wick, so natural that even the
sharpest eyes can not distinguish it from the genuine article.

Once, at a summer resort in Massachusetts, I made use of this candle
with considerable effect. While performing a few parlor tricks to amuse
some friends, I pretended to need a light. A confederate left the room,
and soon returned with a lantern containing one of these apple
counterfeits.

"Do you call that a candle?" I said.

"Certainly," he replied.

"Why, there is scarcely a mouthful."

"A mouthful? Rather a disagreeable mouthful, I guess."

"You have never been in Russia, I presume."

"Never."

"Then you don't know what is good."

"Good?"

"Yes, good. Why, candle ends, with the wick a little burned to give them
a flavor, are delicious. They always serve them up before dinner in
Russia as a kind of relish. It is considered bad taste in good society
there to ask a friend to sit down to dinner without offering him this
appetizer."

"The bad taste would be in the relish, I think."

"Not at all. Try a bit."

I took the candle out of the lantern, and extended it toward my
confederate, who shrank back with disgust.

"Well," I said, "if you won't have it, I'll eat it myself." And so
saying, I put it into my mouth and munched it up, amid the cries of
surprise and horror of the assembled party. Two old maids insisted on
looking into my mouth to see whether it was not concealed there.

Having soaked a piece of thread in common salt water, tie it to a small
finger-ring. When you apply the flame of a candle to the thread it will
burn to ashes and yet sustain the ring.


A DIFFICULT CIRCLE TO JUMP FROM.

Take a piece of chalk, and ask, if you make a circle, whether any boy
standing in it thinks he can jump out of it. As soon as one proposes to
do so, bring him into the center of the room, draw a circle with the
chalk around his jacket, and say, "Now jump out of it!"


AN IMPOSSIBLE WALK.

Ask one young lady in the company whether she thinks, if she clasped her
hands, she could walk out of the room. On her saying she could, request
her to pass her arm round the leg of the table or piano, join her hands,
and walk away.


THE HAT TRICK.

Fill a small glass with water, cover it with a hat, and profess your
readiness to drink it without touching the hat. Put your head under the
table, make a noise, as if drinking, rise, and wipe your lips. The
company, thinking you have drunk the water, one of them will certainly
take up the hat to see. As soon as the hat is removed, take up the glass
and drink its contents. "There!" say you, "you see I have not touched
the hat."


THE INCOMBUSTIBLE THREAD.

Wind some linen thread tightly round a smooth pebble, and secure the
end; then, if you expose it to the flame of a lamp or candle, the thread
will not burn; for the caloric (or heat) traverses the thread, without
remaining in it, and attacks the stone. The same sort of trick may be
performed with a poker, round which is evenly pasted a sheet of paper.
You can poke the fire with it without burning the paper.


AN IMPOSSIBLE JUMP.

Take a ruler, or any other piece of wood, and ask whether, if you laid
it down on the ground, any of the company could jump over it. Of course
one or two will express their readiness to jump over so small an
obstruction. Then lay the ruler on the ground, close against the wall,
and tell them to try.


A DIFFICULT LOAD TO CARRY.

Take a piece of wood, such as a lucifer match, and say to one of the
company, "How long do you think it would take you to carry this piece of
wood into the next room?" "Half a minute." perhaps one will reply.
"Well, try, then," say you; "carry it." You then cut off little pieces,
and give them to him one by one. He will soon be tired of the
experiment.


TO TURN A GLASS OF WATER UPSIDE DOWN WITHOUT SPILLING ITS CONTENTS.

Fill a glass carefully, place a piece of paper on the top, place your
hand on the paper, and tilt the glass round sharply, when it will be
found that the pressure of the air upward on the paper will retain the
water. The glass may then be held by the bottom.

Health and Home says: I want to tell you of something very funny to do,
if you have a little brother or sister who does not mind dressing up and
standing still for a few moments. My aunt showed me how to do it the
other day, when sister Nelly had a birthday party. We took little
brother Tommy out into the library and stood him upon a high wooden
stool, and dressed him up very finely in mamma's clothes. The stool made
him so full that the dress was of just the right length. Then Uncle Ned,
telling him to stand straight and firm, carried him, stool and all, into
the parlor. I wish you could have heard the girls and boys laugh! He had
such a comical look--with his tall body and little round face--just like
some of those French Parian figures. One little girl handed him a fan,
and then it was too funny to see the tall lady fan herself affectedly
with her very small, dimpled hands. All the boys and girls just
shouted.--_Young People._




BRIGHT SAYINGS.


A writer in the School-Boy Magazine has gathered together the following
dictionary words as defined by certain small people:

Bed time--Shut-eye time.

Dust--Mud with the juice squeezed out.

Fan--A thing to brush warm off with.

Fins--A fish's wings.

Ice--Water that staid out in the cold and went to sleep.

Nest-Egg--The egg that the old hen measures to make new ones.

Pig--A hog's little boy.

Salt--What makes your potato taste bad when you don't put any on.

Snoring--Letting off sleep.

Stars--The moon's eggs.

Wakefulness--Eyes all the time coming unbuttoned.



If you would have good health, go out in the sunshine. Sickness is
worse than freckles.



HYPOCHONDRIA.

THE MYSTERIOUS ELEMENT IN THE MIND THAT AROUSES VAGUE
APPREHENSIONS--WHAT ACTUALLY CAUSES IT.

The narrative below, by a prominent scientist, touches a subject of
universal importance. Few people are free from the distressing evils
which hypochondria brings. They come at all times and are fed by the
very flame which they themselves start. They are a dread of coming
derangement caused by present disorder and bring about more suicides
than any other one thing. Their first approach should be carefully
guarded.

_Editors Herald_:

    It is seldom I appear in print and I should not do so now did
    I not believe myself in possession of truths, the revelation
    of which will prove of inestimable value to many who may see
    these lines. Mine has been a trying experience. For many
    years I was conscious of a want of nerve tone. My mind seemed
    sluggish and I felt a certain falling off in my natural
    condition of intellectual acuteness, activity, and vigor. I
    presume this is the same way in which an innumerable number
    of other people feel, who, like myself, are physically below
    par, but like thousands of others I paid no attention to
    these annoying troubles, attributing them to overwork, and
    resorting to a glass of beer or a milk punch, which would for
    the time invigorate and relieve my weariness.

    After awhile the stimulants commenced to disagree with my
    stomach, my weariness increased, and I was compelled to
    resort to other means to find relief. If a physician is
    suffering he invariably calls another physician to prescribe
    for him, as he cannot see himself as he sees others; so I
    called a physician, and he advised me to try a little
    chemical food, or a bottle of hypophosphates. I took two or
    three bottles of the chemical food with no apparent benefit.
    My lassitude and indisposition seemed to increase, my food
    distressed me. I suffered from neuralgic pains in different
    parts of my body, my muscles became sore, my bowels were
    constipated, and my prospects for recovery were not very
    flattering. I stated my case to another physician, and he
    advised me to take five to ten drops of Magende's solution of
    morphine, two or three times a day, for the weakness and
    distress in my stomach, and a blue pill every other night to
    relieve the constipation. The morphine produced such a
    deathly nausea that I could not take it, and the blue pill
    failed to relieve my constipation.

    In this condition I passed nearly a year, wholly unfit for
    business, while the effort to think was irksome and painful.
    My blood became impoverished, and I suffered from incapacity
    with an appalling sense of misery and general apprehension of
    coming evil. I passed sleepless nights and was troubled with
    irregular action of the heart, a constantly feverish
    condition, and the most excruciating tortures in my stomach,
    living for days on rice water and gruel, and, indeed, the
    digestive functions seemed to be entirely destroyed.

    It was natural that while in this condition I should become
    hypochondrical, and fearful suggestions of self-destruction
    occasionally presented themselves. I experienced an
    insatiable desire for sleep, but on retiring would lie awake
    for a long time, tormented with troubled reflections, and
    when at last I did fall into an uneasy slumber of short
    duration, it was disturbed by horrid dreams. In this
    condition I determined to take a trip to Europe, but in spite
    of all the attentions of physicians and change of scene and
    climate, I did not improve, and so returned home with no
    earthly hope of ever again being able to leave the house.

    Among the numerous friends that called on me was one who had
    been afflicted somewhat similarly to myself, but who had been
    restored to perfect health. Upon his earned recommendation I
    began the same treatment he had employed but with little hope
    of being benefited. At first, I experienced little, if any,
    relief, except that it did not distress my stomach as other
    remedies or even food had done. I continued its use, however,
    and after the third bottle could see a marked change for the
    better, and now after the fifteenth bottle I am happy to
    state that I am again able to attend to my professional
    duties. I sleep well, nothing distresses me that I eat, I go
    from day to day without a feeling of weariness or pain,
    indeed I am a well man, and wholly through the influence of
    H.H. Warner & Co's Tippecanoe. I consider this remedy as
    taking the highest possible rank in the treatment of all
    diseases marked by debility, loss of appetite, and all other
    symptoms of stomach and digestive disorders. It is
    overwhelmingly superior to the tonics, bitters, and dyspepsia
    cures of the day, and is certain to be so acknowledged by the
    public universally. Thousands of people to-day are going to
    premature graves with these serious diseases, that I have
    above described, and to all such I would say: "Do not let
    your good judgment be governed by your prejudices, but give
    the above named remedy a fair and patient trial, and I
    believe you will not only be rewarded by a perfect
    restoration to health, but you will also be convinced that
    the medical profession does not possess all the knowledge
    there is embraced in medical science."

    A.G. RICHARDS, M.D.,
    468 Tremont street, Boston, Mass.




COMPILED CORRESPONDENCE.


E.B.F., Scotia, Neb., writes: The weather, so far this winter, has been
extremely warm. No snow to exceed one inch since October. Cattle and
hogs doing finely. Corn planted early is a good crop both as to quality
and quantity, but late planted is soft. Wheat and oats were an extra
good crop, wheat yielding from 25 to 35 bushels per acre, and oats from
50 to 75 bushels.

    E.B.F.



Cobden, Ill., Jan. 6.--We have been through the coldest weather ever
experienced here since weather records have been kept, which is
twenty-five years or more. Yesterday morning the mercury reached 24
degrees below at my house, which is 200 feet higher than the village.
Reports from lower situations run down to 26, 28, with one of 30. This
is six degrees lower than the lowest record ever made here, which was
twenty years ago, when on the 1st of January it marked 18 below at my
house, with some other records two or three degrees lower. At that time
peach orchards were badly killed. There can be no doubt that such is the
case now. And if it has been proportionately cold north, I fear that the
injury to all kinds of fruit trees must have been very serious.

    PARRER EARLE.



Kane Co., Jan 7.--The weather has been intensely cold here since the 3d
instant. The thermometer has been from 4 to 28 degs. below zero at 7
a.m., and from 2 to 16 degs. below at 2 p.m. The 5th was the coldest.
The mercury dropped to 28 degs. below at sunrise; in some places 32
degs. below. On the 6th, 22 degs. below at 7 a.m.; at 12 m. 4 degs.
below; at 5 p.m. 10 degs. below. Domestic animals were kept closely
housed, except while being watered. Where they were exposed to the
weather, they froze. We have not had such continued cold weather since
January 1864, when for ten successive days it was intensely cold. Some
farmers are short of coarse feed, and are shipping bran and middlings
from Minneapolis, and corn from Kansas and Nebraska. Many farmers who
were shipping milk to Chicago, are now taking it to the cheese
factories. There has been an over supply of milk in the city. The
dividends for October were from $1.16 to $1.25 per cwt.

    J.P.B.



THE PRAIRIE FARMER

AND

YOUTH'S COMPANION

ONE YEAR, $3 FOR THE TWO.

It is not required that both papers be sent to one address, nor to the
same post-office.

Address PRAIRIE FARMER PUB. Co., 150 Monroe Street, Chicago.



BREEDERS DIRECTORY.

The following list embraces the names of responsible and reliable
Breeders in their line, and parties wishing to purchase or obtain
information can feel assured that they will be honorably dealt with:

CATTLE.

Jersey.

Mills, Charles F.....................Springfield, Illinois

HORSES.

Clydesdales.

Mills, Charles F.....................Springfield, Illinois

SWINE.

Berkshire.

Mills, Charles F.....................Springfield, Illinois

Chester Whites.

W.A. Gilbert......................Wauwatosa Wis.

SHEEP.

Cotswold.

Mills, Charles F.....................Springfield, Illinois



LIVE STOCK, ETC.

Jerseys for Sale.

One heifer, 2 years old in May, due to calve in April. Heifer, 2 years
in June, and due to calve in April. Cow, 4 years old, due to calve in
May. Bull calf 5 months old, and one good yearling bull. Address

L.P. WHEELER. Quincy, Ill.



SCOTCH COLLIE

SHEPHERD PUPS,

--FROM--

IMPORTED AND TRAINED STOCK

--ALSO--

NEWFOUNDLAND PUPS AND RAT TERRIER PUPS.

Concise and practical printed instruction in Training young Shepherd
Dogs, is given to buyers of Shepherd Puppies; or will be sent on receipt
of 25 cents in postage stamps.

For Printed Circular, giving full particulars about Shepherd Dogs,
enclose a 3-cent stamp, and address

N.H. PAAREN,

P.O. Box 326, CHICAGO. ILL.



HOUSE PLANS FOR EVERYBODY.

By S.B. REED, Architect.

One of the most popular Architectural books ever issued, giving a wide
range of design from a dwelling costing $250 up to $8,000, and adapted
to farm, village, and town residences. It gives an

ESTIMATE OF THE QUANTITY OF EVERY ARTICLE USED

In the construction, and probable cost of constructing any one of the
buildings presented. Profusely illustrated. Price, postpaid, $1.50.
Address

PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING CO., Chicago



MAP

Of the United States and Canada, Printed in Colors, size 4×2-1/2 feet,
also a copy of THE PRAIRIE FARMER for one year. Sent to any address for
$2.00.



AGENTS

WANTED EVERYWHERE to solicit subscriptions for this paper. Write
PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING CO., Chicago, for particulars.




LITERATURE


THE WRONG PEW.


    There's one who wrote in years gone by in clear and ringing rhyme--
    A poet of an elder day and of a distant clime--
    Who sang of mortal misery, of sufferers long and lorn,
    "Man's inhumanity to man makes countless thousands mourn!"

    The hand that held that golden pen--that golden tongue--is dust;
    A dust that's dear to hearts that hold his homely truths in trust;
    And you who read this simple tale of wrath, and ruth, and wrong,
    May hear the echo of the sob that breaks upon my song!

    I sat upon the Sabbath-day within the sacred fane,
    The sunlight through the windows poured like rainbow-tinted rain;
    While maids and matrons passing fair, and men of high degree,
    All fashion's proudest votaries, knelt low on bended knee.

    And there was one of stature tall, whose robe of silken sheen
    Draped quiet grace and courtesy that might have shamed a queen,
    Save only that her pallid face, and drooping, tear-dimmed eyes,
    Looked like the Peri's, waiting by the gates of Paradise.

    What is it moves that jeweled throng of dainty worshippers?
    Their hearts have probed the cruel wrong that rankles sore in hers;
    For she who sat beside her there--ah, heart of hardest stone!
    Swept forth with stern and haughty stare, and left her there alone.

    Then one, God bless her woman's heart! the loveliest woman there,
    Stepped down the aisle with stately tread, and calm and steadfast air;
    With gentle voice, and tender eyes distilling heaven's own dew,
    She whispered to the shrinking girl, "I've room, my friend, for you."

    I think earth's sorest sinners need a judge less stern than they
    Who wear their ermine clasped across a breast of common clay!
    I think heaven's loveliest angels come among us circling down,
    To bear the cruel earthly cross, and then regain the crown.

    Alas! alas! for paltry pride arrayed in rich attire,
    And woe is me for priestly praise which is our heart's desire!
    Would we could seek, like pilgrims gray, beside that sunlit sea,
    The simple faith that lit the shores of sacred Galilee!

    Sometimes it seems that ages past our souls have sojourned here;
    But God's great angel guards the gate and stands beside the bier;
    For when some mystic touch awakes the chords of memory,
    His awful hand holds down the note, and clasps the quivering key.

    Bend low, bend low the lofty brow and bring the sack-cloth gown;
    Throw dust and ashes on our heads, and through the sinful town;
    I think the green earth grows more gray, beneath its golden sun,
    Because the good God sits in heaven, and sees such evil done.

    --_Edward Renaud._




YIK KEE.


After father died some ten years ago, I found, that for three years we
had been living on credit. I was eighteen, strong and well, but did not
know how to work. In the little back room of the New York tenement house
(by the way, the landlady seized my clothes for our rent) I considered
my future. I had inherited a great faith in relatives, from my father,
so I wrote to seven. I received six polite notes, telling me to go to
work, and the following letter:

   JONESBORO, COLORADO--JACKSON'S RANCH.

   Dear Nell.--I'm your cousin Jack. Your father once give me
   money to come out West. I've took up land, got a comfortable
   home, no style or frills, but good folks to live with and
   healthy grub. I've got the best wife you ever see and seven
   fine youngsters. The city ain't no place for a friendless
   girl. Wife wants you to come. She'll be a mother to you. Come
   right off. I'll meet you at Denver.

   Jack.

Inclosed was a check sufficient to defray expenses; so I started. Denver
was then only a large town and the depot a barn-like structure. I got
out of the cars and stood bewildered among all the emigrants and their
bundles. Some one touched me on the shoulder--a roughly-dressed,
broad-shouldered man with long, blonde beard and big blue eyes.

"Are you Nell?" he said.

"Yes; and you're Cousin Jack."

"I knew you," he said, as he led the way, "by your black clothes an'
sorrerful look, an' them big blue eyes, like yer father's as two peas.
We'll git the shader outer 'em when we get home. Yer father was a mighty
good man. Bless yer dear heart, don't let them tears come. This 'ere's a
dry country, we don't waste no water."

Comforting me in his kind, rough way, he reached his team, a big green
wagon, drawn by two wild-looking steeds which I afterward knew to be
bronchos. A fat, blonde boy, about twelve, held the reins.

"That's Ted," said Cousin Jack. "Ted, this is Miss Nell, yer cousin;
give her a hug." The fat boy solemnly obeyed.

After this he seemed to have a special claim on my affections because he
met me first. Jack's wife was a jolly, plump woman, with brown eyes and
curly hair. She always had a baby in her arms and another at her heels.
She adored Jack. I never knew them to have a quarrel. I soon grew to
love the life at the ranch. I liked the big, half-finished house, its
untidyness and comfort--its pleasant, healthy atmosphere. I loved the
children, the household pets--Shep, the sagacious dog; Thad, the clever
cat; the hens and sheep; the horses Dolly, Dot, and Daisy, that did the
plowing, and the marketing at Denver, twelve miles away, and were so
gentle and kind we used to ride them without saddle or bridle. I learned
that cattle grew fat on the dry-looking grass and gave the best of milk.
I learned to love the broad plains and the glorious sunsets, and to
watch the distant bands of Indians with half fear, half interest. I
helped Cousin Mary, sewed and cooked, kept the house and children neat,
and lifted many burdens from her weary shoulders. We were so happy. The
children and I took long walks over the plains, and Ted and I took many
rides on Dolly and Dot, and in the long winter evenings I told the
children stories. Occasionally Harry White came over to visit us from
his ranch five miles away. He lived with his old mother; he and Jack
were dear friends. Harry needed a wife, Jack used to say, winking at me.

One day Jack went to Denver for supplies. He went alone, and coming home
later than usual, Ted and I and baby Mame went out to meet him. Jack
looked sober and guilty, and seemed ill at ease. If he ever drank, I
should have thought him intoxicated. In the wagon was a queer-shaped
heap under a horse-blanket. I was sure it moved. When we got behind the
barn Jack said, sheepishly, avoiding my eye.

"Well, Ted, I calkerlate I've got su'thing in that there waggin that 'ul
astonish yer marm."

Little Mame pulled the blanket off the heap; she had been peeping under
it all the while she was in the back of the wagon. There lay a human
being. Such an object; short and squat, dressed in a queer blue blouse
with flowing sleeves, wide trousers and queer wooden shoes. He had
small, black eyes, a shaven poll, from which depended a long thin queue.
His countenance was battered and bruised, his clothes torn and bloody.

"There was a row down to Denver," said Jack; "the Christian folks stove
in these 'ere heathen's winders, tore their houses down, an' killed half
on 'em. I cleared out soon as I could. When I got half way home I heard
a noise back o' me, and out crawled this thing. I was so dumfounded I
couldn't speak. He thought I was going ter send him back, an' he fell
ter cryin' an' jabberin' in that yap of his, an' clingin' onter my han'
an' kissin' of it. It sorter turned my stomach. I told him ter set down,
give him some crackers ter eat, covered him up an' told him he could
live with me. What do you s'pose marm'll say?"

"Oh! Cousin Jack," I said, "of course, she will not care. Your home is a
refuge for all the wretched and unfortunate."

"Now don't, Nell," he said, turning as red as a rose, and busying
himself about the harness. The Celestial looked at us solemnly: Mame
toddled up to him. He looked at her curiously, but did not move.

"Get out, John," said Jack, "you needn't be scared no more; we're to
home."

He got out stiffly, and, to my surprise, turned and lifted the baby
down. She caught his pig-tail, and pulled it in wild delight. He seemed
grieved when I took her away. When Jack told Mary, the good soul found a
thousand reasons why he should stay, and hurried to make him a bed in
the attic. The Celestial did not say much, but when Jack called him
"John," he smiled a sad smile.

"Melican man callee John. Hump. Yik Kee."

So with due consideration for his feelings we addressed him as Yik Kee.
He was of great use. He helped take care of the children, did the
washing (Mary did not fancy his method of sprinkling clothes) and helped
Jack on the farm. We made him one of the family. He was always pleasant
and smiling, but was a man of few words.

Cousin Jack added much to his income by trading in hides. Ranchmen
living at a distance sold their hides to him and Jack sold them to
traders who came around at certain times in the year. Harry White was a
partner in the business. He used to go on a sort of round-up and visit
the ranches all over the country. The cattle of the ranchmen roamed in
vast herds over the plains, protected only by the brand of the owner.
Cattle stealing was frequently practiced. Offenders in this respect were
shown no mercy. They were convicted, tried, and executed only in the
court of Judge Lynch. I never blamed the ranchmen for this; it was
impossible to guard the herds in the vast area over which they
traversed, and the cattle must be protected in some way. Gil Mead was a
wealthy ranchman, who lived about ten miles from us. He owned the
largest herd of cattle on the plains. They were branded with the vowels
of his name. E.A., which could be recognized anywhere. He always shipped
his cattle East to his brother in Chicago. I feared the man. He was tall
and gaunt, with deep-set black eyes and low forehead. His home was
unhappy; his wife cross and ugly, and his children wild and unruly. This
made him more than commonly disagreeable.

I think it was in the fall of '74 that Harry White brought the big load
of hides to Jack. Both were much pleased at the bargain they made. Harry
gave glowing accounts of a new customer--a ranchman from Chicago, who
had taken up an abandoned homestead. He had purchased many cattle from
his cousin, Gil Mead, and hoped to rival him in the number and quality
of his herd. Jack packed the hides away to keep till December, when we
expected the dealer.

One afternoon, not long after this, Gil Mead rode up to the house,
looking very agreeable and pleasant. A couple of strangers, also
ranchmen, were with him. They wanted to look at the hides, one of the
men being a trader, Gil said. Jack was in Denver, so Yik Kee and I went
to the barn with them. They looked the hides over carefully, and
conversed in low tones, Gil with a suppressed oath. Finally they thanked
us courteously and took their leave.

"Hump; no goodee," said Yik Kee, but he wouldn't say any more.

At five that evening, when we were at supper, a crowd of twenty-five or
thirty men rode up on horseback. Jack came out and met them, inviting
them in to take supper, in his generous, hospitable way. They wanted him
to go to Denver with them, there was to be a meeting there of importance
to ranchmen. The meeting would be at eight. They had brought with them
an extra horse for Jack. Mary looked around for Yik Kee to help her, but
he had mysteriously disappeared.

I faintly remembered seeing his white, horrified face peering around the
barn at the horses. I noted the visitors ate little--the food seemed to
choke them. Some of them watched Mary and the baby in a queer sort of
way. When Jack, as was his custom, kissed his wife and babies good-by,
one of the visitors, an oldish man, coughed huskily, and said: "Blest if
I kin stan' this." They all rode off, Jack the merriest of all, waving
his hat till he was out of sight.

When we were clearing up the unusual quantity of dishes, Yik Kee
appeared at the end window and beckoned me. I followed him out. Ted was
with him. Behind the barn were the three horses saddled. Shep was with
them, released from confinement, where he had been secured from
following his master.

"Foller 'em," said Ted in an excited whisper. "Yik's afraid they're up
to something."

"What is it, Yik?" I said, sternly. "No fooling now."

For answer he twisted his long pig-tail around his neck, tying it under
his left ear in a significant manner.

"Hump, he hangee; stealee cow."

"Oh, Mary," I sobbed, remembering Gil Mead's visit, and his strange
actions, and dimly seeing what Yik Kee meant, "I must tell Mary," I
said, wildly.

"Hump, no," said Yik Kee. "Yellee sick," and he closed his eyes in a
die-away sort of manner. "Go now--too latee."

We mounted.

"Mother'll think we're gone to ride," said Ted, as we galloped over the
plains. He was deathly pale, poor little fellow, but he sat erect and
firm. I saw his father's big Colt's revolver sticking out of his pocket.
He was a determined boy. Even in my despair, in my wild hope that I
could save Jack by begging on my knees, that I could cling to him, that
they would have to kill me first, I could not help a smile at the
comical figure Yik Kee presented on horseback. His loose garments
flapped in the wind, his long pig-tail flew out behind, and he bobbed
up and down like a kernel of corn in a corn-hopper.

It was a soft, warm night, lighted only by the pale young moon and the
twinkling stars. We rode as fast as our horses could gallop. Shep was
close at our heels. Way ahead, when we reached the top of a little hill,
we saw the crowd of horsemen. They were riding toward Denver. We
galloped on with renewed zeal. They turned into a cross road leading to
Mead's ranch. On this road was a bridge over Dry Gulch, which was in the
spring a roaring torrent. Beyond the bridge, across the fields, was the
hay-stack of Mead, where was stored sufficient to feed his domestic
cattle through the winter. We at last reached the turn in the road. They
were three miles in advance, riding rapidly. Yik Kee stopped at the
turn. "Hump! Can't catchee. Hangee at bridge. You goee!" He turned his
horse and sped across the field, deserting us basely.

We rode on, Ted and I. He was pale and still; my cheeks were burning. We
neared the bridge. The high mound of earth before us hid us from sight.
We stopped our horses and listened. The men had lighted torches, some
were preparing a rough gallows under the bridge; two were uncoiling
rope; some held the horses of the others beyond the bridge. The men were
masked now, and I could see by the lighted torches that this number was
increased. Jack was very white and sad, but he showed no fear.

"I am innocent, gentlemen," he said, slowly, "but I refuse to tell you
of whom I bought the hides."

I understood him. Could Harry White be a cattle thief? I felt as if I
were going mad.

"What shall we do?" whispered Ted, cocking his revolver?

Suddenly a bright red light illuminated the heavens, followed by clouds
of black smoke and a queer crackling noise. A yell from the men--Gil
Mead's voice above the rest. The hay-stack was on fire. It seemed to me
in the gale around it that I could see a foreign-looking human vanishing
across the plain.

The men mounted their horses, Gil Mead at the head, and set off across
the fields at a mad gallop. They must save the stack. They left Jack,
bound hand and foot, and guarded by one man.

Shep, the wonderful dog, had kept by us until now, slinking in the dark
shadows. Now, gliding sidewise and still, he reached the man on guard
whose back was to us, and with no warning growl caught him by the throat
with strong white teeth that could choak a coyote in a second. The man,
who was in a sitting posture, fell back with a groan. Ted struck him
over the head with the butt of the revolver, and pulled off the dog. I
cut Jack's bonds with a knife. He looked at us wonderingly and staggered
to his feet.

"Never mind how we came, Jack," I said; "quick, mount the horse beyond
the bridge, and ride to Denver for your life. They will not harm a woman
and child."

"Harry White," he muttered, the loyal soul that even now could think of
another's danger.

"I will tell him."

"No, no; not of this--only say, if he stole the cattle, to fly the
country. They will find out, sooner or later."

He galloped down the road. Ted and I mounted, calling off Shep, who sat
on his haunches watching the unconscious man, and then we, too, sped
down the road. The hay-stack was giving out great columns of black
smoke, but the fire was dead.

Ahead of us was a riderless horse, Dolly, who greeted her master with a
joyful whinny. Where was Yik Kee? Then Dot, my horse, shied from the
road at a recumbent black figure. It was the indomitable Yik Kee, who
had crawled all the way from the stack on his stomach, so that he could
not be seen, after lying in the ditch till the blaze had faded out.
"Hump! no catchee Chinee; heap sore," he said, laconically rubbing his
stomach.

He mounted Dolly, and we rode on to White's ranch. Harry rushed out at
the sound of horses' feet, at midnight. There, under the twinkling stars
I looked into his eyes, and I told him the whole story. He showed no
guilt, but only said we must stay the night at his ranch, for the men
would come back to Jack's for him, and then mounting his fleet colt rode
off down the road. I comforted his mother as best I could. At day-break
we rode home.

Mary was in a wild state of alarm. Where had we been? Where was Jack?
and how cruel we were to leave her alone. She said that at one o'clock
three masked men had come to the house and searched it and the
premises, and had not molested her or the children, only asking where
Jack was, very sternly and sharply.

At noon Jack, Harry, the sheriff, and a party of armed men from Denver
rode up, stopping only a moment to tell me they would be back at night.
I dared not tell Mary, and she worried all the afternoon at their
strange conduct. At night Jack and Harry came home, looking tired but
happy. Then Jack told Mary, and she clung to him as though she could
never let him go.

It seemed the pleasing ranchman from Chicago was one of a band of cattle
thieves. He sold the hides to Harry, who, honest and open himself, was
slow to suspect wrong dealings in others. The sheriff had caught the men
skinning a cow that belonged to Mead, and had captured the gang and
taken them to Denver.

The men concerned in the attempt to lynch Jack were sincerely sorry.
Their regrets would not have availed much, however, if they had
succeeded in their purpose. They gave each of the children ten acres of
land; they gave Ted sixty-five, and me, whom they pleased to consider
very plucky, one hundred and fifty acres. I felt rich enough, and time
has made it very valuable land. The man on guard was our warmest
admirer. He thought Ted, Shep, and I wonders of courage. He said when I
came down on the bridge with the open knife, he thought his last hour
had come.

Gil Mead committed suicide not long after this. He was always queer. No
one ever knew that Yik Kee set the stack afire. I tell you Jack rewarded
the faithful fellow--gave him a good farm, taught him to work it, and
built him a house. The funniest thing was Yik Kee had a wife and three
queer little children back in China, and Jack sent for them, and Yik Kee
and his family are as happy as they can be. The children play with
Jack's (he has twelve now) and get along finely together.

In '75 I married Harry White, which, I suppose, was foreseen from the
beginning--at least, Jack says anybody could have seen it. The most
serene and satisfied face at the wedding was that of the Celestial. In
my inner consciousness, notwithstanding he is a "heathen Chinee," I have
the conviction that as great a hero as is seen in modern times is the
man of few words, Yik Kee.--_The Continent._




HUMOROUS


"A LEEDLE MISTAKES."


"I see all how it vhas now," observed Jacob Handonder, as he came out.

"Oh, you do! You are the man who got drunk and raised a fuss on a street
car?"

"I vhas der man, and I tell you how it vhas. You see, I vhas tight. I
took too much beer."

"Can a saloon-keeper take too much beer?"

"Vhell, maype I vhas seek. I shtart to go home. Vhen der sthreet car
comes along I pelief it vhas my house. I got in und look all aroundt,
but I doan' see Katarina. I call out for der shildrens, und eferybody
laughs at me. Maype dot makes me madt, und der drifer calls a boliceman,
und I vhas galloped down here."

"So it wasn't your home?"

"Not oxactly. It vhas a leedle mistake."

"It'll cost you $5."

"Vheel, dot ain't so bad. I pay him oop und go home to preakfast."

"Be careful next time."

"Oh, I vill dot. Next time I vhas tight I go home on some shtreets
midout cars. If I take some ice-wagon for my house I pelief I got cooled
off pooty queek."




SHARPER THAN A RAZOR.


A long-waisted man, with the nose of a fox and an eye full of
speculation, walked up to a second-hand clothier, in Buffalo, the other
day, and said:

"See that overcoat hanging out down there?"

"Of course."

"Well, I've taken a fancy to it. It's rather cheeky to ask you to go
down there, but I'll make it an object; I won't give but $8 for the
coat, but I'll give you $1 to buy it for me. You are also a Jew and know
how to beat him down. Here are $9."

The dealer took the money and started off, and in five minutes was back
with the coat.

"Good!" chuckled the other. "I reckoned you'd lay him out. How much did
you make for your share?"

"Vhell, ash dot is my branch shore, and I only ask six dollar fur de
goat, I was about tree dollar ahead."


A COMING DIVIDEND.


Last fall, when a would-be purchaser of railroad stock called upon
Russell Sage and asked him regarding the outlook of certain stock, Mr.
Sage replied:

"Splendid idea! That stock is certain to raise fifteen per cent."

"Upon what do you base your calculations?"

"Upon the immense crops to be moved along that line."

The other day the same gentleman again interviewed Mr. Sage regarding
the same stock, and the great financier replied:

"Best outlook in the world for that stock! Certain to advance fifteen
per cent."

"Do you base your calculations upon last fall's crops?"

"No, sir; it's going to be an open winter, and the line will save enough
in snow-plows to declare a dividend of five per cent."



At a party: Merchant--"Ah! How d'do, Mr. Blank? How is your paper coming
out? I read it daily. By the way, you are getting up a report of this
grand assembly, I suppose?" Editor--"No. By the way, how is your store
coming on? My cook buys a good deal of you. You are here drumming up
custom, I suppose?"



"Yes," said Mrs. Towers, as she expatiated upon the beauties of her
flower-garden, "I have given it great care, and if you come over in a
week or two, I expect to be able to show you some beautiful scarlet
pneumonias."



THE PRAIRIE FARMER

AND

YOUTH'S COMPANION

ONE YEAR, $3 FOR THE TWO.

It is not required that both papers be sent to one address, nor to the
same post-office.

Address Prairie Farmer Pub Co.,

150 Monroe Street. Chicago.



ILLINOIS CENTRAL RAILROAD.

The elegant equipment of coaches and sleepers being added to its various
through routes is gaining it many friends. Its patrons fear no
accidents. Its perfect track of steel, and solid road-bed, are a
guarantee against them.



MEDICAL.

DISEASE CURED

Without Medicine.

_A Valuable Discovery for supplying Magnetism to the Human System.
Electricity and Magnetism utilized as never before for Healing the
Sick._

THE MAGNETON APPLIANCE CO.'s

MAGNETIC KIDNEY BELT!

FOR MEN IS

WARRANTED TO CURE Or Money Refunded, the following diseases without
medicine:--Pain in the Back, Hips, Head, or Limbs, Nervous Debility,
Lumbago, General Debility, Rheumatism, Paralysis, Neuralgia, Sciatica,
Diseases of the Kidneys, Spinal Diseases, Torpid Liver, GOUT SEMINAL
EMISSIONS, IMPOTENCY, ASTHMA, HEART DISEASE, DYSPEPSIA, CONSTIPATION,
ERYSIPELAS, INDIGESTION, HERNIA OR RUPTURE, CATARRH, PILES, EPILEPSY,
DUMB AGUE, ETC.

When any debility of the GENERATIVE ORGANS occurs, LOST VITALITY, LACK
OF NERVE FORCE AND VIGOR, WASTING WEAKNESS, and all those Diseases of a
personal nature, from whatever cause, the continuous stream of Magnetism
permeating through the parts, must restore them to a healthy action.
There is no mistake about this appliance.

TO THE LADIES:--If you are afflicted with LAME BACK, WEAKNESS OF THE
SPINE, FALLING OF THE WOMB, LEUCORRHOEA, CHRONIC INFLAMMATION AND
ULCERATION OF THE WOMB, INCIDENTAL HEMORRHAGE OR FLOODING, PAINFUL,
SUPPRESSED, AND IRREGULAR MENSTRUATION, BARRENNESS, AND CHANGE OF LIFE,
THIS IS THE BEST APPLIANCE AND CURATIVE AGENT KNOWN.

For all forms of FEMALE DIFFICULTIES it is unsurpassed by anything
before invented, both as a curative agent and as a source of power and
vitalization.

Price of either Belt with Magnetic Insoles, $10, sent by express C.O.D.,
and examination allowed, or by mail on receipt of price. In ordering
send measure of waist, and size of shoe. Remittance can be made in
currency, sent in letter at our risk.

The Magneton Garments are adapted to all ages, are worn over the
under-clothing (NOT NEXT TO THE BODY LIKE THE MANY GALVANIC AND
ELECTRIC HUMBUGS ADVERTISED SO EXTENSIVELY), and should be taken off at
night. They hold their POWER FOREVER, and are worn at all seasons of the
year.

Send stamp for the "New Departure in Medical treatment WITHOUT
MEDICINE," with thousands of testimonials.

THE MAGNETON APPLIANCE CO., 218 STATE STREET. CHICAGO, ILL.

Note.--Send one dollar in postage stamps or currency (in letter
at our risk) with size of shoe usually worn, and try a pair of our
Magnetic Insoles, and be convinced of the power residing in our other
Magnetic Appliances. Positively no cold feet when they are worn, or
money refunded.



Self Cure Free

Nervous Debility Lost Manhood Weakness and Decay

A favorite prescription of a noted specialist (now retired.) Druggists
can fill it. Address

DR. WARD & CO., LOUISIANA, MO.



SCALES.

U.S. STANDARD SCALES,
MANUFACTURED EXPRESSLY FOR
THE PRAIRIE FARMER

_Every Scale Guaranteed by the Manufacturers, and by Us, to be Perfect,
and to give the Purchaser Satisfaction._

The PRAIRIE FARMER Sent Two Years Free

To any person ordering either size Wagon Scale at prices given below.

[Illustration]

2-Ton Wagon or Farm Scale (Platform 6 × 12 feet), $35; 3-Ton (7 × 13),
$45; 5-Ton (8 × 14), $55. Beam Box, Brass Beam, Iron Levers, Steel
Bearings, and full directions for setting up.

THE PRAIRIE FARMER SENT 1 YEAR FREE!

To any person ordering either of the following Scales, at prices named
below.

[Illustration]

The Housekeeper's Scale--$4.00

Weighing accurately from 1/4 oz. to 25 lbs. This is also a valuable
Scale for Offices for Weighing Mail Matter. Tin Scoop, 50c. extra; Brass
75c. extra.

[Illustration]

The Family Scale--$7.00.

Weighs from 1/4 oz. to 240 lbs. Small articles weighed in Scoop, large
ones on Platform. Size of Platform, 10-1/2 × 13-1/2 in.

[Illustration]

The Prairie Farmer Scale--$10.00

Weighs from 2 oz. to 320 lbs. Size of Platform 14 × 19 inches. A
convenient Scale for Small Farmers, Dairymen, etc.

[Illustration]

Platform Scales--4 Sizes.
400 lbs., $15; 600 lbs., $20; 900 lbs., $24; 1,200 lbs., $28; Wheels and
Axles, $2 extra.

In ordering, give the Price and Description given above. All Scales
Boxed and Delivered at Depot in Chicago. Give full shipping directions.
Send money by Draft on Chicago or New York Post Office Order or
Registered Letter. Address

THE PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING COMPANY, CHICAGO, ILL.



MISCELLANEOUS

[Illustration]

THE STANDARD REMINGTON TYPE-WRITER is acknowledged to be the only rapid
and reliable writing machine. It has no rival. These machines are used
for transcribing and general correspondence in every part of the globe,
doing their work in almost every language. Any young man or woman of
ordinary ability, having a practical knowledge of the use of this
machine may find constant and remunerative employment. All machines and
supplies, furnished by us, warranted. Satisfaction guaranteed or money
refunded. Send for circulars. WYCKOFF, SEAMANS & BENEDICT, 38 East
Madison St, Chicago, Ill.



Send for Catalogue and Prices.

ATLAS ENGINE WORKS

[Illustration]

INDIANAPOLIS, IND., U.S.A.

MANUFACTURERS OF

STEAM ENGINES AND BOILERS.

CARRY ENGINES and BOILERS IN STOCK for IMMEDIATE DELIVERY



SEEDS

ALBERT DICKINSON,

Dealer in Timothy, Clover, Flax, Hungarian, Millet, Red Top, Blue Grass,
Lawn Grass, Orchard Grass, Bird Seeds, &c.

POPCORN.

    Warehouses { 115, 117 & 119 Kinzie St.   OFFICE. 115 KINZIE ST.,
               { 104, 106, 108, & 110 Michigan St. CHICAGO, ILL.




GENERAL NEWS.


Gen. Butler is now out of office.

A verdict of not guilty was rendered in the Emma Bond case.

St. Petersburg, Russia, is in a panic over recent acts of the Nihilists.

Two wolves have lately been killed in the vicinity of Douglas Park,
Chicago.

Another effort is soon to be made in Congress to reinstate Fitz John
Porter.

Brokers in Dubuque have offered $330,000 cash for the B.F. Allen
Homestead.

At Winnipeg on Thursday of last week the mercury was 45 degrees below
zero.

Albert E. Kent, of San Francisco, gives $25,000 for a chemical
laboratory at Yale College.

Judge McCrary, of the Supreme Court, has resigned, and accepted a
position as a railway attorney.

The Government of China has ordered the construction of two more torpedo
boats at the German port of Stettin.

St. Louis had many fires last week. There were nine outbreaks within
forty-eight hours. The firemen were completely worn out.

There were 319 failures in the United States last week--the largest
number yet recorded within the same number of days.

There was strong talk at Hillsboro of lynching the discharged prisoners
in the Emma Bond case, but better counsel prevailed.

Governor Stoneman presided at a meeting in San Francisco, where
arrangements were made to hold a world's exposition in 1887.

The mercury at Charleston, S.C., was 13 degrees below zero January 4th.
Through New England the weather was extremely cold.

Mary, the seventeenth wife of the late Brigham Young, died at Salt Lake
City Saturday from blood poisoning. She has fourteen survivors.

A pie made of tainted meat caused the poisoning of sixteen boarders and
three Sisters at a convent in Montreal. Two of the former are
dangerously ill.

It is announced from Paris that the French government is intending to
sell the railways owned by the Republic. The Rothschilds stand ready to
purchase them.

By a railroad accident near Fort Dodge, on Wednesday last, three persons
were killed and several wounded. Among the killed was Mrs. J.H. South,
of Bureau Co., Ills.

Mrs. Holcomb, daughter of the murdered millionaire Crouch, of Michigan,
has committed suicide. There is some suspicion that she knew something
about the murder.

A nihilist proclamation has been issued threatening the Czar. There is
much anxiety at Gatschina palace. It is now said the Czar's injury in
the shoulder the other day was caused by a bullet.

The United States Consul General at Cairo reports the deaths by the
cholera epidemic at from 65,000 to 70,000. A member of the international
tribunal says there are still from one to three fatal cases each day.

The Gould system of railroads is about to establish a telegraph school
at St. Louis, with a view not only to educating operators, but of
selecting pupils from the acclimated people along the Southwestern
lines.

The Catholic convent at Belleville, Ill., took fire from the furnace
Saturday evening, and in an hour was reduced to ashes. Sixty pupils made
desperate efforts to escape, some of them leaping from the windows.
Twenty-seven lives were lost.

The Secretary of State at Springfield has issued papers of incorporation
to Col. Wood's museum, at Chicago, with a capital stock of $100,000. The
Colonel is said to have secured a lease of his old stand on Randolph
street, and the Olympic Theatre.

Henry Villard closed his business career by handing over to assignees
his mansion on Madison square and other property, with instructions to
dispose of the same, pay a mortgage of $200,000, and discharge any
indebtedness to the Oregon Railway Company, the residue to be given to
his wife.

The directors of the Northern Pacific road held a meeting in New York,
on Friday, of last week. A letter was read from Henry Villard, resigning
the presidency of the company because of nervous prostration and in
deference to the interests of the stockholders. The resignation was
accepted, and a special election was ordered to choose a successor. The
directors voted Mr. Villard $10,000 per annum for his services. Vice
President Oakes reported the line in first-class order except one
hundred miles near the junction west of Helena. It is understood that
the Oregon Navigation company will reduce its dividends to 8 per cent.
The Oregon Transcontinental has raised $3,000,000 in Boston with which
to lift its floating debt.




MARKETS

MARKET REPORTS.


OFFICE OF THE PRAIRIE FARMER,
CHICAGO. Jan 8, 1884.


FINANCIAL AND COMMERCIAL.

The extremely cold weather of the past week interfered with business
very generally. In financial circles, as in others, the arctic wave made
matters rather quiet. Early in the present week, however, business at
the banks was active. The arrival of delayed mail trains added to the
volume of business; but while there was much activity, the monetary
situation remained about the same as usual.

In the loan market quotations were 6@7 per cent.

Eastern exchange sold at 70@75c per $1,000 premium.

Government securities are as follows:

4's coupons, 1907              Q. Apr.      123-1/4
4's reg., 1907                 Q. Apr.      123-1/4
4-1/2's coupon, 1891           Q. Mar.      114-1/8
4-1/2's registered, 1891       Q. Mar.      114-1/8
3's registered                 Q. Mar.      100


GRAIN AND PROVISIONS.

The leading produce markets have been irregular for several days past,
and the tendency, in the main, was downward. Yesterday wheat was
moderately active, but the market was depressed at the close. There was
a drop, also, in corn, oats, mess pork, and lard.

FLOUR was quiet at about the following rates.

Choice to favorite white winters                $5 25 @ 5 50
Fair to good brands of white winters             4 75 @ 5 00
Good to choice red winters                       5 00 @ 5 50
Prime to choice springs                          4 75 @ 5 00
Good to choice export stock, in sacks, extras    4 25 @ 4 50
Good to choice export stock, double extras       4 50 @ 4 65
Fair to good Minnesota springs                   4 50 @ 4 75
Choice to fancy Minnesota springs                5 25 @ 5 75
Patent springs                                   6 00 @ 6 50
Low grades                                       2 25 @ 3 50

WHEAT.--Red winter, No. 2 96 @ 98c; car lots of spring, No. 2, sold at
93-3/4 @ 95c; No. 3, do. 77-1/2 @ 81c.

CORN.--Moderately active. Car lots No. 2, 57-3/8 @ 57-5/8c; rejected,
46-1/2; new mixed, 48 @ 48-1/4c.

OATS.--No. 2 in store, closed 33-1/2 @ 33-5/8.

RYE.--May, in store 58 @ 58-1/2.

BARLEY.--No. 2, 62 @ 63c; No. 3, 44c.

FLAX.--Closed at $1 41.

TIMOTHY.--$1 25 per bushel. Little doing.

CLOVER.--Quiet at $5 90 @ 6 15 for prime.

PROVISIONS.--Mess pork, February, $14 45 @ 14 47-1/2 per bbl; May,
$15 @ 15 05. Green hams, 8-3/8c, per lb. Short ribs, $7 42-1/2 per cwt.

LARD.--January, $8 75; February, $8 85.

LUMBER.

Lumber unchanged. Quotations for green are as follows:

Short dimension, per M                          $9 50 @ 10 00
Long dimension, per M                           10 00 @ 11 50
Boards and strips, No. 2                        11 00 @ 13 00
Boards and strips, medium                       13 00 @ 16 00
Boards and strips, No. 1 choice                 16 00 @ 20 00
Shingles, standard                               2 10 @  2 20
Shingles, choice                                 2 25 @  2 30
Shingles, extra                                  2 40 @  2 60
Lath                                             1 65 @  1 70


COUNTRY PRODUCE.

NOTE.--The quotations for the articles named in the following list are
generally for commission lots of goods and from first hands. While our
prices are based as near as may be on the landing or wholesale rates,
allowance must be made for selections and the sorting up for store
distribution.

BEANS.--Hand picked mediums $2 00 @ 2 10. Hand picked navies,
$2 15 @ 2 20.

BUTTER.--Dull and without change. Choice to extra creamery, 32 @ 35c per
lb.; fair to good do. 26 @ 30c; fair to choice dairy, 25 @ 30c; common
to choice packing stock fresh and sweet, 20 @ 25c; ladle packed
10 @ 13c; fresh made, streaked butter, 9 @ 11c.

BRAN.--Quoted at $11 87-1/2 @ 13 50 per ton; extra choice $13.

BROOM-CORN.--Good to choice hurl 6-1/2 @ 7-1/2c per lb; green
self-working 5 @ 6c; red-tipped and pale do. 4 @ 5c; inside and covers
3 @ 4c; common short corn 2-1/2 @ 3-1/2c; crooked, and damaged, 2 @ 4c,
according to quality.

CHEESE.--Choice full-cream cheddars 12-1/2 @ 13c per lb; medium quality
do. 9 @ 10c; good to prime full cream flats 13 @ 13-3/4c; skimmed
cheddars 9 @ 10c; good skimmed flats 6 @ 7c; hard-skimmed and common
stock 3 @ 4c.

EGGS.--In a small way the best brands are quotable at 25 @ 26c per
dozen; 20 @ 23c for good ice house stock; 18 @ 19c per pickled.

HAY.--No. 1 timothy $10 @ 10 50 per ton; No. 2 do. $8 @ 9; mixed do.
$7 @ 8; upland prairie $8 00 @ 10 75; No. 1 prairie $6 @ 7; No. 2 do.
$4 50 @ 5 50. Small bales sell at 25 @ 50c per ton more than large bales.

HIDES AND PELTS.--Green-cured light hides 8c per lb; do. heavy cows 8c;
No. 2 damaged green-salted hides 6c; green-salted calf 12 @ 12-1/2
cents; green-salted bull 6 c; dry-salted hides 11 cents; No. 2
two-thirds price; No. 1 dry flint 14 @ 14-1/2c. Sheep pelts salable at
28 @ 32c for the estimated amount of wash wool on each pelt. All branded
and scratched hides are discounted 15 per cent from the price of No. 1.

HOPS.--Prime to choice New York State hops 25 @ 26c per lb; Pacific
coast of 23 @ 26c; fair to good Wisconsin 15 @ 20c.

POULTRY.--Prices for good to choice dry picked and unfrozen lots are:
Turkeys 14 @ 15c per lb; chickens 10 @ 11c; ducks 10 @ 12c; geese
9 @ 11c. Thin, undesirable, and frozen stock 2 @ 3c per lb less than
these figures; live offerings nominal.

POTATOES.--Good to choice 35 @ 40c per bu. on track; common to fair
25 @ 30c. Illinois sweet potatoes range at $3 @ 3 50 per bbl for yellow.
Baltimore stock at $2 25 @ 2 75, and Jerseys at $5. Red are dull and
nominal.

TALLOW AND GREASE.--No. 1 country tallow 7@7-1/4c per lb; No. 2 do.
6-1/4 @ 6-1/2 c. Prime white grease 6 @ 6-1/2 c; yellow 5-1/4 @ 5-3/4c:
brown 4-1/2@5.

VEGETABLES.--Cabbage, $8 @ 12 per 100; celery, 35 @ 40c per doz bunches;
onions, $1 00 @ 1 25 $ bbl for yellow, and $1 for red; turnips,
$1 35@ 1 50 per bbl for rutabagas, and $1 00 for white flat.

WOOL.--from store range as follows for bright wools from Wisconsin,
Illinois, Michigan, Indiana, and Eastern Iowa--dark Western lots
generally ranging at 1 @ 2c per lb. less.

Coarse and dingy tub                            25 @ 30
Good medium tub                                 31 @ 34
Unwashed bucks' fleeces                         14 @ 15
Fine unwashed heavy fleeces                     18 @ 22
Fine light unwashed heavy fleeces               22 @ 23
Coarse unwashed fleeces                         21 @ 22
Low medium unwashed fleeces                     24 @ 25
Fine medium unwashed fleeces                    26 @ 27
Fine washed fleeces                             32 @ 33
Coarse washed fleeces                           26 @ 28
Low medium washed fleeces                       30 @ 32
Fine medium washed fleeces                      34 @ 35

Colorado and Territory wools range as follows:

Lowest grades                                   14 @ 16
Low medium                                      18 @ 22
Medium                                          22 @ 26
Fine                                            16 @ 24

Wools from New Mexico:

Lowest grades                                   14 @ 16
Part improved                                   16 @ 17
Best improved                                   19 @ 23

Burry from 2c to 10c off: black 2c to 5c off.


LIVE STOCK MARKETS.

The total receipts and shipments for last week were as follows:

                                    Received.   Shipped.

Cattle                               25,594     13,722
Calves                                  353        166
Hogs                                 45,376     31,864
Sheep                                14,206      8,903

The live stock receipts are increasing, and show a large gain over last
week.

CATTLE.--The receipts for Sunday and Monday were rather large, being
estimated at 6,800 head of cattle, as against 3,700 received in the
corresponding time last week. Shipping grades of cattle were active and
firm yesterday at $5 @ 6 67-1/2, exporters taking a fair number. Common
lots were lower, with sales to dressed-beef buyers as low as $4 25. A
good share of the day's trading was done at $5 70 @ 6 60. Quotations are
as follows:

Fancy fat cattle                             $ 6 75 @ 7 00
Choice to prime steers                         6 05 @ 6 70
Fair to good shipping steers                   5 55 @ 6 00
Common to medium steers                        4 25 @ 5 50
Butcher's steers                               4 50 @ 5 00
Cows and bulls, common to good                 3 00 @ 4 25
Inferior cows and bulls                        2 00 @ 2 95
Stockers                                       3 40 @ 4 40
Feeders                                        4 25 @ 4 75
Milch cows, per head                          25 00 @55 00
Veal calves, per 100lbs                        4 00 @ 7 25

HOGS.--The receipts Sunday and Monday were estimated at 18,000 hogs,
against only 6,700 received in the corresponding time last week.
Although the receipts have been increasing during the last few days,
supplies are still remarkably small for the first half of January. The
great bulk of the crop has undoubtedly been marketed, but there are
known to be a very good number still unmarketed, and it is believed that
farmers are unwilling to ship freely to this market while packers are so
largely inactive, fearing a decline in prices. Shippers have been taking
most of the hogs lately. Butchers took in the neighborhood of 1,900
hogs, leaving a few thousand still unsold. Sales were made of heavy at
$5 10 @ 6 25; light at $5 10 @ 5 75, and skips and culls at $3 50 @ 5.

Note.--All sales of hogs are made subject to a shrinkage of 40 lbs for
piggy sows and 80 lbs for stags. Dead hogs sell for 1-1/2c per lb for
weights of 200 and over and for weights of less than 100lbs.

SHEEP.--The market opened with a good supply, the receipts for Sunday
and Monday being estimated at 2,500 head, as against 1,968 received in
the same time last week. There was an active local and shipping demand
for all desirable offerings, and prices ruled firm at the recent
advance, sales being made of fair to choice at $3 65 @ 5 60.



COMMISSION MERCHANTS.

J.H. WHITE & CO.,

PRODUCE COMMISSION

106 WATER ST., CHICAGO.

Refers to this paper.



MISCELLANEOUS.

YOUR NAME printed on 60 Cards

ALL NEW designs of _Gold Floral, Remembrances, Sentiment, Hand Floral_,
etc., with _Love, Friendship,_ and _Holiday Mottoes_. 10c. 7pks. and this
elegant Ring, 50 c., 15 pks. & Ring, $1.

12 NEW "CONCEALED NAME" Cards (name concealed with hand holding flowers
with mottoes) 20c. 7 pks. and this Ring for $1. Agents sample book and
full outfit, 25c. Over 200 new Cards added this season. Blank Cards at
wholesale prices.

NORTHFORD CARD CO. Northford, Conn.



Agents Wanted, Male and Female, for Spence's Blue Book, a most
fascinating and salable novelty. Every family needs from one to a dozen.
Immense profits and exclusive territory. Sample mailed for 25 cts in
postage stamps. Address J.H. CLARSON, P.O. Box 2296, Philadelphia, Pa.



$1000 Every 100 Days

Positively sure to Agents everywhere selling our New SILVER MOULD WHITE
WIRE CLOTHES-LINE. Warranted. Pleases at sight. Cheap. Sells readily at
every house. Agents clearing $10 per day. Farmers make $900 to $1200
during Winter. _Handsome samples free._

Address, GIRARD WIRE MILLS, Philadelphia, Pa.



BEST QUALITY.

[Illustration]

80 Cards

New designs in Satin and Gold finish, with name, 10 cts. We offer $100
for a pack of cards any nicer work, or prettier styles. _Samples free_.
EAGLE CARD WORKS, NEW HAVEN, CT.



500 VIRGINIA FARMS & MILLS

For Sale and Exchange. Write for free REAL ESTATE JOURNAL. R.B. CHAFFIN;
CO. Richmond, Virginia.



PATENT

Procured or no charge. 40 p. book patent-law free. Add. W.T.
FITZGERALD 1006 F St., Washington, D.C.



CARDS

50 SATIN FINISH CARDS, New Imported designs, name on and Present Free
for 10c. Cut this out. CLINTON BROS. & Co., Clintonville, Ct.



EDUCATIONAL.

MT. CARROLL SEMINARY

And Musical Conservatory, Carroll Co., Ill.,

_Never had an agent_ to beg funds or pupils. The PECUNIARY AID
SYSTEM _is original_, and helps many worthy girls, without means,
to an education. "_Oreads_" _free_.



SEWING SILK.

Corticelli Sewing Silk,

[Illustration]

LADIES, TRY IT!

The Best Sewing Silk Made.

Every Spool Warranted.

Full Length, Smooth and Strong.

Ask your Storekeeper for Corticelli Silk.



SPECIAL OFFER.

$67 FOR $18!

[Illustration]

A Superb New Family

Sewing Machine!

Combining all the most recent improvements, and now selling for $65, is
offered by THE PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING COMPANY to subscribers to THE
PRAIRIE FARMER

FOR $18,

including one year's subscription to the paper.

This exceptional offer will remain open for a few days only.



MISCELLANEOUS.

"FACTS ABOUT Arkansas and Texas."

A handsome book, beautifully illustrated, with colored diagrams, giving
reliable information as to crops, population, religious denominations,
commerce, timber, Railroads, lands, etc., etc.

Sent free to any address on receipt of a 2-cent stamp. Address

    H.C. Townsend,
    Gen. Passenger Agt., St. Louis, Mo.



Stock Farm for Sale

Consisting of 565 acres--360 under plow, 35 acres timber, balance in
grass--situated in finest County in Iowa, one-fourth mile from Village,
Station, and Creamery. Or will sell one-half interest to practical
stockman and feeder who will assume management. Write for particulars to

    H.I. SMITH,
    Prest. First National Bank, Mason City, Iowa.



Print Your Own Cards

Labels, Envelopes, etc.

[Illustration]

with our $3 PRINTING PRESS. Larger sizes for circulars, etc., $8 to
$75. For pleasure, money making, young or old. Everything easy, printed
instructions. Send 2 stamps for Catalogue of Presses, Type, Cards, etc.,
to the factory.

KELSEY & CO., Meriden, Conn.



[Illustration]

We will send you a watch or a chain BY MAIL OR EXPRESS, C.O.D, to be
examined before paying any money and if not satisfactory, returned at
our expense. We manufacture all our watches and save you 30 per cent.
Catalogue of 250 styles free. EVERY WATCH WARRANTED. ADDRESS
STANDARD AMERICAN WATCH CO., PITTSBURGH. PA.



PIG EXTRICATOR

To aid animals in giving birth. Send for free circular to WM. DULIN,
Avoca, Pottawattamie Co., Ia.



FREE

_By return mail_. Full Description MOODY'S NEW TAILOR SYSTEM of Dress
Cutting MOODY & CO, Cincinnati, O.



THE PRAIRIE FARMER is the Cheapest and Best Agricultural Paper
published. Only $2.00 per year.