IV COMPOSITION OF BOOKS                                     111

    Title-page...Preface matter...Chapter headings and
    synopsis...Subheadings...Extracts...Notes and il-
    lustrations...Running titles and paging at head or at
    foot Poetry...Appendix and index...Initials...Headbands,
    etc.

Where chapter synopses are not given, ordinary text type may be used for
the table of contents.

The following reproduction of the table of contents of DeVinne's
_Correct Composition_ shows this method of treatment.

                             CONTENTS

CHAPTER                                                     PAGE
        Preface                                              vii

     I  Spelling                                               5

    II  Abbreviations                                         33

   III  Compound Words                                        61

    IV  Figures and Numerals                                  76

     V  Italic                                                94

    VI  Capital Letters                                      108

   VII  Division of Words                                    128

  VIII  Small Capitals                                       145

    IX  Extracts and Letters                                 157

     X  Notes                                                171

    XI  Indention                                            182

   XII  Spacing                                              198

  XIII  Quotation-marks                                      209

   XIV  Subheadings                                          230

    XV  Punctuation                                          241

   XVI  Proof-reading                                        294

  XVII  About Copy                                           327

 XVIII  Errors of the Press                                  345

        Appendix                                             359

        Index                                                447

Small capitals are best for subheads when of not more than two lines. If
the subheads are longer it is best to use lower-case.

Signatures and credits are often put in small capitals. It is usually,
however, better to use italics for the purpose. There is no need of a
dash to connect the name with the quotation. When two or more quotations
from the same author are used as mottoes, with reference to the works
from which they are taken or the occasion on which they were said, the
name of the author may be put in small capitals in a separate line, the
name of the book or speech in italics, and the occasion in smaller roman
type.

Numerous signatures to a document or petition, such as the _Mayflower
Compact_ or the _Declaration of Independence_, are often set in columns
using capitals for the initials and small capitals for the rest of the
name. Full capitals are too large for the purpose.

    We therefore, the Commissioners for the Massachusetts, Connecticut,
    and New Haven, do also, for our several governments, subscribe unto
    these.

    JOHN WINTHROP, Governor of the Massachusetts
    THOMAS DUDLEY           THEOPHILUS EATON
    GEORGE FENWICK          EDWARD HOPKINS
                            THOMAS GREGSON

Dedications of books are commonly set in small capitals. As these
dedicatory formulas are ordinarily brief there should be wide leading,
good display, and care as to margins. The author will often give very
definite specifications as to the arrangement of his copy in lines, and
this will sometimes cause difficulty, occasionally compelling the use of
too small type. The author's specifications must be followed if he
adheres to them.

Small capitals are much favored for running titles of pages. Full
capitals are much more effective and are to be preferred where the words
are few. Small capitals of 12 or 14 point body are distinct but smaller
sizes are crowded and hard to read. This difficulty can sometimes be
remedied by hair spacing. Over spacing of such lines is objectionable
though it has sometimes prevailed as a temporary fashion.

Small capitals used in running titles are exposed to heavy wear and
their shallow counters are liable to get choked up with ink. Capitals of
the monotint or of a light-faced antique are sometimes selected for
books frequently reprinted where the wear on the exposed running titles
is very severe.

In reprinting letters it is common to use small capitals for the name of
the place from which the letter was written, for the name of the
addressee, and for the signature. In job and advertising work the name
of the month and day and date are generally put in lower-case of the
text letter. This rule is not followed, however, in books. When the
heading of the letter is very long lower-case letters are preferable to
small capitals under the general rules of taste which govern the use of
types. The salutation, _Dear Sir_, _Gentlemen_, or the like, does not
need small capitals. It is better printed in italic lower-case with a
colon (not followed by a dash) at the end. If the matter is double
leaded the salutation may go in a line by itself, otherwise conforming
to the rules just given.

Reprints of formal inscriptions on tablets and the like are often made
in small capitals surrounded by a border. There should be a good relief
of white space between the type and the border.

In the Bible and in hymn books the words LORD and GOD are usually set
with full capital initial and the rest of the word in small capitals.

This is, of course, a method of showing veneration and at one time it
was customary to print all names of spiritual or temporal dignitaries
and magnates or even ordinary names in small capitals. This practice
still lingers in a few newspapers which print the names of persons, even
those of small consequence, in small capitals, especially on the
editorial page.

The tendency is steady toward the discriminating use of capitals, small
capitals, and italics. More and more we restrict the use of marks of
emphasis to the really necessary places leaving the words to tell their
story without outside aid.




SUGGESTIONS AS TO TYPOGRAPHIC USE OF CAPITALS


Capitals are too strong to be used with Arabic numerals. This fault of
proportion is increased by the custom of casting Arabic numerals on an
en body for table work, making them only half as thick as the type. Full
capitals may be used with full figures the width of an ordinary letter.
Condensed capitals may be used with en body numerals.

If old-style capitals and figures are required in the same line use
figures about one-half larger in body than the capitals and justify them
to the line.

It is this difficulty in combining capitals and Arabic numerals in the
same line that causes the extensive use of Roman numerals in chapter
numbers, numbers of other headings, dates on title pages, and the like.

When a large initial three or four lines high is used for the first
letter of a new chapter, large capitals are sometimes used, although
such usage is not free from the reproach of looking too much like
newspaper advertising. When this initial is a two line letter it should
be in alignment with the small capitals of the upper line and the base
line of the text letter of the lower line.

[Illustration:
AMONG the earliest methods of communicating
ideas to the absent pictures
hold the largest place.]

[Illustration: THERE comes a tide in the affairs of men which,
taken at the flood, leads on to fortune.]

Care should be taken not to compact capitals. Use wider leading and
broader spacing than for lower-case; for example, where you would use
one lead between lower-case lines you should use two or three between
lines of capitals.

Capitals occupy more of the type-body than lower-case letters and
consequently words or lines set entirely with capitals need wider
spacing and leading than the lower-case to make composition readable.
When lines of roman capitals are set solid or single-leaded the en-quad
will usually be enough space between words especially if the words are
short; but for wide-leaded lines and head-lines double spaces (two
three-to-em) will be needed. A head-line of round, open capitals may
even need em-quad spaces. Wide letter words require wide spaces and
words of thin or condensed letters require thin spaces.

[Illustration:
UNITED TYPOTHETAE
OF AMERICA

UNITED TYPOTHETAE
OF AMERICA]

Words which begin or end with A Y L V W T may need spaces a little less
than those with H I M, etc. In small types the inequalities in white
space beside or between combinations like L Y A T W and letters with
regular shape like H I M N, may not be readily noticed, but in large
sizes of capitals these differences are greatly increased and will often
make unequal white spaces in a line with uniform metal spaces. In some
styles of types a line may need unequal metal spaces in order to space
the words evenly.

(Marks indicate insertion of spaces.)

[Illustration: TEN MAIL TRAINS]

    This line has en-quads between the words, but the forms
    of L and T make the white space greater than
    between the first and second words.

[Illustration: TEN MAI'L TRAI'N'S]

    This line has an en-quad in first space and three-to-em
    in the second, with hair-spaces between some
    letters of the words.

So, also, it will often be necessary to insert pieces of paper, card, or
thin leads between the letters of a word in large display, in order to
make them evenly spaced, as shown in these examples:

(Marks indicate insertion of spaces.)

[Illustration:
PLAINLY
PLAI'N'LY
UNEVENLY SPACED
EVE'N'LY S'PA'C'E'D]

This differential spacing in a line of capitals will also be required in
a line having abbreviations or initials. The following line, spaced with
en-quads throughout, has unnecessarily wide spaces between the initials:

[Illustration: JOHN ENDICOTT LODGE, A. O. U. W.]

Spaced with four-to-em in the last three places, it is improved:

[Illustration: JOHN ENDICOTT LODGE, A. O. U. W.]

Capitals used as initials of titles and for other abbreviations, with
the accompanying periods, should be thin-spaced or set close together,
as shown in the second of these examples:

[Illustration:
GEORGE MARKHAM, D. D., PH. D.
GEORGE MARKHAM, D.D., PH.D.
JOHN FLINT, M. D. V., BOSTON, U. S. A.
JOHN FLINT, M.D.V., BOSTON, U.S.A.]

Two or more lines of capitals of the same size should be spaced as
nearly alike as possible. These three lines are so disproportionately
spaced that they are not pleasing:

[Illustration:
NORTH END UNION
B  O  S  T  O  N
MASSACHUSETTS]

The squaring up is arbitrary and strained. The lines are better like
this:

[Illustration:
NORTH END UNION
    BOSTON
MASSACHUSETTS]

But if it is necessary to square up lines and no additional words or
letters can be inserted the short line may be filled with florets or
other characters which should not be bolder than the type itself and
should be of a style to harmonize with it as nearly as possible.

[Illustration:
NORTH END UNION
*** BOSTON ***
MASSACHUSETTS]

The extra wide spacing of words set in capitals, as in head-lines and
running-heads, should be avoided by the young compositor; there are
places where it may be unobjectionable but it will require good judgment
and some experience to prevent such lines making the page look freakish
or amateurish.

In jobbing, advertisement, and display work, capitals are used more
freely than in plain reading matter. In book work the practice is to use
capitals more freely than in newspaper composition. A study of the
reading columns of daily newspapers will discover that capitals are used
very sparingly and words are "kept down" in many cases which in more
formal book and pamphlet work would be capitalized.

In advertisements, announcements, and circular letters, words are often
capitalized for distinction or emphasis, as in these examples:

    Those who win a Second or First Prize through a monthly or special
    contest become Honor Members of the Guild, and receive the Guild
    badge without charge.

    You are cordially invited to attend the Spring Opening of Suits and
    Outside Garments for Women, on Wednesday and Thursday, April 28 and
    29, in our new Mason Street Annex.

Precise rules for the use of capitals cannot be given for work of all
kinds. Their insertion or omission will be governed greatly by the
subject matter and the style of treatment desired by the proof-reader or
the customer and the compositor's duty will not go further than to
maintain some consistency in their use in each piece of work. When he
has copy in which capitals are used as in the following example he will
be expected either to discard all capitals except at the beginning of
the sentences or to capitalize the words as in the second example:

    Fifty styles of the Smartest and nobbiest wheel specialties for
    ponies and Small horses, Pony carts, light horse novelties, traps,
    wagons, Harness, Saddles, etc.

    Fifty Styles of the Smartest and Nobbiest Wheel Specialties for
    Ponies and Small Horses, Pony Carts, Light Horse Novelties, Traps,
    Wagons, Harness, Saddles, etc.

In lines of large display, like head-lines, set in capitals and
lower-case, all the important words should begin with capitals.
Unimportant words, such as _of_, _the_, _by_, _for_, _but_, _in_, etc.,
except when they are at the beginning of the displayed phrase, are not
capitalized.

    Notice to the Public
    The Best is the Cheapest
    A Great Bargain in Hats
    By Right of Conquest
    For Love and Honor

A line of capitals containing an abbreviation or other short word should
have capitals throughout when possible, as in the second form of these
examples:

    JOHN SMITH, Jr.              JOHN SMITH, JR.
    ROBINSON & Co.               ROBINSON & CO.

In advertisement display lines like the following are permissible:

    The GOLDEN HARVESTER
    REGAL SHOES _for_ MEN

Combinations of different sizes and styles of types are also common and
serve their purpose properly, as in this style, often used in billheads,
etc.

    TO THOMAS W. ABBOTT, DR.
    _In account with_ FRANK ABBOTT

Combinations of large and small capitals and lower-case like the
following are, however, not approved:

    WILLIAM BROWN, President

The words in small capitals as well as the word in lower-case should
begin with large capitals, like this:

    WILLIAM BROWN, President

When lines of capitals are used in books and pamphlets, for headings and
display, they should be used consistently--that is, all headings of a
similar kind should be alike in any piece of work, and not one heading
in capitals and another in lower-case. The composition of a title page
is more pleasing when its chief lines are in one style of letters,
giving a harmonious effect. When lines of capitals and lines of
lower-case are interspersed in a page an appearance of confusion is
liable to be the result.




SUPPLEMENTARY READING


A Manual for Writers. By John Matthews Manley and John Arthur Powell.
The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

The Writer's Desk Book. By William Dana Orcutt. Frederick Stokes
Company, New York.

Correct Composition. By Theodore L. DeVinne. The Oswald Publishing
Company, New York.

A Handbook of Composition. By Edwin D. Woolley. D. C. Heath, Boston.

Punctuation. With Chapters on Hyphenization, Capitalization and
Spelling. By F. Horace Teale. Appleton & Co., New York.




QUESTIONS


As the subject matter of this book is such that many of the questions
will serve only to bring out the accuracy of the pupil's memory of rules
it is very desirable that care should be taken to insure intelligent use
and application of the rules. To be able to repeat a rule is of very
little importance compared with the ability to apply it intelligently.

The instructor should give the pupils constant practice in the
application of these rules. This should consist of;--

(a) Study of passages taken from all kinds of printed matter.

(b) Rewriting of passages given out without capitalization.

In the first case a wide range of material should be used from the most
carefully printed books to the most carelessly printed matter that can
be found, including newspapers of varying excellence and pure
advertising matter. The capitalization found should be studied and
explained by the rules and the criticisms or changes suggested justified
in the same way.

In like manner in the second case every capital used in the rewritten
text should be justified by the proper rule.

Without such exercises as these, the book will have comparatively little
value.

1. What is a capital letter?

2. How many series of letters does an ordinary font of type contain?

3. Name them, and tell what you know about each one.

4. In what does the distinction between capital and lower-case letter
consist?

5. What combinations of capitals and lower-case are permissible?

6. In manuscript how do you indicate capitals? Italics?

7. What are capitals used for?

8. What tendencies are observable in style?

9. What is the real implement of English speech?

10. What are the general rules for the use of capitals?

11. Capitalize, _men pray to god, to christ and to the virgin mary that
they may be defended by the holy ghost from those assaults of the devil
which would make devils of them_. Give the rule for so doing.

12. Capitalize, _the supreme architect of the universe, sometimes called
providence, has his own ways of bringing men to heaven_. Give the rule
for so doing.

13. Learn the list of words under rule 2.

14. Are these words capitalized in all cases?

15. Are adjectives derived from these words capitalized?

16. When do you not capitalize _God_ and its synonyms?

17. What is the usage as to pronouns referring to God and the other
persons of the Trinity?

18. What is the rule regarding the Bible and matter related to it?

19. What is the rule regarding biblical terms?

20. Capitalize, _the holy man entered the holy place at the appointed
time_. _The message of the gospel is found in the most spiritual form in
the gospel of John._ Give the rule.

21. What is the rule about religious bodies and their members?

22. What is the rule about monastic orders?

23. What is the rule about _church_? Give examples of the different
uses.

24. What is the rule about names of creeds?

25. Give different uses of _father_ and _reformer_ and explain them.

26. How do you use capitals in writing names of persons in English and
in other languages?

27. What is the usage with regard to epithets and the like?

28. What is the usage with regard to races of men?

29. Give the rule for names of places, and examples of each usage.

30. Learn the tables under rule 15.

31. When do you capitalize generic terms for political divisions and
when do you not?

32. What is the rule about words denoting time?

33. What is the rule about festivals, etc.?

34. What is the rule about astronomical terms?

35. When are ordinal numbers capitalized?

36. How are capitals used in scientific names?

37. What is the usage in such words as _father_, _mother_, and other
terms denoting relationship?

38. What is the rule regarding names of parties, political, literary,
etc.?

39. What is the rule as to historic parties, leagues, etc.?

40. What is the usage in writing of periods, historic, geological, etc.?

41. What is the usage regarding important events?

42. How are treaties, laws, etc., treated?

43. When are the names of governmental bodies, departments, etc.,
capitalized?

44. How are official titles of corporations and other bodies treated?

45. How are names of conventions, expositions, and the like treated?

46. How are capitals used in book titles and similar copy, including the
use of _the_?

47. How are capitals used in dedications and headings?

48. Give the rules for the use of capitals in foreign book titles.

49. Give the rules for the use of capitals in personal titles.

50. What can you do when a name is followed by the initials of a number
of titles?

51. What do you do in case of compound titles?

52. How do you write the names of things personified?

53. How are adjectives derived from proper nouns treated?

54. How are capitals used in direct quotations?

55. How are capitals used in resolutions?

56. Are capitals used after colons?

57. How do we write the interjections _O_ and _oh_?

58. How do we write the first personal pronoun?

59. When and where are capitals used for emphasis?

60. Describe the peculiarities of small capitals.

61. Are they used in the same way as full capitals? Why?

62. What is the principal use of small capitals?

63. Give some of the places where small capitals are commonly used.

64. How are small capitals now used in tables of contents, and how were
they formerly used?

65. What type would you use for a table of contents when chapter
synopses are not given?

66. How are subheads treated?

67. How are signatures and credits treated?

68. How are dedications of books treated?

69. How are running titles treated?

70. What is good usage in reprinting letters?

71. What is a good way to set reprints of formal inscriptions?

72. What is the usage with regard to the names of persons treated with
veneration?

73. What is the tendency in the use of capitals and other devices for
emphasis?

74. How would you handle combinations of capitals and numerals, and why?

75. How would you treat large initials?

76. How should you space and lead capitals as compared with lower-case?

77. How should lines of capitals be spaced, and why?

78. Would capitals set with even spacing or without spacing appear to be
evenly spaced?

79. What is the reason for the appearance just noted?

80. What would you do about it?

81. How should you space capitals used as initials of titles with
accompanying periods?

82. How should you space two or more lines of capitals of the same size?

83. If squaring up is necessary, how should it be done?

84. What can you say about wide spacing of words set in capitals?

85. What can you say of the use of capitals in different sorts of
matter?

86. How is the compositor guided in these cases?

87. How are capitals used in lines of large display?

88. How would you set a line of capitals containing an abbreviation or
other short word?

89. How may capitals be used in lines of advertising display?

90. Under what circumstances are combinations of different sizes and
styles of type permissible?

91. Are combinations of large and small capitals and lower-case
advisable?

92. What rule should be followed when lines of capitals are used in
books and pamphlets for headings and display?




GLOSSARY


FORMAL--Made in accordance with regular and established forms, or with
dignity and impressiveness: stiff.

GENERA--Plural of genus, a group for purposes of classification,
embracing one or more species.

GENERIC--Of or pertaining to a genus (see genera) as distinct from
specific, of or pertaining to a species (which see).

ORDINAL--That form of the numeral that shows the order of anything in a
series.

SPECIES--A group for purposes of classification subordinate to a genus
and composed of individuals having only minor differences.

VERSIONS--(Of the Bible) Different translations of the original into the
same or different languages.




TYPOGRAPHIC TECHNICAL SERIES FOR APPRENTICES


The following list of publications, comprising the TYPOGRAPHIC TECHNICAL
SERIES FOR APPRENTICES, has been prepared under the supervision of the
Committee on Education of the United Typothetae of America for use in trade
classes, in course of printing instruction, and by individuals.

Each publication has been compiled by a competent author or group of
authors, and carefully edited, the purpose being to provide the printers of
the United States--employers, journeymen, and apprentices--with a
comprehensive series of handy and inexpensive compendiums of reliable,
up-to-date information upon the various branches and specialties of the
printing craft, all arranged in orderly fashion for progressive study.

The publications of the series are of uniform size, 5×8 inches. Their
general make-up, in typography, illustrations, etc., has been, as far as
practicable, kept in harmony throughout. A brief synopsis of the particular
contents and other chief features of each volume will be found under each
title in the following list.

Each topic is treated in a concise manner, the aim being to embody in each
publication as completely as possible all the rudimentary information and
essential facts necessary to an understanding of the subject. Care has been
taken to make all statements accurate and clear, with the purpose of
bringing essential information within the understanding of beginners in the
different fields of study. Wherever practicable, simple and well-defined
drawings and illustrations have been used to assist in giving additional
clearness to the text.

In order that the pamphlets may be of the greatest possible help for use in
trade-school classes and for self-instruction, each title is accompanied by
a list of Review Questions covering essential items of the subject matter.
A short Glossary of technical terms belonging to the subject or department
treated is also added to many of the books.

These are the Official Text-books of the United Typothetae of America.

Address all orders and inquiries to COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, UNITED
TYPOTHETAE OF AMERICA, CHICAGO, ILLINOIS, U. S. A.


PART I--_Types, Tools, Machines, and Materials_

=1.= =Type: a Primer of Information=                  By A. A. Stewart

     Relating to the mechanical features of printing types; their sizes,
     font schemes, etc., with a brief description of their manufacture.
     44 pp.; illustrated; 74 review questions; glossary.

=2.= =Compositors' Tools and Materials=               By A. A. Stewart

     A primer of information about composing sticks, galleys, leads,
     brass rules, cutting and mitering machines, etc. 47 pp.;
     illustrated; 50 review questions; glossary.

=3.= =Type Cases, Composing Room Furniture=           By A. A. Stewart

     A primer of information about type cases, work stands, cabinets,
     case racks, galley racks, standing galleys, etc. 43 pp.;
     illustrated; 33 review questions; glossary.

=4.= =Imposing Tables and Lock-up Appliances=         By A. A. Stewart

     Describing the tools and materials used in locking up forms for the
     press, including some modern utilities for special purposes. 59
     pp.; illustrated; 70 review questions; glossary.

=5.= =Proof Presses=                                  By A. A. Stewart

     A primer of information about the customary methods and machines
     for taking printers' proofs. 40 pp.; illustrated; 41 review
     questions; glossary.

=6.= =Platen Printing Presses=                         By Daniel Baker

     A primer of information regarding the history and mechanical
     construction of platen printing presses, from the original hand
     press to the modern job press, to which is added a chapter on
     automatic presses of small size. 51 pp.; illustrated; 49 review
     questions; glossary.

=7.= =Cylinder Printing Presses=                   By Herbert L. Baker

     Being a study of the mechanism and operation of the principal types
     of cylinder printing machines. 64 pp.; illustrated; 47 review
     questions; glossary.

=8.= =Mechanical Feeders and Folders=           By William E. Spurrier

     The history and operation of modern feeding and folding machines;
     with hints on their care and adjustments. Illustrated; review
     questions; glossary.

=9.= =Power for Machinery in Printing Houses=         By Carl F. Scott

     A treatise on the methods of applying power to printing presses and
     allied machinery with particular reference to electric drive. 53
     pp.; illustrated; 69 review questions; glossary.

=10.= =Paper Cutting Machines=                       By Niel Gray, Jr.

     A primer of information about paper and card trimmers, hand-lever
     cutters, power cutters, and other automatic machines for cutting
     paper, 70 pp.; illustrated; 115 review questions; glossary.

=11.= =Printers' Rollers=                             By A. A. Stewart

     A primer of information about the composition, manufacture, and
     care of inking rollers. 46 pp.; illustrated; 61 review questions;
     glossary.

=12.= =Printing Inks=                                 By Philip Ruxton

     Their composition, properties and manufacture (reprinted by
     permission from Circular No. 53, United States Bureau of
     Standards); together with some helpful suggestions about the
     everyday use of printing inks by Philip Ruxton. 80 pp.; 100 review
     questions; glossary.

=13.= =How Paper is Made=                  By William Bond Wheelwright

     A primer of information about the materials and processes of
     manufacturing paper for printing and writing. 68 pp.; illustrated;
     62 review questions; glossary.

=14.= =Relief Engravings=                         By Joseph P. Donovan

     Brief history and non-technical description of modern methods of
     engraving; woodcut, zinc plate, halftone; kind of copy for
     reproduction; things to remember when ordering engravings.
     Illustrated; review questions; glossary.

=15.= =Electrotyping and Sterotyping=
                                  By Harris B. Hatch and A. A. Stewart

     A primer of information about the processes of electrotyping and
     stereotyping. 94 pp.; illustrated; 129 review questions;
     glossaries.


PART II--_Hand and Machine Composition_

=16.= =Typesetting=                                   By A. A. Stewart

     A handbook for beginners, giving information about justifying,
     spacing, correcting, and other matters relating to typesetting.
     Illustrated; review questions; glossary.

=17.= =Printers' Proofs=                              By A. A. Stewart

     The methods by which they are made, marked, and corrected, with
     observations on proofreading. Illustrated; review questions;
     glossary.

=18.= =First Steps in Job Composition=               By Camille DeVéze

     Suggestions for the apprentice compositor in setting his first
     jobs, especially about the important little things which go to make
     good display in typography. 63 pp.; examples; 55 review questions;
     glossary.

=19.= =General Job Composition=

     How the job compositor handles business stationery, programs and
     miscellaneous work. Illustrated; review questions; glossary.

=20.= =Book Composition=                             By J. W. Bothwell

     Chapters from DeVinne's "Modern Methods of Book Composition,"
     revised and arranged for this series of text-books by J. W. Bothwell
     of The DeVinne Press, New York. Part I: Composition of pages. Part
     II: Imposition of pages. 229 pp.; illustrated; 525 review
     questions; glossary.

=21.= =Tabular Composition=                           By Robert Seaver

     A study of the elementary forms of table composition, with examples
     of more difficult composition. 36 pp.; examples; 45 review
     questions.

=22.= =Applied Arithmetic=                            By E. E. Sheldon

     Elementary arithmetic applied to problems of the printing trade,
     calculation of materials, paper weights and sizes, with standard
     tables and rules for computation, each subject amplified with
     examples and exercises. 159 pp.

=23.= =Typecasting and Composing Machines=        A. W. Finlay, Editor

     Section I--The Linotype                        By L. A. Hornstein
     Section II--The Monotype                           By Joseph Hays
     Section III--The Intertype                    By Henry W. Cozzens
     Section IV--Other Typecasting and Typesetting Machines
                                                     By Frank H. Smith

     A brief history of typesetting machines, with descriptions of their
     mechanical principles and operations. Illustrated; review
     questions; glossary.


PART III--_Imposition and Stonework_

=24.= =Locking Forms for the Job Press=              By Frank S. Henry

     Things the apprentice should know about locking up small forms, and
     about general work on the stone. Illustrated; review questions;
     glossary.

=25.= =Preparing Forms for the Cylinder Press=       By Frank S. Henry

     Pamphlet and catalog imposition; margins; fold marks, etc. Methods
     of handling type forms and electrotype forms. Illustrated; review
     questions; glossary.


PART IV--_Presswork_

=26.= =Making Ready on Platen Presses=                 By T. G. McGrew

     The essential parts of a press and their functions; distinctive
     features of commonly used machines. Preparing the tympan,
     regulating the impression, underlaying and overlaying, setting
     gauges, and other details explained. Illustrated; review questions;
     glossary.

=27.= =Cylinder Presswork=                             By T. G. McGrew

     Preparing the press; adjustment of bed and cylinder, form rollers,
     ink fountain, grippers and delivery systems. Underlaying and
     overlaying; modern overlay methods. Illustrated; review questions;
     glossary.

=28.= =Pressroom Hints and Helps=                 By Charles L. Dunton

     Describing some practical methods of pressroom work, with
     directions and useful information relating to a variety of
     printing-press problems. 87 pp.; 176 review questions.

=29.= =Reproductive Processes of the Graphic Arts=      By A. W. Elson

     A primer of information about the distinctive features of the
     relief, the intaglio, and the planographic processes of printing.
     84 pp.; illustrated; 100 review questions; glossary.


PART V--_Pamphlet and Book Binding_

=30.= =Pamphlet Binding=                        By Bancroft L. Goodwin

     A primer of information about the various operations employed in
     binding pamphlets and other work in the bindery. Illustrated;
     review questions; glossary.

=31.= =Book Binding=                                 By John J. Pleger

     Practical information about the usual operations in binding books;
     folding; gathering, collating, sewing, forwarding, finishing. Case
     making and cased-in books. Hand work and machine work. Job and
     blank-book binding. Illustrated; review questions; glossary.


PART VI--_Correct Literary Composition_

=32.= =Word Study and English Grammar=               By F. W. Hamilton

     A primer of information about words, their relations, and their
     uses. 68 pp.; 84 review questions; glossary.

=33.= =Punctuation=                                  By F. W. Hamilton

     A primer of information about the marks of punctuation and their
     use, both grammatically and typographically. 56 pp.; 59 review
     questions; glossary.

=34.= =Capitals=                                     By F. W. Hamilton

     A primer of information about capitalization, with some practical
     typographic hints as to the use of capitals. 48 pp.; 92 review
     questions; glossary.

=35.= =Division of Words=                            By F. W. Hamilton

     Rules for the division of words at the ends of lines, with remarks
     on spelling, syllabication and pronunciation. 42 pp.; 70 review
     questions.

=36.= =Compound Words=                               By F. W. Hamilton

     A study of the principles of compounding, the components of
     compounds, and the use of the hyphen. 34 pp.; 62 review questions.

=37.= =Abbreviations and Signs=                      By F. W. Hamilton

     A primer of information about abbreviations and signs, with
     classified lists of those in most common use. 58 pp.; 32 review
     questions.

=38.= =The Uses of Italic=                           By F. W. Hamilton

     A primer of information about the history and uses of italic
     letters. 31 pp.; 37 review questions.

=39.= =Proofreading=                                 By Arnold Levitas

     The technical phases of the proofreader's work; reading, marking,
     revising, etc.; methods of handling proofs and copy. Illustrated by
     examples. 59 pp.; 69 review questions; glossary.

=40.= =Preparation of Printers' Copy=                By F. W. Hamilton

     Suggestions for authors, editors, and all who are engaged in
     preparing copy for the composing room. 36 pp.; 67 review questions.

=41.= =Printers' Manual of Style=

     A reference compilation of approved rules, usages, and suggestions
     relating to uniformity in punctuation, capitalization,
     abbreviations, numerals, and kindred features of composition.

=42.= =The Printer's Dictionary=                      By A. A. Stewart

     A handbook of definitions and miscellaneous information about
     various processes of printing, alphabetically arranged. Technical
     terms explained. Illustrated.


PART VII--_Design, Color, and Lettering_

=43.= =Applied Design for Printers=                   By Harry L. Gage

     A handbook of the principles of arrangement, with brief comment on
     the periods of design which have most influenced printing. Treats
     of harmony, balance, proportion, and rhythm; motion; symmetry and
     variety; ornament, esthetic and symbolic. 37 illustrations; 46
     review questions; glossary; bibliography.

=44.= =Elements of Typographic Design=                By Harry L. Gage

     Applications of the principles of decorative design. Building
     material of typography paper, types, ink, decorations and
     illustrations. Handling of shapes. Design of complete book,
     treating each part. Design of commercial forms and single units.
     Illustrations; review questions; glossary; bibliography.

=45.= =Rudiments of Color in Printing=                By Harry L. Gage

     Use of color: for decoration of black and white, for broad poster
     effect, in combinations of two, three, or more printings with
     process engravings. Scientific nature of color, physical and
     chemical. Terms in which color may be discussed: hue, value,
     intensity. Diagrams in color, scales and combinations. Color theory
     of process engraving. Experiments with color. Illustrations in full
     color, and on various papers. Review questions; glossary;
     bibliography.

=46.= =Lettering in Typography=                       By Harry L. Gage

     Printer's use of lettering: adaptability and decorative effect.
     Development of historic writing and lettering and its influence on
     type design. Classification of general forms in lettering.
     Application of design to lettering. Drawing for reproduction. Fully
     illustrated; review questions; glossary; bibliography.

=47.= =Typographic Design in Advertising=             By Harry L. Gage

     The printer's function in advertising. Precepts upon which
     advertising is based. Printer's analysis of his copy. Emphasis,
     legibility, attention, color. Method of studying advertising
     typography. Illustrations; review questions; glossary;
     bibliography.

=48.= =Making Dummies and Layouts=                    By Harry L. Gage

     A layout: the architectural plan. A dummy: the imitation of a
     proposed final effect. Use of dummy in sales work. Use of layout.
     Function of layout man. Binding schemes for dummies. Dummy
     envelopes. Illustrations; review questions; glossary; bibliography.


PART VIII--_History of Printing_

=49.= =Books Before Typography=                      By F. W. Hamilton

     A primer of information about the invention of the alphabet and the
     history of bookmaking up to the invention of movable types. 62 pp.;
     illustrated; 64 review questions.

=50.= =The Invention of Typography=                  By F. W. Hamilton

     A brief sketch of the invention of printing and how it came about.
     64 pp.; 62 review questions.

=51.= =History of Printing--Part I=                  By F. W. Hamilton

     A primer of information about the beginnings of printing, the
     development of the book, the development of printers' materials,
     and the work of the great pioneers. 63 pp.; 55 review questions.

=52.= =History of Printing--Part II=                 By F. W. Hamilton

     A brief sketch of the economic conditions of the printing industry
     from 1450 to 1789, including government regulations, censorship,
     internal conditions and industrial relations. 94 pp.; 128 review
     questions.

=53.= =Printing in England=                          By F. W. Hamilton

     A short history of printing in England from Caxton to the present
     time. 89 pp.; 65 review questions.

=54.= =Printing in America=                          By F. W. Hamilton

     A brief sketch of the development of the newspaper, and some notes
     on publishers who have especially contributed to printing. 98 pp.;
     84 review questions.

=55.= =Type and Presses in America=                  By F. W. Hamilton

     A brief historical sketch of the development of type casting and
     press building in the United States. 52 pp.; 61 review questions.


PART IX--_Cost Finding and Accounting_

=56.= =Elements of Cost in Printing=                By Henry P. Porter

     The Standard Cost-Finding Forms and their uses. What they should
     show. How to utilize the information they give. Review questions.
     Glossary.

=57.= =Use of a Cost System=                        By Henry P. Porter

     The Standard Cost-Finding Forms and their uses. What they should
     show. How to utilize the information they give. Review questions.
     Glossary.

=58.= =The Printer as a Merchant=                   By Henry P. Porter

     The selection and purchase of materials and supplies for printing.
     The relation of the cost of raw material and the selling price of
     the finished product. Review questions. Glossary.

=59.= =Fundamental Principles of Estimating=        By Henry P. Porter

     The estimator and his work; forms to use; general rules for
     estimating. Review questions. Glossary.

=60.= =Estimating and Selling=                      By Henry P. Porter

     An insight into the methods used in making estimates, and their
     relation to selling. Review questions. Glossary.

=61.= =Accounting for Printers=                     By Henry P. Porter

     A brief outline of an accounting system for printers; necessary
     books and accessory records. Review questions. Glossary.


PART X--_Miscellaneous_

=62.= =Health, Sanitation, and Safety=              By Henry P. Porter

     Hygiene in the printing trade; a study of conditions old and new;
     practical suggestions for improvement; protective appliances and
     rules for safety.

=63.= =Topical Index=                                By F. W. Hamilton

     A book of reference covering the topics treated in the Typographic
     Technical Series, alphabetically arranged.

=64.= =Courses of Study=                             By F. W. Hamilton

     A guidebook for teachers, with outlines and suggestions for
     classroom and shop work.




ACKNOWLEDGMENT


This series of Typographic Text-books is the result of the splendid
co-operation of a large number of firms and individuals engaged in the
printing business and its allied industries in the United States of
America.

The Committee on Education of the United Typothetae of America, under whose
auspices the books have been prepared and published, acknowledges its
indebtedness for the generous assistance rendered by the many authors,
printers, and others identified with this work.

While due acknowledgment is made on the title and copyright pages of those
contributing to each book, the Committee nevertheless felt that a group
list of co-operating firms would be of interest.

The following list is not complete, as it includes only those who have
co-operated in the production of a portion of the volumes, constituting the
first printing. As soon as the entire list of books comprising the
Typographic Technical Series has been completed (which the Committee hopes
will be at an early date), the full list will be printed in each volume.

The Committee also desires to acknowledge its indebtedness to the many
subscribers to this Series who have patiently awaited its publication.

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION,
UNITED TYPOTHETAE OF AMERICA.

  HENRY P. PORTER, _Chairman_,
  E. LAWRENCE FELL,
  A. M. GLOSSBRENNER,
  J. CLYDE OSWALD,
  TOBY RUBOVITS.

FREDERICK W. HAMILTON, _Education Director_.




CONTRIBUTORS


=For Composition and Electrotypes=

ISAAC H. BLANCHARD COMPANY, New York, N. Y.
S. H. BURBANK & CO., Philadelphia, Pa.
J. S. CUSHING & CO., Norwood, Mass.
THE DEVINNE PRESS, New York, N. Y.
R. R. DONNELLEY & SONS CO., Chicago, Ill.
GEO. H. ELLIS CO., Boston, Mass.
EVANS-WINTER-HEBB, Detroit, Mich.
FRANKLIN PRINTING COMPANY, Philadelphia, Pa.
F. H. GILSON COMPANY, Boston, Mass.
STEPHEN GREENE & CO., Philadelphia, Pa.
W. F. HALL PRINTING CO., Chicago, Ill.
J. B. LIPPINCOTT CO., Philadelphia, Pa.
MCCALLA & CO. INC., Philadelphia, Pa.
THE PATTESON PRESS, New York, New York
THE PLIMPTON PRESS, Norwood, Mass.
POOLE BROS., Chicago, Ill.
EDWARD STERN & CO., Philadelphia, Pa.
THE STONE PRINTING & MFG. CO., Roanoke, Va.
C. D. TRAPHAGEN, Lincoln, Neb.
THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, Cambridge, Mass.

=For Composition=

BOSTON TYPOTHETAE SCHOOL OF PRINTING, Boston, Mass.
WILLIAM F. FELL CO., Philadelphia, Pa.
THE KALKHOFF COMPANY, New York, N. Y.
OXFORD-PRINT, Boston, Mass.
TOBY RUBOVITS, Chicago, Ill.

=For Electrotypes=

BLOMGREN BROTHERS CO., Chicago, Ill.
FLOWER STEEL ELECTROTYPING CO., New York, N. Y.
C. J. PETERS & SON CO., Boston, Mass.
ROYAL ELECTROTYPE CO., Philadelphia, Pa.
H. C. WHITCOMB & CO., Boston, Mass.

=For Engravings=

AMERICAN TYPE FOUNDERS CO., Boston, Mass.
C. B. COTTRELL & SONS CO., Westerly, R. I.
GOLDING MANUFACTURING CO., Franklin, Mass.
HARVARD UNIVERSITY, Cambridge, Mass.
INLAND PRINTER CO., Chicago, Ill.
LANSTON MONOTYPE MACHINE COMPANY, Philadelphia, Pa.
MERGENTHALER LINOTYPE COMPANY, New York, N. Y.
GEO. H. MORRILL CO., Norwood, Mass.
OSWALD PUBLISHING CO., New York, N. Y.
THE PRINTING ART, Cambridge, Mass.
B. D. RISING PAPER COMPANY, Housatonic, Mass.
THE VANDERCOOK PRESS, Chicago, Ill.

=For Book Paper=

AMERICAN WRITING PAPER CO., Holyoke, Mass.
WEST VIRGINIA PULP & PAPER CO., Mechanicville, N. Y.