"Contagious ulcers.

"Corrupted elements; epidemical diseases.

"Every acute disease is an attempt to dispel diseased matter.

"Fever is not a disease, but the consequence of it; it is an effect of
an exertion greater than the power of the system.

"The radical healing of acute diseases is only possible by releasing the
diseased matter, by means of water, an agent which invariably effects
its object, and that always in a manner perceptible to the senses.

"By means of physic and bleeding, acute diseases become chronic; the
system, medically treated, effects a partial, but never a total ejection
of diseased matter.

"As sooner or later a body must yield to the effects of drugs, it is
quite impossible that any one suffering from chronic disease, unless
healed by Hydropathy, should die a natural death.

"Chronic disease cannot be permanently cured by drugs: Hydropathy alone
will effect this, by changing the chronic evil to acute eruptions, which
are cured in the same way that acute diseases are cured.

"Men, like other organic beings, ought to live according to nature's
law, without pain, and die a natural death, that is to say, without
illness or suffering. But with us almost every body dies prematurely,
from the effects of poisoning in some way or other."--ARBUTHNOT.

It was stated to Priessnitz, that in a case of gout, the bowels of the
patient by the treatment, had become constipated, to which he replied,
"Cold water never produces torpor of the bowels, but on the contrary, it
excites."

"In the cure of disease, that which is most agreeable is not always the
best. That which lowers the system, generally soothes and allays pain;
bleeding, drugs, opium, and warm baths do this, but they may fix the
disease firmer in the system, they diminish the energy so necessary to
eradicate the disease. Thus Gout, Piles, and many other complaints, are
never thoroughly cured by the faculty; they cannot abate the symptoms
without lowering the system."

"To promote a crisis, dress lightly; warm clothing relaxes the skin. The
stronger and harder the skin, the better will a crisis be developed.
Every sore and boil cannot be considered a crisis, some degenerate into
disease, and have an inward tendency. In a proper crisis of boils, they
rise, burst, and heal."

"For itching rash in the arm, do not wear the bandage, unless great pain
ensues, and in that case only at night."

"Chopping or sawing wood is better exercise for the stomach and bowels
than walking."

To a lady who complained of want of sleep, and much pain from an
eruption on her body, Priessnitz said "Take a tepid bath for some days,
eat lean meat without salt, and indulge freely in butter, you will get
well as soon as the rash has expended itself: there can be no repose for
the nerves until the humours that fret them are expelled."

"Nervous temperaments are the strongest, but most irritable when excited
by acid humours."

"Fingers being white after cold bathing denote weak nerves; the fingers
having lost their vitality, the blood ceases to circulate."

"Constipation and relaxation of the bowels proceed from the same causes,
weakness and impurities; hydropathy corrects both."

"It is impossible to warm, for any length of time, by hot viands and
warm water, their constant application only chills the more; by relaxing
and dilating they produce the opposite effects to those which are so
essential to health, namely Contraction. Cold water determines the
Caloric currents outwards from the vital centre, and promotes
decomposition."

"I cannot understand how drugs can reach any destined point; it appears
to me that all drugs are inimical to the human subject."

"Medicine introduced into the system, like the venom of a serpent,
permeates all the tissues."

"Mercury becomes enveloped in phlegm or slime, and remains in the
system, notwithstanding the body is continually subjected to the laws of
renovation and decay."

"Powerful medicines act speedily and detrimentally to the constitution.
The Water-cure is slow but advantageous in its operations."

"The wet sheet, which is in fact, a poultice, extracts pernicious
matters, as a sponge water from a basin, and brings something away each
time it is immersed in it."


XXXIII.--QUESTIONS PUT TO MR. PRIESSNITZ, AND HIS ANSWERS.

1.--Q. What should be done for:--

Severe cold settled on the lungs, attended with cough and expectoration?

A. Rub the chest and throat with cold water, and hold water in the mouth
often. In cold climates, bandage the throat: in warm climates, washing
it often is best.

2.--Q. Inflammation and soreness of throat attended with hoarseness and
difficulty in speaking?

A. As No. 1.

3.--Q. Exposure to change of climate with clothes occasionally wet,
attended with shivering?

A. Rubbing-sheets.

4.--Q. Continual public speaking of damp evenings?

A. Rubbing-sheets. Wash head well. A foot-bath for a long time; and take
exercise afterwards until feet are warm.

5.--Q. Cold accompanied by fever and restlessness at night?

A. As No. 4.

6.--Q. Head-ache occasioned by excitement?

A. As No. 4.

7.--Q. Shooting pain and tightness across the chest?

A. As No. 4, and rub the chest well with wet hand.

8.--Q. How guard against the effects of a damp atmosphere?

A. Keep the throat and chest always bare; if kept close and warm they
will soon become relaxed. Parts most used should be exposed to the air.

9.--Q. At present I am packed for half an hour, and take the plunge bath
at 5 A.M. Douche for three minutes at 12. Two Abreibungs and a Sitz-bath
for half an hour at 5 P.M. If I remain the summer, should I continue or
diminish this cure?

A. Continue it certainly for a month, and then begin to diminish it,
leaving off the Douche for instance.

10.--Q. If continued, might I take the Douche after my walk in the
morning before breakfast, and the Abreibungs at mid-day, so as to have
my afternoons free?

A. Some cure must be taken after dinner as a rule; but in case of
necessity the cure may be shirked.

11.--Q. Ought I to continue any part of the treatment on leaving
Graefenberg, and what?

A. Washing morning and evening, either bath or Abreibung.

12.--Q. After leaving must I attend to the same diet, and abstain
entirely from Wine, Coffee, and Tea? or may I indulge in them
continuously in small quantities, or only occasionally?

A. Wine, Coffee and Tea may be taken now and then, but by no means
regularly.

13.--Q. On any return of my old complaints, blistered mouth,
indigestion, restlessness, uneasy sensations in the back and side, what
portion of the cure should I have recourse to?

A. The old complaints ought not to return, and will not if the cure is
carried through the summer; on the appearance of any of them, they must
be treated the same as they were here.

14.--Q. The sensations mentioned before now return sometimes; but vanish
after a few days' severe treatment. It is only since the last month that
my limbs and muscles have appeared to recover their tone and firmness,
and enlarge.

A. Both of these observations speak volumes for the continuance of the
cure, as one cannot do too much: but one may easily do too little; and
it would be highly advisable to keep on cleansing and strengthening
every possible way.

15.--Q. Should I continue any of the treatment for the child?

A. Bathe the child every morning and evening, that is, cold washing, by
means of bath or Abreibungs.

16.--Q. Might I myself treat her in the cases of measles and scarlatina,
and how?

A. In case of slight fever, a rubbing-sheet and Umschlag; but it is
impossible to prescribe beforehand how these diseases are to be treated,
as one cannot know how the child may be affected. If the fever is
severe, more wet sheets or rubbing-sheets must be used than if it is
slight. The criterion of treatment is the degree of fever.




TREATMENT AND CASES.

XXXIV.--GOUT.


Great difference of opinion exists as to the cause of gout. Ancient
physicians called it the daughter of Bacchus and Venus; and truly
persons, or their progeny, devoted to these two divinities, offer the
greatest number of examples.

To cure this complaint, the ingenuity of thousands of scientific men has
been taxed, and the whole pharmacopoeia applied to in vain. Perspiration
is mostly resorted to; but as this is effected by warm baths, vapour
baths, or drugs, the consequences are so debilitating that few
constitutions can bear them. The result of all medical treatment in this
disease is, the degradation of robust constitutions, and the promotion
of diseases worse than the gout itself.

Volumes might be written on the various remedial measures which have
been resorted to in this complaint, and of which time has shewn the
fallacy. We now ask the invalid, if he ever knew the gout radically
cured by any pharmaceutical means? Were Hydropathists asked whether they
ever knew cases of gout cured by water, they would unhesitatingly answer
in the affirmative. Incipient gout is always curable. The same may be
said of chronic gout, except in isolated cases: then Hydropathy
invariably gives relief; and by regulating the functions of the body,
improves the general health.

The following treatment and cases will shew how the manipulation is
varied, to combat this disease in its manifold forms:--

Gout cannot be cured by local applications; the whole system must be
purified by a general treatment, or no permanent cure can be effected.

For occasional attacks of gout in the extremities, the constitution
being otherwise robust:--

In the morning, put a bandage on the part affected, pack the patient in
blankets (sweating process) until perspiration appears in the face.

Then put him into the half-bath--water 62 deg. to 65 deg. Fahr.; let him be well
rubbed in this from 5 to 25 minutes, or until friction can be applied to
all parts alike. Cold water should be occasionally poured over head and
shoulders during the operation. This ended, put bandages round the waist
and on the afflicted part.

For the second treatment:--About mid-day, rubbed in a packing-sheet;
take a sitz-bath for fifteen minutes--first time tepid 64 deg., afterwards
cold; then put the offending member into cold water for ten or fifteen
minutes, and renew bandages.

In the afternoon, at 5 o'clock, repeat mid-day treatment. During the
day, drink ten to fourteen tumblers of water.

The above treatment will generally put an end to a slight attack of
gout; but to eradicate it from the system, the cure must be followed up.
To effect this, for the sweating process on the second day, substitute
the packing-sheet until warm, which generally requires the patient to
lie in it from thirty minutes to an hour.

Where a bath cannot be obtained, the rubbing sheet is used instead; this
should be very little wrung out, and if one does not cool the body, a
second or a third should be applied.

The douche is often applied in gout; but as that cannot be the case in
ordinary practice, the practitioner must use his discretion in
prescribing it.

It is good treatment to use the sweating process in the morning, and the
packing-sheet in the afternoon.

The bandages must be worn day and night, and changed often.


_Cases._--A patient, fifty years of age, with rheumatic gout, bad
digestion, nervousness, fingers blue and swollen, slight pain in the
knee, much debilitated, was ordered:--In the morning, five rubbing
sheets, two or three minutes each, allowing a short interim between
each. At noon, the same. At five o'clock, the same. Ten tumblers of
water daily. Bandages to parts affected, and round the loins always. On
the patient experiencing great pain under the knees, the morning
treatment was changed to lying in packing-sheets until well warmed,
followed by the tepid bath. Patient soon improved in health.


A----, forty-six years of age, suffered fifteen years from periodical
attacks of gout, and had his last severe attack in his feet, hands, and
elbows, accompanied by paralysis, which affected his voice.

_Treatment._--Laid in packing-sheet until perspiration ensued (two or
three hours); then tepid bath renewed by cold water being thrown over
head and shoulders; noon, rubbing-sheet, followed by sitz-bath 62 deg. for
fifteen minutes; cold foot-bath fifteen minutes, and head-bath ten
minutes; afternoon, morning treatment repeated.

Alternate days, sweating in blankets instead of the sheets; all other
treatment the same as before.

This continued treatment was persevered in for ten weeks, when patient
was prescribed sweating in the morning, and packing-sheet in the
afternoon, followed by cold bath. Sitz and foot-baths as before;
head-bath discontinued. Shortly after, sweating twice a day, with
foot-baths, fifteen minutes in the middle of the day. Sitz-baths
dispensed with. This treatment at the end of six weeks was again changed
for perspiring only once a day, for three hours. Patient was at length
ordered to discontinue the treatment altogether, and proceed to the
sea-side for a month. Soon after his return again to Graefenberg, he was
able to walk fifteen miles at a time, as is seen by his own letter.


B----, fifty-six years of age, suffering from Gout upwards of seventeen
years, generally incapacitated from following his occupation seven or
eight months in a year. Feet and hands distorted.

_Treatment._--Packing sheet and tepid-bath in morning and afternoon, and
sitz and foot-bath, each fifteen minutes; at noon, bandages round the
waist. After a week's treatment, a fit of gout came on in foot and
ankle, which was combated by packing-sheet and tepid bath before
breakfast; tepid sitz-bath at noon, and the morning treatment repeated
in the afternoon. After three days, a boil began to form under the left
jaw; treatment continued, with the exception of patient's going (_after
the packing-sheet_), into tepid bath for two minutes, then into the cold
bath for two minutes, and back to the tepid, from ten to fifteen
minutes.

In eight days, gout returned with greater violence, when recourse was
had to the packing-sheet, as before; with tepid baths from twenty
minutes to an hour, besides following up other parts of the treatment.
In seven or eight days the fit quite subsided. Some time after this he
had a relapse, which patient stated to me, under the allopathic
treatment, would have confined him to his room at least six months; this
was treated as follows:--

Packing-sheet until warm, followed by tepid bath, ten minutes; then
walked about the room for a quarter of an hour; then the bath again for
a quarter of an hour, a respite of a few minutes, and the bath a third
time.

Two hours after the above operation, a tepid sitting-bath 62 deg., for
twenty minutes.

In the afternoon the packing-sheet and bath as before. This treatment
was repeated, every day for six days, when patient was out of doors
again.

From this time patient felt himself so changed a man, that the author
saw him cry with joy. He could use his limbs as he had not done for many
years, and to prove it, ran up a hill with astonishing alacrity. Three
days treatment were sufficient to reduce the swelling of his knuckles,
toes, and hands.

This patient, on his first arrival, Mr. Priessnitz ordered, without any
previous preparation, into a tepid bath, where he was rubbed upwards of
an hour.


C----, aged forty. Gout generally returned in summer.

_Treatment._--Morning, and afternoon, packing-sheet, tepid bath; noon,
douche, three minutes.

After six weeks treatment, strong redness and much pain to the
conjunctiva; douche omitted.

Sitz-baths of from an hour to an hour and a half; foot-baths; cold wet
bandages to the eye, which became effected.

Then sweating processes, with wet bandages to the head, which afforded
relief.

Alternate tepid, cold and tepid baths for a quarter of an hour;
immediately after the packing-sheet, foot-bath and water poured over the
ancle. Eyes still red; foot-bath resorted to three times a day, followed
by rubbing sheet, instead of the bath and bandage to the eye. Eyes could
bear the light. Patient's appetite good and sleep sound. At night his
arms, head, and most of his body were covered with bandages.

In three weeks, patient's whole body covered with an eruption; recourse
again had to the packing-sheet and tepid bath twice a day. From this
time health improved daily.

D----, a gouty subject, forty-five years of age. Priessnitz, called up
in the middle of the night, found the Baron labouring under an attack of
gout in his chest and stomach, which almost prevented his breathing. He
was immediately put into a packing-sheet for from five to ten minutes,
and out of that into a tepid bath, where two men rubbed him for a
quarter of an hour; cold water being continually thrown over his head
and shoulders; this effectually put an end to the attack, and the
patient afterwards slept soundly until the time for his usual treatment
next morning. This case shows that the fear of this treatment driving
gout to the stomach, is groundless and it combats a dangerous attack,
and quicker than it can be done by any other means.


_Hereditary Gout._--E----, a Polish nobleman, fifty-four years of age,
suffered two winters from hereditary gout, which had existed in his
family for upwards of forty years.

He was attacked in his feet and arms, which confined him to his bed
several months.

_Treatment:_--In the mornings, packing-sheet and tepid bath; noon,
rubbing-sheet followed by sitz-bath, fifteen minutes; afternoon,
rubbing-sheet.

In eighteen days he had boils on his feet and arms, from which matter
continued to exude for three or four weeks; at the expiration of which
Priessnitz said, "Now we will increase the treatment, to see if any more
bad matter remains in the system."

The sweating process and cold bath were now resorted to three or four
times a week; the packing-sheet and cold bath other days; and the douche
every day for three minutes. This treatment was continued for several
weeks, during which no change of any kind was produced, a confirmation
of the cure being effected.

On leaving Graefenberg, Priessnitz advised him to return the next year,
to see if the cure was a radical one.

In 1845, the Count returned, when he was subjected to a most vigorous
treatment, such as sweating, douche, etc., for a month, without any
return of gout.

On leaving Graefenberg he assured me, that he was not only cured of gout;
but that his digestive powers, which for years had been deranged, were
in perfect order, and that his general health was completely restored.

Sixteen years previous to the Count's going to Graefenberg, he had his
elbow wounded by a ball in a duel, which occasionally caused him great
pain. For the cure of this, he, at the time, rubbed in a yellow
ointment. Singular to say, after a lapse of sixteen years, during a
crisis, this ointment re-appeared on the elbow and arm, so thick as to
be taken off with the finger. The exuding of this ointment lasted about
eight days. Since the cure of his gout was effected, the arm has been
pliant, and the elbow has been free from pain.


_Gout in Head and Feet._--F----, a German professor, aged sixty; a small
delicate man, with gout in both hands and both feet: all were
contracted, he had been a martyr to gout for years and upwards, when a
paroxysm of gout came on the following morning.

The following treatment was resorted to. Morning, packing-sheet until
thoroughly warm; then tepid bath 64 deg. for two hours, during which time
200 cans of cold water were thrown over his head and shoulders.

Twenty-five cans were first thrown; then great friction for some time;
then twenty-five cans more, followed by friction; and so repeated until
two hundred cans had been thrown over him.

Heating bandages were applied to all parts afflicted, and kept there day
and night.

The above treatment was resorted to again in the afternoon.

One paroxysm that I witnessed, lasted three weeks. It was astonishing to
see the courage displayed by this patient.

Each operation afforded relief for the time; but the enemy had strong
hold upon the system, and was ejected with difficulty.

During all the time the patient had a good appetite and slept soundly at
night.

He was still under the cure when I left Graefenberg. Priessnitz said, to
effect this cure, it would require at least four years' treatment, which
the patient said he would prefer to a renewal of the suffering he had
already undergone, previously to coming to Graefenberg.

_Calcareous Deposit in the Knees, and high state of Inflammation._--The
last case shews how the human body may be exposed to the action of
water, with friction, for any length of time. The present case is that
of an English Gentleman, well known to all visitors at Graefenberg.

G----, aged between 50 and 60, gouty for the last twenty years, with
contraction of the limbs, chalk stones having formed in the joints. This
patient travelled from Italy to Graefenberg during the heat of summer,
and, on arriving, had a most painful attack of gout in his lower
extremities.

Priessnitz, without the least preparation, put him into a tepid bath,
and he was rubbed by three men for nearly three hours, occasionally
throwing pails of cold water over his head and shoulders. This so
reduced the inflammation, that, towards the end of that period, the
afflicted part might also be rubbed with the wet hand.

Heating bandages were then applied to those parts and the waist.

Water was drunk plentifully during and after the operation.

Patient was able afterwards to get out of doors with the use of sticks,
and slept well at night.

Next morning he began the regular treatment, which was as follows:--

Packing-sheet until warm; then the bath as before for about two hours;
noon, rubbing-sheet and sitz-bath, fifteen minutes; afternoon, morning
process renewed.

Mr. Priessnitz told this patient that, by the following means, he might
always ward off a violent attack of gout:--

On feeling the slightest sensation of gout, he should instantly be put
into a tepid bath, 62 deg., replenished with cold water, and be therein
rubbed for a couple of hours.

This gentleman's general health is perfect: he very seldom has any
attacks, and they are slight; but the calcareous deposit in his knees,
up to the present, resists all attempts at removal.


_Acute attack of Gout._--A patient being attacked with gout was put into
a tepid bath, 68 deg., up to the neck, and rubbed by himself and two
men. By particular injunctions, the process was not to be discontinued
until all pain subsided. The original temperature of the bath was
maintained by fresh supplies of cold water. In seven hours the patient
was completely relieved. His after-treatment was:--

Morning, packing-sheet and plunge-bath, bandage round the waist and on
part afflicted; at noon, douche, and afterwards a rubbing-sheet;
afternoon, rubbing-sheet; the simplest food. On a return of the acute
attack, patient was ordered to perform the bath operation again; but,
not persevering in remaining seven hours in the bath, the attack was not
overcome: the patient was then ordered cold bath every morning before
breakfast (temperature kept always as cold as possible), from fifteen to
twenty minutes, which effected the cure. This patient was allowed a
little weak chocolate, and was ordered to drink abundantly of water.


A---- had a most violent attack at Graefenberg, for which he was put up
to his neck into a tepid bath, 64 deg., and there rubbed by two men for
_seven_ hours. Priessnitz gave particular orders that the patient should
not leave the bath until all pain had completely subsided. Cold water
was frequently added, to keep that in the bath at the original
temperature. By these means the attack was completely subdued. Daily
treatment:--

Morning, packing-sheet and cold plunge-bath; bandage to be applied to
parts affected; noon, douche, and sitz-bath, fifteen minutes; afternoon,
as in the morning.

Instructions:--Eat plain food; and in case of a return of gout,
faithfully perform the first operation.


_Gout in the Foot and Ankle._--A lady awoke in the morning with pain in
her foot and ankle, which were both swollen.

_Treatment._--Packing-sheet for an hour, followed by a rubbing-sheet;
after which a foot-bath, up to the instep, for a quarter of an hour; and
the foot and leg, up to the knee, well rubbed all the time.

Bandages were then applied from the toes to the knee.

At noon, and in the afternoon, the foot-bath was again applied, and the
bandages were changed.

This simple treatment put an end to the attack in two days. If it had
not done so, it ought to have been repeated.


XXXV.--RHEUMATISM, ETC.

Gout, rheumatism, sciatica, lumbago, tic doloureux, and neuralgia, all
being attended with inflammation, are so nearly allied, that the same
treatment as for gout, with slight variation, might be applied to any or
all of them.


_Rheumatism._--On a slight attack of rheumatism, rub the part affected
with wet hands three times a day, from a quarter of an hour to an hour
each time; then apply a bandage, which change when dry, and wear it
until the pain ceases.

Rub the body all over with a wet towel, then a dry one; wait five
minutes, then repeat the same operation four times in succession: this
will animate the circulation. Then apply a bandage as in the case of
gout. This treatment should be applied several times a day. Rheumatic
subjects ought never to be overclothed, wear flannel, or fail drinking
water.

When the attack is more severe, three rubbing-sheets in succession,
allowing an interim of from three to five minutes between each. The body
must be dried after each rubbing-sheet; this increases the effect of the
next rubbing-sheet. Rub the parts affected often with wet hands, and
apply bandages. This treatment may be repeated three or four times a
day. If there is a great want of circulation, the patient may lie in bed
until warm, between the application of each rubbing-sheet.


_Neuralgic Pains._--Whatever the nature of these pains may be (supposing
the patient not too debilitated), perspiration will generally be found
to relieve them. To effect this:--

When in bed in the morning, add a number of blankets, and on them a
feather-bed: there remain until in a profuse perspiration; then cool the
body, either by rubbing-sheets, a cold bath,--or get a washing-tub,
stand up in it, and have some jugs of water poured over the head and
shoulders. This very often settles the affair at once.

A patient was afflicted in every joint so that he could not be moved in
bed without great pain.

Packing-sheets until warm, which required about half an hour, ten times
a day, allowing an interval between them. Each packing sheet was
followed by a rubbing with wet hands.

This treatment in one day enabled patient to stand; then the packing
sheets were used four times a day, followed by rubbing sheets. Parts
affected and loins always enclosed in bandages. Patient drank sixteen to
twenty glasses of water a day. He was out of doors the third day, and
afterwards pursued a more vigorous treatment, such as sweating, douche,
&c.

A----, had a severe rheumatic attack in both knees; he thought swinging
his legs backwards and forwards would relieve him; instead of which, it
brought on enlargement of the joints and inflammation: whilst at
Graefenberg I inquired of Priessnitz what he ought to have done.--

_Answer_--He ought in, the first instance, to have rubbed the knees well
and often with wet hands and worn a bandage. If this was not sufficient,
then to have put the feet and legs, over the knees into cold water for
half an hour at least, rubbing them all the time, and apply a bandage
from the calf of the leg to the middle of the thigh.


_Chronic Rheumatism._--A----, contracted rheumatism in 1837, which
commenced as sciatica. Constitution greatly debilitated. Medical advice,
sea baths, hot baths, and other remedies, useless.

Patient went to Graefenberg, August 1843, and left in May following.

_Treatment._--Packing-sheet, followed by cold bath twice a-day; noon,
sitz-bath and foot-bath, fifteen minutes each; legs rubbed all the time
up to the knee. Douche three minutes daily.

In November, one of his usual attacks came on, when sixteen rubbing
sheets a-day were resorted to. Four of these were given in succession
four times a-day; between each rubbing sheet, the patient being weak lay
down in bed, until warm bandages were applied as usual.

This attack subsided after the second day, when patient renewed his
former treatment.


B----, travelling in North America, and exposed to severe rains without
the means of changing his clothes, suffered the consequences such
circumstances frequently entail. Rheumatism almost beyond endurance
induced him to go to Graefenberg.

At the first interview, Priessnitz put him first into a tepid bath 64
deg., out of which he plunged into a cold bath, where he staid about a
minute, and from that he returned again to the tepid, when bandages were
applied to his waist and parts affected.

_Treatment._--Morning, packing-sheet until warm, then cold bath; noon,
rubbing-sheet; afternoon, packing-sheet, twenty minutes, and then
rubbing-sheet again.

Left Graefenberg in a month, during which time patient used the
rubbing-sheet mornings and evenings; exposed his body (after that in the
morning) quite naked in his room, from a quarter to half an hour.

On returning to Graefenberg, the douche was substituted for the
rubbing-sheet at noon. After continuing the treatment for some time,
rheumatism returned, when he was ordered three rubbing-sheets five
minutes each, twice a-day; between each an air bath of five minutes.

A crisis of boils ensued, and after they healed, patient was perfectly
well. The patient writes to a friend--"I now leave Graefenberg with a
clean body, and a sincere wish for your own speedy cure, and that of all
the agreeable acquaintances that I leave behind me, under the safe care
of our virtuous and sagacious friend V. Priessnitz."


_Chronic Rheumatism, Chronic Headache, Constipation, Piles, &c._--A
Gentleman, aged about 45, was treated as follows:--

Morning, sweating process and cold bath, three minutes; noon, douche,
three minutes; an hour afterwards, sitz-bath fifteen minutes; foot-bath
fifteen minutes; head-bath ten minutes; one following the other
immediately; afternoon, noon treatment over again; all night--loins,
feet, legs, and thighs, to the fork, were encased in bandages.

In a few months, rheumatism, piles, and constipation were cured, but
head-ache returned at intervals.


_Rheumatic attack in the Back, Shoulders, and Neck._--The sweating
process, followed by three rubbing-sheets not much wrung out, applied
without intermission for five minutes each, put an end to the attack at
once. If this number of rubbing-sheets had not cooled the body, more
must have been used.

Had rheumatism continued, rubbing-sheets must have been resorted to
again in the afternoon, and the sweating resumed the next day.


_Rheumatic Fever._--For a slight attack of rheumatic fever, three
rubbing-sheets three times a-day were found sufficient.


_Rheumatic Gout._--A gentleman named Heymann, about 34 years of age, at
the fire at Hamburg was exposed to the wet from the engines for several
days and nights. The result was, a violent attack of rheumatic gout;
first in the knees and feet, then neck and arms; afterward in hip and
both breasts, which confined him to bed a whole year, from April 1843 to
April 1844. During this time he took large quantities of medicine, and
used steam and sulphur baths: about seventy of the former, and near a
hundred of the latter. Also mud and sulphur baths, which enabled him to
walk for about a month, when he was again confined to bed. Gout having
attacked the breast, both his medical attendants declared they could do
no more. 1st May, 1844, he was conveyed to Graefenberg, so crippled that
he could not dress himself. He began the treatment as follows:--

Morning, packing-sheet and tepid bath; noon, three rubbing-sheets, at
intervals of five minutes, with open windows; afternoon, packing-sheet
one hour, and tepid bath; bandage round the body, and from ankles to
knees during the night.

Pain increasing, parts affected were rubbed with wet hands both day and
night until they became hot. Body entirely bandaged by night. Bandage
changed three or four times as pain resulted from the bandages being
dry.

At the expiration of three months, patient enabled to walk out.
Treatment changed.

Morning, packing-sheet and tepid bath; noon, one rubbing-sheet, followed
by sitz-bath for quarter of an hour; douche before and after breakfast
for three minutes; then morning and evening packing-sheet and bath;
tepid for two minutes; then cold one minute and back to tepid bath for
two minutes, instead of an entire tepid bath.

Two months' continuation of this treatment brought out an eruption
around the body, and on the calves of the legs; also a strong fever
which lasted nine days, which was succeeded by boils.

Then three packing-sheet a-day were applied, and tepid, cold, and tepid
baths; continually changing from one to another for an hour and a half.
Douche and rubbing-sheet stopped during the fever.

The eruption continued for three months, discharging whitish brown
matter. During all this time the last treatment was persevered in.

The eruption and boils gave great relief. When pain was diminished and
the eruption ceased, the body bandage was relinquished and those of the
waist and calves retained, and cold bath for one minute, succeeded the
packing sheet.

1st April, 1845. Douche, from three to five minutes, substituted for the
rubbing-sheet.

May 16th, 1845.--Patient was declared perfectly well. He had gone the
whole of the winter without stockings, neckcloth, or waistcoat, wearing
only linen coat and trousers, and sleeping with his windows wide open.
When I saw him at Graefenberg, in May, I thought I never saw a man in
such robust rude health in my life.

This case made a great sensation at Hamburg, as the party is well known
on the exchange of that city.


_Sciatica._--A soldier aged 35, after having been three months in the
hospital with Sciatica, without relief, was cured in five days by the
following treatment:--

In the morning sweating process and cold bath; noon, two rubbing-sheets;
afternoon, the same; much rubbing at other times with wet hands.
Bandages to the part were applied, and much water drank.

This case was treated by the author at Limerick; and the following
process was adopted:--


_Sciatica and Lumbago._--Patient ordered:--Morning, four rubbing-sheets;
at noon, the same; afternoon the same, and if necessary, to be repeated
on going to bed. The usual interval of time between each sheet to be
observed, and parts affected covered in bandages. The treatment to have
been repeated next day, had not the first removed the pains.

In all cases of this nature, Rubbing with wet hands is highly
beneficial, and sometimes Enemas of cold water should be resorted to. If
obstinate, the sweating process must be employed. I knew a very severe
acute case of Sciatica and Lumbago relieved in two days, by the
application of four rubbing-sheets at four intervals during the day, and
the evening bandages were applied, and water drunk in abundance.


_Lumbago or Rick in the Back._--A young man woke early in the morning
with a most excruciating pain in his loins. He could not determine
whether it was simply Lumbago, or a Rick in the back, brought on from
playing at skittles or chopping wood the day before.

Priessnitz had him turned on his stomach, his back rubbed for an hour
with wet hands, and then covered with a bandage.

The Rubbing was to be repeated every four hours, and the bandage changed
every two hours.

The patient was to remain lying on his stomach the whole day and night
if not cured. The reason for this must be evident to those who reflect
upon it. Cured the same day.

Violent attack of Lumbago, supposed to have been brought on by using the
dumb-bells; the party being unaccustomed to their use.

Patient had rubbing with wet hands, and wearing a bandage for two days,
when he could hardly rise from a chair; then he commenced the following
treatment:--

Saturday.--Morning, packing-sheet for an hour, followed by three
rubbing-sheets; noon, two rubbing-sheets and an Enema; night, a
rubbing-sheet. This was not renewed at night, as patient's extremities
were cold and prevented his sleeping.

Sunday.--Four rubbing-sheets; after this operation, the improvement was
almost miraculous. Patient took a long walk.

Monday.--Treatment as yesterday; could turn in bed with less difficulty.

Tuesday.--Packing-sheet forty minutes, preceded by a tepid-bath sixteen
minutes, with great friction; noon, four rubbing-sheets; evening, loins
rubbed with wet hands for half-an-hour.

Wednesday.--Slept well and could turn with ease in bed; three
rubbing-sheets and friction thrice during the day with wet hands.

Drank fourteen tumblers of water daily, and wore a bandage night and
day.

Thursday.--Perfectly well. By the means here described, patient's bowels
were kept in order; his tongue always clean. Had his treatment failed,
the sweating process must have been resorted to.


XXXVI.--TIC-DOLOUREUX.

This is another of those complaints that baffle medical skill, and upon
which medical men are at issue as to the cause; some alleging it to be a
derangement of the nervous system, others think it is in the humours of
the body, which contain an acrimony irritating to the nerves.

The result of my observation is, that if under the Water cure, it is not
cured in three months, it is extremely doubtful if it will succumb to
that treatment. Dr. Munde doubted if purely nervous Tic-doloureux was
curable by any process; but speaks more positively as to that which
arises from acrimonious humour. He says, "I speak with a perfect
knowledge of this disease, having suffered for three years, and having
made observations upon several others who suffered severely from this
complaint. Eight months' treatment cured me after trying all other
remedies in vain."

I knew a patient who had laboured under Tic in his head for fourteen or
fifteen years, perfectly cured in three months. His treatment was the
same as for Rheumatism.

Another patient put a bandage to her face at night, whilst under a
paroxysm of Tic; this increased the pain, the reason of which was, her
not having prepared the system first. Next day she underwent the
sweating process, and could then wear the bandage with great advantage.

A person, whom I knew, suffering from Tic in his legs, made no progress
because of the injudicious use of the Douche. The Douche was abandoned,
and the packing-sheet and tepid bath twice a day substituted with great
advantage.

Another _case of severe_ Tic came under my notice, that resisted all
treatment. The paroxysm was only allayed by very long tepid baths 62 deg.,
and great friction.

_Obstinate case of Tic in the Thigh._--This case is given to shew the
way in which Priessnitz meets extraordinary circumstances.

H. from Berlin, aged 54, had a settled pain down one of his thighs; he
was treated for it seven years ago at Graefenberg. In a few months he
thought himself cured. For seven years he felt no inconvenience, and
lived as he had formerly done. At the expiration of that period, pain
returned; not wishing to devote so much time to the cure as he knew it
would require at Graefenberg, he went to Carlsbad, where the pain became
insupportable. In this state he again had recourse to Priessnitz. He has
now been there four months, undergoing a vigorous treatment of
packing-sheets, baths, rubbing-sheets, and sitz-baths, varied in an
infinity of ways, without experiencing much benefit; his sleep, which
has been disturbed the last eighteen months, still continues so.

Nearly all the sleep he obtains is in the packing-sheet. In this he lies
from his arm-pits down to his thighs, from 9 to 11 o'clock at night, and
again from 2 to 4 o'clock in the morning. At 6 o'clock he commences his
usual treatment. The last fortnight before I left Graefenberg, pain had
ceased, but his sleeping was as disturbed as usual.


XXXVII.--AFFECTION OF THE THROAT AND PAIN AT THE CHEST.

A delicate lady, aged twenty-five: morning, packing-sheet until warm and
tepid bath; noon, rubbing-sheet and sitz-bath; afternoon, rubbing-sheet.

After a few days' treatment, catamenia came on, notwithstanding which,
as patient experienced no inconvenience, the treatment was continued as
before. In two days, pain in the abdomen and hips was felt. All the
previous treatment was now discontinued, and three rubbing-sheets a day
were prescribed, until pain ceased, when it was again resumed.

Throat, and pain at the chest, were cured in six weeks, and patient had
gained eight pounds in weight.

This lady thought she had an affection of the heart. Priessnitz enquired
if she felt pain there: she answered no. "Then," said he, "the heart is
sound." Three years ago, catamenia lasted only five days, but latterly
it extended to seven. Priessnitz said, with her it ought only to last
three or four days. This was effected. Her husband, who had occasional
attacks of bile, gained nine pounds in six weeks. I attended the
weighing of these parties, and can vouch for the fact.


XXXVIII.--FEVERS.

Two Hundred Years Ago, Dr. Vanderheyden of Ghent wrote a work in which
he declared all fevers curable by cold water. Dr. Sir John Floyer, fifty
years later, wrote his work, and then came Drs. Hahn, Smith and others,
and finally, Dr. Currie of Liverpool, who by their works supported the
same theory. It is true that though where medicine saved its hundreds,
their practice saved thousands, the _Modus Operandi_ was somewhat
speculative. It was reserved until our own time to witness the
application of water reduced to a science. Priessnitz by his
packing-sheet has produced the great desideratum, which renders his
treatment omnipotent over all febrile disorders; and if he had
discovered nothing else, this would hand his name down to the latest
posterity.

It is often asked what fevers are curable by the Hydropathic processes.
To this it may be answered, except where by age or disease patients are
not reduced to the last stage of existence, _all_ are curable. I made
constant inquiries when at Graefenberg--witnessed the treatment of
innumerable cases of fever, amongst others Typhus and Brain Fever, and I
could not discover that Priessnitz during his long practice had ever
lost a patient.

I have frequently treated cases of fever and inflammation myself with
the most heartfelt satisfaction; as in every instance on the application
of the sheet or the bath, the patient was relieved in the same manner
that a plant dying for the want of water, is resuscitated on being
supplied with it.

After the number of works published on this subject, all protesting the
safety of this mode of treatment, and the total absence of danger, it
may be fairly presumed, that the packing-sheet process will ere long
take the lead in medical practice.

As almost all complaints trace their origin to fever or inflammation, if
these can be allayed on their first symptoms, a host of evils to the
human family will be avoided.

It does not require any great sagacity to perceive that when the body is
surcharged with heat, if enveloped in a damp sheet, the sheet
immediately becomes hot; take it away and you remove with it a certain
amount of heat. The oftener this is repeated the more the calorie is
diminished, and each sheet requires more time to heat; continue changing
the sheet, and the body resumes a normal state. When once the heat is
eliminated the patient is cured of the Fever.


The following modes of treatment and cases will enable the practitioner
to judge how he should treat his patient as circumstances may arise.

As general rules:--

In the cold fit, use rubbing-sheets well wrung out, with a slight
interim between each until the hot stage is produced. In the hot stage
packing-sheets should be changed as often as necessary. In Typhus I have
known them changed forty or fifty times in a day. The bath which ought
at first to be a little tepid and cooled by degrees, should be resorted
to at intervals twice or thrice a day, from a quarter of an hour to an
hour. Should the heat action be prematurely violent, or likely to end in
inflammation, resort to a sitz-bath with or without a foot-bath, instead
of the tepid bath, particularly where either the brain, organs of sense,
or those within the thorax are at all engaged.

Rubbing-sheets, in certain cases where the vital energies are weak or
languid, will be sufficient to suppress a febrile paroxysm. Their
renewal and time of application must entirely depend on the age,
strength and idiosyncrasy of the case: water should be drunk in small
quantities, and frequently.

Where the brain is attacked, water must be constantly applied to that
locality, so as not to allow of an increase of temperature.

Where there is no want of bodily strength in the patient, the quickest
and surest method of putting an end at once to fever, is as follows. Put
him into a bath up to the shoulders, tepid 63 deg. or 64 deg. to begin with, and
to be renewed constantly by cold water being poured over the shoulders;
two persons rubbing the patient the whole time.

When he is quite fatigued, take him out, dry the body and throw the
window open for air; when recovered a little, renew the operation, and
so on for the third time if necessary. Then dress and go out to walk.
Drink plentifully of water.

If very cold on coming out of the bath, walk without the body bandage,
but put a large thick one from the hips to the arm-pits on returning
home. Let the patient rest two or three hours; and if fever return
repeat the foregoing treatment.


A Mr. B----, who was greatly debilitated, had, for fever, a tepid bath
for half an hour to an hour and half; also many rubbing-sheets; on one
occasion as many as twenty-nine in a day. If the fever resist the above
treatment, then resort to the packing-sheet.


Dr. L----, for fever, ordered, five or six rubbing-sheets in succession.
Head bath for a quarter of an hour. Bandage from hips to arm-pits, to be
changed often, even in the night; to be much in the open air.

In typhus fever, medical men do not make the distinction between
congestion of the venous and arterial systems. They imagine that
inflammatory action exists, whereas it is in typhus, venous congestion:
therefore, the leeching and severe depletory measures are decidedly
wrong; they increase the existing evil, lower and exhaust the vital
powers, and if persevered in, lead to death, or a long lingering state
of convalescence. On the contrary, Hydropathy acts upon a diametrically
opposite system: by the imbibition of water, containing as it does an
excess of oxygen, the vital forces are sustained, the blood is
decarbonised, the appetite improved, the bowels regulated, etc. etc.


_Fever._--An English officer who caught a fever twenty years ago in the
West Indies, wrote to Priessnitz that all his prospects in life were
blighted, and that existence was almost intolerable. He came to
Graefenberg and was treated as follows:

Early in the morning packing-sheet and bath; wore heating bandage
always. Breakfasted at eight o'clock, when, from nine o'clock until five
o'clock in the evening, he was ordered to change the waist bandage every
ten minutes. At five o'clock packing-sheet and bath.

If ague appeared, which it did sometimes, then rubbing-sheets, well
wrung out were applied with great friction until the fit was over.

This patient was perfectly cured in three months.


_Nervousness and slow Fever, and disposition to a Decline._--A lady was
treated as follows:--

Morning, five packing-sheets and bath, 62 deg.; noon, douche and sitz-bath;
afternoon, rubbing-sheet and two sitz-baths.

At first, she was ordered to have a cold bath prepared by the bed-side
at night, and when fever and sweating came on, to go into the bath, and
repeat it if necessary. She had a bad cough at the time; her friends
thought such a proceeding would end in her death; the patient, however,
recovered from her fever and cough, and left much improved in health.

On awaking in the morning with distracting head-ache, parched tongue,
and all the concomitants of fever, a lady was put into a packing-sheet;
in twelve minutes, head-ache ceased. After remaining enveloped an hour
or two, rubbing-sheets were applied, followed by a sitz-bath of twenty
minutes: she drank water freely. This one application effected a cure.

A young lady had her foot and ankle much swollen from rheumatic gout.
Second day, arose with head-ache and pain in all her limbs; and towards
evening, had a slight fever. For this, she was put into a tepid bath
62 deg., and rubbed for forty minutes, when the arm-pits feeling no warmer
than the other parts of her body, she was allowed to leave the bath.
This application was sufficient.


_Typhus Fever_ requires the same treatment as other fevers. The
packing-sheet must be changed every ten or fifteen minutes: I have known
it changed as much as fifty times a day. When the patient is weary of
lying in the packing-sheet, he should be put into a tepid bath and well
rubbed for a time; and then lie quiet, with a packing-sheet doubled
several times from hips to arm-pits. Then packing-sheets should be
resorted to again. If the head is attacked, apply the head-bath whilst
lying in packing-sheet. Drink abundantly of water.

Packing sheets, tepid baths, and cold baths (the former often repeated),
are also the treatment for brain fever. When a patient was in a state
of delirium, Priessnitz ordered her into a cold bath for an hour.


_Teething fever._--Tepid head-bath--water gradually made colder--applied
to the back of the head for half an hour.

If this had not had the desired effect it was to have been repeated
after a short interval. Heating-bandages were to have been applied from
the hips to the arm-pits.


_Gastric Fever._--A young man attacked with gastric fever, was treated
as follows:--

Two packing-sheets, one after the other, until warm, followed, by tepid
bath, in which he was rubbed fifteen minutes, then put into cold bath
for one minute, and from that back again to the tepid bath for fifteen
minutes; patient was then dried, waited a few minutes, and then the
bathing as above was twice repeated.

The whole of the treatment, _i. e._ packing sheet and baths, was
repeated three times during the day; between which, a sitz-bath of half
an hour was prescribed.

Patient was cured in two days, and then declared himself stronger and
better than he was previously to the attack.


A gentleman aged thirty-four was thus treated:--

Packing-sheets twice a day until warm, followed by tepid bath.

Two sitz-baths a day, twenty minutes each. Patient's back, shoulders,
abdomen and chest to be rubbed the whole time whilst taking the
sitting-baths.

Patient having lost his appetite, Priessnitz recommended him to eat
plentifully of common unripe plums: these deranged his stomach, of which
he was immediately cured; and afterwards his appetite was better.


My servant was seized with violent pains in the abdomen during the
night, and in the morning head-ache and fever. Dr. Farr of Nice, who saw
the case, said depletion was requisite, and that the man might be well
in four or five days. I declared with Hydropathy he might be made to
wait at table the same day. He was put into a packing-sheet for an hour
and a half, then a bath; an hour afterwards a sitz-bath; wore the
bandage and required no further treatment. Dr. F----, until the next
morning could not believe that the fever was subdued.


Capt. D---- ordered, in the morning, two packing-sheets until warm, with
head in a basin of cold water all the time; followed by tepid bath,
renewed with cold; noon, cold sitz-bath one hour; afternoon, morning
treatment repeated.


_Bilious Fever._--A female attacked with bilious fever, swelled face,
and violent tooth-ache. Patient in the first instance, preferred
consulting a medical man, who administered a strong aperient; ordered
the feet to be kept in a hot bath for an hour, and said the fever would
certainly last seven days, if not longer.

I applied a packing-sheet, and changed it after twenty minutes; then two
rubbing-sheets. Head-bath 62 deg. for a quarter of an hour: hot-water
poultice to face. This treatment completely subdued the fever the second
day.


Patient attacked with bilious fever, swelled face, and violent
tooth-ache.

Packing-sheet for twenty, and another for thirty minutes; then two
rubbing-sheets, twice a day; head-bath 62 deg., and sitz-bath 62 deg.; hot water
bandage to face.

On a return of the same in the spring of the next year: morning,
packing-sheet and rubbing-sheet; noon, sitz-bath 62 deg.; afternoon,
sitz-bath and foot-bath 62 deg.; the swollen part of the face put into cold
water fifteen minutes, twice a day. This treatment answered admirably.


_Nervous Fever._--Commencement of patient's illness was attended with
violent headache and excessive weakness particularly in his legs--unable
to stand. Ordered four rubbing-sheets, not wrung out, four times a day;
head-baths three or four times a day; fever, notwithstanding, increased,
and, patient was unable to bear the rubbing-sheet: upon which the
treatment was changed to four packing-sheets, renewed every quarter of
an hour, followed by a tepid bath for ten minutes. This process was
repeated three times during the day.

Head became feverish. He took for this, a head-bath five minutes at a
time. In a fortnight, fever left him completely; when only three
packing-sheets a day, and cold bath after each, was ordered. In three
weeks, patient was out of doors.

In the second week of his treatment, patient, besides several small
eruptions, had five large boils, which opened in the first week, and
discharged copiously for a fortnight, when his health improved daily;
and before the expiration of the sixth week, he was perfectly well.


_Remains of Fever strongly resembling Gout._--An artist caught a fever
in Egypt. In Rome, his fingers and feet became enlarged, in appearance
resembling gout, when he was treated for that complaint. Priessnitz at
once declared this a mistake, and that it was the remains of the fever.

In three or four days after beginning the cure, patient had fever, and
in ten days another strong attack: his feet and legs became much
inflamed, attended with headache and great debility.

His former treatment was now abandoned for the following:

Three packing-sheets, one after the other, until warm; then the tepid
bath for fifteen minutes: from that into the cold bath for two minutes,
and return to the tepid again for fifteen or twenty minutes. This was to
be repeated in the afternoon. When fever subsided, patient renewed his
former treatment, and was perfectly cured in three months. I saw him in
Rome the next year, when he was perfectly well; and as an act of
gratitude to Mr. Priessnitz, he had caused to be painted a picture of
the "eternal city," to send for his acceptance.


_Intermittent Fever._--General R---- was attacked with intermittent
fever at the siege of Mantua, in 1798. His complaint resisted all
remedies: his liver became hardened and enlarged, exhibiting a tumour
extending three fingers' breadth above his navel. Came to Graefenberg
thin as a skeleton, complexion nearly livid, unable to walk without the
assistance of two persons. Obstinate indigestion and constipation; no
motion for fifteen years, without aid; congestion of blood to the head,
and threatened apoplexy; insupportable sensitiveness to cold. Arrived at
Graefenberg in 1839; now restored to health: liver restored to normal
size, with merely a slight swelling at epigastric region.

His treatment was:--morning, partial baths (tepid), twenty minutes, with
strong friction; no water in the bath when patient first entered it,
that being poured over his head and shoulders.

After one month of this treatment, sweating for half an hour, followed
by partial bath for five minutes; noon, tepid sitz-bath (70 deg.) for
half an hour; repeated in the afternoon.

In two months patient could walk alone. During the third month, sweating
for an hour, and partial cold bath for five minutes; and sitz-baths were
now cold; eighteen glasses of water, drunk daily; fourth month:--after
sweating, the large plunge-bath, and friction by two men; twenty to
twenty-four glasses of water, daily. Fifth month:--appetite good;
commenced ascending the mountains. The douche found to excite too much:
therefore abandoned.

August, 1840:--Left Graefenberg: his liver softer, though not sensibly
diminished. Recommended, whilst at home, to wear heating bandages
always, and use cold ablutions, but not to transpire, unless pain of
liver occurs.

In January, 1841, eruptions on the skin, and many ulcers, made their
appearance.

August, 1841, returned to Graefenberg, and commenced the same treatment
as before: sweating one hour; plunge-bath and two partial baths a day;
douche for five minutes every other day.

In November, had fever for twenty-five days, and pains in his hands,
with open sores on his fingers for nine months; nails dropped off, and
were replaced by new ones; fingers always wrapped in heating bandages.
For the fever, six packing-sheets, changed every quarter of an hour,
except the last: in this the patient remained longer, preparatory to a
warm bath.

This was renewed twice a day.

Twenty-four glasses of water daily.

March, 1842.--Left Graefenberg: liver reduced to one-half the size it
was.

August, 1842.--Returned again to Graefenberg, when his treatment
was:--packing-sheet every morning one hour, followed by two
rubbing-sheets; noon and afternoon, two rubbing-sheets.

October, 1842.--Was seen at his residence in health; pains from many old
wounds no longer felt.

Patient aged forty-five. Ten years ago; caught cold, which ended in
intermittent fever, which resisted the usual remedies; was cured at
Graefenberg as follows:--morning, packing-sheet and plunge-bath; noon,
rubbing-sheet and sitz-bath; afternoon, as the morning.

Fever and ague returned every fourth day, when treatment was changed.
Packing-sheet and tepid bath 62 deg., ten minutes; then into cold bath two
minutes, and back again to tepid, with much friction; at noon, five
rubbing-sheets; afternoon, as in the morning. The paroxysm over, resumed
the former treatment until perfectly cured.


_Fever and Ague._--S---- had fever, attended with ague; took nine
packing and six rubbing-sheets, and three tepid baths; two of the tepid
baths being followed by cold plunging bath. Cured the same day.


A lady attacked by slight fever and shivering, cured by five
rubbing-sheets.


_Sudden Fever._--Mrs. H----'s little boy awoke with fever; she kept him
in a tepid bath, renewed with cold, until he trembled with cold; then
put him to bed, where he immediately fell asleep, and awoke perfectly
well. Priessnitz said the mother would have done as well, if she had
given him a long sitz-bath.


_Catarrh and Fever._--Child restless all night. Tepid bath (nearly cold)
for a quarter of an hour; lean back in the bath so that the attendant
may well rub the chest and throat. Afternoon, rubbing-sheet and tepid
bath for a quarter of an hour.

After each bath, a head-bath for twelve minutes, each side of the head
being alternately placed in the water. If this does not succeed, lay the
back of the head in water, and well rub the forehead with wet hands. Rub
the throat with wet hands three times a day. Eat no meat, and be much
out of doors. Child, after first day's treatment, wretchedly cold; but
pain in the head gone, and cough decreased.

Second day, pain in his legs, and weak; which Priessnitz said was the
result of the fever. As the cough abated, treatment was moderated. Bath
to be tepid. In the middle of the day, throat and chest to be rubbed. In
the evening, a tepid bath eight minutes; head-bath as before; these were
given in consequence of his feverish state in the night. If the body
continued feverish, and the feet and legs cold at night, then heating
bandages to the feet and legs, up to the fork, would have been applied
all night.


_Fever and Diarrhoea._--A Servant of my own, disturbed many times during
the night with diarrhoea and fever, and with violent pain in his head and
abdomen, was put into a packing-sheet for one hour and a quarter; a
rubbing-sheet was then applied, followed by bandage round the waist; at
noon, sitz-bath one hour and a quarter. This simple treatment effected a
cure in a few hours.


_Constipation and Fever._--Patient took tepid-bath, rubbed by three men
for one hour and a half, getting out of the bath was dried and walked
about the room every half-hour for ten minutes; followed by other
treatment.

Second day, the above repeated twice, with the addition of
packing-sheets and rubbing-sheets, in the interim.

General laxity of the bowels for several days, rest disturbed for two or
three nights; could not rest the last night, diarrhoea and fever, strong
pulse (110).

Morning, two packing-sheets, fifteen minutes each. In the first, patient
felt (as he said) as though he was in boiling water; on the application
of the second he felt cooler, after twenty-five minutes he was put into
a cold bath and there remained until heat had left the arm-pits, which
required seventeen minutes. Then a large towel was doubled four times
and placed round his loins, drank six tumblers of water and went to bed.

At twelve o'clock all fever gone--to put an end to Diarrhoea, I ordered
two rubbing sheets three minutes each, to be followed by tepid sitz-bath
fifteen minutes, wet bandages and water to be drank as before.

At five o'clock sitz-bath twenty minutes.

Patient passed a good night, and next day found himself well.

P.S. I treated this case myself at Naples.


_Cold Shivering by Day, and Feverish Heat when in Bed at Night._--A
young man--ordered three rubbing-sheets on rising quite warm from bed in
the morning; the same at noon, and in the afternoon drink plentifully of
water.

Symptoms continuing--An additional three rubbing-sheets were used
previous to going to bed, and when heat commenced in the night, the body
bandage, which had been worn from the beginning was changed, and water
drunk. If in a state of perspiration early in the morning, a tepid bath.
This treatment had the desired effect.


XXXIX.--CONGESTION OF THE LUNGS.

When the lungs are unsound sitz-baths are liable to cause a pain to be
felt in that region, probably from causing congestion to them. I knew a
case of this kind, and named it to Priessnitz who said, to have relieved
this the patient should have been put into a very shallow tepid-bath,
water two inches deep, and there rubbed by two men until the pain was
removed.

In a case of Gout treated by an inexperienced person--where fears were
entertained that congestion had taken place and castor oil was resorted
to--he advised the same bath and friction, _until it_ was removed.

A third case, where after being some time under the treatment a
practitioner was embarrassed by his patient having fixed pain in his
bowels, Priessnitz said, the bath applied with vigour for a considerable
time would have been sure of removing it.

If a patient is ever lost in these cases, it is through the want of
knowledge and the timidity of the practitioner.


XL.--INFLAMMATIONS.

_Inflammation of the Lungs._--This complaint originates in some
obstruction, and is occasioned by an effort of nature to remove it. By
bleeding the symptoms are reduced, but the cause remains, and
consequently it frequently happens that under Hydropathic treatment
inflammation returns, which then, by producing irritation on the
surface, is extracted.

Mr. Priessnitz' married daughter, this year, returned to Graefenberg,
with her husband, to be cured of an epidemic which raged in Hungary. The
husband was cured. The lady, with an eruption, went for two days into
the country; on return the eruption had nearly subsided; it had gone to
the lungs and inflammation resulted. She was put into tepid and cold
baths thirty or forty times during the day. These positive means put an
end to the inflammation in one day, and the next she was about as usual,
quite well.

This apparently dangerous complaint, without any apparent cause, when
taken quite in its infancy, is generally cured by the following simple
means.

Place a cold packing-sheet several times doubled over the shoulders,
chest, and back of the patient, whilst he takes a cold sitz-bath, for
from half an hour to an hour, during the time use great friction to the
feet and legs with hands dipped in water. All medical reasoning will be
to the effect that this treatment must cause congestion to the lungs;
but every day's practice at Graefenberg proves the contrary.

Between the application of the above treatment, use a rubbing sheet.

If the head is affected, let the patient lay quiet in bed, with his head
in a basin once or twice a day, from fifteen to thirty minutes, or much
longer if necessary each time.

If fever, then resort to the tepid bath, until heat disappears under the
arm-pits; this may require a long time, but must be persevered in.

The water of the bath must be continually renewed or it will become too
warm.

I have known the sitz-bath, applied two or three times a day, completely
cure an attack of this nature.

A lady, aged forty, attacked with inflammation of the lungs, was put
into a tepid bath 62 deg., and kept there three hours and ten minutes, cold
water being constantly poured over the shoulders, to bring down the
temperature. Priessnitz frequently felt the chest and arm-pits; and in
answer to patient's request to discontinue, he said if she did so until
all parts were cool alike, her life would pay the forfeit.

After this, she took a cold bath twice a day, and wore the
heating-bandage. In two months, she was perfectly cured. It should be
remarked, that during the greater part of this times she felt a pain
and hardness in the side, but this all subsided.


_Spitting Blood and Inflammation._--A young man had inflammation of the
lungs at Vienna, which ended in great debility and spitting of blood.
Shortly after going to Graefenberg he had another attack of inflammation
of the lungs.

_Treatment._--Tepid bath 62 deg., five minutes, then cold ten minutes, and
back to the tepid ten minutes. This change from one bath to the other
was repeated for nearly three hours, and ended about nine in the
morning; at eleven o'clock, a sitz-bath fifteen minutes; afternoon,
packing-sheet and cold bath for five minutes. Next day quite well of the
attack; he continued packing-sheet and cold bath, morning and afternoon,
and sitz-bath at noon; more heating-bandages on the chest. In ten weeks
perfectly cured.


_Inflammation in the Wind-pipe._--A lady--Chest, throat, and between the
shoulders rubbed for five minutes with hands, and frequently dipped in
cold water. During this time water was held in the mouth and changed
when warm.

Bandages were applied to throat, shoulders, and waist.

Walked the same afternoon a short time.


_Inflammation of the Brain._--Rubbing-sheets, head-baths, and bandages
to the nape of the neck, back of the head, and some distance down the
back, the rest of the body lightly covered. In an obstinate case,
recourse must be had to a tepid bath 64 deg. for a considerable time.

In all cases, whether in fever or not, where the head is attacked, large
wet bandages may be applied, and changed every five minutes. Bandages to
the whole of the head should not however be applied in general practice.
The head ought to be free and the face washed often.


_Inflammation of the Gums._--A child suffering indescribable pain, no
sleep night or day.

One or two rubbing sheets, two or three times a day. Heating bandages to
be applied to the head, as a turban, so that only the face can be seen,
and changed every five or ten minutes. The same round the waist, from
the hips to the arm-pits, and changed when warm.

If the body is confined, administer a cold water enema; if one is not
sufficient, a second should be administered in half an hour; drink
plentifully of water. Child out at play the third day.


XLI.--GRIPES, CHOLIC, DIARRHOEA, ENGLISH CHOLERA, OR CHOLERA MORBUS.

All partake more or less of the same character; to describe the
symptoms, nature, and medical treatment of these complaints, more
volumes have been written than there are days in the year.

My object is not to inquire how such complaints arise, but to show how
by the most simple and safe means they are to be cured.


_Cholic._--This complaint invariably gives way to sitz-baths, clysters,
bandages, and drinking plentifully of cold water.

A patient suffering from pain in the bowels for some days, was ordered
injections three times a day, notwithstanding the bowels were perfectly
free.


W----, taken with sickness and griping pains, could retain nothing on
his stomach, supposed that it arose from eating unripe fruit. An
injection of cold water was first resorted to; one not being sufficient,
a second in half an hour was administered, and during the day ten
others. Then two rubbing sheets, followed by a tepid bath, with great
friction, and large bandage, three hours afterwards, a sitz-bath, tepid,
fifteen minutes.

Again, after a lapse of three hours, the former process. This put an end
to the gripes the same day.


An Austrian officer, attacked with violent pain in the abdomen, which
extended through to the back. Great heat and pain in the head, with cold
feet.

Priessnitz wetted the body all over with cold water, particularly the
feet, and without drying the parts thus wetted, ordered the patient to
sit quite naked near to the window, which was open, for one hour in a
sitz-bath, his servant rubbing him the whole time. Patient was then
covered up well in bed to bring on re-action, the pains of which for a
short time were worse than cholic. The attack was put an end to by this
one application, or it was to have been renewed in the morning.

The singular part of this treatment is, that the body was thus exposed
to the inclemency of a Siberian winter, wet and naked, for one hour.
When asked why he adopted such positive treatment, Priessnitz said,
because there was a great tendency to intestinal inflammation. The
patient was out and well next day.


_Dysentery and Diarrhoea._--For the information of the general reader, it
may be well to state, that Dysentery is brought on by damp, cold, or
unripe fruit, and is attended by the evacuation of bloody glaires,
violent pain of the stomach, burning at the arms, and spasms of the
bladder, a constant desire to evacuate without being able to render
anything but glaires. Diarrhoea is attended with many of these symptoms,
but there is no blood in the evacuation. Hereafter it will be shewn how
both these complaints are to be treated.

Cold clysters, rubbing-sheets, sitz-baths, and bandage, are the chief
agents in the cure of these complaints. When attended with inflammation
take three or four sitz-baths a day, and change the body bandages every
ten minutes.

In Diarrhoea or Dysentery the patient should take but little exercise.

When Diarrhoea is recent, it is sufficient to drink plentifully of water,
wear a bandage round the wrist, eat little, and that of farinaceous
food.

Diarrhoea is often the work of nature to carry off prejudicial humours;
which ought not to be prevented. At the same time it must not be
suffered to continue too long without resorting to measures to check it.
A patient came to Graefenberg who had suffered six weeks from this
complaint, which had reduced him almost to a skeleton. He was cured in a
few days.

Where abundant evacuations of glaires are alternate with constipation,
cold injections are a great relief. If patients in Cholera, Diarrhoea,
Cholic, or Dysentery, cannot sleep, administer a very cold foot-bath,
water only half an inch deep, for fifteen minutes. Let the feet, legs,
and thighs be rubbed with wet hands the whole time, then the patient
should walk bare-footed in the chamber for ten minutes.


_Dysentery._--Begin with one or two rubbing-sheets, then cold injections
every quarter of an hour for two or three hours.

Then tepid sitz-bath, rather warmer than usual, for half an hour,
followed by a large heating bandage doubled three or four times, from
before the hips to the arm-pits, leaving the arms free. Change this
every ten or fifteen minutes. Let the covering to the bed be light, but
keep the feet warm. Drink large quantities of cold water.

When the bandage has been changed three or four times, if the patient is
better, let him remain quiet; otherwise repeat the treatment.


Miss B----, attacked with dysentery attended with great pain; ordered
four sitz-baths in a day, one hour each large bandage from hips to
arm-pits; changed often.

Took them two days, and one in the night. These chilled her exceedingly,
which Priessnitz said was as it ought to be.


_Diarrhoea._--A delicate lady, ordered not to drink milk for some days,
but sixteen to twenty glasses of water; take but little exercise; at
noon wash with cold water; at eleven o'clock, cold sitz-bath, twenty
minutes, then walk a few times in the room, with only dry sheet over the
person; then sitz-bath again for twenty minutes; repeat this a third
time to complete the hour.


F----, had diarrhoea two days, when Priessnitz said, "If you are not in
pain, do nothing; if the contrary, take a morning rubbing-sheet, and
sitz-bath three quarters of an hour; noon, the same; afternoon,
sitz-bath three quarters of an hour; change bandages and walk less;
drink plentifully of water."


A---- had Diarrhoea whilst travelling, as he could not procure sitz-bath,
he lay in bed, changed bandages every half hour, and drank freely of
water. This treatment sufficed.


_Chronic Diarrhoea._--Morning, packing-sheet from hips to arm-pits until
warm, then cold bath; noon, two rubbing-sheets and sitz-bath
half-an-hour; evening, sitz-bath half-an-hour; or in the morning,
sitz-bath for half an hour, then walk, return and take cold bath; drink
plentifully of water and wear large bandages.


_Pain in the Bowels._--Tepid sitz-bath 62 deg. for three quarters of an
hour; rubbing the abdomen all the time; in a simple case this puts an
end to the pain at once.


_Severe Pain in the Bowels._--Tepid sitz-bath, half an hour to an hour;
much rubbing with wet hands on the back, stomach, and abdomen when in
the bath; no exertion of mind or body; eat only of one thing; drink much
water. When constipated, or had pain in the bowels, extended the period
of the sitz bath. Patient's recovery quite marvellous.

The sitz-bath may be resorted to two or three times a day, and also
rubbing-sheet, if the case proves obstinate.


_Pain in Bowels and Diarrhoea._--Ordered sitz-bath fifteen minutes, walk
gently about the room five minutes, then repeat the sitz-bath fifteen
minutes, and again walk for five minutes, and after third time take
sitz-bath. Put on a large bandage well wrung out, and change it every
quarter of an hour. If not cured in three or four hours, repeat the
above treatment. If obstinate use cold injections.


_Relaxed Bowels._--Three rubbing-sheets and a sitz-bath on rising from
bed, for ten minutes in the morning; one rubbing sheet, and sitz-bath
twenty minutes at noon; the same repeated in the afternoon. If not
better, a clyster of cold water on going to bed; bandage, and drink
water as usual.


A young lady, troubled with relaxed bowels for some days--

Morning, three rubbing-sheets, and immediately after, tepid bath for
fifteen minutes; large bandage; at two o'clock two rubbing sheets.

These simple means effected a cure; if they had not, the sitz-bath was
to have been resorted to again.


_English Cholera._--A Russian General attacked with English Cholera, was
suffering extreme torture when Priessnitz came. He ordered three
rubbing-sheets, five minutes interim between each; patient then to be
put to bed for half-an-hour, and well covered up to promote heat; this
was followed by a cold sitz-bath of 30 or 40 minutes; drank plentifully
of water and wore a large heating bandage.

This one application effected a complete cure; had it not, the General
was to have repeated the treatment in the afternoon.


XLII.--CONSUMPTION.

Mr. Priessnitz thinks that in the great majority of cases consumption is
curable until the age of fourteen or fifteen, when the complaint
generally assumes a more serious aspect.

Young people are often considered consumptive when they really are not
so. A young lady of my acquaintance, having all the symptoms, was
ordered to Italy, where, notwithstanding the climate, the malady seemed
to increase. She went to Graefenberg, when Mr. Priessnitz at once
declared it was not consumption, that it was a contraction of the chest.
Two months' treatment caused the chest to expand and restored the
patient to robust health. Dr. Johnson says, "One thing of which I am
convinced is, that the true principle of treating consumption is to
support the patient's strength to the utmost;" and it must be remembered
that the great aim and principal effect of the Water-cure is to
_strengthen the system_, thereby giving the inherent curative power the
fairest opportunity of doing its own work.

It must however be observed, that when consumption has fairly set in,
neither water or drugs will arrest its progress. A friend of mine writes
me most sensibly on this subject: "I fully believe," says he, "if all
girls were to _wash thoroughly every_ day, more than three-fourths who
now go into consumption would be saved."


XLIII.--CRAMPS.

Rubbing-sheets, and rubbing powerfully with wet hands, for a
considerable time, particularly the feet, are efficient means of cure;
after each application let the patient remain quiet. If the hands or
feet become cold, apply friction again to them and the parts affected.

Mr. Brown finding patient nearly dead from Cramp, immediately
administered an enema, then a rubbing-sheet with great friction,
followed by a tepid bath for nearly an hour, the enema took effect
whilst under the friction, rubbing-sheets and baths were repeated three
times before mid-day with good effect.

In the afternoon, rubbing-sheets were used, and friction with wet hands.


_Cramp-Cough._--I knew a case of this nature which was most successfully
treated at Graefenberg.

Morning, two or three packing-sheets followed by tepid bath; noon, tepid
sitz-bath, quarter of an hour; afternoon, morning treatment renewed.

The Crisis was attended with inflammation and ulcers of the throat.

Tepid-baths, were administered twice a day, for ten to fifteen minutes,
changing alternately from hot to cold and back to hot. To subdue fever
which was very active in the night, the patient took a plunge or two
into a cold bath before going to bed.

Bandage on Chest at night, in addition to that round the loins.


_Cramps in the Stomach._--Patient's complaint was cramp in the stomach,
weak digestion, great nervous sensibility. Packing-sheet one hour, and
tepid-bath in the morning, four minutes, with great friction; then three
successive plunges into tepid, cold, and tepid-bath, to remain in the
last four minutes; noon, rubbing-sheet five minutes, followed by
sitz-bath ten minutes; afternoon, repeat morning treatment, wear bandage
day and night, and drink twelve tumblers of water daily.

In a short time, the tepid-bath was relinquished for the cold-bath; and
the douche was used for two minutes, as a longer period was found to
disagree with the patient. A diarrhoea was cured by the addition of
sitz-baths; at which time the douche was not persevered in.


XLIV.--ASTHMA.

I was astonished at the wonderful effects of the Water-cure treatment,
in cases of Asthma. One night, Priessnitz was called up to a patient
under the cure, who was almost suffocated.

A tepid sitz-bath for thirty minutes with great friction of the abdomen
completely relieved him. This patient was perfectly cured in three
months.


A patient whose age was thirty-five suffered from chest complaint,
asthma, torpid circulation, and stricture. For some time three
rubbing-sheets a day only were prescribed, then a tepid sitz-bath; and
when he evidenced the cure of the Asthma, by ascending with ease the
highest mountains, the general treatment was resorted to.

In three months the stricture was quite cured. Left Graefenberg the
fourth month.


The following interesting case, came under my especial notice.

Mr. M----, aged 26, afflicted with Asthma for three years, tried all the
baths in Germany, and then determined on going to Graefenberg: _en
route_, he was confined to an hotel for eight days. When he arrived,
which was on the 4th January, 1846, he could with difficulty walk a
quarter of a mile.

Inclement as the weather was, Priessnitz, at once ordered him into a
tepid bath, and stripped him of all flannels; next day he began the
following treatment, until warm.

Morning, packing-sheet, tepid-bath; noon, rubbing-sheet, and tepid
sitz-bath; afternoon, the same. In a short time tepid water was
discontinued for cold.

In about three weeks, two large boils appeared and broke, when he was so
much better, as to ascend the highest mountains, his health improved so
fast, that, first in the morning, he was seen up to his middle in snow,
always without hat, neckcloth or great coat.

He was cured in about four months.


XLV.--SURGICAL OPERATIONS, ACCIDENTS, ETC.

_Amputation._--The Surgeon's profession would be a very poor one if
Hydropathy were generally understood.

If a finger, hand, or foot, be nearly severed from the body, they should
be put into the best possible form, bandaged, and placed between two
pieces of wood; over this a large bandage: the former may be wetted
often without being removed.

A friend of mine in Italy had the misfortune, whilst botanising, to fall
from one rock to another, where he hung by his foot. This caused a
compound fracture, and the loss of his foot. I asked Mr. Priessnitz what
ought to have been done,--he said his shepherd would have known better
than to have cut off the foot; a stiff one being preferable to none at
all. The foot should have been healed as above described, a large
bandage applied from the toes up to the top of the thighs constantly
wetted; this would have kept the limb cold. As fever or inflammation
must proceed from the part afflicted, it is evident if the heat is
extracted thence, neither can ensue. The splinters would have come away
of themselves, and the patient might have been spared the loss of his
foot, and several months of severe suffering and loss of health.


_Crushed Finger._--A farmer at Graefenberg had his finger smashed by a
large stone rolling against it; so that it hung by the skin. It was put
together, bandaged, and so fixed between two pieces of wood; over this a
larger bandage was placed, the under part kept constantly wet. When pain
ensued, the elbow was put into cold water for twenty minutes. The
finger, though stiffer than the others, was preserved.


_Fainting Fit._--Open the window to admit fresh air; unfasten the dress.
Sprinkle water on the face and put the feet into a foot pan, with water
only up to the instep, and let the attendant rub feet and legs up to the
knees.


_Effects of Falls._--A young man who came with nervous fever, one day,
whilst labouring under violent palpitation, to which he was subject,
fell, and so hurt the back of his head, as to be insensible for half an
hour. Priessnitz, being sent for, ordered a foot-bath and rubbing with
wet hands up to the knee. Opened his waistcoat, rubbed the chest, and
threw cold water into his face. The friction and foot-bath continued for
an hour, when patient was ordered a sitz-bath for thirty minutes.
Bandages to waist and head.


Another party fell and injured his large toe against a stone. Ordered
three cold foot-baths a day, fifteen minutes each time, and bandage to
be kept continually wet.


Count C. fell down stairs, and afterwards felt pain in his side.
Bandaged the part. Next day a tepid bath for one hour. As the Count was
not young, this was not persevered in. Sitz-baths were substituted.


A. fell from his horse and injured his elbow and arm.

Arm and elbow placed in a tepid bath for an hour.

Repeated three times a day. Arm bandaged night and day.


_Bruised Shin._--Three sitz-baths a day 60 deg.; bandage the leg from ancle
to above the knee, and keep it raised. Throw tepid water over foot and
leg several times a day.

Foot-baths may be resorted to, if the patient is already under
hydropathic treatment: otherwise not, as they draw bad matter downwards,
and might prevent the wound from healing.


B. trod upon a nail which entered his foot. His foot was put for an hour
twice or thrice a day into tepid water, and he wore a bandage on the
part.

In all cases of the kind--either by cutting with sharp instruments or
otherwise, put the wounded part into tepid water until it ceases
bleeding, then bandage it, and afterwards use cold baths several times a
day to the part.

Bandages must extend both ways beyond the wound, to carry off the
inflammation from the part. Viz.--If the calf of the leg be wounded, the
bandage ought to begin at the ancle, and be continued up to the knee. In
all cases take one or two tepid sitz-baths a day. They prevent the head
being affected.


_Tape Worms._--Rubbing-sheets once or twice a day, bandage always round
the waist, cold injections morning and evening, and drink plentifully of
water.

For other worms recourse must be had to the general treatment.


_Sea Sickness._--Wear a large thick bandage on chest and abdomen; and if
it does not prevent, it will mitigate sea-sickness.


_Apoplexy and Paralysis._--Instantly put patient into tepid-bath, water
about two inches deep, throw cold water over head and shoulders, and use
immense friction with wet hands for a very long time. For a wonderful
case of cure of Apoplexy, refer to the letter written from Graefenberg to
the New York Tribune.


_Lock Jaw._--The same as for Apoplexy.


A Belgian Doctor had a paralytic stroke two months previous to coming to
Graefenberg. In a fortnight he had another; when he could neither speak
nor eat, and was too feeble to take the bath.

Sixteen rubbing-sheets a day, four at a time, restored him the use of
his faculties in two days.


A crochet-needle was, by accident, driven into the side of a young lady;
a surgeon lanced the part and extracted it, when Priessnitz simply
ordered a bandage to the part, to be changed every quarter of an hour
until inflammation subsided, and subsequently, as often as it became
dry. After the first day no inconvenience was felt. A green matter
exuded from the wound, which P. said was nothing more than usual in such
circumstances.


_Scalds._--Put the part affected into cold water, or apply a cold
affusion for an hour two or three times a day. Wear a bandage
continually wet; when the inflammation has subsided, put a dry bandage
over the wet one.


_Burns._--If a burn be bad, and the patient cannot endure the
application of water, in that case use tow or lint; but if possible,
wring a bandage well out, apply it to the burn, and put a dry one over
it. Change the bandage often; but if this is too painful, let it remain,
and wet it often. A cold bath applied as a derivative will afford great
relief; _i. e._ if the leg is burnt take a foot-bath; if the hand, put
the elbow in cold water, &c.


_Rupture of the Tendon Achilles._--A friend of mine, running across the
road, heard the crack of a whip; and supposed at first that some one had
struck his leg with a whip, but he soon found he could not put his foot
to the ground, that he had met with an accident called _coup de fouet_,
or a rupture of the tendon Achilles in the calf of his leg. The only
treatment for this, which effected an immediate cure, was binding it up
in a surgeon's bandage very tight, and keeping that wet night and day.


_Accidents to the Head._--A man chopping wood struck a child a back blow
on the forehead; the wound was wetted with tepid water for some time,
and then a bandage was applied.

Two tepid sitz-baths were administered during the day.


Another child seven years old, fell against a stone and laid his
forehead open.

Bandage applied, and wetted occasionally without being taken off; a dry
one kept over it.

Another bandage at the back of the neck, renewed often.

Tepid sitz-bath fifteen minutes, three times a day. Feverish symptoms
arose during the night; sitz-bath renewed.

Prince Ruspoli, Lord Anson, and another were galloping along a road at
the dusk of the evening, not perceiving a drain, two of their horses
fell into it. Two of the party were taken up insensible. On being
brought into Freywalden, they were instantly put into tepid baths of
65 deg.

The prince having fallen on his temple was much stunned; four men rubbed
him in the bath, in five minutes he became conscious and assisted in
rubbing himself; in ten minutes he felt cold. After being in the bath
twenty-five minutes he was taken out, well dried and put to bed, with
bandages on his head and back of the neck, and but slight covering.
After an hour's repose, a tepid sitz-bath was administered for an hour.
During the night patient suffered great pain in his head. Next day he
was out of doors, but took three sitz-baths during the day; in the
morning for an hour; the others, half an hour each time. Bandages always
to the injured part. In a few days he was quite well.

The prince's friend was threatened with congestion in the head, and had
great pain in the stomach; the faeces were nearly black. He took many
injections; three sitz-baths daily, an hour and a half each time, and
one during the night. This treatment effected his cure.


_Cuts and Wounds._--For a clean cut, it will often be sufficient to
close the wound at once, and cover it with a dry bandage, so as to
exclude the air.

A bruise, or jagged cut, should be bound up, and covered with a wet
bandage; and this, when inflammation has subsided, must be covered with
a dry one. Do not remove the under bandage, but pour water on it
occasionally, and cover it again with the dry one. Let the bandage
extend both ways beyond the wound, to conduct away the heat from it.


_Calf of Leg torn off._--Dr. Scontetton, surgeon to the forces at
Strasburg, states, "A soldier trying to descend at night from the walls
of the barracks, fell, and tore the flesh off the calf of his leg. The
doctor put the lacerated flesh together as well as he could, and bound
the leg and thigh up in a bandage; a trough was then made in a slanting
position in which he placed the leg. Over the man's head he fixed a cask
of water with a tube, from which the man was to keep the bandage
constantly wet.[6] By this treatment alone a cure was effected in a
fortnight, during which time the man suffered no pain, nor was even
deprived of his appetite."

  [6] He drank nothing but water, and wore a bandage round his waist.


_Sprained Shoulder._--A patient fell down an ice-berg and severely
bruised his shoulder, so that he could not raise his hand. The bruise
was immediately saturated with cold water for an hour, and cold wet
cloths applied for a long time. When inflammation had subsided, a
heating bandage was applied and renewed when dry. Elbow bath twice a
day, fifteen minutes each.

This treatment was repeated two or three times a day.


_Accident to the Eye._--A child five years old, ran a knife into the
ball of the eye. Cold wet bandages perfected a cure. The blue of the eye
ran, but the boy, now fifteen years of age, sees perfectly well.


_Swelling of a Vein--Varicose Veins._--A young lady was afflicted with
swelled vein just over the large toes of both feet; the swelling in one
foot shortly disappeared, the other became more developed, the foot and
ancle inflamed.

I wrote to Priessnitz, who advised "a cold foot-bath, three times a day,
for twenty minutes; water up to the ancle and not to be changed. After
the bath, rub the foot (omitting the affected part) and leg,
particularly in front, up to the knee, until heat is restored; then
apply a bandage (well wrung out) to the foot and leg up to the knee,
always changing before dry. If an eruption or swelling take place on the
foot, take a sitz-bath half an hour, twice a day, and the sweating
process, followed by cold bath every other day. Do not perspire more
than an hour. The foot should be kept a little elevated."

Patient not getting better, and the medical men declaring the case, in
their opinion, incurable, she went to Graefenberg. The following is the
treatment pursued there:--Packing-sheets for fifteen minutes; changed
for another of twenty minutes; and cold plunge-bath morning and evening;
between which douched twice a day, and a sitz-bath taken; always wearing
foot and leg and waist bandage.

Priessnitz, on seeing the case, declared the complaint was not a local
one, that "it was a general derangement of the nervous system", and so
it turned out, as veins in the arms, thighs, and elsewhere enlarged and
diminished under the treatment. Both feet and legs now became swollen
and inflamed up to the knee, so that patient was obliged to move on
crutches. Treatment increased. Length of cold bath and douche extended
to five minutes each. To prevent the pain that must have attended the
limbs, in so inflamed a state, coming in contact with water, the
bandages remained on those parts whilst taking those baths. This crisis
continued for two months, when it began to recede, then came again in a
more moderate form; receded and again made its appearance a third and
last time. Catamenia became regular, appetite good, and patient could
walk without assistance. The cure was effected in ten months. It is now
upwards of two years since the party left Graefenberg, and she is
perfectly well.

By this it will be seen, that that which is produced by the treatment,
must be made to recede under the treatment. Had Priessnitz relinquished
any part of it at the most trying moment, the cure would not have been
effected.

Speaking to him of varicose or enlarged veins, he said "they are
generally curable. I had a patient with an enlarged vein in his foot,
when on the ground the vein became full, measuring nearly two inches;
this was cured in eighteen months."


_Sprains._--In all cases of sprains, rub the part, with hands dipped in
water, for a long time; the oftener the better, and put on a wet
bandage, which when heat has subsided, change for a heating bandage.

If the sprain is a bad one, apply a cold bath or cold affusion to the
part for half an hour, then the wet, and afterwards the heating bandage,
which change often.

The bath should be repeated thrice a day, and friction used the whole
time.

If general treatment is necessary, then packing-sheets. Tepid bath and
tepid sitting baths must be resorted to.


_Sprained Ankle._--Put the foot immediately into cold water, and rub
foot, ankle, and leg up to the knee for an hour, particularly the
wounded part. The water of the bath, after the first time, only up to
the instep, but repeated three or four times a day. Bandage the foot,
ankle, and leg up to the knee; first, with quite wet bandages, and when
inflammation has somewhat subsided, then with heating bandage. The foot
should not be allowed to remain quiet. If not able to move about, the
patient should put a rolling pin under his foot and keep that in
movement. By these means a sprained ankle is cured in a few days, that
without it might continue for a month or longer.


_Wound in the Abdomen._--A lad leaning upon a piece of wood, hurt his
abdomen; it was rubbed with cold water for half an hour, followed by
sitz-bath half an hour twice a day.


_Bleeding at the Nose._--Sprinkle the face with water, bandage the back
of the neck and the loins; shallow foot bath, where obstinate. Bandage
the genitals and change the bandage often.

Dr. Gibbs states, that whilst at Graefenberg, he was greatly troubled
with bleeding at the nose. He tried bandages at the back of the neck and
foot-bath to no purpose. Priessnitz then ordered him two packing-sheets
in succession, the first fifteen minutes, the other twenty-five minutes,
followed by cold bath. This treatment had the desired effect.

I knew a case where a man bled profusely at the nose. He put his feet up
to the calves of his legs in cold water, and the bleeding stopped in ten
minutes.

A child had a blow on the nose, which occasioned it to bleed frequently.

Bandage worn on the forehead for a week or two, and foot baths,
completed a cure.


_Spitting Blood, Sickness, etc._--This is sometimes occasioned by piles.
Sitz-baths (tepid 62 deg.) may be taken; bandages worn on the waist always,
and on the chest at night. All irritation should be avoided, and repose
of body and mind observed. Water ought to be drunk abundantly. Bleeding
of the lungs, the effect of pulmonary consumption, is not curable. To
distinguish the difference between cases requires the experience of such
a genius as Priessnitz.


XLVI.--SMALL POX, MEASLES, HOOPING COUGH, CROUP, SCARLATINA, COLDS,
SHIVERING, ETC.

All these complaints form the easiest and surest part of Priessnitz's
practice. No child or adult ever died at Graefenberg of any of them. This
fact, attested as it is by all writers on Hydropathy, leads one to look
on the incertitude of medical practice in diseases incidental to
children, with wonder and dismay.

Priessnitz considers these complaints wholesome, being the medium chosen
by Nature for relieving the system.

On their appearance, his great aim is to strengthen the patient, and
eliminate the morbific matters by the pores of the skin. It is
frequently asked, "But does not the hydropathic process drive the virus
into the system?" No, on the contrary, the packing-sheet acts as a
poultice to the whole body; and this, followed by a tepid bath, causes
an outward action, and the system is cooled and relieved through miles
of drainage (the pores), the true medium through which relief can with
certainty be obtained.

A young man with measles, at Graefenberg, had as many as 400
packing-sheets applied in about fourteen days.


_Small-Pox._--Small-pox, of all diseases, is that which should be
treated hydropathically; because by its operation the morbid matters are
thrown out by the pores of the skin, upon which it rarely leaves any of
those scars so detrimental to the beauty of the person.

In the Water-cure, judiciously treated, the small-pox is under no
circumstances attended with danger, nor is the patient reduced in
strength as under any other treatment. "Small pox," Priessnitz says,
"instead of being suppressed, ought to be encouraged, as it relieves the
system of humours that ought to be carried out of it, and is a healthy
process." At one period the profession were as much at fault in the
treatment of small-pox, as they now are in that of cholera. No means
were left untried, but they failed in arresting its ravages. Jenner's
discovery was hailed as an intervention of Providence, and he was voted
two grants in parliament. If Priessnitz is right, this discovery may be
hailed as a curse rather than a blessing. He states that the insertion
of poisonous matter into the blood of a healthy subject produces
poisonous consequences, is repugnant to our feelings, and at variance
with the laws of nature.

In small pox, where there is much eruption on the face, a muslin
handkerchief, wetted, may be used as a bandage to the part.

If the head is much affected, head-bath and wet bandages must be
resorted to.

Bandage the back and thighs if they require it. In these complaints, as
in all others, if the bowels require opening, use injections. Drink
plentifully of water.


I treated a young lady in small-pox as follows:--

First day--patient was confined to the sofa with head-ache and general
lassitude; next morning, fever and several pustules: two
packing-sheets, the first twenty minutes, the other twenty-five minutes;
and tepid bath 70 deg. for eight minutes. Afternoon--As the packing-sheet
did not heat so soon as that in the morning, it was not changed, but
patient remained in it an hour and a quarter--the tepid bath eight
minutes--drank sixteen tumblers of water, windows always open. Second
day, eruption much increased over the body and face; treatment as
before. Third and fourth day, eruption increased; same treatment
persevered in. Fifth day, treatment only in the morning. Sixth day,
eruption decreasing. Eighth day, catamenia, all treatment suspended;
which it should be observed would not have been the case had any fever
remained. Tenth day, patient out walking, eruption nearly gone. Twelfth
and thirteenth day, one rubbing-sheet on getting out of bed. It should
be stated, that the wet bandage was _perpetually_ worn during the
treatment.

Patient quite as well and as strong as before the attack. Complexion
much clearer.

The most extraordinary thing to be observed is, that the patient was not
confined to bed for an hour--felt no disposition to scratch herself. The
tongue, after third day, was perfectly clean, and her rest after the
first night undisturbed.

The fever was taken out the first day, from which time she was not
inconvenienced in the least. This young lady had been twice vaccinated.

The second and third day a smell remained in the room after patient was
taken out of the sheet and bath, that was perfectly intolerable; which
shows that the virus was taken out, and accounts for the eruption being
so mild.

Another friend of mine, 46 years of age, caught the small pox, though he
had been vaccinated twice. He was treated much in the same way, and was
out of doors quite well the twelfth day, never having been confined to
his bed for an hour. Windows open night and day.

In all eruptive complaints, packing-sheets allay the fever. To effect
this, where the fever is strong, they should be changed once or twice,
or even oftener. When there is much eruption, the heat of the bath which
follows the wet sheet must be increased in extraordinary cases even to
80 deg.

The packing-sheet process and the tepid bath must be used twice a-day;
patient must drink abundance of water; windows of the room ought to be
always open; if constipated, clysters; waist bandages in all cases.

This treatment persevered in, must cure all eruptive and other fevers.
No fear need exist as to the eruption by these means being driven
in--all experience shows it is the way to bring it to the surface.


Dr. Farr declares himself a convert to the Water-cure in cases of
eruption and other fevers, and did me the favour of writing the
following letter:--

"Miss ---- for two days had a sensation of languor, drowsiness, and pain
in the head and loins, with sickness and fever. On the third day there
appeared on the face small red spots, and successively on the inferior
parts, until the fifth day! these rose into pimples, and then filled
with puriform matter; dry hard scales formed, and on these falling off,
pits or marks were left on some of them. The cold water cure had been
commenced when I first saw her, which had cut the fever, and altered the
character of the eruption; but as soon as the pustules began to form,
the nature of the disease was no longer a matter of doubt; the pustules
were as well developed, and went through their regular changes as well
and as perfectly as though no application of cold had been made use of.
This was the first case of small-pox I saw this winter at Nice, but
shortly after several others occurred, and some of them of the confluent
kind. I must confess I was surprised at the complete success of the cold
water cure in this case.

                                                           "W. FARR."

    "Nice, 13th April, 1848.["]


_Scarlatina and Measles._--These two complaints are treated alike:--

Morning, packing-sheet twenty-five minutes, then change it for another
for twenty-five minutes, followed by tepid bath 64 deg. for ten minutes.
Bandages. If the eruption is extensive, heat of the bath must be
increased.

Repeat the treatment in the afternoon. If there is much heat between the
hours of treatment, take as many rubbing-sheets one after the other as
are necessary to subdue it. Much water should be drunk.


_Scarlatina._--This complaint, on its first indication, is often subdued
by the following simple means:--

Two or three packing-sheets. Large bandage round the waist. Drink water
and walk out. A few hours afterwards repeat the same.

If obstinate, two or three packing-sheets, changed when warm, followed
by tepid bath 64 deg.

If in scarlatina, or measles, the throat is affected, drink often in
small quantities. Renew the packing-sheet frequently. When fever is
diminished, slight perspiration in packing-sheet for half an hour; then
tepid bath twenty minutes, with friction. Bread and milk diet.


A child, eleven years old, exhibited symptoms of scarlatina. Dry and hot
all over the body. Stitch from chest to back. Was put into a tepid bath
64 deg. and rubbed for an hour, cold water being continually thrown over its
shoulders; child extremely cold; walked out. The same operation
performed again in the afternoon and twice the next day put an end to
the attack.


_Hooping Cough._--Rub the child well all over, particularly the chest
and back of the neck with hands continually dipped in cold water; or use
a rubbing sheet. Bandage the chest, breast, and loins. If sufficiently
strong, let the child lie in bed until quite hot, then tepid bath 64 deg.
and use great friction until quite chilled. If fever be present, a
packing-sheet should precede the tepid bath, and afterwards a bandage
round the waist.


Hooping cough may also be treated thus:--

Tepid bath, with great friction, for ten minutes in the morning; two
rubbing-sheets at mid-day; the same in the afternoon: head-bath before
going to bed; chest and body bandaged and changed often; drink much
water.


_Mumps._--Begin with rubbing-sheets; then packing-sheets and tepid-bath.

Bandage the throat, loins, and side of the head affected.

Change the bandages often, keep the mouth full of water, and change it
when warm.


_Croup with Sore Throat and Cough._--A child, on awaking in the morning,
had face very red and found much difficulty in breathing. Treatment:--

A cold water injection, then two rubbing-sheets, and bandage all round
the body from the throat to the hips.

An enema did not act, but appeared to cool the body; it remained in the
body eight minutes. When discharged, another rubbing-sheet and wet
bandage were applied. Breathing free, and child slept until morning.
Then well rubbed in bath 62 deg. for ten minutes.

Ate little breakfast. Dined on rice pudding.

Afternoon. Flushed and feverish.

Priessnitz, who now saw the patient, approved of what had been done, and
said if the croup had continued, eight or ten rubbing-sheets ought to
have been administered; allowing ten to twenty minutes between each;
depending upon the violence of attack and strength of patient.

Evening. Patient was feverish, when the following was ordered:--

Body, _but not_ the feet, to be enveloped in packing-sheet, and there
remain until feet were warm: then tepid-bath 64 deg. ten minutes. If the
feet are cold in the bath, rub them with wet hands until a good
circulation is produced.

In the night, fever abated and the child slept soundly.

Next day croup nearly gone and appetite good.


Another child with croup was treated in the same way on the first day.
At nine o'clock at night, chest, windpipe, and between the shoulders,
were rubbed for some time with wet hands; then the waist, throat, and
chest were bandaged.

Slept well, but flushed and feverish in the morning; complained of sore
throat. Packing-sheet until hot, and tepid-bath 64 deg.

Still feverish.

At noon, rubbing-sheet, not wrung out. If no fever and appetite, to go
out.

Repeat rubbing-sheet in the afternoon.

Should fever continue, packing-sheet followed by rubbing-sheets. This
was not necessary.

Second day. Tepid bath in the morning, and rubbing-sheets at twelve and
five o'clock. Both children cured in three days.


A child seven years old, subject all his life to severe attacks of
croup, on being seized with one at Graefenberg, was treated as follows:--

Rubbed between the shoulders, and on the chest, for some minutes with
wet hands; then lifted out of bed, and well rubbed all over, especially
in the legs, in a very wet sheet from five to eight minutes.

A wet handkerchief was then put on as a shawl, and a bandage round the
waist; when the patient was allowed to return to bed for ten minutes;
after which the same treatment was repeated. This induced sleep, and he
awoke free from all signs of croup.

At twelve o'clock there was a relapse, when the rubbing was renewed, and
bandage applied to the waist.

At five o'clock in the afternoon, tepid-bath 64 deg. for some minutes, and
patient slept all night in bandage and wet shawl.

The treatment was renewed second day.


A child three years old, also liable to attacks of croup, on being
attacked one evening about nine o'clock, was instantly rubbed on the
chest, windpipe, and between the shoulders, followed by a general
rubbing in rubbing-sheet for five minutes; then bandages were applied to
throat, chest, and round the waist.

This apparently gave great relief, but in the morning he awoke flushed
and feverish, complaining of his throat. A rubbing-sheet followed by a
tepid-bath for some minutes, was resorted to; and at twelve o'clock
another rubbing-sheet followed. Fever having subsided, he was allowed to
go out.

At five o'clock the rubbing-sheet was repeated. He wore the bandage on
his throat down to his chest day and night, changing it when dry. Had
fever continued, he was to have lain in packing-sheet at five o'clock
until warm, instead of the rubbing-sheet. Since this time both children
have been perfectly well.--_August, 1845._


_Ophthalmia._--Inflammation of the eyes is generally catarrhal or
rheumatic, and requires the same treatment as rheumatism and gout. I
never saw it acute, but always chronic.

To the rheumatic treatment, Priessnitz adds eye-baths, and the douche.
The latter must be received in the joined hands; from which, water
coming from a height will rebound as high as the eyes. Head-baths are
equally indispensable, as well as fomentations, to these organs. Chronic
ophthalmia, even at Graefenberg, is most obstinate, and requires a long
course of treatment.


A captain thus attacked, felt, after several head-baths which he
continued for three quarters of an hour, a pungent pain in the head,
accompanied by swelling of the ears. An abscess was expected in one of
these organs, when the pain gave way to a virulent deposit, formed in
the thick part of the cheek; after this, the eyes were re-established.


Another sufferer came to Graefenberg, with an exfoliation in the corner
of the eye. To the whole of the treatment, Priessnitz added eye-baths;
after each of which, the invalid was to look fixedly at the light, and
immediately re-plunge the eyes into cold water. This man, who was
perfectly blind on coming, was, on leaving Graefenberg, able to read with
spectacles.


A third patient presented a very remarkable case of blindness, the
result of a cold caught during hunting, by which he lost his sight. He
had been nine months blind, when he arrived at Graefenberg; after each
process of perspiration, which he submitted to twice a day, the bath and
the head-bath, matter mixed with blood came from the eyes. One might say
that some pounds exuded from the eyes in the course of three weeks. I
did not see the termination of this cure, before leaving Graefenberg; but
I can affirm, that the last time I spoke to the invalid, he could
distinguish colours, and also objects at a certain distance.


_Itch and Ringworm._--These diseases are more easily cured by cold
water, than by any other means. The process of perspiration in the wet
sheet, leads to success; but ringworm is frequently more difficult to
cure than the itch. It requires longer time, and a more energetic use of
cold water.--The douche is also indispensable in cases of ringworm, in
order to bring the morbid humours to the skin. The most difficult
ringworms to cure, are those which have been driven in by bad treatment.
This disease is really equal to the gout, in point of obstinacy, for it
re-appears upon the skin after the use of the douche a long time. After
the process of perspiration, and cold baths too, it again shows itself
under forms much more serious in their aspect, than in the beginning.


_Cold, Cough, with Inflammation._--A lady was ordered--

Packing-sheet, half or three quarters of an hour, then tepid bath 64 deg.
for an hour, twice a day. After first day much better. Third day cured.
If patient is fatigued by staying in bath so long, let him come out and
walk about the room for a few minutes, then enter the bath again.


Major----, a strong man, pursued the following treatment and was cured
the third day.

Morning--Packing-sheet, two and a half hours, and tepid bath 64 deg., ten
minutes. Took a long walk.

At noon--Packing-sheet, one hour, and bath ten minutes.

Afternoon--The same.

Bandaged throat and chest day and night.


_Chronic Sore Throat._--Child two and a half years old.
Morning--Packing-sheet one hour and then cold bath; noon, tepid
sitz-bath, fifteen minutes. Bandage round the throat at night, but not
by day; rub the throat often with wet hands.


_Sore Throat, Pain in the Limbs, and Prostration of Strength._--A young
lady so attacked was ordered not to eat any dinner that day; to run up
and down stairs and about the room until warm.

Then a blanket, warmed by the fire and the patient enveloped in it,
covered by many others, patient to keep in movement in the blanket the
first quarter of an hour, to promote perspiration (the sweating
process). Bandage throat, chest, and waist. Hold water in the mouth, and
rub the throat often with wet hands (requisites in all cases where the
throat is engaged). Patient being under the general treatment at the
usual time, packing sheet and tepid bath, etc., were used.

Cure effected the second day.


_Cold and Cough._--A child six years old. Tepid bath 64 deg. twice a day,
fifteen minutes each time, and waist bandage. Cured the second day.

For an adult the above is also good treatment, with the addition of
holding water constantly in the mouth when walking, and wearing bandages
on chest and legs up to the fork at night; morning, two rubbing sheets;
the same at mid-day and in the afternoon. Two foot-baths during the day
of ten minutes each; feet to be rubbed well the whole time. Bandages as
in former case.


_Cold, and Sore Throat._--Bandage the throat at night, expose it by day,
even in winter.


_Pain in the Bowels._--Packing-sheet until hot, then tepid bath 66 deg.
morning and afternoon; at mid-day, sitz-bath 64 deg. twenty minutes. It was
truly astonishing to witness the result of one day's treatment.


In a case of great swelling in the throat, bandages were applied to it
always, and changed every twenty minutes. To this were added
rubbing-sheets three times a day, and a sitz-bath 64 deg. for twenty
minutes.


_Cold._--In a severe cold, suspend packing-sheet in the morning and
substitute rubbing sheet; at noon, packing-sheet for an hour, followed
by tepid-bath 64 deg.

If not soon well, sweating process for an hour and half, followed by
tepid bath 64 deg.

In a common cold, Priessnitz ordered three rubbing-sheets, with great
friction, on going to bed. For children, he finds a tepid bath, for ten
minutes twice a day, is sufficient; dining on farinaceous food and going
out as usual.


_Cold with Head Ache._--Two rubbing-sheets and tepid sitz-bath for
twenty minutes before dinner, and the same in the afternoon. After each
operation a cold-head bath for ten minutes.


_Cold, Sore Throat, and enlarged Tonsils._--Packing-sheets and
tepid-bath twice a day. Tepid sitz-bath and bandages are generally
ordered.


_Cold settled in the Knee._--One day rising from kneeling, a patient,
aged 50, felt great pain in her knee, which swelled so as to prevent her
going out. Despite medical skill, it increased in size, and the foot
lost all sensation; this took place twelve months previous to going to
Graefenberg.

The patient for the first seven or eight weeks was confined entirely to
her room. In the morning, packing-sheet and tepid bath; noon, stood on
the leg up to the top of the thigh in cold water half an hour;
afternoon, repeated the same; drank ten glasses of water daily; and kept
the leg and foot constantly bandaged. At length she began to walk with
two sticks; then she took a cold bath in the morning, and after ten
weeks the douche twice a day, ten minutes each time. Digestion good.

The bone resumed its position and the swelling began to diminish; when,
the foot having gained its action, she could walk with a stick without
other assistance. This lady was an excellent example of the benefit of
the Water-cure.


_Cough, Sore Throat, and pain in the Chest._--Heating bandage to the
throat at night; expose it by day.

Morning, packing-sheet until quite hot; then tepid bath 64 deg. for fifteen
minutes twice a day.

In the middle of the day tepid sitz-bath, twenty minutes. It was
astonishing to witness the change for the better, after the first day's
treatment.


_Cold and Cough._--An infant aged six years. Tepid bath 64 deg. twice a day,
for fifteen minutes each time.

Heating bandage round the waist. Cured in two days.


_Severe Swelling in the Throat._--A gentleman resident in my house was
ordered three rubbing-sheets, three times a day, and bandages, changed
every twenty minutes.

A friend of mine was constantly annoyed by relaxed and sore throat,
without any assignable cause. At length it was found that he slept with
his mouth open. An Indian-rubber band to go under the chin and over the
head, so as to keep his mouth shut was used at nights and from that time
he was no more annoyed with the complaint.


_Flatulency._--Injection and sitz-baths.


_Drowsiness._--Foot-bath, and rub the head with wet hands. If these
means are not sufficient, use the packing-sheet, followed by friction in
tepid bath for an hour.

A patient complaining to Priessnitz of feeling heavy in the head after
dinner, was ordered to pour a bottle of water on his head, and take
head-baths occasionally.


_Hysteria._--Rubbing-sheets every five minutes, until every appearance
of hysteria is gone. The patient should lie in bed between each
packing-sheet to get warm.


_Ague._--Tepid bath 62 deg. with great friction until fever is reduced; then
packing-sheets, changed on becoming warm; followed by tepid bath,
bandage, drinking water, etc. The sweating stage is much relieved by
packing-sheets.


_Shivering._--For a shivering fit, a patient was ordered five
rubbing-sheets, with an interval of five minutes between them--patient
to walk about the room during that time: first application effected a
cure.

A young lady strong and robust, always cold, sleepy, and indisposed to
leave the house, was ordered to use the packing-sheet until warm; then a
tepid bath for an hour and upwards, three times a day. In three days she
was perfectly well.


_Weakness of Chest and Short Breathing._--A delicate lady was ordered
two packing-sheets, from the arm-pits to knees, and tepid bath 64 deg. Feet
being cold were rubbed in shallow foot-bath for a quarter of an hour,
then dried, and she walked about her chamber for a quarter of an hour
before going to bed.


_Itching of the Fingers, like the approach of Chilblains._--Wash hands
in tepid water, 64 deg., three times a day for five minutes; wear
heating-bandage from the wrist to the elbow.


XLVII.--SORE MOUTH--INFLAMED GUMS.

For this complaint, sweating twice a day, long tepid baths, head-baths,
and sitz-baths, were ordered. Tepid water, 68 deg., should be held in the
mouth.


XLVIII.--TOOTH-ACHE, PRESERVATION OF THE TEETH, ETC.

If the tooth is unsound, it must be stopped or extracted. Sometimes when
a tooth is plugged, the pressure on the nerve renders it insupportable.
At Geneva, a clever dentist avoided this painful result by first
cleaning out the tooth, then placing a small plate of metal very flat
and thin as a sort of shelf in the tooth, so as to leave a hollow below
it. By this means, he avoided the pressure upon the nerve, and the
stopping was not felt. This is foreign to our purpose; but I insert it
as a useful hint. In ordinary cases of tooth-ache, or inflammation of
the gums, fill the mouth with warm water; then with the hand dipped
frequently in cold water, rub the cheeks until it can be borne no
longer; then rub the gums even to bleeding, and bandage the face: if
pain returns in the night, repeat the rubbing. Long and often-repeated
tepid foot-baths are also useful.

A patient at Graefenberg writes as follows:--"Priessnitz ordered me, for
tooth-ache and pain in my gums, to rub the back of my head and down my
neck often and for a long time. The first application afforded me
relief. After ten or fifteen minutes' rubbing, the pain would leave for
hours, and then return. Soon there was a longer interval between the
attacks: at last, the pain ceased altogether." The theory of this mode
of curing such an ailment is based upon true philosophical principles.
Who does not know that the nerves of the teeth centre in the back of the
head? It is evident, then, that by friction to that part, the
inflammation will be drawn from the gums.

A friend of mine, suffering intensely from pain in the gums, found
relief from a tepid sitz-bath of thirty minutes. As a preservative for
the teeth, there is nothing like water. It is related in a useful little
pamphlet, entitled "Facts, proving Water to be the only beverage fitted
to give health and Strength to Man," that General Norton, the Mohawk
Chief, who was in this country some years ago, said that when the
Indians are in their own settlements, living upon the produce of the
chase, and drinking water, their teeth always look clean and white; but
when they go into the United States, and get spirituous liquors, their
teeth look dirty and yellow, and then they are frequently afflicted
with tooth-ache, and are obliged to have their teeth drawn. For cleaning
the teeth and preserving them, there is nothing so good as cold water;
warm or tepid water exposes us to catch cold in the gums, whilst those
who are in the constant habit of using cold water are seldom troubled in
this way.


XLIX.--WATERY OR INFLAMED EYES.

For watery eyes, an eye-bath three times a day for five minutes will
draw blood to, and strengthen, them. For inflamed eyes, throw water with
the hand into them three times a day for five minutes each time, and
wear a bandage on the forehead at night.


_Sore Eyes._--Place the back part of the head in cold water three times
a day, ten minutes each time; then use an eye-bath for five minutes,
twice a day: for this purpose, glasses are to be procured of the form of
the eye. After the eyes are closed in the water for about a minute, they
should be opened for the other four minutes. At night, a bandage should
be placed at the back of the neck: this and the head-bath have the
effect of drawing inflammation from the front. In most cases, foot-baths
twice a day are beneficial. Where there is great inflammation; a very
wet bandage may be applied to the eyes for an hour occasionally. As a
preservative to the eyes, open them in the wash-hand basin of a morning
for two minutes, or throw water [i]nto them occasionally, for two or
three minutes at a time.


L.--DEAFNESS.

Rubbing-Sheet three times a day, wear bandage over the ears at night,
and drink plentifully of water; tepid sitz-baths. This treatment will
often relieve deafness: where it is ineffectual, the general treatment
must be resorted to.


LI.--EAR-ACHE.

Linen wetted should be introduced into the ear; all round the ear often
rubbed with wet hands for a quarter of an hour each time, and a bandage
worn round the head; also tepid foot-bath for half an hour.

In obstinate cases, perspiration and tepid baths, sitz and foot-baths,
must be resorted to. For an obstinate pain in the ear in a strong man,
two packing-sheets and tepid bath for two hours were prescribed; next
day, sweating for five or six hours, and cold bath.


LII.--RINGWORM, ITCH, ETC.

These diseases are more easily conquered by Hydropathy than by any other
means. The most difficult ringworms to cure, are those driven in by bad
treatment. This disease is equal to gout in obstinacy. We shall here
warn the sufferer that the diet prescribed must be rigorously observed.
Dr. Munde states that "three men, attacked with this disease, arrived at
Graefenberg, at the same time as himself; the first, following the
treatment with energy for two months, returned home resolved to continue
through the winter, and then return to Graefenberg to finish the cure,
which, at the time of his departure, was more than half effected. The
two others remained at Graefenberg, one for eight months, the other six;
both left radically cured. The treatment of one of these cases was
attended by an acidity in the throat, and by the vomiting of matter
containing chalky substances. The acidity of the throat was such, that
it caused the tongue to be ulcerated.["]


LIII.--PSORIASIS.

The following extraordinary case is as stated by the patient, an English
gentleman, himself. An eruption made its appearance on his head when
twenty-three years of age; cause unknown. Underwent medical treatment
six years, and tried every remedy five physicians could suggest. Thrice
salivated, tried all sorts of ointments, some so powerful as to burn the
flesh. Visited Harrowgate the third time, when the eruption spread all
over his body. Stomach and bowels a continual source of annoyance.
Arrived at Graefenberg 27th July, 1843; next morning, went into tepid,
from that to cold, and back to tepid bath; and afterwards pursued the
following treatment:--

Morning, two packing-sheets, the first for a quarter of an hour, the
second for an hour, followed by tepid bath for half a minute, then cold,
and back to tepid bath; noon, packing-sheet one hour, and
rubbing-sheet; afternoon, packing-sheet one hour, and rubbing-sheet. At
the expiration of first bath, the bowels acted regularly. Morning and
afternoon treatment the same; noon, douche three minutes, and sitz-bath
half an hour.

Sept. 5.--Considerable pain felt in thighs and legs; ordered after
douching to walk a few minutes, with legs exposed to the air.

Sept. 20.--Diarrhoea. For this, the patient was put into packing-sheet
doubled, from the arm-pits to the hips till warm; this was renewed seven
times every quarter of an hour. Patient free from pain, but weak. Cramp
returned in the evening, when a tepid sitz-bath was ordered, if that did
not succeed, a clyster was to be administered.

The sitz-bath removed the pain. About this time pain in his side, which
patient had felt from his youth, left him and has not returned. Patient
observed that the smell of the packing-sheets, after his having lain in
them, was offensive. Eruption at this time evidently worse. Third month,
packing-sheet and cold bath instead of tepid bath, and in the afternoon
cold bath instead of rubbing-sheet.

Reaction after every operation improved. Eruption so bad that skin
cracked in various places, and discharged yellow gummy matter.

Fourth month.--Eruption caused head to feel quite sore; wore bandage to
head and changed it four times a day.

Fifth month.--Rheumatic pains in shoulder, which had been felt at
intervals for years. Rubbed well on coming out of cold bath; pain ceased
in eight or ten days. After some time the pain returned again in both
shoulders; this was subdued by rubbing-sheets as follows:--three the
same night on going to bed; next day at noon, four afternoon,
packing-sheet, followed by three rubbing-sheets, and on going to bed
five more. Never felt rheumatic pain since. Eruption worse, covering the
entire surface of head and ears, and spots on the body as before.

Jan. 8.--Ceased sweating from weakness; eruption improved in appearance.

Seventh month.--Commenced sweating again; eruption improved.

Eighth month.--Eruption still improving, leaving the skin inflamed and
contracted; the spot on left leg gone, and lumps on neck decreasing in
size.

Ninth month.--Head and ears better, left off venturing to expose them to
the air; washed them frequently with cold water; eruption began to peel
off when rubbed. Towards the end of the month, body quite free from all
eruption. Patient winds up by saying, "I have gradually left off the
various operations, preparatory to my departure, and am happy to say,
that now every particle and sign of the eruption has disappeared."

June 17, 1844.--In a letter written some time afterwards to a friend, he
stated that he was perfectly cured of the disease.


_Fistula._--Patient three years previously had been cured of stricture,
to the treatment for which he attributes his present complaint. Morning,
packing-sheet till warm, and cold bath; noon, rubbing-sheet and tepid
sitz-bath ten minutes; afternoon, packing-sheet and cold bath. Bandages
to the fork and arms, and round the waist always.

In three months, douche for three or four minutes. Sitz-bath to be cold
instead of tepid, and alternate days foot-bath and tepid half bath,
without rubbing-sheet. Cured in five months.

In three months, douche for three or four months; sitz-bath to be cold
instead of tepid; and alternate days foot-bath and tepid half bath,
without rubbing-sheet. Cured in five months.


Another patient stated that, he suffered from piles; for these he was
drugged and leeched at the anus; treatment which was no doubt the cause
of the fistula.


_Nose Frost-bitten._--Chafe it with tepid-water 62 deg., and wear bandage
continually.


_Leprosy._--Patient ordered three packing-sheets and tepid-baths daily,
wet linen drawers and waistcoat, with dry ones over them at night.
Another patient wore two pairs of wet drawers for the same disease by
day.

In another case, patient was ordered packing-sheets and long cold baths,
and slept in a wet dress that fitted him, with a dry one over it; the
whole being covered with a thick blanket. The patient described that his
dress very soon became dry, whilst the blanket was wet and he was cold.
To obviate this, Priessnitz told him to put on a second blanket, and in
two hours take it off.


LIV.--FISTULA.

Where parties are otherwise in tolerable health, this complaint is
always curable in about eight or nine months. When health is
established, contractility takes place. In cases where patients have
been long under medical treatment, the cure of fistula requires great
patience and perseverance.

Morning, packing-sheet and bath; noon, rubbing-sheet, douche; afternoon,
four o'clock, douche; five o'clock, packing-sheet and bath.

Bandage to waist and part affected. The latter made of old linen.

Cold food is better for this complaint than hot. No sitz-baths.


LV.--HAEMORRHAGE, IRREGULAR MENSTRUATION, PAINS IN THE WOMB, &C.

All these diseases are successfully combated by hydropathy.

Away from Priessnitz, excessive menstruation requires cautious
treatment. Persons so afflicted may, however, adopt the following means
of relief.

At the period, wear a large bandage round the waist, wash the body with
cold water on rising in the morning.

Drink plentifully of cold water.

When discharge has ceased, use a sitz-bath for fifteen minutes, once or
twice a day.

If patient is very ill she must remain in bed lightly covered, wearing a
very broad bandage, which must be changed every five minutes, or at
most, every ten minutes, until better.

In cases of flooding, equally broad bandage, very wet, and changed
often; also bandage the calves of the legs, and change it every five or
ten minutes.

In case of great weakness, a tepid bath of 64 deg. for eight or ten minutes,
with much friction, must be resorted to, fresh water being constantly
added, and fresh air admitted into the room.

At the period when menstruation is coming on, if in great pain, let the
abdomen, feet, and legs, be well rubbed for a long time by hands dipped
often in cold water.


_Too frequent Menstruation._--This frequently arises from weakness; in
that case, the general treatment to fortify the system is requisite.

Three rubbing-sheets a day, drink plentifully of cold water, eat
everything cold.

On rising in the morning, wash internal parts well with a sponge. If
this is not sufficient, add packing-sheet and cold bath in the morning,
and during the week, take two tepid sitz-baths fifteen minutes, 62 deg.,
rubbing the abdomen all the time. Change waist bandage often.


_Irregular Menstruation._--A lady, apparently in good health, came to
Graefenberg in 1840. She suffered greatly from head-aches, occasioned by
irregular menstruation; when she arrived, though catamenia was strong,
she was ordered a sitz-bath, when it ceased and returned in fourteen
days. During the patient's stay, it returned three times,
notwithstanding which the treatment was continued.

Sweating morning and evening two hours, followed by first tepid and then
cold bath.

During the day two tepid sitz-baths, followed immediately by tepid
foot-baths, fifteen minutes each.

Douche three minutes. Head-bath, five minutes each side, making fifteen
minutes.

Ten to twelve glasses of water, used waist bandages, and took much
exercise. _Cured in six weeks._


_Suppressed Menstruation._--When catamenia comes on, except in
extraordinary cases, all the operations of the Water-cure are suspended,
but when patients are in a crisis or fever, they are continued. When
menstruation, from any cause, is suppressed, the following treatment is
prescribed.

Three or four times a day, three or four rubbing-sheets, not much wrung
out, with great friction. These are each time to be followed by tepid
foot-baths of fifteen minutes each.

A lady at Graefenberg, for this complaint, took packing-sheet and tepid
bath in the morning, four rubbing-sheets at noon, four in the
afternoon, and four at night; between each rubbing-sheet, she walked or
ran naked about the room, with the windows open, though in the depth of
a Silesian winter. This treatment brought on catemenia the third day. No
bandage was used. If blood had gone to the head, then foot-baths were to
have been applied, and the feet and legs rubbed with hands dipped in
water the whole time. If these means had failed, then the sitz-bath and
douche were to have been added to the treatment. After every operation,
patient must go out of doors and take much exercise, and drink not less
than twelve glasses of water a day. In some cases, cold foot-baths are
more active than tepid ones; and in obstinate complaints of this kind,
the sweating process is useful.


_Pains in the Womb._--Tepid sitz-bath from forty minutes to an hour,
rubbing the abdomen well whilst in the bath with wet hands. Sweating in
cold weather beneficial; in hot weather the contrary. To effect a cure,
the general health must be established.


_Haemorrhage, Irregular Menstruation, &c._--A patient aged 42, was cured
of haemorrhage in six minutes.

Packing-sheet followed by rubbing-sheet, were first resorted to. After
three weeks it became necessary to increase the packing-sheets to fifty
a day. They were applied from the arm-pits down to the hips. Patient
kept in a perfect state of repose.

In five days this treatment stopped the haemorrhage; then packing-sheets
and cold baths twice a day, were had recourse to, until patient was
cured. No sitz-baths. Large bandage, often renewed, was always worn
round the waist.

An English lady of title, nearly exhausted from violent haemorrhage,
arrived at Graefenberg in October. She was ordered not to put her foot to
the ground for two months, to sleep with her window open, and to be
covered with one sheet only. After the packing-sheets, she was carried
to the cold bath and back to bed. She felt as in an ice-house. In two
months, great improvement: then, though winter, and the ground was
covered with snow, she was ordered to go out without bonnet or umbrella,
and as lightly clad as possible; and to douche twice a day for ten
minutes. Everything being done to cause contraction. In May she was
declared perfectly cured. The husband, on coming to her, was in
ecstasies at her healthy appearance, and was at a loss to find words to
express his gratitude to Priessnitz.


_Head-ache, Pain in the Limbs, and great uneasiness._--A child taken in
the night with the above symptoms accompanied with fever, was ordered
immediately--

Rubbing-sheet, sitz-bath, and head-bath; at noon, rubbing-sheet and
sitz-bath; afternoon, packing-sheet twenty minutes, and tepid-bath.

If the packing-sheet heated soon, then to be changed for twenty minutes.

If symptoms continued, renew the rubbing-sheets, sitz, and head-baths,
in the night.

Patient well in the afternoon.


_Pain in the Breast._--A lady, two days after her confinement, had her
breast hardened by milk, so that she could not endure the infant's
attempt to draw it. She applied the bandage, covered with a dry one; it
was immediately soothing, and in less than an hour, the milk began to
flow.


_The Whites._--These find a certain cure in hydropathy. Very often
sitz-bath, beginning with tepid water and afterwards using cold and
injections, effect the object. When they do not, rubbing sheet and the
douche are resorted to.

A case within my knowledge was cured by the following treatment:

Three tepid sitz-baths 60 deg. daily; morning, two packing sheets; one
fifteen minutes, the other twenty-five minutes, followed by cold bath,
with cold water thrown over the body; afternoon, the sheets were
repeated, and either a rubbing sheet or cold bath. When patient did not
feel well the tepid bath was used. Body bandage worn always.


LVI.--CHANGE OF LIFE IN FEMALES.

Health would be re-established by a few months' treatment--such as
rubbing-sheets and douche; drinking water and wearing the bandage. Those
who cannot _devote time_ to go to Graefenberg, should take a rubbing
sheet every morning, wear a waist bandage, and drink seven or eight
tumblers of water a-day.


LVII.--TREATMENT OF LADIES.

_Pain at the Chest, Dry Cough, Weak Digestion, Pain and Pressure at the
Nape of the Neck, Cold Feet, Great Emaciation and Suppression of
Catemenia for three months, Skin dry and hard, Unable to Walk._--A lady,
38 years of age, for the above symptoms, was treated as follows:--

Morning, packing-sheet and tepid-bath; noon, rubbing-sheet; afternoon,
as in the morning.

Bandages on chest and abdomen day and night.

Ten glasses of water drank daily.

In ten days able to walk a little, cough eased, better spirits.

In a month, skin softer; and shortly after, a cold plunge-bath was
ordered instead of tepid.


_Accouchement._--Experience has demonstrated the utility of cold
ablutions, sitz-baths, simple diet, and exercise in the air, to females
enceinte; water should be substituted for all stimulants. Madame
Priessnitz, for her easy and prompt accouchements, is indebted to cold
water and sitz-baths, which she took daily for six weeks previous.

The following statement to me in writing, by an American gentleman,
shews the value that ought to be set on hydropathy by ladies.

"From 1837 to 1844 inclusive, Mrs. ---- was, to all appearance, very
healthy, but had an abortive accouchement every year, sometimes twice a
year. After the second accident of this nature, she took advice; when,
on one occasion, she was subjected to depletion; another, she was
advised to pass her time entirely in a recumbent position; she had the
best advice that could be procured in Boston, Florence, and Liverpool.
These mishaps caused her many distressing and alarming symptoms. She now
went to a hydropathic establishment for a few weeks, and derived great
benefit from the treatment; this determined her on going to Graefenberg,
when Priessnitz assured her, if confined there, no doubt need be
entertained of a favourable result, or the life of the infant. In April,
1845, she arrived at Graefenberg; after six weeks she became unwell, and
continued so for some time; she, however, persevered in the full
treatment until April, 1846, when she gave birth to a male child
weighing twelve pounds, six ounces.

"Her treatment had been packing-sheet and cold bath in the morning,
rubbing-sheets, douche, and sitz-baths in the after part of the day, all
the winter. The latter she took the very morning of her accouchement.

"During labour, the bandages round the waist were quite wet, and changed
every ten minutes. She was also ordered to walk and use her arms as much
as possible.

"After the birth, she was washed twice a day with tepid water