Tomson. Dark cells.

Tomson. No chapel.

Tomson. Dark cells.

Tomson. Melancholy.                    Tomson. Afflicted with remorse
                                       for past crimes--surgeon.

Tomson. Very strange.

Tomson. Removed to lunatic asylum.     Tomson. Removed to asylum.

Tanner (nine years old). Caught        Tanner. Caught up at window;
up at window; asked what he did        answered insolently--jacket.
there; said he wanted to feel the
light--jacket, and bread and water
three days.

Tanner. For repining--chapel           Tanner. Refractory language--
and gas stopped until content.         forbidden chapel until
                                       reformation.


"Can I see such a thing as a prisoner who has attempted suicide?"
inquired he, with lingering incredulity.

"Yes! there are three on this landing. Come first to Joram, of whom
Mr. Hawes writes that he made a sham attempt on his life in a fit of
religious despondency--Mr. Fry, that having been jacketed and put on
bread and water for several days, he became depressed in spirits and
made a real attempt on his life. Ah! here is Mr. Fry, he is coming
this way to tell you his first falsehood. Hawes has been all this
while persuading him to it."

"Where is your journal, Mr. Fry?"

"Well, sir," replied Fry, hanging his head, "I can't show it you. I
lent it to a friend, now I remember, and he has taken it out of the
jail; but," added he with a sense of relief, "you can ask me any
questions you like and I'll answer them all one as my book."

"Well, then, was Joram's attempt at suicide a real or a feigned one?"

"Well, I should say it was a real one. I found him insensible and he
did not come to for best part of a quarter of an hour."

"Open his cell."

"Joram, I am here from the Secretary of State to ask you some
questions. Answer them truly and without fear. Some months ago you
made an attempt on your life."

The prisoner shuddered and hung his head.

"Don't be discouraged, Joram," put in Mr. Eden kindly, "this gentleman
is not a harsh judge, he will make allowances."

"Thank you, gentlemen."

"What made you attempt your life?" persisted Mr. Lacy. "Was it from
religious despondency?"

"That it was not. What did I know about religion before his reverence
here came to the jail? No, sir, I was clammed to death."

"Clammed?"

"Yes, sir, clammed and no mistake."

"North-country word for starved," explained Mr. Eden.

"No, sir, I was starved as well. It was very cold weather, and they
gave me nothing but a roll of bread no bigger than my fist once a day
for the best part of a week. So being starved with cold and clammed
with hunger I knew I couldn't live many hours more, and then the pain
in my vitals was so dreadful, sir, I was obliged to cut it short. Ay!
ay! your reverence, I know it was very wicked--but what was I to do?
If I hadn't attempted my life I shouldn't be alive now. A poor fellow
doesn't know what to do in such a place as this."

"Well," said Mr. Lacy, "I promise you your food shall never be
tampered with again."

"Thank you, sir. Oh! I have nothing to complain of now, sir; they have
never clammed me since I attempted my life."

Mr. Eden. "Suicide is at a premium here."

"What was your first offense?" asked Mr. Lacy.

"Writing on my can."

"What did you write on the can?"

"I wrote, 'I want to speak to the governor.'"

"Couldn't you ring and ask to see him?"

"Ring and ask? I had rung half a dozen times and asked to see him and
could not get to see him. My hand was blistered, and I wanted to ask
him to put me on a different sort of work till such time as it could
get leave to heal."

"Now, sir," said Mr. Eden, "observe the sequence of iniquity. A
refractory jailer defies the discipline of the prison. He breaks Rule
37 and other rules by which he is ordered to be always accessible to a
prisoner. The prisoner being in a strait, through which the jailer
alone can guide him, begs for an interview; unable to obtain this in
his despair he writes one innocent line on his can imploring the
jailer to see him. None of the beasts say, 'What has he written?' they
say only, 'Here be scratches,' and they put him on bread and water for
an illegal period; and Mr. Hawes's new and illegal interpretation of
'bread and water' is aimed at his life. I mean that instead of
receiving three times per diem a weight of bread equal to the weight
of his ordinary diets (which is clearly the intention of the bread and
water statute), he has once a day four ounces of bread. So because a
refractory jailer breaks the discipline, a prisoner with whom no
breach of the discipline _originated_ is feloniously put to death
unless he cuts it short by that which in every spot of the earth but
---- Jail is a deadly crime in Heaven's eyes--self-murder."

"What an eye your reverence ha' got for things! Well now it doesn't
sound quite fair, does it? but stealing is a dog's trick, and if a man
behaves like a dog he must look to be treated like one; and he will
be, too."

"That is right, Joram; you look at it from that point of view, and we
will look at it from another."

"Open Naylor's cell. Naylor, what drove you to attempt suicide?"

"Oh! you know, sir."

"But this gentleman does not."

"Well, gents, they had been at me a pretty while one way and another;
they put me in the jacket till I fainted away."

"Stop a minute; is the jacket very painful?"

"There is nothing in the world like it, sir."

"What is its effect? What sort of pain?"

"Why, all sorts! it crushes your very heart. Then it makes you ache
from your hair to your heel, till you would thank and bless any man to
knock you on the head. Then it takes you by the throat and pinches you
and rasps you all at one time. However, I don't think but what I could
have stood up against that, if I had had food enough; but how can a
chap face trouble and pain and hard labor on a crumb a day? However,
what finally screwed up my stocking altogether, gents, was their
taking away my gas. It was the dark winter nights, and there was me
set with an empty belly and the cell like a grave. So then I turned a
little queer in the head by all accounts, and I saw things
that--hem!--didn't suit my complaint at all, you know."

"What things?"

"Well, gents, it is all over now, but it makes me shiver still, so I
don't care to be reminded; let us drop it if it is all the same to
you."

"But, Naylor, for the sake of other poor fellows and to oblige me."

"Oh! your reverence, if I can oblige you that alters the case
entirely. Well, then, sir, if you must know, I saw 'Child of Hell'
wrote in great letters of fire all over that side of the cell. Always
every evening this was all my society, as the saying is; 'Child of
Hell' wrote ten times brighter than gas.

"Couldn't you shut your eyes and go to sleep?" said Mr. Lacy.

"How could I sleep? and I did shut my eyes, and then the letters they
came through my eyelids. So when this fell on the head of all my
troubles I turned wild, and I said to myself one afternoon, 'Now here
is my belly empty and nothing coming to it, and there is the sun
a-setting, and by-and-by my cell will be brimful of hell-fire--let me
end my troubles and get one night's rest if I never see another.' So I
hung myself up to the bar by my hammock-strap, and that is all I
remember except finding myself on my back, with Mr. Fry and a lot
round me, some coaxing and some cursing; and when I saw where I was I
fell a-crying and blubbering, to think that I had so nearly broke
prison and there they had got me still. I dare say Mr. Fry remembers
how I took on."

"Ay, my man, I remember we got no thanks for bringing you to."

"I was a poor unconverted sinner then," replied Mr. Naylor demurely,
"and didn't know my fault and the consequences; but I thank you now
with all my heart, Mr. Fry, sir."

"I am to understand then that you accuse the jailer of driving you to
suicide by unlawful severities?"

"No, sir, I don't. I only tell you how it happened, and you should not
have asked me if you didn't care to know; and as for blaming folk, the
man I blame the most is John Naylor. His reverence there has taught me
to look at home. If I hadn't robbed honest folk I shouldn't have
robbed myself of character and liberty and health, and Mr. Hawes
wouldn't have robbed me of food and light and life wellnigh. Certainly
there _is_ a deal of ignorance and stupidity in this here jail. The
governor has no head-piece; can't understand that a prisoner is made
out of the same stuff as he is--skin and belly, heart, soul, bones an'
all. I should say he wasn't fit to be trusted with the lives of a
litter of pigs, let alone a couple of hundred men and women. But all
is one for that; if he was born without any gumption, as the saying
is, I wasn't, and I didn't ought to be in a fool's power; that is my
fault entirely, not the fool's; ain't it now? If I hadn't come to the
mill the miller would never have grinded me! I sticks to that!"

"Well said, Naylor. Come, sir, One higher than the State takes
precedence here. We must on no account shake a Christian frame of mind
or rekindle a sufferer's wrongs. Yes, Naylor, forgive and you shall be
forgiven. I am pleased with you, greatly pleased with you, my poor
fellow. There is my hand!" Naylor took his reverence's hand and his
very forehead reddened with pride and pleasure at so warm a word of
praise from the revered mouth. They went out of the cell. Being now in
the corridor, Mr. Eden addressed the Government official thus:

"My proofs draw to a close. I could multiply instances ad
infinitum--but what is the use? If these do not convince you you would
not believe though one rose from the dead. What do I say? Have not
Naylor and Joram and many others come back from the dead to tell you
by what roads they were driven there? One example remains to be shown.
To a philosophical mind it is no stronger than the rest; but there are
many men who can receive no very strong impression except through
their senses. You may be one of these; and it is my duty to give your
judgment every aid. Where is Mr. Fry? He has left us."

"I am coming to attend you, sir," cried Evans from above. "Mr. Fry is
gone to the governor."

"Where are we going?" asked Mr. Lacy.

"To examine a prisoner whom the jailer tortured with the jacket, and
starved, and ended by robbing him of his gas and his bed contrary to
law. Evans, since you are here, relate all that happened to Edward
Josephs on the fourth of this month--and mind you don't exaggerate."

"Well, sir, they had been at him for near a month, overtasking him and
then giving him the jacket, and starving him and overtasking him again
on his empty stomach till the poor lad was a living skeleton. On the
fourth the governor put him in the jacket, and there he was kept till
he swooned."

"Ah!"

"Then they flung two buckets of water over him and that brought him
to. Then they sent him to his cell and there he was in his wet
clothes. Then him being there shaking with cold, the governor ordered
his gas to be taken away--his hands were shaking over it for a little
warmth when they robbed him of that bit o' comfort."

"Hum!"

"Contrary to law!" put in Mr. Eden.

"Well, sir, he was a quiet lad not given to murmur, but at losing his
gas he began to cry out so loud you might hear him all over the
prison."

"What did he cry?"

"Sir, he cried MURDER!"

"Go on."

"Then I came to him and found him shivering and dripping, and crying
fit to break his poor heart."

"And did you do nothing for him?"

"I did what I could, sir. I took him and twisted his bedclothes so
tight round him the air could not get in, and before I left him his
sobs went down and he looked like warm and sleeping after all his
troubles. Well, sir, they can tell you better that did the job, but it
seems the governor sent another turnkey called Hodges to take away his
bed from under him."

"Oh!"

"Well, sir! oh dear me! I hope, your reverence, I shall never have to
tell this story again, for it chokes me every time." And the man was
unable to go on for a while. "Well, sir, the poor thing it seems
didn't cry out as he had about the gas, he took it quite quiet--that
might have let them know, but some folk can see nothing till it is too
late--and he gave Hodges his hand to show he bore him no malice. Eh
dear! eh dear! Would to Heaven I had never seen this wicked place!"

"Wicked place, indeed!" said Mr. Lacy solemnly. "You make me almost
dread to ask the result."

"You shall see the result. Evans!"

Evans opened cell 15, and he and Mr. Eden stood sorrowful aside while
Mr. Lacy entered the cell. The first thing he saw was a rude coffin
standing upright by the window, the next a dead body lying stark upon
a mattress on the floor. The official uttered a cry like the scream of
a woman! "What is this? How dare you bring me to such a place as
this?"

"This is that Edward Josephs whose sufferings you have heard and
pitied."

"Poor wretch! Heaven forgive us! What, did he--did he--?"

"He took one step to meet inevitable death--he hanged himself that
same night by his handkerchief to this bar. Turn his poor body, Evans.
See, sir, here is Mr. Hawes's mark upon his back. These livid stripes
are from the infernal jacket and helped to lash him into his grave.
You are ill. Here! some wine from my flask! You will faint else!"

"Thank you! Yes, I was rather faint. It is passed. Mr. Eden, I find my
life has been spent among words--things of such terrible significance
are new to me. God forgive us! how came this to pass in England in the
nineteenth century? The ---- scoundrel!"

"Kick him out of the jail, but do not swear; it is a sin. By removing
him from this his great temptation we may save even his blood-stained
soul. But the souls of his victims? Oh, sir, when a good man is
hurried to his grave our lamentations are natural but unwise; but
think what he commits who hurries thieves and burglars and homicides
unprepared before their eternal Judge. In this poor boy lay the
materials of a saint--mild, docile, grateful, believing. I was winning
him to all that is good when I fell sick. The sufferings I saw and
could not stop--they made me sick. You did not know that when you let
my discolored cheeks prejudice you against my truth. Oh! I forgive
you, dear sir! Yes, Heaven is inscrutable; for had I not fallen
ill--yes, I was leading you up to Heaven, was I not? Oh, my lost
sheep! my poor lost sheep!" And the faithful shepherd, at the bottom
of whose wit and learning lay a heart simpler than beats in any dunce,
forgot Hawes and everything else and began to mourn by the dead body
of his wandering sheep.

Then in that gloomy abode of blood and tears Heaven wrought a miracle.
One who for twenty years past had been an official became a man for
full five minutes. Light burst on him--Nature rushed back upon her
truant son and seized her long-forgotten empire. The frost and reserve
of office melted like snow in summer before the sun of religion and
humanity. How unreal and idle appeared now the twenty years gone in
tape and circumlocution! Away went his life of shadows--his career of
watery polysyllables meandering through the great desert into the Dead
Sea. He awoke from his desk and saw the corpse of an Englishman
murdered by routine, and the tears of a man of God dripping upon it.

Then his soul burst its desk and his heart broke its polysyllables and
its tapen bonds, and the man of office came quickly to the man of God
and seized his hand with both his which shook very much, and pressed
it again and again, and his eyes glistened and his voice faltered.
"This shall never be again. How these tears honor you! but they cut me
to the heart. There! there! I believe every word you have told me now.
Be comforted! you are not to blame! there were always villains in the
world and fools like us that could not understand or believe in an
apostle like you. We are all in fault, but not you! Be comforted! Law
and order shall be restored this very day and none of these poor
creatures shall suffer violence again or wrong of any sort--by God!"

So these two grasped hands and pledged faith and for a while at least
joined hearts. Mr. Eden thanked him with a grace and dignity all his
own. Then he said with a winning sweetness, "Go now, my dear sir, and
do your duty. Act for once upon an impulse. At this moment you see
things as you will see them when you come to die. A light from Heaven
shines on your path at this moment. Walk by it ere the world dims it.
Go and leave me to repent the many unchristian tempers I have shown
you in one short hour--my heat and bitterness and arrogance--in this
solemn place."

"His unchristian temper! poor soul! There, take me to the justices,
Mr. Evans, and you follow me as soon as you like. Yes, my worthy
friend, I will act upon an impulse for once--Ugh!"

Wheeling rapidly out of the cell, as unlike his past self as a
pin-wheel in a shop-drawer and ditto ignited, he met at the very door
Mr. Hawes!

"You have been witnessing a sad sight, sir, and one that nobody, I
assure you, deplores more than I do," said Mr. Hawes, in a gentle and
feeling tone.

Mr. Lacy answered Mr. Hawes by looking him all over from head to foot
and back, then looking sternly into his eyes he turned his back on him
sharp and left him standing there without a word.



CHAPTER XXVI.

THE jailer had been outwitted by the priest. Hawes had sneaked after
Fry to beg him for Heaven's sake--that was the phrase he used--not to
produce his journal. Fry thought this very hard, and it took Hawes ten
minutes to coax him over. Mr. Eden had calculated on this, and worked
with the attested copy, while Hawes was wasting his time suppressing
the original. Hawes was too cunning to accompany Fry back to Mr. Lacy.
He allowed five minutes more to elapse--all which time his antagonist
was pumping truth into the judge a gallon a stroke. At last up came
Mr. Hawes to protect himself and baffle the parson. He came, he met
Mr. Lacy at the dead prisoner's door, and read his defeat.

Mr. Lacy joined the justices in their room. "I have one question to
ask you, gentlemen, before I go: How many attempts at suicide were
made in this jail under Captain O'Connor while sole jailer?"

"I don't remember," replied Mr. Williams.

"It would be odd if you did, for no one such attempt took place under
him. Are you aware how many attempts at suicide took place during the
two years that this Hawes governed a part of the jail, being kept in
some little check by O'Connor, but not much, as unfortunately you
encouraged the inferior officer to defy his superior? Five attempts at
suicide during this period, gentlemen. And now do you know how many
such attempts have occurred since Mr. Hawes has been sole jailer?"

"I really don't know. Prisoners are always shamming," replied Mr.
Woodcock.

"I do not allude to feigned attempts, of which there have been
several, but to desperate attempts; some of which have left the
prisoner insensible, some have resulted in his death--how many of
these?"

"Four or five, I believe."

"Ah, you have not thought it worth while to inquire!! Hum!--well,
fourteen, at least. Come in, Mr. Eden. Gentlemen, you have neglected
your duty. Making every allowance for your inexperience, it still is
clear that you have undertaken the supervision of a jail and yet have
exercised no actual supervision; even now the life or death of the
prisoners seems to you a matter of indifference. If you are reckless
on such a point as this, what chance have the minor circumstances of
their welfare of being watched by you? and frankly I am puzzled to
conceive what you proposed to yourselves when you undertook an office
so important and requiring so great vigilance. I say this, gentlemen,
merely to explain why I cannot have the pleasure I did promise myself
of putting one of your names into the royal commission which will sit
upon this prison in compliance with the chaplain's petition."

Mr. Eden bowed gratefully, and his point being formally gained, he
hurried away to make up for lost time and visit his longing prisoners.
While he passed like sunshine from cell to cell, Mr. Lacy took a note
or two in solemn silence, and the injustices conferred. Mr. Palmer
whispered, "We had better have taken Mr. Eden's advice." The other two
snorted ill-assured defiance. Mr. Lacy looked up. "You will hold
yourselves in readiness to be examined before the commission." At this
moment Mr. Hawes walked into the room without his mask, and in his own
brutal voice--the voice he spoke to prisoners with--addressed
himself, with great insolence of manner, to Mr. Lacy. "Don't trouble
yourself to hold commissions over me. I think myself worth a great
deal more to the government than they have ever been to me. What they
give me is little enough for what I have given them, and when insults
are added to a man of honor and an old servant of the queen, he flings
his commission in your face;" and the unveiled ruffian raised his
voice, to a roar, and with his hand flung an imaginary commission into
Mr. Lacy's face, who drew back astounded; then resuming his honeyed
manner Hawes turned to the justices. "I return into your hands,
gentlemen, the office I received from you. I thank you for the support
you have afforded me in my endeavors to substitute discipline for the
miserable laxity and slovenliness and dirt we found here; and your
good opinion will always console me for the insults I have received
from a crack-brained parson and his tools in the jail and out of it."

"Your resignation is accepted," said Mr. Lacy coldly, "and as your
connection with ---- Jail is now ended, in virtue of my powers from
the Secretary of State, which I here produce, I give you the use of
the jailer's house for a week, that you may have time to move your
effects; but for many reasons it is advisable that you should not
remain in the _jail_ a single hour. Be so good, therefore, as to
quit the jail as soon as you conveniently can. One of the turnkeys
shall assist you to convey to your house whatever you have in this
building."

"I have nothing to take out of the jail, man," replied Hawes rudely,
"except"--and here he did a bit of pathos and dignity--"my zeal for
her majesty's service and my integrity."

"Ah," replied Mr. Lacy quietly, "you won't want any help to carry
them."

Mr. Hawes left the room, bowing to the justices and ostentatiously
ignoring the government official. Mr. Williams shouted after him. "He
carries our respect wherever he goes," said this magistrate with a
fidelity worthy a better cause. The other two hung their heads and did
not echo their chief. The tide was turned against Jailer Hawes, and
these two were not the articles to swim against a stream even though
that stream was truth.

Mr. Hawes took his time. He shook hands with Fry, who bade him
farewell with regret. Who is there that somebody does not contrive to
like? And rejecting even this mastiff's company he made a gloomy,
solitary progress through the prison for the last time. "How clean and
beautiful it all is; it wasn't like that when I came to it, and it
never will again." Some gleams of remorse began to flit about that
thick skull and self-deceiving heart, for punishment suggests remorse
to sordid natures. But his strong and abiding feeling was a sincere
and profound sense of ill usage--long service--couldn't overlook a
single error--ungrateful government, etc. "Prison go to the devil
now--and serve them right." At last he drew near the outer court, and
there he met a sight that raised all the fiend within him. There was
Mr. Eden ushering Strutt into the garden, and telling Evans the old
man was to pass his whole days there till he was better. "So that is
the way you keep the rules now you have undermined me! No cell at all.
I thought what you would come to. You haven't been long getting
there."

"Mr. Hawes," replied the other with perfect good temper, "Rule 34 of
this prison enjoins that every prisoner shall take daily as much
exercise in the open air as is necessary for his health. You have
violated this rule so long that now Strutt's health requires him to
pass many more hours in the air than he otherwise would; he is dying
for air and amusement, and he shall have both sooner than die for the
want of them, or of anything I can give him."

"And what is it to _him?"_ retorted Evans with rude triumph; "he is
no longer an officer of this jail; he has got the sack and orders to
quit into the bargain."

Fear is entertained that Mr. Evans had listened more or less at the
door of the justices' room.

"Is this so, sir?" asked Mr. Eden gravely, politely, and without a
shadow of visible exultation.

"You know it is, you sneaking, undermining villain; you have weathered
on me, you have out-maneuvered me. When was an honest soldier a match
for a parson?"

"Ah!" cried Mr. Eden. "Then run to the gate, Evans, and let the men
into the jail with the printing-press and the looms. They have been
waiting four hours for this."

Hawes turned black with rage. "Oh, I know you made sure of winning; a
blackguard that loads the dice can always do that. Your triumph won't
be long. I was in this jail honored and respected for four years till
you came. You won't be four months before you are kicked out, and no
one to say a good word for you. A pretty Christian! to suborn my own
servants and rob me of my place and make me a beggar in my old age, a
man you are not worthy to serve under, a man that served his country
by sea and land before you were whelped, ye black hypocrite. You a
Christian! you? If I thought that I'd turn Atheist or anything, you
poor, backbiting, tale-telling, sneaking, undermining, false witness
bearing--"

"Unhappy man," cried Mr. Eden; "turn those perverse eyes from the
faults of others to your own danger. The temptations under which you
fell end here; then let their veil fall from your eyes, and you may
yet bless those who came between your soul and its everlasting ruin.
Your victims are dead; their eternal fate is fixed by you. Heaven is
more merciful--it has not struck you dead by your victim's side; it
gives you, the greatest sinner of all, a chance to escape. Seize that
chance. Waste no time in passion and petulance--think only of your
forfeited soul. Madman, to your knees! What! dare you die as you have
lived these three years past? dare you die abhorred of Heaven? Fool!
see yourself as every eye on earth and in heaven sees you. The land
contains no criminal so black as you. Other homicides have struck
hastily on provocation or stung by injury, or thrust or drawn by some
great passion--but you have deliberately gnawed away men's lives.
Others have seen their one victim die, but you have looked on your
many victims dying yet not spared them. Other homicides' hands are
stained, but yours are steeped in blood. To your knees, MAN-slayer! I
dare not promise you that a life given to penitence and charity will
save so foul a soul, but it may, for Heaven's mercy is infinite. Seize
on that small chance. Seize it like one who feels Satan clutching him
and dragging him down to eternal flames. Life is short, eternity is
close, judgment is sure. A few short years and you must meet Edward
Josephs again before the eternal Judge. What a tribunal to face, your
victims opposite you! There the long-standing prejudices that save you
from a felon's death here will avail you nothing. There the quibbles
that pass current on earth will be blasted with the lips that dare to
utter and the hearts that coin them. Before Him, who has neither body
nor parts, yet created all the forms of matter, vainly will you
pretend that you did not slay, because forsooth the weapons with which
you struck at life were invisible and not to be comprehended by a
vulgar, shallow, sensual, earthly judge. There, too, the imperfection
of human language will yield no leaf of shelter.

"Hope not to shift the weight of guilt upon poor Josephs there. On
earth muddle-heads will call his death and the self-murderer's by one
name of 'suicide,' and so dream the two acts were one; but you cannot
gull Omniscience with a word--the wise man's counter and the money of
a fool. Be not deceived! As Rosamond took poison in her hand, and
drank it with her own lips, and died by her own act, yet died
assassinated by her rival--so died Josephs. As men taken by pirates at
sea, and pricked with cold steel till in despair and pain they fling
themselves into the sea--so died Josephs and his fellows murdered by
you. Be not deceived! I, a minister of the gospel of mercy--I, whose
character leans toward charity, tell you that if you die impenitent,
so surely as the sun shines and the Bible is true, the murder of
Edward Josephs and his brothers will damn your soul to the flames of
hell forever--and forever--and forever!

"Begone, then, poor miserable creature! Do not look behind you. Fly
from this scene where crime and its delusions still cling round your
brain and your self-deceiving heart. Waste no more time with me. A
minute lost may be a soul lost. The avenger of blood is behind you.
Run quickly to your own home--go up to your secret chamber--and there
fall down upon your knees before your God and cry loud and long to him
for pardon. Cry mightily for help--cry humbly and groaning for the
power to repent. Away! away! Wash those red hands and that black soul
in years and years of charity, in tears and tears of penitence, and in
our Redeemer's blood. Begone, and darken and trouble us here no more."

The cowed jailer shrank and cowered before the thunder and lightning
of the priest, who, mild by nature, was awful when he rebuked an
impenitent sinner out of holy writ. He slunk away, his knees trembling
under him, and the first fiery seeds of remorse sown in his dry heart.
He met the printing-press coming in, and the loom following it
(naturally); he scowled at them and groaned. Evans held the door open
for him with a look of joy that stirred all his bile again. He turned
on the very threshold and spat a volley of oaths upon Evans. Evans at
this put down his head like a bull, and running fiercely with the huge
door, slammed it close on his heel with such ferocity that the report
rang like a thunder-clap through the entire building, and the
ex-jailer was in the street.

Five minutes more, the printing-press and loom were reinstalled, and
the punishment-jacket packed up and sent to London to the Home Office.
Ten minutes more, the cranks were examined by the artists in iron Mr.
Eden had sent for, and all condemned, it being proved that the value
of their resistance stated on their lying faces was scarce one-third
of their actual resistance. So much for unerring* science!

*The effect of this little bit of science may be thus stated --Men for
two years had been punished as refractory for not making all day two
thousand revolutions per hour of a 15 lb. crank, when all the while it
was a _45 lb. crank_ they had been vainly struggling against all
day. The proportions of this gory lie never varied. Each crank tasked
the Sisyphus three times what it professed to do. It was calculated
that four prisoners, on an average crank marked 10 lb., had to exert
an aggregate of force equal to one horse; and this exertion was
prolonged, day after day, far beyond a horse's power of endurance, and
in many cases on a modicum of food so scanty that no horse ever
foaled, so fed, could have drawn an armchair a mile.

Five minutes more Mr. Eden had placed in Mr. Lacy's hands a list of
prisoners to whom a free pardon ought now to be extended, some having
suffered a somewhat shorter period but a greater weight of misery than
the judges had contemplated in their several sentences; and others
being so shaken and depressed by separate confinement pushed to excess
that their life and reason now stood in peril for want of open air,
abundant light, and free intercourse with their species. At the head
of these was poor Strutt, an old man crushed to clay by separate
confinement recklessly applied. So alarming was this man's torpor to
Mr. Eden that after trying in vain to interest him in the garden, that
observer ventured on a very strong measure. He had learned from Strutt
that he could play the fiddle; what does he do but runs and fetches
his own violin into the garden, tunes it, and plays some most
inspiriting, rollicking old English tunes to him! A spark came into
the fishy eye of Strutt. At the third tune the old fellow's fingers
began to work impatiently. Mr. Eden broke off directly, put fiddle and
bow into Strutt's hand, and ran off to the prison again to arrest
melancholy, despair, lunacy, stagnation, mortification, putrefaction,
by every art that philosophy and mother-wit could suggest to
Christianity.

This determined man had collected his teaching mechanics again, and he
had them all into the prison the moment Hawes was out. He could not
get the cranks condemned as monsters--the day was not yet come for
that; so he got them condemned as liars, and in their place tasks of
rational and productive labor were set to most of the prisoners, and
London written to for six more trades and arts.

A copy of the prison-rules was cut into eight portions and eight
female prisoners set to compose each her portion. Copies to be printed
on the morrow and put up in every cell, according to the wise
provision of Rule 10, defied by the late jailer for an obvious reason.
Thus in an hour after the body of Hawes had passed through that gate a
firm and adroit hand was wiping his gloomy soul out of the cells as we
wipe a blotch of ink off a written page.

Care, too, was taken every prisoner should know the late jailer was
gone forever. This was done to give the wretches a happy night.
Ejaculations of thanksgiving burst from the cells every now and then;
by some mysterious means the immured seemed to share the joyful
tidings with their fellows, and one pulse of hope and triumph to beat
and thrill through all the life that wasted and withered there encased
in stone; and until sunset the faint notes of a fiddle struggled from
the garden into the temple of silence and gloom, and astounded every
ear.

The merry tunes as Strutt played them sounded like dirges, but they
enlivened him as they sighed forth. They stirred his senses, and
through his senses his mind, and through his mind his body, and so the
anthropologist made a fiddle help save a life, which fact no mortal
man will believe whose habit it is to chatter blindfold about man and
investigate the "crustaceonidunculae."

The cranks being condemned, rational industry restored, and the law
reseated on the throne a manslaughtering dunce had usurped, the
champion of human nature went home to drink his tea and write the plot
of his sermon.

He had won a great battle and felt his victory. He showed it, too, in
his own way. On the evening of this great day his voice was remarkably
gentle and winning, and a celestial light seemed to dwell in his eyes;
no word of exultation, nor even of self-congratulation; and he made no
direct mention of the prison all the evening. His talk was about
Susan's affairs, and he paid his warm thanks to her and her aunt for
all they had done for him. "You have been true friends, true allies,"
said he; "what do I not owe you! you have supported me in a bitter
struggle, and now that the day is won I can find no words to thank you
as I ought."

Both these honest women colored and glistened with pleasure, but they
were too modest to be ready with praise or to bandy compliments.

"As for you, Susan, it was a masterstroke your venturing into my den."

"Oh! we turn bold when a body is ill, don't we, aunt?"

"I am not shy for one at the best of times," remarked the latter.

"Under Heaven you saved my life, at least I think so, Susan, for the
medicinal power of soothing influences is immense, I am sure it is apt
to be underrated; and then it was you who flew to Malvern and dragged
Gulson to me at the crisis of my fate; dear little true-hearted
friend, I am sorry to think I can never repay you."

"You forget, Mr. Eden," said Susan, almost in a whisper, "I was paid
beforehand."

I wish I could convey the native grace and gentle dignity of gratitude
with which the farmer's daughter murmured these four words, like a
duchess acknowledging a kindness.

"Eh?" inquired Mr. Eden, "oh! ah! I forgot," said he naively. "No!
that is nonsense, Susan. You have still an immense Cr. against my
name; but I know a way--Mrs. Davies, for as simple as I sit here you
see in me the ecclesiastic that shall unite this young lady to an
honest man, who, report says, loves her very dearly; so I mean to
square our little account."

"That is fair, Susan; what do you say?"

"La, aunt! why I shouldn't look upon it as a marriage at all if any
clergyman but Mr. Eden said the words."

"That is right," laughed Mr. Eden, "always set some little man above
some great thing, and then you will always be--a woman. I must write
the plot of my sermon, ladies, but you can talk to me all the same."

He wrote and purred every now and then to the women, who purred to
each other and now and then to him. Neither Hawes nor any other
irritation rankled in his heart, or even stuck fast in his memory. He
had two sermons to prepare for Sunday next, and he threw his mind into
them as he had into the battle he had just won. "Hoc agebat."



CHAPTER XXVII.

His reverence in the late battle showed himself a strategist, and won
without bringing up his reserves; if he had failed with Mr. Lacy he
had another arrow behind in his quiver. He had been twice to the mayor
and claimed a coroner's jury to sit on a suicide. The mayor had
consented and the preliminary steps had been taken.

The morning after the jailer's dismissal the inquest was held. Mr.
Eden, Evans, Fry and others were examined, and the case came out as
clear as the day and black as the night.

When twelve honest Englishmen, men of plain sense, not men of system,
men taken from the public not from public offices, sat in a circle
with the corpse of a countryman at their knees, fiebat lux; 'twas as
though twelve suns had burst into a dust-hole.

"Manslaughter!" cried they, and they sent their spokesman to the mayor
and said yet more light must be let into this dusthole, and the mayor
said, "Ay and it shall, too. I will write to London and demand more
light." And the men of the public went to their own homes and told
their wives and children and neighbors what cruelties and villainies
they had unearthed, and their hearers, being men and women of that
people, which is a god in intellect and in heart compared with the
criticasters that try to misguide it with their shallow guesses and
cant and with the clerks that execute it in other men's names, cried
out, "See now! What is the use our building courts of law or prisons
unless they are to be open unto us. Shut us out--keep walls and closed
gate between us and our servants--and what comes of our courts of law
and our prisons? Why they turn nests of villainy in less than no
time."

The twelve honest Englishmen had hardly left the jail an hour, crying
"manslaughter!" and crying "shame!" when all in a moment "TOMB!" fell
a single heavy stroke of the great prison bell. The heart of the
prison leaped, and then grew cold--a long chill pause, then "TOMB!"
again. The jurymen had told most of his fellow-sufferers how Josephs
was driven into his grave--and now--

"TOMB!" the remorseless iron tongue crashed out one by one the last
sad, stern monosyllables of this sorrowfulest of human tales.

They put him in his coffin ("TOMB!") a boy of sixteen, who would be
alive now but that caitiffs, whom God confound on earth, made life an
_impossibility_ to him ("TOMB!"), and that Shallows and Woodcocks,
whom God confound on earth, and unconscientious non-inspecting
inspectors, flunkeys, humbugs, hirelings, whom God confound on earth
("TOMB!"), left these scoundrels month after month and year after year
unwatched, though largely paid by the queen and the people to watch
them ("TOMB!"). Look on your work, hirelings, and listen to that bell,
which would not be tolling now if you had been men of brains and
scruples instead of sordid hirelings. The priest was on his knees,
praying for help from heaven to go through the last sad office with
composure, for he feared his own heart when he should come to say
"ashes to ashes" and "dust to dust" over this hapless boy, that ought
to be in life still. And still the great bell tolled, and many of the
prisoners were invited kindly in a whisper to come into the chapel;
but Fry could not be spared and Hodges fiercely refused. And now the
bell stopped, and as it stopped, the voice of the priest arose, "I am
the resurrection and the life."

A deep and sad gloom was upon all as the last sad offices were done
for this poor young creature cut short by foul play in the midst of
them. And for all he could do the priest's voice trembled often, and a
heavy sigh mingled more than once with the holy words.

What is that? "THIS OUR BROTHER!"--a thief our brother?--ay! the
priest made no mistake, those were the words; pause on them. Two great
characters contradicted each other to the face over dead Josephs.
Unholy State said, "Here is the carcass of a thief whom I and society
honestly believe to be of no more importance than a dog--so it has
unfortunately got killed between us, no matter how; take this carcass
and bury it," said unholy State. Holy Church took the poor abused
remains with reverence, prayed over them as she prays over the just,
and laid them in the earth, calling them "this our brother." Judge now
which is all in the wrong, unholy State or holy Church--for both
cannot be right.

Now while the grave is being filled in, judge, women of England and
America, between these two--unholy State and holy Church. The earth
contains no better judges of this doubt than you. Judge and I will bow
to your verdict with a reverence I know male cliques too well to feel
for them in a case where the great capacious heart alone can enlighten
the clever, little, narrow, shallow brain.

Thus in the nineteenth century--in a kind-hearted nation--under the
most humane sovereign the world has ever witnessed on an earthly
throne--holy Church in vain denouncing the miserable sinners that slay
the thief their brother--Edward Josephs has been done to death in the
queen's name--in the name of England--and in the name of the law.

But each of these great insulted names has its sworn defenders, its
honored and paid defenders. It is not for us to suppose that men so
high in honor will lay aside themselves and turn curs.

Ere I close this long story, let us hope I shall be able to relate
with what zeal and honor statesmen disowned and punished wholesale
manslaughter done in the name of the State; and with what zeal and
horror judges disowned and punished wholesale manslaughter done in
their name; and so, in all good men's eyes, washed off the blood with
which a hireling had bespattered the state ermine and the snow-white
robe of law.

For the present, the account between Josephs and the law stands
thus:--Josephs has committed the smallest theft imaginable. He has
stolen food. For this the law, professing to punish him with certain
months' imprisonment, has inflicted capital punishment; has
overtasked, crucified, starved--overtasked, starved, crucified--robbed
him of light, of sleep, of hope, of life; has destroyed his body, and
perhaps his soul. Sum total--1st page of account--

Josephs a larcenist and a corpse. The law a liar and a felon.



CHAPTER XXVIII.

JOSEPHS has dropped out of our story. Mr. Hawes has got himself kicked
out of our story. The other prisoners, of whom casual mention has been
made, were never in our story, any more than the boy Xury in "Robinson
Crusoe." There remains to us in the prison Mr. Eden and Robinson, a
saint and a thief.

My readers have seen how the saint has saved the thief's life. They
shall guess awhile how on earth Susan Merton can be affected by that
circumstance. They have seen a set of bipeds acting on the notion that
all prisoners are incurable: they have seen a thief, thus despaired
of, driven toward despair, and almost made incurable through being
thought so. Then they have seen this supposed incurable fall into the
hands of a Christian that held "it is never too late to mend;" and
generally I think that, feebly as my pen has drawn so great a
character, they can calculate, by what Mr. Eden has already done, what
he will do while I am with Susan and George; what love, what
eloquence, what ingenuity he will move to save this wandering sheep,
to turn this thief honest and teach him how to be honest yet not
starve.

I will ask my reader to bear in mind, that the good and wise priest
has no longer his hands tied by a jailer in the interest of the foul
fiend. But then, against all this, is to be set the slippery heart of
a thief, a thief almost from his cradle. Here are great antagonist
forces and they will be in daily almost hourly collision for months to
come. In life nothing stands still; all this will work goodward or
badward. I must leave it to work.



CHAPTER XXIX.

MR. EDEN'S health improved so visibly that Susan Merton announced her
immediate return to her father. It was a fixed idea in this young
lady's mind that she and Mrs. Davies had no business in the house of a
saint upon earth, as she called Mr. Eden, except as nurses.

The parting of attached friends has always a touch of sadness needless
to dwell on at this time. Enough that these two parted as brother and
young sister, and a spiritual adviser and advised, with warm
expressions of Christian amity, and an agreement on Susan's part to
write for advice and sympathy whenever needed.

On her arrival at Grassmere Farm there was Mr. Meadows to greet her.
"Well, that is attentive!" cried Susan. There was also a stranger to
her, a Mr. Clinton.

As nothing remarkable occurred this evening, we may as well explain
this Mr. Clinton. He was a speculator, and above all a setter on foot
of rotten speculations, and a keeper on foot a little while of lame
ones. No man exceeded him in the art of rose-tinting bad paper or
parchment. He was sanguine and fluent. His mind had two eyes, an
eagle's and a bat's; with the first he looked at the "pros," and with
the second at the "cons" of a spec.

He was an old acquaintance of Meadows, and had come thirty miles out
of the way to show him how to make 100 per cent without the shadow of
a risk. Meadows declined to violate the laws of Nature, but, said he,
"If you like to stay a day or two I will introduce you to one or two
who have money to fling away." And he introduced him to Mr. Merton.
Now that worthy had a fair stock of latent cupidity, and Mr. Clinton
was the man to tempt it.

In a very few conversations he convinced the farmer that there were a
hundred ways of making money, all of them quicker than the slow
process of farming and the unpleasant process of denying one's self
superfluities and growing saved pennies into pounds.

"What do you think, John," said Merton one day to Meadows, "I have got
a few hundreds loose. I'm half minded to try and turn them into
thousands for my girl's sake. Mr. Clinton makes it clear, don't you
think?"

"Well, I don't know," was the reply. "I have no experience in that
sort of thing, but it certainly looks well the way he puts it."

In short, Meadows did not discourage his friend from co-operating with
Mr. Clinton; for his own part he spoke him fair, and expressed openly
a favorable opinion of his talent and his various projects, and always
found some excuse or other for not risking a halfpenny with him.



CHAPTER XXX.

ONE day Mr. Meadows walked into the post-office of Farnborough and
said to Jefferies, the postmaster, "A word with you in private, Mr.
Jefferies."

"Certainly, Mr. Meadows--come to my back parlor, sir; a fine day, Mr.
Meadows, but I think we shall have a shower or two."

"Shouldn't wonder. Do you know this five-pound note?"

"Can't say I do."

"Why it has passed through your hands?"

"Has it? well a good many of them pass through my hands in the course
of the year. I wish a few of 'em would stop on the road."

"This one did. It stuck to your fingers, as the phrase goes."

"I don't know what you mean, sir," said Jefferies haughtily.

"You stole it," explained Meadows quietly.

"Take care," cried Jefferies in a loud quaver--" Take care what you
say! I'll have my action of defamation against you double quick if you
dare to say such a thing of me."

"So be it. You will want witnesses. Defamation is no defamation you
know till the scandal is published. Call in your lodger."

"Ugh!"

"And call your wife!" cried Meadows, raising his voice in turn.

"Heaven forbid! Don't speak so loud, for goodness' sake!"

"Hold your tongue then and don't waste my time with your gammon," said
Meadows sternly. Then resuming his former manner he went on in the
tone of calm explanation. "One or two in this neighborhood lost money
coming through the post. I said to myself, 'Jefferies is a man that
often talks of his conscience--he will be the thief--so I baited six
traps for you, and you took five. This note came over from Ireland;
you remember it now?"

"I am ruined! I am ruined!"

"You changed it at Evans' the grocer's; you had four sovereigns and
silver for it. The other baits were a note and two sovereigns and two
half sovereigns. You spared one sovereign, the rest you nailed. They
were all marked by Lawyer Crawley. They have been traced from your
hand, and lie locked up ready for next assizes. Good-morning, Mr.
Jefferies."

Jefferies turned a cold jelly where he sat--and Meadows walked out,
primed Crawley, and sent him to stroll in sight of the post-office.

Soon a quavering voice called Crawley into the post-office. "Come into
my back parlor, sir. Oh! Mr. Crawley, can nothing be done? No one
knows my misfortune but you and Mr. Meadows. It is not for my own
sake, sir, but my wife's. If she knew I had been tempted so far
astray, she would never hold up her head again. Sir, if you and Mr.
Meadows will let me off this once, I will take an oath on my bended
knees never to offend again."

"What good will that do me?" asked Crawley contemptuously.

"Ah!" cried Jefferies, a light breaking in, "will money make it right?
I'll sell the coat off my back."

"Humph! If it was only me--but Mr. Meadows has such a sense of public
duty, and yet--hum!--I know a way to influence him just now."

"Oh, sir! do pray use your influence with him."

"What will you do for me if I succeed?"

"Do for you?--cut myself in pieces to serve you."

"Well, Jefferies, I'm undertaking a difficult task--to turn such a man
as Meadows, but I will try it and I think I shall succeed; but I must
have terms. Every letter that comes here from Australia you must bring
to me with your own hands directly."

"I will, sir, I will."

"I shall keep it an hour or two perhaps, not more; and I shall take no
money out of it."

"I will do it, sir, and with pleasure. It is the least I can do for
you."

"And you must find me 10 pounds." The little rogue must do a bit on
his own account.

"I must pinch to get it," said Jefferies ruefully.

"Pinch then," replied Crawley coolly; "and let me have it directly."

"You shall--you shall--before the day is out."

"And you must never let Meadows know I took this money of you."

"No, sir, I won't! is that all?"

"That is all."

"Then I am very grateful, sir, and I won't fail, you may depend."

Thus the two battledores played with this poor little undetected one,
whom his respectability no less than his roguery placed at their
mercy.



CHAPTER XXXI.

WHENEVER Mr. Meadows could do Mr. Levi an ill turn he did; and vice
versa. They hated one another like men who differ about baptism. Susan
sprinkled dewdrops of charity on each in turn.

Levi listened to her with infinite pleasure. "Your voice," said he,
"is low and melodious like the voice of my own people in the East."
And then she secretly quoted the New Testament to him, having first
ascertained that he had never read it; and he wondered where on earth
this simple girl had picked up so deep a wisdom and so lofty and
self-denying a morality.

Meadows listened to her with respect from another cause; but the ill
offices that kept passing between the two men counteracted her
transitory influence and fed fat the ancient grudge.



CHAPTER XXXII.

"WILL FIELDING is in the town; I'm to arrest him as agreed last
night?"

"Hum! no!"

"Why I have got the judgment in my pocket and the constable at the
public hard by."

"Never mind! he was saucy to me in the market yesterday--I was angry
and--but anger is a snare. What shall I gain by locking him up just
now? let him go."

"Well, sir, your will is law," said Crawley obsequiously but sadly.

"Now to business of more importance."

"At your service, sir."

But the business of more importance was interrupted by a sudden knock
at the outside door of Mr. Meadows' study.

"Well!"

A young lady to see you.

"A young lady?" inquired Meadows with no very amiable air, "I am
engaged--do you know who it is?"

"It is Farmer Merton's daughter, David says."

"Miss Merton!" cried Meadows, with a marvelous change of manner. "Show
her up directly. Crawley, run into the passage, quick, man--and wait
for signals." He bundled Crawley out, shut the secret door, threw open
both the others, and welcomed Susan warmly at the threshold. "Well,
this is good of you, Miss Merton, to come and shine in upon me in my
own house."

"I have brought your book back!" replied Susan, coloring a little;
"that was my errand, that is," said she, "that was partly my errand."
She hesitated a moment--"I am going to Mr. Levi." Meadows'
countenance fell. "And I wouldn't go to him without coming to you;
because what I have to say to him I must say to you as well. Mr.
Meadows, do let me persuade you out of this bitter feeling against the
poor old man. Oh! I know you will say he is worse than you are; so he
is, a little; but then consider he has more excuse than you; he has
never been taught how wicked it is not to forgive. You know it--but
don't practice it."

Meadows looked at the simple-minded enthusiast, and his cold eye
deepened in color as it dwelt on her, and his voice dropped into the
low and modulated tone which no other human creature but this ever
heard from him. "Human nature is very revengeful. Few of us are like
you. It is my misfortune that I have not oftener a lesson from you;
perhaps you might charm away this unchristian spirit that makes me
unworthy to be your--your friend."

"Oh no! no!" cried Susan, "if I thought so should I be here?"

"Your voice and your face do make me at peace with all the world,
Susan--I beg your pardon--Miss Merton."

"And why not Susan?" said the young lady kindly.

"Well! Susan is a very inviting name."

"La! Mr. Meadows," cried Susan, arching her brows, "why, it is a
frightful name--it is so old-fashioned; nobody is christened Susan
nowadays."

"It is a name for everything that is good and gentle and lovely--"A
moment more and passion would have melted all the icy barriers
prudence and craft had reared round this deep heart. His voice was
trembling, his cheek flushing; but he was saved by--an enemy. "Susan!"
cried a threatening voice at the door, and there stood William
Fielding with a look to match.

Rage burned in Meadows' heart. He said bruskly, "Come in," and seizing
a slip of paper he wrote five words on it, and taking out a book flung
it into the passage to Crawley. He then turned toward W. Fielding, who
by this time had walked up to Susan. Was on the other side of the
screen.

"Was told you had gone in here," said William quietly, "so I came
after you."

"Now that was very attentive of you," replied Susan ironically. "It is
so nice to have a sensible young man like you following forever at
one's heels--like a dog."

A world of quiet scorn embellished this little remark.

William's reply was happier than usual. "The sheep find the dog often
in their way, but they are all the safer for him."

"Well, I'm sure," cried Susan, her scorn giving way to anger.

Mr. Meadows put in: "I must trouble you to treat Miss Merton with
proper respect when you speak to her in my house."

"Who respects her more than I?" retorted William; "but you see, Mr.
Meadows, sheep are no match for wolves when the dog is away--so the
dog is here."

"I see the dog is here and by his own invitation; all I say is that if
the dog is to stay here he must behave like a man."

William gasped at this hit; he didn't trust himself to answer Meadows;
in fact, a blow of his fist seemed to him the only sufficient
answer--he turned to Susan. "Susan, do you remember poor George's last
words to me? with a tear in his eye and his hand in mine. Well, I keep
my promise to him--I keep my eye upon such as I think capable of
undermining my brother. This man is a schemer, Susan, and you are too
simple to fathom him."

The look of surprise crafty Meadows put on here, and William
Fielding's implied compliment to his own superior sagacity struck
Susan as infinitely ludicrous, and she looked at Meadows and laughed
like a peal of bells. Of course he looked at her and laughed with her.
At this all young Fielding's self-restraint went to the winds, and he
went on--"But sooner than that, I'll twist as good a man's neck as
ever schemed in Jack Meadows' shoes!"

At this defiance Meadows wheeled round on William Fielding and
confronted him with his stalwart person and eyes glowing with gloomy
wrath. Susan screamed with terror at William's insulting words and at
the attitude of the two men, and she made a step to throw herself
between them if necessary; but before words could end in blows a tap
at the study door caused a diversion, and a cringing sort of voice
said "May I come in?"

"Of course you may," shouted Meadows; "the place is public. Anybody
walks into my room to-day, friend or foe. Don't ask my leave--come in,
man, whoever you are--Mr. Crawley; well, I didn't expect a call from
you any more than from this one."

"Now don't you be angry, sir. I had a good reason for intruding on you
this once. Jackson!" Jackson stepped forward and touched William
Fielding on the shoulder.

"You must come along with me," said he.

"What for?" inquired Fielding.

"You are arrested on this judgment," explained Crawley, letting the
document peep a moment from his waistcoat pocket. William threw
himself into an attitude of defense. His first impulse was to knock
the officer down and run into another county, but the next moment he
saw the folly and injustice of this and another sentiment overpowered
the honest simple fellow--shame. He covered his face with both his
hands and groaned aloud with the sense of humiliation.

"Oh! my poor William!" cried Susan. "Oh! Mr. Meadows, can nothing be
done?"

"Why, Miss Merton," said Meadows, looking down, "you can't expect me
to do anything for him. If it was his brother now, Lawyer Crawley
shouldn't ever take him out of my house."

Susan flushed all over. "That I am sure you would, Mr. Meadows," cried
she (for feeling obscured grammar). "Now see, dear William, how your
temper and unworthy suspicions alienate our friends; but father shan't
let you lie in prison. Mr. Meadows, will you lend me a sheet of
paper?"

She sat down, pen in hand, in generous excitement. While she wrote Mr.
Meadows addressed Crawley. "And now a word with you, Mr. Crawley. You
and I meet on business now and then, but we are not on visiting terms
that I know of. How come you to walk into my house with a constable at
your back?"

"Well, sir, I did it for the best," said Crawley apologetically. "Our
man came in here, and the street door was open, and I said, 'He is a
friend of Mr. Meadows, perhaps it would be more delicate to all
parties to take him indoors than in the open street.'"

"Oh, yes!" cried William, "it is bitter enough as it is, but that
would have been worse--thank you for arresting me here--and now take
me away and let me hide from all the world."

"Fools!" said a firm voice behind the screen.

"Fools!" At this word and a new voice Susan started up from the table
and William turned his face from the wall. Meadows did more.
"Another!" cried he in utter amazement; "why my house is an inn. Ah!"

While speaking he had run round the screen and come plump upon Isaac
Levi seated in a chair and looking up in his face with stern
composure. His exclamation brought the others round after him and a
group of excited faces encircled this old man seated sternly composed.

"Fools!" repeated he, "these tricks were stale before England was a
nation. Which of you two has the judgment?"

"I, sir," said Crawley, at a look from Meadows.

"The amount?"

"A hundred and six thirteen four."

"Here is the money. Give me the document."

"Here, sir." Levi read it. "This action was taken on a bill of
exchange. I must have that too."

"Here it is, sir. Would you like an acknowledgment, Mr. Levi," said
Crawley obsequiously.

"No! foolish man. Are not these sufficient vouchers? You are free,
sir," said Crawley to William with an air of cheerful congratulation.

"Am I? Then I advise you to get out of my way, for my fingers do itch
to fling you headforemost down the stairs."

On this hint out wriggled Mr. Crawley with a semicircle of bows to the
company. Constable touched his frontlock and went straight away as if
he was going through the opposite wall of the house. Meadows pointed
after him with his finger and said to Levi, "You see the road--get out
of my house."

The old man never moved from his chair, to which he had returned after
paying William's debts. "It is not your house," said he coolly.

The other stared. "No matter," replied Meadows sharply, "it is mine
till my mortgage is paid off."

"I am here to pay it."

"Ah!"

"Principal and interest calculated up to twelve o'clock this eleventh
day of March. It wants five minutes to twelve. I offer you principal
and interest--eight hundred and twenty-two pounds fourteen shillings
and fivepence three farthings before these witnesses--and demand the
title deeds."

Meadows hung his head, but he was not a man to waste words in mere
scolding. He took the blow with forced calmness as who should say,
"This is your turn--the next is mine."

"Miss Merton," said he, almost in a whisper, "I never had the honor to
receive you here before and I never shall again. How long do you give
me to move my things?"

"Can you not guess?" inquired the other with a shade of curiosity.

"Why, of course you will put me to all the inconvenience you can.
Come, now, am I to move all my furniture and effects out of this great
house in twenty-four hours?"

"I give you more than that."

"How kind! What, you give me a week perhaps?" asked Meadows
incredulously.

"More than that, you fool! Don't you see that it is on next Lady-day
you will be turned into the street. Aha! woman-worshiper, on Lady-day!
A tooth for a tooth!" And the old man ground his teeth, which were
white as ivory, and his fist clinched itself, while his eye glittered,
and he swelled out from the chair, and literally bristled with hate--
"A tooth for a tooth!"

"Oh, Mr. Levi," said Susan sorrowfully, "how soon you have forgotten
my last lesson!"

Meadows for a moment felt a chill of fear at the punctiliousness of
revenge in this Oriental whom he had made his enemy. To this succeeded
the old hate multiplied by ten; but he made a monstrous effort and
drove it from his face down into the recesses of his heart. "Well,"
said he, "may you enjoy this house as I have done this last
twelvemonth!"

"That does you credit, good Mr. Meadows," cried simple Susan, missing
his meaning. Meadows continued in the same tone, "And I must make
shift with the one you vacate on Lady-day."

"Solomon teach me to outwit this dog."

"Come, Mr. Levi, I have visited Mr. Meadows and now I am going to your
house."

"You shall be welcome, kindly welcome," said the old man with large
and flowing courtesy.

"And will you show me," said Susan very tenderly, "where Leah used to
sit?"

"Ah!"

"And where Rachel and Sarah loved to play?"

"Ah me! Ah me! Ah me! Yes! I could not show another these holy places,
but I will show you."

"And will you forget awhile this unhappy quarrel and listen to my
words?"

"Surely I shall listen to you; for even now your voice is to my ear
like the wind sighing among the cedars of Lebanon, and the wave that
plays at night upon the sands of Galilee."

"'Tis but the frail voice of a foolish woman, who loves and respects
you, and yet," said Susan, her color mantling with enthusiasm, "with
it I can speak you words more beautiful than Lebanon's cedars or
Galilee's shore. Ay, old man, words that make the stars brighter and
the sons of the morning rejoice. I will not tell you whence I had
them, but you shall say surely they never came from earth, selfish,
cruel, revengeful earth, these words that drop on our hot passions
like the dew, and speak of trespasses forgiven, and peace and goodwill
among men."

Oh! magic of a lovely voice speaking the truths of Heaven! How still
the room was as these goodly words rang in it from a pure heart. Three
men there had all been raging with anger and hate; now a calming music
fell like oil upon these human waves, and stilled them.

The men drooped their heads, and held their breath to make sure the
balmy sounds had ceased. Then Levi answered in a tone gentle, firm,
and low (very different from his last), "Susanna, bitterness fades
from my heart as you speak; but experience remains." He turned to
Meadows, "When I wander forth at Lady-day she shall still be watched
over though I be far away. My eye shall be here, and my hand shall
still be so over you all," and raising his thin hand, he held it high
up, the nails pointing downward. It looked just like a hawk hovering
over its prey. "I will say no bitterer word than that to-day;" and in
fact he delivered this without apparent heat or malice.

"Come, then, with me, Susanna--a goodly name, it comes to you from the
despised people. Come like peace to my dwelling, Susanna--you know not
this world's wiles as I do, but you can teach me the higher wisdom
that controls the folly of passion and purifies the soul."

The pair were gone, and William and Meadows were left alone. The
latter looked sadly and gloomily at the door by which Susan had gone
out. He was in a sort of torpor. He was not conscious of William's
presence.

Now the said William had a misgiving; in the country a man's roof is
sacred; he had affronted Meadows under his own roof, and then Mr. Levi
had come and affronted him there, too. William began to doubt whether
this was not a little hard, moreover he thought he had seen Meadows
brush his eye hastily with the back of his hand as Susan retired. He
came toward Meadows with his old sulky, honest, hang-the-head manner,
and said, "Mr. Meadows, seems to me we have been a little hard upon
you in your own house, and I am not quite easy about my share on't."
Meadows shrugged his shoulders imperceptibly.

"Well, sir--I am not the Almighty to read folk's hearts--least of all
such a one as yours--but if I have done you wrong I ask your pardon.
Come, sir, if you don't mean to undermine my brother with the girl you
can give me your hand, and I can give you mine--and there 'tis."

Meadows wished this young man away, and seeing that the best way to
get rid of him was to give him his hand, he turned round, and,
scarcely looking toward him, gave him his hand. William shook it and
went away with something that sounded like a sigh. Meadows saw him
out, and locked the door impatiently; then he flung himself into a
chair and laid his beating temples on the cold table; then he started
up and walked wildly to and fro the room. The man was torn this way
and that with rage, love and remorse.

"What shall I do?" thus ran his thoughts. "That angel is my only
refuge, and yet to win her I shall have to walk through dirt and shame
and every sin that is. I see crimes ahead; such a heap of crimes, my
flesh creeps at the number of them. Why not be like her, why not be
the greatest saint that ever lived, instead of one more villain added
to so many? Let me tear this terrible love out of my heart and die.
Oh! if some one would but take me by the scurf of the neck and drag me
to some other country a million miles away, where I might never see my
tempter again till this madness is out of me. Susan, you are an angel,
but you will plunge me to hell."

Now it happened while he was thus raving and suffering the preliminary
pangs of wrong-doing that his old servant knocked at the outside of
the door and thrust a letter through the trap; the letter was from a
country gentleman, one Mr. Chester, for whom be had done business. Mr.
Chester wrote from Lancashire. He informed Meadows he had succeeded to
a very large property in that county--it had been shockingly
mismanaged by his predecessor; he wanted a capable man's advice, and
moreover all the estates thereabouts were compelled to be surveyed and
valued this year, which he deplored, but since so it was he would be
surveyed and valued by none but John Meadows.

"Come by return of post," added this hasty squire, "and I'll introduce
you to half the landed proprietors in this county."

Meadows read this and seizing a pen wrote thus:


"DEAR SIR--Yours received this day at 1 p.m., and will start for your
house at 6 P.M."


He threw himself on his horse and rode to his mother's house. "Mother,
I am turned out of my house."

"Why, John, you don't say so?"

"I must go into the new house I have built outside the town."

"What, the one you thought to let to Mr. James?"

"The same. I have got only a fortnight to move all my things. Will you
do me a kindness now, will you see them put into the new house?"

"Me, John! why I should be afraid something would go wrong."

"Well, it isn't fair of me to put this trouble on you at your age; but
read this letter--there is fifteen hundred pounds waiting for me in
the North."

The old woman put on her spectacles and read the letter slowly. "Go,
John! go by all means! I will see all your things moved into the new
house--don't let them be a hindrance; you go. Your old mother will
take care your things are not hurt moving, nor you wronged in the way
of expense."

"Thank you, mother! thank you! they say there is no friend like a
mother, and I dare say they are not far wrong."

"No such friend but God--none such but God!" said the old woman with
great emphasis and looking Meadows in the face with a searching eye.

"Well, then, here are the keys of the new house, and here are my keys.
I am off tonight, so good-by, mother. God bless you!"

He had just turned to go, when by an unusual impulse he turned, took
the old woman in his hands, almost lifted her off the ground, for she
weighed light, and gave her a hasty kiss on the cheek; then he set her
down and strode out of the house about his business.

When curious Hannah ran in the next moment she found the old lady in
silent agitation. "Oh, dear! What is the matter, Dame Meadows?"

"Nothing at all, silly girl."

"Nothing! And look at you all of a tremble."

"He took me up all in a moment and kissed me. I dare say it is
five-and-twenty years since he kissed me last. He was a curly-headed
lad then."

So this had set the poor old thing trembling. She soon recovered her
firmness and that very evening Hannah and she slept in John's house,
and the next day set to and began to move his furniture and prepare
his new house for him.



CHAPTER XXXIII.

PETER CRAWLEY received a regular allowance during his chief's absence
and remained in constant communication with him, and was as heretofore
his money-bag, his tool, his invisible hand. But if anybody had had a
microscope and lots of time they might have discovered a gloomy hue
spreading itself over Crawley's soul. A pleasant illusion had been
rudely shaken.

All men have something they admire.

Crawley admired cunning. It is not a sublime quality, but Crawley
thought it was, and revered it with pious, affectionate awe. He had
always thought Mr. Meadows No. 1 in cunning, but now came a doleful
suspicion that he was No. 2.

Losing a portion of his veneration for the chief he had seen
outmaneuvered, he took the liberty of getting drunk contrary to his
severe command, and being drunk and maudlin he unbosomed himself on
this head to a low woman who was his confidante whenever drink
loosened his tongue.

"I'm out spirits, Sal. I'm tebbly out spirits. Where shall we all go
to? I dinn't think there was great a man on earth z Mizza Meadows. But
the worlz wide. Mizza Levi z greada man--a mudge greada man (hic). He
was down upon us like a amma (hic). His Jew's eye went through our
lill sgeme like a gimlet. 'Fools!' says he--that's me and Meadows,
'these dodges were used up in our family before Lunnun was built.
Fools!' Mizza Levi despises me and Meadows; and I respect him
accordingly. I'm tebbly out spirits (hic)."



CHAPTER XXXIV.

FARMER MERTON received a line from Meadows telling him he had gone
into Lancashire on important business, and did not expect to be back
for three months, except perhaps for a day at a time. Merton handed
the letter to Susan.

"We shall miss him," was her remark.

"That we shall. He is capital company."

"And a worthy man into the bargain," said Susan warmly, "spite of what
little-minded folk say and think. What do you think that Will Fielding
did only yesterday?"

"I don't know."

"Well, he followed me into--there, it is not worth while having an
open quarrel, but I shall hate the sight of his very face. I can't
think how such a fool can be George's brother. No wonder George and he
could not agree. Poor Mr. Meadows--to be affronted in his own house,
just for treating me with respect and civility. So that is a crime
now."

"What are you saying, girl? That young pauper affront my friend
Meadows, the warmest man for fifty miles round. If he has, he shall
never come on my premises again. You may take your oath of that."

Susan looked aghast. This was more than she had bargained for. She was
the last in the world to set two people by the ears.

"Now don't you be so peppery, father," said she. "There is nothing to
make a quarrel about."

"Yes there is, though, if that ignorant beggar insulted my friend."

"No! no! no!"

"Why, what did you say?"

"I say--that here is Mr. Clinton coming to the door."

"Let him in, girl, let him in. And you needn't stay. We are going to
talk business."



CHAPTER XXXV.

MRS. MEADOWS, preparing her son's new home and defeating the little
cheating tradesmen and workmen that fasten like leeches on such as
carry their furniture to a new house; Hannah, working round and round
her in a state of glorious excitement; Crawley, smelling of Betts'
British brandy, and slightly regretting he was not No. 1's tool
(Levi's) instead of No. 2's, as he now bitterly called him, and
writing obsequious letters to, and doing the dirty work of, the said
No. 2; old Merton speculating, sometimes losing, sometimes winning;
Meadows gone to Lancashire with a fixed idea that Susan would be his
ruin if he could not cure himself of his love for her; Susan rather
regretting his absence, and wishing for his return, that she might
show him how little she sympathized with Will Fielding's suspicions,
injustice and brutality.

Leaving all this to work, our story follows an honest fellow to the
other side of the globe.



CHAPTER XXXVI.

GEORGE FIELDING found Farmer Dodd waiting to drive him to the town
where he was to meet Mr. Winchester. The farmer's wife would press a
glass of wine upon George. She was an old playmate of his, and the
tear was in her eye as she shook his hand and bade Heaven bless him,
and send him safe back to "The Grove."

"A taking of his hand and him going across sea!! Can't ye do no better
nor that?" cried the stout farmer; "I'm not a-looking, dame."

So then Mrs. Dodd put her hands on George's shoulders and kissed him
rustic-wise on both cheeks--and he felt a tear on his cheek, and
stammered "Good-by, Jane--you and I were always good neighbors, but
now we shan't be neighbors for a while. Ned, drive me away, please,
and let me shut my eyes and forget that ever I was born."

The farmer made a signal of intelligence to his wife and drove him
hastily away.

They went along in silence for about two miles. Then the farmer
suddenly stopped. George looked up, the other looked down.

"Allen's Corner, George. You know 'The Grove' is in sight from here,
and after this we shan't see it again on account of this here wood,
you know."

"Thank ye, Ned! Yes--one more look--the afternoon sun lies upon it.
Oh, how different it do seem to my eyes now, by what it used when I
rode by from market; but then I was going to it, now I'm going far,
far from it--never heed me, Ned--I shall be better in a moment. Heaven
forgive me for thinking so little of the village folk as I have done."
Then he suddenly threw up his hands. "God bless the place and bless
the folk," he cried very loud; "God bless them all, from the oldest
man in it, and that is grandfather, down to Isaac King's little girl
that was born yester-night! and may none of them ever come to this
corner, and their faces turned toward the sea."

"Doant ye, George! doant ye! doant ye! doant ye!" cried Edward Dodd in
great agitation.

"Let the mare go on, Ned; she is fretting through her skin."

"I'll fret her," roared the farmer, lifting his whip exactly as if it
was a sword, and a cut to be made at a dragoon's helmet. "I'll cut her
liver out."

"No, ye shan't," said George. "Poor thing, she is thinking of her corn
at the Queen's Head in Newborough. She isn't going across the sea--let
her go, I've taken my last look and said my last word;" and he covered
up his face.

Farmer Dodd drove on in silence, except that every now and then he
gave an audible snivel, and whenever this occurred he always
accommodated the mare with a smart cut--reasonable!

At Newborough they found Mr. Winchester. He drove George to the rail,
and that night they slept on board the _Phoenix_ emigrant ship.
Here they found three hundred men and women in a ship where there was
room for two hundred and fifty, accommodation for eighty.

Next morning, "Farmer," said Mr. Winchester gayly, "we have four hours
before we sail--some of these poor people will suffer great hardships
between this and Sydney; suppose you and I go and buy a lot of
blankets, brawn, needles, canvas, greatcoats, felt, American beef,
solidified milk, Macintoshes, high-lows and thimbles. That will rouse
us up a little."

"Thank you, sir, kindly."

Out they went into the Ratcliffe Highway, and chaffered with some of
the greatest rascals in trade. The difference between what they asked
and what they took made George stare. Their little cabin was crowded
with goods, only just room left for the aristocrat, the farmer and
Carlo. And now the hour came. Poor George was roused from his lethargy
by the noise and bustle; and oh, the creaking of cables sickened his
heart. Then the steamer came up and took them in tow, and these our
countrymen and women were pulled away from their native land too
little and too full to hold us all. It was a sad sight, saddest to
those whose own flesh and blood was on the shore and saw the steamer
pull them away; bitterest to those who had no friend to watch them go.

How they clung to England! they stretched out their hands to her, and
when they could hold to her no other way they waved their hats and
their handkerchiefs to their countrymen, who waved to them from
shore--and so they spun out a little longer the slender chain that
visibly bound them to her. And at this moment even the iron-hearted
and the reckless were soft and sad. Our hearts' roots lie in the soil
we have grown on.

No wonder then George Fielding leaned over the ship-side benumbed with
sorrow, and counted each foot of water as it glided by, and thought
"Now I am so much farther from Susan."

For a wonder he was not sea-sick, but his appetite was gone from a
nobler cause; he could hardly be persuaded to eat at all for many
days.

The steamer cast off at Gravesend, and the captain made sail and beat
down the Channel. Off the Scilly Isles a northeasterly breeze, and the
_Phoenix_ crowded all her canvas; when topsails, royals,
skyscrapers and all were drawing the men rigged out booms alow and
aloft, and by means of them set studding sails out several yards clear
of the hull on either side; so on she plowed, her canvas spread out
like an enormous fan or a huge albatross all wings. A goodly, gallant
show; but under all this vast and swelling plumage an exile's heart.

Of all that smarted, ached and throbbed beneath that swelling plumage
few suffered more than poor George. It was his first great sorrow; and
all so new and strange.

The ship touched at Madeira, and then flew southward with the favoring
gale. Many leagues she sailed, and still George hung over the bulwarks
and sadly watched the waves. This simple-minded, honest fellow was not
a girl. If they had offered to put the ship about and take him back he
would not have consented, but yet to go on almost broke his heart. He
was steel and butter. His friend, the honorable Frank Winchester, was
or seemed all steel. He was one of those sanguine spirits that don't
admit into their minds the notion of ultimate failure. He was
supported, too, by a natural and indomitable gayety. Whatever most men
grumble or whine at he took as practical jokes played by Fortune
partly to try his good humor, but more to amuse him.

The poorer passengers suffered much discomfort, and the blankets,
etc., stored in Winchester's cabin often warmed these two honest
hearts, as with pitying hands they wrapped them round some shivering
fellow-creature.

Off Cape Verd a heavy gale came on. It lasted thirty-six hours, and
the distress and sufferings of the over-crowded passengers were
terrible. An unpaternal government had allowed a ship to undertake a
voyage of twelve thousand miles, with a short crew, short provisions,
and just twice as many passengers as could be protected from the
weather.

Driven from the deck by the piercing wind and the deluges of water
that came on board, and crowded into the narrowest compass, many of
these unfortunates almost died of sickness and polluted air; and when
in despair they rushed back upon deck, horrors and suffering met them
in another shape; in vain they huddled together for a little warmth
and tried to shield themselves with blankets stretched to windward.
The bitter blast cut like a razor through their threadbare defenses,
and the water rushed in torrents along the deck and crept cold as ice
up their bodies as they sat huddled, or lay sick and despairing on the
hard and tossing wood; and whenever a heavier sea than usual struck
the ship a despairing scream burst from the women, and the good ship
groaned and shivered and seemed to share their fears, and the blast
yelled into their souls, "I am mighty as fate--as fate. And pitiless!
pitiless! pitiless! pitiless! pitiless!"

Oh! then, how they longed for a mud cabin, or a hole picked with a
pickax in some ancient city wall, or a cow-house, or a cart-shed in
their native land.

But it is an ill wind that blows nobody good. This storm raised George
Fielding's better part of man. Integer vitae scelerisque purus was not
very much afraid to die. Once when the _Phoenix_ gave a weather
roll that wetted the foresail to the yard-arm, he said, "My poor
Susan!" with a pitying accent, not a quavering one. But most of the
time he was busy crawling on all-fours from one sufferer to another
with a drop of brandy in a phial. The wind emptied a glass of the very
moisture let alone the liquid in a moment. So George would put his
bottle to some poor creature's lips, and if it was a man he would tell
him in his simple way Who was stronger than the wind or the sea, and
that the ship could not go down without His will. To the women he
whispered that he had just had a word with the captain, and he said it
was only a gale not a tempest, as the passengers fancied, and there
was no danger, none whatever.

The gale blew itself out, and then for an hour or two the ship rolled
frightfully; but at last the angry sea went down, the decks were
mopped, the _Phoenix_ shook her wet feathers and spread her wings
again and glided on her way.

George felt a little better; the storm shook him and roused him and
did him good. And it was a coincidence in the history of these two
lovers that just as Susan under Mr. Eden's advice was applying the
healing ointment of charitable employment to her wound, George, too,
was finding a little comfort and life from the little bit of good he
and his friend did to the poor population in his wooden hamlet.

After a voyage of four months one evening the captain shortened sail,
though the breeze was fair and the night clear. Upon being asked the
reason of this strange order he said knowingly, "If you get up with
the sun perhaps you will see the reason."

Curiosity being excited, one or two did rise before the sun. Just as
he emerged from the sea a young seaman called Patterson, who was in
the foretop, hailed the deck.

"What is it?" roared the mate.

"Land on the weather bow," sung out the seaman in reply.

Land! In one moment the word ran like electric fire through all the
veins of the _Phoenix_; the upper deck was crowded in a minute, but
all were disappointed. No one saw land but Mr. Patterson, whose
elevation and keen sight gave him an advantage. But a heavenly smell
as of a region of cowslips came and perfumed the air and rejoiced all
the hearts; at six o'clock a something like a narrow cloud broke the
watery horizon on the weather bow. All sail was made and at noon the
coast of Australia glittered like a diamond under their lee. Then the
three hundred prisoners fell into a wild excitement--some became
irritable, others absurdly affectionate to people they did not care a
button for. The captain himself was not free from the intoxication; he
walked the deck in jerks instead of his usual roll, and clapped on
sail as if he would fly on shore.

At half-past one they glided out of the open sea into the Port Jackson
River. They were now in a harbor fifteen miles long, land-locked on
both sides, and not a shoal or a rock in it. This wonderful haven, in
which all the navies that float or ever will float might maneuver all
day and ride at anchor all night without jostling, was the sea avenue
by which they approached a land of wonders.

It was the second of December. The sky was purple and the sun blazed
in its center. The land glittered like a thousand emeralds beneath his
glowing smile, and the waves seemed to drink his glory and melt it
into their tints, so rich were the flakes of burning gold that shone
in the heart of their transparent, lovely blue.

"Oh! what a heavenly land! and after four months' prison at sea."

Our humble hero's heart beat high with hope. Surely in so glorious a
place as this he could make a thousand pounds, and then dart back with
it to Susan. Long before the ship came to an anchor George got a sheet
of paper and by a natural impulse wrote to Susan a letter, telling her
all the misery the _Phoenix_ and her passengers had come through
between London Bridge and Sydney Cove, and as soon as he had written
it he tore it up and threw it into the water. "It would have vexed her
to hear what I have gone through. Time enough to tell her that when I
am home again sitting by the fire with her hand in mine."

So then he tried again and wrote a cheerful letter, and concealed all
his troubles except his sorrow at being obliged to go so far from her
even for a time. "But it is only for a time, Susan dear. And, Susan
dear, I've got a good friend here, and one that can feel for us; for
he is here on the same errand as I am. I am to bide with him six
months and help him the best I can, and so I shall learn how matters
are managed here; and after that I am to set up on my own account;
and, Susan dear, I do think by all I can see there is money to be made
here. Heaven knows my heart was never much set on gain, but it is now
because it is the road to you. Please tell Will Carlo has been a great
comfort to me and is a general favorite. He pointed a rat on board
ship--but it was excusable, and him cooped up so long and had almost
forgotten the smell of a bird, I daresay; and if anybody comes to make
believe to threaten me he is ready to pull them down in a minute. So
tell Will this, and that I do think his master is as much my friend at
home as the dog is out here.

"Susan dear, I do beg of you as a great favor to keep up your heart,
and not give way to grief or desponding feelings. I don't; leastways I
won't. Poor Mr. Winchester is here on the same errand as I am. But I
often think his heart is stouter than mine, which is much to his
credit and little to mine. Susan dear, I have come to the country that
is farther from Grassmere than any other in the globe--that seems
hard; and my very face is turned the opposite way to yours as I walk,
but nothing can ever turn my heart away from my Susan. I desire my
respects to Mr. Merton and that you would tell him I will make the one
thousand pounds, please God. But I hope you will pray for me, Susan,
that I may have that success; you are so good that I do think the
Almighty will hear you sooner than me or any one. So no more at
present, dear Susan, but remain, with sincere respect, your loving
servant and faithful lover till death, GEORGE FIELDING."

They landed. Mr. Winchester purchased the right of feeding cattle over
a large tract a hundred miles distant from Sydney, and after a few
days spent in that capital started with their wagons into the
interior. There for about five months George was Mr. Winchester's
factotum, and though he had himself much to learn, the country and its
habits being new to him, still he saved his friend from fundamental
errors, and, from five in the morning till eight at night, put zeal,
honesty and the muscular strength of two ordinary men at his friend's
service.

At the expiration of this period Mr. Winchester said to him one
evening, "George, I can do my work alone now, and the time is come to
show my sense of your services and friendship. I have bought a run for
you about eight miles from here, and now you are to choose five
hundred sheep and thirty beasts; the black pony you ride goes with
them."

"Oh no, sir! it is enough to rob you of them at all without me going
and taking the pick of them."

"Well! will you consent to pen the flocks and then lift one hurdle and
take them as they come out, so many from each lot?"

"That I consent to, sir, and remain your debtor for life."

"I can't see it; I set _my life_ a great deal higher than
sheepskin."

Mr. Winchester did not stop there, he forced a hundred pounds upon
George. "If you start in any business with an empty pocket you are a
gone coon."

So these two friends parted with mutual esteem, and George set to work
by prudence and vigor to make the thousand pounds.

One thousand pounds! This one is to have the woman he loves for a
thousand pounds. That sounds cheap. Heaven upon earth for a thousand
pounds. What is a thousand pounds? Nothing. There are slippery men
that gain this in a week by time bargains, trading on capital of round
0's; others who net as much in an evening, and as honorably, by cards.
There are merchants who net twenty times this sum by a single
operation.

"An operation?" inquires Belgravia.

This is an operation: You send forth a man not given to drink and
consequently chatter to Amsterdam, another not given to drink and
chatter to New Orleans, another n. g. t. d. and c. to Bordeaux, Cadiz,
Canton, Liverpool, Japan, and where not, all with secret instructions.
Then at an appointed day all the men n. g. t. d. and c. begin
gradually, secretly, cannily, to buy up in all those places all the
lac-dye or something of the kind that you and I thought there was
about thirty pounds of in creation. This done mercator raises the
price of lac-dye or what not throughout Europe. If he is greedy and
raises it a halfpenny a pound, perhaps commerce revolts and invokes
nature against so vast an oppression, and nature comes and crushes our
speculator. But if he be wise and puts on what mankind can bear, say
three mites per pound, then he sells tons and tons at this fractional
profit on each pound, and makes fourteen thousand pounds by lac-dye or
the like of which you and I thought creation held thirty or at most
thirty-two pounds.

These men are the warriors of commerce; but its smaller captains,
watching the fluctuations of this or that market, can often turn a
thousand pounds ere we could say J. R. Far more than a thousand pounds
have been made in a year by selling pastry off a table in the
Boulevards of Paris.

In matters practical a single idea is worth thousands.

This nation being always in a hurry paid four thousand pounds to a man
to show them how to separate letter-stamps in a hurry. "Punch the
divisions full of little holes," said he, and he held out his hand for
the four thousand pounds; and now test his invention, tear one head
from another in a hurry, and you will see that money sometimes goes
cheaper than invention.

A single idea is sometimes worth a thousand pounds in a book, though
books are by far the least lucrative channels ideas run in; Mr.
Bradshaw's duodecimo, to wit--profit seven thousand pounds per annum.
A thousand pounds! How many men have toiled for money all their lives,
have met with success, yet never reached a thousand pounds.

Eight thousand servants, fed and half clothed at their master's
expense, have put by for forty years, and yet not even by aid of
interest and compound interest and perquisites and commissions
squeezed out of little tradesmen and other time-honored embezzlements,
have reached the rubicon of four figures. Five thousand little
shopkeepers, active, intelligent and greedy, have bought wholesale and
sold retail, yet never mounted so high as this above rent,
housekeeping, bad debts and casualties. Many a writer of genius has
charmed his nation and adorned her language, yet never held a thousand
pounds in his hand even for a day. Many a great painter has written
the world-wide language of form and color, and attained to European
fame, but not to a thousand pounds sterling English.

Among all these aspirants and a million more George Fielding now made
one, urged and possessed by as keen an incentive as ever spurred a
man.

George's materials were five hundred sheep, twenty cows, ten bullocks,
two large sheep-dogs and Carlo. It was a keen clear, frosty day in
July when he drove his herd to his own pasture. His heart beat high
that morning. He left Abner, his shepherd, a white native of the
colony, to drive the slow cattle. He strode out in advance, and scarce
felt the ground beneath his feet. The thermometer was at 28 degrees,
yet his coat was only tied round his neck by the sleeves as he swept
along all health, fire, manhood, love and hope. He marched this day
like dear Smollett's lines, whose thoughts, though he had never heard
them, fired his heart.

             "Thy spirit, Independence, let me share,
              Lord of the lion heart and eagle eye;
              Thy steps I follow with my bosom bare,
              Nor heed the storm that howls along the sky."

He was on the ground long before Abner, and set to work building a
roofless hut on the west side of some thick bushes, and hard by the
only water near at hand. And here he fixed his headquarters, stretched
a blanket across the hut for a roof, and slept his own master.



CHAPTER XXXVII.

AT the end of six months George Fielding's stock had varied thus. Four
hundred lambs, ten calves, fifteen cows, four hundred sheep. He had
lost some sheep in lambing, and one cow in calving, but these
casualties every feeder counts on; he had been lucky on the whole. He
had sold about eighty sheep, and eaten a few but not many, and of his
hundred pounds only five pounds were gone; against which and the
decline in cows were to be placed the calves and lambs.

George considered himself eighty pounds richer in substance than six
months ago. It so happened that on every side of George but one were
nomads, shepherd-kings--fellows with a thousand head of horned cattle,
and sheep like white pebbles by the sea; but on his right hand was
another small bucolical, a Scotchman, who had started with less means
than himself, and was slowly working his way, making a halfpenny and
saving a penny after the manner of his nation. These two were mighty
dissimilar, but they were on a level as to means and near neighbors,
and that drew them together. In particular, they used to pay each
other friendly visits on Sunday evenings, and McLaughlan would read a
good book to George, for he was strict in his observances; but after
that the pair would argue points of husbandry.

But one Sunday that George, admiring his stock, inadvertently proposed
to him an exchange of certain animals, he rebuked the young man with
awful gravity.

"Is this a day for warldly dealings?" said he. "Hoo div ye think to
thrive gien y'offer your mairchandeeze o' the Sabba day!" George
colored up to the eyes. "Ye'll may be no hae read the paurable o' the
money changers i' the temple, no forgettin' a wheen warldly-minded
chields that sell't doos, when they had mair need to be on their
knees--or hearkening a religious discourse---or a bit psaum--or the
like. Aweel, ye need na hong your heed yon gate neether. Ye had na the
privileege of being born in Scoetland, ye ken--or nae doot ye'd hae
kenned better, for ye are a decent lad--deed are ye. Aweel, stap ben
led, and I'se let ye see a drap whisky. The like does na aften gang
doon an Englishman's thrapple."

"Whisky? Well, but it seems to me if we didn't ought to deal we didn't
ought to drink."

"Hout! tout! it is no forbedden to taste--thaat's nae sen that ever I
heerd't--C-way."



CHAPTER XXXVIII.

GEORGE heard of a farmer who was selling off his sheep about fifty
miles off near the coast. George put money in his purse, rose at
three, and walked the fifty miles with Carlo that day. The next he
chaffered with the farmer, but they did not quite agree. George was
vexed, but he knew it would not do to show it, so he strolled away
carelessly toward the water. In this place the sea comes several miles
inland, not in one sheet, but in a series of salt-water lakes very
pretty.

George stood and admired the water and the native blacks paddling
along in boats of bark no bigger than a cocked hat. These strips of
bark are good for carriage and bad for carriage; I mean they are very
easily carried on a man's back ashore, but they won't carry a man on
the water so well, and sitting in them is like balancing on a straw.
These absurd vehicles have come down to these blockheads from their
fathers, so they won't burn them and build according to reason. They
commonly paddle in companies of three; so then whenever one is purled
the other two come on each side of him, each takes a hand and with
amazing skill and delicacy they reseat him in his cocked hat, which
never sinks--only purls. Several of these triads passed in the middle
of the lake, looking to George like inverted capital "T's." They went
a tremendous pace--with occasional stoppages when a purl occurred.

Presently a single savage appeared nearer the land and George could
see his lithe, sinewy form and the grace and rapidity with which he
urged his gossamer bark along. It was like a hawk--half a dozen rapid
strokes of his wings and then a smooth glide for ever so far.

"Our savages would sit on the blade of a knife, I do think," was
George's observation.

Now as George looked and admired blackee, it unfortunately happened
that a mosquito flew into blackee's nostrils, which were much larger
and more inviting--to a gnat--than ours. The aboriginal sneezed, and
over went the ancestral boat.

The next moment he was seen swimming and pushing his boat before him.
He was scarce a hundred yards from the shore when all of a sudden down
he went. George was frightened and took off his coat, and was unlacing
his boots--when the black came up again. "Oh, he was only larking,"
thought George. "But he has left his boat--and why, there he goes down
again!" The savage made a dive and came up ten yards nearer the shore,
but he kept his face parallel to it, and he was scarce a moment in
sight before he dived again. Then a horrible suspicion flashed across
George--"There is something after him!"

This soon became a fearful certainty. Just before he dived next time,
a dark object was plainly visible on the water close behind him.
George was wild with fear for poor blackee. He shouted at the monster,
he shouted and beckoned to the swimmer; and last, snatching up a
stone, he darted up a little bed of rock elevated about a yard above
the shore. The next dive the black came up within thirty yards of this
very place, but the shark came at him the next moment. He dived again,
but before the fish followed him George threw a stone with great
precision and force at him. It struck the water close by him as he
turned to follow his prey; George jumped down and got several more
stones, and held one foot advanced and his arm high in air. Up came
the savage panting for breath. The fish made a dart, George threw a
stone; it struck him with such fury on the shoulders that it span off
into the air and fell into the sea forty yards off. Down went the man,
and the fish after him. The next time they came up, to George's
dismay, the sea-tiger showed no signs of being hurt and the man was
greatly distressed. The moment he was above water George heard him
sob, and saw the whites of his eyes, as he rolled them despairingly;
and he could not dive again for want of breath. Seeing this, the shark
turned on his back, and came at him with his white belly visible and
his treble row of teeth glistening in a mouth like a red grave.

Rage as well as fear seized George Fielding, the muscles started on
his brawny arm as he held it aloft with a heavy stone in it. The black
was so hard pressed the last time, and so dead beat, that he could
make but a short duck under the fish's back and come out at his tail.
The shark did not follow him this time, but cunning as well as
ferocious slipped a yard or two inshore, and waited to grab him; not
seeing him, he gave a slap with his tail-fin, and reared his huge head
out of water a moment to look forth. Then George Fielding, grinding
his teeth with fury, flung his heavy stone with tremendous force at
the creature's cruel eye. The heavy stone missed the eye by an inch or
two, but it struck the fish on the nose and teeth with a force that
would have felled a bullock.

"Creesh!" went the sea-tiger's flesh and teeth, and the blood
squirted in a circle. Down went the shark like a lump of lead,
literally felled by the crashing stroke.

"I've hit him! I've hit him!" roared George, seizing another stone.
"Come here, quick! quick! before he gets the better of it."

The black swam like a mad thing to George. George splashed into the
water up to his knee, and taking blackee under the arm-pits, tore him
out of the water and set him down high and dry.

"Give us your hand over it, old fellow," cried George, panting and
trembling. "Oh dear, my heart is in my mouth, it is!"

The black's eye seemed to kindle a little at George's fire, but all
the rest of him was as cool as a cucumber. He let George shake his
hand and said quietly, "Thank you, sar! Jacky thank you a good deal!"
he added in the same breath; "suppose you lend me a knife, then we eat
a good deal."

George lent him his knife, and to his surprise the savage slipped into
the water again. His object was soon revealed; the shark had come up
to the surface and was floating motionless. It was with no small
trepidation George saw this cool hand swim gently behind him and
suddenly disappear; in a moment, however, the water was red all round,
and the shark turned round on his belly. Jacky swam behind, and pushed
him ashore. It proved to be a young fish about six feet long; but it
was as much as the men could do to lift it. The creature's nose was
battered, and Jacky showed this to George, and let him know that a
blow on that part was deadly to them. "You make him dead for a little
while," said he, "so then I make him dead enough to eat;" and he
showed where he had driven the knife into him in three places.

Jacky's next proceeding was to get some dry sticks and wood, and
prepare a fire, which to George's astonishment he lighted thus. He got
a block of wood, in the middle of which he made a little hole; then he
cut and pointed a long stick, and inserting the point into the block,
worked it round between his palms for some time and with increasing
rapidity. Presently there came a smell of burning wood, and soon after
it burst into a flame at the point of contact. Jacky cut slices of
shark and toasted them. "Black fellow stupid fellow--eat 'em raw; but
I eat 'em burn't, like white man."

He then told George he had often been at Sydney, and could "speak the
white man's language a good deal," and must on no account be
confounded with common black fellows. He illustrated his civilization
by eating the shark as it cooked; that is to say, as soon as the
surface was brown he gnawed it off, and put the rest down to brown
again, and so ate a series of laminae instead of a steak; that it
would be cooked to the center if he let it alone was a fact this
gentleman had never discovered; probably had never had the patience to
discover.

George, finding the shark's flesh detestable, declined it, and watched
the other. Presently he vented his reflections. "Well you are a cool
one! half an hour ago I didn't expect to see you eating him--quite the
contrary." Jacky grinned good-humoredly in reply.

When George returned to the farmer, the latter, who had begun to fear
the loss of a customer, came at once to terms with him. The next day
he started for home with three hundred sheep. Jacky announced that he
should accompany him, and help him a good deal. George's consent was
not given, simply because it was not asked. However, having saved the
man's life, he was not sorry to see a little more of him.

It is usual in works of this kind to give minute descriptions of
people's dress. I fear I have often violated this rule. However I will
not in this case.

Jacky's dress consisted of, in front, a sort of purse made of
rat-skin; behind, a bran new tomahawk and two spears.

George fancied this costume might be improved upon; he therefore
bought from the farmer a second-hand coat and trousers and his new
friend donned them with grinning satisfaction. The farmer's wife
pitied George living by himself out there, and she gave him several
little luxuries; a bacon-ham, some tea, and some orange-marmalade, and
a little lump-sugar and some potatoes.

He gave the potatoes to Jacky to carry. They weighed but a few pounds.
George himself carried about a quarter of a hundredweight. For all
that the potatoes worried Jacky more than George's burden him. At last
he loitered behind so long that George sat down and lighted his pipe.
Presently up comes Niger with the sleeves of his coat hanging on each
side of his neck and the potatoes in them. My lord had taken his
tomahawk and chopped off the sleeves at the arm-pit; then he had sewed
up their bottoms and made bags of them, uniting them at the other end
by a string which rested on the back of his neck like a milkmaid's
balance. Being asked what he had done with the rest of the coat, he
told George he had thrown it away because it was a good deal hot.

"But it won't be hot at night, and then you will wish you hadn't been
such a fool," said George, irate.

No, he couldn't make Jacky see this; being hot at the time Jacky could
not feel the cold to come. Jacky became a hanger-on of George, and if
he did little he cost little; and if a beast strayed he was
invaluable, he could follow the creature for miles by a chain of
physical evidence no single link of which a civilized man would have
seen.

A quantity of rain having fallen and filled all the pools, George
thought he would close with an offer that had been made him and swap
one hundred and fifty sheep for cows and bullocks. He mentioned this
intention to McLaughlan one Sunday evening. McLaughlan warmly approved
his intention. George then went on to name the customer who was
disposed to make the exchange in question. At this the worthy
McLaughlan showed some little uneasiness and told George he might do
better than deal with that person.

George said he should be glad to do better, but did not see how.

"Humph!" said McLaughlan, and fidgeted.

McLaughlan then invited George to a glass of grog, and while they were
sipping he gave an order to his man.

McLaughlan inquired when the proposed negotiation was likely to take
place. "To-morrow morning," said George. "He asked me to go over about
it this afternoon, but I remembered the lesson you gave me about
making bargains on this day, and I said 'To-morrow, farmer.'"

"Y're a guid lad," said the Scot demurely; "y're just as decent a body
as ever I forgathered wi'--and I'm thinking it's a sin to let ye gang
twa miles for mairchandeeze whan ye can hae it a hantle cheaper at
your ain door."

"Can I? I don't know what you mean."

"Ye dinna ken what I mean? Maybe no."

Mr. McLaughlan fell into thought a while, and the grog being finished
he proposed a stroll. He took George out into the yard, and there the
first thing they saw was a score and a half of bullocks that had just
been driven into a circle and were maintained there by two men and two
dogs.

George's eye brightened at the sight and his host watched it. "Aweel,"
said he, "has Tamson a bonnier lot than yon to gie ye?"

"I don't know," said George dryly. "I have not seen his."

"But I hae--and he hasna a lot to even wi' them."

"I shall know to-morrow," said George. But he eyed McLaughlan's cattle
with an expression there was no mistaking.

"Aweel," said the worthy Scot, "ye're a neebor and a decent lad ye
are, sae I'll just speer ye ane question. Noo, mon," continued he in a
most mellifluous tone and pausing at every word, "gien it were
Monday--as it is the Sabba day--hoo mony sheep wud ye gie for yon
bonnie beasties?"

George, finding his friend in this mind, pretended to hang back and to
consider himself bound to treat with Thomson first. The result of all
which was that McLaughlan came over to him at daybreak and George made
a very profitable exchange with him.

At the end of six months more George found himself twice as rich in
substance as at first starting; but instead of one hundred pounds cash
he had but eighty. Still if sold up he would have fetched five hundred
pounds. But more than a year was gone since he began on his own
account. "Well," said George, "I must be patient and still keep
doubling on, and if I do as well next year as last I shall be worth
eight hundred pounds."

A month's dry hot weather came and George had arduous work to take
water to his bullocks and to drive them in from long distances to his
homestead, where, by digging enormous tanks, he had secured a constant
supply. No man ever worked for a master as this rustic Hercules worked
for Susan Merton. Prudent George sold twenty bullocks and cows to the
first bidder. "I can buy again at a better time," argued he.

He had now one hundred and twenty-five pounds in hand. The drought
continued and he wished he had sold more.

One morning Abner came hastily in and told him that nearly all the
beasts and cows were missing. George flung himself on his horse and
galloped to the end of his run. No signs of them--returning
disconsolate he took Jacky on his crupper and went over the ground
with him. Jacky's eyes were playing and sparkling all the time in
search of signs. Nothing clear was discovered. Then at Jacky's request
they rode off George's feeding-ground altogether and made for a little
wood about two miles distant. "Suppose you stop here, I go in the
bush," said Jacky.

George sat down and waited. In about two hours Jacky came back. "I've
found 'em," said Jacky coolly.

George rose in great excitement and followed Jacky through the stiff
bush, often scratching his hands and face. At last Jacky stopped and
pointed to the ground, "There!"

"There? ye foolish creature," cried George; "that's ashes where
somebody has lighted a fire; that and a bone or two is all I see."

"Beef bone," replied Jacky coolly. George started with horror. "Black
fellow burn beef here and eat him. Black fellow a great thief. Black
fellow take all your beef. Now we catch black fellow and shoot him
suppose he not tell us where the other beef gone."

"But how am I to catch him? How am I even to find him?"

"You wait till the sun so; then black fellow burn more beef. Then I
see the smoke; then I catch him. You go fetch the make-thunder with
two mouths. When he see him that make him honest a good deal."

Off galloped George and returned with his double-barreled gun in about
an hour and a half. He found Jacky where he had left him at the foot
of a gumtree tall and smooth as an admiral's main-mast.

Jacky, who was coiled up in happy repose like a dog in warm weather,
rose and with a slight yawn said, "Now I go up and look."

He made two sharp cuts on the tree with his tomahawk, and putting his
great toe in the nick, rose on it, made another nick higher up, and
holding the smooth stem put his other great toe in it, and so on till
in an incredibly short time he had reached the top and left a
staircase of his own making behind him. He had hardly reached the top
when he slid down to the bottom again and announced that he had
discovered what they were in search of.

George haltered the pony to the tree and followed Jacky, who struck
farther into the wood. After a most disagreeable scramble at the other
side of the wood Jacky stopped and put his finger to his lips. They
both went cautiously out of the wood, and mounting a bank that lay
under its shelter they came plump upon a little party of blacks, four
male and three female. The women were seated round a fire burning beef
and gnawing the outside laminae, then putting it down to the fire
again. The men, who always serve themselves first, were lying
gorged--but at sight of George and Jacky they were on their feet in a
moment and their spears poised in their hands.

Jacky walked down the bank and poured a volley of abuse into them.
Between two of his native sentences he uttered a quiet aside to
George, "Suppose black fellow lift spear you shoot him dead," and then
abused them like pickpockets again and pointed to the make-thunder
with two mouths in George's hand.

After a severe cackle on both sides the voices began to calm down like
water going off the boil, and presently soft low gutturals passed in
pleasant modulation. Then the eldest male savage made a courteous
signal to Jacky that he should sit down and gnaw. Jacky on this
administered three kicks among the gins and sent them flying, then
down he sat and had a gnaw at their beef--George's beef, I mean. The
rage of hunger appeased, he rose, and with the male savages took the
open country. On the way he let George know that these black fellows
were of his tribe, that they had driven off the cattle and that he had
insisted on restitution--which was about to be made; and sure enough,
before they had gone a mile they saw some beasts grazing in a narrow
valley. George gave a shout of joy, but counting them he found fifteen
short. When Jacky inquired after the others the blacks shrugged their
shoulders. They knew nothing more than this, that wanting a dinner
they had driven off forty bullocks; but finding they could only eat
one that day they had killed one and left the others, of whom some
were in the place they had left them; the rest were somewhere, they
didn't know where--far less care. They had dined, that was enough for
them.

When this characteristic answer reached George he clinched his teeth
and for a moment felt an impulse to make a little thunder on their
slippery black carcasses, but he groaned instead and said, "They were
never taught any better."

Then Jacky and he set to work to drive the cattle together. With
infinite difficulty they got them all home by about eleven o'clock at
night. The next day up with the sun to find the rest. Two o'clock--and
only one had they fallen in with, and the sun broiled so that lazy
Jacky gave in and crept in under the beast for shade, and George was
fain to sit on his shady side with moody brow and sorrowful heart.

Presently Jacky got up. "I find one," said he.

"Where? where?" cried George, looking all round. Jacky pointed to a
rising ground at least six miles off.

George groaned, "Are you making a fool of me? I can see nothing but a
barren hill with a few great bushes here and there. You are never
taking those bushes for beasts?"

Jacky smiled with utter scorn. "White fellow stupid fellow; he see
nothing."

"Well and what does black fellow see?" snapped George.

"Black fellow see a crow coming from the sun, and when he came over
there he turned and went down and not get up again a good while. Then
black fellow say, 'I tink.' Presently come flying one more crow from
that other side where the sun is not. Black fellow watch him, and when
he come over there he turn round and go down, too, and not get up a
good while. Then black fellow say, 'I know.'"

"Oh, come along!" cried George.

They hurried on; but when they came to the rising ground and bushes
Jacky put his finger to his lips. "Suppose we catch the black fellows
that have got wings; you make thunder for them?"

He read the answer in George's eye. Then he took George round the back
of the hill and they mounted the crest from the reverse side. They
came over it and there at their very feet lay one of George's best
bullocks, with tongue protruded, breathing his last gasp. A crow of
the country was perched on his ribs, digging his thick beak into a
hole he had made in his ribs, and another was picking out one of his
eyes. The birds rose heavily, clogged and swelling with gore. George's
eyes flashed, his gun went up to his shoulder, and Jacky saw the brown
barrel rise slowly for a moment as it followed the nearest bird
wobbling off with broad back invitingly displayed to the marksman.
Bang! the whole charge shivered the ill-omened glutton, who instantly
dropped riddled with shot like a sieve, while a cloud of dusky
feathers rose from him into the air. The other, hearing the earthly
thunder and Jacky's exulting whoop, gave a sudden whirl with his long
wing and shot up into the air at an angle and made off with great
velocity; but the second barrel followed him as he turned and followed
him as he flew down the wind. Bang! out flew two handfuls of dusky
feathers, and glutton No. 2 died in the air, and its carcass and
expanded wings went whirling like a sheet of paper and fell on the top
of a bush at the foot of the hill.

All this delighted the devil-may-care Jacky, but it may be supposed it
was small consolation to George. He went up to the poor beast, who
died even as he looked down on him.

"Drought, Jacky! drought!" said he--"it is Moses, the best of the
herd. Oh, Moses, why couldn't you stay beside me? I'm sure I never let
you want for water, and never would--you left me to find worse
friends!" and so the poor simple fellow moaned over the unfortunate
creature, and gently reproached him for his want of confidence in him
that it was pitiful. Then suddenly turning on Jacky he said gravely,
"Moses won't be the only one, I doubt."

The words were hardly out of his mouth before a loud moo proclaimed
the vicinity of cattle. They ran toward the sound, and in a rocky
hollow they found nine bullocks; and alas! at some little distance
another lay dead. Those that were alive were panting with lolling
tongues in the broiling sun. How to save them; how to get them home a
distance of eight miles. "Oh! for a drop of water." The poor fools had
strayed into the most arid region for miles round.

Instinct makes blunders as well as reason.--Bestiale est errare.

"We must drive them from this, Jacky, though half of them die by the
way."

The languid brutes made no active resistance. Being goaded and beaten
they got on their legs and moved feebly away.

Three miles the men drove them, and then one who had been already
staggering more than the rest gave in and lay down, and no power could
get him up again. Jacky advised to leave him. George made a few steps
onward with the other cattle, but then he stopped and came back to the
sufferer and sat down beside him disconsolate.

"I can't bear to desert a poor dumb creature. He can't speak, Jacky,
but look at his poor frightened eye; it seems to say have you got the
heart to go on and leave me to die for the want of a drop of water.
Oh! Jacky, you that is so clever in reading the signs of Nature, have
pity on the poor thing and do pray try and find us a drop of water.
I'd run five miles and fetch it in my hat if you would but find it. Do
help us, Jacky." And the white man looked helplessly up to the black
savage, who had learned to read the small type of Nature's book and he
had not.

Jacky hung his head. "White fellow's eyes always shut; black fellow's
always open. We pass here before and Jacky look for water--look for
everything. No water here. But," said he languidly, "Jacky will go up
high tree and look a good deal." Selecting the highest tree near he
chopped a staircase and went up it almost as quickly as a bricklayer
mounts a ladder with a hod. At the top he crossed his thighs over the
stem, and there he sat full half an hour; his glittering eye reading
the confused page, and his subtle mind picking out the minutest
syllables of meaning. Several times he shook his head. At last all of
a sudden he gave a little start, and then a chuckle, and the next
moment he was on the ground.

"What is it?"

"Black fellow stupid fellow--look too far off," and be laughed again
for all the world like a jackdaw.

"What is it?"

"A little water; not much."

"Where is it? Where is it? Why don't you tell me where it is?"

"Come," was the answer.

Not forty yards from where they stood Jacky stopped and thrusting his
hand into a tuft of long grass pulled out a short blue flower with a
very thick stem. "Saw him spark from the top of the tree," said Jacky
with a grin. "This fellow stand with him head in the air but him foot
in the water. Suppose no water he die a good deal quick." Then taking
George's hand he made him press the grass hard, and George felt
moisture ooze through the herb.

"Yes, my hand is wet, but, Jacky, this drop won't save a beast's life
without it is a frog's."

Jacky smiled and rose. "Where that wet came from more stay behind."

He pointed to other patches of grass close by, and following them
showed George that they got larger and larger in a certain direction.
At last he came to a hidden nook, where was a great patch of grass
quite a different color, green as an emerald. "Water," cried Jacky, "a
good deal of water." He took a jump and came down flat on his back on
the grass, and sure enough, though not a drop of surface water was
visible, the cool liquid squirted up in a shower round Jacky.

Nature is extremely fond of producing the same things in very
different sizes. Here was a miniature copy of those large Australian
lakes which show nothing to the eye but rank grass. You ride upon them
a little way, merely wetting your horse's feet, but after a while the
sponge gets fuller and fuller, and the grass shows symptoms of giving
way, and letting you down to "bottomless perdition."

They squeezed out of this grass sponge a calabash full of water, and
George ran with it to the panting beast. Oh! how he sucked it up, and
his wild eye calmed, and the liquid life ran through all his frame!

It was hardly in his stomach before he got up of his own accord, and
gave a most sonorous moo, intended no doubt to express the sentiment
of "never say die."

George drove them all to the grassy sponge, and kept them there till
sunset. He was three hours squeezing out water and giving it them
before they were satisfied. Then in the cool of the evening he drove
them safe home.

The next day one more of his strayed cattle found his way home. The
rest he never saw again. This was his first dead loss of any
importance; unfortunately, it was not the last.

The brutes were demoralized by their excursion, and being active as
deer they would jump over anything and stray.

Sometimes the vagrant was recovered--often he was found dead; and
sometimes he went twenty miles and mingled with the huge herds of some
Croesus, and was absorbed like a drop of water and lost to George
Fielding. This was a bitter blow. This was not the way to make the
thousand pounds.

"Better sell them all to the first comer, and then I shall see the end
of my loss. I am not one of your lucky ones. I must not venture."

A settler passed George's way driving a large herd of sheep and ten
cows. George gave him a dinner and looked over his stock. "You have
but few beasts for so many sheep," said he.

The other assented.

"I could part with a few of mine to you if you were so minded."

The other said he should be very glad, but he had no money to spare.
Would George take sheep in exchange?

"Well," drawled George, "I would rather it had been cash, but such as
you and I must not make the road hard to one another. Sheep I'll take,
but full value."

The other was delighted, and nearly all George's bullocks became his
for one hundred and fifty sheep.

George was proud of his bargain, and said, "That is a good thing for
you and me, Susan, please God."

Now the next morning Abner came in and said to George, "I don't like
some of your new lot--the last that are marked with a red V."

"Why, what is wrong about them?"

"Come and see."

He found more than one of the new sheep rubbing themselves angrily
against the pen, and sometimes among one another.

"Oh dear!" said George, "I have prayed against this on my knees every
night of my life, and it is come upon me at last. Sharpen your knife,
Abner."

"What! must they all--"

"All the new lot. Call Jacky, he will help you; he likes to see blood.
I can't abide it. One hundred and fifty sheep; eighteen-pennorth of
wool, and eighteen-pennorth of fat when we fling 'em into the
pot--that is all that is left to me of yesterday's deal."

Jacky was called.

"Now, Jacky," said George, "these sheep have got the scab of the
country; if they get to my flock and taint it I am a beggar from that
moment. These sheep are sure to die, so Abner and you are to kill
them. He will show you how. I can't look on and see their blood and my
means spilled like water. Susan, this is a black day for us!"

He went away and sat down upon a stone a good way off, and turned his
back upon his house and his little homestead. This was not the way to
make the thousand pounds.

The next day the dead sheep were skinned and their bodies chopped up
and flung into the copper. The grease was skimmed as it rose, and set
aside, and when cool was put into rough barrels with some salt and
kept up until such time as a merchant should pass that way and buy it.

"Well!" said George, with a sigh, "I know my loss. But if the red scab
had got into the large herd, there would have been no end to the
mischief."

Soon after this a small feeder at some distance offered to change with
McLaughlan. That worthy liked his own ground best, but willing to do
his friend George a good turn he turned the man over to him. George
examined the new place, found that it was smaller but richer and
better watered, and very wisely closed with the proposal.

When he told Jacky that worthy's eyes sparkled.

"Black fellow likes another place. Not every day the same."

And in fact he let out that if this change had not occurred his
intention had been to go a-hunting for a month or two, so weary had he
become of always the same place.

The new ground was excellent, and George's hopes, lately clouded,
brightened again. He set to work and made huge tanks to catch the next
rain, and as heretofore did the work of two.

It was a sad thing to have to write to Susan and tell her that after
twenty months' hard work he was just where he had been at first
starting. One day, as George was eating his homely dinner on his knee
by the side of his principal flock, he suddenly heard a tremendous
scrimmage mixed with loud, abusive epithets from Abner. He started up,
and there was Carlo pitching into a sheep who was trying to jam
herself into the crowd to escape him. Up runs one of the sheep-dogs
growling, but instead of seizing Carlo, as George thought he would,
what does he do but fall upon another sheep, and spite of all their
evasions the two dogs drove the two sheep out of the flock and sent
them pelting down the hill. In one moment George was alongside Abner.

"Abner," said he, "how came you to let strange sheep in among mine?"

"Never saw them till the dog pinned them."

"You never saw them," said George reproachfully. "No, nor your dog
either till my Carlo opened your eyes. A pretty thing for a shepherd
and his dog to be taught by a pointer. Well," said George, "you had
eyes enough to see whose sheep they were. Tell me that, if you
please?"

Abner looked down.

"Why, Abner?"

"I'd as lieve bite off my tongue as tell you.

George looked uneasy and his face fell.

"A 'V.' Don't ye take on," said Abner. "They couldn't have been ten
minutes among ours, and there were but two. And don't you blow me up,
for such a thing might happen to the carefulest shepherd that ever
was."

"I won't blow ye up, Will Abner," said George. "It is my luck not
yours that has done this. It was always so. From a game of cricket
upward I never had my neighbor's luck. If the flock are not tainted
I'll give you five pounds, and my purse is not so deep as some. If
they are, take your knife and drive it into my heart. I'll forgive you
that as I do this. Carlo! let me look at you. See here, he is all over
some stinking ointment. It is off those sheep. I knew it. 'Twasn't
likely a pointer dog would be down on strange sheep like a shepherd's
dog by the sight. 'Twas this stuff offended him. Heaven's will be
done."

"Let us hope the best, and not meet trouble half way."

"Yes" said George feebly. "Let us hope the best."

"Don't I hear that Thompson has an ointment that cures the red scab?"

"So they say."

George whistled to his pony. The pony came to him. George did not
treat him as we are apt to treat a horse--like a riding machine. He
used to speak to him and caress him when he fed him and when he made
his bed, and the horse followed him about like a dog.

In half an hour's sharp riding they were at Thompson's, an invaluable
man that sold and bought animals, doctored animals, and kept a huge
boiler in which bullocks were reduced to a few pounds of grease in a
very few hours.

"You have an ointment that is good for the scab, sir?"

"That I have, farmer. Sold some to a neighbor of yours day before
yesterday."

"Who was that?"

"A newcomer. Vesey is his name."

George groaned. "How do you use it, if you please?"

"Shear 'em close, rub the ointment well in, wash 'em every two days,
and rub in again."

"Give me a stone of it."

"A stone of my ointment! Well! you are the wisest man I have come
across this year or two. You shall have it, sir."

George rode home with his purchase.

Abner turned up his nose at it, and was inclined to laugh at George's
fears. But George said to himself, "I have Susan to think of as well
as myself. Besides," said he a little bitterly, "I haven't a grain of
luck. If I am to do any good I must be twice as prudent and thrice as
industrious as my neighbors or I shall fall behind them. Now, Abner,
we'll shear them close."

"Shear them! Why it is not two months since they were all sheared."

"And then we will rub a little of this ointment into them."

"What! before we see any sign of the scab among them? I wouldn't do
that if they were mine."

"No more would I if they were yours," replied George almost fiercely.
"But they are not yours, Will Abner. They are unlucky George's."

During the next three days four hundred sheep were clipped and
anointed. Jacky helped clip, but he would not wear gloves, and George
would not let him handle the ointment without them, suspecting
mercury.

At last George yielded to Abner's remonstrances, and left off shearing
and anointing.

Abner altered his opinion when one day he found a sheep rubbing like
mad against a tree, and before noon half a dozen at the same game.
Those two wretched sheep had tainted the flock.

Abner hung his head when he came to George with this ill-omened news.
He expected a storm of reproaches. But George was too deeply
distressed for any petulances of anger. "It is my fault," said he, "I
was the master, and I let my servant direct me. My own heart told me
what to do, yet I must listen to a fool and a hireling that cared not
for the sheep. How should he? they weren't his, they were mine to lose
and mine to save. I had my choice, I took it, I lost them. Call Jacky
and let's to work and save here and there one, if so be God shall be
kinder to them than I have been."

From that hour there was but little rest morning, noon or night. It
was nothing but an endless routine of anointing and washing, washing
and anointing sheep. To the credit of Mr. Thompson it must be told
that of the four hundred who had been taken in time no single sheep
died; but of the others a good many. There are incompetent shepherds
as well as incompetent statesmen and doctors, though not so many.
Abner was one of these. An acute Australian shepherd would have seen
the more subtle signs of this terrible disease a day or two before the
patient sheep began to rub themselves with fury against the trees and
against each other; but Abner did not; and George did not profess to
have a minute knowledge of the animal, or why pay a shepherd? When
this Herculean labor and battle had gone on for about a week, Abner
came to George, and with a hang-dog look begged him to look out for
another shepherd.

"Why, Will! surely you won't think to leave me in this strait? Why
three of us are hardly able for the work, and how can I make head
against this plague with only the poor sav--with only Jacky, that is
first-rate at light work till he gets to find it dull--but can't lift
a sheep and fling her into the water, as the like of us can?"

"Well, ye see," said Abner, doggedly, "I have got the offer of a place
with Mr. Meredith, and he won't wait for me more than a week."

"He is a rich man, Will, and I am a poor one," said George in a faint,
expostulating tone. Abner said nothing, but his face showed he had
already considered this fact from his own point of view.

"He could spare you better than I can; but you are right to leave a
falling house that you have helped to pull down."

"I don't want to go all in a moment. I can stay a week till you get
another."

"A week! how can I get a shepherd in this wilderness at a week's
notice? You talk like a fool."

"Well, I can't stay any longer. You know there is no agreement at all
between us, but I'll stay a week to oblige you."

"You'll oblige me, will you?" said George, with a burst of
indignation; "then oblige me by packing up your traps and taking your
ugly face out of my sight before dinner-time this day. Stay, my man,
here are your wages up to twelve o'clock to-day, take 'em and out of
my sight, you dirty rascal. Let me meet misfortune with none but
friends by my side. Away with you, or I shall forget myself and dirty
my hands with your mean carcass."

The hireling slunk off, and as he slunk George stormed and thundered
after him, "And wherever you may go, may sorrow and sickness--no!"

George turned to Jacky, who sat coolly by, his eyes sparkling at the
prospect of a row. "Jacky!" said he, and then he seemed to choke, and
could not say another word.

"Suppose I get the make-thunder, then you shoot him."

"Shoot him! what for?"

"Too much bungality,* shoot him dead. He let the sheep come that have
my two fingers so on their backs;" here Jacky made a V with his middle
and forefinger, "so he kill the other sheep--yet still you not shoot
him--that so stupid I call."

* Stupidity.

"Oh Jacky, hush! don't you know me better than to think I would kill a
man for killing my sheep. Oh fie! oh fie! No, Jacky, Heaven forbid I
should do the man any harm; but when I think of what he has brought on
my head, and then to skulk and leave me in my sore strait and trouble,
me that never gave him ill language as most masters would; and then,
Jacky, do you remember when he was sick how kind you and I were to
him--and now to leave us. There, I must go into the house, and you
come and call me out when that man is off the premises--not before."

At twelve o'clock selfish Abner started to walk thirty miles to Mr.
Meredith's. Smarting under the sense of his contemptibleness and of
the injury he was doing his kind, poor master, he shook his fist at
the house and told Jacky he hoped the scab would rot the flock, and
that done fall upon the bipeds, on his own black hide in particular.
Jacky only answered with his eye. When the man was gone he called
George.

George's anger had soon died. Jacky found him reading a little book in
search of comfort, and when they were out in the air Jacky saw that
his eyes were rather red.

"Why you cry?" said Jacky. "I very angry because you cry."

"It is very foolish of me," said George, apologetically, "but three is
a small company, and we in such trouble; I thought I had made a friend
of him. Often I saw he was not worth his wages, but out of pity I
wouldn't part with him when I could better have spared him than he me,
and now--there--no more about it. Work is best for a sore heart, and
mine is sore and heavy, too, this day."

Jacky put his finger to his head, and looked wise. "First you listen
me--this one time I speak a good many words. Dat stupid fellow know
nothing, and so because you not shoot him a good way* behind--you
very stupid. One," counted Jacky, touching his thumb, "he know nothing
with these (pointing to his eyes). Jacky know possum,** Jacky know
kangaroo, know turkey, know snake, know a good many, some with legs
like dis (four fingers), some with legs like dis (two flngers)--dat
stupid fellow know nothing but sheep, and not know sheep, let him die
too much. Know nothing with 'um eyes. One more (touching his
forefinger). Know nothing with dis (touching his tongue). Jacky speak
him good words, he speak Jacky bad words. Dat so stupid--he know
nothing with dis.

* Long ago.

** Opossum.

"One more. You do him good things--he do you bad things; he know
nothing with these (indicating his arms and legs as the seat of moral
action), so den because you not shoot him long ago now you cry; den
because you cry Jacky angry. Yes, Jacky very good. Jacky a little good
before he live with you. Since den very good--but when dat fellow know
nothing, and now you cry at the bottom* part Jacky a little angry, and
Jacky go hunting a little not much direckly."

*At last.

With these words the savage caught up his tomahawk and two spears, and
was going across country without another word, but George cried out in
dismay, "Oh, stop a moment! What! to-day, Jacky? Jacky, Jacky, now
don't ye go to-day. I know it is very dull for the likes of you, and
you will soon leave me, but don't ye go to-day; don't set me against
flesh and blood altogether."

"I come back when the sun there," pointing to the east, "but must hunt
a little, not much. Jacky uncomfortable," continued he, jumping at a
word which from its size he thought must be of weight in any argument,
"a good deal uncomfortable suppose I not hunt a little dis day."

"I say no more, I have no right--goodby, take my hand, I shall never
see you any more.

"I shall come back when the sun there."

"Ah! well I daresay you think you will. Good-by, Jacky; don't you stay
to please me."

Jacky glided away across country. He looked back once and saw George
watching him. George was sitting sorrowful upon a stone, and as this
last bit of humanity fell away from him and melted away in the
distance his heart died within him. "He thinks he will come back to
me, but when he gets in the open and finds the track of animals to
hunt he will follow them wherever they go, and his poor shallow head
won't remember this place nor me; I shall never see poor Jacky any
more!"

The black continued his course for about four miles until a deep
hollow hid him from George. Arrived here he instantly took a line
nearly opposite to his first, and when he had gone about three miles
on this tack he began to examine the ground attentively and to run
about like a hound. After near half an hour of this he fell upon some
tracks and followed them at an easy trot across the country for miles
and miles, his eye keenly bent upon the ground.



CHAPTER XXXIX.

OUR story has to follow a little way an infinitesimal personage.

Abner, the ungratefulish one, with a bundle tied up in a handkerchief,
strode stoutly away toward Mr. Meredith's grazing ground. "I am well
out of that place," was his reflection. As he had been only once over
the ground before, he did not venture to relax his pace lest night
should overtake him in a strange part. He stepped out so well that
just before the sun set he reached the head of a broad valley that was
all Meredith's. About three miles off glittered a white mansion set in
a sea of pasture, studded with cattle instead of sails. "Ay! ay!"
thought the ungratefulish one, no fear of the scab breaking up this
master--"I'm all right now." As he chuckled over his prospects a dusky
figure stole noiselessly from a little thicket--an arm was raised
behind him--crosssh! a hard weapon came down on his skull, and he lay
on his face with the blood trickling from his mouth and ears.



CHAPTER XL.

HE who a few months ago was so lighthearted and bright with hope now
rose at daybreak for a work of Herculean toil as usual, but no longer
with the spirit that makes labor light. The same strength, the same
dogged perseverance were there, but the sense of lost money, lost
time, and invincible ill-luck oppressed him; then, too, he was
alone--everything had deserted him but misfortune.

"I have left my Susan and I have lost her--left the only friend I had
or ever shall have in this hard world." This was his constant thought,
as doggedly but hopelessly he struggled against the pestilence.
Single-handed and leaden-hearted he had to catch a sheep, to fling her
down, to hold her down, to rub the ointment into her, and to catch
another that had been rubbed yesterday and take her to the pool and
fling her in and keep her in till every part of her skin was soaked.

Four hours of this drudgery had George gone through single-handed and
leaden-hearted, when as he knelt over a kicking, struggling sheep, he
became conscious of something gliding between him and the sun; he
looked up and there was Jacky grinning.

George uttered an exclamation: "What, come back! Well, now that is
very good of you I call. How do you do?" and he gave him a great shake
of the hand.

"Jacky very well, Jacky not at all uncomfortable after him hunt a
little."

"Then I am very glad you have had a day's sport, leastways a night's,
I call it, since it has made you comfortable, Jacky."

"Oh! yes, very comfortable now," and his white teeth and bright eye
proclaimed the relief and satisfaction his little trip had afforded
his nature.

"There, Jacky, if the ointment is worth the trouble it gives me
rubbing of it in, that sheep won't ever catch the scab, I do think.
Well, Jacky, seems to me I ought to ask your pardon--I did you wrong.
I never expected you would leave the kangaroos and opossums for me
once you were off. But I suppose fact is you haven't quite forgotten
Twofold Bay."

"Two fool bay!" inquired Jacky, puzzled.

"Where I first fell in with you. You made one in a hunt that day, only
instead of hunting you was hunted and pretty close, too, and if I
hadn't been a good cricketer and learned to fling true--Why, I do
declare I think he has forgotten the whole thing, shark and all!"

At the word shark a gleam of intelligence came to the black's eye; it
was succeeded by a look of wonder. "Shark come to eat me--you throw
stone--so we eat him. I see him now a little--a very little--dat a
long way off--a very long way off. Jacky can hardly see him when he
try a good deal. White fellow see a long way off behind him back--dat
is very curious."

George colored. "You are right, lad--it was a long while ago, and I
am vexed for mentioning it. Well, any way you are come back and you
are welcome. Now you shall do a little of the light work, but I'll do
all the heavy work because I'm used to it;" and indeed poor George did
work and slave like Hercules; forty times that day he carried a
full-sized sheep in his hands a distance of twenty yards and flung her
into the water and splashed in and rubbed her back in the water.

The fourth day after Jacky's return George asked him to go all over
the ground and tell him how many sheep he saw give signs of the fatal
disorder.

About four o'clock in the afternoon Jacky returned driving before him
with his spear a single sheep. The agility of both the biped and
quadruped were droll; the latter every now and then making a rapid
bolt to get back to the pasture and Jacky bounding like a buck and
pricking her with a spear.

For the first time he found George doing nothing. "Dis one scratch um
back--only dis one."

"Then we have driven out the murrain and the rest will live. A hard
fight! Jacky, a hard fight! but we have won it at last. We will rub
this one well; help me put her down, for my head aches."

After rubbing her a little George said, "Jacky, I wish you would do it
for me, for my head do ache so I can't abide to hold it down and work,
too."

After dinner they sat and looked at the sheep feeding. "No more dis,"
said Jacky gayly, imitating a sheep rubbing against a tree.

"No! I have won the day; but I haven't won it cheap. Jacky, that
fellow, Abner, was a bad man--an ungrateful man."

These words George spoke with a very singular tone of gravity.

"Never you. mind you about him."

"No! I must try to forgive him; we are all great sinners; is it cold
to-day?"

"No! it is a good deal hot

"I thought it must, for the wind is in a kindly quarter. Well, Jacky,
I am as cool as ice."

"Dat very curious."

"And my head do ache so I can hardly bear myself."

"You ill a little--soon be well."

"I doubt I shall be worse before I am better."

"Never you mind you. I go and bring something I know. We make it hot
with water, den you drink it; and after dat you a good deal better."

"Do, Jacky. I won't take doctor's stuff; it is dug out of the ground
and never was intended for man's inside. But you get me something that
grows in sight and I'll take that; and don't be long, Jacky--for I am
not well."

Jacky returned toward evening with a bundle of simples. He found
George shivering over a fire. He got the pot and began to prepare an
infusion. "Now you soon better," said he.

"I hope so, Jacky," said George very gravely, "thank you, all the
same. Jacky, I haven't been not to say dry for the last ten days with
me washing the sheep, and I have caught a terrible chill--a chill like
death; and, Jacky, I have tried too much--I have abused my strength. I
am a very strong man as men go, and so was my father; but he abused
his strength--and he was took just as I am took now, and in a week he
was dead. I have worked hard ever since I came here, but since Abner
left me at the pinch it hasn't been man's work, Jacky; it has been a
wrestling-match from dawn to dark. No man could go on so and not break
down; but I wanted so to save the poor sheep. Well, the sheep are
saved; but--"

When Jacky's infusion was ready he made George take it and then lie
down. Unfortunately the attack was too violent to yield to this simple
remedy. Fever was upon George Fielding--fever in his giant shape; not
as he creeps over the weak, but as he rushes on the strong. George had
never a headache in his life before. Fever found him full of blood and
turned it all to fire. He tossed--he raged--and forty-eight hours
after his first seizure the strong man lay weak as a child, except
during those paroxysms of delirium which robbed him of his reason
while they lasted, and of his strength when they retired.

On the fourth day---after a raging paroxysm--he became suddenly calm,
and looking up saw Jacky seated at some little distance, his bright
eye fixed upon him.

"You better now?" inquired he, with even more than his usual
gentleness of tone. "You not talk stupid things any more?"

"What, Jacky, are you watching me?" said the sick man. "Now I call
that very kind of you. Jacky, I am not the man I was--we are cut down
in a day like the ripe grass. How long is it since I was took ill?"

"One, one, one, and one more day."

"Ay! Ay! My father lasted till the fifth day, and then--Jacky!"

"Here Jacky! what you want?"

"Go out on the hill and see whether any of the sheep are rubbing
themselves."

Jacky went out and soon returned.

"Not see one rub himself."

A faint gleam lighted George's sunken eye. "That is a comfort. I hope
I shall be accepted not to have been a bad shepherd, for I may say 'I
have given my life for my sheep.' Poor things."

George dozed. Toward evening he awoke, and there was Jacky just where
he had seen him last. "I didn't think you had cared so much for me,
Jacky, my boy."

"Yes, care very much for you. See, um make beef-water for you a good
deal."

And sure enough he had boiled down about forty pounds of beef and
filled a huge calabash with the extract, which he set by George's
side.

"And why are you so fond of me, Jacky? It isn't on account of my
saving your life, for you had forgotten that. What makes you such a
friend to me?"

"I tell you. Often I go to tell you before, but many words dat a good
deal trouble. One--when you make thunder the bird always die. One--you
take a sheep so and hold him up high. Um never see one more white
fellow able do dat. One--you make a stone go and hit thing; other
white fellow never hit. One--little horse come to you; other white
fellow go to horse--horse run away. Little horse run to you, dat
because you so good. One--Carlo fond of you. All day now he come in
and go out, and say so (imitating a dog's whimper). He so
uncomfortable because you lie down so. One--when you speak to Jacky
you not speak big like white fellow, you speak small and like a
fiddle--dat please Jacky's ear.

"One--when you look at Jacky always your face make like a hot day when
dere no rain--dat please Jacky's eye; and so when Jacky see you stand
up one day a good deal high and now lie down--dat makes him
uncomfortable; and when he see you red one day and white dis day--dat
make him uncomfortable a good deal; and when he see you so beautiful
one day and dis day so ugly--dat make him so uncomfortable, he afraid
you go away and speak no more good words to Jacky--and dat make Jacky
feel a thing inside here (touching his breast), no more can
breathe--and want to do like the gin, but don't know how. Oh, dear!
don't know how!"

"Poor Jacky! I do wish I had been kinder to you than I have. Oh, I am
very short of wind, and my back is very bad!"

"When black fellow bad in um back he always die," said Jacky very
gravely.

"Ay," said George quietly. "Jacky, will you do one or two little
things for me now?"

"Yes, do um all."

"Give me that little book that I may read it. Thank you. Jacky, this
is the book of my religion; and it was given to me by one I love
better than all the world. I have disobeyed her--I have thought too
little of what is in this book and too much of this world's gain. God
forgive me! and I think He will, because it was for Susan's sake I was
so greedy of gain."

Jacky looked on awestruck as George read the book of his religion.
"Open the door, Jacky."

Jacky opened the door; then coming to George's side, he said with an
anxious, inquiring look and trembling voice, "Are you going to leave
me, George?"

"Yes, Jacky, my boy," said George, "I doubt I am going to leave you.
So now thank you and bless you for all kindness. Put your face close
down to mine-there--I don't care for your black skin--He who made mine
made yours; and I feel we are brothers, and you have been one to me.
Good-by, dear, and don't stay here. You can do nothing more for your
poor friend George."

Jacky gave a little moan. "Yes, um can do a little more before he go
and hide him face where there are a good deal of trees."

Then Jacky went almost on tiptoe, and fetched another calabash full of
water and placed it by George's head. Then he went very softly and
fetched the heavy iron which he had seen George use in penning sheep,
and laid it by George's side; next he went softly and brought George's
gun, and laid it gently by George's side down on the ground.

This done he turned to take his last look of the sick man now feebly
dozing, the little book in his drooping hand. But as he gazed nature
rushed over the poor savage's heart and took it quite by surprise.
Even while bending over his white brother to look his last farewell,
with a sudden start he turned his back on him, and sinking on his hams
he burst out crying and sobbing with a wild and terrible violence.



CHAPTER XLI.

FOR near an hour Jacky sat upon the ground, his face averted from his
sick friend, and cried; then suddenly he rose, and without looking at
him went out at the door, and turning his face toward the great
forests that lay forty miles distant eastward, he ran all the night,
and long before dawn was hid in the pathless woods.

A white man feels that grief, when not selfish, is honorable, and
unconsciously he nurses such grief more or less; but to simple-minded
Jacky grief was merely a subtle pain, and to be got rid of as quickly
as possible, like any other pain.

He ran to the vast and distant woods, hoping to leave George's death a
long way behind him, and so not see what caused his pain so plain as
he saw it just now. It is to be observed that he looked upon George as
dead. The taking into his hand of the book of his religion, the kind
embrace, the request that the door might be opened, doubtless for the
disembodied spirit to pass out, all these rites were understood by
Jacky to imply that the last scene was at hand. Why witness it? it
would make him still more uncomfortable. Therefore he ran, and never
once looked back, and plunged into the impenetrable gloom of the
eastern forests.

The white man had left Fielding to get a richer master. The
half-reasoning savage left him to cure his own grief at losing him.
There he lay abandoned in trouble and sickness by all his kind. But
one friend never stirred; a single-hearted, single-minded,
non-reasoning friend.

Who was this pure-minded friend? A dog.

Carlo loved George. They had lived together, they had sported
together, they had slept together side by side on the cold, hard deck
of the _Phoenix_, and often they had kept each other warm, sitting
crouched together behind a little bank or a fallen tree, with the wind
whistling and the rain shooting by their ears.

When day after day George came not out of the house, Carlo was very
uneasy. He used to patter in and out all day, and whimper pitifully,
and often he sat in the room where George lay and looked toward him
and whined. But now when his master was left quite alone his distress
and anxiety redoubled; he never went ten yards away from George. He
ran in and out moaning and whining, and at last he sat outside the
door and lifted up his voice and howled day and night continually. His
meaner instincts lay neglected; he ate nothing; his heart was bigger
than his belly; he would not leave his friend even to feed himself.
And still day and night without cease his passionate cry went up to
heaven.

What passed in that single heart none can tell for certain but his
Creator; nor what was uttered in that deplorable cry; love, sorrow,
perplexity, dismay--all these perhaps, and something of prayer--for
still he lifted his sorrowful face toward heaven as he cried out in
sore perplexity, distress, and fear for his poor master--oh! o-o-o-h!
o-o-o-o-h! o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-h!

So we must leave awhile poor, honest, unlucky George, sick of a fever,
ten miles from the nearest hut.

Leather-heart has gone from him to be a rich man's hireling.

Shallow-heart has fled to the forest, and is hunting kangaroos with
all the inches of his soul.

Single-heart sits fasting from all but grief before the door, and
utters heartrending, lamentable cries to earth and heaven.



CHAPTER XLII.

---- JAIL is still a grim and castellated mountain of masonry, but a
human heart beats and a human brain throbs inside it now.

Enter without fear of seeing children kill themselves, and bearded men
faint like women, or weep like children--horrible sights.

The prisoners no longer crouch and cower past the officers, nor the
officers look at them and speak to them as if they were dogs, as they
do in most of these places, and used to here.

Open this cell. A woman rises with a smile! why a smile? Because for
months an open door has generally let in what is always a great boon
to a separate prisoner--a human creature with a civil word. We
remember when an open door meant "way for a ruffian and a fool to
trample upon the solitary and sorrowful!"

What is this smiling personage doing? as I live she is watchmaking! A
woman watchmaking, with neat and taper fingers, and a glass at her eye
sometimes, but not always, for in vision as well as in sense of touch
and patience nature has been bounteous to her. She is one of four.
Eight, besides these four, were tried and found incapable of
excellence in this difficult craft. They were put to other things; for
permanent failures are not permitted in ---- Jail. The theory is that
every home can turn some sort of labor to profit.

Difficulties occur often. Impossibilities will bar the way now and
then; but there are so few real impossibilities. When a difficulty
arises, the three hundred industrious arts and crafts are freely
ransacked for a prisoner; ay!--ransacked as few rich men would be
bothered to sift the seven or eight liberal professions in order to
fit a beloved son.

Here, as in the world, the average of talent is low. The majority can
only learn easy things, and vulgar things, and some can do higher
things and a few can do beautiful things, and one or two have
developed first-rate gifts and powers.

There are 25 shoemakers (male); 12 tailors, of whom 6 female; 24
weavers, of whom 10 female; 4 watchmakers, all female; 6 printers and
composers, 5 female; 4 engrainers of wood, 2 female. (In this art we
have the first artist in Britain, our old acquaintance, Thomas
Robinson. He has passed all his competitors by a simple process.
Beautiful specimens of all the woods have been placed and kept before
him, and for a month he has been forced to imitate nature with his eye
never off her. His competitors in the world imitate nature from
memory, from convention, or from tradition. By such processes truth
and beauty are lost at each step down the ladder of routine. Mr. Eden
gave clever Tom at first starting the right end of the stick, instead
of letting him take the wrong.) Nine joiners and carpenters, 3 female;
3 who color prints downright well, 1 female; 2 painters, 1 female; 3
pupils shorthand writing, 1 female.

[Fancy these attending the Old Bailey and taking it all down solemn as
judges.]

Workers in gutta-percha, modelers in clay, washers and getters-up of
linen, hoe-makers, spade-makers, rake-makers, woodcarvers,
stonecutters, bakers, etc., etc., etc., ad infinitum. Come to the
hard-labor yard. Do you see those fifteen stables? there lurk in vain
the rusty cranks; condemned first as liars they fell soon after into
disrepute as weapons of half-science to degrade minds and bodies. They
lurk there grim as the used-up giants in "Pilgrim's Progress," and
like them can't catch a soul.

Hark to the music of the shuttle and the useful loom. We weave linen,
cotton, woolen, linsey-woolsey, and, not to be behind the rogues
outside, cottonsey-woolsey and cottonsey-silksey; damask we weave, and
a little silk and poplin, and Mary Baker velvet itself for a treat now
and then. We of the loom relieve the county of all expense in keeping
us, and enrich a fund for taking care of discharged industrious
prisoners until such time as they can soften prejudices and obtain
lucrative employment. The old plan was to kick a prisoner out and say:

"There, dog! go without a rap among those who will look on you as a
dog and make you starve or steal. We have taught you no labor but
crank, and as there are no cranks in the outside world, the world not
being such an idiot as we are, you must fill your belly by means of
the only other thing you have ever been taught--theft."

Now the officers take leave of a discharged prisoner in English.
Farewell; good-by!--a contraction for God be wi' ye--etc. It used to
be in French, Sans adieu! au revoir! and the like.

Having passed the merry, useful looms open this cell. A she-thief
looks up with an eye six times as mellow as when we were here last.
She is busy gilding. See with what an adroit and delicate touch the
jade slips the long square knife under the gossamer gold-leaf which
she has blown gently out of the book--and turns it over; and now she
breathes gently and vertically on the exact center of it, and the
fragile yet rebellious leaf that has rolled itself up like a hedgehog
is flattened by that human zephyr on the little leathern easel. Now
she cuts it in three with vertical blade; now she takes her long flat
brush and applies it to her own hair once or twice; strange to say the
camel-hair takes from this contact a soupcon of some very slight and
delicate animal oil, which enables the brush to take up the gold-leaf,
and the artist lays a square of gold in its place on the plaster bull
she is gilding. Said bull was cast in the prison by another female
prisoner who at this moment is preparing a green artificial meadow for
the animal to stand in. These two girls had failed at the watchmaking.
They had sight and the fine sensation of touch required, but they
lacked the caution, patience and judgment so severe an art demanded;
so their talents were directed elsewhere. This one is a first-rate
gilder, she mistressed it entirely in three days.

The last thing they did in this way was an elephant. Cost of casting
him, reckoning labor and the percentage he ought to pay to the mold,
was 1s. 4d. Plaster, chrome, water-size and oil-size, 3d.; goldleaf,
3s.; 1 foot of German velvet, 4d.; thread, needles and wear of tools,
1d.; total, 5s.

Said gold elephant standing on a purple cushion was subjected to a
severe test of his value. He was sent to a low auction room in London.
There he fell to the trade at 18s. This was a "knock-out" transaction;
twelve buyers had agreed not to bid against one another in the auction
room, a conspiracy illegal but customary. The same afternoon these
twelve held one of their little private unlawful auctions over him;
here the bidding was like drops of blood oozing from flints, but at
least it was bona-fide, and he rose to 25s. The seven shillings
premium was divided among the eleven sharpers. Sharper No. 12 carried
him home and sold him the very next day for 37s. to a lady who lived
in Belgravia, but shopped in filthy alleys, misled perhaps by the
phrase "dirt cheap."

Mr. Eden conceived him, two detected ones made him at a cost of 5s.,
twelve undetected ones caught him first for 18s., and now he stands in
Belgravia, and the fair ejaculate over him, "What a duck!"

The aggregate of labor to make and gild this elephant was not quite
one woman's work (12 hours). Taking 18s. as the true value of the
work, for in this world the workman has commonly to sell his
production under the above disadvantages, forced sale and the
conspiracies of the unimprisoned--we have still 13s. for a day's work
by a woman.

From the bull greater things are expected. The cast is from the bull
of the Vatican, a bull true to Nature, and Nature adorned the very
meadows when she produced the bull. What a magnificent animal is a
bull! what a dewlap! what a front! what clean pasterns! what fearless
eyes! what a deep diapason is his voice! of which beholding this his
true and massive effigy in ---- Jail we are reminded. When he stands
muscular, majestic, sonorous, gold, in his meadow pied with daisies,
it shall not be "sweet" and "love" and "duck"--words of beauty but no
earthly signification; it shall be, "There, I forgive Europa."

And need I say there were more aimed at in all this than pecuniary
profit. Mr. Eden held that the love of production is the natural
specific antidote to the love of stealing. He kindled in his prisoners
the love of producing, of what some by an abuse of language call
"creating." And the producers rose in the scale of human beings. Their
faces showed it--the untamed look melted away--the white of the eye
showed less, and the pupil and iris more, and better quality.

Gold-leaf when first laid on adheres in visible squares with uncouth
edges, a ragged affair; then the gilder takes a camelhair brush and
under its light and rapid touch the work changes as under a diviner's
rod, so rapidly and majestically come beauty and finish over it.
Perhaps no other art has so delicious a one minute as this is to the
gilder. The first work our prisoner gilded she screamed with delight
several times at this crisis. She begged to have the work left in her
cell one day at least. "It lights up the cell and lights up my heart."

"Of course it does," said Mr. Eden. "Aha! what, there are greater
pleasures in the world than sinning, are there?"

"That there are. I never was so pleased in my life. May I have it a
few minutes?"

"My child, you shall have it till its place is taken by others like
it. Keep it before your eyes, feed on it, and ask yourself which is
the best, to work and add something useful or beautiful to the world's
material wealth, or to steal; to be a little benefactor to your kind
and yourself, or a little vermin preying on the industrious. Which is
best?"

"I'll never take while I can make."

This is, of course, but a single specimen out of scores. To follow Mr.
Eden from cell to cell, from mind to mind, from sex to sex, would take
volumes and volumes. I only profess to reveal fragments of such a man.
He never hoped from the mere separate cell the wonders that dreamers
hope. It was essential to the reform of prisoners that moral contagion
should be checkmated, and the cell was the mode adopted, because it is
the laziest, cheapest, selfishest and cruelest way of doing this. That
no discretion was allowed him to let the converted or the
well-disposed mix and sympathize, and compare notes, and confirm each
other in good under a watchful officer's eye; this he thought a
frightful blunder of the system.

Generally he held the good effect of separate confinement to be merely
negative; he laughed to scorn the chimera that solitude is an active
agent, capable of converting a rogue. Shut a rogue from rogues and let
honest men in upon him--the honest men get a good chance to convert
him, but if they do succeed it was not solitude that converted him but
healing contact. The moments that most good comes to him are the
moments his solitude is broken.

He used to say solitude will cow a rogue and suspend his overt acts of
theft by force, and so make him to a non-reflector seem no longer a
thief; but the notion of the cell effecting permanent cures might
honestly be worded thus: "I am a lazy self-deceiver, and want to do by
machinery and without personal fatigue what St. Paul could only do by
working with all his heart, with all his time, with all his wit, with
all his soul, with all his strength and with all himself." Or thus:
"Confine the leopards in separate cages, Jock; _the cages_ will
take their spots out while ye're sleeping."

Generally this was Mr. Eden's theory of the cell--a check to further
contamination, but no more. He even saw in the cell much positive ill
which he set himself to qualify.

"Separate confinement breeds monstrous egotism," said he, "and egotism
hardens the heart. You can't make any man good if you never let him
say a kind word or do an unselfish action to a fellow-creature. Man is
an acting animal. His real moral character all lies in his actions,
and none of it in his dreams or cogitations. Moral stagnation or
cessation of all bad acts and of all good acts is a state on the
borders of every vice and a million miles from virtue."

His reverence attacked the petrifaction and egotism of the separate
cell as far as the shallow system of this prison let him. First, he
encouraged prisoners to write their lives for the use of the prison;
these were weeded, if necessary (the editor was strong-minded and did
not weed out the re-poppies); printed and circulated in the jail. The
writer's number was printed at the foot if he pleased, but never his
name. Biography begot a world of sympathy in the prison. Second, he
talked to one prisoner acquainted with another prisoner's character,
talked about No. 80 to No. 60, and would sometimes say: "Now could you
give No. 60 any good advice on this point?"

Then if 80's advice was good he would carry it to 60, and 60 would
think all the more of it that it came from one of his fellows.

Then in matters of art he would carry the difficulties of a beginner
or a bungler to a proficient, and the latter would help the former.
The pleasure of being kind on one side, a touch of gratitude on the
other, seeds of interest and sympathy in both. Then such as had
produced pretty things were encouraged to lend them to other cells to
adorn them and stimulate the occupants.

For instance, No. 140, who gilded the bull, was reminded that No. 120,
who had cast him, had never had the pleasure of setting him on her
table in her gloomy cell and so raising its look from dungeon to
workshop. Then No. 140 said, "Poor No. 120! that is not fair; she
shall have him half the day or more if you like, sir."

Thus a grain of self-denial, justice and charity was often drawn into
the heart of a cell through the very keyhole.

No. 19, Robinson, did many a little friendly office for other figures,
received their thanks, and, above all, obliging these figures warmed
and softened his own heart.

You might hear such dialogues as this:

No. 24. "And how is poor old No. 50 to-day (Strutt)?"

Mr. Eden. "Much the same."

No. 24. "Do you think you will bring him round, sir?"

Mr. Eden. "I have great hopes; he is much improved since he had the
garden and the violin."

No. 24. "Will you give him my compliments, sir? No. 24's compliments
and tell him I bid him 'never say die'?"

Mr. Eden. "Well, ----, how are you this morning?"

"I am a little better, sir. This room (the infirmary) is so sweet and
airy, and they give me precious nice things to eat and drink."

"Are the nurses kind to you?"

"That, they are, sir, kinder than I deserve."

"I have a message for you from No. -- on your corridor."

"No! have you, sir?"

"He sends his best wishes for your recovery."

"Now that is very good of him."

"And he would be very glad to hear from yourself how you feel."

"Well, sir, you tell him I am a trifle better, and God bless him for
troubling his head about me."

In short, his reverence reversed the Hawes system. Under that a
prisoner was divested of humanity and became a number and when he fell
sick the sentiment created was, "The figure written on the floor of
that cell looks faint." When he died or was murdered, "There is such
and such a figure rubbed off our slate."

Mr. Eden made these figures signify flesh and blood, even to those who
never saw their human faces. When he had softened a prisoner's heart
then he laid the deeper truths of Christianity to that heart. They
would not adhere to ice or stone or brass. He knew that till he had
taught a man to love his brother whom he had seen he could never make
him love God whom he has not seen. To vary the metaphor, his plan was,
first warm and soften your wax then begin to shape it after Heaven's
pattern. The old-fashioned way is freeze, petrify and mold your wax by
a single process. Not that he was mawkish. No man rebuked sin more
terribly than he often rebuked it in many of these cells; and when he
did so see what he gained by the personal kindness that preceded these
terrible rebukes! The rogue said: "What! is it so bad that his
reverence, who I know has a regard for me, rebukes me for it like
this?--why, it must be bad indeed!"

A loving friend's rebuke is a rebuke--sinks into the heart and
convinces the judgment; an enemy's or stranger's rebuke is invective
and irritates--not converts. The great vice of the new prisons is
general self-deception varied by downright calculating hypocrisy. A
shallow zealot like Mr. Lepel is sure to drive the prisoners into one
or other of these. It was Mr. Eden's struggle to keep them out of it.
He froze cant in the bud. Puritanical burglars tried Scriptural
phrases on him as a matter of course, but they soon found it was the
very worse lay they could get upon in ---- Jail. The notion that a man
can jump from the depths of vice up to the climax of righteous habits,
spiritual-mindedness, at one leap, shocked his sense and terrified him
for the daring dogs that profess these saltatory powers and the geese
that believe it. He said to such: "Let me see you crawl heavenward
first, then walk heavenward; it will be time enough to soar when you
have lived soberly, honestly, piously a year or two--not here, where
you are tied hands, feet and tongue, but free among the world's
temptations." He had no blind confidence in learned-by-heart texts.
"Many a scoundrel has a good memory," said he.

Here he was quite opposed to his friend Lepel. This gentleman
attributed a sort of physical virtue to Holy Writ poured anyhow into a
human vessel. His plan of making a thief honest will appear incredible
to a more enlightened age; yet it is widely accepted now and its
advocates call Mr. Eden a dreamer. It was this: He came into a cell
cold and stern and set the rogues a lot of texts. Those that learned a
great many he called good prisoners, and those that learned few--black
sheep; and the prisoners soon found out that their life, bitter as it
was, would be bitterer if they did not look sharp and learn a good
many texts. So they learned lots--and the slyest scoundrels learned
the most. "Why not?" said they, "in these cursed holes we have nothing
better to do; and it is the only way to get the parson's good word,
and that is always worth having in jail."

One rogue on getting out explained his knowledge of five hundred texts
thus: "What did it hurt me learning texts? I'd just as lieve be
learning texts as turning a crank, and as soon be d--d as either."

This fellow had been one of Mr. Lepel's sucking saints--a show
prisoner. The Bible and brute force--how odd they sound together! Yet
such was the Lepel system, humbug apart. Put a thief in a press
between an Old Testament and a New Testament. Turn the screw, crush
the texts in, and the rogue's vices out! Conversion made easy! What a
wonder he opposes cunning cloaked with religion to brutality cloaked
under religion. Ay, brutality, and laziness, and selfishness, all
these are the true foundation of that system. Selfishness--for such a
man won't do anything he does not like. No! "Why should I make myself
'all things to all men' to save a soul? I will save them this one way
or none--this is my way and they shall all come to it," says the
reverend Procrustes, forgetting that if the heart is not won in vain
is the will crushed; or perhaps not caring so that he gets his own
way.

To work on Mr. Eden's plan is a herculean effort day by day repeated;
but to set texts is easy, easier even than to learn them--and how easy
that is appears from the multitude of incurable felons who have
swapped texts for tickets-of-leave. Messieurs Lepel, who teach
solitary depressed sinners the Bible with screw and lifted lash and no
love nor pity, a word in your ear. Begin a step higher. Go first to
some charitable priest and at his feet learn that Bible yourselves!

Forgive my heat, dear reader. I am not an Eden, and these fellows rile
me when I think of the good they might do, and they do nothing but
force hypocrisy upon men who were bad enough without that. I allow a
certain latitude; don't want to swim in hot water by quarreling with
every madman or every dunce, but I do doubt any man's right to combine
contradictory vices. Now these worthies are stupid yet wild,
thick-headed yet delirious--tortoises and March hares.

My sketch of Mr. Eden and his ways is feeble and unworthy. But I
conclude it with one master-stroke of eulogy--He was the opposite of
these men.



CHAPTER XLIII.

WE left Thomas Robinson writing his life. He has written it. It has
been printed by prisoners and circulated among prisoners. One copy lay
in Robinson's cell till he left the prison, and to this copy were
appended Mr. Eden's remarks in MS.

This autobiography is a self-drawn portrait of a true Bohemian and his
mind from boyhood up to the date when he fell into my hands.

Unfortunately we cannot afford so late in our story to make any
retrograde step. The "Autobiography of a Thief" must therefore be
thrust into my Appendix or printed elsewhere.

The reader has seen Robinson turned into a fiend by cruelty and turned
back to a man by humanity.

On this followed many sacred, softening, improving lessons, and as he
loved Mr. Eden his heart was open to them.

Most prisoners are very sensible of genuine kindness, and docile as
wax in the hands of those who show it. They are the easiest class in
the world to impress. The difficulty is to make the impression
permanent. But the people who pretend to you that kindness does not
greatly affect, persuade and help convince them HAVE NEVER TRIED
ANYTHING BUT BRUTALITY, and never will; for nothing greater, wiser or
better is in them.

I will now indicate the other phases through which his mind passed in
---- Jail.

Being shown that his crimes were virtually the cause of Mary's hapless
life and untimely death, and hard pressed by his father confessor, he
fell into religious despondency; believed his case desperate, and his
sins too many for Heaven's mercy.

Of all states of mind this was the one Mr. Eden most dreaded. He had
observed that the notion that they cannot be reconciled to God and man
is the cause of prisoners' recklessness, and one great means by which
jail officers and society, England A.D. 185--, confirm them in ill.

He soothed and cheered the poor fellow with many a hopeful message
from the gospel of mercy and soon drew him out of the Slough of
Despond; but he drew him out with so eager an arm that up went this
impressionable personage from despond to the fifth heaven. He was
penitent, forgiven, justified, sanctified, all in three weeks.
Moreover, he now fell into a certain foul habit. Of course Scripture
formed a portion of his daily reading and discourse with the chaplain.
Robinson had a memory that seized and kept everything like a vise, so
now a text occurred to him for every occasion, and he interwove them
with all his talk. Your shallow observers would have said, "What a
hypocrite!"

Not a hypocrite, oh Criticaster, but a chameleon! who had been months
out of the atmosphere of vice and in an atmosphere of religion.

His reverence broke him of this nasty habit of chattering Bible, and
generally cooled him down. Finally he became sober, penitent for his
past life, and firmly resolved to lead a better. With this began to
mingle ambition to rise very high in the world, and a violent
impatience to begin.

Through all these phases ran one excellent and saving thing, a genuine
attachment to his good friend the chaplain. The attachment was
reciprocal, and there was something touching in the friendship of two
men so different in mind and worldly station. But they had suffered
together. And indeed a much more depraved prisoner than Robinson would
have loved such a benefactor and brother as Eden; and many a scoundrel
in this place did love him as well as he could love anything; and as
to the other, the clew to him is simple. While the vulgar
self-deceiving moralist loathes the detected criminal, and never
(whatever he may think) really rises to abhorrence of crime, the saint
makes two steps upward toward the mind of Heaven itself, abhors crime,
and loves, pities, and will not despair of the criminal.

But besides this Robinson was an engaging fellow, full of thought and
full of facts, and the Rev. Francis Tender-Conscience often spent an
extra five minutes in his cell and then reproached himself for letting
the more interesting personage rob other depressed and thirsty souls
of those drops of dew.

One day Mr. Eden, who had just entered the cell, said to Robinson,
"Give me your hand. It is as I feared, your nerves are going."

"Are they?" said Robinson ruefully.

"Do you not observe that you are becoming tremulous?"

"I notice that when my door is opened suddenly it makes me shake a
little and twitches come in my thigh."

"I feared as much. It is not every man that can bear separate
confinement for twelve months. You cannot."

"I shall have to, whether I can or not."

"Will you?"

Three days after this Mr. Eden came into his cell and said with a sad
smile, "I have good news for you; you are going to leave me.

"Oh, your reverence! is that good news?"

"Those who have the disposal of you are beginning to see that all
punishment (except hanging) is for the welfare of the culprit, and
must never be allowed to injure him. Strutt left the prison for my
house a fortnight ago, and you are to cross the water next week."

"Oh, your reverence! Heaven forgive me for feeling glad."

"For being human, eh, my poor fellow?"

In the course of this conversation Mr. Eden frankly regretted that
Robinson was going so soon. "Four months more prison would have made
you safer, and I would have kept you here till the last minute of your
sentence for the good of your soul," said he grimly; "but your body
and nerves might have suffered," added he tenderly; "we must do all
for the best."

A light burst on Robinson. "Why, your reverence," cried he, "is it for
fear? Why you don't ever think that I shall turn rogue again after I
get out of prison?"

"You are going among a thousand temptations."

"What! do you really think all your kindness has been wasted on me?
Why, sir, if a thousand pounds lay there I would not stretch out my
hand to take one that did not belong to me. How ungrateful you must
think me, and what a fool into the bargain after all my experience!"

"Ungrateful you are not, but you are naturally a fool--a weak,
flexible fool. A man with a tenth of your gifts would lead you by the
nose into temptation. But I warn you if you fall now conscience will
prick you as it never yet has; you will be miserable, and yet though
miserable perhaps will never rise again, for remorse is not
penitence."

Robinson was so hurt at this want of confidence that he said nothing
in reply, and then Mr. Eden felt sorry he had said so much, "for,
after all," thought he, "these are mere misgivings; by uttering them I
only pain him. I can't make him share them. Let me think what I can
do."

That very day he wrote to Susan Merton. The letter contained the
following: "Thomas Robinson goes to Australia next week. He will get a
ticket-of-leave almost immediately on landing. I am in great anxiety;
he is full of good resolves, but his nature is unstable, yet I should
not fear to trust him anywhere if I could but choose his associates.
In this difficulty I have thought of George Fielding. You know I can
read characters, and though you never summed George up to me, his
sayings and doings reveal him to me. He is a man in whom honesty is
engrained. Poor Robinson with such a companion would be as honest as
the day, and a useful friend, for he is full of resources. Then, dear
friend, will you do a Christian act and come to our aid. I want you to
write a note to Mr. Fielding and let this poor fellow take it to him.
Armed with this my convert will not be shy of approaching the honest
man, and the exile will not hate me for this trick--will he? I send
you inclosed the poor clever fool's life written by himself and
printed by my girls. Read it and tell me are we wrong in making every
effort to save such a man?" etc.

By return of post came a reply from Susan Merton, full of pity for
Robinson and affectionate zeal to co-operate in any way with her
friend. Inclosed was a letter addressed to George Fielding, the
envelope not closed. Mr. Eden slipped in a banknote and a very small
envelope and closed it, placed it in a larger envelope, sealed that
and copied the first address on its cover.

He now gave Robinson more of his time than ever and seemed to cling to
him with almost a motherly apprehension. Robinson noticed it and felt
it very, very much, and his joy at getting out of prison oozed away
more and more as the day drew near.

That day came at last. Robinson was taken by Evans to the chaplain's
room to bid him farewell. He found him walking about the room in deep
thought. "Robinson, when you are thousands of miles from me bear this
in mind, that if you fall again you will break my heart."

"I know it, sir; I know it; for you would say, 'If I could not save
him who can I hope to?'"

"You would not like to break my heart--to discourage your friend and
brother in the good work, the difficult work?"

"I would rather die; if it is to be so I pray Heaven to strike me dead
in this room while I am fit to die!"

"Don't say that; live to repair your crimes and to make me prouder of
you than a mother of her first-born." He paused and walked the room in
silence. Presently he stopped in front of Robinson. "You have often
said you owed me something."

"My life and my soul's salvation," was the instant reply.

"I ask a return; square the account with me."

"That I can never do."

"You can! I will take two favors in return for all you say I have done
for you. No idle words--but yes or no upon your honor. Will you grant
them or won't you?"

"I will, upon my honor."

"One is that you will pray very often, not only morning and evening,
but at sunset, at that dangerous hour to you when evil association
begins; at that hour honest men retire out of sight and rogues come
abroad like vermin and wild beasts; but most of all at any hour of the
day or night a temptation comes near you, at that moment pray! Don't
wait to see how strong the temptation is, and whether you can't
conquer it without help from above. At the sight of an enemy put on
heavenly armor--pray! No need to kneel or to go apart. Two words
secretly cast heavenward, 'Lord, help me,' are prayer. Will you so
pray?"

"Yes!"

"Then give me your hand; here is a plain gold ring to recall this
sacred promise; put it on, wear it, and look at it, and never lose it
or forget your promise."

"Them that take it must cut my hand off with it."

"Enough, it is a promise. My second request is that the moment you are
free you will go and stay with an honest man."

"I ask no better, sir, if he will have me."

"George Fielding; he has a farm near Bathurst."

"George Fielding, sir? He affronted me when I was in trouble. It was
no more than I deserved. I forgive him; but you don't know the lad,
sir. He would not speak to me; he would not look at me. He would turn
his back on me if we ran against one another in a wilderness."

"Here is a talisman that will insure you a welcome from him--a letter
from the woman he loves. Come, yes or no?"

"I will, sir, for your sake, not for theirs. Sir, do pray give me
something harder to do for you than these two things!"

"No, I won't overweight you--nor encumber your memory with pledges--
these two and no more. And here we part. See what it is to sin against
society. I, whom your conversation has so interested, to whom your
company is so agreeable--in one word, I, who love you, can find no
kinder word to say to you to-day than this--let me never see your face
again--let me never hear your name in this world!"

His voice trembled as he said these words--and he wrung Robinson's
hand, and Robinson groaned and turned away.

"So now I can do no more for you--I must leave the rest to God." And
with these words, for the second time in their acquaintance, the good
soul kneeled down and prayed aloud for this man. And this time he
prayed at length with ardor and tenderness unspeakable. He prayed as
for a brother on the brink of a precipice. He wrestled with Heaven;
and ere he concluded he heard a subdued sound near him, and it was
poor Robinson, who, touched and penetrated by such angelic love, and
awestruck to hear a good man pour out his very soul at the mercy-seat
of Heaven, had crept timidly to his side and knelt there, bearing his
mute part in this fervent supplication.

As Mr. Eden rose from his knees Evans knocked gently at the door. He
had been waiting some minutes, but had heard the voice of prayer and
reverently forbore to interrupt it. At his knock the priest and the
thief started. The priest suddenly held out both his hands; the thief
bowed his head and kissed them many times, and on this they parted
hastily with swelling hearts and not another word--except the
thousands that their moist eyes exchanged in one single look--the
last.



CHAPTER XLIV

THE ship was to sail in a week, and meantime Robinson was in the hulks
at Portsmouth. Now the hulks are a disgrace to Europe, and a most
incongruous appendage to a system that professes to cure by separate
confinement. One or two of the worst convicts made the usual overtures
of evil companionship to Robinson. These were coldly declined; and it
was a good sign that Robinson, being permitted by the regulations to
write one letter, did not write to any of his old pals in London or
elsewhere, but to Mr. Eden. He told him that he regretted his quiet
cell where his ears were never invaded with blasphemy and indecency,
things he never took pleasure in even at his worst--and missed his
reverence's talk sadly. He concluded by asking for some good books by
way of antidote.

He received no answer while at Portsmouth, but the vessel having
sailed and lying two days off Plymouth, his name was called just
before she weighed again and a thick letter handed to him. He opened
it eagerly and two things fell on deck--a sovereign and a tract. The
sovereign rolled off and made for the sea. Robinson darted after it
and saved it from the deep and the surrounding rogues. Then he read a
letter which was also in the inclosure. It was short. In it Mr. Eden
told him he had sent him the last tract printed in the prison. "It is
called 'The Wages of Sin are Death.' It is not the same one you made
into cards; that being out of print and the author dead I have been
tempted by that good, true title to write another. I think you will
value it none the less for being written by me and printed by our
brothers and sisters in this place. I inclose one pound that you may
not be tempted for want of a shilling."

Robinson looked round for the tract; it was not to be seen; nobody had
seen it. N. B. It had been through a dozen light-fingered hands
already and was now being laughed at and blasphemed over by two filthy
ruffians behind a barrel on the lower deck. Robinson was first in a
fury and then, when he found it was really stolen from him, he was
very much cut up. "I wish I had lifted it and let the money roll."
However, thought he, "if I keep quiet I shall hear of it."

He did hear of it, but he never saw it; for one of these hardened
creatures that had got hold of it had a spite against Robinson for
refusing his proffered amity, and the malicious dog, after keeping it
several hours, hearing Robinson threaten to inform against whoever had
taken it, made himself safe and gratified his spite by flinging it
into the Channel.

This, too, came in due course to Robinson's ears. He moralized on it.
"I made the first into the devil's books," said he, "and now a child
of the devil has robbed me of the second. I shan't get a third chance.
I would give my sovereign and more to see what his reverence says
about 'The wages of sin are death.' The very title is a sermon. I pray
Heaven the dirty hand that robbed me of it may rot off at the--no! I
forgot. Bless and curse not!"

And now Robinson was confined for five months in a wooden prison with
the scum of our jails. No cell to take refuge in from evil society.
And in that wretched five months this perpetual contact with
criminals, many of them all but incurable, took the gloss off him. His
good resolutions were unshaken, but his repugnance to evil associates
became gradually worn away.

At last they landed at Sydney. They were employed for about a
fortnight in some government works, a mile from the town; and at the
end of that time he was picked out by a gentleman who wanted a
servant.

Robinson's work was to call him not too early, to clean his boots, go
on errands into the town, and be always in the way till five o'clock.
From that hour until about two in the morning Mr. Miles devoted to
amusement, returning with his latch key, and often rousing the night
owl and his servant with a bacchanalian or Anacreontic melody. In
short, Mr. Miles was a loose fish; a bachelor who had recently
inherited the fortune of an old screw his uncle, and was spending
thrift in all the traditional modes. Horses, dogs, women, cards, etc.

He was a good-natured creature, and one morning as he brought him up
his hot water and his soda-water Robinson ventured on a friendly
remonstrance.

Mr. Miles flung canting rogue and half a dozen oaths and one boot at
his head, and was preparing to add a tumbler, when his mentor whipped
into the lobby. Robinson could not have fallen to a worse master than
this, whose irregularities were so regular that his servant had always
seven hours to spend in the town as he pleased. There he was often
solicited to join in depredations on property. For he found half his
old acquaintances were collected by the magic of the law on this spot
of earth.

Robinson took a particular pride in telling these gentlemen that he
had no objection to taking a friendly glass with them and talking over
old times, but that as for taking what did not belong to him all that
was over forever. In short, he improved on Mr. Eden's instructions.
Instead of flying from temptation, like a coward conscious of
weakness, he nobly faced it and walked cool, collected and safe on the
edge of danger.

One good result of this was that he spent his wages every month faster
than he got them, and spent the clothes his master gave him, and these
were worth more than his wages, for Mr. Miles was going the pace--wore
nothing after the gloss was off it. But Robinson had never lived out
of prison at less than five hundred per annum, and the evening is a
good time in the day for spending money in a town, and his evenings
were all his own.

One evening a young tradeswoman with whom he was flirting in the
character of a merchant's clerk, tremendously busy, who could only get
out in the evening; this young woman, whom he had often solicited to
go to the theater, consented.

"I could go with you to-morrow, my sister and I," said she.

Robinson expressed his delight, but consulting his pockets found he
had not the means of paying for their seats, and he could not pawn any
clothes, for he had but two sets. One (yellowish) that government
compelled him to wear by daylight, and one a present from his master
(black). That, together with a mustache, admitted him into the bosom
of society at night. What was to be done? Propose to the ladies to
pay, that was quite without precedent. Ask his master for an advance,
impossible. His master was gone kangaroo hunting for three days.
Borrow some of his master's clothes and pawn them, that was too like
theft. He would pawn his ring, it would only be for a day or two, and
he would not spend a farthing more till he had got it back.

He pawned Mr. Eden's ring; it just paid for their places at the
theater, where they saw the living puppets of the colony mop and mow
and rant under the title of acting. This was so interesting that
Robinson was thinking of his ring the whole time, and how to get it
back. The girls agreed between themselves they had never enjoyed so
dull a cavalier.

The next day a line from Mr. Miles to say that he should not be back
for a week. No hope of funds from him. So Robinson pawned his black
coat and got back his ring; and as the trousers and waistcoat were no
use now, he pawned them for pocket-money, which soon dissolved.

Mr. Robinson now was out of spirits.

"Service is not the thing for me. I am of an active turn--I want to go
into business that will occupy me all day long--business that
requires some head. Even his reverence, the first man in the country,
acknowledged my talents--and what is the vent for them here? The
blacking-bottle."



CHAPTER XLV.

IN a low public outside the town--in a back room--with their arms on
the table and their low foreheads nearly touching, sat whispering two
men--types. One had the deep-sunk, colorless eyes, the protruding
cheek-bones, the shapeless mouth, and the broad chin good in itself
but bad in the above connection; the other had the vulpine chin, and
the fiendish eyebrows descending on the very nose in two sharp arches.
Both had the restless eye, both the short-cropped hair, society's
comment, congruous and auxiliary, though in itself faint by the side
of habit's seal and Nature's.

A small north window dimly lighted the gloomy, uncouth cabin, and
revealed the sole furniture--four chairs, too heavy to lift, too thick
to break, and a table discolored with the stains of a thousand filthy
debauches and dotted here and there with the fresh ashes of pipes and
cigars.

In this appropriate frame behold two felons putting their heads
together. By each felon's side smoked in a glass hot with heat and
hotter with alcohol, the enemy of man. It would be difficult to give
their dialogue, for they spoke in thieves' Latin. The substance was
this: They had scent of a booty in a house that stood by itself three
miles out of the town. But the servants were incorruptible, and they
could not get access to inspect the premises, which were intricate.
Now your professional burglar will no more venture upon unexplored
premises than a good seaman will run into an unknown channel without
pilot, soundings or chart. It appeared from the dialogue that the two
men were acquainted with a party who knew these premises, having been
more than once inside them with his master.

The more rugged one objected to this party. "He is no use, he has
turned soft. I have heard him refuse a dozen good plants the last
month. Besides, I don't want a canting son of a gun for my pal--ten to
one if he don't turn tail and perhaps split."

N. B.--All this not in English, but in thieve's cant, with an oath or
a nasty expression at every third word. The sentences measled with
them.

"You don't know how to take him," replied he of the Mephistopheles
eye-brow. "He won't refuse me."

"Why not?"

"He is an old pal of mine, and I never found the thing I could not
persuade him to. He does not know how to say me nay--you may bully him
and queer him till all is blue, and he won't budge, and that is the
lay you have been upon with him. Now I shall pull a long face--make up
a story--take him by his soft bit--tell him I can't get on without
him, and patter old lang syne to him. Then we'll get a fiddle and lots
of whisky; and when we have had a reel and he has shaken his foot on
the floor and drank a gill or two, you will see him thaw, and then you
leave him to me and don't put in your jaw to spoil it. If we get him
it will be all right--he is No. 1; his little finger has seen more
than both our carcasses put together."



CHAPTER XLVI.

FOUR days after this, mephistopheles with a small m and brutus with a
little b sat again in the filthy little cabin where men hatch
burglaries--but this time the conference wore an air of expectant
triumph.

"Didn't I tell you?"

"You didn't do it easy."

"No, I had almost to go on my knees to him."

"He isn't worth so much trouble."

"He is worth it ten times over. Look at this," and the speaker
produced a plan of the premises they were plotting against. "Could you
have done this?"

"I don't say I could."

"Could any man you know have done it? See here is every room and every
door and window and passage put down, and what sort of keys and bolts
and fastenings to each."

"How came he to know so much; he never was in the house but twice."

"A top-sawyer like him looks at everything with an eye to business. If
he was in a church he'd twig the candlesticks and the fastenings,
while the rest were mooning into the parson's face--he can't help it."

"Well, he may be a top-sawyer, but I don't like him. See how loth he
was, and, when he did agree, how he turned to and drank as if he would
drown his pluck before it could come to anything."

"Wait till you see him work. He will shake all that nonsense to blazes
when he finds himself out under the moon with the swag on one side and
the gallows on the other."

To go back a little. Mr. Miles did not return at the appointed day;
and Robinson, who had no work to do, and could not amuse himself
without money, pawned Mr. Eden's ring. He felt ashamed and sorrowful,
but not so much so as the first time.

This evening, as he was strolling moodily through the suburbs, a voice
hailed him in tones of the utmost cordiality. He looked up and there
was an old pal, with whom he had been associated in many a merry bout
and pleasant felony; he had not seen the man for two years; a friendly
glass was offered and accepted. Two girls were of the party, to oblige
whom Robinson's old acquaintance sent for Blind Bill, the fiddler, and
soon Robinson was dancing and shouting with the girls like mad--"High
cut," "side cut," "heel and toe," "sailor's fling," and the double
shuffle.

He did not leave till three in the morning, and after a promise to
meet the same little party again next evening--to dance and drink and
drive away dull care.



CHAPTER XLVII.

ON a certain evening some days later, the two men whose faces were
definitions sat on a bench outside that little public in the
suburbs--one at the end of a clay-pipe, the other behind a pewter mug.
It was dusk.

"He ought to be here soon," said the one into whose forehead holes
seemed dug and little bits of some vitreous substance left at the
bottom. "Well, mate," cried he harshly, "what do you want that you
stick to us so tight?" This was addressed to a peddler who had been
standing opposite showing the contents of his box with a silent
eloquence. Now this very asperity made the portable shopman say to
himself, "wants me out of the way--perhaps buy me out." So he stuck
where he was, and exhibited his wares.

"We don't want your gim-cracks," said mephistopheles quietly.

The man eyed his customers and did not despair. "But, gents," said he,
"I have got other things besides gim-cracks; something that will suit
you if you can read."

"Of course we can read," replied sunken-eyes haughtily; and in fact
they had been too often in jail to escape this accomplishment.

The peddler looked furtively in every direction; and after this
precaution pressed a spring and brought a small drawer out from the
bottom of his pack. The two rogues winked at one another. Out of the
drawer the peddler whipped a sealed packet.

"What is it?" asked mephistopheles, beginning to take an interest.

"Just imported from England," said the peddler, a certain pomp
mingling with his furtive and mysterious manner.

"---- England," was the other's patriotic reply.

"And translated from the French."

"That is better! but what is it?"

"Them that buy it--they will see!"

"Something flash?"

"Rather, I should say."

"Is there plenty about the women in it?"

The trader answered obliquely.

"What are we obliged to keep it dark for?"--the other put in, "Why of
course there is."

"Well!" said sunken-eyes affecting carelessness. "What do you want for
it? Got sixpence, Bill?"

"I sold the last to a gentleman for three-and-sixpence. But as this is
the last I've got--say half a crown."

Sunken-eyes swore at the peddler.

"What! half a crown for a book no thicker than a quire of paper?"

"Only half a crown for a thing I could be put in prison for selling.
Is not my risk to be paid as well as my leaves?"

This logic went home, and after a little higgling two shillings was
offered and accepted, but in the very act of commerce the trader
seemed to have a misgiving.

"I daren't do it unless you promise faithfully never to tell you had
it of me. I have got a character to lose, and I would not have it
known--not for the world, that James Walker had sold such
loose--licentious--"

"Oh! what it is very spicy, is it? Come, hand it over. There's the two
bob."

"My poverty and not my will consents," sighed the trader.

"There, you be off, or we shall have all the brats coming round us."

The peddler complied and moved off, and so willing was he to oblige
his customers that on turning the corner he shouldered his pack and
ran with great agility down the street, till he gained a network of
small alleys in which he wriggled and left no trace.

Meantime sunken-eyes had put his tongue to the envelope and drawn out
the contents. "I'll go into the light and see what it is all about."

mephistopheles left alone had hardly given his pipe two sucks ere
brutus returned black with rage and spouting oaths like a whale.

"Why, what is the matter?"

"Matter! Didn't he sell this to me for a flash story?"

"Why he didn't say so. But certainly he dropped a word about loose
books."

"Of course he did."

"Well! and ain't they?"

"Ain't they!" cried the other with fury. "Here, you young shaver,
bring the candle out here. Ain't they? No they
ain't----and----and----the ---- ----. Look here!"

mephisto. "'Mend your Ways,' a tract."

brutus. "I'll break his head instead."

mephisto. "'Narrative of Mr. James the Missionary.'"

brutus. "The cheating, undermining rip."

mephisto. "And here is another to the same tune."

brutus. "Didn't I tell you so. The hypocritical, humbugging rascal--"

mephisto. "Stop a bit. Here is a little one: 'Memoirs of a Gentleman's
Housekeeper.'"

brutus. "Oh! is there? I did not see that."

mephisto. "You are so hasty. The case mayn't be so black as it looks.
The others might be thrown in to make up the parcel. Hold the candle
nearer.

brutus. "Ay! let us see about the housekeeper."

The two men read "The Housekeeper" eagerly, but as they read the
momentary excitement of hope died out of their faces. Not a sparkle of
the ore they sought; all was dross. "The Housekeeper" was one of those
who make pickles, not eat them--and in a linen apron a yard wide save
their master's money from the fangs of cook and footman, not help him
scatter it in a satin gown.

There was not even a stray hint or an indelicate expression for the
poor fellow's two shillings. The fraud, was complete. It was not like
the ground coffee, pepper and mustard in a London shop--in which there
is as often as not a pinch of real coffee, mustard and pepper to a
pound of chicory and bullock's blood, of red lead, dirt, flour and
turmeric. Here the do was pure.

Then brutus relieved his swelling heart by a string of observations
partly rhetorical, partly zoological. He devoted to horrible plagues
every square inch of the peddler, enumerating more particularly those
interior organs that subserve vitality, and concluded by vowing
solemnly to put a knife into him the first fair opportunity. "I'll
teach the rogue to--" Sell you medicine for poison, eh?

mephistopheles, either because he was a more philosophic spirit or was
not the one out of pocket, took the blow more coolly. "It is a bite
and no mistake. But what of it? Our money," said he, with a touch of
sadness, "goes as it comes. This is only two bob flung in the dirt. We
should not have invested them in the Three per Cents; and to-night's
swag will make it up."

He then got a fresh wafer and sealed the pamphlets up again. "There,"
said he, you keep dark and sell the first flat you come across the
same way the varmint sold you.

brutus, sickened at heart by the peddler's iniquity, revived at the
prospect of selling some fellow-creature as he had been sold. He put
the paper-trap in his pocket; and, cheated of obscenity, consoled
himself with brandy such as Bacchus would not own, but Beelzebub would
brew for man if permitted to keep an earthly distillery.

Presently they were joined by the third man, and for two hours the
three heads might all have been covered by one bushel-basket, and
peddler Walker's heartless fraud was forgotten in business of a higher
order.

At last mephistopheles gave brutus a signal, and they rose to
interrupt the potations of the newcomer, who was pouring down fire and
hot water in rather a reckless way.

"We won't all go together," said mephistopheles. "You two meet me at
Jonathan's ken in an hour."

As brutus and the newcomer walked along an idea came to brutus. "Here
is a fellow that passes for a sharp. What if I sell him my pamphlets
and get a laugh at his expense. Mate," said he, "here is a flash book
all sealed up. What will you give me for it?"

"Well! I don't much care for that sort of reading, old fellow."

"But this is cheap. I got it a bargain. Come--a shilling won't hurt
you for it. See there is more than one under the cover."

Now the other had been drinking till he was in that state in which a
good-natured fellow's mind if decomposed would be found to be all
"Yes," and "Dine with me to-morrow," so he fell into the trap.

"I'll give it you, my boy," said he. "Let us see it? There are more
than one inside it. You're an honest fellow. Owe you a shilling." And
the sealed parcel went into his pocket. Then, seeing brutus look
rather rueful at this way of doing business, he hiccoughed out, "Stop
your bob out of the swag"--and chuckled.



CHAPTER XLVIII.

A SNOW-WHITE suburban villa standing alone with its satellites that
occupied five times as much space as itself; coach-house, stable,
offices, greenhouse clinging to it like dew to a lily, and hot-house
farther in the rear. A wall of considerable height inclosed the whole.
It booked as secure and peaceful as innocent in the fleeting light the
young moon cast on it every time the passing clouds left her clear a
moment. Yet at this calm thoughtful hour crime was waiting to invade
this pretty little place.

Under the scullery-window lurked brutus and mephistopheles--faces
blackened, tools in hand--ready to whip out a pane of said window and
so penetrate the kitchen, and from the kitchen the pantry, where they
made sure of a few spoons, and up the back stairs to the plate-chest.
They would be in the house even now but a circumstance delayed them--a
light was burning on the second floor. Now it was contrary to their
creed to enter a house where a light was burning, above all, if there
was the least chance of that light being in a sitting-room. Now they
had been some hours watching the house and that light had been there
all the time, therefore, argued mephistopheles, "It is not a farthing
glim in a bedroom or we should have seen it lighted. It is some one
up. We must wait till they roost."

They waited and waited and waited. Still the light burned. They cursed
the light. No wonder. Light seems the natural enemy of evil deeds.

They began to get bitter, and their bodies cold. Even burglary becomes
a bore when you have to wait too long idle out in the cold.

At last, at about half past two, the light went out. Then, keenly
listening, the two sons of darkness heard a movement in the house, and
more than one door open and shut, and then the sound of feet going
rapidly down the road toward Sydney.

"Why! it is a party only just broke up. Lucky I would not work till
the glim was out."

"But I say, Bill--he is at that corner--the nobs must have passed
close to him--suppose they saw him."

"He is not so green as let them see him."

The next question was how long they should wait to let the inmates
close their peepers. All had been still and dark more than half an
hour when the pair began to work. mephisto took out a large piece of
putty and dabbed it on the middle of the pane; this putty he worked in
the center up to a pyramid; this he held with his left hand, while
with his right be took out his glazier's diamond and cut the pane all
round the edges. By the hold the putty gave him, he prevented the pane
from falling inside the house and making a noise, and finally whipped
it out clean and handed it to brutus. A moment more the two men were
in the scullery, thence into the kitchen through a door which they
found open; in the kitchen were two doors--trying one they found it
open into a larder. Here casting the light of his dark lantern round,
brutus discovered some cold fowl and a ham; they took these into the
kitchen, and somewhat coolly took out their knives and ate a hasty but
hearty supper. Their way of hacking the ham was as lawless as all the
rest. They then took off their shoes and dropped them outside the
scullery window, and now the serious part of the game began. Creeping
like cats, they reached the pantry, and sure enough found more than a
dozen silver spoons and forks of different sizes that had been
recently used. These they put into a small bag, and mephisto went back
through the scullery into the back garden and hid these spoons in a
bush. "Then, if we should be interrupted, we can come back for them."

And now the game became more serious and more nervous--the pair drew
their clasp knives and placed them in their bosoms ready in case of
extremity; then creeping like cats, one foot at a time and then a
pause, ascended the back stairs, at the top of which was a door. But
this door was not fastened, and in another moment they passed through
it and were on the first landing. The plan, correct in every
particular, indicated the plate closet to their right. A gleam from
the lantern showed it; the key-hole was old-fashioned as also
described, and in a moment brutus had it open. Then mephisto whipped
out a green baize bag with compartments, and in a minute these adroit
hands had stowed away cups, tureens, baskets, soup-spoons, etc., to
the value of three hundred pounds, and scarce a chink heard during the
whole operation. It was done; a look passed as much as to say this is
enough, and they crept back silent and cat-like as they had come,
brutus leading with the bag. Now just as he had his hand on the door
through which they had come up--snick! click!--a door was locked
somewhere down below.

brutus looked round and put the bag gently down. "Where?" he
whispered.

"Near the kitchen," was the reply scarce audible. "Sounded to me to
come from the hall," whispered the other.

Both men changed color, but retained their presence of mind and their
cunning. brutus stepped back to the plate-closet, put the bag in it,
and closed it, but without locking it. "Stay there," whispered he,
"and if I whistle--run out the back way empty-handed. If I mew--out
with the bag and come out by the front door; nothing but inside bolts
to it, plan says."

They listened a moment, there was no fresh sound. Then brutus slipped
down the front stairs in no time; he found the front door not bolted;
he did not quite understand that, and drawing a short bludgeon, he
opened it very cautiously; the caution was not superfluous. Two
gentlemen made a dash at him from the outside the moment the door was
open; one of their heads cracked like a broken bottle under the blow
the ready ruffian struck him with his bludgeon, and he dropped like a
shot; but another was coming flying across the lawn with a drawn
cutlass, and brutus, finding himself overmatched, gave one loud
whistle and flew across the hall, making for the kitchen. Flew he
never so fast mephisto was there an instant before him. As for the
gentleman at the door he was encumbered with his hurt companion, who
fell across his knees as he rushed at the burglar. brutus got a start
of some seconds and dashed furiously into the kitchen and flew to the
only door between them and the scullery-window.

THE DOOR WAS LOCKED.

The burglar's eyes gleamed in their deep caverns, "Back, Will--and cut
through them," he cried--and out flashed his long bright knife.



CHAPTER XLIX.

WHILE the two burglars were near the scullery-window watching the
light in the upper story a third man stood sentinel on the opposite
side of the house; he was but a few yards from the public road, yet
hundreds would have passed and no man seen him; for he had placed
himself in a thick shadow flat against the garden-wall. His office was
to signal danger from his side should any come. Now the light that
kept his comrades inactive was not on his side of the house; he waited
therefore expecting every moment their signal that the job was done.
On this the cue was to slip quietly off and all make by different
paths for the low public-house described above and there divide the
swag.

The man waited and waited and waited for this signal; it never came;
we know why. Then he became impatient--miserable; he was out of his
element--wanted to be doing something. At last all this was an
intolerable bore. Not feeling warm toward the job, he had given the
active business to his comrades, which he now regretted for two
reasons. First, he was kept here stagnant and bored; and second, they
must be a pair of bunglers; he'd have robbed a parish in less time. He
would light a cigar. Tobacco blunts all ills, even ennui. Putting his
hand in his pocket for a cigar, it ran against a hard, square
substance. What is this?--oh! the book mephisto had sold him. No, he
would not smoke, he would see what the book was all about; he knelt
down and took off his hat, and put his dark-lantern inside it before
he ventured to move the slide; then undid the paper, and putting it
into the hat, threw the concentrated rays on the contents and peered
in to examine them. Now the various little pamphlets had been
displaced by mephisto, and the first words that met the thief's eye in
large letters on the back of a tract were these, "THE WAGES OF SIN ARE
DEATH."

Thomas Robinson looked at these words with a stupid gaze. At first he
did not realize all that lay in them. He did not open the tract; he
gazed benumbed at the words, and they glared at him like the eyes of
green fire when we come in the dark on some tiger-cat crouching in his
lair.

Oh that I were a painter and could make you see what cannot be
described--the features of this strange incident that sounds so small
and was so great! The black night, the hat, the renegade peering under
it in the wall's deep shadows to read something trashy, and the
half-open lantern shooting its little strip of intense fire, and the
grim words springing out in a moment from the dark face of night and
dazzling the renegade's eyes and chilling his heart:

                  "THE WAGES OF SIN ARE DEATH."

To his stupor now succeeded surprise and awe. "How comes this?" he
whispered aloud, "was this a trick of ----'s? No! he doesn't know--
This is the devil's own doing--no! it is not--more likely it is--The
third time!--I'll read it. My hands shake so I can hardly hold it. It
is by him--yes--signed F. E. Heaven, have mercy on me!--This is more
than natural."

He read it, shaking all over as he read.

The tract was simply written. It began with a story of instances, some
of them drawn from the histories of prisoners, and it ended with an
earnest exhortation and a terrible warning. When the renegade came to
this part, his heart beat violently; for along with the earnest,
straightforward, unmincing words of sacred fire there seemed to rise
from the paper the eloquent voice, the eye rich with love, the face of
inexhaustible intelligence and sympathy that had so often shone on
Robinson, while just words such as these issued from those golden
lips.

He read on, but not to the end; for as he read he came to one
paragraph that made him fancy that Mr. Eden was by his very side.
"You, into whose hands these words of truth shall fall, and find you
intending to do some foolish or wicked thing to-morrow, or the next
day, or to-day, or this very hour--stop!--do not that sin! on your
soul do it not!--fall on your knees and repent the sin you have
meditated; better repent the base design than suffer for the sin, as
suffer you shall so surely as the sky is pure, so surely as God is
holy and sin's wages are death."

At these words, as if the priest's hand had been stretched across the
earth and sea and laid on the thief's head, he fell down upon his
knees with his back toward the scene of burglary and his face toward
England, crying out, "I will, your reverence. I am!--Lord, help me!"
cried he, then first remembering how he had been told to pray in
temptation's hour. The next moment he started to his feet, he dashed
his lantern to the ground, and leaped over a gate that stood in his
way, and fled down the road to Sydney.

He ran full half a mile before he stopped; his mind was in a whirl.
Another reflection stopped him. He was a sentinel, and had betrayed
his post; suppose his pals were to get into trouble through reckoning
on him; was it fair to desert them without warning? What if he were to
go back and give the whistle of alarm, pretend he had seen some one
watching, and so prevent the meditated crime, as well as be guiltless
of it himself; but then, thought he, "and suppose I do go back what
will become of me?"

While he hesitated, the question was decided for him. As he looked
back irresolute, his keen eye noticed a shadow moving along the
hedge-side to his left.

"Why, they are coming away," was his first thought. But looking keenly
down the other edge which was darker still he saw another noiseless
moving shadow. "Why are they on different sides of the road and both
keeping in the shadow?" thought this shrewd spirit, and he liked it so
ill that he turned at once and ran off toward Sydney.

At this out came the two figures with a bound into the middle of the
road, and, with a loud view-halloo, raced after him like the wind.

Robinson, as he started and before he knew the speed of his pursuers,
ventured to run sidewise a moment to see who or what they were. He
caught a glimpse of white waistcoats and glittering studs, and guessed
the rest.

He had a start of not more than twenty yards, but he was a good
runner, and it was in his favor that his pursuers had come up at a
certain speed, while he started fresh after a rest. He squared his
shoulders, opened his mouth wide for a long race, and ran as men run
for their lives.

In the silent night Robinson's highlows might have been heard half a
mile off clattering along the hard road. Pit pit pit pat! came two
pair of dress-boots after him. Robinson heard the sound with a thrill
of fear: "They in their pumps and I in boots," thought he, and his
pursuers heard the hunted one groan, and redoubled their efforts as
dogs when the stag begins to sob.

He had scarce run a hundred yards with his ears laid back like a
hare's, when he could not help thinking the horrible pit pit pit got
nearer; he listened with agonized keenness as he ran, and so fine did
his danger make his ear that he could tell the exact position of his
pursuers. A cold sweat crept over him as he felt they had both gained
ten yards out of the twenty on him; then he distinctly felt one
pursuer gain upon the other, and this one's pit pit pit crept nearer
and nearer, an inch every three or four yards; the other held his
own--no more--no less.

At last so near crept No. 1 that Robinson felt his hot breath at his
ear. He clinched his teeth and gave a desperate spurt, and put four or
five yards between them; he could have measured the ground gained by
the pit pit pat. But the pursuer put on a spurt, and reduced the
distance by half.

"I may as well give in," thought the hunted one--but at that moment
came a gleam of hope; this pursuer began suddenly to pant very loud.
He had clinched his teeth to gain the twenty yards; he had gained them
but had lost his wind. Robinson heard this, and feared him no longer,
and in fact after one or two more puffs came one despairing snort, and
No. 1 pulled up dead short, thoroughly blown.

As No. 2 passed him, he just panted out

"Won't catch him."

"Won't I!" ejaculated No 2, expelling the words rather than uttering
them.

Klopetee klop, klopetee klop, klopetee, klopetee, klopetee klop.

Pit pat, pit pat, pit pat pat, pit pit pat. Ten yards apart, no more
no less.

          Nor nearer might the dog attain,
          Nor farther might the quarry strain.

"They have done me between them, thought poor Robinson. "I could have
run from either singly, but one blows me, and then the other runs me
down. I can get out of it by fighting perhaps, but then there will be
another crime."

Robinson now began to pant audibly, and finding he could not shake the
hunter off, he with some reluctance prepared another game.

He began to exaggerate his symptoms of distress, and imperceptibly to
relax his pace. On this the pursuer came up hand over head. He was
scarce four yards behind when Robinson suddenly turned and threw
himself on one knee, with both hands out like a cat's claws. The man
ran on full tilt; in fact, he could not have stopped. Robinson caught
his nearest ankle with both hands and rose with him and lifted him,
aided by his own impulse, high into the air and sent his heels up
perpendicular. The man described a parabola in the air, and came down
on the very top of his head with frightful force; and as he lay, his
head buried in his hat and his heels kicking, Robinson without a
moment lost jumped over his body, and klopetee klop rang fainter and
fainter down the road alone.

The plucky pursuer wrenched his head with infinite difficulty out of
his hat, which sat on his shoulders with his nose pointing through a
chasm from crown to brim, shook himself, and ran wildly a few yards in
pursuit--but finding he had in his confusion run away from Robinson as
well as Robinson from him, and hopeless of recovering the ground now
lost, he gave a rueful sort of laugh, made the best of it, put his
hands in his pockets and strolled back to meet No. 1.

Meantime, Robinson, fearful of being pursued on horseback, relaxed his
speed but little and ran the three miles out into Sydney. He came home
with his flank heating and a glutinous moisture on his lip, and a
hunted look in his eye. He crept into bed, but spent the night
thinking, ay, and praying, too, not sleeping.



CHAPTER L.

THOMAS ROBINSON rose from his sleepless bed an altered man; altered
above all in this that his self-confidence was clean gone. "How little
I knew myself," said he, "and how well his reverence knew me! I am the
weakest fool on earth--he saw that and told me what to do. He provided
help for me--and I, like an ungrateful idiot, never once thought of
obeying him; but from this hour I see myself as I am and as he used to
call me--a clever fool. I can't walk straight without some honest man
to hold by. Well, I'll have one, though I give up everything else in
the world for it."

Then he went to his little box and took out the letter to George
Fielding. He looked at it and reproached himself for forgetting it so
long. "A letter from the poor fellow's sweetheart, too. I ought to
have sent it by the post if I did not take it. But I will take it.
I'll ask Mr. Miles's leave the moment he comes home, and start that
very day." Then he sat down and read the tract again, and as he read
it was filled with shame and contrition.

By one of those freaks of mind which it is so hard to account for,
every good feeling rushed upon him with far greater power than when he
was in ---- Prison, and, strange to say, he now loved his reverence
more and took his words deeper to heart than he had done when they
were together. His flesh crept with horror at the thought that he had
been a criminal again, at least in intention, and that but for
Heaven's mercy he would have been taken and punished with frightful
severity, and above all would have wounded his reverence to the heart
in return for more than mortal kindness, goodness and love. And, to do
Robinson justice, this last thought made his heart sicken and his
flesh creep more than all the rest. He was like a man who had fallen
asleep on the brink of an unseen precipice--awoke--and looked down.

The penitent man said his prayers this morning and vowed on his knees
humility and a new life. Henceforth he would know himself; he would
not attempt to guide himself; he would just obey his reverence. And to
begin, whenever a temptation came in sight he would pray against it
then and there and fly from it, and the moment his master returned he
would leave the town and get away to honest George Fielding with his
passport--Susan's letter.

With these prayers and these resolutions a calm complacency stole over
him; he put his reverence's tract and George's letter in his bosom and
came down into the kitchen.

The first person he met was the housemaid, Jenny.

"Oh, here is my lord!" cried she. "Where were you last night?"

Robinson stammered out, "Nowhere in particular. Why?"

"Oh, because the master was asking for you, and you weren't to be
found high or low."

"What, is he come home?"

"Came home last night."

"I'll go and take him his hot water."

"Why, he is not in the house, stupid. He dressed the moment he came
home and went out to a party. He swore properly at your not being in
the way to help him dress."

"What did he say?" asked Robinson, a little uneasy.

The girl's eyes twinkled. "He said, 'How ever am I to lace myself now
that scamp is not in the way?'"

"Come, none of your chaff, Jenny."

"Why you know you do lace him, and pretty tight, too."

"I do nothing of the kind."

"Oh, of course you won't tell on one another. Tell me our head scamp
does not wear stays! A man would not be as broadshouldered as that and
have a waist like a wasp and his back like a board without a little
lacing, and a good deal, too."

"Well, have it your own way, Jenny. Won't you give me a morsel of
breakfast?"

"Well, Tom, I can give you some just for form's sake; but bless you,
you won't able to eat it."

"Why not?"

"Gents that are out all night bring a headache home in the morning in
place of an appetite."

"But I was not out all night. I was at home soon after twelve."

"Really?"

"Really!"

"Tom?"

"Well, Jane!"

"Those that ain't clever enough to hide secrets should trust them to
those that are."

"I don't know what you mean, my lass."

"Oh, nothing; only I sat up till halfpast one in the kitchen, and I
listened till three in my room.

"You took a deal of trouble on my account."

"Oh, it was more curiosity than regard," was the keen reply.

"So I should say."

The girl colored and seemed nettled by this answer. She set demurely
about the work of small vengeance. "Now," said she with great
cordiality, "you tell me what you were doing all night and why you
broke into the house like a--a--hem! instead of coming into it like a
man, and then you'll save me the trouble of finding it out whether you
like or not."

These words chilled Robinson. What! had a spy been watching
him--perhaps for days--and above all a female spy--a thing with a
velvet paw, a noiseless step, an inscrutable countenance, and a
microscopic eye.

He hung his head over his cup in silence. Jenny's eye was scanning
him. He felt that without seeing it. He was uneasy under it, but his
self-reproach was greater than his uneasiness.

At this juncture the street door was opened with a latch-key. "Here
comes the head scamp,' said Jenny, with her eye on Robinson. The next
moment a bell was rung sharply. Robinson rose.

"Finish your breakfast," said Jenny, "I'll answer the bell," and out
she went. She returned in about ten minutes with a dressing-gown over
her arm and a pair of curling-irons in her hand. "There," said she,
"you are to go in the parlor, and get up the young buck; curl his nob
and whiskers. I wish it was me, I'd curl his ear the first thing I'd
curl."

"What, Jane, did you take the trouble to bring them down for me?"

"They look like it," replied the other tartly, as if she repented the
good office.

Robinson went in to his master. He expected a rebuke for being out of
the way; but no! he found the young gentleman in excellent humor and
high spirits. "Help me off with this coat, Tom."

"Yes, sir."

"Oh! not so rough, confound you. Ah! Ugh!"

"Coat's a little too tight, sir."

"No it isn't--it fits me like a glove but I am stiff and sore. There,
now, get me a shirt."

Robinson came back with the shirt, and aired it close to the fire; and
this being a favorable position for saying what he felt awkward about,
he began:

"Mr. Miles, sir."

"Hallo!"

"I am going to ask you a favor."

"Out with it!"

"You have been a kind master to me."

"I should think I have, too. By Jove, you won't find such another in a
hurry."

"No, sir, I am sure I should not, but there is an opening for me of a
different sort altogether. I have a friend, a squatter, near Bathurst,
and I am to join him if you will be so kind as to let me go."

"What an infernal nuisance!" cried the young gentleman, who was like
most boys, good-natured and selfish. "The moment I get a servant I
like he wants to go to the devil."

"Only to Bathurst, sir," said Robinson deprecatingly, to put him in a
good humor.

"And what am I to do for another?"

At this moment in came Jenny with all the paraphernalia of breakfast.
"Here, Jenny," cried he, "here's Robinson wants to leave us. Stupid
ass!"

Jenny stood transfixed with the tray in her hand. "Since when?" asked
she of her master, but looking at Robinson.

"This moment. The faithful creature greeted my return with that
proposal."

"Well, sir, a servant isn't a slave and suppose he has a reason?"

"Oh! they have always got a reason, such as it is. Wants to go and
squat at Bathurst. Well, Tom, you are a fool for leaving us, but of
course we shan't pay you the compliment of keeping you against your
will, shall we?" looking at Jane.

"What have I to do with it?" replied she, opening her gray eyes. "What
is it to me whether he goes or stays?"

"Come, I like that. Why you are the housemaid and he is the footman,
and those two we know are always"--and the young gentleman eked out
his meaning by whistling a tune.

"Mr. Miles," said Jenny, very gravely, like an elder rebuking a
younger, "you must excuse me, sir, but I advise you not to make so
free with your servants. Servants are encroaching, and they will be
sure to take liberties with you in turn; and," turning suddenly red
and angry, "if you talk like that to me I shall leave the room."

"Well, if you must! you must! but bring the tea-kettle back with you.
That is a duck!"

Jenny could not help laughing, and went for the tea-kettle. On her
return Robinson made signals to her over the master's head, which he
had begun to frizz. At first she looked puzzled, but following the
direction of his eye she saw that her master's right hand was terribly
cut and swollen. "Oh!" cried the girl. "Oh, dear! Oh, dear!"

"Eh?" cried Mr. Miles, "what is the row?"

"Look at your poor hand, sir!"

"Oh, ay! isn't it hideous. Met with an accident. Soon get well."

"No, it won't, not of itself; but I have got a capital lotion for
bruises, and I shall bathe it for you."

Jenny brought in a large basin of warm water and began to foment it
first, touching it so tenderly. "And his hand that was as white as a
lady's," said Jenny pitifully, "po-o-r bo-y!" This kind expression had
no sooner escaped her than she colored and bent her head down over her
work, hoping it might escape notice.

"Young woman," said Mr. Miles with paternal gravity, "servants are
advised not to make too free with their masters; or the beggars will
forget their place and take liberties with you. He! He! He!"

Jenny put his hand quietly down into the water and got up and ran
across the room for the door. Her course was arrested by a howl from
the jocose youth.

"Murder! Take him off, Jenny; kick him; the beggar is curling and
laughing at the same time. Confound you, can't you lay the irons down
when I say a good thing. Ha! Ha! Ha!"

This strange trio chuckled a space. Miles the loudest. "Tom, pour out
my tea; and you, Jenny, if you will come to the scratch again, ha!
ha!--I'll tell you how I came by this."

This promise brought the inquisitive Jenny to the basin directly.

"You know Hazeltine?"

"Yes, sir, a tall gentleman that comes here now and then. That is the
one you are to run a race with on the public course," put in Jenny,
looking up with a scandalized air.

"That is the boy; but how the deuce did you know?"

"Gentlemen to run with all the dirty boys looking on like horses,"
remonstrated the grammatical one, "it is a disgrace."

"So it is--for the one that is beat. Well, I was to meet Hazeltine to
supper out of town. By-the-by, you don't know Tom Yates?"

"Oh," said Jenny, "I have heard of him, too."

"I doubt that; there are a good many of his name."

"The rake, I mean; lives a mile or two out of Sydney.

"So do half a dozen more of them."

"This one is about the biggest gambler and sharper unhung."

"All right! that is my friend! Well, he gave us a thundering
supper--lots of lush."

"What is lush?"

"Tea and coffee and barley-water, my dear. Oh! can't you put the
thundering irons down when I say a good thing? Well, I mustn't be
witty any more, the penalty is too severe."

I need hardly say it was not Mr. Miles's jokes that agitated Robinson
now; on the contrary, in the midst of his curiosity and rising
agitation these jokes seemed ghastly impossibilities.

"Well, at ten o'clock we went upstairs to a snug little room, and all
four sat down to a nice little green table."

"To gamble?"

"No! to whist; but now comes the fun. We had been playing about four
hours, and the room was hot, and Yates was gone for a fresh pack, and
old Hazeltine was gone into the drawing-room to cool himself.
Presently he comes back and he says in a whisper, "Come here, old
fellows." We went with him to the drawing-room, and at first sight we
saw nothing, but presently flash came a light right in our eyes; it
seemed to come from something glittering in the field. And these
flashes kept coming and going. At last we got the governor, and he
puzzled over it a little while. 'I know what it is,' cried he, 'it is
my cucumber glass.'"

Jenny looked up. "Glass might glitter," said she, "but I don't see how
it could flash."

"No more did we, and we laughed in the governor's face; for all that
we were wrong. 'There is somebody under that wall with a dark
lantern,' said Tom Yates, 'and every now and then the glass catches
the glare and reflects it this way.' 'Solomon!' cried the rest of us.
The fact is, Jenny, when Tom Yates gets half drunk he develops
sagacity more than human. (Robinson gave a little groan.) Aha," cried
Miles, "the beggar has burned his finger. I'm glad of it. Why should I
be the only sufferer by his thundering irons? 'Here is a lark,' said
I, 'we'll nab this dark lantern--won't we, Hazy?' 'Rather,' said Hazy.
'Wait till I get my pistols, and I'll give you a cutlass, George,'
says Tom Yates. I forget who George was; but he said he was of noble
blood, and I think myself he was some relation to the King-of-trumps,
the whole family came about him so--mind my hair now. 'Oh, bother your
artillery,' said I. 'Thrice is he armed that hath his quarrel just.'
When I'm a little cut you may know it by my quoting Shakespeare. When
I'm sober I don't remember a word of him--and don't want to."

"No, the _Sporting Magazine_, that is your Bible, sir," suggested
Jenny.

"Yes, and let me read it without your commentary--mind my hair now.
Where was I? Oh. Hazeltine and I opened the door softly and whipped
out, but the beggar was too sharp for us. No doubt he heard the door.
Anyway, before we could get through the shrubbery he was off, and we
heard him clattering down the road ever so far off. However we
followed quietly on the grass by the road-side at a fair traveling
pace, and by and by what do you think? Our man had pulled up in the
middle of the road and stood stock still. 'That is a green trick,'
thought I. However, before we could get up to him he saw us or heard
us, and off down the road no end of a pace. 'Tally ho!' cried I. Out
came Hazy from the other hedge, and away we went--'Pug' ahead,
'Growler' and 'Gay-lad' scarce twenty yards from his brush, and the
devil take the hindmost. Well, of course, we made sure of catching him
in about a hundred yards--two such runners as Hazy and me--"

"And did not you?"

"I'll tell you. At first we certainly gained on him a few yards, but
after that I could not near him. But Hazy put on a tremendous spurt,
and left me behind for all I could do. 'Here is a go,' thought I, 'and
I have backed myself for a hundred pounds in a half-mile race against
this beggar.' Well, I was behind, but Hazy and the fox seemed to me to
be joined together running, when all of a sudden--pouff! Hazy's wind
and his pluck blew out together. He tailed off. Wasn't I pleased!
'Good-by, Hazy,' says I, as I shot by him and took up the running.
Well, I tried all I knew; but this confounded fellow ran me within
half a mile of Sydney (N. B., within two miles of it). My throat and
all my inside was like an oven, and I was thinking of tailing off,
too, when I heard the beggar puff and blow, so then I knew I must come
up with him before long."

"And did you, sir?" asked Jenny in great excitement.

"Yes," said the other, "I passed him even."

"But did you catch him?"

"Well! why--yes--I caught him--as the Chinese caught the Tartar. This
was one of your downy coves that are up to every move. When he found
he hadn't legs to run from me he slips back to meet me. Down he goes
under my leg--I go blundering over him twenty miles an hour. He lifts
me clear over his head and I come flying down from the clouds heel
over tip. I'd give twenty pounds to know how it was done, and fifty to
see it done--to a friend, All I know is that I should have knocked my
own brains out if it had not been for my hat and my hand--they bore
the brunt between them, as you see."

"And what became of the poor man?" asked Jane.

"Well, when the poor man had flung me over his head he ran on faster
than ever, and by the time I had shaken my knowledge-box and found out
north from south, I heard the poor man's nailed shoes clattering down
the road. To start again a hundred yards behind a poor man who could
run like that would have been making a toil of a trouble, so I trotted
back to meet Hazy.

"Well, I am glad he got off clear--ain't you, Tom?"

"Yes--no. A scoundrel that hashed the master like this--why, Jane, you
must be mad!"

"Spare your virtuous indignation," said the other coolly. "Remember I
had been hunting him like a wild beast till his heart was nearly
broke, and, when I was down, he could easily have revenged himself by
giving me a kick with his heavy shoes on the head or the loins that
would have spoiled my running for a month of Sundays. What do you say
to that?"

Robinson colored. "I say you are very good to make excuses for an
unfortunate man--for a rascal--that is to say, a burglar; a--"

"And how do you know he was all that?" asked Jenny very sharply.

"Why did he run if he was not guilty?" inquired Robinson cunningly.

"Guilty--what of?" asked Jenny.

"That is more than I can tell you," replied Robinson.

"I dare say," said Jenny, "it was some peaceable man that took fright
at seeing two wild young gentlemen come out like mad bulls after him."

"When I have told you my story you will be better able to judge."

"What, isn't the story ended?"

"Ended? The cream of it is coming."

"Oh, sir," cried Jenny, "please don't go on till I come back. I am
going for the cold lotion now; I have fomented it enough."

"Well, look sharp, then--here is the other all in a twitter with
excitement."

"Me, sir? No--yes. I am naturally interested."

"Well, you haven't been long. I don't think I want any lotion, the hot
water has done it a good deal of good."

"This will do it more."

"But do you know it is rather a bore to have only one hand to cut
bread and butter with?"

"I'll cut it, sir," said Robinson, laying down his irons for a moment.

"How long shall you be, Jenny?" asked Mr. Miles.

"I shall have done by when your story is done," replied she coolly.

Mr. Miles laughed. "Well, Jenny," said he, "I hadn't walked far before
I met Hazeltine. 'Have you got him?' says he. 'Do I look like it?'
said I rather crustily. Fancy a fool asking me whether I had got him!
So I told him all about it, and we walked back together. By-and-by we
met the other two just outside the gate. Well, just as we were going
in Tom Yates said, 'I say, suppose we look round the premises before
we go to bed.' We went softly round the house and what did we find but
a window with the glass taken out; we poked about and we found a pair
of shoes. 'Why, there's some one in the house,' says Tom Yates, 'as
I'm a sinner.' So we held a council of war. Tom was to go into the
kitchen, lock the door leading out, and ambush in the larder with his
pistols; and we three were to go in by the front door and search the
house. Well, Hazeltine and I had got within a yard or two of it and
the knave of trumps in the rear with a sword or something, when, by
George! sir, the door began to open, and out slips a fellow quietly.
Long Hazy and I went at him, Hazy first. Crack he caught Hazy on the
head with a bludgeon, down went daddy-long-legs, and I got entangled
in him, and the robber cut like the wind for the kitchen. 'Come on,'
shouted I to the honorable thingunibob, bother his name--there--the
knave of trumps, and I pulled up Hazy but couldn't wait for him, and
after the beggar like mad. Well, as I came near the kitchen-door I
heard a small scrimmage, and back comes my man flying bludgeon in one
hand and knife in the other, both whirling over his head like a
windmill. I kept cool, doubled my right, and put in a heavy one from
the armpit; you know, Tom; caught him just under the chin, you might
have heard his jaw crack a mile off; down goes my man on his back flat
on the bricks, and his bludgeon rattled one way and his knife the
other--such a lark. Oh! oh! oh! what are you doing, Robinson, you hurt
me most confoundedly--I won't tell you any more. So now he was down,
in popped the knave of swords and fell on him, and Hazy came
staggering in after and insulted him a bit and we bagged him."

"And the other, sir," asked Tom, affecting an indifferent tone, "he
didn't get off, I hope?"

"What other?" inquired Jenny.

"The other unfor--the other rascal--the burglar."

"Why he never said there were two."

"Y--yes!--he said they found their shoes."

"No, he said he found a pair of shoes."

"For all that you are wrong, Jenny, and he is right--there were two;
and, what is more, Tom Yates had got the other, threatening to blow
out his brains if he moved, so down he sat on the dresser and took it
quite easy and whistled a tune while we trussed the other beggar with
his own bludgeon and our chokers. Tom Yates says the cool one tumbled
down from upstairs just as we drove our one in. Tom let them try the
door before he bounced out; then my one flung a chair at Tom's head
and cut back, Tom nailed the other and I floored mine. Hurrah!"

Through this whole narrative Robinson had coolly and delicately to
curl live hair with a beating heart, and to curl the very man who was
relating all the time how he had hunted him and caught his comrades.
Meantime a shrewd woman there listening with all her ears, a woman,
too, who had certain vague suspicions about him, and had taken him up
rather sharper than natural, he thought, when, being off his guard for
a moment he anticipated the narrator, and assumed there were two
burglars in the house.

Tom, therefore, though curious and anxious, shut his face and got on
his guard, and it was with an admirable imitation of mere sociable
curiosity that he inquired, "And what did the rascals say for
themselves?"

"What could they say?" said Jenny, "they were caught in the fact."

"To do them justice they did not speak of themselves, but they said
three or four words too--very much to the point."

"How interesting it is!" cried Jenny--"what about?"

"Well! it was about your friend."

"My friend?"

"The peaceable gentleman the two young ruffians had chased down the
road."

"Oh! he was one of them," said Jane, "that is plain enough now in
course. What did they say about him?"

"'Sold!' says my one to Tom's. 'And no mistake,' says Tom's. Oh! they
spoke out, took no more notice of us four than if we had no ears. Then
says mine: 'What do you think of _your_  pal now?' and what do you
think Tom's answered, Jenny?--it was rather a curious answer--multum
in parvo as we say at school, and one that makes me fear there is a
storm brewing for our mutual friend, the peaceable gentleman,
Jenny--alias the downy runner."

"Why, what did he say?"

"He said, 'I think--he won't be alive this day week! '"

"The wretches!"

"No! you don't see--they thought he had betrayed them."

"But, of course, you undeceived them," said Robinson.

"No! I didn't. Why, you precious greenhorn, was that our game?"

"Well, sir," cried Robinson cheerfully, "any way it was a good night's
work. The only thing vexes me," added he, with an intense air of
mortification, "is that the worst scoundrel of the lot got clear off;
that is a pity--a downright pity."

"Make your mind easy," replied Mr. Miles calmly, "he won't escape; we
shall have him before the day is out."

"Will you, sir? that is right--but how?"

"The honorable thingumbob, Tom Yates's friend, put us up to it. We
sent the pair down to Sydney in the break and we put Yates's groom (he
is a ticket-of-leave) in with them, and a bottle of brandy, and he is
to condole with them and have a guinea if they let out the third man's
name, and they will--for they are bitter against him."

Robinson sighed. "What is the matter?" said his master, trying to
twist his head round.

"Nothing! only I am afraid they--they won't split; fellows of that
sort don't split on a comrade where they can get no good by it."

"Well, if they don't, still we shall have him. One of us saw his
face."

"Ah!"

"It was the honorable--the knave of trumps. While Yates was getting
the arms, Trumps slipped out by the garden gate and caught a glimpse
of our friend; he saw him take the lantern up and fling it down and
run. The light fell full on his face and he could swear to it out of a
thousand. So the net is round our friend and we shall have him before
the day is out."

Dring-a-dong-dring" (a ring at the bell).

"Have you done, Tom?"

"Just one more turn, sir."

"Then, Jenny, you see who that is?"

Jenny went and returned with an embossed card, "It is a young
gentleman--mustache and lavender gloves; oh, such a buck!"

"Who can it be? the 'Honorable George Lascelles?' why that is the very
man. I remember he said he would do himself the honor to call on me.
That is the knave of trumps; go down directly, Robinson, and tell him
I'm at home and bring him up."

"Yes, sir!"

"Yes, sir! Well, then, why don't you go!"

"Um! perhaps Jenny will go while I clear these things away;" and
without waiting for an answer Robinson hastened to encumber himself
with the tea-tray, and flung the loaf and curling-irons into it, and
bustled about and showed a sudden zeal lest this bachelor's room
should appear in disorder; and as Jenny mounted the front stairs
followed by the sprig of nobility, he plunged heavily laden down the
back stairs into the kitchen and off with his coat and cleaned knives
like a mad thing.

"Oh! if I had but a pound in my pocket," thought he, "I would not stay
another hour in Sydney. I'd get my ring and run for Bathurst and never
look behind me. How comfortable and happy I was until I fell back into
the old courses, and now see what a life mine has been ever since!
What a twelve hours! hunted like a wild beast, suspected and watched
by my fellow-servant and forced to hide my thoughts from this one and
my face from that one; but I deserve it and I wish it was ten times as
bad. Oh! you fool--you idiot--you brute--it is not the half of what
you deserve. I ask but one thing of Heaven--that his reverence may
never know; don't let me break that good man's heart; I'd much rather
die before the day is out!"

At this moment Jenny came in. Robinson cleaned the poor knives harder
still and did not speak; his cue was to find out what was passing in
the girl's mind. But she washed her cup and saucer and plates in
silence. Presently the bell rang.

"Tom!" said Jenny quietly.

"Would you mind going, Jenny?"

"Me! it is not my business."

"No, Jenny! but once in a way if you will be so kind."

"Once! why I have been twice to the door for you to-day. You to your
place and I to mine. Shan't go!"

"Look at me with my coat off and covered with brickdust."

"Put your coat on and shake the dust off."

"Oh, Jenny! that is not like you to refuse me such a trifle. I would
not disoblige you so."

"I didn't refuse," said Jenny, making for the door; "I only said 'no'
once or twice--_we_ don't call that refusing;" but as she went out
of the door she turned sharp as if to catch Robinson's face off its
guard; and her gray eye dwelt on him with one of those demure,
inexplicable looks her sex can give all _ab extra_--seeing all,
revealing nothing.

She returned with her face on fire. "That is what I get for taking
your place!"

"What is the matter?"

"That impudent young villain wanted to kiss me."

"Oh! is that all?"

"No! it is not all; he said I was the prettiest girl in Sydney" (with
an appearance of rising indignation).

"Well! but, Jenny, that is no news, I could have told him that."

"Then why did you never tell me?"

"I thought by your manner--you knew it."

Having tried to propitiate the foe thus, Robinson lost no more time,
but went upstairs and asked Mr. Miles for the trifle due to him as
wages. Mr. Miles was very sorry, but he had been cleaned out at his
friend Yates's--had not a shilling left and no hopes of any for a
fortnight to come.

"Then, sir," said Robinson doggedly, "I hope you will allow me to go
into the town and try and make a little for myself, just enough to pay
my traveling expenses.

"By all means," was the reply; "tell me if you succeed--and I'll
borrow a sovereign of you."

Out went Robinson into the town of Sydney. He got into a respectable
street, and knocked at a good house with a green door. He introduced
himself to the owner as a first-rate painter and engrainer, and
offered to turn this door into a mahogany, walnut, oak or what-not
door. "The house is beautiful, all but the door," said sly Tom; "it is
blistered."

"I am quite content with it as it is," was the reply in a rude,
supercilious tone.

Robinson went away discomfited; he went doggedly down the street
begging them all to have their doors beautified, and wincing at every
refusal. At last he found a shopkeeper who had no objection, but
doubted Robinson's capacity. "Show me what you can do," said he slyly,
"and then I'll talk to you."

"Send for the materials," replied the artist, "and give me a board and
I'll put half a dozen woods on the face of it."

"And pray," said the man, "why should I lay out my money in
advertising you? No! you bring me a specimen, and if it is all right
I'll give you the job."

"That is a bargain," replied Robinson, and went off. "How hard they
make honesty to a poor fellow," muttered he bitterly, "but I'll beat
them," and he clinched his teeth.

He went to a pawnbroker and pawned the hat off his head--it was a new
one; then for a halfpenny he bought a sheet of brown paper and twisted
it into a workman's cap; he bought the brushes and a little paint and
a little varnish, and then he was without a penny again. He went to a
wheelwright's and begged the loan of a small valueless worm-eaten
board he saw kicking about, telling him what it was for. The wealthy
wheelwright eyed him with scorn. "Should I ever see it again?" asked
he ironically.

"Keep it for your coffin," said Robinson fiercely, and passed on. "How
hard they make honesty to a poor fellow! I was a fool for asking for
it when I might have taken it. What was there to hinder me? Honesty,
my lass, you are bitter."

Presently he came to the suburbs and there was a small wooden cottage.
The owner, a common laborer, was repairing it as well as he could.
Robinson asked him very timidly if he could spare a couple of square
feet off a board he was sawing. "What for?" Robinson showed his
paintpot and brushes, and told him how he was at a stand-still for
want of a board. "It is only a loan of it I ask," said he.

The man measured the plank carefully, and after some hesitation cut
off a good piece. "I can spare that much," said he; "poor folk should
feel for one another."

"I'll bring it back, you may depend," said Robinson.

"You needn't trouble," replied the laboring man with a droll wink, as
much as to say, "Gammon!"

When Robinson returned to the skeptical shopkeeper with a board on
which oak, satin-wood, walnut, etc., were imitated to the life in
squares, that worthy gave a start and betrayed his admiration, and
Robinson asked him five shillings more than he would if the other had
been more considerate. In short, before evening the door was painted a
splendid imitation of walnut-wood, the shopkeeper was enchanted, and
Robinson had fifteen shillings handed over to him. He ran and got Mr.
Eden's ring out of pawn, and kissed it and put it on; next he
liberated his hat. He slept better this night than the last. "One more
such day and I shall have enough to pay my expenses to Bathurst."

He turned, out early and went into the town. He went into the street
where he had worked last evening, and when he came near this door
there was a knot of persons round it. Robinson joined them. Presently
one of the shop-boys cried out, "Why, here he is; this is the
painter!"

Instantly three or four hands were laid on Robinson. "Come and paint
my door."

"No, come and paint mine!"

"No, mine!"

Tom had never been in such request since he was an itinerant quack.
His sly eye twinkled, and this artist put himself up to auction then
and there. He was knocked down to a tradesman in the same
street--twenty-one shillings the price of this door (mock mahogany).
While he was working commissions poured in and Robinson's price rose,
the demand for him being greater than the supply. The mahogany door
was really a chef-d'oeuvre. He came home triumphant with thirty
shillings in his pocket, he spread them out on the kitchen table and
looked at them with a pride and a thrill of joy money never gave him
before. He had often closed the shutters and furtively spread out
twice as many sovereigns, but they were only his, these shillings were
his own. And they were not only his own but his own by labor. Each
sacred shilling represented so much virtue; for industry is a virtue.
He looked at them with a father's pride.

     How sweet the butter our own hands have churned!--T. T.

He blessed his reverend friend for having taught him an art in a
dunghole where idiots and savages teach crank. He blessed his
reverence's four bones, his favorite imprecation of the benevolent
kind. I conclude the four bones meant the arms and legs. If so it
would have been more to the point had he blessed the fifth--the skull.

Jenny came in and found him gloating over his virtuous shillings. She
stared. He told her what he had been about these two days past, his
difficulties, his success, the admiration his work excited throughout
the capital (he must exaggerate a little or it would not be Tom
Robinson), and the wealth he was amassing.

Jenny was glad to hear this, very glad, but she scolded him well for
pawning his hat. "Why didn't you ask me?" said she; "I would have lent
you a pound or even two, or given them you for any _honest
purpose_." And Jenny pouted and got up a little quarrel.

The next day a gentleman caught Robinson and made him paint two doors
in his fancy villa. Satin-wood this time; and he received three pounds
three shillings, a good dinner, and what Bohemians all adore--Praise.
Now as he returned in the evening a sudden misgiving came to him. "I
have not thought once of Bathurst to-day. I see--all this money-making
is a contrivance to keep me in Sydney. It is absurd my coining paint
at this rate. I see your game, my lad; either I am to fall into bad
company again, or to be split upon and nabbed for that last job.
To-morrow I will be on the road to Bathurst. I can paint there just as
well as here; besides I have got my orders from his reverence to go,
and I'll go."

He told Jane his resolution. She made no answer. While these two were
sitting cozily by the fireside--for since Robinson took to working
hard all day he began to relish the hearth at night--suddenly
cheerful, boisterous voices, and Mr. Miles and two friends burst in
and would have an extempore supper, and nothing else would serve these
libertines but mutton-chops off the gridiron. So they invaded the
kitchen. Out ran Jenny to avoid them--or put on a smarter cap; and
Robinson was to cut the chops and lay a cloth on the dresser and help
cook. While his master went off to the cellar the two rakes who
remained chattered and laughed both pretty loud. They had dined
together and the bottle had not stood still.

"I have heard that voice before," thought Robinson. "It is a very
peculiar voice. Whose voice is that?"

He looked the gentleman full in the face and could hardly suppress a
movement of surprise.

The gentleman by the instinct of the eye caught his, and his attention
was suddenly attracted to Robinson, and from that moment his eye was
never off Robinson, following him everywhere. Robinson affected not to
notice this; the chops were grilling, Jenny came in and bustled about
and pretended not to hear the side-compliments of the libertines.
Presently the young gentleman with the peculiar voice took out his
pocketbook and said, "I have a bet to propose. I'll bet you fifty
pounds I find the man you two hunted down the road on Monday night."

"No takers," replied Mr. Hazeltine with his mouth full.

"Stop a bit. I don't care if I make a time bet," said Miles. "How soon
will you bet you catch him?"

"In half an hour," was the cool reply. And the Honorable George while
making it managed at the same time in a sauntering sort of way to put
himself between Robinson and the door that led out into the garden.
Robinson eyed him in silence and never moved.

"In half a hour. That is a fair bet," said Mr. Miles. "Shall I take
him?"

"Better not; he is a knowing one. He has seen him to earth somewhere
or he would not offer you such a bet."

"Well, I'll bet you five to three," proposed the Honorable George.

"Done!"

"Done!"

Robinson put in a hasty word: "And what is to become of Thimble-rig
Jem, sir?" These words, addressed to Mr. Lascelles, produced a
singular effect. That gentleman gave an immediate shiver, as if a
bullet had passed clean through him and out again, then opened his
eyes and looked first at one door then at the other as if hesitating
which he should go by. Robinson continued, addressing him with marked
respect, "What I mean, sir, is that there is a government reward of
two hundred pounds for Thimble-rig Jem, and the police wouldn't like
to be drawn away from two hundred pounds after a poor fellow like him
you saw on Monday night, one that is only suspected and no reward
offered. Now Jem is a notorious culprit."

"Who is this Jem, my man? What is he?" asked Mr. Lascelles with a
composure that contrasted remarkably with his late emotion.

"A convict escaped from Norfolk Island, sir; an old offender. I fell
in with him once. He has forgotten me I dare say, but I never forget a
man. They say he has grown a mustache and whiskers and passes himself
off for a nob; but I could swear to him."

"How? By what?" cried Mr. Miles.

"If he should ever be fool enough to get in my way--"

"Hang Thimble-rig Jem," cried Hazeltine. "Is it a bet, Lascelles?"

"What?"

"That you nab our one in half an hour?" Mr. Lascelles affected an
aristocratic drawl. "No, I was joking. I couldn't afford to leave the
fire for thirty pounds. Why should I run after the poor dayvil? Find
him yourselves. He never annoyed me. Got a cigar, Miles?"

After their chops, etc., the rakes went off to finish the night
elsewhere.

"There, they are gone at last! Why, Jenny, how pale you look!" said
Robinson, not seeing the color of his own cheek. "What is wrong?"
Jenny answered by sitting down and bursting out crying. Tom sat
opposite her with his eyes on the ground.

"Oh, what I have gone through this day!" cried Jenny. "Oh! oh! oh!
oh!" sobbing convulsively.

What could Tom do but console her? And she found it so agreeable to be
consoled that she prolonged her distress. An impressionable Bohemian
on one side a fireplace, and a sweet, pretty girl crying on the other,
what wonder that two o'clock in the morning found this pair sitting on
the same side of the fire aforesaid--her hand in his?

The next morning at six o'clock Jenny was down to make his breakfast
for him before starting. If she had said, "Don't go," it is to be
feared the temptation would have been too strong, but she did not; she
said sorrowfully, "You are right to leave this town." She never
explained. Tom never heard from her own lips how far her suspicions
went. He was a coward, and seeing how shrewd she was, was afraid to
ask her; and she was one of your natural ladies who can leave a thing
unsaid out of delicacy.

Tom Robinson was what Jenny called "capital company." He had won her
admiration by his conversation, his stories of life, and now and then
a song, and by his good looks and good nature. She disguised her
affection admirably until he was in danger and about to leave her--and
then she betrayed herself. If she was fire he was tow. At last it came
to this: "Don't you cry so, dear girl. I have got a question to put to
you--IF I COME BACK A BETTER MAN THAN I GO, WILL YOU BE MRS.
ROBINSON?"

"Yes."



CHAPTER LI.

ROBINSON started for Bathurst. Just before he got clear of the town he
passed the poor man's cottage who had lent him the board. "Bless me,
how came I to forget him?" said he. At that moment the man came out to
go to work. "Here I am," said Robinson, meeting him full, "and here is
your board;" showing it to him painted in squares. "Can't afford to
give it you back--it is my advertisement. But here is half-a-crown for
it and for your trusting me."

"Well, to be sure," cried the man. "Now who'd have thought this? Why,
if the world is not turning honest. But half-a-crown is too much;
'tain't worth the half of it."

"It was worth five pounds to me. I got employment through it. Look
here," and he showed him several pounds in silver; "all this came from
your board; so take your half-crown and my thanks on the head of it."

The half-crown lay in the man's palm; he looked in Robinson's face.
"Well," cried he with astonishment, "you are the honestest man ever I
fell in with."

"I am the honestest man! You will go to heaven for saying those words
to me," cried Robinson warmly and with agitation. "Good-by, my good,
charitable soul; you deserve ten times what you have got," and
Robinson made off.

The other, as soon as he recovered the shock, shouted after him,
"Good-by, honest man, and good luck wherever you go."

And Robinson heard him scuttle about and hastily convene small boys
and dispatch them down the road to look at an honest man. But the
young wood did not kindle at his enthusiasm. Had the rarity been a
bear with a monkey on him, well and good.

"I'm pretty well paid for a little honesty," thought Robinson. He
stepped gallantly out in high spirits, and thought of Jenny, and fell
in love with her, and saw in her affection yet another inducement to
be honest and industrious. Nothing of note happened on his way to
Bathurst, except that one day as he was tramping along very hot and
thirsty a luscious prickly pear hung over a wall, and many a
respectable man would have taken it without scruple; but Tom was so
afraid of beginning again he turned his back on it and ran on instead
of walking to make sure.

When he reached Bathurst his purse was very low, and he had a good
many more miles to go, and not feeling quite sure of his welcome he
did not care to be penniless, so he went round the town with his
advertising-board and very soon was painting doors in Bathurst. He
found the natives stingier here than in Sydney, and they had a notion
a traveler like him ought to work much cheaper than an established
man; but still he put by something every day.

He had been three days in the town when a man stepped up to him as he
finished a job and asked him to go home with him. The man took him to
a small but rather neat shop, plumber's, glazier's and painter's.

"Why, you don't want me," said Robinson; "we are in the same line of
business."

"Step in," said the man. In a few words he let Robinson know that he
had a great bargain to offer him. "I am going to sell the shop," said
he. "It is a business I never much fancied, and I had rather sell it
to a stranger than to a Bathurst man, for the trade have offended me.
There is not a man in the colony can work like you, and you may make a
little fortune here."

Robinson's eyes sparkled a moment, then he replied, "I am too poor to
buy a business. What do you want for it?"

"Only sixty pounds for the articles in the shop and the good will and
all."

"Well, I dare say it is moderate, but how am I to find sixty pounds?"

"I'll make it as light as a feather. Five pounds down. Five pounds in
a month; after that--ten pounds a month till we are clear. Take
possession and sell the goods and work the good-will on payment of the
first five."

"That is very liberal," said Robinson. "Well, give me till next
Thursday and I'll bring you the first five."

"Oh, I can't do that; I give you the first offer, but into the market
it goes this evening, and no later."

"I'll call this evening and see if I can do it." Robinson tried to
make up the money, but it was not to be done. Then fell a terrible
temptation upon him. Handling George Fielding's letter with his
delicate fingers, he had satisfied himself there was a bank-note in
it. Why not borrow this bank-note? The shop would soon repay it. The
idea rushed over him like a flood. At the same moment he took fright
at it. "Lord, help me!" he ejaculated.

He rushed to a shop, bought two or three sheets of brown paper and a
lot of wafers. With nimble fingers he put the letter in one parcel,
that parcel in another, that in another, and so on till there were a
dozen envelopes between him and the irregular loan. This done he
confided the grand parcel to his landlord.

"Give it me when I start."

He went no more near the little shop till he had made seven pounds;
then he went. The shop and business had been sold just twenty-four
hours. Robinson groaned. "If I had not been so very honest! Never
mind. I must take the bitter with the sweet."

For all that the town became distasteful to him. He bought a cheap
revolver--for there was a talk of bushrangers in the neighborhood--and
started to walk to George Fielding's farm. He reached it in the
evening.

"There is no George Fielding here," was the news. "He left this more
than six months ago."

"Do you know where he is?"

"Not I."

Robinson had to ask everybody he met where George Fielding was gone
to. At last, by good luck, he fell in with George's friend,
McLaughlan, who told him it was twenty-five miles off.

"Twenty-five miles? that must be for to-morrow, then."

McLaughlan told him he knew George Fielding very well. "He is a fine
lad." Then he asked Robinson what was his business. Robinson took down
a very thin light board with ornamented words painted on it.

"That is my business," said he.

At the sight of a real business the worthy Scot offered to take care
of him for the night, and put him on the road to Fielding's next
morning. Next morning Robinson painted his front door as a return for
bed and breakfast. McLaughlan gave him somewhat intricate instructions
for to-morrow's route. Robinson followed them and soon lost his way.
He was set right again, but lost it again; and after a tremendous
day's walk made up his mind he should have to camp in the open air and
without his supper--when he heard a dog baying in the distance. "There
is a house of some kind anyway," thought Robinson, "but where?--I see
none--better make for the dog."

He made straight for the sound, but still he could not see any house.
At last, however, coming over a hill he found a house beneath him, and
on the other side of this house the dog was howling incessantly.
Robinson came down the hill, walked round the house, and there sat the
dog on the steps.

"Well, it is you for howling anyway," said Robinson.

"Anybody at home?" he shouted. No one answered, and the dog howled on.

"Why, the place is deserted, I think. Haven't I seen that dog before?
Why, it is Carlo! Here, Carlo, poor fellow, Carlo, what is the
matter?"

The dog gave a little whimper as Robinson stooped and patted him, but
no sign of positive recognition, but he pattered into the house.
Robinson followed him, and there he found the man he had come to
see--stretched on his bed--pale and hollow-eyed and grisly--and
looking like a corpse in the fading light.

Robinson was awestruck. "Oh! what is this?" said he. "Have I come all
this way to bury him?"

He leaned over and felt his heart; it beat feebly but equably, and he
muttered something unintelligible when Robinson touched him. Then
Robinson struck a light, and right glad he was to find a cauldron full
of gelatinized beef soup. He warmed some and ate a great supper, and
Carlo sat and whimpered, and then wagged his tail and plucked up more
and more spirit, and finally recognized Tom all in a moment somehow
and announced the fact by one great disconnected bark and a saltatory
motion. This done he turned to and also ate a voracious supper.
Robinson rolled himself up in George's great-coat and slept like a top
on the floor. Next morning he was waked by a tapping, and there was
Carlo seated bolt upright with his tail beating the floor because
George was sitting up in the bed looking about him in a puzzled way.

"Jacky," said he, "is that you?"

Robinson got up, rubbed his eyes, and came toward the bed. George
stared in his face and rubbed his eyes, too, for he thought he must be
under an ocular delusion. "Who are you?"

"A friend."

"Well! I didn't think to see you under a roof of mine again."

"Just the welcome I expected," thought Robinson bitterly. He answered
coldly: "Well, as soon as you are well you can turn me out of your
house, but I should say you are not strong enough to do it just now."

"No, I am weak enough, but I am better--I could eat something."

"Oh, you could do that! what! even if I cooked it? Here goes, then."

Tom lit the fire and warmed some beef soup. George ate some, but very
little; however he drank a great jugful of water--then dozed and fell
into a fine perspiration. It was a favorable crisis, and from that
moment youth and a sound constitution began to pull him through;
moreover no assassin had been there with his lancet.

Behold the thief turned nurse! The next day as he pottered about
clearing the room, opening or shutting the windows, cooking and
serving, he noticed George's eye following him everywhere with a
placid wonder which at last broke into words:

"You take a deal of trouble about me."

"I do," was the dry answer.

"It is very good of you, but--"

"You would as lieve it was anybody else; but your other friends have
left you to die like a dog," said Robinson sarcastically. "Well, they
left you when you were sick--I'll leave you when you are well."

"What for? Seems to me that you have earned a right to stay as long as
you are minded. The man that stands by me in trouble I won't bid him
go when the sun shines again."

And at this precise point in his sentence, without the least warning,
Mr. Fielding ignited himself--and inquired with fury whether it came
within Robinson's individual experience that George Fielding was of an
ungrateful turn, or whether such was the general voice of fame. "Now,
don't you get in a rage and burst your boiler," said Robinson. "Well,
George--without joking, though--I have been kind to you. Not for
nursing you--what Christian would not do that for his countryman and
his old landlord sick in a desert?--but what would you think of me if
I told you I had come a hundred and sixty miles to bring you a letter?
I wouldn't show it you before, for they say exciting them is bad for
fever, but I think I may venture now; here it is." And Robinson tore
off one by one the twelve envelopes, to George's astonishment and
curiosity. "There."

"I don't know the hand," said George. But opening the inclosure he
caught a glance of a hand he did know, and let everything else drop on
the bed, while he held this and gazed at it, and the color flushed
into his white cheek. "Oh!" cried he, and worshipped it in silence
again; then opened it and devoured it. First came some precious words
of affection and encouragement. He kissed the letter. "You are a good
fellow to bring me such a treasure; and I'll never forget it as long
as I live!"

Then he went back to the letter. "There is something about you, Tom!"

"About me?"

"She tells me you never had a father, not to say a father--"

"She says true."

"Susan says that is a great disadvantage to any man, and so it
is--and--poor fellow--"

"What?"

"She says they came between your sweetheart and you--Oh! poor Tom!"

"What?"

"You lost your sweetheart; no wonder you went astray after that. What
would become of me if I lost my Susan? And--ay, you were always
better than me, Susan. She says she and I have never been sore tempted
like you."

"Bless her little heart for making excuses for a poor fellow; but she
was always a charitable, kind-hearted young lady."

"Wasn't she, Tom?"

"And what sweet eyes!"

"Ain't they, Tom? brimful of heaven I call them."

"And when she used to smile on you, Master George, oh! the ivories."

"Now you take my hand this minute. How foolish I am. I can't see--now
you shall read it on to me because you brought it."

"'And you, George, that are as honest a man as ever lived, do keep him
by you a while, and keep him in the right way. He is well-disposed but
weak--do it to oblige me.'"

"Will you stay with me, Tom?" inquired George, cheerful and
business-like. "I am not a lucky man, but while I have a shilling
there's sixpence for the man that brought me this--dew in the desert I
call it. And to think you have seen her since I have; how was she
looking; had she her beautiful color; what did she say to you with her
own mouth?"

Then Robinson had to recall every word Susan had said to him; this
done, George took the inclosure. "Stop, here is something for you:
'George Fielding is requested to give this to Robinson for the use of
Thomas Sinclair.' There you are, Tom--well!--what is the matter?"

"Nothing. It is a name I have not heard a while. I did not know any
creature but me knew it; is it glamour, or what?"

"Why, Tom! what is the matter? don't look like that. Open it, and let
us see what there is inside."

Robinson opened it, and there was the five-pound note for him, with
this line: "If you have regained the name of Sinclair, keep it."

Robinson ran out of the house, and walked to and fro in a state of
exaltation. "I'm well paid for my journey; I'm well paid for not
fingering that note! Who would not be honest if they knew the sweets?
How could he know my name? is he really more than man? Keep it? Will I
not!"



CHAPTER LII.

THE old attachment was revived. Robinson had always a great regard for
George, and after nursing and bringing him through a dangerous illness
this feeling doubled. And as for George, the man who had brought him a
letter from Susan one hundred and sixty miles became such a benefactor
in his eyes that he thought nothing good enough for him.

In a very few days George was about again and on his pony, and he and
Robinson and Carlo went a shepherding. One or two bullocks had gone to
Jericho while George lay ill, and the poor fellow's heart was sore
when he looked at his diminished substance and lost time. Robinson
threw himself heart and soul into the business, and was of great
service to George; but after a bit he found it a dull life.

George saw this, and said to him: "You would do better in a town. I
should he sorry to lose you, but if you take my advice you will turn
your back on unlucky George, and try the paint-brush in Bathurst."

For Robinson had told him all about it--and painted his front door.
"Can't afford to part from Honesty," was the firm reply.

George breathed again. Robinson was a great comfort to the weak,
solitary, and now desponding man. One day for a change they had a
thirty-mile walk, to see a farmer that had some beasts to sell a great
bargain; he was going to boil them down if he could not find a
customer. They found them all just sold. "Just my luck," said George.

They came home another way. Returning home, George was silent and
depressed.

Robinson was silent, but appeared to be swelling with some grand idea.
Every now and then he shot ahead under its influence. When they got
home and were seated at supper, he suddenly put this question to
George, "Did you ever hear of any gold being found in these parts?"

"No! never!"

"What, not in any part of the country?"

"No! never!"

"Well, that is odd!"

"I am afraid it is a very bad country for that."

"Ay to make it in, but not to find it in."

"What do you mean?"

"George," said the other, lowering his voice mysteriously, "in our
walk to-day we passed places that brought my heart into my mouth; for
if this was only California those places would be pockets of gold."

"But you see it is not California, but Australia, where all the world
knows there is nothing of what your mind is running on."

"Don't say 'knows,' say 'thinks.' Has it ever been searched for gold?"

"I'll be bound it has; or, if not, with so many eyes constantly
looking on every foot of soil a speck or two would have come to
light."

"One would think so; but it is astonishing how blind folks are, till
they are taught how to look, and where to look. 'Tis the mind that
sees things, George, not the eye."

"Ah!" said George with a sigh, "this chat puts me in mind of 'The
Grove.' Do you mind how you used to pester everybody to go out to
California?"

"Yes! and I wish we were there now."

"And all your talk used to be gold--gold--gold."

"As well say it as think it."

"That is true. Well, we shall be very busy all day to-morrow, but in
the afternoon dig for gold an hour or two--then you will be
satisfied."

"But it is no use digging here; it was full five-and-twenty miles from
here the likely-looking place."

"Then why didn't you stop me at the place?"

"Why?" replied Robinson, sourly, "because his reverence did so snub me
whenever I got upon that favorite topic, that I really had got out of
the habit. I was ashamed to say, 'George, let us stop on the road and
try for gold with our finger-nails.' I knew I should only get laughed
at."

"Well," said George sarcastically, "since the gold mine is twenty-five
miles off, and our work is round about the door, suppose we pen sheep
to-morrow--and dig for gold when there is nothing better to be done."

Robinson sighed. Unbucolical to the last degree was the spirit in
which our Bohemian tended the flocks next morning.

His thoughts were deeper than the soil. And every evening up came the
old topic. Oh! how sick George got of it. At last one night he said:
"My lad, I should like to tell you a story--but I suppose I shall make
a bungle of it; shan't cut the furrow clean I am doubtful."

"Never mind; try!"

"Well, then. Once upon a time there was an old chap that had heard or
read about treasures being found in odd places, a pot full of guineas
or something; and it took root in his heart till nothing would serve
him but he must find a pot of guineas, too; he used to poke about all
the old ruins. grubbing away, and would have taken up the floor of the
church, but the churchwardens would not have it. One morning he comes
down and says to his wife, 'It is all right, old woman, I've found the
treasure.'

"'No! have you, though?' says she.

"'Yes!' says he; 'leastways, it is as good as found; it is only
waiting till I've had my breakfast, and then I'll go out and fetch it
in.'

"'La, John, but how did you find it?'

"'It was revealed to me in a dream,' says he, as grave as a judge.

"'And where is it?' asks the old woman.

"'Under a tree in our own orchard--no farther,' says he.

"'Oh, John! how long you are at breakfast to-day!' Up they both got
and into the orchard. 'Now, which tree is it under?'

"John, he scratches his head, 'Blest if I know.'

"'Why, you old ninny,' says the mistress, 'didn't you take the trouble
to notice?'

"'That I did,' said he; 'I saw plain enough which tree it was in my
dream, but now they muddle it all, there are so many of 'em.'

"'Drat your stupid old head,' says she, 'why didn't you put a nick on
the right one at the time?'"

Robinson burst out laughing. George chuckled. "Oh!" said he, "there
were a pair of them for wisdom, you may take your oath of that.
'Well,' says he, 'I must dig till I find the right one.' The wife she
loses heart at this; for there was eighty apple-trees, and a score of
cherry-trees. 'Mind you don't cut the roots,' says she, and she heaves
a sigh. John he gives them bad language, root and branch. 'What
signifies cut or no cut; the old faggots--they don't bear me a bushel
of fruit the whole lot. They used to bear two sacks apiece in father's
time. Drat 'em.'

"'Well, John,' says the old woman, smoothing him down; 'father used to
give them a deal of attention.'--' 'Tain't that! 'tain't that!' says
he quick and spiteful-like; 'they have got old like ourselves, and
good for fire-wood.' Out pickax and spade and digs three foot deep
round one, and finding nothing but mould goes at another, makes a
little mound all round him, too--no guinea-pot. Well, the village let
him dig three or four quiet enough; but after that curiosity was
awakened, and while John was digging, and that was all day, there was
mostly seven or eight watching through the fence and passing jests.
After a bit a fashion came up of flinging a stone or two at John; then
John he brought out his gun loaded with dust-shot along with his pick
and spade, and the first stone came he fired sharp in that direction
and then loaded again. So they took that hint, and John dug on in
peace--till about the fourth Sunday--and then the parson had a slap at
him in church. 'Folks were not to heap up to themselves treasures on
earth,' was all his discourse."

"Well, but," said Robinson, "this one was only heaping up mould."

"So it seemed when he had dug the five-score holes, for no pot of gold
didn't come to light. Then the neighbors called the orchard 'Jacobs'
Folly;' his name was Jacobs--John Jacobs. 'Now then, wife,' says he,
'suppose you and I look out for another village to live in, for their
gibes are more than I can bear.' Old woman begins to cry. 'Been here
so long--brought me home here, John--when we were first married,
John--and I was a comely lass, and you the smartest young man I ever
saw, to my fancy any way; couldn't sleep or eat my victuals in any
house but this.'

"'Oh! couldn't ye? Well, then, we must stay; perhaps it will blow
over.' -- 'Like everything else, John; but, dear John, do ye fill in
those holes; the young folk come far and wide on Sundays to see them.'

"'Wife, I haven't the heart,' says he. 'You see, when I was digging for
the treasure I was always a-going to find, it kept my heart up; but
take out shovel and fill them in--I'd as lieve dine off white of egg
on a Sunday.' So for six blessed months the heaps were out in the heat
and frost till the end of February, and then when the weather broke
the old man takes heart and fills them in, and the village soon forgot
'Jacobs' Folly' because it was out of sight. Comes April, and out
burst the trees. 'Wife,' says he, 'our bloom is richer than I have
known it this many a year, it is richer than our neighbors'.' Bloom
dies, and then out come about a million little green things quite
hard."

"Ay! ay!" said Robinson; "I see."

"Michaelmas-day the old trees were staggering and the branches down to
the ground with the crop; thirty shillings on every tree one with
another; and so on for the next year, and the next; sometimes more,
sometimes less, according to the year. Trees were old and wanted a
change. His letting in the air to them, and turning the subsoil up to
the frost and sun, had renewed their youth. So by that he learned that
tillage is the way to get treasure from the earth. Men are ungrateful
at times, but the soil is never ungrateful, it always makes a return
for the pains we give it."

"Well, George," said Robinson, "thank you for your story; it is a very
good one, and after it I'll never dig for gold in a garden. But now
suppose a bare rock or an old river's bed, or a mass of shingles or
pipe-clay, would you dig or manure them for crops?"

"Why, of course not."

"Well, those are the sort of places in which nature has planted a
yellower crop and a richer crop than tillage ever produced. And I
believe there are plums of gold not thirty miles from here in such
spots waiting only to be dug out."

"Well, Tom, I have wasted a parable, that is all. Good-night; I hope
to sleep and be ready for a good day's work to-morrow. You shall dream
of digging up gold here--if you like."

"I'll never speak of it again," said Robinson doggedly.

If you want to make a man a bad companion, interdict altogether the
topic that happens to interest him. Robinson ceased to vent his
chimera. So it swelled and swelled in his heart, and he became silent,
absorbed, absent and out of spirits. "Ah!" thought George, "poor
fellow, he is very dull. He won't stay beside me much longer."

This conviction was so strong that he hesitated to close with an
advantageous offer that came to him from his friend, Mr. Winchester.
That gentleman had taken a lease of a fine run some thirty miles from
George. He had written George that he was to go and look at it, and if
he liked it better than his own he was to take it. Mr. Winchester
could make no considerable use of either for some time to come.

George hesitated. He felt himself so weak-handed with only Robinson,
who might leave him, and a shepherd lad he had just hired. However his
hands were unexpectedly strengthened.

One day as the two friends were washing a sheep an armed savage
suddenly stood before them. Robinson dropped the sheep and stood on
his defense, but George cried out, "No! no! it is Jacky! Why, Jacky,
where on earth have you been?" And he came warmly toward him. Jacky
fled to a small eminence and made warlike preparations. "You stop you
a good while and I speak. Who you?"

"Who am I? stupid. Why, who should I be but George Fielding?"

"I see you one George Fielding, but I not know you dis George
Fielding. George die. I see him die. You alive. You please you call
dog Carlo! Carlo wise dog."

"Well, I never! Hie, Carlo! Carlo!"

Up came Carlo full pelt. George patted him, and Carlo wagged his tail
and pranced about in the shape of a reaping-hook. Jacky came instantly
down, showed his ivories, and admitted his friend's existence on the
word of the dog. "Jacky a good deal glad because you not dead now.
When black fellow die he never live any more. Black fellow stupid
fellow. I tink I like white fellow a good deal bigger than black
fellow. Now I stay with you a good while."

George's hands thus strengthened he wrote and told Mr. Winchester he
would go to the new ground, which, as far as he could remember, was
very good, and would inspect it, and probably make the exchange with
thanks. It was arranged that in two days' time the three friends
should go together, inspect the new ground and build a temporary hut
there.

Meantime Robinson and Jacky make great friends. Robinson showed him
one or two sleight-of-hand tricks that stamped him at once a superior
being in Jacky's eyes, and Jacky showed Robinson a thing or two He
threw his boomerang and made it travel a couple of hundred yards, and
return and hover over his head like a bird and settle at his feet; but
he was shy of throwing his spear. "Keep spear for when um angry, not
throw him straight now.

"Don't you believe that, Tom," said George. "Fact is the little
varmint can't hit anything with 'em. Now look at that piece of bark
leaning against that tree. You don't hit it. Come, try, Jacky." Jacky
yawned and threw a spear carelessly. It went close by but did not hit
it.

"Didn't I tell you so?" said George. "I'd stand before him and his
spears all day with nothing but a cricket-stump in my hand, and never
be hit, and never brag, neither." Jacky showed his ivories. "When I
down at Sydney white man put up a little wood and a bit of white money
for Jacky. Then Jacky throw straight a good deal."

"Now hark to that! black skin or white skin 'tis all the same; we
can't do our best till we are paid for it. Don't you encourage him,
Tom, I won't have it."

The two started early one fine morning for the new ground, distant
full thirty miles. At first starting Robinson was in high glee; his
nature delighted in change; but George was sad and silent. Three times
he had changed his ground and always for the better. But to what end.
These starts in early morning for fresh places used once to make him
buoyant, but not now. All that was over. He persisted doggedly, and
did his best like a man, but in his secret heart not one grain of hope
was left. Indeed it was but the other day he had written to Susan and
told her it was not possible he could make a thousand pounds. The
difficulties were too many, and then his losses had been too great.
And he told her he felt it was scarcely fair to keep her to her
promise. "You would waste all your youth, Susan, dear, waiting for
me." And he told her how he loved her and never should love another;
but left her free.

To add to his troubles he was scarcely well of the fever when he
caught a touch of rheumatism; and the stalwart young fellow limped
along by Robinson's side, and instead of his distancing Jacky as he
used in better days, Jacky rattled on ahead and having got on the
trail of an opossum announced his intention of hunting it down and
then following the human trail. "Me catch you before the sun go, and
bring opossum--then we eat a good deal." And off glided Jacky after
his opossum.

The pair plodded and limped on in gloomy silence, for at a part of the
road where they emerged from green meadows on rocks and broken ground
Robinson's tongue had suddenly ceased.

They plodded on, one sad and stiff, the other thoughtful. Any one
meeting the pair would have pitied them. Ill-success was stamped on
them. Their features were so good, their fortunes so unkind. Their
clothes were sadly worn, their beards neglected, their looks
thoughtful and sad. The convert to honesty stole more than one look at
the noble figure that limped beside him and the handsome face in which
gentle, uncomplaining sorrow seemed to be a tenant for life; and to
the credit of our nature be it said that his eyes filled and his heart
yearned. "Oh, Honesty!" said he, "you are ill-paid here. I have been
well paid for my little bit of you, but here is a life of honesty and
a life of ill-luck and bitter disappointment. Poor George! poor, dear
George! Leave you? never while I have hands to work and a brain to
devise!"

They now began slowly to mount a gentle slope that ended in a long
black snakelike hill. "When we get to that hill we shall see my new
pasture," said George. "New or old, I doubt 'twill be all the same."

And he sighed and relapsed into silence. Meantime Jacky had killed his
opossum and was now following their trail at an easy trot.

Leaving the two sad ones with worn clothes and heavy hearts plodding
slowly and stiffly up the long rough slope, our story runs on before
and gains the rocky platform they are making for and looks both
ways--back toward the sad ones and forward over a grand, long,
sweeping valley. This pasture is rich in proportion as it recedes from
this huge backbone of rock that comes from the stony mountains and
pierces and divides the meadows as a cape the sea. In the foreground
the grass suffers from its stern neighbor, is cut up here and there by
the channels of defunct torrents, and dotted with fragments of rock,
some of which seem to have pierced the bosom of the soil from below,
others have been detached at different epochs from the parent rock and
rolled into the valley. But these wounds are only discovered on
inspection; at a general glance from the rocky road into the dale the
prospect is large, rich and laughing; fairer pastures are to be found
in that favored land, but this sparkles at you like an emerald roughly
set, and where the backbone of rock gives a sudden twist bursts out
all at once broad smiling in your face--a land flowing with milk and
every bush a thousand nosegays. At the angle above-mentioned, which
commanded a double view, a man was standing watching some object or
objects not visible to his three companions; they were working some
yards lower down by the side of a rivulet that brawled and bounded
down the hill. Every now and then an inquiry was shouted up to that
individual, who was evidently a sort of scout or sentinel. At last one
of the men in the ravine came up and bade the scout go down.

"I'll soon tell you whether we shall have to knock off work." And he
turned the corner and disappeared.

He shaded both his eyes with his hands, for the sun was glaring. About
a mile off he saw two men coming slowly up by a zig-zag path toward
the very point where he stood. Presently the men stopped and examined
the prospect, each in his own way. The taller one took a wide survey
of the low ground, and calling his companion to him appeared to point
out to him some beauty or peculiarity of the region. Our scout stepped
back and called down to his companions, "Shepherds!"

He then strolled back to his post with no particular anxiety. Arrived
there his uneasiness seemed to revive. The shorter of the two
strangers had lagged behind his comrade, and the watcher observed,
that he was carrying on a close and earnest inspection of the ground
in detail.

He peered into the hollows and loitered in every ravine. This gave
singular offense to the keen eye that was now upon him. Presently he
was seen to stop and call his taller companion to him, and point with
great earnestness first to something at their feet, then to the
backbone of rocks; and it so happened by mere accident that his finger
took nearly the direction of the very spot where the observer of all
his movements stood. The man started back out of sight and called in a
low voice to his comrades,

"Come here."

They came straggling up with troubled and lowering faces. "Lie down
and watch them," said the leader. The men stooped and crawled forward
to some stunted bushes, behind which they lay down and watched in
silence the unconscious pair who were now about two furlongs distant.
The shorter of the two still loitered behind his companion, and
inspected the ground with particular interest. The leader of the band,
who went by the name of Black Will, muttered a curse upon his
inquisitiveness. The others assented all but one, a huge fellow whom
the others addressed as Jem. "Nonsense," said Jem, "dozens pass this
way and are none the wiser."

"Ay," replied Black Will, "with their noses in the air. But that is a
notice-taking fellow. Look at him with his eyes forever on the rocks,
or in the gullies, or--there if he is not picking up a stone and
breaking it!"

"Ha! ha!" laughed Jem incredulously, "how many thousand have picked up
stones and broke them and all, and never known what we know."

"He has been in the same oven as we," retorted the other.

Here one of the others put in his word. "That is not likely, captain;
but if it is so there are no two ways. A secret is no secret if all
the world is to know it."

"You remember our oath, Jem," said the leader sternly.

"Why should I forget it more than another?" replied the other angrily.

"Have you all your knives?" asked the captain gloomily. The men nodded
assent.

"Cross them with me as we did when we took our oath first."

The men stretched out each a brawny arm, and a long sharp knife, so
that all the points came together in a focus; and this action suited
well with their fierce and animal features, their long neglected
beards, their matted hair and their gleaming eyes. It looked the
prologue to some deed of blood. This done, at another word from their
ruffianly leader they turned away from the angle in the rock and
plunged hastily down the ravine; but they had scarcely taken thirty
steps when they suddenly disappeared.

In the neighborhood of the small stream I have mentioned was a cavern
of irregular shape that served these men for a habitation and place of
concealment. Nature had not done all. The stone was soft, and the
natural cavity had been enlarged and made a comfortable retreat enough
for the hardy men whose home it was. A few feet from the mouth of the
cave on one side grew a stout bush that added to the shelter and the
concealment, and on the other the men themselves had placed two or
three huge stones, which, from the attitude the rogues had given them,
appeared, like many others, to have rolled thither years ago from the
rock above.

In this retreat the whole band were now silently couched, two of them
in the mouth of the cave, Black Will and another lying flat on their
stomachs watching the angle of the road for the two men who must pass
that way, and listening for every sound. Black Will was carefully and
quietly sharpening his knife on one of the stones and casting back
every now and then a meaning glance to his companions. The pertinacity
with which he held to his idea began to tell on them, and they sat in
an attitude of sullen and terrible suspicion. But Jem wore a look of
contemptuous incredulity. However small a society may be, if it is a
human one jealousy shall creep in. Jem grudged Black Will his
captaincy. Jem was intellectually a bit of a brute. He was a stronger
man than Will, and therefore thought it hard that merely because Will
was a keener spirit, Will should be over him. Half an hour passed
thus, and the two travelers did not make their appearance.

"Not even coming this way at all," said Jem.

"Hush!" replied Will sternly, "hold your tongue. They must come this
way, and they can't be far off. Jem, you can crawl out and see where
they are, if you are clever enough to keep that great body out of
sight."

Jem resented this doubt cast upon his adroitness, and crawled out
among the bushes. He had scarcely got twenty yards when he halted and
made a signal that the men were in sight. Soon afterward he came back
with less precaution. "They are sitting eating their dinner close by,
just on the sunny side of the rock--shepherds, as I told you--got a
dog. Go yourself if you don't believe me."

The leader went to the spot, and soon after returned and said quietly,
"Pals, I dare say he is right. Lie still till they have had their
dinner; they are going farther, no doubt."

Soon after this he gave a hasty signal of silence, for George and
Robinson at that moment came round the corner of the rock and stood on
the road not fifty yards above them. Here they paused as the valley
burst on their view, and George pointed out its qualities to his
comrade. "It is not first-rate, Tom, but there is good grass in
patches, and plenty of water."

Robinson, instead of replying or giving his mind to the prospect said
to George, "Why, where is he?"

"Who?"

"The man that I saw standing at this corner a while ago. He came round
this way I'll be sworn."

"He is gone away, I suppose. I never saw any one, for my part."

"I did, though. Gone away? How could he go away? The road is in sight
for miles, and not a creature on it. He is vanished."

"I don't see him anyway, Tom."

"Of course you don't, he is vanished into the bowels of the earth. I
don't like gentlemen that vanish into the bowels of the earth."

"How suspicious you are! Bushrangers again, I suppose. They are always
running in your mind--them and gold."

"You know the country, George. Here, take my stick." And he handed
George a long stick with a heavy iron ferule. "If a man is safe here
he owes it to himself, not to his neighbor."

"Then why do you give me your weapon?" said George with a smile.

"I haven't," was the reply. "I carry my sting out of sight, like a
humble bee." And Mr. Robinson winked mysteriously, and the process
seemed to relieve his mind and soothe his suspicions. He then fell to
inspecting the rocks; and when George pointed out to him the broad and
distant pasture he said, in an absent way, "Yes;" and turning round
George found him with his eyes glued to the ground at his feet, and
his mind in a deep reverie. George was vexed, and said somewhat
warmly, "Why, Tom, the place is worth looking at now we are come to
it, surely."

Robinson made no direct reply. "George," said he thoughtfully, "how
far have you got toward your thousand pounds?"

"Oh, Tom! don't ask me, don't remind me! How can I ever make it? No
market within a thousand miles of any place in this confounded
country! Forced to boil down sheep into tallow and sell them for the
price of a wild duck! I have left my Susan, and I have lost her. Oh,
why did you remind me?"

"So much for the farming lay. Don't you be down-hearted, there's
better cards in the pack than the five of spades; and the farther I go
and the more I see of this country the surer I am. There is a good day
coming for you and me. Listen, George. When I shut my eyes for a
moment now where I stand, and then open them--I'm in California."

"Dreaming?"

"No, wide awake--wider than you are now. George, look at these hills;
you could not tell them from the golden range of California.. But that
is not all; when you look into them you find they are made of the same
stuff, too--granite, mica and quartz. Now don't you be cross."

"No! no! why should I? Show me," said George, trying out of
kindheartedness to take an interest in this subject, which had so
often wearied him.

"Well, here are two of them. That great dark bit out there is mica,
and all this that runs in a vein like is quartz. Quartz and mica are
the natural home of gold; and some gold is to be found at home still,
but the main of it has been washed out and scattered like seed all
over the neighboring clays. You see, George, the world is a thousand
times older than most folks think, and water has been working upon
gold thousands and thousands of years before ever a man stood upon the
earth, ay or a dog either, Carlo, for as wise as you look squatting
out there thinking of nothing and pretending to be thinking of
everything."

"Well, drop gold," said George, "and tell me what this is," and he
handed Robinson a small fossil.

Robinson eyed it with wonder and interest. "Where on earth did you
find this?"

"Hard by; what is it?"

"Plenty of these in California. What is it? Why, I'll tell you; it is
a pale old Joey."

"You don't say so; looks like a shell."

"Sit down a moment, George, and let us look at it. He bids me drop
gold--and then goes and shows me a proof of gold that never deceived
us out there."

"You are mad. How can this be a sign of gold? I tell you it is a
shell."

"And I tell you that where these things are found among mica, quartz
and granite, there gold is to be found if men have the wit, the
patience and the skill to look for it. I can't tell you why; the laws
of gold puzzle deeper heads than mine, but so it is. I seem to smell
gold all round me here." And Robinson flushed all over, so powerfully
did the great idea of gold seated here on his native throne grapple
and agitate his mind.

"Tom," said the other doggedly, "if there is as much gold on the
ground of New South Wales as will make me a wedding-ring--I am a
Dutchman;" and he got up calmly and jerked the pale old Joey a
tremendous way into the valley.

This action put Robinson's blood up. "George," cried he, springing up
like fire and bringing his foot down sharp upon the rocky floor, "IF I
DON'T STAND UPON GOLD--I'M D----D!"

And a wild but true inspiration seemed to be upon the man; a stranger
could hardly have helped believing him, but George had heard a good
deal of this, though the mania had never gone quite so far. He said
quickly, "Come, let us go down into the pasture."

"Not I," replied Robinson. "Come, George, prejudice is for babies,
experience for men. Here is an unknown country with all the signs of
gold thicker than ever. I have got a calabash--stay and try for gold
in this gully; it looks to me just like the mouth of a purse."

"Not I."

"I will, then."

"Why not? I don't think you will find anything in it, but anyway you
will have a better chance when I am not by to spoil you. Luck is all
against me. If I want rain, comes drought; if I want sun, look for a
deluge, if there is money to be made by a thing I'm out of it; to be
lost, I'm in it; if I loved a vixen she'd drop into my arms like a
medlar; I love an angel and that is why I shall never have her, never.
From a game of marbles to the game of life I never had a grain of luck
like other people. Leave me, Tom, and try if you can find gold; you
will have a chance, my poor fellow, if unlucky George is not aside
you."

"Leave you, George! not if I know it."

"You are to blame if you don't. Turn your back on me as I did on you
in England."

"Never! I'd rather not find gold than part with honesty. There, I'm
coming--let us go--quick--come, let us leave here." And the two men
left the road and turned their faces and their steps across the
ravine.

During all this dialogue the men in the cave had strained both eyes
and ears to comprehend the speakers. The distance was too great for
them to catch all the words, but this much was clear from the first,
that one of the men wished to stay on the spot for some purpose, and
the other to go on; but presently, as the speakers warmed, a word
traveled down the breeze that made the four ruffians start and turn
red with surprise, and the next moment darken with anger and
apprehension. The word came again and again; they all heard it--its
open vowel gave it a sonorous ring; it seemed to fly farther than any
other word the speaker uttered, or perhaps when he came to it he spoke
it louder than smaller words, or the hearers' ears were watching for
it.

The men interchanged terrible looks, and then they grasped their
knives and watched their leader's eye for some deadly signal. Again
and again the word "g-o-l-d" came like an Aeolian note into the secret
cave, and each time eye sought eye and read the unlucky speaker's
death-warrant there. But when George prevailed and the two men started
for the valley, the men in the cave cast uncertain looks on one
another, and he we have called Jem drew a long breath and said
brutally, yet with something of satisfaction, "You have saved your
bacon this time." The voices now drew near and the men crouched close,
for George and Robinson passed within fifteen yards of them. They were
talking now about matters connected with George's business, for
Robinson made a violent effort and dropped his favorite theme to
oblige his comrade. They passed near the cave, and presently their
backs were turned to it.

"Good-by, my lads," whispered Jem. "And curse you for making us lose a
good half hour," muttered another of the gang. The words were scarce
out of his mouth before a sudden rustle was heard and there was Carlo.
He had pulled up in mid career and stood transfixed with astonishment,
literally pointing the gang; it was but for a moment--he did not like
the looks of the men at all; he gave a sharp bark that made George and
Robinson turn quickly round, and then he went on hunting.

"A kangaroo!" shouted Robinson, "it must have got up near that bush;
come and look--if it is we will hunt it down."

George turned back with him, but on reflection he said, "No! Tom, we
have a long road to go, let us keep on, if you please;" and they once
more turned their backs to the cave, whistled Carlo, and stepped
briskly out toward the valley. A few yards before them was the brook I
have already noticed--it was about three yards broad at this spot.
However, Robinson, who was determined not to make George lose any more
time, took the lead and giving himself the benefit of a run, cleared
it like a buck. But as he was in the air his eye caught some object on
this side the brook, and making a little circle on the other side, he
came back with ludicrous precipitancy, and jumping short, landed with
one foot on shore and one in the stream. George burst out laughing.

"Do you see this?" cried Robinson.

"Yes; somebody has been digging a hole here," said George very coolly.

"Come higher up," cried Robinson, all in a flutter--"do you see this?"

"Yes; it is another hole."

"'It is. Do you see this wet, too?"

"I see there has been some water spilled by the brook side."

"What kind of work has been done here? have they been digging
potatoes, farmer?"

"Don't be foolish, Tom."

"Is it any kind of work you know? Here is another trench dug."

"No! it is nothing in my way, that is the truth."

"But it is work the signs of which I know as well as you know a plowed
field from a turnpike-road."

"Why, what is it then?"

"It is gold washing."

"You don't say so, Tom."

"This is gold washing as beginners practice it in California and
Mexico and Peru, and wherever gold-dust is found. They have been
working with a pan, they haven't got such a thing as a cradle in this
country. Come lower down; this was yesterday's work, let us find
to-day's."

The two men now ran down the stream busy as dogs hunting an otter. A
little lower down they found both banks of the stream pitted with
holes about two feet deep and the sides drenched with water from it.

"Well, if it is so, you need not look so pale; why, dear me, how pale
you are, Tom!"

"You would be pale," gasped Tom, "if you could see what a day this is
for you and me, ay! and for all the world, old England especially.
George, in a month there will be five thousand men working round this
little spot. Ay! come," cried he, shouting wildly at the top of his
voice, "there is plenty for all. GOLD! GOLD! GOLD! I have found it. I,
Tom Robinson, I've found it, and I grudge it to no man. I, a thief
that was, make a present of it to its rightful owner, and that is all
the world. Here GOLD! GOLD! GOLD!"

Though George hardly understood his companion's words, he was carried
away by the torrent of his enthusiasm, and even as Robinson spoke his
cheeks in turn flushed and his eyes flashed, and he grasped his
friend's hands warmly, and cried, "GOLD! GOLD! blessings on it if it
takes me to Susan; GOLD! GOLD!"

The poor fellows' triumph and friendly exultation lasted but a moment;
the words were scarce out of Robinson's mouth when to his surprise
George started from him, turned very pale, but at the same time lifted
his iron-shod stick high in the air and clinched his teeth with
desperate resolution. Four men with shaggy beards and wild faces and
murderous eyes were literally upon them, each with a long glittering
knife raised in the air.

At that fearful moment George learned the value of a friend that had
seen adventure and crime; rapid and fierce and unexpected as the
attack was, Robinson was not caught off his guard. His hand went like
lightning into his bosom, and the assailants, in the very act of
striking, were met in the face by the long glistening barrels of a
rifle revolver, while the cool, wicked eye behind it showed them
nothing was to be hoped in that quarter from flurry, or haste, or
indecision.

The two men nearest the revolver started back, the other two neither
recoiled nor advanced, but merely hung fire. George made a movement to
throw himself upon them; but Robinson seized him fiercely by the
arm--he said steadily but sternly, "Keep cool, young man--no running
among their knives while they are four. Strike across me and I shall
guard you till we have thinned."

"Will you?" said Black Will, "here, pals!" The four assailants came
together like a fan for a moment and took a whisper from their leader.
They then spread out like a fan and began to encircle their
antagonists, so as to attack on both sides at once.

"Back to the water, George," cried Robinson quickly, "to the broad
part here." Robinson calculated that the stream would protect his
rear, and that safe he was content to wait and profit by the slightest
error of his numerous assailants; this, however, was to a certain
degree a miscalculation, for the huge ruffian we have called Jem
sprang boldly across the stream higher up and prepared to attack the
men behind, the moment they should be engaged with his comrades. The
others no sooner saw him in position than they rushed desperately upon
George and Robinson in the form of a crescent, and as they came on Jem
came flying knife in hand to plunge it into Robinson's back. As the
front assailants neared them, true to his promise, Robinson fired
across George, and the outside man received a bullet in his
shoulder-blade, and turning round like a top fell upon his knees.
Unluckily George wasted a blow at this man which sung idly over him,
he dropping his head and losing his knife and his powers at the very
moment. By this means Robinson, the moment he had fired his pistol,
had no less than three assailants; one of these George struck behind
the neck so furiously with a back-handed stroke of his iron-shod stick
that he fell senseless at Robinson's feet. The other, met in front by
the revolver, recoiled, but kept Robinson at bay while Jem sprang on
him from the rear. This attack was the most dangerous of all; in fact,
neither Robinson nor George had time to defend themselves against him
even if they had seen him, which they did not. Now as Jem was in the
very act of making his spring from the other side of the brook, a
spear glanced like a streak of light past the principal combatants and
pierced Jem through and through the fleshy part of the thigh, and
there stood Jacky at forty yards' distance, with the hand still raised
from which the spear had flown, and his emu-like eye glittering with
the light of battle.

Jem, instead of bounding clear over the stream, fell heavily into the
middle of it and lay writhing and floundering at George's mercy, who
turning in alarm at the sound stood over him with his long deadly
staff whirling and swinging round his head in the air, while Robinson
placed one foot firmly on the stunned man's right arm and threatened
the leader Black Will with his pistol, and at the same moment with a
wild and piercing yell Jacky came down in leaps like a kangaroo, his
tomahawk flourished over his head, his features entirely changed, and
the thirst of blood written upon every inch of him. Black Will was
preparing to run away and leave his wounded companions, but at sight
of the fleet savage he stood still and roared out for mercy. "Quarter!
quarter!" cried Black Will.

"Down on your knees!" cried Robinson in a terrible voice.

The man fell on his knees, and in that posture Jacky would certainly
have knocked out his brains but that Robinson pointed the pistol at
his head and forbade him; and Carlo, who had arrived hastily at the
sound of battle, in great excitement but not with clear ideas, seeing
Jacky, whom he always looked on as a wild animal, opposed in some way
to Robinson, seized him directly by the leg from behind and held him
howling in a vise. "Hold your cursed noise, all of you," roared
Robinson. "D'ye ask quarter?"

"Quarter!" cried Black Will.

"Quarter!" gurgled Jem.

"Quarter!" echoed more faintly the wounded man. The other was
insensible.

"Then throw me your knives."

The men hesitated.

"Throw me them this instant, or--"

They threw down their knives.

"George, take them and tie them up in your wipe." George took the
knives and tied them up.

"Now pull that big brute out of the water or he'll drown himself."
George and Jacky pulled Jem out of the water with the spear sticking
in him; the water was discolored with his blood.

"Pull the spear out of him!" George pulled and Jem roared with pain,
but the spear-head would not come back through the wound; then Jacky
came up and broke the light shaft off close to the skin, and grasping
the head drew the remainder through the wound forward, and grinned
with a sense of superior wisdom.

By this time the man whom George had felled sat up on his beam ends
winking and blinking and confused, like a great owl at sunrise.

Then Robinson, who had never lost his presence of mind, and had now
recovered his sang-froid, made all four captives sit around together
on the ground in one little lot, "While I show you the error of your
ways," said he. "I could forgive a rascal but I hate a fool. You
thought to keep such a secret as this all to yourselves--you
dunces--the very birds in the air would carry it; it never was kept
secret in any land and never will. And you would spill blood sooner
than your betters should know it--ye ninny-cumpoops! What the worse
are you for our knowing it? If a thousand knew it to-day would that
lower the price of gold a penny an ounce? No! All the harm they could
do you would be this, that some of them would show you where it lies
thickest, and then you'd profit by it. You had better tie that leg of
yours up; you have lost blood enough I should say by the look of you;
haven't you got a wipe? here, take mine--you deserve it, don't you? No
man's luck hurts his neighbor at this work; how clever you were, you
have just pitched on the unlikeliest place in the whole gulley, and
you wanted to kill the man that would have taught you which are the
likelier ones. I shall find ten times as much gold before the sun sets
as you will find in a week by the side of that stream; why, it hasn't
been running above a thousand years or two, I should say, by the look
of it; you have got plenty to learn, you bloody-minded greenhorns! Now
I'll tell you what it is," continued Robinson, getting angry about it,
"since you are for keeping dark what little you know, I'll keep you
dark; and in ten minutes my pal here and the very nigger shall know
more about gold-finding than you know, so be off, for I'm going to
work. Come, march!"

"Where are we to go, mate?" said the leader sullenly.

"Do you see that ridge about three miles west? well, if we catch you
on this side of it we will hang you like wild cats. On the other side
of it do what you like, and try all you know; but this gully belongs
to us now; you wanted to take something from us that did not belong to
you--our blood--so now we take something from you that didn't belong
to us a minute or two ago. Come, mizzle, and no more words, or--" and
he pointed the tail of his discourse with his revolver.

The men rose, and with sullen, rueful, downcast looks moved off in the
direction of the boundary; but one remained behind, the man was Jem.

"Well!"

"Captain, I wish you would let me join in with you!"

"What for?"

"Well, captain, you've lent me your wipe, and I think a deal of it,
for it's what I did not deserve; but that is not all. You are the best
man, and I like to be under the best man if I must be under anybody."

Robinson hesitated a moment. "Come here," said he. The man came and
fronted him. "Look me in the face! now give me your hand--quick, no
thinking about how." The man gave him his hand readily. Robinson
looked into his eyes. "What is your name?"

"Jem."

"Jem, we take you on trial."

Jem's late companions, who perfectly comprehended what was passing,
turned and hooted the deserter; Jem, whose ideas of repartee were
primitive, turned and hooted them in reply.

While the men were retreating Robinson walked thoughtfully with his
hands behind him, backward and forward, like a great admiral on his
quarter deck--enemy to leeward. Every eye was upon him and watched him
in respectful, inquiring silence. "Knowledge is power;" this was the
man now, the rest children.

"What tools have you?"

"There is a spade and trowel in that bush, captain."

"Fetch them, George. Hadn't you a pan?"

"No, captain; we used a calabash. He will find it lower down."

George, after a little search, found all these objects, and brought
them back. "Now," cried Robinson, "these greenhorns have been washing
in a stream that runs now, but perhaps in the days of Noah was not a
river at all; but you look at the old bed of a stream down out there.
That was a much stronger stream than this in its day, and it ran for
more than a hundred thousand years before it dried up."

"How can you tell that?" said George, resuming some of his
incredulity.

"Look at those monstrous stones in it here, there and everywhere. It
has been a powerful stream to carry such masses with it as that, and
it has been running many thousand years, for see how deep it has eaten
into its rocky sides here and there. That was a river, my lads, and
washed gold down for hundreds of thousands of years before ever Adam
stood on the earth."

The men gave a hurrah, and George and Jacky prepared to run and find
the treasure. "Stop," cried Robinson, "you are not at the gold yet.
Can you tell in what parts of the channel it lies thick and where
there isn't enough to pay the labor of washing it? Well, I can--look
at that bend where the round pebbles are collected so; there was a
strong eddy there. Well, under the ridge of that eddy is ten times as
much gold lying as in the level parts. Stop a bit again. Do you know
how deep or how shallow it lies--do you think you can find it by the
eye? Do you know what clays it sinks through, as if they were a sieve,
and what stops it like an iron door? Your quickest way is to take
Captain Robinson's time--and that is now."

He snatched the spade, and giving full vent to the ardor he had so
long suppressed with difficulty, plunged down a little declivity that
led to the ancient stream, and drove his spade into its shingle, the
debris of centuries of centuries. George sprang after him, his eyes
gleaming with hope and agitation; the black followed in wonder and
excitement, and the wounded Jem limped last, and, unable through
weakness to work, seated himself with glowing eyes upon that ancient
river's bank.

"Away with all this gravel and shingle--these are all newcomers--the
real bed of the stream is below all this, and we must go down to
that."

Trowel and spade and tomahawk went furiously to work, and soon cleared
away the gravel from a surface of three or four feet.

Beneath this they found a bed of gray clay.

"Let us wash that, captain," said Jem eagerly.

"No! Jem," was the reply; "that is the way novices waste their time.
This gray clay is porous, too porous to hold gold--we must go deeper."

Tomahawk, spade and trowel went furiously to work again.

"Give me the spade," said George, and he dug and shoveled out with
herculean strength and amazing ardor; his rheumatism was gone and
nerves came back from that very hour. "Here is a white clay."

"Let me see it. Pipe-clay! go no deeper, George; if you were to dig a
hundred feet you would not find an ounce of gold below that."

George rested on his spade. "What are we to do, then? try somewhere
else?"

"Not till we have tried here first."

"But you say there is nothing below this pipe-clay."

"No more there is."

"Well, then."

"But I don't say there is nothing above it!!!"

"Well, but there is nothing much above it except the gray, without
'tis this small streak of brownish clay; but that is not an inch
thick."

"George! in that inch lies all the gold we are likely to find; if it
is not there we have only to go elsewhere. Now while I get water you
stick your spade in and cut the brown clay away from the white it lies
on. Don't leave a spot of the brown sticking to the white--the lower
part of the brown clay is the likeliest."

A shower having fallen the day before, Robinson found water in a hole
not far distant. He filled his calabash and returned; meantime George
and Jacky had got together nearly a barrowful of the brown or rather
chocolate-colored clay, mixed slightly with the upper and lower
strata, the gray and white.

"I want yon calabash and George's as well." Robinson filled George's
calabash two-thirds full of the stuff, and pouring some water upon it,
said good-naturedly to Jem, "There--you may do the first washing, if
you like."

"Thank you, captain," said Jem, who proceeded instantly to stir and
dissolve the clay and pour it carefully away as it dissolved. Jacky
was sent for more water, and this, when used as described, had left
the clay reduced to about one-sixth of its original bulk.

"Now, captain," cried Jem in great excitement.

"No, it's not now, captain, yet," said Robinson; "is that the way you
do pan-washing?"

He then took the calabash from Jem, and gave him Jacky's calabash
two-thirds full of clay to treat like the other, and this being done
he emptied the dry remains of one calabash into the other, and gave
Jem a third lot to treat likewise. This done, you will observe he had
in one calabash the results of three first washings. But now he
trusted Jem no longer. He took the calabash and said, "You look faint,
you are not fit to work; besides you have not got the right twist of
the hand yet, my lad. Pour for me, George." Robinson stirred and began
to dissolve the three remainders, and every now and then with an
artful turn of the hand he sent a portion of the muddy liquid out of
the vessel. At the end of this washing there remained scarce more than
a good handful of clay at the bottom. More water was poured on this.
"Now," said Robinson, "we shall know this time, and if you see but one
spot of yellow among it, we are all gentlemen and men of fortune."

He dissolved the clay, and twisted and turned the vessel with great
dexterity, and presently the whole of the clay was liquefied.

"Now," said Robinson, "all your eyes upon it, and if I spill anything
I ought to keep--you tell me." He said this conceitedly but with
evident agitation. He was now pouring away the dirty water with the
utmost care, so that anything, however small, that might be heavier
than clay should remain behind. Presently he paused and drew a long
breath. He feared to decide so great a question. It was but for a
moment; he began again to pour the dirty water away very slowly and
carefully. Every eye was diving into the vessel. There was a dead
silence!

Robinson poured with great care. There was now little more than a
wine-glassful left.

DEAD SILENCE!

Suddenly a tremendous cry broke from all these silent figures at the
same instant. A cry! it was a yell. I don't know what to compare it
to. But imagine that a score of wolves had hunted a horse for two
centuries up and down, round and round, sometimes losing a yard,
sometimes gaining one on him, and at last, after a thousand
disappointments and fierce alternations of hope and despair, the horse
had suddenly stumbled and the wild gluttons had pounced on him at
last. Such a fierce yell of triumph burst from four human bosoms now.

"Hurrah! we are the greatest men above ground. If a hundred emperors
and kings died to-day, their places could be filled to-morrow; but the
world could not do without us and our find. We are gentlemen--we are
noblemen--we are whatever we like to be. Hurrah!" cried Robinson.

"Hurrah!" cried George, "I see my Susan's eyes in you, you beauty."

"Hurrah!" whined Jem feebly, "let me see how much there is," and
clutching the calabash he fainted at that moment from loss of blood
and fell forward insensible, his face in the vessel that held the
gold, and his hands grasping it so tight that great force had to be
used to separate them.

They lifted Jem and set him up again, and sprinkled water in his face.
The man's thick lip was cut by the side of the vessel, and more than
one drop of blood had trickled down its sides and mingled with the
gold-dust.

No comment was made on this at the time. They were so busy.

"There, he's coming to, and we've no time to waste in nursing the
sick. Work!" and they sprang up on to the work again.

It was not what you have seen pass for work in Europe, it was men
working themselves for once as they make horses work forever. Work? It
was battle; it was humanity fighting and struggling with Nature for
her prime treasure--(so esteemed). How they dug and scraped, and
fought tooth, and spade, and nail, and trowel, and tomahawk for gold!
Their shirts were wet through with sweat, yet they felt no fatigue.
Their trousers were sheets of clay, yet they suffered no sense of
dirt. The wounded man recovered a portion of his strength, and,
thirsting for gold, brought feeble hands but indomitable ardor to the
great cause. They dug, they scraped, they bowed their backs, and
wrought with fury and inspiration unparalleled; and when the sun began
to decline behind the hills these four human mutes felt injured. They
lifted their eyes a moment from the ground, and cast a fretful look at
the great, tranquil luminary.

"Are you really going to set this afternoon the same as usual, when we
need your services so?"

Would you know why that wolfish yell of triumph? Would you see what
sight so electrified those gloating eyes and panting bosoms? Would you
realize that discovery, which in six months peopled that barren spot
with thousands of men from all the civilized tribes upon earth, and in
a few years must and will make despised Australia a queen among the
nations--nations who must and will come with the best thing they
have, wealth, talent, cunning, song, pencil, pen, tongue, arm, and lay
them all at her feet for this one thing?

Would you behold this great discovery the same in appearance and
magnitude as it met the eyes of the first discoverers, picked with a
knife from the bottom of a calabash, separated at last by human art
and gravity's great law from the meaner dust it had lurked in for a
million years--Then turn your eyes hither, for here it is:

[Knife handle drawing



CHAPTER LIII.

MR. MEADOWS dispatched his work in Shropshire twice as fast as he had
calculated, and returned home with two forces battling inside
him--love and prudence. The battle was decided for him.

William Fielding's honest but awkward interference had raised in Susan
Merton a desire to separate her sentiments from his by showing Mr.
Meadows a marked respect. She heard of his arrival and instantly sent
her father to welcome him home. Old Merton embraced the commission,
for he happened to need Meadows's advice and assistance. The
speculations into which he had been led by Mr. Clinton, after some
fluctuations, wore a gloomy look, "which could only be temporary,"
said that gentleman. Still a great loss would be incurred by selling
out of them at a period of depression, and Mr. Clinton advised him to
borrow a thousand pounds and hold on till things brightened.

Mr. Meadows smiled grimly as the fly came and buzzed all this in his
web: "Dear! dear! what a pity my money is locked up! Go to Lawyer
Crawley. Use my name. He won't refuse my friend, for I could do him an
ill turn if I chose."

"I will. You are a true friend. You will look in and see us, of
course, market-day?"

"Why not?"

Meadows did not resume his visits at Grassmere without some twinges of
conscience and a prudent resolve not to anchor his happiness upon
Susan Merton. "That man might come here any day with his thousand
pounds and take her from me," said he. "He seems by his letters to be
doing well, and they say any fool can make money in the colonies.
Well, if he comes home respectable and well to do--I'll go out. If I
am not to have the only woman I ever loved or cared for, let thousands
and thousands of miles of sea lie between me and that pair." But still
he wheeled about the flame.

Ere long matters took a very different turn. The tone of George's
letters began to change. His repeated losses of bullocks and sheep
were all recorded in his letters to Susan, and these letters were all
read with eager anxiety by Meadows a day before they reached
Grassmere.

The respectable man did not commit this action without some iron
passing through his own soul--_Nemo repente turpissimus._ The first
letter he opened it was like picking a lock. He writhed and blushed,
and his uncertain fingers fumbled with another's property as if it had
been red-hot. The next cost him some shame, too, but the next less,
and soon these little spasms of conscience began to be lost in the
pleasure the letters gave him. "It is clear he will never make a
thousand pounds out there, and if he doesn't the old farmer won't give
him Susan. Won't? He shan't! He shall be too deep in my debt to
venture on it even if he was minded." Meadows exulted over the
letters; and as he exulted they stabbed him, for by the side of the
records of his ill fortune the exile never failed to pour out his love
and confidence in his Susan and to acknowledge the receipt of some
dear letter from her, which Meadows could see by George's must have
assured him of undiminished or even increased affection.

Thus did sin lead to sin. By breaking a seal which was not his and
reading letters which were not his, Meadows filled himself with the
warmest hopes of possessing Susan one day, and got to hate George for
the stabs the young man innocently gave him. At last he actually
looked on George as a sort of dog in the manger, who could not make
Susan happy, yet would come between her heart and one who could. All
weapons seemed lawful against such a mere pest as this--a dog in the
manger.

Meadows started with nothing better nor worse than a commonplace
conscience. A vicious habit is an iron that soon sears that sort of
article. When he had opened and read about four letters, his moral
nature turned stone-blind of one eye. And now he was happier (on the
surface) than he had been ever since he fell in love with Susan.

Sure now that one day or another she must be his, he waited patiently,
enjoyed her society twice a week, got everybody into his power, and
bided his time. And one frightful thing in all this was that his love
for Susan was not only a strong but in itself a good love. I mean it
was a love founded on esteem; it was a passionate love, and yet a
profound and tender affection. It was the love which, under different
circumstances, has often weaned men, ay, and women, too, from a
frivolous, selfish, and sometimes from a vicious life. This love
Meadows thought and hoped would hallow the unlawful means by which he
must crown it. In fact, he was mixing vice and virtue. The snow was to
whiten the pitch, not the pitch blacken the snow. Thousands had tried
this before him and will try it after him. Oh, that I could persuade
them to mix fire and gunpowder instead! Men would bless me for this
when all else I have written has been long, long forgotten.

He felt good all over when he sat with Susan and thought how his means
would enable that angel to satisfy her charitable nature, and win the
prayers of the poor as well as the admiration of the wealthy. "If ever
a woman was cherished she shall be! If ever a woman was happy she
shall be!" And as for him, if he had done wrong to win her, he would
more than compensate it afterward. In short, he had been for more than
twenty years selling, buying, swapping, driving every conceivable
earthly bargain--so now he was proposing one to Heaven.

At last came a letter in which George told Susan of the fatal murrain
among his sheep, of his fever that had followed immediately, of the
further losses while he lay ill, and concluded by saying that he had
no right to tie her to his misfortunes, and that he felt it would be
more manly to set her free.

When he read this, Meadows' exultation broke all bounds. "Ah ha!"
cried he, "is it come to that at last? Well, he is a fine fellow after
all, and looks at it the sensible way, and if I can do him a good turn
in business I always will."

The next day he called at Grassmere. Susan met him all smiles and was
more cheerful than usual. The watchful man was delighted. "Come, she
does not take it to heart." He did not guess that Susan had cried for
hours and hours over the letter, and then had sat quietly down and
written a letter and begged George to come home and not add separation
to their other misfortunes; and that it was this decision, and having
acted upon it, that had made her cheerful. Meadows argued in his own
favor, and now made sure to win. The next week he called three times
at Grassmere instead of twice, and asked himself how much longer he
must wait before he should speak out. Prudence said, "A little more
patience;" and so he still hid in his bosom the flame that burned him
the deeper for this unnatural smothering. But he drank deep, silent
draughts of love, and reveled in the bright future of his passion. It
was no longer hope, it was certainty. Susan liked him; her eye
brightened at his coming; her father was in his power. There was
nothing between them but the distant shadow of a rival; sooner or
later she must be his. So passed three calm, delicious weeks away.



CHAPTER LIV.

MEADOWS sat one day in his study receiving Crawley's report.

"Old Mr. Merton came yesterday. I made difficulties as instructed. Is
to come to-morrow."

"He shall have the eight hundred."

"That makes two thousand four hundred; why, his whole stock won't
cover it."

"No!"

"Don't understand it, it is too deep for me. What is the old gentleman
doing?"

"Hunting Will-o'-the-wisp. Throwing it away in speculations that are
colored bright for him by a man that wants to ruin him."

"Aha!" cackled Crawley.

"And do him no harm."

"Augh! How far is it to the bottom of the sea, sir, if you please? I'm
sure you know? Mr. Levi and you."

"Crawley," said Meadows, suddenly turning the conversation, "the world
calls me close-fisted, have you found me so?"

"Liberal as running water, sir. I sometimes say how long will this
last before such a great man breaks Peter Crawley and flings him away
and takes another?" and Crawley sighed.

"Then your game is to make yourself necessary to me."

"I wish I could," said Peter, with mock candor. "Sir," he crept on,
"if the most ardent zeal, if punctuality, secrecy, and unscrupulous
fidelity--"

"Hold your gammon! Are we writing a book together! Answer me this in
English. How far dare you go along with me?"

"As far as your purse extends: only--"

"Only what? Only your thermometer is going down already, I suppose."

"No, sir; but what I mean is, I shouldn't like to do anything too
bad."

"What d'ye mean by too bad?"

"Punishable by law."

"It is not your conscience you fear, then?" asked the other gloomily.

"Oh, dear, no, sir, only the law."

"I envy you. There is but one crime punishable by law, and that I
shall never counsel you to."

"Only one--too deep, sir, too deep. Which is that?"

"The crime of getting found out."

"What a great man! how far would I go with you? To the end of the
earth. I have but one regret, sir."

"And what is that?"

"That I am not thought worthy of your confidence. That after so many
years I am still only a too--I mean an honored instrument, and not a
humble friend."

"Crawley," said Meadows, solemnly, "let well alone. Don't ask my
confidence, for I am often tempted to give it you, and that would be
all one as if I put the blade of a razor in your naked hand."

"I don't care, sir! You are up to some game as deep as a coal-pit; and
I go on working and working all in the dark. I'd give anything to be
in your confidence."

"Anything is nothing; put it in figures," sneered Meadows,
incredulously.

"I'll give twenty per cent off all you give me if you will let me see
the bottom."

"The bottom?"

"The reason, sir--the motive!--the why!--the wherefore--the what it is
all to end in. The bottom!"

"Why not say you would like to read John Meadows' heart?"

"Don't be angry, sir; it is presumption, but I can't help it. Deduct
twenty per cent for so great a honor."

"Why, the fool is in earnest."

"He is; we have all got our little vanity, and like to be thought
worthy of confidence."

"Humph!"

"And then I can't sleep for puzzling. Why should you stop every letter
that comes here from Australia. Oh, bless me, how neglectful I am;
here is a letter from there, just come. To think of me bringing it,
and then forgetting."

"Give it me, directly."

"There it is. And then, why on earth are we ruining old Mr. Merton
without benefiting you? and you seem so friendly with him; and indeed,
you say he is not to be harmed--only ruined; it makes my head ache.
Why, what is the matter, Mr. Meadows, sir? What is wrong? No ill news,
I hope. I wish I'd never brought the letter."

"That will do, Crawley," said Meadows, faintly, "you may go."

Crawley rose with a puzzled air.

"Come here to-morrow evening at nine o'clock, and you shall have your
wish. All the worse for you," added he, moodily. "All the worse for
me. Now go, without one word."

Crawley retired dumfounded. He saw the iron man had received some
strange, unexpected and terrible blow; but for a moment awe suppressed
curiosity, and he went off on tiptoe, saying almost in a whisper,
"To-morrow night at nine, sir."

Meadows spread George's letter on the table and leaned on his two
hands over it.

The letter was written some weeks after the last desponding one. It
was full of modest, but warm and buoyant exultation. Heaven had been
very good to Susan and him. Robinson had discovered gold; gold in such
abundance and quality as beat even California. The thousand pounds, so
late despaired of, was now a certainty. Six months' work, with average
good fortune, would do it. Robinson said five thousand apiece was the
least they ought to bring home; but how could he (George) wait so long
as that would take! "And, Susan, dear, if anything could make this
wonderful luck sweeter, it is to think that I owe it to you and to
your goodness. It was you that gave Tom the letter, and bade me be
kind to him, and keep him by me for his good; he has repaid me by
making us two man and wife, please God. See what a web life is! Tom
and I often talk of this. But Tom says it is Parson Eden I have to
thank for it, and the lessons he learned in the prison; but I tell him
if he goes so far back as that, he should go farther, and thank Farmer
Meadows, for he it was that sent Tom to the prison, where he was
converted, and became as honest a fellow as any in the world, and a
friend to your George as true as steel."

The letter concluded as it began, with thanks to Heaven, and bidding
Susan expect his happy return in six months after this letter. In
short, the letter was one "Hurrah!" tempered with simple piety and
love.

Meadows turned cold as death in reading it. At the part where Farmer
Meadows was referred to as the first link in the golden chain, he
dashed it to the ground and raised his foot to trample on it, but
forbore lest he should dirty a thing that must go to Susan.

Then he walked the room in great agitation.

"Too late, George Fielding," he cried aloud--"too late; I can't shift
my heart like a weathercock to suit the changes in your luck. You have
been feeding me with hopes till I can't live without them. I never
longed for a thing yet but what I got it, and I'll have this though I
trample a hundred George Fieldings dead on my way to it. Now let me
think."

He pondered deeply, his great brows knitted and lowered. For full half
an hour invention and resource poured scheme after scheme through that
teeming brain, and prudence and knowledge of the world sat in severe
and cool judgment on each in turn, and dismissed the visionary ones.
At last the deep brow began to relax, and the eye to kindle; and when
he rose to ring the bell his face was a sign-post with Eureka written
on it in Nature's vivid handwriting. In that hour he had hatched a
plot worthy of Machiavel---a plot complex yet clear. A servant-girl
answered the bell.

"Tell David to saddle Rachel directly."

And in five minutes Mr. Meadows, with a shirt, a razor, a comb, and a
map of Australia, was galloping by cross lanes to the nearest railway
station. There he telegraphed Mr. Clinton to meet him at Peel's
Coffee-House at two o'clock. The message flashed up to town like
lightning. The man followed it slowly like the wind.



CHAPTER LV.

MEADOWS found Mr. Clinton at Peel's. "Mr. Clinton, I want a man of
intelligence to be at my service for twenty-four hours. I give you the
first offer."

Mr. Clinton replied that really he had so many irons in the fire that
twenty-four hours--

Meadows put a fifty-pound note on the table.

"Will all your irons iron you out fifty pounds as flat as that?"

"Why, hem?"

"No, nor five. Come, sir, sharp is the word. Can you be my servant for
twenty-four hours for fifty pounds? yes or no!"

"Why, this is dramatic--yes!"

"It is half-past two. Between this and four o'clock I must buy a few
hundred acres in Australia, a fair bargain."

"Humph! Well, that can be done. I know an old fellow that has land in
every part of the globe."

"Take me to him."

In ten minutes they were in one of those dingy, narrow alleys in the
city of London, that look the abode of decent poverty, and they could
afford to buy Grosvenor Square for their stables; and Mr. Clinton
introduced his friend to a blear-eyed merchant in a large room papered
with maps; the windows were incrusted; mustard and cress might have
been grown from them. Beauty in clean linen collar and wristbands
would have shown here with intolerable luster; but the blear-eyed
merchant did not come out bright by contrast; he had taken the local
color. You could see him and that was all. He was like a partridge in
a furrow. A snuff-colored man; coat rusty all but the collar, and that
greasy; poor as its color was, his linen had thought it worth
emulating; blackish nails, cotton wipe, little bald place on head, but
didn't shine for the same reason the windows didn't. Mr. Clinton
approached this "dhirrrty money," this rusty coin, in the spirit of
flunkyish.

"Sir," said he, in a low reverential tone, "this party is disposed to
purchase a few hundred acres in the colonies."

Mr. Rich looked up from his desk and pointed with a sweep of his pen
to the walls.

"There are the maps; the red crosses are my land. They are numbered.
Refer to the margin of map, and you will find the acres and the
latitude and longitude calculated to a fraction. When you have settled
in what part of the world you buy, come to me again; time is gold."

And the blear-eyed merchant wrote and sealed and filed and took no
notice of his customers. They found red crosses in several of the
United States, in Canada, in Borneo, in nearly all the colonies, and
as luck would have it they found one small cross within thirty miles
of Bathurst, and the margin described it as five hundred acres. Mr.
Meadows stepped toward the desk.

"I have found a small property near Bathurst."

"Bathurst? where is that?"

"In Australia."

"Suit?"

"If the price suits. What is the price, sir?"

"The books must tell us that."

Mr. Rich stretched out his arm and seized a ledger, and gave it
Meadows.

"I have but one price for land, and that is five per cent profit on my
outlay. Book will tell you what it stands me in, you can add five per
cent to that, and take the land away or leave it."

With this curt explanation, Mr. Rich resumed his work.

"It seems you gave five shillings an acre, sir," said Mr. Clinton.
"Five times five hundred shillings, one hundred and twenty-five
pounds. Interest at five per cent, six pounds five."

"When did I buy it?" asked Mr. Rich.

"Oh, when did you buy it, sir?"

Mr. Rich snatched the book a little pettishly, and gave it to Meadows.

"You make the calculation," said he; "the figures are all there. Come
to me when you have made it."

The land had been bought twenty-seven years and some months ago. Mr.
Meadows made the calculation in a turn of the hand and announced it.
Rich rang a hand bell. Another snuffy figure with a stoop and a bald
head and a pen came through a curtain.

"Jones, verify that calculation."

"Penny, halfpenny, twopence, penny, halfpenny, twopence. Mum, mum!
Halfpenny wrong, sir."

"There is a halfpenny wrong!" cried Mr. Rich to Meadows, with a most
injured air.

"There is, sir," said Meadows, "but it is on the right side for you. I
thought I would make it even money against myself."

"There are only two ways, wrong and right," was the reply. "Jones,
make it right. There, that is the price for the next half hour; after
business hours to-day add a day's interest; and, Jones--if he does not
buy, write your calculation into the book with date--save time, next
customer comes for it."

"You need not trouble, Mr. Jones," said Meadows. "I take the land.
Here is two hundred and fifty pounds--that is rather more than half
the purchase-money.

"Jones--count."

"When can I have the deeds?"

"Ten, to-morrow."

"Receipt for two hundred and fifty pounds," said Meadows, falling into
the other's key.

"Jones, write receipt--two five naught."

"Write me an agreement to sell," proposed Meadows.

"No, you write it; I'll sign it. Jones, enter transaction in the
books. Have you anything to do, young gentleman?" addressing Clinton.

"No, sir."

"Then draw this pen through the two crosses on the map and margin.
Good morning, gentlemen."

And the money-making machine rose and dismissed them, as he had
received them, with a short, sharp business _conge'._

Ye fair, who turn a shop head over heels, maul sixty yards of ribbon
and buy six, which being sent home insatiable becomes your desire to
change it for other six which you had fairly, closely, and with all
the powers of your mind compared with it during the seventy minutes
the purchase occupied, let me respectfully inform you that the above
business took just eight minutes, and that "when it was done, 'twas
done." (Shakespeare.)

"You have given too much, my friend," said Mr. Clinton.

"Come to my inn," was all the reply. "This is the easy part, the game
is behind."

After dinner. "Now," said Meadows, "business. Do you know any
respectable firm disposed toward speculation in mines?"

"Plenty."

"Any that are looking toward gold?"

"Why, no. Gold is a metal that ranks very low in speculation. Stop!
yes, I know one tip-top house that has gone a little way in it, but
they have burned their fingers, so they will go no farther."

"You are wrong; they will be eager to go on--first to recover the loss
on that article of account, and next to show their enemies, and in
particular such of them as are their friends, that they didn't
blunder. You will go to them to-morrow and ask if they can allow you a
commission for bringing them an Australian settler on whose land gold
has been found."

"Now, my good sir," began Mr. Clinton, a little superciliously, "that
is not the way to gain the ear of such a firm as that. The better way
will be for you to show me your whole design and leave me to devise
the best means for carrying it into effect."

Up to this moment Meadows had treated Mr. Clinton with a marked
deference, as from yeoman to gentleman. The latter, therefore, was not
a little surprised when the other turned sharp on him thus:

"This won't do; we must understand one another. You think you are the
man of talent and I am the clodhopper. Think so to-morrow night; but
for the next twenty-four hours you must keep that notion out of your
head or you will bitch my schemes and lose your fifty pounds. Look
here, sir. You began life with ten thousand pounds; you have been all
your life trying all you know to double it--and where is it? The
pounds are pence and the pence on the road to farthings. I started
with a whip and a smock-frock, and this," touching his head, "and I
have fifty thousand pounds in government securities. Which is the able
man of these two--the bankrupt that talks like an angel and loses the
game, or the wise man that quietly wins it and pockets what all the
earth are grappling with him for? So much for that. And now which is
master, the one who pays or the one who is paid? I am not a liberal
man, sir; I am a man that looks at every penny. I don't give fifty
pounds. I sell it. That fifty pounds is the price of your vanity for
twenty-four hours. I take a day's loan of it. You are paid fifty
pounds per diem to see that there is more brains in my little finger
than in all your carcass. See it for twenty-four hours or I won't fork
out, or don't see it but obey me as if you did see it. You shan't
utter a syllable or move an inch that I have not set down for you. Is
this too hard? then accept ten pounds for to-day's work, and let us
part before you bungle your master's game as you have done your own."

Mr. Clinton was red with mortified vanity, but forty pounds! He threw
himself back in his chair.

"This is amusing," said he. "Well, sir, I will act as if you were
Solomon and I nobody. Of course under these circumstances no
responsibility rests with me."

"You are wasting my time with your silly prattle," said Meadows, very
sternly. "Man alive! you never made fifty pounds cash since you were
calved. It comes to your hand to-day, and even then you must chatter
and jaw instead of saying yes and closing your fingers on it like a
vise."

"Yes!" shouted Clinton; "there."

"Take that quire," said Meadows, sharply. "Now I'll dictate the very
words you are to say; learn them off by heart and don't add a syllable
or subtract one or--no fifty pounds."

Meadows being a general by nature (not Horse-Guards) gave Clinton
instructions down to the minutest matters of detail, and he whose life
had been spent in proving he would succeed--and failing--began to
suspect the man who had always succeeded might perhaps have had
something to do with his success.

Next morning, well primed by Meadows, Mr. Clinton presented himself to
Messrs. Brathwaite & Stevens and requested a private audience. He
inquired whether they were disposed to allow him a commission if he
would introduce them to an Australian settler on whose land gold had
been discovered.

The two members of the firm looked at one another. After a pause one
of them said:

"Commission really must depend on how such a thing turned out. They
had little confidence in such statements, but would see the settler
and put some questions to him."

Clinton went out and introduced Meadows. This happened just as Meadows
had told him it would. Outside the door Mr. Meadows suddenly put on a
rustic carriage and so came in and imitated natural shyness with great
skill; he had to be twice asked to sit down.

The firm cross-examined him. He told them gold had been discovered
within a stone's throw of his land, thirty miles from Bathurst; that
his friends out there had said go home to England and they will give
you a heavy price for your land now; that he did hope to get a heavy
price, and so be able to live at home--didn't want to go out there
again; that the land was worth money--for there was no more to be sold
in that part; government land all round and they wouldn't sell, for he
had tried them (his sharp eye had seen this fact marked on Mr. Rich's
map).

"Well," said the senior partner, "we have information that gold has
been discovered in that district; the report came here two days ago by
the _Anne Amelia._ But the account is not distinct as yet. We do
not hear on whose land it is found if at all. I presume you have not
seen gold found."

"Could I afford to leave my business out there and come home--on a
speculation?"

The eyes of the firm began to glitter.

"Have you got any gold to show us?"

"Nothing to speak of, sir; only what they chucked me for giving them a
good dinner. But they are shoveling it about like grains of wheat, I
assure you."

The firm became impatient.

"Show us what they gave you as the price of a dinner?"

Meadows dug into a deep pocket, and chased into a corner, and caught,
and produced a little nugget of quartz and gold worth about four
pounds, also another of somewhat less value.

"They don't look handsome, gents," said he, "but you may see the stuff
glitter here and there; and here is some of the dust. I had to buy
this; gave them fifty shillings an ounce for it. I wish I had bought a
hundred-weight, for they tell me it is worth three pound ten here."

"May we inspect these specimens?"

"Why not, sir? I'll trust it with you. I wouldn't with everybody,
though."

The partners retired with the gold, tested it with muriatic acid,
weighed it, and after a short, excited interview one of them brought
it back and asked with great nonchalance the price of the land.

Meadows hung his head.

"Twenty thousand pounds."

"Twenty thousand pounds!" and the partner laughed in his face.

"I don't wonder you are surprised, sir. I wonder at myself asking so
much. Why, before this, if you had offered me five thousand, I would
have jumped into your arms, as the saying is; but they all say I ought
to have twenty thousand, and they have talked to me till they make me
greedy."

The partner retired and consulted, and the firm ended by offering ten
thousand.

"I am right down ashamed to say no," was the answer, "but I suppose I
must not take it."

The firm undertook to prove it was a magnificent offer. Meadows
offered no resistance, he thought so too; but he must not take it,
everybody told him it was worth more. At last, when his hand was on
the door, they offered him twelve thousand five hundred.

He begged to consider it.

No! they were peremptory. If he was off, they were off.

He looked this way and that way with a frightened air.

"What shall I do, sir?" said he, helplessly, to Clinton, and nudged
him secretly.

"Take it, and think yourself very lucky," said that gentleman,
exchanging a glance with the firm.

"Well, then, if you say so, I will. You shall have it, gentlemen, five
hundred acres in two lots--400 and 100."

Clinton, acting on his secret instructions, now sought a private
interview with the firm.

"I am to have a commission, gentlemen?"

"Yes! fifty pounds; but, really, we can hardly afford it."

"Well, then, as you give me an interest in it, I say--pin him."

"Why?"

"Don't you see he is one of those soft fellows who listen to
everybody. If he goes away, and they laugh at him for not getting more
for it, I really could hardly answer for his ever coming back here."

The firm came in cheerfully.

"Well, Mr. ---- Mr."

"Not Mr., sir. Crawley--plain John Crawley."

"We will terminate this affair with you. We will have a contract of
sale drawn up and make you an advance. When can you give us the title
deeds?"

"In a couple of hours, if the lawyer is at home."

"By the by, you will not object to draw upon us at three months for
one half of the money?"

"No, sir. I should say by the look of you you were as good as the
bank."

"The other half by check in two hours." The parties signed the
contract respectively.

Then Meadows and Clinton went off to the Five-per-Center, completed
with him, got the title deeds, brought them, received check and
accepted draft. Clinton, by Meadows' advice, went in and dunned for
his commission then and there, and got it, and the confederates went
off and took a hasty dinner together. After dinner they settled.

"As you showed me how to get this commission out of them, it belongs
to you," said Clinton, sorrowfully.

"It does, sir. Give it to me. I return it to you, sir; do me the favor
to accept it."

"You are very generous, Mr. Meadows."

"And here is the other fifty you have earned."

"Thank you, my good sir. Are you satisfied with the day's work?"

"Amply, sir. Your skill and ingenuity brought us through triumphant,"
said Meadows, resuming the deferential, since he risked nothing by it
now.

"Well, I think I managed it pretty well. By the by, that gold you
showed them, was it really gold?"

"Certainly."

"Oh! because I thought--"

"No, sir, you did not. A man of your ability knows I would not risk
ten thousand pounds for want of a purchase I could not lose ten.
shillings by. Ore is not a fancy article."

"Oh! ah! yes, very true; no, of course not. One question more. Where
did the gold come from?"

"California."

"But, I mean, how did you get it?"

"I bought it out of a shop window those two knowing ones pass twice
every day of their lives."

"Ha! ha! ha!"

"You pass it oftener than that, sir. Excuse me, sir; I must catch the
train. But one word before I go. My name must never be mentioned in
this business."

"Very well; it never shall transpire, upon my honor."

Meadows felt pretty safe. As he put on his greatcoat he thought to
himself: "When the story is blown and laughed over, this man's vanity
will keep my name out of it. He won't miss a chance of telling the
world how clever he is. My game is to pass for honest, not for clever,
no, thank you."

"Good-by, sir," was his last word. "It is you for hoodwinking them."

"Ha! ha! ha! Good-by, farmer"(in a patronizing tone).

Soon after this, Meadows was in a corner of a railway-carriage, twelve
thousand four hundred and fifty pounds in his pocket, and the second
part of his great complex scheme boiling and bubbling in his massive
head. There he sat silent as the grave, his hat drawn over his
powerful brows that were knitted all the journey by one who never
knitted them in vain.

He reached home at eight and sat down to his desk and wrote for more
than half an hour. Then he sealed up the paper, and when Crawley came
he found him walking up and down the room. At a silent gesture Crawley
took a chair and sat quivering with curiosity. Meadows walked in deep
thought.

"You demanded my confidence. It is a dangerous secret, for once you
know it you must serve me with red-hot zeal, or be my enemy and be
crushed out of life like a blind-worm, or an adder, Peter Crawley."

"I know that, dear sir," assented Peter, ruefully.

"First, how far have you guessed?"

"I guess Mr. Levi is somehow against us."

"He is," replied Meadows, carelessly.

"Then that is a bad job. He will beat us. He is as cunning as a fox."

Meadows looked up contemptuously; but as he could not afford to let
such a sneak as Crawley think him anything short of invincible, he
said coolly, "He is, and I have measured cunning with a fox."

"You have? That must have been a tight match."

"A fox used to take my chickens one hard winter; an old fox cautious
and sly as the Jew you rate so high. The men sat up with guns for
him--no; a keeper set traps in a triangle for him--no. He had the eye
of a hawk, the ear of a hare, and his own nose. He would have the
chickens, and he would not get himself into trouble. The women
complained to me of the fox. I turned a ferret loose into the
rabbit-hutch, and in half a minute there was as nice a young rabbit
dead as ever you saw."

"Lookee there now," cried Crawley.

"I choked the ferret off, but never touched the rabbit. I took the
rabbit with a pair of tongs; the others had handled their baits and
pug crept round 'em and nosed the trick. I poured twenty drops of
croton oil into the little hole ferret had made in bunny's head, and I
dropped him in the grass near pug's track. Next morning rabbit had
been drawn about twenty yards and the hole in his head was three times
as big. Pug went the nearest way to blood; went in at ferret's hole. I
knew he would."

"Yes, sir! yes! yes! yes! and there lay the fox."

"No signs of him. Then I said: 'Go to the nearest water. Croton oil
makes 'em dry.' They went along the brook--and on the very bank there
lay an old dog-fox blown up like bladder, as big as a wolf and as dead
as a herring. Now for the Jew. Look at that;" and he threw him a
paper.

"Why, this is the judgment on which I arrested Will Fielding, and here
is the acceptance."

"Levi bought them to take the man out of my power. He left them with
old Cohen. I have got them again, you see, and got young Fielding in
my power spite of his foxy friend."

"Capital, sir, capital!" cried the admiring Crawley. He then looked at
the reconquered documents. "Ah!" said he, spitefully, "how I wish I
could alter one of these names, only one!"

"What d'ye mean?"

"I mean that I'd give fifty pound (if I had it) if it was but that
brute George Fielding that was in our power instead of this fool
William."

Meadows opened his eyes: "Why?"

"Because he put an affront upon me," was the somewhat sulky reply.

"What was that?"

"Oh, no matter, sir!"

"But it is matter. Tell me. I am that man's enemy."

"Then I am in luck. You are just the enemy I wish him."

"What was the affront?"

"He called me a pettifogger."

"Oh, is that all?"

"No. He discharged me from visiting his premises."

"That was not very polite."

"And threatened to horsewhip me next time I came there."

"Oh, is that where the shoe pinches?"

"No, it is not!" cried Crawley, almost in a shriek; "but he altered
his mind, and did horsewhip me then and there. Curse him!"

Meadows smiled grimly. He saw his advantage. "Crawley," said he,
quickly, "he shall rue the day he lifted his hand over you. You want
to see to the bottom of me."

"Oh, Mr. Meadows, that is too far for the naked eye to see," was the
despondent reply.

"Not when it suits my book. I am going to keep my promise and show you
my heart."

"Ah!"

"Listen and hear the secret of my life. Are you listening?"

"What do you think, sir?" was the tremulous answer.

"I--love--Miss--Merton;" and for once his eyes sank before Crawley's.

"Sir! you--love--a--woman?"

"Not as libertines love, nor as boys flirt and pass on. Heaven have
mercy on me, I love her with all my heart and soul and brain! I love
her with more force than such as you can hate!"

"The deuce you do!"

"I love the sweetheart--of the man--who lashed you--like a dog."

Crawley winced and rubbed his hands.

"And your fortune is made if you help me to win her."

Crawley rubbed his hands.

"Old Merton has promised the woman I love to this George Fielding if
he comes back with a thousand pounds."

"Don't you be frightened, sir; that he will never do."

"Will he not? Read this letter."

"Ah! the letter that put you out so. Let me see--Mum! mum! Found gold.
Pheugh! Pheugh! Pheeeugh!!"

"Crawley, most men reading that letter would have given in then and
there, and not fought against such luck as this. I only said to
myself, 'Then it will cost me ten thousand pounds to win the day.'
Well, between yesterday eleven forenoon and this hour I made the ten
thousand pounds."

He told him briefly how.

"Beautiful, sir! What, did you make the ten thousand out of your own
rival's letter?"

"Yes, I taxed the enemy for the expenses of the war."

"Oh, Mr. Meadows, what a fool, what a villain I was to think Mr. Levi
was as great a man as you! I must have been under a hallucination."

"Crawley, the day that John and Susan Meadows walk out of church man
and wife I put a thousand pounds into your hand and set you up in any
business you like; in any honest business, for from that day our
underhand dealings must end. The husband of that angel must never
grind the poor or wrong a living creature. If Heaven consents to my
being happy in this way, the least I can do is to walk straight and
straightforward the rest of my days, and I will, s'help me God."

"That is fair. I knew you were a great man, but I had no idea you were
such a good one."

"Crawley," said the other, with a sudden gloomy misgiving, "I am
trying to cheat the devil. I fear no man can do that;" and he hung his
head.

"No ordinary man, sir," replied the parasite, "but your skill has no
bounds. Your plan, sir, at once, that I may co-operate and not thwart
your great skill through ignorance."

"My plan has two hands; one must work here, the other a great many
miles from here. If I could but cut myself in two, all would be well;
but I can't; I must be one hand, you the other. _I_ work thus:
Post-office here is under my thumb. I stop all letters from him to
her. Presently comes a letter from Australia telling among pork,
grains, etc., how George Fielding has made his fortune and married a
girl out there."

"But who is to write the letter?"

Can't you guess?"

"Haven't an idea. She won't believe it."

"Not at first, perhaps, but when she gets no more letters from him she
will."

"So she will. So then you will run him down to her."

"Not such a fool, she would hate me. I shall never mention his name. I
make one of my tools hang jail over old Merton. Susan thinks George
married. I strike upon her pique and her father's distress. I ask him
for his daughter. Offer to pay my father-in-law's debts and start him
afresh."

"Beautiful! Beautiful!"

"Susan likes me already. I tell her all I suffered silent while she
was on with George. I press her to be mine. She will say no perhaps
three or four times, but the fifth she will say yes!"

"She will; you are a great man."

"And she will be happy."

"Can't see it."

"A man that marries a virtuous woman and loves her is no man at all if
he can't make her love him; they can't resist our stronger wills
except by flight or by leaning upon another man. I'll be back
directly."

Mr. Meadows returned with a bottle of wine and two glasses. Crawley
was surprised. This was a beverage he had never seen his friend drink
or offer him. Another thing puzzled him. When Mr. Meadows came back
with the wine he had not so much color as usual in his face--not near
so much.

"Crawley," said Meadows, in a low voice, "suppose, while I am working,
this George Fielding were to come home with money in both pockets?"

"He would kick it all down in a moment."

"I am glad you see that. Then you see one hand is not enough; another
must be working far away."

"Yes, but I don't see--"

"You will see. Drink a glass of wine with me, my good friend; your
health."

"Same to you, sir."

"Is it to your mind?"

"Elixir! This is the stuff that sharpens a chap's wit and puts courage
in his heart."

"I brought it for that. You and I have no chicken's play on hand.
Another glass."

"Success to your scheme, sir."

"Crawley, George Fielding must not come back this year with one
thousand pounds."

"No, he must not--thank you, sir, your health. Mustn't, he shan't; but
how on earth can you prevent him?"

"That paper will prevent him; it is a paper of instructions. My very
brains lie in that paper--put it in your pocket."

"In my pocket, sir? Highly honored--shall be executed to the letter.
What, wine!"

"And this is a check-book."

"No! is it though?"

"You will draw on me for one hundred pounds per month."

"No! shall I, though? Sir, you are a king!"

"Of which you will account for fifty pounds only."

"Liberal, sir; as I said before, liberal as running water."

"You are going a journey."

"Am I? well! Don't you turn pale for that--I'll come back to
you--nothing but death shall part us. Have a drop of this, sir; it
will put blood into your cheek, and fire into your heart. That is
right. Where am I going, sir?"

"What, don't you know?"

"No! nor I don't care, so long as it is in your service I go."

"Still it is a long journey."

"Oh, is it? Your health then, and my happy return."

"You are not afraid of the sea or the wind?"

"I am afraid of nothing but your wrath, and--and--the law. The sea be
hanged, and the wind be blowed! When I see your talent and energy, and
hold your checkbook in my hand and your instructions in my pocket, I
feel to play at football with the world. When shall I start?"

"To-morrow morning."

"To-night, if you like. Where am I to go to?"

"To AUSTRALIA!"

That single word suspended the glass going to Crawley's lips, and the
chuckle coming from them. A dead silence on both sides followed it.
And now two colorless faces looked into one another's eyes across the
table.



CHAPTER LVI.

THREE days the gold-finders worked alone upon the pre-Adamite river's
bed. At evening on the third day they looked up and saw a figure
perched watching them with a pipe in its mouth. It disappeared in
silence. Next day there were men on their knees beside them, digging,
scraping, washing and worshipping gold. Soon they were the center of a
group--soon after of a humming mob. As if the birds had really carried
the secret north, south, east and west, men swarmed and buzzed and
settled like locusts on the gold-bearing tract. They came in panting,
gleaming, dusty and travel-stained and flung off their fatigue at
sight, and, running up, dived into the gullies and plied spade and
pickax with clinched teeth and throbbing hearts. They seamed the face
of Nature for miles; turned the streams to get at their beds; pounded
and crushed the solid rock to squeeze out the subtle stain of gold it
held in its veins; hacked through the crops as through any other idle
impediment; pecked and hewed and fought and wrestled with Nature for
the treasure that lay so near yet in so tight a grip.

We take off our clothes to sleep and put them on to play at work, but
these put on their clothes to sleep in, and tore them off at peep of
day, and labor was red-hot till night came and cooled it; and in this
fight lives fell as quickly as in actual war, and by the same
enemy--Disease. Small wonder, when hundreds and hundreds wrought the
livelong day one half in icy water, the other half dripping with
sweat.

Men rotted like sheep, and died at the feet of that Gold whom they
stormed here in his fortress; and some alas met a worse fate. For that
befell which the world has seen in every age and land where gold has
come to light upon a soil; men wrestling fiercely with Nature jostled
each other; cupidity inflamed hate to madness, and human blood flowed
like water over that yellow dirt. And now from this one burning spot
gold fever struck inward to the heart of the land; burned its veins
and maddened its brain. The workman sold his tools, bought a spade and
a pickax, and fled to the gold; the lawyer flung down his parchment
and off to the gold; the penny-a-liner his brass pen and off to a
greater wonder than he had ever fabricated; the schoolmaster to whom
little boys were puzzling out

            Quid non mortalia pectora cogis
            Auri sacra fames--

made the meaning perfectly clear; he dropped ferrule and book and ran
with the national hunt for gold. Shops were closed for want of buyers
and sellers; the grass crept up between the paving-stones in great
thoroughfares; outward-bound ships lay deserted and helpless in the
roads; the wilderness was peopled and the cities desolate; commerce
was paralyzed, industry contracted. The wise and good trembled for the
destiny of the people, the government trembled for itself--idle fear.
That which shook this colony for a moment settled it as firm as a
granite mountain and made it great with a rapidity that would have
astounded the puny ages cant appeals to as the days of wonders.

The _sacra fames_ was not Australian, but human; and so at the
first whisper of gold the old nations poured the wealth they
valued--their food and clothes and silk and coin--and the prime
treasure they valued not, their men--into that favored land.

Then did great Labor, insulted and cheated so many years in narrow,
overcrowded corners of the huge unpeopled globe, lift his bare arm and
cry, "Who bids for this?" and a dozen gloved hands jumped and clutched
at the prize. And in bargains where a man went on one side and money
on the other, the money had to say, "Thank you," over it instead of
the man.

But still, though the average value of labor was now full as high in
the cities as in the mine, men flowed to the desert and the gold,
tempted by the enormous prizes there, that lay close to all and came
to fortune's favorites.

Hence a new wonder, a great moral phenomenon the world had never seen
before on such a wide scale. At a period of unparalleled civilization
and refinement, society, with its artificial habits and its jealous
class distinctions on its back, took a sudden unprepared leap from the
heights it had been centuries constructing--into a gold mine; it
emerged, its delicate fabric crushed out of all recognizable shape,
its petty prides annihilated, and even its just distinctions turned
topsy-turvey. For mind is really more honorable than muscle, yet when
these two met in a gold mine it fared ill with mind. Classical and
mathematical scholars joined their forces with navvies to dig gold;
and nearly always the scholars were found after a while cooking, shoe
cleaning, and doing generally menial offices for the navvies.

Those who had no learning, but had good birth, genteel manners and kid
gloves and feeble loins, sunk lower and became the dregs of
gold-digging society ere a week's digging had passed over their backs.
Not that all wit yielded to muscle. Low cunning often held its own;
hundreds of lazy leeches settled on labor's bare arm and bled it. Such
as could minister to the diggers' physical needs, appetites, vices,
had no need to dig; they made the diggers work for them, and took toll
of the precious dust as it fell into their hands.

One brute that could not spell chicory to save himself from the
gallows cleared two thousand pounds a month by selling it and hot
water at a pinch a cup. Thus ran his announcement, "Cofy allus rady."

Meantime Trigonometry was frying steaks and on Sunday blacking boots.

After a while lucky diggers returned to the towns clogged with gold,
and lusting and panting for pleasure.

They hired carriages and sweethearts, and paraded the streets all day,
crying, "We be the hairy-stocracy, now!!"

The shopkeepers bowed down and did them homage.

Even here Nature had her say. The sexes came out--the men sat in the
carriages in their dirty fustian and their checkered shirts and no
jacket; their inamoritas beside them glittered in silk and satin. And
some fiend told these poor women it was genteel to be short-sighted;
so they all bought gold spy-glasses, and spied without intermission.

Then the old colonial aristocracy, who had been born in broadcloth and
silk, and unlike the new had not been transported, but only their
papas and mammas, were driven to despair; but at last they hit upon a
remedy. They would be distinguished by hook or by crook, and the only
way left now was always to go on foot. So they walked the
pavement--wet or dry, nothing could induce them to enter the door of a
carriage. Item: they gave up being shortsighted; the few who for
reasons distinct from fashion could not resign the habit concealed it,
as if it was a defect instead of a beauty.

This struggle of classes in the towns, with its hundred and one
incidents, was an excellent theme for satire of the highest class. How
has it escaped? is it that even Satire, low and easy art, is not so
low and easy as Detraction? But these are the outskirts of a great
theme. The theme itself belonged, not to little satire, but to great
epic.

In the sudden return of a society far more complex, artificial and
conventional than Pericles ever dreamed of, to elements more primitive
than Homer had to deal with; in this, with its novelty, and nature,
and strange contrasts,

In the old barbaric force and native color of the passions, as they
burst out undisguised around the gold,

In the hundred and one personal combats and trials of cunning,

In a desert peopled, and cities thinned by the magic of cupidity,

In a huge army collected in ten thousand tents, not as heretofore by
one man's constraining will, but each human unit spurred into the
crowd by his own heart,

In "the siege of Gold," defended stoutly by Rock and Disease,

In the world-wide effect of the discovery, the peopling of the earth
at last according to Heaven's long-published and resisted design,

Fate offered poetry a theme broad and high, yet piquant, and various
as the dolphin and the rainbow.

I cannot sing this song, because I am neither Lamartine, nor Hugo, nor
Walter Scott. I cannot hum this song, because the severe conditions of
my story forbid me even to make the adventurous attempt. I am here to
tell, not the great tale of gold, but the little story of how Susan
Merton was affected thereby. Yet it shall never be said that my pen
passed close to a great man or a great thing without a word of homage
and sympathy to set against the sneers of groveling criticasters, the
blindness of self-singing poetasters, and the national itch for
detraction of all great things and men that live, and deification of
dead dwarfs.

God has been bountiful to the human race in this age. Most bountiful
to Poets; most bountiful to all of us who have a spark of nobleness in
ourselves, and so can see and revere at sight the truly grand and
noble (any snob can do this after it has been settled two hundred
years by other minds that he is to do it). He has given us warlike
heroes more than we can count--far less honor as they deserve; and
valor as full of variety as courage in the Iliad is monotonous--except
when it takes to its heels.

He has given us one hero, a better man than Hector or Achilles. For
Hector ran away from a single man; this hero was never known to run
away at all. Achilles was a better egotist than soldier; wounded in
his personal vanity, he revenged himself, not on the man who had
wronged him--Prudence forbade--but on the army, and on his country.
This antique hero sulked; my hero, deprived of the highest command,
retained a higher still--the command that places the great of heart
above all petty personal feeling. He was a soldier, and could not look
from his tent on battle and not plunge into it. What true soldier ever
could? He was not a Greek but a Frenchman--and could not love himself
better than his country. Above all, he was not Achilles, but
Canrobert.

He has given us to see Nineveh disinterred by an English hero.

He has given us to see the northwest passage forced, and winter
bearded on his everlasting throne, by another. (Is it the hero's fault
if self and snowdrop-singing poetasters cannot see this feat with the
eyes of Camoens?)

He has given us to see Titans enslaved by man; Steam harnessed to our
carriages and ships; Galvanism tamed into an alphabet--a Gamut, and
its metal harp-strings stretched across the earth _malgre'_
mountains and the sea, and so men's minds defying the twin monsters
Time and Space; and now, gold revealed in the East and West at once,
and so mankind now first in earnest peopling the enormous globe. Yet
old women and children of the pen say, this is a bad, a small, a
lifeless, an unpoetic age--and they are not mistaken. For they lie.

As only tooth-stoppers, retailers of conventional phrases, links in
the great cuckoo-chain, universal pill-venders, Satan, and ancient
booksellers' ancient nameless hacks can lie, they lie.

It is they who are _small-eyed._ Now, as heretofore, weaklings
cannot rise high enough to take a bird's-eye view of their own age,
and calculate its dimensions.

The age, smaller than epochs to come, is a giant compared with the
past, and full of mighty materials for any great pen in prose or
verse.

My little friends aged nineteen and downward--fourscore and
upward--who have been lending your ears to the stale little cant of
every age, as chanted in this one by Buffo-Bombastes and other
foaming-at-the-pen old women of both sexes--take by way of antidote to
all that poisonous, soul-withering drivel, ten honest words.

I say before heaven and earth that the man who could grasp the facts
of this day and do an immortal writer's duty by them, i.e., so paint
them as a later age will be content to engrave them, would be the
greatest writer ever lived. Such is the force, weight and number of
the grand topics that lie this day on the world's face. I say that he
who has eyes to see may now see greater and far more poetic things
than human eyes have seen since our Lord and his Apostles and his
miracles left the earth.

It is very hard to write a good book or a good play, or to invent a
good picture, and having invented paint it. But it always was hard,
except to those--to whom it was impossible. Bunglers will not mend
matters by blackening the great canvases they can't paint on, nor the
impotent become males by detraction.

"Justice!"

When we write a story or sing a poem of the great nineteenth century,
there is but one fear--not that our theme will be beneath us, but we
miles below it; that we shall lack the comprehensive vision a man must
have from heaven to catch the historical, the poetic, the lasting
features of the Titan events that stride so swiftly past IN THIS
GIGANTIC AGE.



CHAPTER LVII.

THE life of George Fielding and Thomas Robinson for months could be
composed in a few words: tremendous work from sunrise to sundown, and
on Sunday welcome rest, a quiet pipe, and a book.

At night they slept in a good tent, with Carlo at their feet and a
little bag between them; this bag never left their sight; it went out
to their work and in to sleep.

It is dinner-time; George and Tom are snatching a mouthful, and a few
words over it.

"How much do you think we are, Tom?"

"Hush! don't speak so loud, for Heaven's sake;" he added in a whisper,
"not a penny under seven hundred pounds' worth."

George sighed.

"It is slower work than I thought; but it is my fault, I am so
unlucky."

"Unlucky! and we have not been eight months at it."

"But one party near us cleared four thousand pounds at a haul; one
thousand pounds apiece--ah!"

"And hundreds have only just been able to keep themselves. Come, you
must not grumble, we are high above the average."

George persisted.

"The reason we don't get on is we try for nothing better than dust.
You know what you told me, that the gold was never created in dust,
but in masses, like all metals; the dust is only a trifle that has
been washed off the bulk. Then you said we ought to track the
gold-dust coarser and coarser till we traced the metal to its home in
the great rocks."

"Ay! ay! I believe I used to talk so; but I am wiser now. Look here,
George, no doubt the gold was all in block when the world started, but
how many million years ago was that? This is my notion, George; at the
beginning of the world the gold was all solid, at the end it is all to
be dust; now which are we nearer, the end or the beginning?"

"Not knowing, can't say, Tom."

"Then I can, for his reverence told me. We are fifty times nearer the
end than the beginning, follows there is fifty times as much gold-dust
in nature as solid gold."

"What a head you ha' got, Tom! but I can't take it up so. Seems to me
this dust is like the grain that is shed from a ripe crop before it
comes to the sickle. Now if we could trace--"

"How can you trace syrup to the lump when the lump is all turned to
syrup?"

George held his peace--shut up, but not convinced.

"Hallo! you two lucky ones," cried a voice distant about thirty yards.
"Will you buy our hole, it is breaking our heart here."

Robinson went up and found a large hole excavated to a great depth; it
was yielding literally nothing, and this determined that paradoxical
personage to buy it if it was cheap. "What there is must be somewhere
all in a lump."

He offered ten pounds for it, which was eagerly snapped at.

"Well done, Gardiner," said one of the band. "We would have taken ten
shillings for it," explained he to Robinson.

Robinson paid the money, and let himself down into the hole with his
spade. He drove his spade into the clay, and the bottom of it just
reached the rock; he looked up. "I would have gone just one foot
deeper before I gave in," said he; he called George. "Come, George, we
can know our fate in ten minutes."

They shoveled the clay away down to about one inch above the rock, and
there in the white clay they found a little bit of gold as big as a
pin's head.

"We have done it this time," cried Robinson, "shave a little more off,
not too deep, and save the clay." This time a score of little nuggets
came to view sticking in the clay; no need for washing, they picked
them out with their knives.

The news soon spread, and a multitude buzzed round the hole and looked
down on the men picking out peas and beans of pure gold with their
knives.

Presently a voice cried, "Shame, give the men back their hole!"

"Gammon," cried others, "they paid for a chance, and it turned out
well; a bargain is a bargain." Gardiner and his mates looked
sorrowfully down. Robinson saw their faces and came out of the hole a
moment. He took Gardiner aside and whispered, "Jump into our hole like
lightning, it is worth four pound a day."

"God bless you!" said Gardiner. He ran and jumped into the hole just
as another man was going to take possession. By digger's law no party
is allowed to occupy two holes.

All that afternoon there was a mob looking down at George and Robinson
picking out peas and beans of gold, and envy's satanic fire burned
many a heart. These two were picking up at least a hundred pounds an
hour.

Now it happened late in the afternoon that a man of shabby figure,
evidently not a digger, observing that there was always more or less
crowd in one place, shambled up and looked down with the rest; as he
looked down, George happened to look up; the newcomer drew back
hastily. After that his proceedings were singular; he remained in the
crowd more than two hours, not stationary, but winding in and out. He
listened to everything that was said, especially if it was muttered
and not spoken out; and he peered into every face, and peering into
every face it befell that at last his eye lighted on one that seemed
to fascinate him; it belonged to a fellow with a great bull neck, and
hair and beard flowing all into one--a man more like the black-maned
lion of North Africa than anything else. But it was not his appearance
that fascinated the serpentine one, it was the look he cast down upon
those two lucky diggers; a scowl of tremendous hatred--hatred unto
death. Instinct told the serpent there must be more in this than
extempore envy. He waited and watched, and, when the black-maned one
moved away, he followed him about everywhere till at last he got him
alone.

Then he sidled up, and in a cringing way said:

"What luck some men have, don't they?"

The man answered by a fierce grunt.

The serpent was half afraid of him, but he went on.

"There will be a good lump of gold in their tent to-night."

The other seemed struck with these words.

"They have been lucky a long time," explained the other, "and now this
added--"

"Well, what about it?"

"Nothing! only I wish somebody else had it instead."

"Why?"

"That is a secret for the present. I only tell you because I think
somehow they are no friends of yours either."

"Perhaps not! what then."

"Then we might perhaps do business together; it will strike you
singular, but I have a friend who would give money to any one that
would take a little from those two."

"Say that again."

"Would give money to any one that would take it from those two."

"And you won't ask for any share of the swag?"

"Me? I have nothing to do with it."

"Gammon! well, your friend! will he?"

"Not a farthing!"

"And what will he give, suppose I have a friend that will do the
trick?"

"According to the risk!"

The man gave a whistle. A fellow with forehead villainously low came
from behind some tents.

"What is it, Will?" asked the newcomer.

"A plant."

"This one in it?"

"Yes! This is too public, come to Bevan's store."



CHAPTER LVIII.

"GEORGE, I want you to go to Bathurst."

"What for?"

"To buy some things."

"What things?"

"First of all, a revolver; there were fellows about our tent last
night, creeping and prowling."

"I never heard them."

"No more you would an earthquake--but I heard them, and got up and
pointed my revolver at them; so then they cut--all the better for
them. We must mind our eye, George; a good many tents are robbed every
week, and we are known to have a good swag."

"Well, I must start this moment if I am to be back."

"And take a pound of dust and buy things that we can sell here to a
profit."

George came back at night looking rather sheep-faced.

"Tom," said he, "I am afraid I have done wrong. You see there was a
confounded auction, and what with the hammer, and the folk bidding,
and his palaver, I could not help it."

"But what is it you have bought?"

"A bit o' land, Tom."

Robinson groaned; but, recovering himself, he said gayly:

"Well, have you brought it with you?"

"No, it is not so small as all that; as nice a bit of grass as ever
you saw, Tom, and just outside the town of Bathurat; only I didn't
ought to have spent your money as well as my own."

"Stuff and nonsense--I accept the investment. Let me load your new
revolver. Now look at my day's work. I wouldn't take a hundred pound
for these little fellows."

George gloated over the little nuggets, for he saw Susan's eyes in
them. To-night she seemed so near. The little bag was placed between
them, the day's spoils added to it, and the tired friends were soon
asleep.



CHAPTER LIX.

"HELP! help! murder! help! murder!" Such were the cries that invaded
the sleepers' ears in the middle of the night, to which horrible
sounds was added the furious barking of Carlo.

The men seized their revolvers and rushed out of the tent. At about
sixty yards distant they saw a man on the ground struggling under two
fellows, and still crying, though more faintly, "murder" and "help."

"They are killing him!" cried George; and Robinson and he cocked their
revolvers and ran furiously toward the men. But these did not wait the
attack. They started up and off like the wind, followed by two shots
from Robinson that whistled unpleasantly near them.

"Have they hurt you, my poor fellow ?" said Robinson.

The man only groaned for answer.

Robinson turned his face up in the moonlight, and recognized a man to
whom he had never spoken, but whom his watchful eye had noticed more
than once in the mine--it was, in fact, the peddler Walker.

"Stop, George, I have seen this face in bad company. Oh! back to our
tent for your life, and kill any man you see near it!"

They ran back. They saw two dark figures melting into the night on the
other side the tent. They darted in--they felt for the bag. Gone! They
felt convulsively all round the tent. Gone! With trembling hands
Robinson struck a light. Gone--the work of months in a moment---the
hope of a life snatched out of a lover's very hand, and held out a
mile off again!

The poor fellows rushed wildly out into the night. They saw nothing
but the wretched decoy vanishing behind the nearest tents. They came
into the tent again. They sat down and bowed to the blow in silence,
and looked at one another, and their lips quivered, and they feared to
speak lest they should break into unmanly rage or sorrow. So they sat
like stone till daybreak.

And when the first streak of twilight came in, George said in a firm
whisper:

"Take my hand, Tom, before we go to work."

So the two friends sat hand in hand a minute or two; and that hard
grip of two workingmen's hands, though it was not gently eloquent like
beauty's soft, expressive palm, did yet say many things good for the
heart in this bitter hour.

It said: "A great calamity has fallen; but we do not blame each other,
as some turn to directly and do. It is not your fault, George. It is
not your fault, Tom."

It said: "We were lucky together; now we are unlucky together--all the
more friends. We wrought together; now we have been wronged
together--all the more friends." With this the sun rose, and for the
first time they crept to their work instead of springing to it.

They still found gold in it, but not quite so abundant or so large.
They had raised the cream of it for the thieves. Moreover, a rush had
been made to the hole, claims measured off actually touching them; so
they could not follow the gold-bearing strata horizontally--it
belonged to their neighbors. They worked in silence, they ate their
meal in silence. But as they rose to work again, Robinson said, very
gravely, even solemnly:

"George, now I know what an honest man feels when he is robbed of the
fruits of his work and his self-denial and his sobriety. If I had
known it fifteen years ago, I should never have been a--what I have
been."

For two months the friends worked stoutly with leaden hearts, but did
little more than pay their expenses. The bag lay between them light as
a feather. One morning Tom said to George:

"George, this won't do. I am going prospecting. Moore will lend me his
horse for a day."

That day George worked alone. Robinson rode all over the country with
a tin pan at his back, and tested all the places that seemed likely to
his experienced eye. At night he returned to their tent. George was
just lying down.

"No sleep to-night, George," said he, instinctively lowering his voice
to a whisper; "I have found surface gold ten miles to the southward."

"Well, we will go to it to-morrow."

"What, by daylight, watched as we are? We, the two lucky ones," said
Robinson bitterly. "No. Wait till the coast is clear--then strike tent
and away."

At midnight they stole out of the camp. By peep of day they were in a
little dell with a brook running at the bottom of it.

"Now, George, listen to me. Here is ten thousand pounds if we could
keep this gully and the creek a fortnight to ourselves."

"Oh, Tom! and we will. Nobody will find us here, it is like a box."

Robinson smiled sadly. The men drove their spades in close to the
little hole which Robinson had made prospecting yesterday, and the
very first cradleful yielded an ounce of gold-dust extremely small and
pure. They found it diffused with wonderful regularity within a few
inches of the surface. Here for the first time George saw gold-dust so
plentiful as to be visible. When a spadeful of the clay was turned up
it glittered all over. When they tore up the grass, which was green as
an emerald, specks of bright gold came up clinging to the roots. They
fell like spaded tigers on the prey.

"What are you doing, George?"

"Going to light a fire for dinner. We must eat, I suppose, though I do
grudge the time."

"We must eat, but not hot."

"Why not?"

"Because, if you light a fire, the smoke will be seen miles off, and
half the diggings will be down upon us. I have brought three days'
cold meat---here it is."

"Will this be enough?" asked George, simply, his mouth full.

"Yes, it will be enough," replied the other, bitterly. "Do you hear
that bird, George? They call him a leather-head. What is he singing?"

George laughed. "Seems to me he is saying, 'Off we go!' 'Off we go!'
'Off we go!'"

"That is it. And look now, off he is gone; and, what is more, he has
gone to tell all the world he saw two men pick up gold like beans."

"Work!" cried George.

That night the little bag felt twice as heavy as last night, and Susan
seemed nearer than for many a day. These two worked for their lives.
They counted each minute, and George was a Goliath; the soil flew
round him like the dust about a wmnnowing-machine. He was working for
Susan. Robinson wasted two seconds admiring him.

"Well," said he, "gold puts us all on our mettle, but you beat all I
ever saw. You are a man."

It was the morning of the third day, and the friends were filling the
little bag fast; and at breakfast George quizzed Robinson's late
fears.

"The leather-head didn't tell anybody, for here we are all alone."

Robinson laughed.

"But we should not have been, if I had let you light a fire. However,
I really begin to hope now they will let us alone till we have cleared
out the gully. Hallo!"

"What is the matter?"

"Look there, George."

"What is it? Smoke rising--down the valley ?"

"We are done! Didn't I tell you?"

"Don't say so, Tom. Why, it is only smoke, and five miles off."

"What signifies what it is or where it is? It is on the road to us."

"I hope better."

"What is the use of hoping nonsense? Was it there yesterday? Well,
then."

"Don't you be faint-hearted," said George. "We are not caught yet. I
wonder whether Susan would say it was a sin to try and mislead them?"

"A sin! I wish I knew how, I'd soon see. That was a good notion. This
place is five hundred pound a day to us. We must keep it to-day by
hook or by crook. Come with me, quick. Bring your tools and the bag."

George followed Robinson in utter ignorance of his design; that worthy
made his way as fast as he could toward the smoke. When they got
within a mile of it the valley widened and the smoke was seen rising
from the side of the stream. Concealing themselves, they saw two men
beating the ground on each side like pointers. Robinson drew back.
"They are hunting up the stream," said he, "it is there we must put
the stopper on them."

They made eastward for the stream which they had left.

"Come," said Robinson, "here is a spot that looks likely to a novice;
dig and cut it up all you can."

George was mystified but obeyed, and soon the place looked as if men
had been at work on it some time. Then Robinson took out a handful of
gold-dust and coolly scattered it over a large heap of mould.

"What are you at? Are you mad, Tom? Why, there goes five pounds. What
a sin!"

"Did you never hear of the man that flung away a sprat to catch a
whale? Now turn back to our hole. Stop, leave your pickax, then they
will think we are coming back to work."

In little more than half an hour they were in their little gully
working like mad. They ate their dinner working. At five o'clock
George pointed out to Robinson no less than seven distinct columns of
smoke rising about a mile apart all down the valley.

"Ay!" said Robinson, "those six smokes are hunting the smoke that is
hunting us! but we have screwed another day out."

Just as the sun was setting, a man came into the gully with a pickax
on his shoulder.

"Ah! how d'ye do?" said Robinson, in a mock friendly accent. "We have
been expecting you. Thank you for bringing us our pickax."

The man gave a sort of rueful laugh and came and delivered the pick
and coolly watched the cradle.

"Why don't you ask what you want to know?" said Robinson.

The man sneered. "Is that the way to get the truth from a digger?"
said he.

"It is from me, and the only one."

"Oh! then what are you doing, mate?"

"About ten ounces of gold per hour."

The man's mouth and eyes both opened. "Come, my lad," said Robinson,
good-naturedly, "of course I am not glad you have found us, but since
you are come, call your pals, light fires, and work all night.
To-morrow it will be too late."

The man whistled. He was soon joined by two more and afterward by
others. The whole party was eight. A hurried conference took place,
and presently the captain, whose name was Ede, came up to Robinson
with a small barrel of beer and begged him and his pal to drink as
much as they liked. They were very glad of the draught and thanked the
men warmly.

The newcomers took Robinson's advice, lighted large fires, divided
their company, and groped for gold. Every now and then came a shout of
joy, and, in the light of the fires, the wild figures showed red as
blood against the black wall of night, and their excited eyes glowed
like carbuncles as they clawed the sparkling dust. George and
Robinson, fatigued already by a long day, broke down about three in
the morning. They reeled into their tent, dug a hole, put in their
gold bag, stamped it down, tumbled dead asleep down over it, and never
woke till morn.

Gn l r-r-r! gn l r-r-r!

"What is the matter, Carlo?"

Gn l r-r-r.

Hum! hum! hum! Crash! crash!

At these sounds Robinson lifted up the corner of his tent. The gully
was a digging. He ran out to see where he was to work, and found the
whole soil one enormous tan-yard, the pits ten feet square, and so
close there was hardly room to walk to your hole without tumbling into
your neighbor's. You had to balance yourself like boys going along a
beam in a timber-yard. In one of these he found Ede and his gang
working. Mr. Ede had acquired a black eye, ditto one of his mates.

"Good-morning, Captain Robinson," said this personage, with a general
gayety of countenance that contrasted most drolly with the mourning an
expressive organ had gone into.

"Well, was I right?" asked Robinson, looking ruefully round the
crowded digging.

"You were, Captain Robinson, and thank you for last night."

"Well, you have picked up my name somehow. Now just tell me how you
picked up something else. How did you suspect us in this retired
spot?"

"We were working just clear of the great digging by the side of the
creek, and doing no good, when your cork came down."

"My cork?"

"Cork out of your bottle."

"I had no bottle. Oh, yes! my pal had a bottle of small beer."

"Ay, he must have thrown it into the creek, for a cork came down to
us. Then I looked at it, and I said, 'Here is a cork from Moore's
store; there is a party working up stream by this cork.'"

Robinson gave a little groan. "We are never to be at the bottom of
gold digging," said he.

"So we came up the stream and tried several places as we came, but
found nothing; at last we came to your pickax and signs of work, so my
lads would stay and work there, and I let them an hour or two, and
then I said, 'Come now, lads, the party we are after is higher up.'"

"Now how could you pretend to know that?" inquired Robinson, with
curiosity.

"Easy enough. The water came down to us thick and muddyish, so I knew
you were washing up stream."

"Confound my stupid head," cried Robinson, "I deserve to have it cut
off after all my experience."

And he actually capered with vexation.

"The best may make a mistake," said the other soothingly. "Well,
captain, you did us a good turn last night, so here is your claim. We
put your pal's pick in it--here close to us. Oh! there was a lot that
made difficulties, but we over-persuaded them."

"Indeed! How?"

"Gave them a hiding, and promised to knock out any one's brains that
went into it. Oh! kindness begets kindness, even in a gold mine."

"It does," cried Robinson, "and the proof is--that I give you the
claim. Here come this way and seem to buy it of me. All their eyes are
upon us. Now split your gang, and four take my claim."

"Well, that is good of you. But what will you do, captain? Where shall
you go?" And his eyes betrayed his curiosity.

"Humph! Well, I will tell you on condition that you don't bring two
thousand after me again. You should look behind you as well as before,
stupid."

These terms agreed to, Robinson let Ede know that he was going this
moment back to the old digging. The other was greatly surprised.
Robinson then explained that in the old digging gold lay at various
depths and was inexhaustible; that this afternoon there would be a
rush made from it to Robinson's Gully (so the spot where they stood
was already called); that thousands of good claims would thus by
diggers' law be vacated; and that he should take the best before the
rush came back, which would be immediately, since Robinson's Gully
would be emptied of its gold in four hours.

"So clear out your two claims," said he. "It won't take you two hours.
All the gold lies in one streak four inches deep. Then back after me;
I'll give you the office. I'll mark you down a good claim."

Mr. Ede, who was not used to this sort of thing since he fought for
gold, wore a ludicrous expression of surprise and gratitude. Robinson
read it and grinned superior, but the look rendered words needless, so
he turned the conversation.

"How did you get your black eye?"

"Oh! didn't I tell you? Fighting with the blackguards for your claim."

It was now Robinson's turn to be touched.

"You are a good fellow. You and I must be friends. Ah! if I could but
get together about forty decent men like you, and that had got gold to
lose."

"Well," said Ede, "why not? Here are eight that have got gold to lose,
thanks to you, and your own lot--that makes ten. We could easy make up
forty for any good lay; there is my hand for one. What is it?"

Robinson took Ede's hand with a haste and an energy that almost
startled him, and his features darkened with an expression unusual now
to his good-natured face. "To put down thieving in the camp," said he,
sternly.

"Ah!" said the other, half sadly (the desirableness of this had
occurred to him before now); "but how are we to do that?" asked he,
incredulously. "The camp is choke-full of them."

Robinson looked blacker, uglier and more in earnest. So was his answer
when it came.

"Make stealing death by the law."

"The law! What law?"

"Lynch!"



CHAPTER LX.

ABOUT a fortnight after Robinson's return to the diggings two men were
seated in a small room at Bevan's store. There was little risk of
their being interrupted by any honest digger, for it was the middle of
the day.

"I know that well enough," growled the black-maned one, "everybody
knows the lucky rip has got a heavier swag than ever, but we shan't
get it so cheap, if we do at all."

"Why not?"

"He is on his guard now, night and day, and what is more he has got
friends in the mine that would hang me or you either up to dry, if
they but caught us looking too near his tent."

"The ruffians. Well, but if he has friends he has enemies."

"Not so many; none that I know of but you and me. I wonder what he has
done to you?"

The other waived this question and replied: "I have found two parties
that hate him; two that came in last week."

"Have you? then, if you are in earnest, make me acquainted with them,
for I am weak-handed; I lost one of my pals yesterday."

"Indeed! how?"

"They caught him at work and gave him a rap over the head with a
spade. The more ---- fool he for being caught. Here is to his memory."

"Ugh! what, is he, is he--"

"Dead as a herring."

"Where shall we all go to? What lawless fellows these diggers are. I
will bring you the men."

For the last two months the serpentine man had wound in and out the
camp, poking about for a villain of the darker sort as minutely as
Diogenes did for an honest man, and dispensing liquor and watching
looks and words. He found rogues galore, and envious spirits that
wished the friends ill, but none of them seemed game to risk their
lives against two men, one of whom said openly he would kill any
stranger he caught in his tent, and whom some fifty stout fellows
called Captain Robinson, and were ready to take up his quarrel like
fire. But at last he fell in with two old lags, who had a deadly
grudge against the captain, and a sovereign contempt for him into the
bargain. By the aid of liquor he wormed out their story. This was the
marrow of it: The captain had been their pal, and, while they were all
three cracking a crib, had with unexampled treachery betrayed them,
and got them laid by the heels for nearly a year; in fact, if they had
not broken prison they would not have been here now. In short, in less
than half an hour he returned with our old acquaintances, brutus and
mephistopheles.

These two came half reluctant, suspicious and reserved. But at sight
of Black Will they were reassured, villain was so stamped on him. With
instantaneous sympathy and an instinct of confidence the three
compared notes, and showed how each had been aggrieved by the common
enemy. Next they held a council of war, the grand object of which was
to hit upon some plan of robbing the friends of their new swag.

It was a difficult and very dangerous job. Plans were proposed and
rejected, and nothing agreed upon but this, that the men should be
carefully watched for days to find out where they kept their gold at
night and where by day, and an attempt timed and regulated
accordingly. Moreover, the same afternoon a special gang of six was
formed, including Walker, which pitiful fox was greatly patronized by
the black-maned lion. At sight of him, brutus, who knew him not indeed
by name but by a literary transaction, was "for laying on," but his
patron interposed, and, having inquired and heard the offense,
bellowed with laughter, and condemned the ex-peddler to a fine of half
a crown in grog. This softened brutus, and a harmonious debauch
succeeded. Like the old Egyptians they debated first sober and then
drunk, and to stagger my general notion that the ancients were unwise,
candor compels me to own, it was while stammering, maudling, stinking
and in every sense drunk that mephistopheles driveled out a scheme so
cunning and so new as threw everybody and everything into the shade.
It was carried by hiccoughation.

To work this scheme mephistopheles required a beautiful large new
tent; the serpentine man bought it. Money to feed the gang; serpent
advanced it.

Robinson's tent was about thirty yards from his claim, which its one
opening faced. So he and George worked with an eye ever upon their
tent. At night two men of Robinson's party patrolled armed to the
teeth; they relieved guard every two hours. Captain Robinson's orders
to these men, if they saw anybody doing anything suspicious after
dark, were these:

                  First fire,
                  Then inquire.

This general order was matter of publicity for a quarter of a mile
round Robinson's tent, and added to his popularity and our rascals'
perplexities.

These orders had surely the double merit of conciseness and melody;
well, for all that, they were disgustingly offensive to one true
friend of the captain, viz., to George Fielding.

"What is all the gold in the world compared with a man's life?" said
he, indignantly.

"An ounce of it is worth half a dozen such lives as some here," was
the cool reply.

"I have heard you talk very different. I mind when you could make
excuses even for thieves that were never taught any better, poor
unfortunate souls."

"Did I?" said the captain, a little taken aback. "Well, perhaps I did;
it was natural, hem, under the circumstances. No! not for such thieves
as these, that haven't got any honor at all."

"Honor, eh?"

"Yes! honor. Look here, suppose in my unconverted days I had broke
into a jeweler's shop (that comes nearest to a mine) with four or five
pals, do you think I should have held it lawful to rob my pals of any
part of the swag just because we happened to be robbing a silversmith?
Certainly not; I assure you, George, the punishment of such a nasty,
sneaking, dishonorable act would be death in every gang, and cheap,
too. Well, we have broken into Nature's shop here, and we are to rifle
her, and not turn to like unnatural monsters, and rob our ten thousand
pals."

"Thieving is thieving, in my view," was the prejudiced reply.

"And hanging is hanging--as all thieves shall find if caught
convenient."

"You make my flesh creep, Tom. I liked you better when you were not so
great a man, more humble like; have you forgotten when you had to make
excuses for yourself; then you had Susan on your side and brought me
round, for I was bitter against theft; but never so bad as you are
now."

"Oh, never mind what I said in those days; why, you must be well aware
I did not know what I was talking about. I had been a rogue and a
fool, and I talked like both. But now I am a man of property, and my
eyes are open and my conscience revolts against theft, and the gallows
is the finest institution going, and next to that comes a jolly good
prison. I wish there was one in this mine as big as Pentonville, then
property--"

Here the dialogue was closed by the demand the pick made upon the man
of property's breath. But it rankled, and on laying down the pick he
burst out: "Well, to think of an honest man like you having a word to
say for thieving. Why, it is a despicable trait in a gold mine. I'll
go farther, I'll prove it is the sin of sins all round the world.
Stolen money never thrives--goes for drink and nonsense. Now you pick
and I'll wash. Theft corrupts the man that is robbed as well as the
thief; drives him to despair and drink and ruin temporal and eternal.
No country could stand half an hour without law!! The very honest
would turn thieves if not protected, and there would be a go. Besides,
this great crime is like a trunk railway, other little crimes run into
it and out of it; lies buzz about it like these Australian flies--drat
you! Drunkenness precedes and follows it, and perjury rushes to its
defense."

"Well, Tom, you are a beautiful speaker."

"I haven't done yet. What wonder it degrades a man when a dog loses
his dignity under it. Behold the dog who has stolen; look at Carlo
yesterday when he demeaned himself to prig Jem's dinner (the sly brute
won't look at ours). How mean he cut with his tail under his belly,
instead of turning out to meet folk all jolly and waggle-um-tail-um as
on other occasions--Hallo, you, sir! what are you doing so near our
tent?" and up jumped the man of property and ran cocking a revolver to
a party who was kneeling close to the friends' tent.

The man looked up coolly; he was on his knees.

"We are newly arrived and just going to pitch, and a digger told us we
must not come within thirty yards of the captain's tent, so we are
measuring the distance."

"Well, measure it--and keep it."

Robinson stayed by his tent till the man, whose face was strange to
him, had measured and marked the ground. Soon after the tent in
question was pitched, and it looked so large and new that the man of
property's suspicions were lulled.

"It is all right," said he, "tent is worth twenty pounds at the lowest
farthing."

While Black Will and his gang were scheming to get the friends' gold,
Robinson, though conscious only of his general danger, grew more and
more nervous as the bag grew heavier, and strengthened his defenses
every day.

This very day one was added to the cause of order in a very
characteristic way. I must first observe that Mr. McLaughlan had
become George's bailiff, that is, on discovery of the gold he had
agreed to incorporate George's flocks, to use his ground and to
account to him, sharing the profits, and George running the risks.
George had, however, encumbered the property with Abner as herdsman.
That worthy had come whining to him lame of one leg from a blow on the
head, which he convinced George Jacky had given him with his
battle-ax.

"I'm spoiled for life and by your savage. I have lost my place; do
something for me."

Good-hearted George did as related, and moreover promised to give
Jacky a hiding if ever he caught him again. George's aversion to
bloodshed is matter of history; it was also his creed that a good
hiding did nobody any harm.

Now it was sheep-shearing time and McLaughlan was short of hands; he
came into the mine to see whether out of so many thousands he could
not find four or five who would shear instead of digging.

When he put the question to George, George shook his head doubtfully.
"However," said he, "look out for some unlucky ones, that is your best
chance, leastways your only one."

So McLaughlan went cannily about listening here and there to the men
who were now at their dinners, and he found Ede's gang grumbling and
growling with their mouths full; in short, enjoying at the same time a
good dinner and an Englishman's grace.

"This will do," thought the Scot, misled like continental nations by
that little trait of ours; he opened the ball.

"I'm saying--my lads--will ye gie ower this _weary warrk a wee
whilee_ and sheer a wheen sheep to me?"

The men looked in his face, then at one another, and the proposal
struck them as singularly droll. They burst out laughing in his face.

McLaughlan (keeping his temper thoroughly, but not without a severe
struggle). "Oh, fine I ken I'll ha'e to pay a maist deevelich price
for your highnesses--aweel, I'se pay--aw thing has its price; jaast
name your wage for shearing five hunder sheep."

The men whispered together. The Scot congratulated himself on his
success; it would be a question of price, after all.

"We will do it for--the wool."

"Th' 'oo?--oo ay! but hoo muckle o' th' 'oo? for ye ken--"

"How muckle? why, all."

"A' the 'oo! ye blackguard, ye're no blate."

"Keep your temper, farmer, it is not worth our while to shear sheep
for less than that."

"De'il go wi' ye then!" and he moved off in great dudgeon.

"Stop," cried the captain, "you and I are acquainted--you lived out
Wellington way--me and another wandered to your hut one day and you
gave us our supper."

"Ay, lad, I mind o' ye the noo!"

"The jolliest supper ever I had--a haggis you called it."

"Ay, did I, my fine lad. I cookit it till ye myssel. Ye meicht help me
for ane."

"I will," said Captain Ede; and a conference took place in a whisper
between him and his men.

"It is a' reicht the noo!" thought McLaughlan.

"We have an offer to make you," said Ede, respectfully.

"Let us hear't."

"Our party is large; we want a cook for it, and we offer you the place
in return for past kindness."

"Me a cuik, y' impudent vagabond!" cried the Caledonian, red as a
turkey-cock; and, if a look could have crushed a party of eight, their
hole had been their grave.

McLaughlan took seven ireful steps--wide ones--then his hot anger
assumed a cold, sardonic form, he returned, and with blighting satire
speered this question by way of gratifying an ironical curiosity.

"An' whaat would ye ha'e the cheek t'offer a McLanghlan to cuik till
ye, you that kens sae fine the price o' wark?"

"Thirty shillings."

"Thretty shilling the week for a McLaughlan!"

"The week," cried Ede, "nonsense--thirty shillings a day of course.
We sell work for gold, sir, and we give gold for it; look here!" and
he suddenly bared a sturdy brown arm, and, smacking it, cried, "That
is dirt where you come from, but it is gold here."

"Ye're a fine lad," said the Scot, smoothly, "and ye've a boeny aerm,"
added he, looking down at it. "I'se no deny that. I'm thinking--I'll
just come--and cuik till ye a wee--for auld lang syne--thretty schelln
the day--an' ye'll buy the flesh o' me. I'll sell it a hantle cheaper
than thir warldly-minded fleshers."

Bref, he came to be shorn, and remained to fleece.

He went and told George what he had done.

"Hech! hech!" whined he, "thir's a maist awfu' come doon for the
McLaughlans---but wha wadna' stuip to lift gowd?"

He left his head man, a countryman of his own, in charge of the
flocks, and tarried in the mine. He gave great satisfaction, except
that he used to make his masters wait for dinner while he pronounced a
thundering long benediction; but his cookery compensated the delay.

Robinson enrolled him in his police and it was the fashion openly to
quiz, and secretly respect him.

Robinson also made friends with the women, in particular with one Mary
McDogherty, wife of a very unsuccessful digger. Many a pound of
potatoes Pat and she had from the captain, and this getting wind
secured the good will of the Irish boys.



CHAPTER LXI.

GEORGE was very homesick.

"Haven't we got a thousand pounds apiece yet?"

"Hush! no! not quite; but too much to bawl about."

"And we never shall till you take my advice, and trace the gold to its
home in the high rocks. Here we are plodding for dust, and one good
nugget would make us."

"Well! well!" said Robinson, "the moment the dry weather goes you
shall show me the home of the gold." Poor George and his nuggets!

"That is a bargain," said George, "and now I have something more to
say. Why keep so much gold in our tent? It makes me fret. I am for
selling some of it to Mr. Levi.

"What, at three pounds the ounce? not if I know it."

"Then why not leave it with him to keep?"

"Because it is safer in its little hole in our tent. What do the
diggers care for Mr. Levi? You and I respect him, but I am the man
they swear by. No, George, Tom Weasel isn't caught napping twice in
the same year. Don't you see I've been working this four months past
to make my tent safe? and I've done it. It is watched for me night and
day, and if our swag was in the Bank of England it wouldn't be safer
than it is. Put that in your pipe. Well, Carlo, what is the news in
your part?"

Carlo came running up to George, and licked his face, which just rose
above the hole.

"What is it, Carlo?" asked George, in some astonishment.

"Ha! ha!" laughed the other. "Here is the very dog come out to
encourage his faint-hearted master."

"No!" said George, "it can't be that--he means something--be quiet,
Carlo, licking me to pieces--but what it is Heaven only knows; don't
you encourage him; he has no business out of the tent--go back,
Carlo--go into kennel, sir;" and off slunk Carlo back into the tent,
of which he was the day sentinel.

"Tom," remarked George, thoughtfully, "I believe Carlo wanted to show
me something; he is a wonderful wise dog."

"Nonsense," cried Robinson, sharply, "he heard you at the old lay,
grumbling, and came to say cheer up, old fellow."

While Robinson was thus quizzing George, a tremendous noise was
suddenly heard in their tent. A scuffle--a fierce, muffled snarl--and
a human yell; with a cry, almost as loud, the men bounded out of their
hole, and, the blood running like melting ice down their backs with
apprehension, burst into the tent; then they came upon a sight that
almost drew the eyes out of their heads.

In the center of the tent, not six inches from their buried treasure,
was the head of a man emerging from the bowels of the earth, and
cursing and yelling, for Carlo had seized his head by the nape of the
neck, and bitten it so deep that the blood literally squirted, and was
stamping and going back snarling and pulling and hauling in fierce
jerks to extract it from the earth, while the burly-headed ruffian it
belonged to, cramped by his situation, and pounced on unawares by the
fiery teeth, was striving and battling to get down into the earth
again. Spite of his disadvantage, such were his strength and despair
that he now swung the dog backward and forward. But the men burst in.
George seized him by the hair of his head, Tom by the shoulder, and
with Carlo's help, wrenched him on to the floor of the tent, where he
was flung on his back with Tom's revolver at his temple, and Carlo
flew round and round barking furiously, and now and then coming flying
at him; on which occasions he was always warded off by George's strong
arm, and passed devious, his teeth clicking together like machinery,
the snap and the rush being all one design that must succeed or fail
together. Captain Robinson put his lips to his whistle, and the tent
was full of his friends in a moment.

"Get me a bullock rope."

"Ay!"

"And drive a stout pole into the ground."

"Ay!"

In less than five minutes brutus was tied up to a post in the sun,
with a placard on his breast on which was written in enormous
letters--

                     THIEF

(and underneath in smaller letters--)

     Caught trying to shake Captain Robinson's tent.
                    First offense.
                 N B--To be hanged next time.

Then a crier was sent through the mine to invite inspection of
brutus's features, and ere sunset thousands looked into his face, and
when he tried to lower it pulled it savagely up.

"I shall know you again, my lad," was the common remark, "and, if I
catch you too near my tent, rope or revolver, one of the two."

Captain Robinson's men did not waste five minutes with brutus. They
tied him to the stake, and dashed into their holes to make up lost
time, but Robinson and George remained quiet in their tent.

"George," said Tom, in a low, contrite, humble voice, "let us return
thanks to Heaven, for vain is man's skill."

And they did.

"George," said Tom, rising from his knees, "the conceit is taken out
of me for about the twentieth time; I felt so strong and I was nobody.
The danger came in a way I never dreamed, and when it had come we were
saved by a friend I never valued. Give a paw, Carlo."

Carlo gave a paw.

"He has been a good friend to us this day," said George. "I see it all
now; he must have heard the earth move and did not understand it so he
came for me, and, when you would not let me go, he went back, and says
he, 'I dare to say it is a rabbit burrowing up.' So he waited still as
death, watching, and nailed six feet of vermin instead of bunny."

Here they both fell to caressing Carlo, who jumped and barked and
finished with a pretended onslaught on the captain as he was kneeling,
looking at their so late imperiled gold, and knocked him over and
slobbered his face when he was down. Opinions varied, but the
impression was he knew he had been a clever dog. This same evening,
Jem made a collar for him on which was written "Policeman C."

The fine new tent was entered and found deserted, nothing there but an
enormous mound of earth that came out of the subterranean, which
Robinson got a light and inspected all the way to its _debouchure_
in his own tent. As he returned, holding up his light and peering
about, he noticed something glitter at the top of the arch; he held
the light close to it and saw a speck or two of gold sparkling here
and there. He took out his knife and scraped the roof in places, and
brought to light in detached pieces a layer of gold-dust about the
substance of a sheet of blotting-paper and full three yards wide; it
crossed the subterranean at right angles, dipping apparently about an
inch in two yards. The conduct of brutus and co. had been typical.
They had been so bent on theft, that they were blind to the pocketfuls
of honest, safe, easy gold they rubbed their very eyes and their thick
skulls against on their subterraneous path to danger and crime.

Two courses occurred to Robinson; one was to try and monopolize this
vein of gold, the other to take his share of it and make the rest add
to his popularity and influence in the mine. He chose the latter, for
the bumptiousness was chilled in him. This second attack on his tent
made him tremble.

"I am a marked man," said he. "Well, if I have enemies, the more need
to get friends all round me."

I must here observe that many men failed altogether at the gold
diggings and returned in rags and tatters to the towns; many others
found a little, enough to live like a gentleman anywhere else, but too
little for bare existence in a place where an egg cost a shilling, a
cabbage a shilling, and baking two pounds of beef one shilling and
sixpence, and a pair of mining boots eight pounds, and a frying-pan
thirty shillings, and so on.

Besides, the hundreds that fell by diarrhea, their hands clutching in
vain the gold that could not follow them, many a poor fellow died of a
broken heart and hardships suffered in vain, and some, long unlucky
but persevering, suddenly surprised by a rich find of gold, fell by
the shock of good fortune, went raving mad, dazzled by the gold, and
perished miserably. For here all was on a great heroic scale,
starvation, wealth, industry, crime, retribution, madness and disease.

Now the good-natured captain had his eye upon four unlucky men at this
identical moment.

No. 1, Mr. Miles, his old master, who, having run through his means,
had come to the diggings. He had joined a gang of five; they made only
about three pounds a week each, and had expelled him, alleging that
his work was not quite up to their mark. He was left without a mate
and earned a precarious livelihood without complaining, for he was
game; but Robinson's quick eye and ear saw his clothes were shabby and
that he had given up his ha! ha! ha!

No. 2, Jem, whose mate had run away and robbed him, and he was left
solus with his tools.

No. 3, Mr. Stevens, an accomplished scholar, and, above all, linguist,
broad in the forehead but narrow in the chest, who had been
successively rejected by five gangs and was now at a discount. He
picked up a few shillings by interpreting, but it was a suspicious
circumstance that he often came two miles from his end of the camp to
see Robinson just at dinner-time. Then a look used to pass between
those two good-hearted creatures, and Mr. Stevens was served first and
Carlo docked till evening. Titles prevailed but little in the mine.
They generally addressed the males of our species thus:

"Hi! man!"

The females thus:

"Hi! woman!"

The Spartans! but these two made an exception in favor of this reduced
scholar. They called him "Sir," and felt abashed his black coat should
be so rusty; and they gave him the gristly bits, for he was not
working, but always served him first.

No. 4, Unlucky Jack, a digger. This man really seemed to be unlucky.
Gangs would find the stuff on four sides of him, and he none; his last
party had dissolved, owing they said to his ill-luck, and he was
forlorn. These four Robinson convened, with the help of Mary
McDogherty, who went for Stevens; and made them a little speech,
telling them he had seen all their four ill-lucks, and was going to
end that with one blow. He then, taking the direction of brutus's
gold-vein, marked them out a claim full forty yards off, and himself
one close to them; organized them, and set them working in high
spirits, tremulous expectation, and a fervor of gratitude to him, and
kindly feeling toward their unlucky comrades.

"You won't find anything for six feet," said the captain. "Meantime,
all of you turn to and tell the rest how you were the unluckiest man
in the whole mine--till you fell in with me--he! he!"

And the captain chuckled. His elastic vanity was fast recovering from
brutus, and his spirits rising.

Toward evening he collected his whole faction, got on the top of two
cradles, made a speech, thanked them for their good-will, and told
them he had now an opportunity of making them a return. He had
discovered a vein of gold which he could have kept all to himself, but
it was more just and more generous to share it with his partisans.

"Now, pass through this little mine one at a time," said he, "and look
at the roof, where I have stuck the two lighted candles, and then pass
on quick to make room for others."

The men dived one after another, examined the roof, and, rushing
wildly out at the other end in great excitement, ran and marked out
claims on both sides of the subterranean.

But, with all their greediness and eagerness, they left ten feet
square untouched on each side the subterranean.

"What is this left for?"

"That is left for the clever fellow that found the gold after a thief
had missed it," cried one.

"And for the generous fellow that parted his find," roared another,
from a distance.

Robinson seemed to reflect.

"No! I won't spoil the meat by cutting myself the fat--no! I am a
digger, but not only a digger, I aspire to the honor of being a
captain of diggers; my claim lies out there."

"Hurrah; three cheers for Captain Robinson!"

"Will you do me a favor in return?"

"Hurrah! won't we?"

"I am going to petition the governor to send us out police to guard
our tents."

"Hurrah!"

"And even beaks, if necessary" (doubtful murmurs). "And, above all,
soldiers to take our gold safe down to Sydney."

"Hurrah!"

"Where we can sell it at three fifteen the ounce."

"Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah!"

"Instead of giving it away here for three pounds, and then being
robbed. If you will all sign, Mr. Stevens and I will draw up the
petition; no country can stand without law!"

"Hurrah for Captain Robinson, the diggers' friend."

And the wild fellows jumped out of the holes, and four seized the
diggers' friend, and they chaired him in their rough way, and they put
Carlo into a cradle, and raised him high, and chaired him; and both
man and dog were right glad to get safe out of the precarious honor.

The proceedings ended by brutus being loosed and set between two long
lines of men with lumps of clay, and pelted and knocked down, and
knocked up again, and driven, bruised, battered and bleeding, out of
that part of the camp. He found his way to a little dirty tent not
much bigger than a badger's hole, crawled in, and sank down in a
fainting state, and lay on his back stiff and fevered, and smarting
soul and body many days.

And while Robinson was exulting in his skill, his good fortune, his
popularity, his swelling bag, and the constabulary force he was
collecting and heading, this tortured ruffian, driven to utter
desperation by the exposure of his features to all the camp with
"Thief" blazing on him, lay groaning stiff and sore--but lived for
revenge.

"Let him keep his gold--I don't care for his gold now. I'll have his
blood!"



CHAPTER LXII.

"I WONDER at you giving away the claim that lay close to the gold; it
is all very well to be generous, but you forget--Susan."

"Don't you be silly, George. The vein dips, and those that cut down on
it where it is horizontalish will get a little; we, that nick it
nearly verticalish, will get three times as much out of a ten-foot
square claim."

"Well! you are a sharp fellow, to be sure; but, if it is so, why on
earth did you make a favor to them of giving them the milk and taking
the cream?"

"Policy, George! policy!"



CHAPTER LXIII.

SUNDAY.

"TOM, I invite you to a walk."

"Ay! ay! I'd give twenty pounds for one; but the swag?"

"Leave it this one day with Mr. Levi; he has got two young men always
armed in his tent, and a little peevish dog, and gutta-percha pipes
running into all the Jews' tents that are at his back like chicks
after the old hen."

"Oh, he is a deep one."

"And he has got mouth-pieces to them, and so he could bring thirty men
upon a thief in less than half a minute."

"Well, then, George! a walk is a great temptation, this beautiful
day."

In short, by eight o'clock the gold was deposited, and the three
friends, for Policeman C must count for one, stepped lustily out in
the morning air.

It was the month of January; a blazing hot day was beginning to glow
through the freshness of morning; the sky was one cope of pure blue,
and the southern air crept slowly up, its wings clogged with
fragrance, and just tuned the trembling leaves--no more.

"Is not this pleasant, Tom--isn't it sweet?"

"I believe you, George! and what a shame to run down such a country as
this. There they come home, and tell you the flowers have no smell,
but they keep dark about the trees and bushes being haystacks of
flowers. Snuff the air as we go, it is a thousand English gardens in
one. Look at all those tea-scrubs each with a thousand blossoms on it
as sweet as honey, and the golden wattles on the other side, and all
smelling like seven o'clock; after which flowers be hanged!"

"Ay, lad! it is very refreshing; and it is Sunday, and we have got
away from the wicked for an hour or two; but in England there would be
a little white church out yonder, and a spire like an angel's
forefinger pointing from the grass to heaven, and the lads in their
clean smock-frocks like snow, and the wenches in their white stockings
and new shawls, and the old women in their scarlet cloaks and black
bonnets, all going one road, and a tinkle-tinkle from the belfry, that
would turn all these other sounds and colors and sweet smells holy, as
well as fair, on the Sabbath morn. Ah! England. Ah!"

"You will see her again--no need to sigh."

"Oh, I was not thinking of her in particular just then."

"Of who?"

"Of Susan!"

"Prejudice be hanged, this is a lovely land."

"So 'tis, Tom, so 'tis. But I'll tell you what puts me out a little
bit; nothing is what it sets up for here. If you see a ripe pear and
go to eat it,--it is a lump of hard wood. Next comes a thing the very
sight of which turns your stomach--and that is delicious, a loquot,
for instance. There now, look at that magpie! well, it is
Australia--so that magpie is a crow and not a magpie at all.
Everything pretends to be some old friend or other of mine, and turns
out a stranger. Here is nothing but surprises and deceptions. The
flowers make a point of not smelling, and the bushes that nobody
expects to smell, or wants to smell, they smell lovely.

"What does it matter where the smell comes from, so that you get it?"

"Why, Tom," replied George, opening his eyes, "it makes all the
difference. I like to smell a flower--flower is not complete without
smell--but I don't care if I never smell a bush till I die. Then the
birds they laugh and talk like Christians; they make me split my
sides, God bless their little hearts; but they won't chirrup. Oh,
dear, no, bless you, they leave the Christians to chirrup--they hold
conversations and giggle and laugh and play a thing like a fiddle--it
is Australia! where everything is inside-out and topsy-turvy. The
animals have four legs, so they jump on two. Ten-foot square of rock
lets for a pound a month; ten acres of grass for a shilling a year.
Roasted at Christmas, shiver o' cold on midsummer-day. The lakes are
grass, and the rivers turn their backs on the sea and run into the
heart of the land; and the men would stand on their heads, but I have
taken a thought, and I've found out why they don't."

"Why?"

"Because if they did their heads would point the same way a man's head
points in England."

Robinson laughed, and told George he admired the country for these
very traits. "Novelty for me against the world. Who'd come twelve
thousand miles to see nothing we couldn't see at home? Hang the same
old story always; where are we going, George?"

"Oh, not much farther, only about twelve miles from the camp?"

"Where to?"

"To a farmer I know. I am going to show you a lark, Tom," said George.
His eyes beamed benevolence on his comrade.

Robinson stopped dead short. "George," said he, "no! don't let us. I
would rather stay at home and read my book. You can go into temptation
and come out pure; I can't. I am one of those that, if I go into a
puddle up to my shoe, I must splash up to my middle."

"What has that to do with it?"

"Your proposing to me to go in for a lark on the Sabbath day.

"Why, Tom, am I the man to tempt you to do evil?" asked George, hurt.

"Why, no! but, for all that, you proposed a lark."

"Ay, but an innocent one, one more likely to lift your heart on high
than to give you ill thoughts."

"Well, this is a riddle;" and Robinson was intensely puzzled.

"Carlo," cried George, suddenly, "come here. I will not have you
hunting and tormenting those kangaroo rats to-day. Let us all be at
peace, if you please. Come to heel."

The friends strode briskly on, and a little after eleven o'clock they
came upon a small squatter's house and premises. "Here we are," cried
George, and his eyes glittered with innocent delight.

The house was thatched and whitewashed, and English was written on it
and on every foot of ground round it. A furzebush had been planted by
the door. Vertical oak palings were the fence, with a five-barred gate
in the middle of them. From the little plantation all the magnificent
trees and shrubs of Australia had been excluded with amazing
resolution and consistency, and oak and ash reigned safe from
overtowering rivals. They passed to the back of the house, and there
George's countenance fell a little, for on the oval grass-plot and
gravel walk he found from thirty to forty rough fellows, most of them
diggers.

"Ah, well," said he, on reflection, "we could not expect to have it
all to ourselves, and indeed it would be a sin to wish it, you know.
Now, Tom, come this way; here it is, here it is--there." Tom looked
up, and in a gigantic cage was a light brown bird.

He was utterly confounded. "What, is it this we came twelve miles to
see?"

"Ay! and twice twelve wouldn't have been much to me."

"Well, but what is the lark you talked of?"

"This is it."

"This? This is a bird."

"Well, and isn't a lark a bird?"

"Oh, ay! I see! ha! ha! ha! ha!"

Robinson's merriment was interrupted by a harsh remonstrance from
several of the diggers, who were all from the other end of the camp.

"Hold your ---- cackle," cried one, "he is going to sing;" and the
whole party had their eyes turned with expectation toward the bird.

Like most singers, he kept them waiting a bit. But at last, just at
noon, when the mistress of the house had warranted him to sing, the
little feathered exile began as it were to tune his pipes. The savage
men gathered round the cage that moment, and amid a dead stillness the
bird uttered some very uncertain chirps, but after a while he seemed
to revive his memories, and call his ancient cadences back him to one
by one, and string them sotto voce.

And then the same sun that had warmed his little heart at home came
glowing down on him here, and he gave music back for it more and more,
till at last--amid breathless silence and glistening eyes of the rough
diggers hanging on his voice--out burst in that distant land his
English song.

It swelled his little throat and gushed from him with thrilling force
and plenty, and every time he checked his song to think of its theme,
the green meadows, the quiet stealing streams, the clover he first
soared from, and the spring he sang so well, a loud sigh from many a
rough bosom, many a wild and wicked heart, told how tight the
listeners had held their breath to hear him; and when he swelled with
song again, and poured with all his soul the green meadows, the quiet
brooks, the honey clover and the English spring, the rugged mouths
opened and so stayed, and the shaggy lips trembled, and more than one
drop trickled from fierce unbridled hearts down bronzed and rugged
cheeks.

_Dulce dornurn!_

And these shaggy men, full of oaths and strife and cupidity, had once
been white-headed boys, and had strolled about the English fields with
little sisters and little brothers, and seen the lark rise, and heard
him sing this very song. The little playmates lay in the churchyard,
and they were full of oaths and drink and lusts and remorses--but no
note was changed in this immortal song. And so for a moment or two
years of vice rolled away like a dark cloud from the memory, and the
past shone out in the song-shine. They came back, bright as the
immortal notes that lighted them, those faded pictures and those
fleeted days; the cottage, the old mother's tears when he left her
without one grain of sorrow; the village-church and its simple chimes;
the clover-field hard by in which he lay and gamboled, while the lark
praised God overhead; the chubby playmates that never grew to be
wicked, the sweet hours of youth--and innocence--and home.



CHAPTER LXIV.

"WHAT will you take for him, mistress? I will give you five pounds for
him."

"No! no! I won't take five pounds for my bird!"

"Of course she won't," cried another, "she wouldn't be such a flat.
Here, missus," cried he, "I'll give you that for him;" and he extended
a brown hand with at least thirty new sovereigns glittering in it.

The woman trembled; she and her husband were just emerging from
poverty after a hard fight. "Oh!" she cried, "it is a shame to tempt a
poor woman with so much gold. We had six brought over, and all died on
the way but this one!" and she threw her white apron over her head,
not to see the glittering bribe.

"---- you, put the blunt up and don't tempt the woman," was the cry.
Another added: "Why, you fool, it wouldn't live a week if you had it,"
and they all abused the merchant. But the woman turned to him kindly
and said:

"You come to me every Sunday, and he shall sing to you. You will get
more pleasure from him so," said she, sweetly, "than if he was always
by you."

"So I will, old girl," replied the rough, in a friendly tone.

George stayed till the lark gave up singing altogether, and then he
said: "Now I am off. I don't want to hear bad language after that; let
us take the lark's chirp home to bed with us;" and they made off; and
true it was the pure strains dwelt upon their spirits, and refreshed
and purified these sojourners in a godless place. Meeting these two
figures on Sunday afternoon, armed each with a double-barreled gun and
a revolver, you would never have guessed what gentle thoughts
possessed them wholly. They talked less than they did coming, but they
felt so quiet and happy.

"The pretty bird," purred George (seeing him by the ear), "I feel
after him--there--as if I had just come out o' church."

"So do I, George, and I think his song must be a psalm, if we knew
all."

"That it is, for Heaven taught it him. We must try and keep all this
in our hearts when we get among the broken bottles, and foul language,
and gold," says George. "How sweet it all smells, sweeter than
before."

"That is because it is afternoon."

"Yes! or along of the music; that tune was a breath from home that
makes everything please me. Now this is the first Sunday that has
looked, and smelled, and sounded Sunday."

"George, it is hard to believe the world is wicked. Everything seems
good, and gentle, and at peace with heaven and earth."

A jet of smoke issued from the bush, followed by the report of a gun,
and Carlo, who had taken advantage of George's revery to slip on
ahead, gave a sharp howl, and spun round upon all fours.

"The scoundrels!" shrieked Robinson. And in a moment his gun was at
his shoulder, and he fired both barrels slap into the spot whence the
smoke had issued.

Both the men dashed up and sprang into the bush revolver in hand, but
ere they could reach it the dastard had run for it; and the scrub was
so thick pursuit was hopeless. The men returned full of anxiety for
Carlo.

The dog met them, his tail between his legs, but at sight of George he
wagged his tail, and came to him and licked George's hand, and walked
on with them, licking George's hand every now and then.

"Look, Tom, he is as sensible as a Christian. He knows the shot was
meant for him, though they didn't hit him."

By this time the men had got out of the wood, and pursued their road,
but not with tranquil hearts. Sunday ended with the noise of that
coward's gun. They walked on hastily, guns ready, fingers on
trigger--at war. Suddenly Robinson looked back, and stopped and drew
George's attention to Carlo. He was standing with all his four legs
wide apart, like a statue.

George called him; he came directly, and was for licking George's
hand, but George pulled him about and examined him all over.

"I wish they may not have hurt him after all, the butchers; they have,
too. See here, Tom, here is one streak of blood on his belly, nothing
to hurt, though, I do hope. Never mind, Carlo," cried George, "it is
only a single shot by what I can see, 'tisn't like when Will put the
whole charge into you, rabbit-shooting, is it, Carlo? No, says he; we
don't care for this, do we, Carlo?" cried George, rather boisterously.

"Make him go into that pool, there," said Robinson; "then he won't
have fever."

"I will; here--cess! cess!" He threw a stone into the pool of water
that lay a little off the road, and Carlo went in after it without
hesitation, though not with his usual alacrity. After an unsuccessful
attempt to recover the stone he swam out lower down, and came back to
the men and wagged his tail slowly, and walked behind George.

They went on.

"Tom," said George, after a pause, "I don't like it."

"Don't like what?"

"He never so much as shook himself."

"What of that? He did shake himself, I should say."

"Not as should be. Who ever saw a dog come out of the water and not
shake himself? Carlo, hie, Carlo!" and George threw a stone along the
ground, after which Carlo trotted; but his limbs seemed to work
stiffly; the stone spun round a sharp corner in the road, the dog
followed it.

"He will do now," said Robinson.

They walked briskly on. On turning the corner they found Carlo sitting
up and shivering, with the stone between his paws.

"We must not let him sit," said Tom; "keep his blood warm. I don't
think we ought to have sent him into the water."

"I don't know," muttered George, gloomily. "Carlo," cried he,
cheerfully, "don't you be down-hearted; there is nothing so bad as
faint-heartedness for man or beast. Come, up and away ye go, and shake
it off like a man."

Carlo got up and wagged his tail in answer, but he evidently was in no
mood for running; he followed languidly behind.

"Let us get home," said Robinson; "there is an old pal of mine that is
clever about dogs, he will cut the shot out if there is one in him,
and give him some physic."

The men strode on, and each, to hide his own uneasiness, chatted about
other matters; but all of a sudden Robinson cried out, "Why, where
_is_ the dog?" They looked back, and there was Carlo some sixty
yards in the rear, but he was not sitting this time, he was lying on
his belly.

"Oh! this is a bad job," cried George. The men ran up in real alarm;
Carlo wagged his tail as soon as they came near him, but he did not
get up.

"Carlo," cried George, despairingly, "you wouldn't do it, you couldn't
think to do it. Oh, my dear Carlo, it is only making up your mind to
live; keep up your heart, old fellow; don't go to leave us alone among
these villains. My poor, dear, darling dog! Oh, no! he won't live, he
can't live; see how dull his poor, dear eye is getting. Oh, Carlo!
Carlo!"

At the sound of his master's voice in such distress, Carlo whimpered,
and then he began to stretch his limbs out. At the sight of this
Robinson cried hastily:

"Rub him, George; we did wrong to send him into the water."

George rubbed him all over. After rubbing him a while, he said:

"Tom, I seem to feel him turning to dead under my hand."

George's hand in rubbing Carlo came round to the dog's shoulder, then
Carlo turned his head and for the third time began to lick George's
hand. George let him lick his hand and gave up rubbing him, for where
was the use? Carlo never left off licking his hand, but feebly, very
feebly, more and more feebly.

Presently, even while he was licking his hand, the poor thing's teeth
closed slowly on his loving tongue, and then he could lick the beloved
hand no more. Breath fluttered about his body a little while longer;
but in truth he had ceased to live when he could no longer kiss his
master's hand.

And so the poor single-hearted soul was gone.

George took it up tenderly in his arms. Robinson made an effort to
console him. "Don't speak to me, if you please," said George, gently
but quickly. He carried it home silently, and laid it silently down in
a corner of the tent.

Robinson made a fire and put some steaks on, and made George slice
some potatoes to keep him from looking always at what so little while
since was Carlo. Then they sat down silently and gloomily to dinner,
it was long past their usual hour and they were workingmen. Until we
die we dine, come what may. The first part of the meal passed in deep
silence. Then Robinson said sadly:

"We will go home, George. I fall into your wishes now. Gold can't pay
for what we go through in this hellish place."

"Not it," replied George, quietly.

"We are surrounded by enemies."

"Seems so," was the reply, in a very languid tone.

"Labor by day and danger by night."

"Ay," but in a most indifferent tone.

"And no Sabbath for us two."

"No!"

"I'll do my best for you, and when we have five hundred pounds more
you shall go home to Susan."

"Thank you. He was a good friend to us that lies there under my coat;
he used to lie over it, and then who dare touch it?"

"No! but don't give way to that, George--do eat a bit, it will do you
good."

"I will, Tom, I will. Thank you kindly. Ah! now I see why he came to
me and kept licking my hand so the moment he got the hurt. He had more
sense than we had; he knew he and I were to part that hour. And I
tormented his last minutes sending him into the water and after
stones, when the poor thing wanted to be bidding me good-by all the
while. Oh, dear! oh, dear!" and George pushed his scarce-tasted dinner
from him, and left the tent hurriedly, his eyes thick with tears.

Thus ended this human day so happily begun; and thus the poor dog paid
the price of fidelity this Sunday afternoon.

_Siste viator iter_--and part with poor Carlo--for whom there are
now no more little passing troubles--no more little simple joys. His
duty is performed, his race is run. Peace be to him, and to all simple
and devoted hearts. Ah me! how rare they are among men!


"What are you doing, Tom, if you please?"

"Laying down a gut line to trip them up when they get into our tent."

"When--who?"

"Those that shot Carlo."

"They won't venture near me.

"Won't they? What was the dog shot for? They will come--and come to
their death; to-night, I hope. Let them come! you will hear me cry
'Carlo' in their ears as I put my revolver to their skulls and pull
the trigger."

George said nothing, but he clinched his teeth. After a pause he
muttered, "We should pray against such thoughts."

Robinson was disappointed, no attack was made; in fact, even if such a
thing was meditated, the captain's friends watched his tent night and
day, and made such a feat a foolhardy enterprise, full of danger from
without and within.

In the course of the next week a good deal of rain fell and filled
many of the claims, and caused much inaction and distress among the
diggers, and Robinson guarded the tent, and wrote letters and studied
Australian politics, with a view to being shortly a member of Congress
in these parts. George had his wish at last and cruised about looking
for the home of the gold. George recollected to have seen what he
described as a river of quartz sixty feet broad, and running between
two black rocks. It ran in his head that gold in masses was there
locked up, for, argued he, all the nuggets of any size I have seen
were more than half quartz. Robinson had given up debating the point.

George was uneasy and out of spirits at not hearing from Susan for
several months, and Robinson was for indulging him in everything.

Poor George! he could not even find his river of quartz. And when he
used to come home day after day empty-handed and with this confession,
the other's lips used to twitch with the hard struggle not to laugh at
him; and he used to see the struggle and be secretly more annoyed than
if he had been laughed out at.

One afternoon Tom Robinson, internally despising the whole thing, and
perfectly sure in his own mind that there was no river of quartz, but
paternal and indulgent to his friend's one weakness, said to him:

"I'll tell you how to find this river of quartz, if it is anywhere
except in your own head."

"I shall be much obliged to you. How?"

"Jem has come back to camp and he tells me that Jacky is encamped with
a lot more close to the gully he is working--it was on the other side
the bush there-and Jacky inquired very kind after you."

"The little viper."

"He grinned from ear to ear, Jem tells me; and says he, 'Me come and
see George a good deal soon,' says he."

"If he does, George will tan his black hide for him."

"What makes you hold spite so long against poor Jacky?"

"He is a little sneaking varmint."

"He knows every part of this country, and he would show you 'the home
of the gold,'" observed Robinson, restraining his merriment with great
difficulty.

This cock would not fight, as vulgar wretches say. Jacky had rather
mortified George by deserting him upon the first discovery of gold.
"Dis a good deal stupid," was that worthy's remark on the second day.
"When I hunt tings run, and I run behind and catch dem. You hunt--it
not run--yet you not catch it always. Dat a good deal stupid. Before
we hunt gold you do many tings, now do one; dat a good deal stupid.
Before, you go so (erecting a forefinger); now you always so (crooking
it). Dat too stupid." And with this--whir! my lord was off to the
woods.

On the head of this came Abner limping in, and told how a savage had
been seen creeping after him with a battle-ax, and how he had lain
insensible for days, and now was lame for life. George managed to
forgive Jacky's unkind desertion, but for creeping after Abner and
"spoiling him for life," to use Abner's phrase, he vowed vengeance on
that black hide and heart.

Now if the truth must be told, Jacky had come back to the camp with
Jem, and would have marched before this into George's tent. But
Robinson, knowing how angry George was with him, and not wishing
either Jacky to be licked or George to be tomahawked, insisted on his
staying with Jem till he had smoothed down his friend's indignation.
Soon after this dialogue Robinson slipped out, and told Jacky to stay
with Jem and keep out of George's way for a day or two.

And now the sun began to set red as blood, and the place to sparkle
far and wide with the fiery rays emitted from a hundred thousand
bottles that lay sown broadcast over the land; and the thunder of the
cradles ceased, and the accordions came out all over five miles of
gold mine. Their gentler strains lasted till the sun left the sky;
then, just at dusk, came a tremendous discharge of musketry roaring,
rattling, and re-echoing among the rocks. This was tens of thousands
of diggers discharging their muskets and revolvers previous to
reloading them for the night; for, calm as the sun had set to the
music of accordions, many a deadly weapon they knew would be wanted to
defend life and gold ere that same tranquil sun should rise again.

Thus the tired army slept not at their ease, like other armies,
guarded by sentinels and pickets, but every man in danger every night
and every hour of it. Each man lay in his clothes with a weapon of
death in his hand; Robinson with two, a revolver and a cutlass ground
like a razor. Outside it was all calm and peaceful. No boisterous
revelry--all seemed to sleep innocent and calm in the moonlight after
the day of herculean toil.

Perhaps if any one eye could have visited the whole enormous camp, the
children of theft and of the night might have been seen prowling and
crawling from one bit of shade to another. But in the part where our
friends lay the moon revealed no human figures but Robinson's patrol,
three men, who, with a dark-lantern and armed to the teeth, went their
rounds and guarded forty tents, above all the captain's. It was at his
tent that guard was relieved every two hours. So all was watched the
livelong night.

Two pointed rocks connected at the base faced the captain's tent. The
silver rays struck upon their foreheads wet with the vapors of night,
and made them like frost seen through phosphorus. It was startling.
The soul of silver seemed to be sentinel and eye the secret gold
below.

And now a sad, a miserable sound grated on the ear of night. A
lugubrious quail doled forth a grating, dismal note at long but
measured intervals, offending the ear and depressing the heart. This
was the only sound Nature afforded for hours. The neighboring bush,
though crammed with the merriest souls that ever made feathers vibrate
and dance with song, was like a tomb of black marble; not a
sound--only this little raven of a quail tolled her harsh, lugubrious
crake.

Those whose musical creed is Time before Sentiment might have put up
with this night-bird; for to do her justice she was a perfect
timist--one crake in a bar the livelong night; but her tune--ugh! She
was the mother of all files that play on iron throughout the globe.
Crake!--crake!--crake! untuning the night.

An eye of red light suddenly opened in the silver stream shows three
men standing by a snowy tent. It is the patrol waiting to be relieved.
Three more figures emerge from the distant shade and join them. The
first three melt into the shade.

Crake!

The other three remain and mutter. Now they start on their rounds.
"What is that?" mutters one.

"I'll go and see." Click.

"Well!"

"Oh, it is only that brown donkey that cruises about here. She will
break her neck in one of the pits some day."

"Not she. She is not such an ass."

These three melted into the night, going their rounds; and now nothing
is left in sight but a thousand cones of snow, and the donkey paddling
carefully among the pits.

Craake!

Now the donkey stands a moment still in the moonlight--now he paddles
slowly away and disappears on the dark side the captain's tent. What
is he doing? He stoops--he lies down--he takes off his head and skin
and lays them down.

It is a man! He draws his knife and puts it between his teeth. A
pistol is in his hand--he crawls on his stomach--the tent is between
him and the patrol. His hand is inside the tent--he finds the opening
and winds like a serpent into the tent.

Craake!



CHAPTER LXV.

BLACK WILL no sooner found himself inside the tent than he took out a
dark lantern and opened the slide cautiously. There lay in one corner
the two men fast asleep side by side. Casting the glare around he saw
at his feet a dog with a chain round him. It startled him for a
moment--but only for a moment. He knew that dog was dead.
mephistopheles had told him within an hour after the feat was
performed. Close to his very hand was a pair of miner's boots. He
detached them from the canvas and passed them out of the tent; and now
looking closely at the ground he observed a place where the soil
seemed loose. His eye flashed with triumph at this. He turned up the
openings of the tent behind him to make his retreat clear if
necessary. He made at once for the loose soil, and the moment he moved
forward Robinson's gut-lines twisted his feet from under him. He fell
headlong in the middle, and half a dozen little bells rang furiously
at the sleepers' heads.

Up jumped Tom and George, weapons in hand, but not before Black Will
had wrenched himself clear and bounded back to the door. At the door,
in his rage at being balked, he turned like lightning and leveled his
pistol at Robinson, who was coming at him cutlass in hand. The
ex-thief dropped on his knees and made a furious upward cut at his
arm. At one and the same moment the pistol exploded and the cutlass
struck it and knocked it against the other side of the tent. The
bullet passed over Robinson's head. Black Will gave a yell so
frightful that for a moment it paralyzed the men, and even with this
yell he burst backward through the opening, and with a violent wrench
of his left hand brought the whole tent down and fled, leaving George
and Robinson struggling in the canvas like cats in an empty
flour-sack.

The baffled burglar had fled but a few yards, when, casting his eye
back, he saw their helplessness. Losing danger in hatred he came back,
not now to rob, but murder, his left hand lifted high and gleaming
like his cruel eye. As he prepared to plunge his knife through the
canvas, flash bang! flash bang! bang! came three pistol-shots in his
face from the patrol, who were running right slap at him not thirty
yards off, and now it was life or death. He turned and ran for his
life, the patrol blazing and banging at him. Eighteen shots they fired
at him, one after another; more than one cut his clothes, and one went
clean through his hat, but he was too fleet, he distanced them; but at
the reports diggers peeped out of distant tents, and at sight of him
running, flash bang went a pistol at him from every tent he passed,
and George and Robinson, who had struggled out into the night, saw the
red flashes issue, and then heard the loud reports bellow and re-echo
as he dodged about down the line, and then all was still and calm as
death under the cold, pure stars.

Craake!

They put up their tent again. The patrol came panting back. "He has
got off--but he carried some of our lead in him. Go to bed, captain,
we won't leave your tent all night."

Robinson and George lay down again thus guarded. The patrol sat by the
tent. Two slept, one loaded the arms again and watched. In a few
minutes the friends were actually fast asleep again, lying silent as
the vast camp lay beneath the silver stars.

Craake!

And now it was cold, much colder than before, darker, too, no moon
now, only the silver stars; it makes one shiver. Nature seemed to lie
stark and stiff and dead, and that accursed craake her dirge. All
tended to shivering and gloom. Yet a great event approached.

Craake!

A single event, a thousand times weightier to the world, each time it
comes, than if with one fell stroke all the kingdoms of the globe
became republics and all the republics empires, so to remain a
thousand years. An event a hundred times more beautiful than any other
thing the eye can hope to see while in the flesh, yet it regaled the
other senses, too, and blessed the universal heart.

Before this prodigious event came its little heralds sweeping across
the face of night. First came a little motion of cold air--it was
dead-still before; then an undefinable freshness; then a very slight
but rather grateful smell from the soil of the conscious earth. Next
twittered from the bush one little hesitating chirp.

Craake! went the lugubrious quail, pooh-poohing the suggestion. Then
somehow rocks and forest and tents seemed less indistinct in shape;
outlines peeped where masses had been.

Jug! jug! went a bird with a sweet jurgle in his deep throat. Craake!
went the ill-omened one directly, disputing the last inch of nature.
But a gray thrush took up the brighter view; otock otock tock! o tuee
o o! o tuee oo! o chio chee! o chio chee! sang the thrush, with a
decision as well as a melody that seemed to say: "Ah! but I am sure of
it; I am sure, I am sure, wake up, joy! joy!"

From that moment there was no more craake. The lugubrious quail shut
up in despair, perhaps in disdain,* and out gurgled another jug! jug!
jug! as sweet a chuckle as Nature's sweet voice ever uttered in any
land; and with that a mist like a white sheet came to light, but only
for a moment, for it dared not stay to be inspected, "I know who is
coming, I'm off," and away it crept off close to the ground--and
little drops of dew peeped sparkling in the frost-powdered grass.

* Like anonymous detraction before _vox populi._

Yock! yock! O chio faliera po! Otock otock tock! o chio chee! o chio
chee!

Jug! jug! jug! jug!

Off we go! off we go!

And now a thin red streak came into the sky, and perfume burst from
the bushes, and the woods rang, not only with songs some shrill, some
as sweet as honey, but with a grotesque yet beautiful electric
merriment of birds that can only be heard in this land of wonders. The
pen can give but a shadow of the drollery and devilry of the sweet,
merry rogues that hailed the smiling morn. Ten thousand of them, each
with half a dozen songs, besides chattering and talking and imitating
the fiddle, the fife and the trombone. Niel gow! niel gow! niel gow!
whined a leather-head. Take care o' my hat! cries a thrush, in a soft,
melancholy voice; then with frightful harshness and severity, where is
your bacca-box! your box! your box! then before any one could answer,
in a tone that said devil may care where the box is or anything else,
gyroc de doc! gyroc de doc! roc de doc! cheboc cheboc! Then came a
tremendous cackle ending with an obstreperous hoo! hoo! ha! from the
laughing jackass, who had caught sight of the red streak in the
sky--harbinger, like himself, of morn; and the piping crows or
whistling magpies modulating and humming and chanting, not like birds,
but like practiced musicians with rich baritone voices, and the next
moment creaking just for all the world like Punch, or barking like a
pug dog. And the delicious thrush with its sweet and mellow tune.
Nothing in an English wood so honey-sweet as his otock otock tock! o
tuee o  o! o tuee o o! o chio chee! o chio chee!

But the leather-heads beat all. Niel gow! niel gow! niel gow! off we
go! off we go! off we go! followed by rapid conversations, the words
unintelligible but perfectly articulate, and interspersed with the
oddest chuckles, plans of pleasure for the day, no doubt. Then ri
tiddle tiddle tiddle tiddle tiddle tiddle! playing a thing like a
fiddle with wires; then "off we go" again, and bow! wow! wow! jug!
jug! jug! jug! jug! and the whole lot in exuberant spirits, such
extravagance of drollery, such rollicking jollity, evidently splitting
their sides with fun, and not able to contain themselves for it.

Oh! it was twelve thousand miles above the monotonous and scanty
strains of a European wood; and when the roving and laughing, and
harshly demanding bacca-boxes and then as good as telling you they
didn't care a feather for bacca-boxes or anything else, gyroc de doc!
cheboc cheboc cheboc! and loudly announcing their immediate departure,
and perching in the same place all the more and sweet, low modulations
ending in putting on the steam and creaking like Punch, and then
almost tumbling off the branches with laughing at the general
accumulation of nonsense--when all this drollery and devilry and joy
and absurdity were at their maddest, and a thousand feathered
fountains bubbling song were at their highest, then came the cause of
all the merry hubbub--the pinnacles of rock glowed burnished gold,
Nature, that had crept from gloom to pallor, burst from pallor to
light and life and burning color--the great sun's forehead came with
one gallant stride into the sky--and it was day!

Out shone ten thousand tents of every size and hue and shape, from
Isaac Levi's rood of white canvas down to sugar-loaves, and even to
miserable roofs built on the bare ground with slips of bark, under
which unlucky diggers crept at night like badgers--roofed beds--no
more--the stars twinkling through chinks in the tester. The myriad
tents were clustered for full five miles on each side of the river,
and it wound and sparkled in and out at various distances, and shone
like a mirror in the distant background.

At the first ray the tents disgorged their inmates, and the human hive
began to hum; then came the fight, the maneuvering, the desperate
wrestle with Nature, and the keen fencing with their fellows--in
short, the battle--to which, that nothing might be wanting, out burst
the tremendous artillery of ten thousand cradles louder than thunder,
and roaring and crashing without a pause.

The base of the two-peaked rock that looked so silvery in the moon is
now seen to be covered with manuscript advertisements posted on it; we
can only read two or three as we run to our work:


"_Immense_ reduction in eggs only one shilling each!!! Bevan's
store."

"Go-ahead library and registration office for new chums. Tom Long in
the dead-horse gully."

"If this meets the i of Tom Bowles he will ear of is pal in the
iron-bark gully."

"This is to give notice that whereas my wife Elizabeth Sutton has
taken to drink and gone off with my mate Bob, I will not be answerable
for your debts nor hold any communication with you in future.

                                   "JAMES SUTTON."


A young Jew, Nathan, issued from Levi's tent with a rough table and
two or three pair of scales and other paraphernalia of a gold assayer
and merchant. This was not the first mine by many the old Jew had
traded in.

His first customers this morning were George and Robinson.

"Our tent was attacked last night, Mr. Levi."

"Again? humph!"

"Tom thinks he has got enemies in the camp."

"Humph! the young man puts himself too forward not to have enemies."

"Well," said George, quickly, "if he makes bitter enemies he makes
warm friends."

George then explained that his nerve and Robinson's were giving way
under the repeated attacks.

"We have had a talk and we will sell the best part of our dust to you,
sir. Give him the best price you can afford for Susan's sake."

And away went George to look for his quartz river, leaving the
ex-thief to make the bargain and receive the money.

In the transaction that followed Mr. Levi did not appear to great
advantage. He made a little advance on the three pounds per ounce on
account of the quantity, but he would not give a penny above three
guineas. No! business was business; he could and would have _given_
George a couple of hundred pounds in day of need, but in buying and
selling the habits of a life could not be shaken off. Wherefore
Robinson kept back eight pounds of gold-dust and sold him the rest for
notes of the Sydney Bank.

"Well, sir," said Tom, cheerfully, "now my heart is light; what we
have got we can carry round our waists now by night or day. Well,
friend, what do you want, poking your nose into the tent?"

Coming out suddenly he had run against a man who was in a suspicious
attitude at the entrance.

"No offense," muttered the man, "I wanted to sell a little gold-dust."

Levi heard what Robinson said, and came quickly out.

He seated himself behind the scales.

"Where is your gold?"

The man fumbled and brought out about an ounce. All the time he
weighed it, the Jew's keen eye kept glancing into his face he lowered
his eyes and could not conceal a certain uneasiness. When he was gone,
Levi asked Robinson whether he knew that face.

"No," said Robinson, "I don't."

Levi called Nathan out.

"Nathan, look at that man, follow him cautiously, and tell me where we
have seen him; above all, know him again. Surely that is the face of
an enemy."

Then the old man asked himself where he had seen such an eye and brow
and shambling walk as that; and he fell into a brown study and groped
among many years for the clew.

"What! is Erin-go-bragh up with the sun for once?" cried Robinson to
Mary McDogherty, who passed him spade on shoulder.

"Sure if she warn't she'd never keep up with Newgut," was the instant
rejoinder.

"Hem! how is your husband, Mary?"

"Och, captain, it is a true friend ye are for inquiring. Then it's
tied in a knot he is.

"Mercy on us, tied in a knot?"

"Tied in a knot intirely--wid the rheumatism--and it's tin days I'm
working for him and the childhre, and my heart's broke against gravel
and stone intirely. I wish it was pratees we are digging, I'd maybe
dig up a dinner any way."

"There is no difficulty, the secret is to look in the right place."

"Ay! ay! take your divairsion, ye sly rogue!--I wish ye had my five
childhre."

"Oh! you spiteful cat!"

"Well, Ede, come to sell?"

"A little."

"What is to do out there? seems a bit of a crowd."

"What, haven't you heard? it is your friend Jem! he has got a slice of
luck, bought a hole of a stranger, saw the stuff glitter, so offered
him thirty pounds; he was green and snapped at it; and if Jem didn't
wash four ounces out the first cradleful I'm a Dutchman."

"Well, I am right glad of that."

A young digger now approached respectfully. "Police report, captain."

"Hand it here. May I sit at your table a minute, Mr. Levi?" Mr. Levi
bowed assent.

"No clew to the parties that attacked our tent last night?"

"None at present, captain, but we are all on the lookout. Some of us
will be sure to hear of something, course of the day, and then I'll
come and tell you. Will you read the report? There is the week's
summary as well."

"Of course I will. Mum! mum! 'Less violence on the whole this week;
more petty larceny.' That is bad. I'll put it down, Mr. Levi. I am
determined to put it down. What an infernal row the cradles make. What
is this? 'A great flow of strangers into the camp, most thought to be
honest, but some great roughs; also a good many Yankees and Germans
come in at the south side.' What is this? 'A thief lynched yesterday.
Flung headforemost into a hole and stuck in the clay. Not expected to
live after it.' Go it, my boys! Didn't I say law is the best for all
parties, thieves included? Leave it, Andrew, I will examine it with
the utmost minuteness."

The dog used fine words on these occasions, that he might pass for a
pundit with his clique, and being now alone he pored over his
police-sheet as solemn and stern as if the nation depended on his
investigations.

A short explosion of laughter from Andrew interrupted this grave
occupation. The beak looked up with offended dignity, and, in spite of
a mighty effort, fell a sniggering. For following Andrew's eyes he saw
two gig umbrellas gliding erect and peaceful side by side among the
pits.

"What on earth are they?"

"Chinamen, captain. They are too lazy to dig. They go about all day
looking at the heaps and poking all over the camp. They have got eyes
like hawks. It is wonderful, I am told, what they contrive to pick up
first and last. What hats! Why, one of 'm would roof a tent."

"Hurroo!"

"What is up now?"

"Hurroo!" And up came Mary McDogherty dancing and jumping as only
Irish ever jumped. She had a lump of dim metal in one hand and a
glittering mass in the other. She came up to the table with a
fantastic spring and spanked down the sparkling mass on it, bounding
back one step like india-rubber even as she struck the table.

"There, ould gintleman, what will ye be after giving me for that? Sure
the luck is come to the right colleen at last."

"I deal but in the precious metals and stones," replied Isaac,
quietly.

"Sure, and isn't gould a precious metal?"

"Do you offer me this for gold? This is not even a metal. It is
mica--yellow mica.

"Mikee?" cried Mary, ruefully, with an inquiring look.

At this juncture in ran George, hot as fire. "There!" cried he,
triumphantly to Robinson, "was I right or wrong? What becomes of your
gold-dust?" And he laid a nugget as big as his fist on the table.

"Ochone!" cried the Irishwoman, "they all have the luck barrin' poor
Molly McDogherty."

The mica was handled, and George said to her compassionately, "You
see, my poor girl, the first thing you should do is to heft it in your
hand. Now see, your lump is not heavy like--"

"Pyrites!" said Isaac, dryly, handing George back his lump. "No!
pyrites is heavier than mica--and gold than pyrites."

"Mr. Levi, don't go to tell me this is not a metal," remonstrated
George, rather sulkily, "for I won't have it."

"Nay, it is a metal," replied Levi, calmly, "and a very useful metal,
but not of the precious metals. It is iron."

"How can it be iron when it is yellow? And how is one to know iron
from gold, at any rate?"

"Be patient, my son." said the old Jew calmly, "and learn. Take this
needle. Here is a scale of gold; take it up on the needle-point. You
have done it. Why? Because gold is a soft metal. Now take up this
scale from your pyrites?"

"I can't."

"No, because iron is a hard metal. Here is another childish test--a
bloodstone, called by some the touchstone. Rub the pyrites on it. It
colors it not--a hard metal. Now rub this little nugget of pure gold I
have just bought."

"Ay! this stains the stone yellow."

"A soft metal. Here in this little phial is muriatic acid. Pour a drop
on my nugget. The metal defies it. Now pour on your pyrites. See how
it smokes and perishes. It cannot resist the acid. There are many
other tests, but little needed. No metal, no earthly substance,
resembles gold in the least."

"Not to a Jew's eye," whispered Robinson.

"And much I marvel that any man or even any woman who has been in a
gold mine and seen and handled virgin gold should take mica" (here he
knocked the mica clean off the table) "or pyrites" (here he spanged
that in another direction) "for the royal metal."

"I'll tell you what to do, Mary," began Robinson, cheerfully. "Hallo!
she is crying. Here is a faint heart."

"Och! captain dear, Pat an' me we are kilt right out for want of luck.
Oh! oh! We niver found but one gould--and that was mikee. We can't
fall upon luck of any sort--good, bad or indifferent--that is where
I'm broke and spiled and kilt hintirely. Oh! oh! oh!"

"Don't cry. You have chosen a bad spot."

"Captain, avick, they do be turning it up like carrots on both sides
of huz. And I dig right down as if I'd go through the 'orld back to
dear old Ireland again. He! he! he! oh! oh! An' I do be praying to the
Virgin at every stroke of the spade, I do, and she sends us no gould
at all at all, barrin' mikee, bad cess to 't. Oh!"

"That is it. You are on two wrong tacks. You dig perpendicular and
pray horizontal. Now you should dig horizontal and pray
perpendicular."

"Och! captain, thim's hard words for poor Molly McDogherty to quarry
through."

"What is that in your hand?"

"Sure it is an illigant lump of lead I found," replied poor Mary; the
base metal rising in estimation since her gold turned out dross. "Ye
are great with the revolver, captain," said she, coaxingly, "ye'll be
afther giving me the laste pinch of the rale stuff for it?"

Robinson took the lump. "Good heavens! what a weight!" cried he. He
eyed it keenly. "Come, Mr. Levi," cried he, "here is a find; be
generous. She is unlucky."

"I shall be just," said the old man gravely. He weighed the lump and
made a calculation on paper, then handed her forty sovereigns.

She looked at them. "Oh, now, it is mocking me ye are, old man;" and
she would not take the money. On this he put it coolly down on the
table.

"What is it at all?" asked she, faintly.

"Platinum," replied Isaac, coldly.

"And a magnificent lump of it!" cried Robinson, warmly.

"Och, captain! och, captain, dear! and what is plateenum at all--if ye
plaze?"

"It is not like your mica," said Isaac. "See, it is heavier than gold,
and far more precious than silver. It has noble qualities. It resists
even the simple acid that dissolves gold. Fear not to take the money.
I give you but your metal's value, minus the merchant's just profit.
Platinum is the queen of the metals."

"Och, captain, avick! och! och! come here till I eat you!" And she
flung her arm round Robinson's neck, and bestowed a little furious
kiss on him. Then she pranced away; then she pranced back. "Platinum,
you are the boy; y'are the queen of the mitals. May the Lord bless
you, ould gentleman, and the SAINTS BLESS YOU! and the VIRGIN MARY
BLESS YOU!"* And she made at Isaac with the tears in her eyes, to kiss
him; but he waved her off with calm, repulsive dignity. "Hurroo!" And
the child of Nature bounded into the air like an antelope, and frisked
three times; then she made another set at them. "May you live till the
skirts of your coat knock your brains out, the pair of ye! hurroo!"
Then with sudden demureness, "An' here's wishing you all sorts of
luck, good, bad an' indifferent, my darlin's. Plateenum foriver, and
gould to the Divil," cried she, suddenly, with a sort of musical
war-shout, the last words being uttered three feet high in air, and
accompanied with a vague kick, utterly impossible in that position
except to Irish, and intended, it is supposed, to send the obnoxious
metal off the surface of the globe forever. And away she danced.

* These imprecations are printed on the ascending scale by way of
endeavor to show how the speaker delivered them.

Breakfast now! and all the cradles stopped at once.

"What a delightful calm," said Robinson, "now I can study my
police-sheet at my ease."

This morning, as he happened to be making no noise, the noise of
others worried him.

"Mr. Levi, how still and peaceful they are when their time comes to
grub. 'The still sow sups the kail,' as we used to say in the north;
the English turn the proverb differently, they say 'The silent hog--'"

"Jabber! jabber! jabber!--aie! aie!"

"Hallo! there's a scrimmage! and there go all the fools rushing to see
it. I'll go, too!"

Alas! poor human nature; the row was this. The peaceful children of
the moon, whom last we saw gliding side by side, vertical and
seemingly imperturbable, had yielded to the _genius loci,_ and were
engaged in bitter combat, after the manner of their nation. The gig
umbrellas were resolved into their constituent parts; the umbrellas
proper, or hats, lay on the ground--the sticks or men rolled over one
another scratching and biting. Europe wrenched them asunder with much
pain, and held them back by their tails, grinning horribly at each
other, and their long claws working unamiably.

The diggers were remonstrating; their morality was shocked.

"Is that the way to fight? What are fists given us for, ye varmint?"

Robinson put himself at the head of the general sentiment. "I must do
a bit of beak here!!!" cried he; "bring those two tom-cats up before
me!!"

The proposal was received with acclamation. A high seat was made for
the self-constituted beak, and Mr. Stevens was directed to make the
Orientals think that he was the lawful magistrate of the mine. Mr.
Stevens, entering into the fun, persuaded the Orientals, who were now
gig umbrellas again, that Robinson was the mandarin who settled
property, and possessed, among other trifles, the power of life and
death. On this they took off their slippers before him, and were
awestruck, and secretly wished they had not kicked up a row, still
more that they had stayed quiet by the banks of the Hoang-ho.

Robinson settled himself, demanded a pipe, and smoked calm and
terrible, while his myrmidons kept their countenances as well as they
could. After smoking in silence a while, he demanded of the Chinese,
"What was the row?"

1st Chinaman. "Jabber! jabber! jabber!"

2d Chinaman. "Jabber! jabber! jabber!"

Both. "Jabber! jabber! jabber!"

"What is that? Can't they speak any English at all?"

"No!"

"No wonder they can't conduct themselves, then," remarked a digger.

The judge looked him into the earth for the interruption.

"You get the story from them, and tell it."

After a conference, Mr. Stevens came forward.

"It is about a nugget of gold, which is claimed by both parties."

Robinson. "Stop! bring that nugget into court; that is the regular
course."

Great interest began to be excited, and all their necks craned
forward--when Mr. Stevens took from one of the Chinese the cause of so
sanguinary a disturbance, and placed it on the judge's table. A roar
of laughter followed--it was between a pea and a pin's head in
magnitude.

Robinson. "You know this is shocking. Asia, I am ashamed of you.
Silence in the court! Proceed with the evidence."

Mr. Stevens. "This one saw the gold shining, and he said to the other,
'Ah!'"

Robinson (writing his notes). "Said--to--the-other--'Ah!'--Stop! what
was the Chinese for 'ah'?"

Stevens. "'Ah!"

Robinson. "Oh!"

Andrew. "Come! the beggars have got hold of some of our words!"

Robinson. "Silence in the court!"

Andrew. "I ask pardon, captain."

Stevens. "But the other pounced on it first, so they both claim it."

Robinson. "Well! I call it a plain case."

Stevens. "So I told them."

Robinson. "Exactly! Which do you think ought to have it?"

Stevens. "Why, I told them we have a proverb--'Losers,
seekers--finders, keepers.'"

Robinson. "Of course; and which was the finder?"

Stevens. "Oh! of course this one that--hum! Well, to be sure he only
said 'ah!' he did not point. Then perhaps--but on the other
hand--hum!"

Robinson. "Why, don't you see? but no!--yes! why it must be the one
that--ugh! Drat you both! why couldn't one of you find it, and the
other another?"

Robinson was puzzled. At last he determined that this his first
judgment should satisfy both parties.

"Remove the prisoners," said he; "are they the prisoners or the
witnesses? remove them anyway, and keep them apart."

Robinson then searched his pockets, and produced a little gold
swan-shot scarce distinguishable from the Chinese. He put this on the
table, and took up the other.

"Fetch in number one!"

The Chinaman came in with obeisances and misgivings; but when the
judge signed to him to take up the gold, which he mistook for the
cause of quarrel, his face lightened with a sacred joy--he receded,
and with a polite gesture cleared a space; then, advancing one foot
with large and lofty grace, he addressed the judge, whose mouth began
to open with astonishment, in slow, balanced and musical sentences.
This done, he retired with three flowing salaams, to which the judge
replied with three little nods.

"What on earth did the beggar say? What makes you grin, Mr. Stevens?"

Stevens. "He said--click!"

Robinson. "Come! tell me first, laugh after."

Stevens. "He said, 'May your highness flourish like a tree by the side
of a stream that never overflows, yet is never dry, but
glides--(click!)--even and tranquil as the tide of your prosperity--'"

Robinson. "Well, I consent!"

Stevens. "'May dogs defile the graves of your enemies! '"

Robinson. "With all my heart! provided I am not dancing over them at
the time."

Stevens. "When satiated with earthly felicity, may you be received in
paradise by seventy dark-eyed houris--'"

Robinson. "Oh! my eye!"

Stevens. "Click! 'Each bearing in her hand the wine of the faithful;
and may the applause of the good at your departure resemble the waves
of the ocean beating musically upon rocky caverns. Thy servant,
inexperienced in oratory, retires abashed at the greatness of his
subject, and the insignificance of his expressions.' So then he cut
his stick!"

Robinson. "A very sensible speech! Well, boys, I'm not greedy; I take
the half of that offer, and give you the rest--bring in the other
gentleman!"

No. 2 advanced with reverences and misgivings. Robinson placed the
gold on the table and assigned it to him. A sacred joy illumined him,
and he was about to retire with deep obeisances.

"Where is his speech?" cried the judge ruefuly.

Stevens explained to him that the other had returned thanks. On this
No. 2 smiled assentingly, and advancing delivered the following
sentences:

"Your slave lay writhing in adversity, despoiled by the unprincipled.
He was a gourd withered by the noonday sun, until your virtues
descended like the dew, and refreshed him with your justice and
benignity.

"Wherefore hear now the benediction of him whom your clemency has
raised from despair.

"May your shadow increase and cover many lands. May your offspring be
a nation dwelling in palaces with golden roofs and walls of ivory, and
on the terraces may peacocks be as plentiful as sparrows are to the
undeserving. May you live many centuries shining as you now shine; and
at your setting may rivulets of ink dug by the pens of poets flow
through meadows of paper in praise of the virtues that embellish you
here on earth. Sing-tu-Che, a person of small note but devoted to your
service, wishes these frivolous advantages to the Pearl of the West,
on whom be honor."

Chorus of diggers. "My eye!"

Robinson rose with much gravity and delivered himself thus:

"Sing-tu-Che, you are a trump, an orator, and a humbug. All the better
for you. May felicity attend you. Heichster guchster--honi soit qui
mal y pense--donner und blitzen--tempora mutantur--O mia cara and pax
vobiscum. The court is dissolved."

It was, and I regret to add that Judge Robinson's concluding sentences
raised him greatly in the opinion of the miners.

"Captain knows a thing or two."

"If ever we send one to parliament that is the man."

"Halo! you fellows, come here! come here!"

A rush was made toward Jem, who was roaring and gesticulating at Mr.
Levi's table. When they came up they found Jem black and white with
rage, and Mr. Levi seated in calm indifference.

"What is it?" asked Robinson.

"The merchant refuses my gold."

"I refuse no man's gold," objected Levi coolly, "but this stuff is not
gold."

"Not gold-dust," cried a miner; and they all looked with wonder at the
rejected merchandise.

Mr. Levi took the dust and poured it out from one hand to the other;
he separated the particles and named them by some mighty instinct.

"Brass--or-molu--gilt platinum to give it weight; this is from
Birmingham, not from Australia, nor nature."

"Such as it is it cost me thirty pounds," cried Jem. "Keep it. I shall
find him. My spade shall never go into the earth again till I'm quits
with this one."

"That is right," roared the men, "bring him to us, and the captain
shall sit in judgment again;" and the men's countenances were gloomy,
for this was a new roguery and struck at the very root of gold
digging.

"I'll put it down, Mr. Levi," said Robinson, after the others had gone
to their work; "here is a new dodge, Brummagem planted on us so far
from home. I will pull it down with a tenpenny cord but I'll end it."

Crash! went ten thousand cradles; the mine had breakfasted. I wish I
could give the European reader an idea of the magnitude of this sound
whose cause was so humble. I must draw on nature for a comparison.

Did you ever stand upon a rocky shore at evening when a great storm
has suddenly gone down, leaving the waves about as high as they were
while it raged? Then there is no roaring wind to dull the clamor of
the tremendous sea as it lashes the long re-bellowing shore. Such was
the sound of ten thousand cradles; yet the sound of each one was
insignificant. Hence an observation and a reflection--the latter I
dedicate to the lovers of antiquity--that multiplying sound, magnifies
it in a way science has not yet accounted for; and that, though men
are all dwarfs, Napoleon included, man is a giant.

The works of man are so prodigious they contradict all we see of any
individual's powers; and even so when you had seen and heard one man
rock one cradle, it was all the harder to believe that a few thousand
of them could rival thunder, avalanches, and the angry sea lashing the
long reechoing shore at night. These miserable wooden cradles lost
their real character when combined in one mighty human effort; it
seemed as if giant labor had stretched forth an arm huge as an arm of
the sea and rocked one enormous engine, whose sides where these great
primeval rocks, and its mouth a thundering sea.

Crash! from meal to meal!

The more was Robinson surprised when, full an hour before dinner-time,
this mighty noise all of a sudden became feebler and feebler, and
presently human cries of a strange character made their way to his ear
through the wooden thunder.

"What on earth is up now?" thought he--"an earthquake?"

Presently he saw at about half a mile off a vast crowd of miners
making toward him in tremendous excitement. They came on, swelled
every moment by fresh faces, and cries of vengeance and excitement
were now heard, which the wild and savage aspect of the men rendered
truly terrible. At last he saw and comprehended all at a glance.

There were Jem and two others dragging a man along whose white face
and knocking knees betrayed his guilt and his terror. Robinson knew
him directly; it was Walker, who had been the decoy-duck the night his
tent was robbed.

"Here is the captain! Hurrah! I've got him, captain. This is the
beggar that peppered the hole for me, and now we will pepper him!"

A fierce burst of exultation from the crowd. They thirsted for
revenge. Jem had caught the man at the other end of the camp, and his
offense was known by this time to half the mine.

"Proceed regularly, Jem," said Robinson. "Don't condemn the man
unheard."

"Oh, no! He shall be tried, and you shall be the judge."

"I consent," said Robinson, somewhat pompously.

Then arose a cry that made him reflect.

"Lynch! Lynch! a seat for Judge Lynch!" and in a moment a
judgment-seat was built with cradles, and he was set on high, with six
strange faces scowling round him for one of his own clique. He
determined to back out of the whole thing.

"No, no!" cried he; "that is impossible. I cannot be a judge in such a
serious matter."

"Why not?" roared several voices.

"Why not? Because I am not a regular beak; because I have not got
authority from the Crown."

There was a howl of derision.

"We give you authority!"

"We order you to be judge!"

"We are King, Lords, and Commons!"

"Do what we bid you, or," added a stranger, "we will hang you and the
prisoner with one rope!"

Grim assent of the surrounding faces; Robinson sat down on the
judgment-seat not a little discomposed.

"Now then," remonstrated one; "what are you waiting for? Name the
jury."

"Me!" "Me!" "Me!" "I!" "I!" "I!" and there was a rush for the office.

"Keep cool," replied another. "Lynch law goes quick, but it goes by
rule. Judge, name the jury."

Robinson, a man whose wits seldom deserted him, at once determined to
lead, since he could not resist. He said with dignity: "I shall choose
one juryman from each of the different countries that are working in
this mine, that no nation may seem to be slighted, for this gold
belongs to all the world."

"Hurrah! Well done, judge. Three cheers for Judge Lynch!"

"When I call a country, give me a name, which I will inscribe on my
report of the proceedings. I want a currency lad first."

"Here is one. William Parker."

"Pass over. France."

"Present. Pierre Chanot."

"Germany."

"Here. Hans Muller."

"Holland."

"Here. Jan Van der Stegen."

Spain and Italy were called, but no reply. Asleep, I take it.

"United States."

"Here. Nathan Tucker."

Here Robinson, casting his eyes round, spied McLaughlan, and, being
minded to dilute the severity of his jury, he cried out, "Scotland.
McLaughlan, you shall represent her."

No answer.

"McLaughlan," cried several voices, "where are ye? Don't you hear
Judge Lynch speak to you?"

"Come, McLaughlan, come over; you are a respectable man."

Mr. McLaughlan intimated briefly in his native dialect that he was,
and intended to remain so; by way of comment on which he made a bolt
from the judgment-hall, but was rudely seized and dragged before the
judge.

"For Heaven's sake, don't be a fool, McLaughlan. No man must refuse to
be a juryman in a trial by lynch. I saw a Quaker stoned to death for
it in California."

"I guess I was thyar," said a voice behind the judge, who shifted
uneasily.

McLaughlan went into the jury-box with a meaning look at Robinson, but
without another audible word.

"Mercy! mercy!" cried Walker.

"You must not interrupt the proceedings," said Judge Lynch.

"Haud your whist, ye gowk. Ye are no fand guilty yet," remonstrated a
juror.

The jury being formed, the judge called the plaintiff.

"The man sold me a claim for thirty pound. I gave him the blunt
because I saw the stuff was glittery. Well, I worked it, and I found
it work rather easy, that is a fact."

"Haw! haw! haw!" roared the crowd, but with a horrible laughter, no
placability in it.

"Well, I found lots of dust, and I took it to the merchant, and he
says it is none of it gold. That is my tale."

"Have you any witnesses?"

"I don't know. Yes, the nigger; he saw it. Here, Jacky, come and tell
them."

Jacky was thrust forward, but was interrupted by McLaughlan as soon as
he opened his mouth. The Scottish juror declined to receive evidence
but upon oath. The judge allowed the objection.

"Swear him in, then," cried a hundred voices.

"Swear?" inquired Jacky, innocently.

Another brutal roar of laughter followed.

Jacky was offended.

"What for you laugh, you stupid fellows? I not a common black fellow.
I been to Sydney and learn all the white man knows. Jacky will swear,"
added he.

"Left your hond," cried McLaughlan. "It is no swearing if you dinna
left your hond."

"Dat so stupid," said Jacky, lifting his hand peevishly. This done, he
delivered his evidence thus: "Damme I saw dis fellow sell dirt to dis
fellow, and damme I saw dis fellow find a good deal gold, and damme I
heard him say dis is a dam good job, and den damme he put down his
spade and go to sell, and directly he come back and say damme I am
done!"

"Aweel," said McLaughlan; "we jaast refuse yon lad's evidence, the
deevelich heathen."

A threatening murmur.

"Silence! Hear the defendant."

Walker, trembling like an aspen, owned to having sold the claim, but
denied that the dust was false. "This is what I dug out of it," said
he; and he produced a small pinch of dust.

"Hand it to me," said the judge. "It seems genuine."

"Put it to the test. Call the merchant for a witness," cried another.

A party ran instantly for Levi. He refused to come. They dragged him
with fearful menaces.

"A test, old man; a test of gold!"

The old Jew cast his eyes around, took in the whole scene, and with a
courage few of the younger ones would have shown, defied that wild
mob.

"I will give you no test. I wash my hands of your mad passions, and
your mockeries of justice, men of Belial!"

A moment's silence and wonder, a yell of rage, and a dozen knives in
the air.

The judge rose hastily, and in a terrible voice that governed the
tumult for an instant said: "Down knives! I hang the first man that
uses one in my court." And during the momentary pause that followed
this he cried out: "He has given me a test. Run and fetch me the
bottle of acid on his table."

"Hurrah! Judge Lynch forever!" was now the cry, and in a minute the
bottle was thrust into the judge's hand.

"Young man," said Isaac solemnly, "do not pour, lest Heaven bring your
soul to as keen a test one day. Who are you that judge your brother?"

Judge Lynch trembled visibly as the reverend man rebuked him thus,
but, fearing Isaac would go farther and pay the forfeit of his
boldness, he said calmly: "Friends, remove the old man from the court,
but use respect. He is an aged man."

Isaac was removed. The judge took the bottle and poured a drop on that
small pinch of dust the man had last given him.

No effect followed.

"I pronounce this to be gold."

"There," put in McLaughlan, "ye see the lad was no deceiving ye; is it
his fault if a' the gowd is no the same?"

"No!" whimpered Walker, eagerly, and the crowd began to whisper and
allow he might be innocent.

The man standing behind the judge said, with a cold sneer: "That is
the stuff he did not sell--now pour on the stuff he sold."

These words brought back the prejudice against the prisoner, and a
hundred voices shouted, "Pour!" while their eyes gleamed with a
terrible curiosity.

Judge Lynch, awestruck by this terrible roar, now felt what it is to
be a judge; he trembled and hesitated.

"Pour!" roared the crowd, still louder and more fiercely.

McLaughlan read the judge's feeling, and whimpered out, "Let it fa',
lad--let it fa'!"

"If he does our knives fall on him and you. Pour!"

Robinson poured. All their fierce eyes were fixed on the experiment.
He meant to pour a drop or two, but the man behind him jogged his arm,
and half the acid in the bottle fell upon Walker's dust.

A quantity of smoke rose from it, and the particles fizzed and bubbled
under the terrible test.

"Trash! a rope--no! dig a hole and bury him--no! fling him off the
rock into the water."

"Silence!" roared Robinson, "I am the judge, and it is for me to
pronounce the verdict."

"Silence! hear Judge Lynch!" Silence was not obtained for five
minutes, during which the court was like a forest of wild beasts
howling.

"I condemn him to be exposed all day, with his dust tied round his
neck, and then drummed out of the camp."

This verdict was received first with a yell of derisive laughter, then
with a roar of rage.

"Down with the judge!"

"We are the judges!"

"To the rock with him!"

"Ay, to the rock with him."

With this, an all-overpowering rush was made, and Walker was carried
off up the rock in the middle of five hundred infuriated men.

The poor wretch cried, "Mercy! mercy!"

"Justice! dog," was the roar in reply. The raging crowd went bellowing
up the rock like a wave, and gained a natural platform forty feet
above the great deep pool that lay dark and calm below. At the sight
of it, the poor wretch screamed to wake the dead, but the roars and
yells of vengeance drowned his voice.

"Put his dust in his pocket," cried one, crueler than the rest.

Their thirst of vengeance was too hot to wait for this diabolical
proposal; in a moment four of them had him by the shoulders and heels;
another moment and the man was flung from the rock, uttering a
terrible death-cry in the very air; then down his body fell like lead,
and struck with a tremendous plunge the deep water that splashed up a
moment, then closed and bubbled over it.

From that moment the crowd roared no longer, but buzzed and murmured,
and looked down upon their work half stupidly.

"Hush!"

"What is that?"

"It is his head!"

"He is up again!"

"Can he swim?"

"Fling stones on him."

"No! Let him alone, or we'll fling you atop of him."

"He is up, but he can't swim. He is only struggling! he is down
again!"

He was down, but only for a moment; then he appeared again choking and
gurgling.

"Mercy! mercy!"

"Justice, thieving dog!" was the appalling answer.

"Save me! save me! Oh, save me! save me!"

"Save yourself! if you are worth it!" was the savage reply.

The drowning, despairing man's head was sinking again, his strength
exhausted by his idle struggles, when suddenly on his left hand he saw
a round piece of rock scarce a yard from him. He made a desperate
effort and got his hand on it. Alas! it was so slimy he could not hold
by it; he fell off it into the water; he struggled up again, tried to
dig his feet into the rock, but, after a convulsive fling of a few
seconds, fell back--the slimy rock mocked his grasp. He came up again
and clung, and cried piteously for help and mercy. There was
none!--but a grim silence and looks of horrible curiosity at his idle
struggles. His crime had struck at the very root of their hearts and
lives. Then this poor, cowardly wretch made up his mind that he must
die. He gave up praying to the pitiless, who could look down and laugh
at his death-agony, and he cried upon the absent only. "My children!
my wife! my poor Jenny!" and with this he shut his eyes, and,
struggling no more, sank quietly down! down! down. First his shoulders
disappeared, then his chin, then his eyes, and then his hair. Who can
fathom human nature? that sad, despairing cry, which was not addressed
to them, knocked at the bosoms that all his prayers to them for pity
had never touched. A hasty, low and uneasy murmur followed it almost
as a report follows a flash.

"His wife and children!" cried several voices with surprise; but there
were two men this cry not only touched, but pierced--the plaintiff and
the judge.

"The man has got a wife and children," cried Jem in dismay, as he
tried to descend the rock by means of some diminutive steps. "They
never offended me--he is gone down, ---- me if I see the man drowned
like a rat--Hallo!--Splash!"

Jem's foot had slipped, and, as he felt he must go, he jumped right
out, and fell twenty feet into the water.

At this the crowd roared with laughter, and now was the first shade of
good-nature mixed with the guffaw. Jem fell so near Walker that on
coming up he clutched the drowning man's head and dragged him up once
more from death. At the sight of Walker's face above water again, what
did the crowd, think you?

They burst into a loud hurrah! and cheered Jem till the echoes rang
again.

"Hurrah! Bravo! Hurrah!" pealed the fickle crowd.

Now Walker no sooner felt himself clutched than he clutched in return
with the deadly grasp of a drowning man. Jem struggled to get free in
vain. Walker could not hear or see, he was past all that; but he could
cling, and he got Jem round the arms and pinned them. After a few
convulsive efforts Jem gave a loud groan. He then said quietly to the
spectators, "He will drown me in another half minute." But at this
critical moment out came from the other extremity of the pool Judge
Lynch, swimming with a long rope in his hand; one end of this rope he
had made into a bight ere he took the water. He swam behind Walker and
Jem, whipped the noose over their heads and tightened it under their
shoulders. "Haul!" cried he to Ede, who held the other end of the
rope. Ede hauled, and down went the two heads.

A groan of terror and pity from the mob--their feelings were reversed.

"Haul quick, Ede," shouted Robinson, "or you will drown them, man
alive."

Ede hauled hand over hand, and a train of bubbles was seen making all
across the pool toward him. And the next moment two dripping heads
came up to hand close together, like cherries on a stalk; and now a
dozen hands were at the rope, and the plaintiff and defendant were
lifted bodily up on to the flat rock, which came nearly to the water's
edge on this side the pool.

"Augh! augh! augh! augh!" gasped Jem.

Walker said nothing. He lay white and motionless, water trickling from
his mouth, nose and ears.

Robinson swam quietly ashore. The rocks thundered with cheers over his
head.

The next moment, "the many-headed beast" remembered that all this was
a waste of time, and bolted underground like a rabbit, and dug and
pecked for the bare life with but one thought left, and that was GOLD.

"How are you, Jem?"

"Oh, captain, oh!" gasped poor Jem, "I am choked--I am dead--I am
poisoned--why, I'm full of water; bring this other beggar to my tent,
and we will take a nanny-goat together."

So Jem was taken off hanging his head, and deadly sick, supported by
two friends, and Walker was carried to the same tent, and stripped and
rubbed and rolled up in a blanket; and lots of brandy poured down him
and Jem, to counteract the poison they had swallowed.

Robinson went to Mr. Levi, to see if he would lend him a suit, while
he got his own dried. The old Jew received my lord judge with a low,
ironical bow, and sent Nathan to borrow the suit from another
Israelite. He then lectured my lord Lynch.

"Learn from this, young man, how easy it is to set a stone rolling
down hill, how hard to stop it half-way down. Law must always be above
the mob, or it cannot be law. If it fall into their hands it goes down
to their own level and becomes revenge, passion, cruelty, anything
but--law. The madmen! they have lost two thousand ounces of gold--to
themselves and to the world, while they have been wasting their time
and risking their souls over a pound of brass, and aspiring to play
the judge and the executioner, and playing nothing but the brute and
the fool--as in the days of old."

Mr. Levi concluded by intimating that there was very little common
sense left upon earth, and that little it would be lost time to search
for among the Gentiles. Finally his discourse galled Judge Lynch, who
thereupon resolved to turn the laugh against him.

"Mr. Levi," said he, "I see you know a thing or two. Will you be so
good as to answer me a question?"

"If it come within my knowledge," replied the senior, with grave
politeness.

"Which weighs the heaviest, sir, a pound of gold or a pound of
feathers?" and he winked at Nathan, but looked in Isaac's face as
demure as a Quakeress.

"A pound of feathers," replied Isaac.

Robinson looked half puzzled, half satirical.

"A childish question," said Isaac sternly. "What boy knows not that
feathers are weighed by Avoirdupois, and gold by Troy weight, and
consequently that a pound of feathers weighs sixteen ounces, and a
pound of gold but twelve?"

"Well, that is a new answer," cried Robinson. "Good-by, sir, you are
too hard for me;" and he made off to his own tent. It was a day of
defeats.

The moment he was out of hearing, Isaac laughed. The only time he had
done it during six years. And what a laugh! How, sublimely devoid of
merriment! a sudden loud cackle of three distinct cachinni not
declining into a chuckle, as we do, but ending sharp in abrupt and
severe gravity.

"I discomfited the young man, Nathan--I mightily discomfited him. Ha!
ha! ho! Nathan, did you as I bade you?"

"Yes, master, I found the man, and I sent Samuel, who went hastily to
him and cried out, 'Mr. Meadows is in the camp and wishes to speak to
you.' Master, he started up in wonder, and his whole face changed;
without doubt he is the man you suspected."

"Yes," said Isaac, reflecting deeply. "The man is Peter Crawley; and
what does he here? Some deep villainy lies at the bottom of this; but
I will fathom it, ay, and thwart it, I swear by the God of Abraham.
Let me think awhile in my tent. Sit you at the receipt of gold."

The old man sat upon a divan in his tent, and pondered on all that had
happened in the mine; above all, on the repeated attacks that had been
made on that one tent.

He remembered, too, that George had said sorrowfully to him more than
once: "No letters for me, Mr. Levi, no letter again this month!" The
shrewd old man tied these two threads together directly.

"All these things are one," said Isaac Levi.

Thus pondering, and patiently following out his threads, the old man
paced a mile down the camp to the post-office, for he had heard the
postman's horn, and he expected important letters from England, from
his friend and agent at Farnborough, Old Cohen.

There were letters from England, but none in old Cohen's hand. He put
them in his bosom with a disappointed look, and paced slowly, and
deeply pondering, back toward his tent. He was about half way, when,
much to his surprise, a stone fell close to him. He took, however, no
notice, did not even accelerate his pace or look round; but the next
moment a lump of clay struck him on the arm. He turned round,
quivering with rage at the insult, and then he saw a whole band of
diggers behind him, who the moment he turned his face began to hoot
and pelt him.

"Who got poor Walker drowned? Ah! ah! ah!"

"Who refused to give evidence before Judge Lynch?" cried another, "Ah!
ah! ah!"

There were clearly two parties in the mob.

"Down with the Jew--the blood-sucker. We do all the work, and he gets
all the profit. Ah! ah! ah!"

And a lump of clay struck that reverend head and almost stunned the
poor old man. He sunk upon his knees, and in a moment his coat was
torn to shreds, but with unexpected activity he wriggled himself free
and drew a dagger long, bright, and sharp as a needle. His assailants
recoiled a moment. The next a voice was heard from behind, "Get on
both sides of him at once!"

Isaac looked and saw Peter Crawley. Then the old man trembled for his
life, and cried, "Help! help!" and they hemmed him in and knocked his
dagger out of his hand, and hustled and pommeled him, and would have
torn him in pieces, but he slipped down, and two of them got in front
and dragged him along the ground.

"To Walker's pool," cried brutus, putting himself at the head of those
who followed.

All of a sudden Isaac, though half insensible, heard a roar of rage
that seemed to come from a lion--a whiz, a blow like a
thunder-clap--saw one of his assassins driven into the air and falling
like a dead clod three yards off, found himself dropped and a man
striding over him. It was George Fielding, who stood a single moment
snorting and blowing out his cheeks with rage, then went slap at the
mob as a lion goes at sheep; seized one of the small ruffians by the
knees, and, by a tremendous effect of strength and rage, actually used
him as a flail, and struck brutus with the man's head, and knocked
that ruffian down stunned, and his nose leveled with his cheeks. The
mob recoiled a moment from this one hero. George knew it could be but
for a moment, so he had no sooner felled brutus, and hurled the
other's carcass in their faces, than he pounced on Isaac, whipped him
on his back and ran off with him.

He had got thirty yards with him ere the staggered mob could realize
it all.

The mob recovered their surprise, and with a yell like a pack of
hounds bursting covert dashed after the pair. The young Hercules made
a wonderful effort, but no mortal man could run very fast so weighted.
In spite of his start they caught him in about a hundred yards. He
heard them close upon him--put the Jew down--and whispered hastily,
"Run to your tent," and instantly wheeled round and flung himself at
thirty men. He struck two blows and disabled a couple; the rest came
upon him like one battering-ram and bore him to the ground; but even
as he went down he caught the nearest assailant by the throat and they
rolled over one another, the rest kicking savagely at George's head
and loins. The poor fellow defended his head with one arm and his
assailant's body for a little while, but he received some terrible
kicks on the back and legs.

"Give it him on the head!"

"Kick his life out!"

"Settle his hash!"

They were so fiercely intent on finishing George that they did not
observe a danger that menaced themselves.

As a round shot cuts a lane through a column of infantry, so clean
came two files of special constables with their short staves severing
the mob in two--crick, crack, crick, crick, crick, crick, crack,
crack. In three seconds ten heads were broken, with a sound just like
glass bottles, under the short, deadly truncheon, and there lay half a
dozen ruffians writhing on the ground and beating the Devil's tattoo
with their heels.

"Charge back!" cried the head-policeman as soon as he had cut clean
through.

But at the very word the cowardly crew fled on all sides yelling. The
police followed in different directions a little way, and through this
error three of the felled got up and ran staggering off. When the
head-policeman saw that he cried out:

"Back, and secure prisoners."

They caught three who were too stupefied to run, and rescued brutus
from George, who had got him by the throat and was hammering the
ground with his head.

"Let go, George," cried Policeman Robinson, in some anxiety, "you are
killing the man."

"Oh, I don't want to kill him neither," said George.

And he slowly withdrew his grasp, and left off hammering with the
rascal's head, but looked at him as if he would have preferred to have
gone on a little longer. They captured the three others.

"Now secure them," cried Ede. "Out with your wipes."

"There is no need of wipes," said Robinson.

He then, with a slight blush, and rather avoiding George's eye, put
his hand in his pockets and produced four beautiful sets of handcuffs,
bran new, polished to the fine. With a magical turn of the hand he
handcuffed the three men, still avoiding George's eye. Unnecessary.
George's sense of humor was very faint, and so was his sweetheart's--a
sad defect.

Perhaps I may as well explain here how Robinson came so opportunely to
the rescue. The fact is, that a week ago he had ordered a lot of
constables' staves and four sets of handcuffs. The staves were nicely
painted, lettered "Captain Robinson's Police, A, B, C," etc. They had
just come home, and Robinson was showing them to Ede and his gang,
when a hullabaloo was heard, and Levi was seen full half a mile off
being hunted. Such an opportunity of trying the new staves was not to
be neglected. Ede and his men jumped out of their claim and ran with
Robinson to the rescue. But they would have been too late if George,
who had just come into the camp at that very part, had not made his
noble and desperate assault and retreat, which baffled the assailants
for two precious minutes.

Robinson. "What shall we do with them now we have got them?"

George. "Give them a kick apiece on their behinds, and let them
go--the rubbish."

Robinson. "Not if I know it."

Ede. "I say blackguard 'em."

Robinson. "No, that would be letting ourselves down to their level.
No, we will expose them as we did my old pal here before."

Ede. "Why that is what I mean. Ticket them--put a black card on them
with their offense wrote out large."

No sooner said than done. All four were tied to posts in the sun, and
black-carded, or, as some spell it, placarded, thus:


                       COWARD.
           Attacked and abused an old man.
     >N. B.--Not hanged this time because they
            got a licking then and there.


"Let us go and see after Mr. Levi, George."

"Well, Tom, I had rather not."

"Why not? he ought to be very much obliged to you."

"That is it, Tom. The old man is of rather a grateful turn of
mind--and it is ten to one if he doesn't go and begin praising me to
my face--and then that makes me--I don't know which way to look. Wait
till he has cooled upon it a bit."

"You are a rum one. Well, George, I have got one proposal you won't
say no to. First, I must tell you there is really a river of quartz in
the country."

"Didn't I tell you?"

"Yes, and I didn't believe it. But I have spoken to Jacky about it,
and he has seen it; it is on the other side of the bush. I am ready to
start for it to-morrow, for there is little good to be done here now
the weather has broken."

George assented with joy; but, when Robinson suggested that Jacky
would be very useful to pilot them through the bush, his countenance
fell.

"Don't think of it," said he. "I know he is here, Tom, and I shan't go
after him. But don't let him come near me, the nasty little, creeping,
murdering varmint. Poor Abner will never get over his tomahawk--not if
he lives fifty years."

In short, it was agreed they should go alone at peep of day.

"I have talked it over with Jem already, and he will take charge of
our tent till we come back."

"So be it."

"We must take some provisions with us, George."

"I'll go and get some cold meat and bread, Tom."

"Do. I'm going to the tent."

Robinson, it is to be observed, had not been in his tent since George
and he left it and took their gold out of it just before sunrise. As
he now carried their joint wealth about his person, his anxiety was
transferred.

Now at the door of the tent he was intercepted by Jem, very red in the
face, partly with brandy, partly with rage. Walker, whose life he had
saved, whom he had taken to his own tent, and whom Robinson had seen
lying asleep in the best blanket, this Walker had absconded with his
boots and half a pound of tobacco.

"Well, but you knew he was a rogue. Why did you leave him alone in
your tent?"

"I only left him for a minute to go a few steps with you if you
remember, and you said yourself he was asleep. Well, the moment our
backs were turned he must have got up and done the trick."

"I don't, like it," said Robinson.

"No more don't I," said Jem.

"If he was not asleep, be must have heard me say I was going to cross
the bush with my mate to-morrow at daybreak."

"Well! and what if he did?"

"He is like enough to have gone and told the whole gang."

"And what if he has?"

Robinson was about to explain to Jem. that he now carried all the
joint gold in his pocket, but he forbore. "It is too great a stake for
me to trust anybody unless I am forced," thought he. So he only said:
"Well, it is best to be prudent. I shall change the hour for
starting."

"You are a cunning one, captain, but I really think you are
overcareful sometimes."

"Jem," said the other gravely, "there is a mystery in this mine. There
is a black gang in it, and that Walker is one of them. I think they
have sworn to have my gold or my life, and they shan't have either if
I can help it. I shall start two hours before the sun."

He was quite right; Walker had been shamming sleep, and full four
hours ago he had told his confederates as a matter of course all that
he had heard in the enemy's camp.

Walker, a timid villain, was unprepared for the burst of savage
exultation from brutus and Black Will that followed this intelligence.
These two, by an instinct quick as lightning, saw the means of
gratifying at one blow their cupidity and hate. Crawley had already
told them he had seen Robinson come out of Levi's tent after a long
stay, and their other spies had told them his own tent had been left
unguarded for hours. They put these things together and conjectured at
once that the men had now their swag about them in one form or other.

"When do they go?"

"To-morrow at break of day," he said.

"The bush is very thick!"

"And dark, too!"

"It is just the place for a job."

"Will two of you be enough?"

"Plenty, the way we shall work."

"The men are strong and armed."

"Their strength will be no use to them, and they shan't get time to
use their arms."

"For Heaven's sake, shed no blood unnecessarily," said Crawley,
beginning to tremble at the pool of crime to whose brink he had led
these men.

"Do you think they will give up their swag while they are alive?"
asked brutus, scornfully.

"Then I wash my hands of it all," cried the little self-deceiving
caitiff; and he affected to have nothing to do with it.

Walker was then thanked for his information, and he thought this was a
good opportunity for complaining of his wrongs and demanding redress.
This fellow was a thorough egotist, saw everything from his own point
of view only.

Jem had dragged him before Judge Robinson; Robinson had played the
beak and found him guilty; Levi had furnished the test on which he had
been convicted. All these had therefore cruelly injured and nearly
killed him.

Himself was not the cause. He had not set all these stones rolling by
forging upon nature and robbing Jem of thirty pounds. No! he could not
see that, nor did he thank Jem one bit for jumping in and saving his
life at risk of his own. "Why did he ever get him thrown in, the
brute? If he was not quite drowned he was nearly, and Jem the cause."

His confederates soothed him with promises of vengeance on all their
three his enemies, and soon after catching sight of one of them, Levi,
they kept their word; they roused up some of the other diggers against
Isaac on the plea that he had refused to give evidence against Walker,
and so they launched a mob and trusted to mob nature for the rest. The
recoil of this superfluous villainy was, as often happens, a blow to
the head scheme.

brutus, who was wanted at peep of day for the dark scheme already
hinted at, got terribly battered by George Fielding, and placarded,
and, what was worse, chained to a post, by Robinson and Ede. It became
necessary to sound his body and spirit.

One of the gang was sent by Crawley to inquire whether he felt strong
enough to go with Black Will on that difficult and dangerous work
to-morrow. The question put in a passing whisper was answered in a
whisper.

"I am as strong as a lion for revenge. Tell them I would not miss
to-morrow's work for all the gold in Australia."

The lowering face spoke loud enough if the mouth whispered.

The message was brought back to Black Will and Crawley.

"What energy!" said Crawley, admiringly.

"Ay!" said Black Will, "that is your sort; give me a pal with his skin
smarting and his bones aching for the sort of job that wood shall see
to-morrow. Have they marked him?" he inquired, with a strange
curiosity.

"I am afraid they have; his nose is smashed frightful."

"I am glad of it; now we are brothers and will have blood for blood."

"Your expressions are dreadfully terse," said Crawley, trying to
smile, but looking scared instead; "but I don't understand your
remark; you were not in the late unsuccessful attack on Mr. Levi, and
you escaped most providentially in the night business--the men have
not marked you, my good friend."

"Haven't they?" yelled the man, with a tremendous oath--"haven't they?
LOOK HERE!" A glance was enough. Crawley turned wan and shuddered from
head to foot.



CHAPTER LXVI.

WE left Robinson and Jem talking at the entrance to the tent.

"Come in," said Robinson. "You will take care of this tent while we
are gone."

Jem promised faithfully.

He then asked Robinson to explain to him the dodge of the gut-lines.
Robinson showed him, and how the bells were rung at his head by the
thief's foot.

Jem complimented him highly.

Robinson smiled, but the next moment sighed. "They will be too clever
for us some of these dark nights--see how nearly they have nicked us
again and again!"

"Don't be down on your luck, captain!"

"Jem, what frightens me is the villains getting off so; there they are
to try again, and next time the luck will be theirs--it can't be
always ours--why should it? Jem, there was a man in my tent last
night."

"There is no denying that, captain."

"Well, Jem, I can't get it off my heart that I was to kill that man,
or he me. Everything was on my side. I had my gut-lines, and I had a
revolver and a cutlass--and I took up the cutlass like a fool; if I
had taken up the revolver the man would be dead. I took up the wrong,
and that man will be my death. The cards never forgive! I had the odd
trick, and didn't take it--I shall lose the game."

"No, ye shan't," cried Jem, hastily. "What if the man got clear for
the moment, we will hunt him out for you. You give me his
description."

"I couldn't," said Robinson, despondingly. "It was so dark! Here is
his pistol, but that is no use. If I had but a clew, ay, ever so
slight, I'd follow it up; but no, there is none. Hallo, what is the
matter! What is it? what on earth is the man looking at like that?"

"What was you asking for?" stammered Jem. "Wasn't it a clew?"

"Yes."

Robinson got up and came to Jem, who was standing with dilated eyes
looking at the ground in the very corner of the tent. He followed the
direction of Jem's eyes, and was instantly transfixed with curiosity
and rising horror.

"Take it up, Jem," he gasped.

"No, you take it up! it was you who--"

"No--yes! there is George's voice. I wouldn't let him see such a thing
for the world. Oh, God! here is another."

"Another?"

"Yes, in the long grass! and there is George's voice."

"Come out, Jem. Not a word to George for the world. I want to talk to
you. If it hasn't turned me sick! I should make a poor hangman. But it
was in self-defense, thank Heaven for that!"

"Where are you going in such a hurry, Tom?" said George.

"Oh, only a little way with Jem."

"Don't be long, it is getting late."

"No, George!"

"Jem, this is an ugly job!"

"An ugly job, no! ---- him, I wish it was his head. Give them me,
captain."

"What, will you take charge of them?"

"That I will, captain, and what is more I'll find your enemy out by
them, and--when you come back he shall be in custody--waiting your
orders. Give them me."

"Yes, take them. Oh, but I am glad to be rid of them. What a ghastly
look they have."

"I don't care for their looks. I am right glad to see them--they are a
clew and no mistake. Keep dark to-night. Don't tell this to Ede--he is
a good fellow but chatters too much--let me work it out. I'll find the
late owner double quick," said Jem, with a somewhat brutal laugh.

"Your orders about the prisoners, captain?" cried Ede, coming up.

Robinson reflected.

Turn them all loose--but one."

"And what shall I do with him?"

"Hum! Put a post up in your own tent."

"Yes."

"Tie him to it in his handcuffs. Give him food enough."

"And when shall we loose him?"

"At noon, to-morrow."

"It shall be done! but you must come and show me which of the four it
is."

Robinson went with Ede and his men.

"Turn this one loose," said he; it was done on the instant.

"And this."

"And this."

"And" (laying his finger on brutus) "keep this one prisoner in your
tent, handcuffed and chained, till noon to-morrow."

At the touch, brutus trembled with hate; at the order, his countenance
fell like Cain's.

Full two hours before sunrise the patrol called Robinson by his own
order, and the friends made for the bush, with a day's provision and
their blankets, their picks, and their revolvers. When they arrived at
the edge of the bush, Robinson halted and looked round to see if they
were followed. The night was pretty clear; no one was in sight. The
men struck rapidly into the bush, which at this part had been cut and
cleared in places, lying as it did so near a mine.

"What, are we to run, Tom?"

"Yes! I want to get to the river of quartz as soon as possible," was
the dry answer.

"With all my heart."

After running about half a mile, George pulled up, and they walked.

"What do you keep looking behind for, Tom?"

"Oh, nothing."

"You fidget me, Tom!"

"Can't help it. I shall be like that till daylight. They have shaken
my nerves among them."

"Don't give way to such nonsense. What are you afraid of?"

"I am not afraid of anything. Come, George, another run."

"Oh, as you like. This beats all."

This run brought them to the end of the broad road, and they found two
smaller paths; after some hesitation, Robinson took the left-hand one,
and it landed them in such a terribly thick scrub they could hardly
move. They forced their way through it, getting some frightful
scratches, but after struggling with it for a good half hour, began to
fear it was impenetrable and interminable, when the sun rising showed
them a clear space some yards ahead. They burst through the remainder
of the scrub, and came out upon an old clearing full a mile long and a
quarter of a mile broad. They gave a hurrah at the sight of it, but
when they came to walk on it the ground was clay and so sticky with a
late shower that they were like flies moving upon varnish, and at last
were fain to take off their shoes and stockings and run over it on the
tips of their toes. At the end of this opening they came to a place
like the "Seven Dials"--no end of little paths into the wood, and none
very promising. After a natural hesitation, they took the one that
seemed to be most on their line of march, and followed it briskly till
it brought them plump upon a brook, and there it ended. Robinson
groaned.

"Confound the bush," cried he. "You were wrong not to let me bring
Jacky. What is to be done?"

"Go back."

"I hate going back. I would rather go thirty miles ahead than one
back. I've got an idea; off shoes and paddle up the stream; perhaps we
shall find a path that comes to it from the other side."

They paddled up the stream a long way, and at last, sure enough, they
found a path that came down to the stream from the opposite side. They
now took a hasty breakfast, washing it down with water from the brook,
then dived into the wood.

The sun, was high in heaven, yet still they had not got out of the
bush.

"I can't make it out, George; there is nothing to steer by, and these
paths twist and turn so. I don't think we shall do any good till
night. When I see the Southern Cross in the sky I shall be able to
steer northeast. That is our line."

"Don't give in," said George; "I think it looks clearer ahead. I
believe we are at the end of it."

"No such luck, I am afraid," was the despondent reply.

For all that, in a few yards more they came upon an open place.

They could not help cheering. "At last!" cried they. But this triumph
gave way to doubts.

"I am afraid we are not clear yet," said Robinson. "See, there is wood
again on the other side. Why, it is that sticky clay again. Why,
George, it is the clearing we crossed before breakfast."

"You are talking nonsense, Tom," cried George, angrily.

"No, I am not," said the other, sadly. "Come across. We shall soon
know by our footsteps in the clay."

Sure enough, half way across they found a track of footsteps. George
was staggered. "It is the place, I really think," said he. "But, Tom,
when you talk of the footsteps, look here? You and I never made all
these tracks. This is the track of a party."

Robinson examined the ground.

"Tracks of three men; two barefoot, one in nailed boots."

"Well, is that us?"

"Look at the clearing, George, you have got eyes. It is the same."

"So 'tis, but I can't make out the three tracks."

Robinson groaned. "I can. This third track has come since we went by."

"No doubt of that, Tom. Well?"

"Well, don't you see?"

"No. What?"

"You and I are being hunted."

George looked blank a moment. "Can't we be followed without being
hunted?"

"No; others might, but not me. We are being hunted," said Robinson,
sternly. "George, I am sick of this, let us end it. Let us show these
fellows they are hunting lions and not sheep. Is your revolver
loaded?"

"Yes."

"Then come on!" And he set off to run, following the old tracks.
George ran by his side, his eyes flashing with excitement. They came
to the brook. Robinson showed. George that their pursuer had taken
some steps down the stream. "No matter," said he, "don't lose time,
George, go right up the bank to our path. He will have puzzled it out,
you may take your oath."

Sure enough they found another set of footsteps added to their own.
Robinson. paused before entering the wood. He put fresh caps on his
revolver. "Now, George," said he, in a low voice, "we couldn't sleep
in this wood without having our throats cut, but before night I'll be
out of danger or in my grave, for life is not worth having in the
midst of enemies. Hush! hus-s-sh! You must not speak to me but in a
whisper."

"No!" whispered George.

"Nor rustle against the boughs."

"No, I won't," whispered George. "But make me sensible, Tom. Tell me
what all this caution is to lead to. What are you doing?"

"I AM HUNTING THE HUNTER!" hissed. Robinson, with concentrated fury.
And he glided rapidly down the trodden path, his revolver cocked, his
ears pricked, his eye on fire, and his teeth clinched.

George followed, silent and cautious, his revolver ready cocked in his
hand. As they glided thus, following their own footsteps, and hunting
their hunter with gloomy brows, and nerves quivering, and hearts
darkening with anger and bitterness, sudden a gloom fell upon the
wood--it darkened and darkened. Meantime a breeze chill as ice
disturbed its tepid and close air, forerunner of a great wind which
was soon heard, first moaning in the distance, then howling and
rushing up, and sweeping over the tall trees and rocking them like so
many bulrushes. A great storm was coming.



CHAPTER LXVII.

THIS very afternoon Mr. Levi came to inquire for George Fielding.
Unable to find him, he asked of several diggers where the young man
was; he could get no information till Jem saw him, and came and told
him.

Now when he heard they were gone, and not expected back for some days,
Isaac gave quite a start, and showed a degree of regret and vexation
that Jem was puzzled to account for.

On reflection he begged Jem to come to his tent; there he sat down and
wrote a letter.

"Young man," said he, "I do entreat you to give this to George
Fielding the moment he returns to the camp. Why did he go without
coming to see me? my old heart is full of misgivings."

"You needn't have any, sir," said Jem, surprised at the depth of
feeling in the old Jew's face and voice. "He shall have the letter,
you may depend."

Levi thanked him.

He then said to Nathan: "Strike the tents, collect our party, and let
us be gone."

"What! going to leave us, sir?"

"Yes! young man, this very hour."

"Well now, I am sorry for that, and so will the captain be, and his
pal that you think so much of."

"We shall not be long parted," said the old man, in his sweet musical
Eastern accent, "not very long, if you are faithful to your trust and
give the good young man my letter. May good angels hover round him,
may the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob guard him!"

"Amen!" said rough Jem; for the reverend face glowed with piety, and
the voice was the voice of prayer.

Suddenly an unpleasant reflection occurred to Jem.

"Well, but if you go, who is to buy our gold-dust?"

"The Christian merchants," said Isaac, with an indifferent air.

"But they are such Jews," cried Jem, inadvertently. "I mean--I
mean----" And rough as he was, he looked as if he could have bitten
his tongue off.

"I know what you mean," said Isaac, sadly. He added: "Such as they
are, they are all you have now. The old Jew was hunted and hooted and
insulted in this place yesterday; here then he trades no more; those
who set no value on him can of course supply his place."

"The blackguards," cried Jem, "the ruffians, I wish I had seen them.
Come, Mr. Levi, that was not the mine; that was only the riffraff; you
might forgive us that."

"I never forgive," was the calm reply.



CHAPTER LXVIII.

A TREMENDOUS snow-storm fell upon the mine and drove Jem into his
tent, where he was soon after joined by Jacky, a circumstance in
itself sufficient to prove the violence of the storm, for Jacky
loathed indoors, it choked him a good deal.

The more was Jem surprised when he heard a lamentable howl coming
nearer and nearer, and a woman burst into his tent, a mere pillar of
snow, for she was covered with a thousand flakes each as big as a
lady's hand.

"Ochone! ochone! ochone!" cried Mary McDogherty, and, on being asked
what was the matter, she sat down and rocked herself and moaned and
cried, "Ochone--och, captain, avick, what will I do for you? an' who
will I find to save you? an' oh, it is the warm heart and the kind
heart ye had to poor Molly McDogherty that ud give her life to save
yours this day."

"The captain," cried Jem, in great alarm. "What is wrong with the
captain?"

"He is lying could and stiff in the dark, bloody wood. Och, the
murthering villains! och, what will I do at all! och, captain, avick,
warm was your heart to the poor Irish boys, but it is could now.
Ochone! ochone!"

"Woman," cried Jem, in great agitation, "leave off blubbering and tell
me what is the matter."

Thus blandly interrogated, Mary told him a story (often interrupted
with tears and sighs) of what had been heard and seen yester eve by
one of the Irish boys--a story that turned him cold, for it left on
him the same impression it had left on the warmhearted Irishwoman,
that at this moment his good friend was lying dead in the bush hard
by.

He rose and loaded Robinson's double-barreled gun; he loaded it with
bullets, and, as he rammed them fiercely down, he said angrily: "Leave
off crying and wringing your hands; what on earth is the use of that?
here goes to save him or to revenge him."

"An' och, James, take the wild Ingine wid ye; they know them bloody,
murthering woods better than our boys, glory be to God for taching
them that same."

"Of course I shall take him. You hear, Jacky, will you show me how to
find the poor dear captain and his mate if they are in life?"

"If they are alive, Jacky will find them a good deal soon--if they are
dead, still Jacky will find them."

The Irishwoman's sorrow burst out afresh at these words. The savage
then admitted the probability of that she dreaded.

"And their enemies--the cowardly villains--what will you do to them?"
asked Jem, black with rage.

Jacky's answer made Mary scream with affright, and startled even Jem's
iron nerves for a moment. At the very first word of the Irishwoman's
story, the savage had seated himself on the ground with his back
turned to the others, and, unnoticed by them, had rapidly painted his
face with the war-paint of his tribe. Words cannot describe the
ghastly terrors, the fiendish ferocity these traditional lines and
colors gave his countenance. This creature, that looked so like a
fiend, came erect into the middle of the tent with a single bound, as
if that moment vomited forth by hell, and yet with a grander carriage
and princelier presence than he had worn in time of peace; and even as
he bounded he crossed his tomahawk and narrow wooden shield, to
signify that his answer was no vulgar asseveration, but a vow of
sacred war.

"KALINGALUNGA WILL KILL THEM, AND DRINK THEIR BLOOD."

Kalingalunga glided from the tent. Jem followed him. The snow fell in
flakes as large as a lady's hand, and the air was dark; Jem could not
see where the hunter was taking him, but he strode after him and
trusted to his sagacity.

Five hours' hard walking, and then the snow left off. The air became
clear, and to Jem's surprise the bush, instead of being on his right
hand, was now on his left; and there on its skirts, about a mile off,
was the native camp. They had hardly come in sight of it when it was
seen to break from quietude into extraordinary bustle.

"What is up?" asked Jem.

The hunter smiled, and pointed to his own face:

"Kalingalunga painted war."

"What eyes the beggars must have," said Jem.

The next minute a score of black figures came tearing up in such
excitement that their long rows of white teeth and the whites of their
eyes flashed like Budelights in their black heads.

Kalingalunga soon calmed them down by letting them know that he was
painted for a private, not a national feud. He gave them no further
information. I suspect he was too keen a sportsman to put others on
the scent of his game. He went all through the camp, and ascertained
from the stragglers that no men answering the description of George
and Robinson had passed out of the wood.

"They are in the wood," said he

He then ordered a great fire--bade Jem dry his clothes and eat; he
collected two of his wives and committed Jem to their care, and glided
like a panther into the wood.

What with the great heat succeeding to the great cold, and the great
supper the gins gave him, Jem fell fast asleep. It was near daylight
when a hand was laid on his shoulder, and there was Kalingalunga.

"Not a track on the snow."

"No? then let us hope they are not in the wood."

The hunter hung his head.

"Me tink they are in the wood," said he, gravely.

Jem groaned, "Then they are lying under the soil of it or in some dark
pit."

Kalingalunga reflected. He replied to this effect:

"That there were no more traces of an assassin than of victims,
consequently that it was impossible to know anything, and that it was
a good deal too stupid to speak a good deal knowing nothing."

All this time Jem's fear and rage and impatience contrasted greatly
with the philosophic phlegm of the Pict, who looked so fierce and took
it all so cool, ending with an announcement that now Kalingalunga
would sleep a good deal.

The chief was soon asleep, but not till he had ordered his gins to
wake him the moment the snow should be melted. This occurred at noon,
and, after snatching a hasty meal, he put a tomahawk into Jem's hands
and darted into the bush.

All the savage's coldness disappeared now he was at work. He took Jem
right across the wood from southeast to northwest. Nothing stopped
him. When the scrub was thick above but hollow below he threw himself
on his belly and wriggled along like a snake. When it was all thick,
he hacked into it with fury and forced a path. When it was
impenetrable he went round it, and by some wonderful instinct got into
the same line again. Thus they cut clean across the wood but found no
tracks.

Then the savage, being out in the open, trotted easily down the
woodside to the southwest point; here he entered and took a line
straight as an arrow to the northeast.

It was about five in the afternoon. Kalingalunga was bleeding all over
with scratches, and Jem was torn to pieces and done up. He was just
about to tell the other that he must give in, when Kalingalunga
suddenly stopped, and pointed to the ground:

"Track!"

"What of?"

"A white man's shoe."

"How many are there?"

"One."

Jem sighed.

"I doubt it is a bad job, Jacky," said he.

"Follow--not too close," was the low reply.

And the panther became a serpent, so smooth and undulating were the
motions with which he glided upon the track he had now discovered.

Jem, well aware that he could not move noiselessly like the savage,
obeyed him and crept after at some distance.

The savage had followed the man's footsteps about half a mile, and the
white man the savage, when suddenly both were diverted from their
purpose. Kalingalunga stood still and beckoned Jem. Jem ran to him,
and found him standing snuffing the air with his great broad nostrils,
like a stag.

"What is it?"

"White fellow burn wambiloa wood."

"How d'ye know? how d'ye know?"

"Wambiloa wood smell a good way off when him burn."

"And how do you know it is a white man?"

"Black fellow never burn wambiloa wood; not good to burn that. Keep it
for milmeridien."

The chief now cut off a few of his long hairs and held them up to
ascertain the exact direction of the wind. This done, he barked a tree
to mark the spot to which he had followed the trail, and striking out
into quite a different direction he hunted by scent.

Jem expected to come on the burning wambiloa very soon, but he
underrated either the savage's keen scent or the acrid odor of the
sacred wood--perhaps both. They had gone half a mile at least before
his companion thought it necessary to show any caution. At last he
stopped short, and then Jem smelled a smell as if "cinnamon and
ginger, nutmegs and cloves," were all blazing in one bonfire. With
some difficulty he was prevailed on to stand still and let the subtle
native creep on, nor would he consent to be inactive until the other
solemnly vowed to come back for him and give him his full share of the
fighting. Then Kalingalunga went gliding like a shadow and flitted
from tree to tree.

Woe be to the enemy the subtle, noiseless, pitiless, remorseless
savage surprises; he has not put on his war-paint in sport or for
barren show.



CHAPTER LXIX.

A MAN was hunting Robinson and George Fielding, and they were hunting
him. Both parties inflamed with rage and bitterness; both master of
the other's fate, they thought.

A change of wind brought a fall of snow, and the fall of snow baffled
both parties in five minutes. Down came the Australian flakes large as
a woman's hand (I am not romancing), and effaced the tracks of the
pursuing and pursued and pursuers. So tremendous was the fall that the
two friends thought of nothing but shelter. They drew their blankets
over their heads and ran hither and thither looking for a friendly
tree. At last they found an old tree with a prodigious stem that
parted about ten feet up into two forks. With some effort they got up
into this cleft, and then they were on a natural platform. Robinson
always carried nails in his pocket, and he contrived to nail the two
blankets to the forks so as to make a screen. Then they took out their
provisions and fortified themselves with a hearty supper.

As they were eating it they were suddenly startled by an explosion so
tremendous that their tree seemed to have been struck by lightning.
Out went Robinson, with his mouth full, on to a snowdrift four feet
high. He looked up and saw the cause of the fracas. A large bough of a
neighboring tree had parted from the trunk with the enormous weight of
the snow. Robinson climbed back to George and told him. Supper
recommenced, but all over the wood at intervals they now heard huge
forks and boughs parting from their parent stems with a report like a
thirty-two-pounder ringing and echoing through the wood. Others so
distant that they were like crackers.

These sounds were very appalling in the ghostly wood. The men
instinctively drew closer to each other; but they were no chickens;
use soon hardened them even to this. They settled it that the forks
they were sitting on would not give way, because there were no leaves
on them to hold a great burden of snow; and soon they yielded to
nature and fell fast asleep in spite of all the dangers that hemmed
them.

At his regular hour, just before sunrise, Robinson awoke and peeped
from below the blanket. He shook George.

"Getup directly, George. We are wasting time when time is gold."

"What is it?"

"'What is it?' There is a pilot in the sky that will take us out of
this cursed trap, if the day does not come and spoil all."

George's eye followed Robinson's finger, and in the center of the dark
vault of heaven this glittered.

[Southern Cross constellation]



CHAPTER LXX.

"I KNOW it, Tom. When I was sailing to this country we came to a part
where the north star went down and down to the water's edge, and this
was all we got in exchange for it."

"George," said Tom, rather sternly, "how do you know they don't hear
us, and here we are surrounded by enemies, and would you run down our
only friend? That silver star will save our lives if they are to be
saved at all. Come on; and, George, if you were to take your revolver
and blow out my brains, it is no more than I deserve for sleeping away
the precious hours of night, when I ought to have been steering out of
this cursed timber-net by that blessed star."

With these words Robinson dived into the wood, steering due east by
the Southern Cross. It was like going through a frozen river. The
scrub was loaded with snow, which it discharged in masses on the
travelers at every step.

"Keep your revolver dry in your hat and your lucifers, too," cried
Robinson. "We shall have to use them both, ten to one. As to our
skins, that is hopeless."

Then the men found how hard it is to take a line and keep it in the
Australian bush. When the Southern Cross was lost in a cloud, though
but for a minute, they were sure to go all wrong, as they found upon
its reappearance; and sometimes the scrub was impenetrable and they
were forced to go round it and walk four hundred yards, advancing
eastward but twenty or thirty.

Thus they battled on till the sun rose.

"Now we shall be all in the dark again," said poor Robinson, "here
comes a fog."

"Stop, Tom," said George; "oughtn't we to make this good before we go
on?"

"What do you mean?"

"We have come right by the star so far, have we not?"

"Yes."

"Then let us bark fifty of these trees for a mark. I have seen that
varmint Jacky do that."

"A capital idea, George; out with our knives--here goes."

"No breakfast to-day, Tom."

"No, George, nor dinner, either, till we are out of the wood."

These two poor fellows walked and ran and crept and struggled all day,
sometimes hoping, sometimes desponding. At last, at five o'clock in
the afternoon, their bellies gnawed with hunger, their clothes torn to
rags, their skin bleeding, they came out upon some trees with the bark
stripped. They gave one another a look that words can hardly paint.
They were the trees they had barked twelve hours ago!

The men stood silent--neither cared to tell the other all he felt--for
now there crept over these two stout bosoms a terrible chill, the
sense of a danger new to them in experience, but not new in report.
They had heard of settlers and others who had been lost in the fatal
labyrinth of the Australian bush, and now they saw how easily it might
be true.

"We may as well sit down here and rest; we shall do no good till
night. What, are you in pain, George?"

"Yes, Tom, a little."

"Where?"

"Something gnaws my stomach like an adder."

"Oh, that is the soldier's gripes," said Tom, with a ghastly attempt
at a jest. "Poor George!" said he, kindly, "I dare say you never knew
what it was to go twenty-four hours without food before."

"Never in my life, Tom."

"Well, I have, and I'll tell you the only thing to do--when you can't
fill the breadbasket, shut it. Go to sleep till the Southern Cross
comes out again."

"What, sleep in our dripping clothes?"

"No, we will make a roaring fire with these strips of bark; they are
dry as tinder by now."

A pyre four feet high was raised, the strips being laid from north to
south and east to west alternately, and they dried their blankets and
warmed their smoking bodies.

"George, I have got two cigars; they must last us two days."

"Oh, I'm no great smoker--keep them for your own comfort."

Robinson wore a sad smile.

"We can't afford to smoke them; this is to chew; it is not food,
George, but it keeps the stomach from eating itself. We must do the
best for our lives we can for Susan's sake."

"Give it me, Tom; I'll chew it, and thank you kindly. You are a wise
companion in adversity, Tom; it is a great grief to me that I have
brought you into this trouble, looking for what I know you think is a
mare's nest, as the saying is."

"Don't talk so, George. True pals like you and me never reproach one
another. They stand and fall together like men. The fire is warm,
George--that is one comfort."

"The fire is well enough, but there's nothing down at it. I'd give a
hundred pounds for a mutton chop."

The friends sat like sacrifices by the fire, and chewed their cigars
in silence, with foreboding hearts. After a while, as the heat laid
hold of him, George began to dose. Robinson felt inclined to do the
same, but the sense that perhaps a human enemy might be near caused
him to fight against sleep in this exposed locality; so, whenever his
head bobbed down, he lifted it sharply and forced his eyes open. It
was on one of these occasions that, looking up, he saw, set as it were
in a frame of leaves, a hideous countenance glaring at him; it was
painted in circular lines, red, blue and white.

"Get up, George," roared Robinson; "they are upon us!"

And both men were on their feet, revolvers pointed. The leaves parted,
and out came this diabolical face which they had never seen before,
but with it a figure they seemed to know, and a harsh cackle they
instantly recognized, and it sounded like music to them.

"Oh, my dear Jacky," cried George, "who'd have thought it was you!
Well, you are a godsend! Good afternoon. Oh, Jacky!--how d'ye do?"

"Jacky not Jacky now, cos um a good deal angry, and paint war.
Kalingalunga berywelltanku" (he always took these four words for one).
"Now I go fetch white fellow;" and he disappeared.

"Who is he going to fetch? is it the one that was following us?"

"No doubt. Then, Tom, it was not an enemy, after all!"

Jacky came back with Jem, who, at sight of them alive and well, burst
into extravagances. He waved his hat round his head several times and
then flung it into a tree; then danced a _pas seul_ consisting of
steps not one of them known at the opera house, and chanted a song of
triumph the words of which were, Ri tol de riddy iddydol, and the
ditty naught; finally he shook hands with both.

"Never say die!"

"Well, that is hearty! and how thoughtful of him to come after us, and
above all to bring Jacky!"

"That it was," replied George. "Jem," said he, with feeling, "I don't
know but what you have saved two men's lives."

"If I don't it shan't be my fault, farmer."

George. "Oh, Jacky, I am so hungry! I have been twenty-four hours
without food."

Kalingalunga. "You stupid fellow to go widout food, always a good deal
food in bush."

George. "Is there? then for Heaven's sake go and get us some of it."

Kalingalunga. "No need go, food here." He stepped up to the very tree
against which George was standing, showed him an excrescence on the
bark, made two clean cuts with his tomahawk, pulled out a huge white
worm and offered it George. George turned from it in disgust; the wild
chief grinned superior and ate it himself, and smacked his lips with
infinite gusto.

Meantime his quick eye had caught sight of something else. "A good
deal dinner in dis tree," said he, and he made the white men observe
some slight scratches on the bark. "Possum claws go up tree." Then he
showed them that there were no marks with the claw reversed, a clear
proof the animal had not come down. "Possum in tree."

The white men looked up into the bare tree with a mixture of wonder
and incredulity. Jacky cut steps with his tomahawk and went up the
main stem, which was short, and then up a fork, one out of about
twelve; among all these he jumped about like a monkey till he found
one that was hollow at the top.

"Throw Kalingalunga a stone, den he find possum a good deal quick."

They could not find a stone for their lives, so, being hungry,
Robinson threw a small nugget of gold he had in his pocket. Jacky
caught it, placed it at the top of the hollow fork and let it drop.
Listening keenly, his fine ear heard the nugget go down the fork,
striking the wood first one side then another, and then at a certain
part sound no more. Down he slips to that silent part, makes a deep
cut with his tomahawk just above the spot, thrusts in his hand and
pulls out a large opossum, yelling and scratching and emitting a
delicious scent in an agony of fear. The tomahawk soon silenced him,
and the carcass fell among the applauding whites. Now it was
Robinson's turn. He carved the raw animal for greater expedition, and
George helped him to wrap each limb and carcass in a thin covering of
clay. Thus prepared, it was thrust into the great pile of burning
ashes.

"Look yonder, do! look at that Jem! Why, Jem, what are you up to,
patroling like a sentinel out there?"

"Never you heed Jem," was the dry reply; "you mind the roast, captain,
and I'll mind--my business;" and Jem continued to parade up and down
with his gun cocked and his eye piercing the wood.

To Robinson's repeated and uneasy inquiries what meant this pantomime,
Jem persisted in returning no answer but this: "You want your dinner,
captain; eat your dinner, and then I'll hoffer a hobservation;
meantime, as these woods are queer places, a little hextra caution is
no sin."

The pie dishes were now drawn out of the ashes and broken, and the
meat baked with all its juices was greedily devoured. "It tastes like
a rabbit stuffed with peppermint," said George, "and uncommon nice it
is. Now I am another man."

"So am I; Jacky forever!"

"Now, Jem, I have dined. Your story, if you please. Why are you here?
for you are a good fellow, but you haven't got gumption enough to say
to yourself, 'These two will get lost in the bush, I'll take Jacky and
pull them out.'"

"You are right, captain, that wasn't the way at all; and, since your
belly is full and your courage up, you will be able to enjoy my story
better than you could afore."

"Yes, so let us have it;" and Robinson leaned back luxuriously, being
filled and warmed.

"First and foremost," commenced this artful narrator, "there is a chap
prowling in this wood at the present time with a double-barreled gun
to blow out your brains, captain."

"The devil," cried Robinson, starting to his feet.

"And yours, farmer."

"How do you know?" asked George, without moving.

"That is what I am going to tell you. That Mary McDogherty came crying
to my tent all through the snow. 'What is up?' says I; says she,
'Murder is up.' Then she told me her cousin, an Irish boy, was at
Bevan's store and he heard some queer talk, and he looked through a
chink in the wall and saw two rascals putting their heads together,
and he soon made out they were driving a bargain to rob you two. One
was to do it, the other was a-egging him on. 'I must have fifty pounds
first,' says this one. 'Why?' says the other. 'Because he has been and
locked my pal up that was to be in it with me.'"

"Ah!" cried Robinson. "Go on, Jem--there is a clew anyway."

"I have got a thicker one behind. Says the other, 'Agreed! when will
you have it?' 'Why, now,' says t'other. Then this one gave him a note.
Pat couldn't see that it was a fifty, but no doubt it was, but he saw
the man take it and put it in a little tin box and shove it in his
bosom."

"That note was the price of blood," said Robinson. "Oh, the
black-hearted villains. Tell me who they were, that is all; tell me
but who they were!"

"The boy didn't know."

"There! it is always so. The fools! they never know."

"Stop a bit, captain, there is a clew (your own word)."

"Ay, and what is the clew?"

"As soon as ever the note was safe in his bosom he says: 'I sold you,
blind mate; I'd have given fifty sooner than not done this job. Look
here!' says he, 'I have sworn to have a life for each of these;' and,
captain," said Jem, suddenly lowering his voice, "with that it seems
he held up his right hand."

"Well, yes! yes! eh!"

"And there were two fingers a-missing on it!"

"Ah!"

"Now those two fingers are the ones you chopped off with your cutlass
the night when the tent was attacked."

"Why, Tom, what is this? you never told me of this," cried George.

"And which are in my pocket."

"In your pocket?" said George, drawing away from him.

"Ay, farmer! wrapped up in silver paper, and they shall never leave my
pocket till I have fitted them on the man, and seen him hung or shot
with them two pickers and stealers tied round his bloodthirsty,
mercenairy, aass-aassinating neck, say that I said it."

George. "Jacky, show us the way out of this wood."

Kalingalunga bowed assent, but he expressed a wish to take with him
some of the ashes of the wambiloa. George helped him.

Robinson drew Jem aside. "You shouldn't have mentioned that before
George; you have disgusted him properly."

"Oh, hang him! he needn't be so squeamish; why, I've had 'em salt--"

"There, there! drop it, Jem, do!"

"Captain! are you going to let them take us out of the wood before we
have hunted it for that scoundrel?"

"Yes, I am. Look here, Jem, we are four, and he is one, but a
double-barreled gun is an awkward enemy in a dark wood. No, Jem, we
will outwit him to the last. We will clear the wood and get back to
the camp. He doesn't know we have got a clew to him. He will come back
without fear, and we will nail him with the fifty-pound note upon him.
And then--Jack Ketch."

The whole party was now on the move, led by Kalingalunga, bearing the
sacred ashes.

"What on earth is he going to do with them?"

The chief heard this query, and looking back said gravely, "He take
them to 'Milmeridien';" and the party followed Jacky, who twisted and
zigzagged about the bush till, at last, he brought them to a fairy
spot, whose existence in that rugged wood none of them had dreamed
possible. It was a long, open glade, meandering like a river between
two deep, irregular fringes of the drooping acacia, and another lovely
tree which I only know by its uncouth, unmelodious, scientiuncular
name--the eucalyptus. This tree, as well as the drooping acacia,
leaned over the ground with long leaves like disheveled hair.

Kalingalunga paused at the brink and said to his companions in a low,
awestruck voice, "Milmeridien."

The glade was full of graves, some of them fresh, glittering with
bright red earth under the cool, green acacias, others richly veiled
with golden moss more or less according to their age; and in the
recesses of the grove peeped smoother traces of mortality, mossy
mounds a thousand years old, and others far more ancient still, now
mere excrescences of green, known to be graves only by the light of
that immense gradation of times and dates and epochs.

The floor of the open glade was laid out as a vast parterre--each
grave a little flower-bed, round, square, oval, or rhomboid; and all
round each bed flowed in fine and graceful curves little paths too
narrow for a human foot. Primeval tradition had placed them there that
spirits might have free passage to visit all the mighty dead. For here
reposed no vulgar corpses. Here, their heads near the surface, but
their feet deep in earth, sat the great hunters and warriors of every
age of the race of Kalingalunga, once a great nation, though now a
failing tribe. They sat there this many a day, their weapons in their
hands, ready to start up whenever the great signal should come, and
hunt once more, but without fatigue, in woods boundless as the sea,
and with bodily frames no longer mortal, to knock and be knocked on
the head, _ad infinitum._

Simple and benign creed!

A cry of delight burst from the white men, and they were going to
spread themselves over the garden of the dead.

The savage checked them with horror.

"Nobody walk there while him alive," said he. "Now you follow me and
not speak any words at all, or Kalingalunga will leave you in the
bush.--Hush!"

The savage paused, that even the echo of his remonstrance might die
well away before he traversed the garden. He then bowed his head down
upon his breast in a set manner, and so remained quiet a few seconds.
In that same attitude he started and walked slowly by the verge of the
glade, keeping carefully clear of the graves, and never raising his
head. About half way he stopped and reverently scattered the ashes of
the wambiloa upon three graves that lay near the edge, then
forward--silent, downcast, reverential.

"Mors omnibus est communis!" The white men, even down to Jem,
understood and sympathized with Kalingalunga. In this garden of the
dead of all ages they felt their common humanity, and followed their
black brother silent and awestruck. Melted, too, by the sweet and
sacred sorrow of this calm scene; for here Death seemed to relax his
frown, and the dead but to rest from trouble and toil, mourned by
gentle, tender trees; and in truth it was a beautiful thought of these
savage men to have given their dead for companions those rare and
drooping acacias, that bowed themselves and loosed their hair so like
fair women abandoned to sorrow over the beloved and dead, and night
and morning swept with their dewy eyelashes the pillows of the brave.
_Requiescant in pace!--resurgant in pacem!_ For I wish them better
than they wished themselves.

After Milmeridien came a thick scrub, through which Kalingalunga
tracked his way; and then a loud hurrah burst from all, for they were
free--the net was broken. There were the mountains before them and the
gaunt wood behind them at last. The native camp was visible two miles
distant, and thither the party ran and found food and fires in
abundance. Black sentinels were set at such distances as to render a
surprise impossible, and the travelers were invited to sleep and
forget all their troubles. Robinson and Jem did sleep, and George
would have been glad to, and tried, but was prevented by an
unfortunate incident--_les enfans terribles_ found out his
infirmity, viz., that nothing they could do would make him hit them.
So half a dozen little rascals, potter bellied than you can conceive,
climbed up and down George, sticking in their twenty claws like
squirrels, and feeling like cold, slippery slugs. Thus was sleep
averted, until a merciful gin, hearing the man's groans, came and
cracked two or three of these little black pots with a waddie or club,
so then George got leave to sleep, and just as he was dozing off,
ting, tong, ti tong, tong, tong, came a fearful drumming of parchment.
A corroboree or native dance was beginning. No more sleep till that
was over--so all hands turned out. A space was cleared in the wood,
women stood on both sides with flaming boughs and threw a bright red
light upon a particular portion of that space; the rest was dark as
pitch. Time, midnight. When the white men came up the dancing had not
begun. Kalingalunga was singing a preliminary war song.

George had picked up some of the native language, and he explained to
the other that Jacky was singing about some great battle, near the
Wurra-Gurra River.

"The Wurra-Gurra! why, that is where we first found gold."

"Why of course it is! and--yes! I thought so."

"Thought what?"

"It is our battle he is describing."

"Which of 'em?--we live in hot water."

"The one before Jem was our friend. What is he singing? Oh, come! that
is overdoing it, Jacky! Why, Jem! he is telling them he killed you on
the spot."

"I'll punch his head!"

"No! take it easy," said Robinson; "he is a poet; this is what they
call poetical license."

"Lie without sense, I call it--when here is the man."

      "Ting tong! ting tong tong!--
       I slew him -- he fell -- by the Wurra-Gurra River.
       I slew him! -- ting tong! he fell --ting tong!
       By the Wurra-Gurra River--ting ting tong!"

This line Jacky repeated at least forty times; but he evaded monotony
by the following simple contrivance:

     "I _slew_ him; he _fell_ by the Wurra-Gurra River--ting tong!
     _I_ slew him; _he_ fell, by the Wurra-Gurra River,
      I slew him; he fell, by the _Wurra-Gurra River,"_

with similar changes, and then back again.

One of our own savages saved a great poet from monotony by similar
means;* very good of him.

* The elder Sheridan, who used to teach his pupils to tresh dead
Dryden out thus: _None_ but the brave,/None but the
_brave,_/None _but_ the brave, deserve the fair.

And now the gins took up the tune without the words and the dance
began to it. First, two figures ghastly with white paint came bounding
like Jacks-in-the-box out of the gloom into the red light, and danced
gracefully--then one more popped out--then another, at set intervals
of time--then another, all painted differently--and swelled the dance
by degrees; and still, as the dance grew in numbers, the musicians
sang and drummed louder and faster by well-planned gradations, and the
motion rose in intensity, till they all warmed into the terrible
savage corroboree jump, legs striding wide, head turned over one
shoulder, the eyes glaring with fiendish intensity in one direction,
the arms both raised and grasping waddies and boomerangs--till at
last they worked up to such a gallop of fierce, buck-like leaps that
there was a jump for each beat of the music. Now they were in four
lines, and as the figures in the front line jumped to the right, each
keeping his distance to a hair, the second line jumped to the left,
the third to the right, and the fourth to the left.

The twinkle and beauty and symmetry of this was admirable, and,
strange as it may appear, not only were the savages now wrought up to
frenzy at this climax of the dance, but the wonderful magnetic
influence these children of Nature have learned to create and launch
in the corroboree so stirred the white men's blood, that they went
half mad too, and laughed and shouted and danced, and could hardly
help flinging themselves among the mad fiends and jumping and yelling
with them; and when the jump was at its fiercest and quickest, and the
great frenzy boiling over, these cunning artists brought it to a dead
stop sharp upon the climax--and all was still.

In another minute they were all snoring; but George and Robinson often
started in their slumbers, dreaming they saw the horrid figures--the
skeletons, lizards, snakes, tartan shawls, and whitened fiends, the
whole lot blazing at the eyes and mouth like white budelights, come
bounding one after another out of the black night into the red
torchlight, and then go striding and jumping and glaring and raging
and bucking and prancing, and scattering battle and song and joy and
rage and inspiration and stark-staring frenzy all around.

They awoke at daylight rather cold, and found piles of snow upon their
blankets, and the lizards and skeletons and imps and tartan shawls
deteriorated. The snow had melted on their bodies, and the colors had
all run--some of them away. _Quid multa?_ we all know how beauties
look when the sun breaks on them after a ball.

They asked for Jacky. To their great chagrin he was not to be found.
They waited, getting crosser and crosser, till nine o'clock, and then
out comes my lord from the wood, walking toward them with his head
down on his bosom, the picture of woe--the milmeridien movement over
again.

"There! don't let us scold him," said George, "I am sure he has lost a
relation, or maybe a dear friend; anyway I hope it is not his
sweetheart--poor Jacky. Well, Jacky! I am glad you have washed your
face, now I know you again. You can't think how much better you look
in your own face than painted up in that unreasonable way,
like-like-like-I dono-what-all."

"Like something between a devil and a rainbow," suggested Robinson.

"But what is wrong?" asked George, kindly. "I am almost afraid to ask,
though!"

Encouraged by the tone of sympathy, the afflicted chief pointed to his
face, sighed, and said:

"Kalingalunga paint war, and now Kalingalunga wash um face and not
kill anybody first. Kalingalunga Jacky again, and show your white
place in um hill a good deal soon."

And the amiable heathen cleared up a little at the prospect of serving
George, whom he loved--aboriginally.

Jem remained with the natives upon some frivolous pretense. His real
hope was to catch the ruffian whom he secretly believed to be still in
the wood. "He is like enough to creep out this way," thought Jem, "and
then--won't I nail him!"

In half an hour they were standing under the spot whose existence
Robinson had so often doubted.

"Well, George, you painted it true. It really is a river of quartz
running between those two black rocks. And that you think is the home
of the gold, eh?"

"Well, I do. Look here, Tom! look at this great large heap of quartz
bowlders, all of different sizes; they have all rolled down here out
of that river of quartz."

"Why, of course they have! who doubts that?"

"Many is the time I have sat on that green mound where Jacky is
sitting now, and eaten my bread and cheese."

"I dare say! but what has that to do with it? what are we to do? Are
we to go up the rock and peck into that mass of quartz?"

"Well, I think it is worth while."

"Why, it would be like biting a piece out of the world! Look here,
Master George, we can put your notion about the home of the gold to
the test without all that trouble."

"As how?"

"You own all these quartz stones rolled out of yon river; if so, they
are samples of it. Ten thousand quartz stones is quite sample enough,
so begin and turn them all over, examine them--break them if you like.
If we find but a speck of gold in one of them I'll believe that quartz
river is gold's home--if not, it is all humbug!"

George pulled a wry face; he found himself pinned to his own theory.

"Well," said he, "I own the sample tells us what is in the barn; so
now I am vexed for bringing you here."

"Now we _are_ here, give it a fair trial; let us set to and break
every bowlder in the thundering heap."

They went to work and picked the quartz bowlders; full two hours they
worked, and by this time they had made a considerable heap of broken
quartz; it glittered in the sun, but it glittered white, not a speck
of yellow came to light.

George was vexed. Robinson grinned; expecting nothing, he was not
disappointed. Besides, he was winning an argument, and we all like to
turn out prophets. Presently a little cackle from Jacky.

"I find um!"

"Find what?" asked Robinson, without looking up.

"A good deal yellow stone," replied Jacky, with at least equal
composure.

"Let me see that," said George, with considerable curiosity; and they
both went to Jacky.

Now the fact is that this heap of quartz stones was in reality much
larger than they thought, only the greater part of it had been
overgrown with moss and patches of grass a few centuries of centuries
ago.

Jacky, seated on what seemed a grassy mound, was in reality perched
upon a part of the antique heap; his keen eye saw a little bit of
yellow protruding through the moss, and he was amusing himself
clipping it with his tomahawk, cutting away the moss and chipping the
stone, which made the latter glitter more and yellower.

"Hallo!" cried George, "this looks better."

Robinson went on his knees without a word.

"It is all right," said he, in a great flutter, "it is a nugget--and a
good-sized one--a pound weight, I think. Now then, my lad, out you
come;" and he dug his fingers under it to jerk it out.

But the next moment he gave a screech and looked up amazed.

"Why, this is the point of the nugget; it lies the other way, not
flat. George! I can't move it! The pick! Oh, Lord! oh, Lord! The pick!
the pick!"

"Stand clear," shouted George, and he drove the point of the pick down
close by the prize, then he pressed on the handle. "Why, Tom, it is
jammed somehow."

"No, it is not jammed--it is its own weight. Why, George!"

"Then, Tom! it is a hundred-weight if it is an ounce!"

"Don't be a fool," cried the other, trembling all over; "there is no
such thing in nature."

The nugget now yielded slowly to the pressure and began to come up
into the world again inch by inch after so many thousand years. Of
course, before it could come all out, the soil must open first, and
when Robinson, glaring down, saw a square foot of earth part and gape
as the nugget came majestically up, he gave another cry, and with
trembling hands laid hold of the prize, and pulled and tugged and
rolled it on the clean moss--to lift it was not so easy. They fell
down on their knees by the side of it like men in a dream. Such a
thing had never been seen or heard of--a hundred-weight of quartz and
gold, and beautiful as it was great. It was like honeycomb, the cells
of which had been sliced by a knife; the shining metal brimmed over in
the delicate quartz cells.

They lifted it. Yes, full a hundredweight; half the mass was quartz,
but four-fifths of the weight they knew must be gold. Then they jumped
up and each put a foot on it, and shook hands over it.

"Oh, you beauty!" cried George, and he went on his knees and kissed
it; "that is not because you are gold, but because you take me to
Susan. Now, Tom, let us thank Heaven for its goodness to us, and back
to camp this very day."

"Ay! but stop, we must wrap it in our wipes or we shall never get back
alive. The very honest ones would turn villains at sight of it. It is
the wonder of the world."

"I see my Susan's eyes in it," cried George, in rapture. "Oh, Tom,
good, kind, honest Tom, shake hands over it once more!"

In the midst of all this rapture a horrible thought occurred.

"Why, it's Jacky's," said George, faintly, "he found it."

"Nonsense! nonsense!" cried Tom, uneasily; he added, however, "but I am
afraid one third of it is--pals share, white or black."

All their eyes now turned uneasily to the Aboriginal, who lay yawning
on the grass.

"Jacky give him you, George," said this worthy savage, with superb
indifference. He added with a yawn: "What for you dance corroboree
when um not dark?--den you bite yellow stone," continued this
original, "den you red, den you white, den you red again, all because
we pull up yellow stone-all dis a good deal dam ridiculous."

"So 'tis, Jacky," replied Robinson, hastily; "don't you have anything
to do with yellow stone, it would make you as great a fool as we are.
Now show us the shortest cut back home through the bush."

At the native camp they fell in with Jem. The monstrous nugget was too
heavy to conceal from his shrewd eye, so they showed it him. The sight
of it almost knocked him down. Robinson told him where they found it,
and advised Jem to go and look for another. Alas! the great nugget
already made him wish one friend away. But Jem said:

"No, I will see you safe through the bush first."



CHAPTER LXXI.

ALL this time two persons in the gold mine were upon thorns of
expectation and doubt--brutus and Peter Crawley. George and Robinson
did not return, but no more did Black Will. What had happened? Had the
parties come into collision? and, if so, with what result? If the
friends had escaped, why had they never been heard of since? If, on
the other hand, Will had come off conqueror, why had he never
reappeared? At last brutus arrived at a positive conviction that Black
Will had robbed and probably murdered the men, and was skulking
somewhere with their gold, thereby defrauding him, his pal; however,
he kept this to himself, and told Crawley that he feared Will had come
to grief, so he would go well armed, and see what was the matter, and
whether he could help him. So he started for the bush, well armed. Now
his real object, I blush to say, was to murder Black Will, and rob him
of the spoils of George and Robinson.

Wicked as these men of violence had been six months ago, gold and
Crawley had made them worse, ay, much worse. Crawley, indeed, had
never openly urged any of them to so deep a crime as murder, and it is
worthy of note, as a psychological fact, that this reptile contrived
to deceive itself into thinking that it had stopped short of crime's
utmost limits; to be sure it had tempted and bribed and urged men to
robbery under circumstances that were almost sure to lead to murder,
but still murder might not occur; meantime it had openly
discountenanced that crime, and checked the natural proclivity of
brutus and Black Will toward deeds of blood.

Self-deception will probably cease at the first blast of the
archangel's trumpet. But what human heart will part with it till then?
The circumstances under which a human being could not excuse or delude
or justify himself have never yet occurred in the huge annals of
crime. Prejudice apart, Crawley's moral position behind brutus and
Black Will seems to bear a strong family likeness to that which Holy
Writ assigns to the great enemy of man. That personage knocks out
nobody's brains, cuts nobody's throat, never was guilty of such
brutality since the world was, but he finds some thorough egotist, and
whispers how the egotism of his passions or his interest may be
gratified by the death of a fellow-creature. The egotist listens, and
blood flows.

brutus and Black Will had both suffered for their crimes. brutus had
been nailed by Carlo, twice gibbeted, and the bridge of his nose
broken once. Black Will had been mutilated, and Walker nearly drowned,
but "the close contriver of all harms" had kept out of harm's way.
Violence had never recoiled on him who set it moving. For all that,
Crawley, I must inform the reader, was not entirely prosperous. He had
his little troubles, too, whether warnings that he was on the wrong
path, or punishments of his vices, or both, I can't say.

Thus it was. Mr. Crawley had a natural love of spirits, without a
stomach strong enough to deal with them. When he got away from Mr.
Meadows he indulged more and more, and for some months past he had
been subject to an unpleasant phenomenon that arises now and then out
of the fumes of liquor. At the festive board, even as he raised the
glass to his lips, the face of Crawley would often be seen to writhe
with a sort of horror, and his eyes to become fixed on unseen objects,
and perspiration to gather on his brow. Then such as were not in the
secret would jump up and say, "What on earth is the matter?" and look
fearfully round, expecting to see some horrid sight to justify that
look of horror and anguish; but Crawley, his glassy eyes still fixed,
would whimper out, his teeth chattering, and clipping the words: "Oh,
ne-ne-never mind, it's o-o-only a trifling ap-parition!" He had got to
try and make light of it, because at first he used to cry out and
point, and then the miners ran out and left him alone with his
phantoms, and this was terrible. He dreaded solitude; he schemed
against it, and provided against it, and paid fellows to bear him
company night and day, and at the festive board it was one thing to
drink his phantoms neat and another to dilute them with figures of
flesh and blood. He much preferred the latter.

At first, his supernatural visitors were of a unfavorable but not a
ghastly character.

No. 1 was a judge who used to rise through the floor, and sit half in
and half out of the wall, with a tremendous flow of horse-hair, a
furrowed face, a vertical chasm between the temples, and a
strike-me-off-the-rolls eye gleaming with diabolical fire from under a
gray, shaggy eyebrow.

No. 2 was a policeman, who came in through the window, and stood
imperturbable, all in blue, with a pair of handcuffs, and a calm eye,
and a disagreeable absence of effort or emotion--an inevitable-looking
policeman.

But as Crawley went deeper in crime and brandy, blood-boltered
figures, erect corpses, with the sickening signs of violence in every
conceivable form, used to come and blast his sight and arrest the
glass on its way to his lips, and make his songs and the boisterous
attempts at mirth of his withered heart die in a quaver and a shiver
of fear and despair. And at this period of our tale these horrors had
made room for a phantom more horrible still to such a creature as
Crawley. The air would seem to thicken into sulfurous smoke, and then
to clear, and then would come out clearer and clearer, more and more
awful, a black figure with hoof and horns and tail, eyes like red-hot
carbuncles, teeth a _chevaux-de-frise_ of white-hot iron, and an
appalling grin.*

* The god Pan colored black by the early Christians.



CHAPTER LXXII.

THE party, consisting of Jacky, Jem, Robinson and George, had
traversed about one half the bush, when a great heavy crow came
wheeling and cackling over their heads, and then joined a number more
who were now seen circling over a gum-tree some hundred yards distant.

"Let us go and see what that is," said Jem.

Jacky grinned, and led the way. They had not gone very far when
another great black bird rose so near their feet as to make them jump,
and peering through the bushes they saw a man lying on his back. His
arm was thrown in an easy, natural way round his gun, but at a second
glance it was plain the man was dead. The crows had ripped his clothes
to ribbons with their tremendous beaks, and lacerated the flesh and
picked out the eyes.

They stepped a few paces from this sight. There was no sign of
violence on the body.

"Poor fellow!" said Jem. "How did he come by his end, I wonder?" And
he stretched forward and peered with pity and curiosity mingled.

"Lost in the bush!" said Robinson, very solemnly. And he and George
exchanged a meaning look.

"What is that for?" said George, angrily, to Jacky--"grinning in sight
of a dead body?"

"White fellow stupid fellow," was all Jacky's reply.

The men now stepped up to the body to examine it; not that they had
much hope of discovering who it was, but still they knew it was their
duty for the sake of his kindred to try and find out.

George, overcoming a natural repugnance, examined the pockets. He
found no papers. He found a knife, but no name was cut in the handle.
In the man's bosom he found a small metal box, but just as he was
taking it out Jem gave a halo!

"I think I know him," cried Jem. "There is no mistaking that crop of
black hair; it is my old captain, Black Will."

"You don't say so! What could he be doing here without his party?"

"Anything in the box, George?" asked Robinson.

"Nothing but a little money. Here is a sovereign--look. And here is a
bank-note."

"A five-pound note?"

"Yes--no; it is more than that a good deal. It is for fifty pounds,
Tom."

"What?"

"A fifty-pound note, I tell you."

"Jem!"

"Captain!"

A most expressive look was exchanged between these two, and by one
impulse they both seized the stock of the gun that was in the dead
man's hand. They lifted it, and yes--two fingers were wanting on the
right hand.

"Come away from that fellow," cried Robinson to George. "Let him lie."

George looked up in some wonder. Robinson pointed sternly to the dead
hand in silence. George, by the light of the other men's faces, saw it
all, and recoiled with a natural movement of repugnance as from a dead
snake. There was a breathless silence--and every eye bent upon this
terrible enemy lying terrible no longer at their feet.

"How did he die?" asked Robinson, in a whisper.

"In the great snow-storm," replied George, in a whisper.

"No," said Jem, in the same tone, "he was alive yesterday. I saw his
footprint after the snow was melted."

"There was snow again last night, Tom. Perhaps he went to sleep in
that with his belly empty."

"Starvation and fatigue would do it without the snow, George. We
brought a day's provisions out with us, George. He never thought of
that, I will be bound."

"Not he," said Jem. "I'll answer for him he only thought of robbing
and killing--never thought about dying himself."

"I can't believe he is dead so easy as this," said Robinson.

The feeling was natural. This man had come into the wood and had
followed them burning to work them ill, and they to work him ill. Both
were utterly baffled. He had never prevailed to hurt them, nor they
him. He was dead, but by no mortal hand. The immediate cause of his
death was unknown, and will never be known for certain while the world
lasts.

_L'homme propose, mais Dieu dispose!_



CHAPTER LXXIII.

"DON'T keep staring at it so, farmer, it is an ugly sight. You will
see him in your sleep if you do that. Here is something better to look
at--a letter. And there I carried it and never once thought of it till
the sight of his hand made me feel in my pocket, and then my hand ran
against it. 'Tis from Mr. Levi."

"Thank you, Jem. Tom, will you be so kind as read it me while I work?"

"Yes, give it me. Work? Why, what are we going to work at in the
bush?"

"I should think you might guess," replied George quietly, while
putting down his pickax and taking off his coat. "Well, I am
astonished at both of you. You ought to know what I am going to do.
Humph! Under this tree will be as good a place as any."

"Jem, as I am a sinner, he is going to bury him."

"Bury what? The nugget?"

"No, Jem, the Christian."*

* In Berkshire, among a certain class, this word means "a human
being."

"A pretty Christian," sneered Robinson.

"You know what I mean, Tom?"

"I know it is very kind of you to take all this trouble to bury my
enemy," said Robinson, hurt.

"Don't ye say that," replied George, hurt in his turn. "He was as much
my enemy as yours."

"No such thing. He was here after me, and has been tormenting me this
twelve months. You have no enemy, a great soft spoon like you."

"Keep your temper, Tom," answered George, in a mollifying tone. "Let
each man act according to his lights. I _couldn't_ leave a corpse
to the fowls of the air.

"Gibbet a murderer, I say--don't bury him; especially when he has just
been hunting our very lives."

"Tom," replied George doggedly," death settles all accounts. I liked
the man as little as you could; and it is not to say I am in love with
a man because I sprinkle a little earth over his dead bones. Ugh! This
is the unkindest soil to work. It is full of roots, enough to break a
fellow's heart."

While George was picking and grubbing out roots, and fighting with the
difficult soil, Robinson opened Levi's letter viciously and read out:

"George Fielding, you have an enemy in the mine--a secret, cowardly,
unscrupulous enemy, who lies in wait for your return. I have seen his
face, and tremble for you. Therefore listen to my words. The old Jew,
whom twice you have saved from harm and insult, is rich, his children
are dead, the wife of his bosom is dead. He loves no creature now but
you and Susannah; therefore run no more risks for gold, since much
gold awaits you without risk. Come home. Respect the words of age and
experience--come home. Delay not an hour. Oh, say not, 'I will sleep
yet one more night in my tent, and then I will depart,' but ride
speedily after me on the very instant. Two horses have I purchased for
you and the young man your friend--two swift horses with their
saddles. The voucher is inclosed. Ride speedily after me this very
hour, lest evil befall you and yet more sorrow fall upon Susannah and
upon--Isaac Levi."

The reading of this letter was followed by a thoughtful silence broken
only by the sound of George's pickax and the bursting roots.

"This is a very extraordinary letter. Mr. Levi knows more than he
tells you, George."

"I am of your opinion."

"Why, captain," said Jem, "to go by that letter, Fielding is the
marked man, and not you after all. So it is his own enemy he is
digging that grave for."

"Do you think you will stop him by saying that?" asked Robinson, with
a shrug.

"He was my enemy, Tom, and yours too; but now he is nobody's enemy; he
is dead. Will you help me lay him in the earth, or shall I do it by
myself?"

"We will help," said the others, a little sullenly.

They brought the body to its grave under the tall gum-tree.

"Not quite so rough, Tom, if _you_ please."

"I didn't mean to be rough that I know of--there."

They laid the dead villain gently and reverently in his grave. George
took a handful of soil and scattered it over him.

"Ashes to ashes, dust to dust," said he, solemnly.

The other two looked down and sprinkled soil, too, and their anger and
bitterness began to soften by the side of George and over the grave.

Then Jem felt in his pocket and produced something wrapped in silver
paper.

"This belongs!" said he, with a horrible simplicity. "The farmer is
too good for this world, but it is a good fault. There, farmer," said
he, looking to George for approbation as he dropped the little parcel
into the grave. "After all," continued Jem, good-naturedly, "it would
have been very hard upon a poor fellow to wake up in the next world
and not have what does belong to him to make an honest living with."

The grave was filled in, and a little mound made at the foot of the
tree. Then George took out his knife and began to cut the smooth bark.

"What now? Oh, I see. That is a good idea, George. Read them a lesson.
Say in a few words how he came here to do a deed of violence and died
himself--by the hand of Heaven."

"Tom," replied George, cutting away at the bark, "he is gone where he
is sure to be judged; so we have no call to judge him. God Almighty
can do that, I do suppose, without us putting in our word."

"Well, have it your own way. I never saw the toad so obstinate before,
Jem. What is he cutting, I wonder?"

The inscription, when finished, ran thus:

               "PLEASE DON'T CUT DOWN THIS TREE.
                      "IT IS A TOMBSTONE.
                   "A WHITE MAN LIES BELOW."

"Now, Tom, for England!"

They set out again with alacrity, and battled with the bush about two
hours more. George and Robinson carried the great nugget on a
handkerchief stretched double across two sticks, Jem carried the
picks. They were all in high spirits, and made light of scratches and
difficulties. At last, somewhat suddenly, they burst out of the thick
part into the mere outskirts frequented by the miners, and there they
came plump upon brutus, with a gun in his hand and pistols peeping out
of his pockets, come to murder Black Will and rob him of his spoils.

They were startled, and brutus astounded, for he was fully persuaded
George and Robinson had ceased to exist. He was so dumfounded that
Robinson walked up to him and took the gun out of his hands without
any resistance on his part. The others came round him, and Robinson
demanded his pistols.

"What for?" said he.

Now at this very moment his eye fell upon that fabulous mass of gold
they carried, and both his eyes opened, and a sort of shiver passed
over him. With ready cunning he looked another way, but it was too
late. Robinson had caught that furtive glance, and a chill came over
him that this villain should have seen the prize, a thing to excite
cupidity to frenzy. Nothing now would have induced Robinson to leave
him armed.

He replied, sternly: "Because we are four to one, and we will hang you
on the nearest tree if you don't give them up. And, now, what are you
doing here?"

"I was only looking for my pal," said brutus.

"Well, you won't want a gun and pistols to look for your pal. Which
way are you going?"

"Into the bush."

"Then mizzle! That is the road."

brutus moved gloomily away into the bush.

"There," said Robinson, "he has turned bushranger. I've disarmed him,
and saved some poor fellow's life and property. Cover up the nugget,
George."

They went on, but presently Robinson had a thought.

"Jacky," said he, "you saw that man; should you know him again?"

"Yes."

"Jacky, that man is our enemy. Could you track him by his footsteps
without ever letting him see you?"

Jacky smiled superior.

"Then follow him and see where he goes, and whom he joins--and come to
the mine directly and tell me."

Jacky's eyes gleamed at this intelligence. He sat down, and in a few
turns of the hand painted his face war, and glided like a serpent on
brutus's trail.

The rest cleared the wood, and brought the nugget, safe hidden in
their pocket-handkerchief, to camp. They begged Jem to accept the
fifty pounds, if he did not mind handling the price of blood.

Jem assured them he had no such scruples, and took it with a burst of
thanks.

Then they made him promise faithfully not to mention to a soul about
the monster nugget. No more he did while he was sober, but, alas! some
hours later, having a drop in his head, he betrayed the secret to one
or two--say forty.

Robinson pitched their tent and mounted guard over the nugget. George
was observed to be in a strange flutter. He ran hither and thither.
Ran to the post-office--ran to the stationer--got paper--drew up a
paper--found McLaughlan--made him sign it--went to Mr. Moore--showed
him Isaac's voucher; on which Moore produced the horses, a large black
horse with both bone and blood, and a good cob.

George was very much pleased with them, and asked what Levi had given
for them.

"Two hundred and fifty pounds for the pair."

"Good Heavens," cried George, "what a price! Mr. Levi was in earnest."
Then he ran out and went to the tent and gave Robinson his letters.
"But there were none for me, Tom," sighed George. "Never mind, I shall
soon--"

Now these letters brought joy and triumph to Robinson; one contained a
free pardon, the other was a polite missive from the Colonial
Government, in answer to the miners' petition he had sent up.

"Secretary had the honor to inform Mr. Robinson that police were on
the road to the mine, and that soldiers would arrive by to-morrow to
form an escort, so that the miners' gold might travel in safety down
to Sydney."

"Hurrah! this is good news," cried Robinson, "and what a compliment to
me. Do you hear, George? an escort of soldiers coming to the camp
to-morrow; they will take the nugget safe to Sydney."

"Not if we are robbed of it to-night," replied George.

At this moment in came Jacky with news of brutus. That wily man had
gone but a little way in the bush when he had made a circuit, and had
slipped back into another part of the mine, and Jacky had followed him
first by trail, afterward by sight, and had marked him down into a
certain tent, on which he had straightway put a little red mark.

"Come back after our nugget, George. Fools we were to carry it blazing
in folks' eyes."

"I dare say we can beat him."

"I am game to try. Jacky, I want to put a question to you."

While Jacky and Tom were conferring in animated whispers, George was
fixing an old spur he had picked up into the heel of his boot.

"That is capital, Jacky. Well, George, we have hit upon a plan."

"And so have I."

"You?"

"Yes! me! but tell me yours first, Tom."

Robinson detailed him his scheme with all its ramifications, and a
very ingenious stratagem it was.

For all that, when George propounded his plan in less than six words,
Robinson stared with surprise and then gave way to ludicrous
admiration.

"Well," cried he, "simplicity before cunning; look at that now. Where
was my head?--George, this is your day--carried _nem. con."_

"And, Tom, you can do yours all the same."

"Can I? Why, yes, to be sure I can. There, he saw that, too, before.
Why, George, if you don't mind, you will be No. 1 and I No. 2. What
makes you so sharp all of a sudden?"

"I have to think for Susan as well as us," said the poor fellow,
tenderly, "that is why I am sharp--for once in a way. And now,
Jacky--you are a great anxiety to me, and the time is so short--come
sit by me, dear Jacky, and let me try and make you understand what I
have been doing for you, that you may be good and happy, and
comfortable in your old age, when your poor old limbs turn stiff, and
you can hunt no longer. In grateful return for the nugget, and more
than that for all your goodness and kindness to me in times of bitter
trouble."

Then George showed Jacky how he had given Abner one-third of all his
sheep and cattle, and Jacky two-thirds, and how McLaughlan, a just
man, would see the division made. "And do leave the woods, except for
a hunt now and then, Jacky; you are too good for them."

Above all, George explained with homely earnestness the nature of the
sheep, her time of lambing, etc., and showed Jacky how the sheep and
cattle would always keep him fed and clothed, if he would but use them
reasonably, and not kill the breeders for dinner.

And Jacky listened with glistening eyes, for George's glistened, and
the sweet tones of affection and gratitude pierced through this family
talk, and it is sad that we must drop the curtain on this green spot
in the great camp and go among our villains.



CHAPTER LXXIV.

ROBINSON did not overrate the fatal power of the fabulous mass of
gold, a glimpse of which he had incautiously given to greedy eyes. It
drew brutus like a magnet after it. He came all in a flutter to
mephistopheles, and told him he had met the two men carrying a lump of
solid gold between them so heavy that the sticks bent under it. "The
sweat ran down me at the sight of it, but I managed to look another
way directly."

What with the blows and kicks and bruises and defeats he had received,
and with the gold mass his lawless eye had rested on, brutus was now
in a state of mind terrible to think of.

Lust and hate, terrible twins, stung that dark heart to frenzy. Could
he have had his will he would have dispensed with cunning, would have
gone out and fired bullets from his gun into the tent, and, if his
enemies came out alive, have met them hand to hand to slay or be
slain. But the watchful foe had disarmed him, and he was compelled to
listen to the more reynard-like ferocity of his accomplice.

"Bill," said the assassin of Carlo, "keep cool, and you shall have the
swag; and yet not lose your revenge neither."

"---- you, tell me how."

"Let the bottle alone, then; you are hot enough without that. Come
nearer me. What I have got to say is not the sort of thing for me to
bawl about. We should not be alive half an hour if it was heard to
come from our lips."

The two heads came close together, and Crawley leaned over the other
side of the table and listened with senses keen as a razor.

"Suppose I show you how to make those two run out of their tent like
two frightened women, and never once think about their swag?"

"Ah!"

"And fall blinded for life or dead or dying while we walk off with the
swag."

"Blind, dead, dying! give me your hand. How? how? how?"

"Hush! don't shout like that; come closer, and you, Smith."

Then a diabolical scheme hissed into the listeners' ears--a scheme at
once cowardly and savage--a scheme of that terrible kind that robs
courage, strength and even skill of their natural advantages, and
reduces their owners to the level of the weak and the timid--a scheme
worthy of the assassin of Carlo, and the name I have given this
wretch, whose brain was so fertile and his heart so fiendish. Its
effect on the hearers was great, but very different. Crawley recoiled,
not violently, but like a serpent on which water had been poured; but
brutus broke into a rapture of admiration, exultation, gratified hate.

"Bless you, bless you!" cried he, with a violence more horrible than
his curses, "you warm my heart, you _are_ a pal. What a head-piece
you have got! ---- you, Smith, have you nothing to say? Isn't this a
dodge out of the common?"

Now for the last minute or two Crawley's eyes had been fixed with a
haggard expression on a distant corner of the room. He did not move
them; he appeared hardly to have the power, but he answered, dropping
the words down on the table anywhere.

"Ye-yes! it is very inge-nious, ah!"

mephisto. "We must buy the turpentine directly; there is only one
store sells it, and that shuts at nine.

brutus. "Do you hear, Smith? hand us out the blunt."

Crawley. "Oh, ugh!" and his eyes seemed fascinated to that spot.

brutus (following Crawley's eye uneasily). "What is the matter?"

Crawley. "Lo-o-o-k th-e-r-e! No! on your right. Oh, his tail is in the
fire!"

brutus. "Whose tail? don't be a fool!"

Crawley. "And it doesn't burn!! Oh, it burns blacker in the fire!--Ah,
ah! now the eyes have caught fire--diamonds full of hell. They blast!
Ah, now the teeth have caught light--red-hot nails. The mouth is as
big as the table, gaping wider, wider, wider. Ah! ah! ah!"

brutus. "---- him; I won't stay in the room with such a fellow, he
makes my blood run cold. Has he cut his father's throat in a church,
or what?"

Crawley (shrieking). "Oh, don't go; oh, my dear friends, don't leave
me alone with IT. My dear friends, you sit down right upon it--that
sends it away." And Crawley hid his face, and pointed wildly to
whereabouts they were to sit upon the phantom.

brutus. "Come, it is gone now; was forced nearly to squash it first,
though, haw! haw! haw!"

Crawley. "Yes, it is gone. Thank Heaven--I'll give up drinking."

brutus. "So now fork out the blunt for the turps."

Crawley. "No! I will give no money toward murder--robbery is bad
enough. Where shall we go to?" And he rose and went out, muttering
something about "a little brandy."

brutus. "The sneak--to fail us at the pinch. I'll wring his neck
round. What is this? five pounds."

mephisto. "Don't you see the move? he won't give it us, conscience
forbids; but, if we are such rogues as take it, no questions asked."

"The tarnation hypocrite," roared brutus, with disgust--hypocrisy was
the one vice he was innocent of--out of jail. mephistopheles stole
Crawley's money, left for that purpose, and went and bought a
four-gallon cask of turpentine.

brutus remained and sharpened an old cutlass, the only weapon he had
got left. Crawley and mephistopheles returned almost together. Crawley
produced a bottle of brandy.

"Now," said he to mephistopheles, "I don't dispute your ingenuity, my
friend, but suppose while we have been talking the men have struck
their tent and gone away, nugget and all?"

The pair looked terribly blank--what fools we were not to think of
that.

Crawley kept them in pain a moment or two.

"Well, they have not," said he, "I have been to look."

"Well done," cried mephistopheles.

"Well done," cried brutus, gasping for breath.

"There is their tent all right."

"How near did you go to it?"

"Near enough to hear their voices muttering."

"When does the moon rise, to-night?"

"She is rising now."

"When does she go down?"

"Soon after two o'clock."

"Will you take a share of the work, Smith?"

"Heaven forbid!"



CHAPTER LXXV.

IT was a gusty night. The moon had gone down. The tents gleamed
indistinct in form, but white as snow. Robinson's tent stood a little
apart, among a number of deserted claims, some of them dry, but most
of them with three or four feet of water in them.

There was, however, one large tent about twenty yards from Robinson's.

A man crept on his stomach up to this tent and listened. He then
joined another man who stood at some distance, and whose form seemed
gigantic in the dim starlight. "All right," said the spy, "they are
all fast as dormice, snoring like hogs; no fear from them."

"Go to work, then," whispered brutus. "Do your part."

mephistopheles laid a deep iron dish upon the ground, and removed the
bung from the turpentine cask, and poured. "Confound the wind, how it
wastes the stuff," cried he.

He now walked on tiptoe past Robinson's tent and scattered the
turpentine with a bold sweep, so that it fell light as rain over a
considerable surface. A moment of anxiety succeeded; would their keen
antagonists hear even that slight noise? No! no one stirred in the
tent.

mephistopheles returned to the cask, and, emboldened by success,
brought it nearer the doomed tent. Six times he walked past the
windward side of the tent, and scattered the turpentine over it. It
was at the other side his difficulties began.

The first time he launched the liquid, the wind took it and returned
it nearly all in his face, and over his clothes. Scarce a drop reached
the tent.

The next time he went up closer with a beating heart, and flung it
sharper. This time full two-thirds went upon the tent, and only a
small quantity came back like spray.

By the time the cask was emptied, the tent was saturated. Then this
wretch passed the tent yet once more, and scattered a small quantity
of oil to make the flame more durable and deadly.

"Now it is my turn," whispered brutus. "I thought it would never
come."

What is that figure crouching and crawling about a hundred yards to
windward? It is the caitiff, Crawley, who, after peremptorily
declining to have anything to do with this hellish act, has crept
furtively after them, partly to play the spy on them, for he suspects
they will lie to him about the gold, partly urged by curiosity. He
could see nothing at that distance but the dark body of mephistopheles
passing at intervals between him and the white tent.

He shivered with cold and terror at the crime about to be done, and
quivered with impatience that it was so long a-doing.

The assassins now divided their force. mephistopheles took his station
to leeward of the tent; brutus to windward.

Crawley saw a sudden spark upon the ground; it was brutus striking a
lucifer match against his heel. With this he lighted a piece of tow,
and running along the tent he left a line of fire behind him, and
awaited the result, his cutlass griped in his hand and his teeth
clinched.

Crawley saw that line of fire come and then creep and then rise and
then roar, and shoot up into a great column of fire thirty feet high,
roaring and blazing, and turning night into day all round.
Simultaneously with this tremendous burst of fire and light, which
startled Crawley by bringing him in a moment into broad daylight, he
saw rise from the earth a black figure with a fiendish face.

At this awful sight the conscience-stricken wretch fell flat and tried
to work into the soil like a worm. Nor did he recover any portion of
his presence of mind till he heard a shrill whoop, savage and
soul-chilling, but mortal, and, looking up, saw Kalingalunga go
bounding down upon brutus with gigantic leaps, his tomahawk whirling.

Crawley cowered like a hare and watched. brutus, surprised but not
dismayed, wheeled round and faced the savage, cutlass in hand. He
parried a fierce blow of the tomahawk, and with his left fist struck
Kalingalunga on the temple, and knocked him backward half a dozen
yards. The elastic savage recovered himself and danced like a fiend
round brutus in the red light of the blazing tent.

Warned by that strange blow, straight from the armpit, a blow entirely
new to him, he came on with more deadly caution, eyes and teeth
budelights, and brutus felt a chill for a moment, but it speedily
turned to rage. Now as the combatants each prepared to strike again,
screams suddenly issued from the other side the tent, so wild,
despairing, and unnatural as to suspend their arms for a moment. They
heard but saw nothing, only the savage heart of brutus found time to
exult--his enemies were perishing. But Crawley saw as well as heard. A
pillar of flame eight feet high burst out from behind the tent and ran
along the ground. From that conical flame issued those appalling
shrieks--it was a man on fire. The living flame ran but a few steps,
then disappeared from the earth, and the screams ceased. Apparently
the fire had not only killed, but annihilated its prey and so itself.
Crawley sickened with horror, and for a moment with remorse.

But already brutus and Kalingalunga were fighting again by the light
of the burning tent. They closed, and this time blood flowed on both
sides. The savage, by a skillful feint, cut brutus on the flesh of the
left shoulder, but not deep, and brutus once more surprised the savage
by delivering point with his cutlass, and inflicted a severe graze on
the ribs.

At the sight of his enemy's blood, brutus followed up and aimed a
fierce blow at Kalingalunga's head; he could not have made a more
useless attack. The savage bore on his left arm a shield, so called;
it was but three inches broad and two feet long, but skill and
practice had made it an impenetrable defense. He received the cutlass
on this shield as a matter of course, and simultaneously delivered his
tomahawk on brutus's unguarded head. brutus went down under the blow
and rolled over on his face.

The crouching spectator of this terrible combat by the decaying light
of the tent heard the hard blow and saw the white man roll upon the
ground. Then he saw the tomahawk twice lifted and twice descend upon
the man's back as he lay. The next moment the savage came running from
the tent at his utmost speed.

Crawley's first thought was that assistance had come to brutus; his
next was a terrible one. The savage had first risen from the earth at
a spot between the tent and him. Perhaps he had been watching both him
and the tent. A moment of horrible uncertainty, and then Crawley
yielded to his instinct and ran. A terrible whoop behind told him he
was indeed to be the next victim. He ran for the dear life; no one
would have believed he could shamble along at the rate he did. His
tent was half a mile off; he would be a dead man long ere he could
reach it. He turned his yelling head as he ran, to see. The fleet
savage had already diminished the distance between them by half.
Crawley now filled the air with despairing cries for help. A large
tent was before him; he knew not whose, but certain death was behind
him. He made for the tent. If he could but reach it before the
death-stroke was given him! Yes, it is near! No, it is white and looks
closer than it is. A whoop sounded in his ears; it seemed to ring
inside his head it was so near. He flung himself yelling with terror
at the wall of the tent. An aperture gave way. A sharp cut as with a
whip seemed to sting him, and he was on his knees in the middle of the
tent howling for mercy, first to the savage, who he made sure was
standing over him with his tomahawk; then to a man who got him by the
throat and pressed a pistol barrel cold as an icicle to his cheek.

"Mercy! mercy! the savage! he is killing me! murder! murder! help!"

"Who are you?" roared the man, shaking him.

"Oh, stop him! he will kill me! Shoot him! Don't shoot me! I am a
respectable man. It is the savage! kill him! He is at the door--please
kill him! I'll give you a hundred pounds!"

"What is to do? The critter is mad!"

"There! there! you will see a savage! Shoot him! kill him! For pity's
sake kill him, and I'll tell you all! I am respectable. I'll give you
a hundred pounds to kill him!"

"Why, it is Smith, that gives us all a treat at times."

"Don't I! Oh, my dear, good friend, he has killed me! He came after me
with his tomahawk. Have pity on a respectable man--and kill him!"

The man went to the door of the tent and sure enough there was Jacky,
who had retired to some distance. The man fired at him with as little
ceremony as he would at a glass bottle, and, as was to be expected,
missed him; but Jacky, who had a wholesome horror of the
make-thunders, ran off directly, and went to hack the last vestiges of
life out of brutus.

Crawley remained on his knees, howling and whimpering so piteously
that the man took pity on this abject personage.

"Have a drop, Mr. Smith; you have often given me one--there. I'll
strike a light."

The man struck a light and fixed a candle in a socket. He fumbled in a
corner for the bottle, and was about to offer it to Crawley, when he
was arrested by a look of silent horror on his visitor's face.

"Why, what is wrong now?"

"Look! look! look!" cried Crawley, trembling from head to foot. "Here
it comes! there is its tail! Soon its eyes and teeth will catch light!
It knows the work we have been at. Ah! ah! ah!"

The man looked round very uneasily. Crawley's way of pointing and
glaring over one's head at some object behind one was anything but
encouraging.

"What? where?"

"There! there! coming through the side of the tent. It can come
through a wall!" and Crawley shook from head to foot.

"Why, that is your own shadow," said the man. "Why, what a
faint-hearted one to shake at your own shadow."

"My shadow!" cried Crawley; "Heaven forbid! Have I got a tail?"
screeched Crawley, reproachfully.

"That you have," said the man, "now I look at you full."

Crawley clapped his hand behind him, and to his horror he had a tail



CHAPTER LXXVI.

CRAWLEY, who, what with the habit of cerebral hallucination due to
brandy and the present flutter of his spirits and his conscience, had
for a moment or two lost all the landmarks of probability, no sooner
felt his hand encounter a tail--slight in size, but stiff as a pug's,
and straight as a pointer's--than he uttered a dismal howl, and it is
said that for a single moment he really suspected premature caudation
had been inflicted on him for his crimes. But such delusions are
short-lived. He slewed himself round after this tail in his efforts to
see it, and squinting over his shoulder he did see it; and a warm
liquid which he now felt stealing down his legs and turning cold as it
went, opened his eyes still farther. It was a red spear sticking in
his person--sticking tight. Jacky, who had never got so near him as he
fancied, saw him about to get into a tent, and, unable to tomahawk
him, did the best he could--flung a light javelin with such force and
address that it pierced his coat and trousers and buried half its head
in his flesh.

This spear-head, made of jagged fishbones, had to be cut out by the
simple and agreeable process of making all round it a hole larger than
itself. The operation served to occupy Crawley for the remaining part
of the night, and exercised his vocal powers. This was the first time
he had smarted in his penetrable part--the skin--and it made him very
spiteful. Away went his compunction, and at peep of day he shambled
out very stiff, no longer dreading, but longing to hear which of his
enemies it was he had seen wrapped in flame, shrieking, and
annihilated like the snuff of a candle. He came to the scene of action
just as the sun rose.

But others were there before him. A knot of men stood round a black
patch of scorched soil, round which were scattered little fragments of
canvas burned to tinder, talking over a most mysterious affair of the
night past.

It came out that the patrol, some of whom were present, had been
ordered by Captain Robinson not to go their rounds as usual, but to
watch in a tent near his own, since he expected an attack. Accustomed
to keep awake on the move, but not in a recumbent posture, they had
slept the sleep of infancy, till suddenly awakened by the sound of a
pistol. Then they had run out, and had found the captain's tent in
ashes, and a man lying near it sore hacked and insensible, but still
breathing. They had taken him to their tent, but he had never spoken,
and the affair was incomprehensible. While each was giving some wild
opinion or another, a faint voice issued from the bowels of the earth,
invoking aid.

Several ran to the spot, and at the bottom of an old claim full thirty
feet deep they discovered on looking intently down the face of a man
rising out of the clayey water. They lowered ropes and hauled him up.

"How did you come there, mate?"

"He had come into the camp in the dark, and, not knowing the ground,
and having (to tell the truth) had a drop, he had fallen into the
claim."

He was asked with an air of suspicion how long ago this had happened.

"More than an hour," replied the wily one.

Crawley looked at him, and being, unlike the others, acquainted with
the man's features, saw, spite of the clay-cake he was enveloped in,
that his whiskers were frizzled to nothing and his fiendish eyebrows
gone. Then a sickening suspicion crept over him; he communicated it by
a look to mephistopheles.

Acting on it he asked, with an artful appearance of friendly interest:

"But the men? the poor men that were in the tent?"

"What! the captain and his mate?"

"Yes!"

"Why, ye fool! they are half way to Sydney by now."

"Half way to Sydney?" and a ghastly look passed between the speaker
and mephistopheles.

"Ay, lad! they rode off on Moore's two best nags at midnight."

"The captain had a belt round his waist crammed with dust and
bank-notes," cried another, "and the farmer a nugget as big as a
pumpkin on the pommel of his saddle."

Four hours had not elapsed ere Crawley and mephistopheles were on the
road to Sydney, but not on horseback. Crawley had no longer funds to
buy two horses, and, even if he had, he could not have borne the
saddle after the barbarous surgery of last night---the lance-head was
cut out with a cheese-knife. But he and mephistopheles joined a
company of successful diggers going down with their swag. On the road
they constantly passed smaller parties of unfortunate diggers, who had
left the mine in despair when the weather broke and the claims filled
with water; and the farther they went the more wretched was the
condition of those they overtook. Ragged, shoeless, hungry, foot-sore,
heart-sore, poor, broken pilgrims from the shrine of Mammon.

Now it befell that, forty miles on this side Sydney, they fell in with
seven such ragged specters; and, while they were giving these a little
food, up came from the city a large, joyful party--the eagerness of
hope and cupidity on their faces.

"Hallo! are they mad, going up to the diggings in the wet weather!"

They were questioned.

A hundred-weight of gold had been found at the diggings, and all the
town was turning out to find some more such prizes; and, in fact,
every mile after this they met a party, great or small, ardent,
sanguine, on an almost hopeless errand.

Such is the strange and fatal no-logic of speculation. For us the rare
is to turn common, and, when we have got it, be rare as ever.

mephistopheles and Crawley parted at the suburb; the former was to go
to certain haunts and form a gang to seize the rich prize. Meantime
Crawley would enter the town and discover where the men were lodging.
If in an inn, one of the gang must go there as a well-dressed
traveler, and watch his opportunity. If in a lodging, other means.

Crawley found the whole city ringing with the great nugget. Crawley
put eager questions, and received ready answers. He was shown the bank
up to which the men had ridden in broad daylight; the one on the big
horse had the nugget on his saddle; they had taken it, and broken it,
and weighed it, and sold it in the bank parlor for three thousand
eight hundred pounds. Crawley did not like this, he had rather they
had not converted it into paper. His next question was, whether it was
known where the men lodged.

"Known! I believe you; why, they are more thought of than the
governor. Everybody runs to get a word with them, gentle or simple.
You will find them at the 'Ship' inn."

To the "Ship" went Crawley. He dared not be too direct in his queries,
so he put them in form of a statement.

"You have got some lucky ones here, that found the great nugget?"

"Well, we had! But they are gone--been gone this two hours. Do you
know them?"

"Yes," said Crawley, without fear, as they were gone. "Where are they
gone, do you know?"

"Why, home, I suppose; you chaps make your money out of us, but you
all run home to spend it."

"What, gone to England!" gasped Crawley.

"Ay, look! there is the ship just being towed out of the harbor."

Crawley shambled, and tore, and ran, and was just in time to see the
two friends standing with beaming faces on the vessel's deck as she
glided out on her voyage home.

He sat down half stupid; mephistopheles went on collecting his gang in
the suburbs.

The steamer cast off and came wheeling back; the ship spread her huge
white plumage, and went proudly off to sea, the blue waves breaking
white under her bows.

Crawley sat glaring at all this in a state of mental collapse.



CHAPTER LXXVII.

THUS have I told in long and tedious strains how George Fielding went
to Australia to make a thousand pounds, and how by industry, sobriety,
and cattle, he did not make a thousand pounds, and how, aided with the
help of a converted thief, this honest fellow did by gold digging,
industry and sobriety, make several thousand pounds, and take them
safe away home, spite of many wicked devices and wicked men.

Thus have I told how Mr. Meadows flung out his left hand into
Australia to keep George from coming back to Susan with a thousand
pounds, and how, spite of one stroke of success, his left hand
eventually failed, and failed completely.

But his right?



CHAPTER LXXVIII.

Joyous as the first burst of summer were the months Susan passed after
the receipt of George's happy letter. Many warm feelings combined in
one stream of happiness in Susan's heart. Perhaps the keenest of all
was pride at George's success. Nobody could laugh at George now, and
insult her again there where she was most sensitive, by telling her
that George was not good enough for her or any woman; and even those
who set such store upon money-making would have to confess that George
could do even that for love of her, as well as they could do it for
love of themselves. Next to this her joy was greatest at the prospect
of his speedy return.

And now she became joyfully impatient for further news, but not
disappointed at his silence till two months had passed without another
letter. Then, indeed, anxiety mingled now and then with her happiness.
Then it was that Meadows, slowly and hesitatingly to the last, raised
his hand and struck the first direct blow at her heart. He struck in
the dark. He winced for her both before and after. Yet he struck.

One market-day a whisper passed through Farnborough that George
Fielding had met with wonderful luck. That he had made his fortune by
gold, and was going to marry a young lady out in Australia. Farmer
Merton brought the whisper home. Meadows was sure he would.

Meadows did not come to the house for some days. He half feared to
look upon his work; to see Susan's face agonized under his blow. At
last he came. He watched her by stealth. He found he might have spared
his qualms. She chatted as usual in very good spirits, and just before
he went she told him the report with a smile of ineffable scorn.

She was simple, unsuspicious, and every way without a shield against a
Meadows, but the loyal heart by its own virtue had turned the dagger's
edge.

A week after this Jefferies brought Meadows a letter; it was from
Susan to George. Meadows read it writhing. It breathed kind affection,
with one or two demi-maternal cautions about his health, and to be
very prudent for her sake. Not a word of doubt; there was, however, a
postscript of which the following is the exact wording:

"P. S. It is all over Farnborough that you are going to be married to
some one in Australia."

Two months more passed, and no letter from George. These two months
told upon Susan; she fretted and became restless and irritable, and
cold misgivings crept over her, and the anguish of suspense!

At last one day she unbosomed herself, though with hesitation, to a
warm and disinterested friend; blushing all over with tearful eyes she
confessed her grief to Mr. Meadows. "Don't tell father, sir; I hide my
trouble from him as well as I can, but what does it mean George not
writing to me these four months and three days? Do pray tell me what
does it mean!" and Susan cried so piteously that Meadows winced at his
success.

"Oh, Mr. Meadows! don't flatter me; tell me the truth." While he was
exulting in her firmness, who demanded the truth, bitter or not, she
continued: "Only don't tell me that I am forgotten!" And she looked so
piteously in the oracle's face that he forgot everything in the desire
to say something she would like him the better for saying; he
muttered, "Perhaps he has sailed for home." He expected her to say,
"And if he has he would have written to me before sailing." But
instead of this Susan gave a little cry of joy.

"Ah! how foolish I have been. Mr. Meadows, you are a friend out of a
thousand; you are as wise as I am foolish. Poor George! you will never
let him know I was so wicked as to doubt him." And Susan brightened
with joy and hope. The heart believes so readily the thing it longs
should be true. She was happy all the rest of the evening.

Meadows went away mad with her for her folly, and with himself for his
feebleness of purpose, and next market-day again the whisper went
round the market that George Fielding was going to marry out there.
This time a detail was sketched in: "It was a lady in the town of
Bathurst." Old Merton brought this home and twitted his daughter. She
answered haughtily that it was a falsehood. She would stake her life
on George's fidelity.

"See, Mr. Meadows, they are all against poor George, all except you.
But what does it mean? if he does not write or come soon I think I
shall go mad."

"Report is a common liar; I would not believe anything till I saw it
in black and white," said Meadows, doggedly.

"No more I will."

Soon after this William Fielding had a talk with Susan.

"Have you heard a report about George?"

"Yes! I have heard a rumor."

"You don't believe it, I hope."

"Why should I believe it?"

"I'm going to trace it up to the liar that forged it, if I can."

Susan suppressed her satisfaction at this resolution of Will
Fielding's.

"Is it worth while?" asked she coldly.

"If I didn't think so, I shouldn't take that much trouble, not
expecting any thanks."

"Have I said anything to offend you?" asked Susan, with a still more
frigid tone.

The other did not trust himself to answer. But two days after he came
again, and told her he had written a letter to George, telling him
what reports were about, and begging for an answer whether or not
there was any truth in them.

A gleam of satisfaction from Susan's eyes, but not a word. This man,
who had once been George's rival at heart, was the last to whom she
would openly acknowledge her doubts. Then Will went on to tell her
that he had traced the rumor from one to another up to a stranger
whose name nobody knew; "but I dare say Mr. Meadows has a notion."

"No!"

"Are you sure?"

"Yes! he would have told me if he had."

William gave a snort of incredulity, and hinted that probably Mr.
Meadows himself was at the bottom of the scandal.

Now Meadows' artful conduct had fortified Susan against such a
suspicion, and, being by nature a warm-hearted friend, she fired up
for him, as she would have for Mr. Eden, or even for poor Will in his
absence. She did it, too, in the most womanish way. She did not tell
the young man that she had consulted Mr. Meadows, and that he had
constantly discredited the report, and set her against believing it.
Had she done this, she would have staggered the simple-minded Will;
but no; she said to herself, "He has attacked a good friend of mine, I
won't satisfy him so far as to give him reasons;" so she merely
snubbed him.

"Oh, I know you are set against poor Mr. Meadows; he is a good friend
of ours, of my father, and me, and of George, too."

"I wish you may not have to alter your mind," sneered Will.

"I will not without a reason."

"I will give you a reason; do you remember that day--"

"When you insulted him in his own house, and me into the bargain,
Will?"

"Not you, Susan, leastways I hope not, but him I did, and am just as
like to do it again; well, when you were gone, I took a thought, and I
said, appearances deceive the wisest; I may be mistaken--"

"He! he!"

"I don't know what you are laughing at; and then, says I, it is his
own house, after all, so I said, 'If I am wrong, and you don't mean to
undermine my brother, take my hand;' and I gave it him."

"And be refused it?"

"No, Susan!"

"Well, then--"

"But, Susan," said William, solemnly, "his hand lay in mine like a
stone."

"Really, now!"

"A lump of ice would be as near the mark."

"Well! is that the reason you promised me?" William nodded.

"William, you are a fool."

"Oh I am a fool now?"

"You go and insult a man, your superior in every respect, and the very
next moment he is to give you his hand as warmly as to a friend, and
an equal; you really are too foolish to go without a keeper, and if it
was in any man's power to set me against poor George altogether you
have gone the way to do it this twelve months past;" and Susan closed
the conference abruptly.

It was William's fate to rivet Meadows' influence by every blow he
aimed at it. For all that the prudent Meadows thought it worth his
while to rid himself of this honest and determined foe, and he had
already taken steps. He had discovered that this last month William
Fielding, returning from market, had been seen more than once to stop
and chat at one Mrs. Holiday's, a retired small tradeswoman in
Farnborough. Now Mrs. Holiday was an old acquaintance of Meadows' and
had given him sugar-plums thirty years ago. It suited his purpose to
remember all of a sudden these old sugar-plums, and that Mrs. Holiday
had lately told him she wanted to get out of the town and end her days
upon turf.

There was a cottage, paddock and garden for sale within a hundred
yards of "The Grove." Meadows bought them a good bargain, and offered
them to the widow at a very moderate rent.

The widow was charmed. "Why, we can keep a cow, Mr. Meadows."

"Well, there is grass enough."

The widow took the cottage with enthusiasm.

Mrs. Holiday had a daughter, a handsome--a downright handsome girl,
and a good girl into the bargain.

Meadows had said to himself: "It is not the old woman Will Fielding
goes there for. Well, she will want some one to teach her how to farm
that half acre of grass, and buy the cow and milk her. Friendly
offices--chat coming and going--come in, Mr. Fielding, and taste your
cow's cream!--and, when he has got a lass of his own, his eye won't
be forever on mine."

William's letter to George went to the post-office, and from the
post-office to a little pile of intercepted letters in Meadows' desk.



CHAPTER LXXIX.

NEARLY eight months had now elapsed without a letter from George.
Susan could no longer deceive herself with hopes. George was either
false to her or dead. She said as much to her false friend. This
inspired him with an artifice as subtle as unscrupulous. A letter had
been brought to him by Jefferies, which he at once recognized as the
planned letter from Crawley to another tool of his in Farnborough.
This very day he set about a report that George was dead. It did not
reach Susan so soon as he thought it would, for old Merton hesitated
to tell her; but on the Sunday evening, with considerable reluctance
and misgivings, he tried in a very clumsy way to prepare her for sad
news.

But her mind had long been prepared for bitter tidings. Fancy eight
weary months spent in passing every possible calamity before her
imagination, death as often as any.

She fixed her eyes on the old man. "Father, George is dead!"

Old Merton hung his head, and made no reply.

That was enough. Susan crept from the room pale as ashes. She
tottered, but she did not fall. She reached her room and locked
herself in.



CHAPTER LXXX.

MR. MEADOWS did not visit Grassmere for some days; the cruel one
distrusted his own firmness. When he did come he came with a distinct
purpose. He found Merton alone.

"Susan sees no one. You have heard?"

"What?"

"Her sweetheart. He is dead."

"Why, how can that be? And who says so?"

"That is the news."

"Well, it is a falsehood!" said Mr. Meadows, coolly.

"I wish to Heaven it might," whispered old Merton, "for she won't live
long after him."

Mr. Meadows then told Merton that he had spoken with a man who had got
news of George Fielding not four months old, and he was in very good
health.

"Will you tell Susan this?"

"Certainly."

Susan was called down. Meadows started at the sight of her. She was
pale and hollow-eyed, and in these few days seemed ten years older.
She was dressed all in black. "I am a murderer!" thought he. And
remorse without one grain of honest repentance pierced his heart.

"Speak out, John," said the father, "the girl is not a fool. She has
borne ill news, she can bear good. Can't you, Susan?"

"Yes, dear father, if it is God's will any good news should come to
me." And she never took her eyes off Mr. Meadows, but belied her
assumed firmness by quivering like an aspen leaf.

"Do you know Mr. Griffin?" asked Meadows.

"Yes!" replied Susan, still trembling gently, but all over.

"He has got a letter from Sydney from a little roguish attorney called
Crawley. I heard him say with my own ears that Crawley tells him he
had just seen George Fielding in the streets of Sydney, well and
hearty."

"You are deceiving me out of kindness." (Her eyes fixed on his.)

"I am not. I wish I may die if the man is not as well as I am!"

Her eyes were never off his face, and at this moment she read for
certain that it was true.

She uttered a cry of joy so keen it was painful to hear, and then she
laughed and cried and sank into a chair laughing and crying in strong
hysterics, that lasted till the poor girl almost fainted from
exhaustion. Her joy was more violent and even terrible than her grief
had been.

The female servants were called to assist her, and old Merton and
Meadows left her in their hands, feeble, but calm and thankful. She
even smiled her adieu to Meadows.

The next day Meadows called upon Griffin. "Let me look at that
letter?" said he. "I want to copy a part of it."

"There has been one here before you," said Griffin.

"Who?"

"She did not give her name, but I think it must have been Miss Merton.
She begged me hard to let her see the letter. I told her she might
take it home with her. Poor thing! she gave me a look as if she could
have eaten me."

"What else?" asked Meadows anxiously--his success had run ahead of his
plot.

"She put it in her bosom."

"In her bosom?"

"Ay! and pressed her little white hands upon it as if she had got a
treasure. I doubt it will be more like the asp in the Bible story, eh!
sir?"

"There! I don't want your reflections," said Meadows, fiercely, but
his voice quavered. The myrmidon was silenced.

Susan made her escape into a field called the Kynecroft, belonging to
the citizens, and there she read the letter. It was a long, tiresome
one, all about matters of business which she did not understand; it
was only at the last page that she caught sight of the name she longed
to see. She hurried down to it, and when she got to it with beating
heart it was the fate of this innocent, loving woman to read these
words:

"What luck some have. There is George Fielding, of the 'Grove Farm,'
has made his fortune at the gold, and married yesterday to one of the
prettiest girls in Sydney. I met them walking in the street to-day.
She would not have looked at him but for the gold."

Susan uttered a faint moan, and sank down slowly on her knees, like
some tender tree felled by a rude stroke; her eyes seemed to swim in a
mist, she tried to read the cruel words again but could not; she put
her hands before her eyes.

"He is alive," she said, "thank God, he is alive." And at last tears
forced their way through her fingers. She took her handkerchief and
dried her eyes. "Why do I cry for another woman's husband?" and the
hot color of shame and of wounded pride burst even through her tears.

"I will not cry," said she, proudly, "he is alive--I will not cry--he
has forgotten me; from this moment I will never shed another tear for
one that is alive and unworthy of a tear. I will go home."

She went home, crying all the way. And now a partial success attended
the deep Meadows' policy. It was no common stroke of unscrupulous
cunning to plunge her into the very depths of woe in order to take her
out of them. The effects were manifold, and all tended his way.

First she was less sorrowful than she had been before that deadly
blow, for now the heart had realized a greater woe, and had the
miserable comfort of the comparison; but, above all, new and strong
passions had risen and battled fiercely with grief--anger and wounded
pride.

Susan had self-respect and pride, too, perhaps a shade too much though
less small vanity than have most persons of her moderate caliber.

What! had she wept and sighed all these months for a man who did not
care for her?

What! had she defied sneers, and despised affectionate hints, and
gloried openly in her love, to be openly insulted and betrayed!

What! had she shut herself from the world, and put on mourning and
been seen in mourning for one who was not dead, but well and happy and
married to another!

An agony of shame rushed over the wronged, insulted, humiliated
beauty. She longed to fly from the world. She asked her father to
leave Grassmere and go to some other farm a hundred miles away. She
asked him suddenly, nervously, and so impetuously that the old man
looked up in dismay.

"What! leave the farm where your mother lived with me, and where you
were born. I should feel strange, girl; but"--and he gave a strange
sigh--"mayhap I shall have to leave it whether I will or no."

Susan misunderstood him and colored with self-reproach. She said
hastily: "No! no! Father, you shan't leave it for me. Forgive me, I am
a wayward girl!"

And the strung nerves gave way, and tears gushed over the hot cheeks,
as she clung to her father, and tried to turn the current of her
despised love and bestow it all on that selfish old noodle. A great
treasure went a-begging in Grassmere farmhouse.

Mr. Meadows called, but much to his chagrin Susan was never visible.
"Would he excuse her? she was indisposed."

The next evening he came he found her entertaining four or five other
farmers' daughters and a couple of young men. She was playing the
piano to them and talking and laughing louder and faster than ever he
had heard her in his life. He sat moody a little while and watched her
uneasily, but soon took his line, and exerting his excellent social
powers became the life of the party. But as he warmed Susan froze, as
much as to say, "Somebody must play the fool to amuse these
triflers--if you undertake it I need not." For all that the very
attempt at society indicated what was passing in Susan's mind, and the
deep Meadows invited all present to meet at his house in two days'
time.

Meadows was now living in Isaac Levi's old house. He had examined it,
found it a much nicer house for him than his new one--it was like
himself, full of ins and outs, and it was more in the heart of
business and yet quiet; for, though it stood in a row, yet it was as
good as detached, because the houses on each side were unoccupied.
They belonged to Jews, probably dependents on Isaac, for they had left
the town about a twelvemonth after his departure and had never
returned, though a large quantity of goods had been deposited in one
of the houses.

Meadows contrived that this little party should lead to another. His
game was to draw Susan into the world, and moreover have her seen in
his company. She made no resistance, for her wounded pride said,
"Don't let people know you are breaking your heart for one who does
not care for you." She used to come to these parties radiant and
playing her part with consummate resolution and success, and go home
and spend the night in tears.

Meadows did not see the tears that followed these unusual
efforts--perhaps he suspected them. Enough for him that Susan's pride
and shame and indignation were set against her love, and, above all,
against her grief, and that she was forming habits whose tendency at
least was favorable to his views.

Another four months, and Susan, exhausted by conflicting passions, had
settled down into a pensive languor, broken by gusts of bitter grief,
which became rarer and rarer. Her health recovered itself, all but its
elasticity. Her pride would not let her pine away. But her heart
scarcely beat at all, and perhaps it was a good thing for her that a
trouble of another kind came to gently stir it. Her father, who had
for some months been moody and depressed, confessed to her that he had
been speculating and was on the verge of ruin. This dreadful
disclosure gave little more pain to Susan than if he had told her his
head ached; but she put down her work and came and kissed him, and
tried to console him.

"I must work harder, that is all, father. I am often asked to give a
lesson on the piano-forte; I will do that for your sake, and don't you
fret for me. What with the trifle my mother settled on me and my
industry, I am above poverty, and you shall never see me repine."

In short, poor Susan took her father for a woman--adopted a line of
consolation addressed to his affection, instead of his selfishness. It
was not for her he was afflicted, it was for himself.

It was at this conjuncture that Meadows spoke out. There was no longer
anything to be gained by delay. In fact, he could not but observe that
since the fatal letter he appeared to be rather losing ground in his
old character. There was nothing left him but to attack her in a new
one. He removed the barrier from his patient impatience.

He found her alone one evening. He begged her to walk in the garden.
She complied with an unsuspecting smile. Then he told her all he had
suffered for her sake; how he had loved her this three years with all
his soul--how he never thought to tell her this--how hard he had
struggled against it--how he had run away from it, and after that how
he had subdued it, or thought he had subdued it, to esteem--and how he
had been rewarded by seeing that his visits and his talk had done her
some good. "But now," said he, "that you are free, I have no longer
the force to hide my love; now that the man I dared not interfere with
has thrown away the jewel, it is not in nature that I should not beg
to be allowed to take it up and wear it in my heart."

Susan listened; first with surprise, then with confusion and pain,
then with terror at the violence of the man's passion; for, the long
restraint removed, it overwhelmed him like a flood. Her bosom heaved
with modest agitation, and soon the tears streamed down her cheeks at
his picture of what he had gone through for her sake. She made shift
to gasp out, "My poor friend!" But she ended almost fiercely: "Let no
man ever hope for affection from me, for my heart is in the grave. Oh,
that I was there, too!" And she ran sobbing away from him in spite of
his entreaties.

Another man and not George had made a confession of love to her. His
voice had trembled, his heart quivered, with love for her, and it was
not George. So then another link was snapped. Others saw they had a
right to love her now, and acted on it.

Meadows was at a loss, but he stayed away a week in silence, and
thought and thought, and then he wrote a line begging permission to
visit her as usual. "I have been so long used to hide my feelings,
because they were unlawful, that I can surely hide them if I see they
make you more unhappy than you would be without."

Susan replied that her advice to him was to avoid her as he would a
pestilence. He came as usual, and told her he would take her commands,
but could not take her advice. He would run all risks to his own
heart. He was cheerful, chatty and never said a word of love; and this
relieved Susan, so that the evening passed pleasantly. Susan, listless
and indifferent to present events, and never accustomed, like Meadows,
to act upon a preconceived plan, did not even observe what Meadows had
gained by this sacrifice of his topic for a single night, viz., that
after declaring himself her lover he was still admitted to the house.
The next visit he was not quite so forbearing, yet still forbearing;
and so on by sly gradations. It was every way an unequal contest. A
great man against an average woman--a man of forty against a woman of
twenty-two--a man all love and selfishness against a woman all
affection and unselfishness. But I think his chief ally was a firm
belief on Susan's part that he was the best of men; that from first to
last of this affair his conduct had been perfection; that while George
was true all his thought had been to console her grief at his absence;
that he never would have spoken but for the unexpected treason of
George, and then seeing her insulted and despised he had taken that
moment to show her she was loved and honored. Oh, what an ungrateful
girl she was that she could not love such a man!

Then her father was on the same side. "John Meadows seems down like,
Susan. Do try and cheer him up a bit, I am sure he has often cheered
thee."

"That he has, father."

Susan pitied Meadows. Pitying him, she forced herself at times to be
gracious, and when she did he was so happy that she was alarmed at her
power and drew in.

Old Merton saw now how the land lay, and he clung to a marriage
between these two as his only hope. "John Meadows will pull me
through, if he marries my Susan."

And so the two selfish ones had got the unselfish one between them,
one pulling gently, the other pushing quietly, but both without
intermission. Thus days and days rolled on.

Meadows now came four times a week instead of two, and courted her
openly, and beamed so with happiness that she had not always the heart
to rob him of this satisfaction, and he overwhelmed her with kindness
and attention of every sort, and, if any one else was present, she was
sure to see how much he was respected; and this man whom others
courted was her slave. This soothed the pride another had wounded.

One day he poured out his love to her with such passion that he
terrified her, and the next time he came she avoided him.

Her father remonstrated. "Girl, you will break that man's heart if you
are so unkind to him; he could not say a word because you shunned him
like. Why, your heart must be made of stone." A burst of tears was all
the reply.

At last two things presented themselves to this poor girl's
understanding; that for her there was no chance of earthly happiness,
do what she would, and that, strangely enough, she the wretched one
had it in her power to make two other beings happy, her father and
good Mr. Meadows.

Now, a true woman lives to make others happy. She rarely takes the
self-contained views of life men are apt to do.

It passed through Susan's mind: "If I refuse to make these happy, why
do I live, what am I on the earth for at all?"

It seemed cruel to her to refuse happiness when she could bestow it
without making herself two shades more miserable than she was.

Despair and unselfishness are evil counselors in a scheming, selfish
world. The life-blood had been drained out of her heart by so many
cruel blows, by the long waiting, the misgivings, the deep woe when
she believed George dead, the bitter grief and mortification and sense
of wrong when she found he was married to another.

Many of us, male and female, treated as Susan imagined herself
treated, have taken another lover out of pique. Susan did not so. She
was bitterly piqued, but she did not make that use of her pique.

Despair of happiness, pity, and pure unselfishness, these stood John
Meadows' friends with this unhappy dupe, and perhaps my male readers
will be incredulous as well as shocked when I relate the manner in
which at last this young creature, lovely as an angel, in the spring
of life, loving another still, and deluding herself to think she hated
and despised him, was one afternoon surprised into giving her hand to
a man for whom she did not really care a button.

It was as if she had said: "Is it really true your happiness depends
on me? then take me--quick--before my courage fails--are you happy
now, my poor soul?" On the other side there were the passionate
pleadings of a lover; the deep, manly voice broken with supplication,
the male eyes glistening, the diabolical mixture of fraud and cunning
with sincerity.

At the first symptom of yielding the man seized her as the hawk the
dove. He did not wait for a second hint. He poured out gratitude and
protestations. He thanked her, and blessed her, and in his manly ardor
caught her to his bosom.

She shut her eyes, and submitted to the caress as to an executioner.

"Pray let me go to my father," she whispered.

She came to her father and told him what she had done, and kissed him,
and when he kissed her in return, that rare embrace seemed to her her
reward.

Meadows went home on wings--he was in a whirlwind of joy and triumph.

"Aha! what will not a strong will do?" He had no fears, no misgivings.
He saw she did not really like him even, but he would make her love
him! Let him once get her into his house and into his arms, by degrees
she should love him; ay, she should adore him! He held that a young
and virtuous woman cannot resist the husband who remains a lover,
unless he is a fool as well as a lover. She could resist a man, but
hardly the hearth, the marriage-bed, the sacred domestic ties, and a
man whose love should be always present, always ardent, yet his temper
always cool, and his determination to be loved unflinching.

With this conviction, Meadows had committed crimes of the deepest dye
to possess Susan. Villain as he was, it may be doubted whether he
would have committed these felonies had he doubted for an instant her
ultimate happiness. The unconquerable dog said to himself: "The day
will come that I will tell her how I have risked my soul for her; how
I have played the villain for her; and she shall throw her arms round
my neck, and bless me for committing all those crimes to make her so
happy against her will."

It remained to clinch the nail.

He came to Grassmere every day; and one night that the old man was
telling Susan and him how badly things were going with him, he said,
with a cheerful laugh: "I wonder at you, father-in-law, taking on that
way. Do you think Susan will let you be uncomfortable for want of a
thousand pounds or two?"

Now this remark was slyly made while Susan was at the other end of the
room, so that she could hear it, but was not supposed to. He did not
look at her for some time, and then her face was scarlet.

The next day he said privately to old Merton: "The day Susan and I go
to church together, you must let me take your engagements and do the
best I can with them."

"Ah, John, you are a friend! but it will take a pretty deal to set me
straight again."

"How much? Two thousand?"

"More, I am afraid, and too much--"

"Too much for me to take out of my pocket for a stranger; but not for
my wife's father--not if it was ten times that."

From that hour Meadows had an ally at Grassmere, working heart and
soul to hasten the wedding-day.

Meadows longed for this day; for he could not hide from himself that
as a lover he made no advances. Susan's heart was like a globe of ice;
he could get no hold of it anywhere. He burned with rage when the
bitter truth was forced on him, that, with the topic of George
Fielding, he had lost those bright, animated looks of affection she
used to bestow on him, and now could only command her polite
attention, not always that. Once he ventured on a remonstrance--only
once.

She answered coldly that she could not feign; indifferent she was to
everything on earth, indifferent she always should be. But for that
indifference she should never have consented to marry him. Let him
pause then, and think what he was doing, or, better still, give up
this folly, and not tie an icicle like her to an honest and warm heart
like his.

The deep Meadows never ventured on that ground again. He feared she
wanted to be off the marriage, and he determined to hurry it on. He
pressed her to name the day. She would not.

"Would she let him name it?"

"No."

Her father came to Meadows' assistance. "I'll name it," said he.

"Father! no! no!"

Old Merton then made a pretense of selecting a day. Rejected one day
for one reason, another for another, and pitched on a day only six
weeks distant.

The next day Meadows bought the license. "I thought you would like
that better than being cried in church, Susan." Susan thanked him and
said, "Oh, yes."

That evening he had a note from her in which "she humbly asked his
pardon, but she could not marry him; he must excuse her. She trusted
to his generosity to let the matter drop, and forgive a poor
brokenhearted girl who had behaved ill from weakness of judgment, not
lightness of heart."

Two days after this, which remained unanswered, her father came to her
in great agitation and said to her: "Have you a mind to have a man's
death upon your conscience?"

"Father!"

"I have seen John Meadows, and he is going to kill himself. What sort
of a letter was that to write to the poor man? Says he, 'It has come
on me like a thunder-clap.' I saw a pistol on his table, and he told
me he wouldn't give a button to live. You ought to be ashamed of
yourself trifling with folks' hearts so."

"I trifle with folks' hearts! Oh! what shall I do!" cried Susan.

"Think of others as well as yourself," replied the old man in a rage.
"Think of me."

"Of you, dear father? Does not your Susan think of you?"

"No! what will become of me if the man kills himself? He is all I have
to look to, to save me from ruin."

"What, then?" cried Susan, coloring scarlet, "it is not his life you
care for, it is his means of being useful to us! Poor Mr. Meadows! He
has no friend but me. I will give you a line to him." The line
contained these words: "Forgive me."

Half an hour after receipt of it Meadows was at the farm. Susan was
going to make some faint apology. He stopped her and said: "I know you
like to make folk happy. I have got a job for you. A gentleman, a
friend of mine in Cheshire, wants a bailiff. He has written to me. A
word from me will do the business. Now is there any one you would like
to oblige? The place is worth five hundred a year." Susan was grateful
to him for waiving disagreeable topics. She reflected and said: "Ah!
but he is no friend of yours."

"What does that matter if he is yours?"

"Will Fielding."

"With all my heart. Only my name must not be mentioned. You are right.
He can marry on this. They would both have starved in 'The Grove.'"

Thus he made the benevolent girl taste the sweets of power. "You will
be asked to do many a kind action like this when you are Mrs.
Meadows." So he bribed father and daughter each after their kind.

The offer came in form from the gentleman to Will Fielding. He and
Miss Holiday had already been cried in church. They were married, and
went off to Cheshire.

So Meadows got rid of Will Fielding at a crisis. When it suited his
strategy he made his enemy's fortune with as little compunction as he
would have ruined him. A man of iron! Cold iron, hot iron, whatever
iron was wanted.

Mr. and Mrs. Fielding gone off to Cheshire, and Mrs. Holiday after
them on a visit of domestic instruction, Meadows publicly announced
his approaching marriage with Miss Merton. The coast being clear, he
clinched the last nail. From this day there were gusts of repugnance,
but not a shadow of resistance on Susan's side. It was to be.

The weather was fine, and every evening this man and woman walked
together. The woman envied by all the women; the man by all the men.
Yet they walked side by side like the ghosts of lovers. And, since he
was her betrothed, one or two iron-gray hairs in the man's head had
turned white, and lines deepened in his face. The victim had
unwittingly revenged herself.

He had stabbed her heart again and again, and drained it. He had
battered this poor heart till it had become more like leather than
flesh and blood, and now he wanted to nestle in it and be warmed by
it. To kill the affections and revive them at will. No!!!!

She tried to give happiness and to avoid giving pain, but her heart of
hearts was inaccessible. The town had capitulated, but the citadel was
empty yet impregnable. And there were moments when flashes of hate
mingled with the steady flame of this unhappy man's love, and he was
tempted to kill her and himself.

But these weaknesses passed like air, the iron purpose stood firm.
This day week they were to be married. Meadows counted the days and
exulted; he had faith in the magic ring. It was on this Monday evening
then they walked arm in arm in the field, and it so happened that
Meadows was not speaking of love, but of a scheme for making all the
poor people in Grassmere comfortable, especially of keeping the rain
out of their roofs and the wind out of what they vulgarly, but not
unreasonably, called their windys, and Susan's color was rising and
her eyes brightening at this the one interesting side marriage
offered--to make people happy near her and round about her, and she
cast a look of gratitude upon her companion--a look that, coming from
so lovely a face, might very well pass for love. While thus pleasantly
employed the pair suddenly encountered a form in a long bristling
beard, who peered into their faces with a singular expression of
strange and wild curiosity and anxiety, but did not stop; he was
making toward Farnborough.

Susan was a little startled. "Who is that?"

"I don't know."

"He looked as if he knew us."

"A traveler, I think, dearest. The folk hereabouts have not got to
wear those long beards yet."

"Why did you start when he passed us?"

"Did I start, Susan?"

"Your arm twitched me."

"You must have fancied it," replied Meadows, with a sickly smile;
"but, come, Susan, the dew is falling, you had better make toward
home."

He saw her safe home, then, instead of waiting to supper as usual, got
his horse out and rode to the town full gallop.

"Any one been here for me?"

"Yes! a stranger."

"With a long beard?"

"Why, yes, he had."

"He will come again?"

"In half an hour."

"Show him into my room when he comes, and admit no one else."

Meadows was hardly seated in his study and his candles lighted when
the servant ushered in his visitor.

"Shut both the doors, and you can go to bed. I will let Mr. Richards
out."

"Well?"

"Well, we have done the trick between us, eh?"

"What made you come home without orders?" asked Meadows, somewhat
sternly.

"Why, you know as well as me, sir; you have seen them?"

"Who?"

"George Fielding and his mate."

Meadows started. "How should I see them?"

"Sir! Why, they are come home. They gave me the slip, and got away
before me. I followed them. They are here. They must be here."
Crawley, not noticing Meadows' face, went on. "Sir, when I found they
had slipped out of the camp on horseback, and down to Sydney, and saw
them with my own eyes go out of the harbor for England, I thought I
should have died on the spot. I thought I should never have the
courage to face you, but when I met you arm in arm, her eye smiling on
you, I knew it was all right then. When did the event come off?"

"What event?"

"The marriage, sir--you and the lady. She is worth all the trouble she
has given us."

"You fool," roared Meadows, "we are not married. The wedding is to be
this day week!" Crawley started and gasped, "We are ruined, we are
undone!"

"Hold your bawling," cried Meadows, fiercely, "and let me think." He
buried his face in his hands; when he removed them, he was gloomy but
self-possessed. "They are not in England, Crawley, or we should have
seen them. They are on the road. You sailed faster than they; passed
them at night, perhaps. They will soon be here. My own heart tells me
they will be here before Monday. Well, I will beat them still. I will
be married Thursday next." The iron man then turned to Crawley, and
sternly demanded how he had let the man slip.

Crawley related all, and as he told his tale the tone of Meadows
altered. He no longer doubted the zeal of his hireling. He laid his
hand on his brow and more than once he groaned and muttered
half-articulate expressions of repugnance. At the conclusion he said
moodily: "Crawley, you have served me well--too well! All the women
upon earth were not worth a murder, and we have been on the brink of
several. You went beyond your instructions."

"No, I did not," replied Crawley; "I have got them in my pocket. I
will read them to you. See! there is no discretion allowed me. I was
to bribe them to rob."

"Where do I countenance the use of deadly weapons?"

"Where is there a word against deadly weapons?" asked Crawley,
sharply. "Be just to me, sir," he added in a more whining tone. "You
know you are a man that must and will be obeyed. You sent me to
Australia to do a certain thing, and you would have flung me to
perdition if I had stuck at anything to do it. Well, sir, I tried
skill without force--look here," and he placed a small substance like
white sugar on the table.

"What is that?"

"Put that in a man's glass he will never taste it, and in half an hour
he will sleep you might take the clothes off his back. Three of us
watched months and months for a chance, but it was no go; those two
were teetotal or next door it."

"I wish I had never sent you out."

"Why," replied Crawley, "there is no harm done, no blood has been
spilled except on our own side. George Fielding is coming home all
right. Give him up the lady, and he will never know you were his
enemy."

"What!" cried Meadows, "wade through all these crimes for nothing? Lie
and feign, and intercept letters, and rob and all but
assassinate---and fail? Wade in crime up to my middle, and then wade
back again without the prize! Do you see this pistol? it has two
barrels; if she and I are ever parted it shall be this way--I'll send
her to heaven with one barrel, and myself to hell with the other."

There was a dead silence! Crawley returned to their old relation, and
was cowed by the natural ascendency of the greater spirit.

"You need not look like a girl at me," said Meadows, "most likely it
won't come to that. It is not easy to beat me, and I shall try every
move man's wit can devise--this last," said he, in a voice of iron,
touching the pistol as it lay on the table.

There was another pause. Then Meadows rose and said calmly: "You look
tired, you shall have a bottle of my old port; and my own heart is
staggered, but it is only for a moment." He struck his hand upon his
breast, and walked slowly from the room. And Crawley heard his step
descend to the hall, and then to the cellar; and the indomitable
character of the man rang in his solid tread.

Crawley was uneasy. "Mr. Meadows is getting wildish; it frightens me
to see such a man as him burst out like that. He is not to be trusted
with a loaded pistol. Ah! and I am in his secrets, deep in his
secrets; great men sweep away little folk that know too much. I never
saw him with a pistol before." All this passing rapidly through his
head, Crawley pounced on the pistol, took off the caps, whipped out a
little bottle, and poured some strong stuff into the caps that
loosened the detonating powder directly; then with a steel pen he
picked it all out and replaced the caps, their virtue gone, before Mr.
Meadows returned with two bottles; and the confederates sat in close
conclave till the gray of morning broke into the room.

The great man gave but few orders to his subordinate, for this simple
reason, that the game had fallen into his own hands.

Still there was something for Crawley to do. He was to have an officer
watching to arrest Will Fielding on the old judgment should he, which
was hardly to be expected, come to kick up a row and interrupt the
wedding. And to-morrow he was to take out a writ against his
"father-in-law." Mr. Meadows played a close game. He knew that things
are not to be got when they are wanted. His plan was to have
everything ready that might be wanted long before it was wanted.

But most of the night passed in relation of what had already taken
place, and Crawley was the chief speaker, and magnified his services.
He related from his own point of view all that I have told, and
Meadows listened with all his soul and intelligence.

At the attack on Mr. Levi, Meadows chuckled. "The old heathen," said
he, contemptuously, "I have beat him anyway."

"By the way, sir, have you seen anything of him?" asked Crawley.

"No."

"He is not come home, then."

"Not that I know of; have you any reason to think he has?"

"No, only he left the mine directly after they pelted him; but he
would not leave the country any the more for that, and money to be
made in it by handfuls."

"Now, Crawley, go and get some sleep. A cold bath for me and then on
horseback. I must breakfast at Grassmere."

"Great man, sir! great man! You will beat them yet, sir. You have beat
Mr. Levi. Here we are in his house; and he driven away to lay his sly
old bones at the Antipodes. Ha! ha! ha!"

The sun came in at the window, and the long conference broke up, and,
strange to say, it broke into three. Crawley home to sleep. Meadows to
Grassmere. Isaac Levi to smoke an Eastern pipe, and so meditate with
more tranquil pulse how to strike with deadliest effect these two, his
insolent enemies.

_Siste viator_--and guess that riddle.



CHAPTER LXXXI.

ISAAC LEVI, rescued by George Fielding, reached his tent smarting with
pain and bitter insult; he sat on the floor pale and dusty, and
anathematized his adversaries in the Hebrew tongue. Wrath still
boiling in his heart, he drew out his letters and read them. Then
grief mingled with his anger. Old Cohen, his friend and agent and
coeval, was dead. Another self dead.

Besides the hint that this gave him to set his house in order, a
distinct consideration drew Isaac now to England. He had trusted much
larger interests to old Cohen than he was at all disposed to leave in
the hands of Cohen's successors, men of another generation, "progeniem
vitiosiorem," he sincerely believed.

Another letter gave him some information about Meadows that added
another uneasiness to those he already felt on George's account. Hence
his bitter disappointment when he found George gone from the mine, the
date of his return uncertain. Hence, too, the purchase of Moore's
horses, and the imploring letter to George--measures that proved
invaluable to that young man, whose primitive simplicity and wise
humility led him not to question the advice of his elder, but obey it.

And so it was that, although the old Jew sailed home upon his own
interests, yet during the voyage George Fielding's assumed a great
importance, direct and incidental. Direct, because the old man was
warm with gratitude to him; indirect, because he boiled over with hate
of George's most dangerous enemy. And, as he neared the English coast,
the thought that though he was coming to Farnborough he could not come
home, grew bitterer and bitterer, and then that he should find his
enemy and his insulter in the very house sacred by the shadows of the
beloved and dead!!

Finding in Nathan a youth of no common fidelity and shrewdness, Isaac
confided in him; and Nathan, proud beyond description of the
confidence bestowed on him by one so honored in his tribe, enlisted in
his cause with all the ardor of youth tempered by Jewish address.

Often they sat together on the deck, and the young Jewish brain and
the old Jewish brain mingled and digested a course of conduct to meet
every imaginable contingency; for the facts they at present possessed
were only general and vague.

The first result of all this was that these two crept into the town of
Farnborough at three o'clock one morning; that Isaac took out a key
and unlocked the house that stood next to Meadows' on the left hand;
that Isaac took secret possession of the first floor, and Nathan open
but not ostentatious possession of the ground-floor, with a tale
skillfully concocted to excite no suspicion whatever that Isaac was in
any way connected with his presence in the town. Nathan, it is to be
observed, had never been in Farnborough before.

The next morning they worked. Nathan went out, locking the door after
him, to execute two commissions. He was to find out what the young
Cohens were doing, and how far they were likely to prove worthy of the
trust reposed in their father; and what Susan Merton was doing, and
whether Meadows was courting her or not. The latter part of Nathan's
task was terribly easy.

The young man came home late at night, locked the door, made a
concerted signal, and was admitted to the senior presence. He found
him smoking his Eastern pipe. Nathan with dejected air told him that
he had good news; that the Cohens not only thought themselves wiser
than their father, which was permissible, but openly declared it,
which he, though young, had observed to be a trait confined to very
great fools.

"It is well said, my son," quoth Isaac, smoking calmly, "and the other
business?"

"Oh, master!" said Nathan, "I bring still worse tidings of her. She is
a true Nazarite, a creature without faith. She is betrothed to the man
you hate, and whom I, for your sake, hate even to death."

They spoke in an Eastern dialect, which I am paraphrasing here and
translating there, according to the measure of my humble abilities.
Isaac sucked his pipe very fast; this news was a double blow to his
feelings. "If she be indeed a Nazarite without faith, let her go; but
judge not the simple hastily. First, let me know how far woman's
frailty is to blame; how far man's guile--for not for nothing was
Crawley sent out to the mine by Meadows. Let me consider;" and he
smoked calmly again.

After a long silence, which Nathan was too respectful to break, the
old man gave him his commission for to-morrow. He was to try and
discover why Susan Merton had written no letters for many months to
George; and why she had betrothed herself to the foe. "But reveal
nothing in return," said Isaac, "neither ask more than three questions
of any one person, lest they say, 'Who is this that being a Jew asks
many questions about a Nazarite maiden, and why asks he them?'"

At night Nathan returned full of intelligence. She loved the young man
Fielding. She wrote letters to him and received letters from him,
until gold was found in Australia. But after this he wrote to her no
more letters, wherefore her heart was troubled.

"Ah! and did she write to him?"

"Yes! but received no answer, nor any letter for many months."

"Ah!"(puff!) (puff!)

"Then came a rumor that he was dead, and she mourned for him after the
manner of her people many days. Verily, master, I am vexed for the
Nazarite maiden, for her tale is sad. Then came a letter from
Australia, that said he is not dead, but married to a stranger. Then
the maiden said: 'Behold now this twelve months he writes not to me,
this then is true'; and she bowed her head, and the color left her
cheek. Then this Meadows visited her, and consoled her day by day. And
there are those who confidently affirm that her father said often to
her, 'Behold now I am a man stricken in years, and the man Meadows is
rich'; so the maiden gave her hand to the man, but whether to please
the old man her father, or out of the folly and weakness of females,
thou, O Isaac, son of Shadrach, shalt determine; seeing that I am
young, and little versed in the ways of women, knowing this only by
universal report, that they are fair to the eye but often bitter to
the taste."

"Aha!" cried Isaac, "but I am old, O Nathan, son of Eli, and with the
thorns of old age comes one good fruit, 'experience.' No letters came
to him, yet she wrote many. None came to her, yet he wrote many. All
this is transparent as glass--here has been fraud as well as guile."

Nathan's eye sparkled. "What is the fraud, master?"

"Nay, that I know not, but I will know!"

"But how, master?"

"By help of thine ears, or my own!"

Nathan looked puzzled. So long as Mr. Levi shut himself up a close
prisoner on the first floor what could he hear for himself?

Isaac read the look and smiled. He then rose, and, putting his finger
to his lips, led the way to his own apartments. At the staircase-door,
which even Nathan had not yet passed, he bade the young man take off
his shoes; he himself was in slippers. He took Nathan into a room, the
floor of which was entirely covered with mattresses. A staircase, the
steps of which were covered with horsehair, went by a tolerably easy
slope and spiral movement nearly up to the cornice. Of this cornice a
portion about a foot square swung back on a well-oiled hinge, and
Isaac drew out from the wall with the utmost caution a piece of
gutta-percha piping, to this he screwed on another piece open at the
end, and applied it to his ear.

Nathan comprehended it all in a moment. His master could overhear
every word uttered in Meadows' study. Levi explained to him that ere
he left his old house he had put a new cornice in the room he thought
Meadows would sit in, a cornice so deeply ornamented that no one could
see the ear he left in it, and had taken out bricks in the wall of the
adjoining house and made the other arrangements they were inspecting
together. Mr. Levi further explained that his object was simply to
overhear and counteract every scheme Meadows should form. He added
that he never intended to leave Farnborough for long. His intention
had been to establish certain relations in that country, buy some
land, and return immediately; but the gold discovery had detained him.

"But, master," said Nathan, "suppose the man had taken his business to
the other side of his house?"

"Foolish youth," replied Isaac, "am I not on both sides of him!!"

"Ah! What, is there another on the other?" Isaac nodded.

Thus, while Nathan was collecting facts, Isaac had been watching,
"patient as a cat, keen as a lynx," at his ear-hole, and
heard--nothing.

Now the next day Nathan came in hastily long before the usual hour.
"Master, another enemy is come--the man Crawley! I saw him from the
window; he saw not me. What shall I do?"

"Keep the house all day. I would not have him see you. He would say,
'Aha! the old Jew is here, too.'" Nathan's countenance fell. He was a
prisoner now as well as his master.

The next morning, rising early to prepare their food, he was surprised
to find the old man smoking his pipe down below.

"All is well, my son. My turn has come. I have had great patience, and
great is the reward." He then told him with natural exultation the
long conference he had been secretly present at between Crawley and
Meadows--a conference in which the enemy had laid bare, not his guilt
only, but the secret crevice in his coat of mail. "She loves him not!"
cried Levi, with exultation. "She is his dupe! With a word I can
separate them and confound him utterly."

"Oh, master!" cried the youth eagerly, "speak that word to-day, and
let me be there and hear it spoken if I have favor in your eyes."

"Speak it to-day!" cried Levi, with a look of intense surprise at
Nathan's simplicity. "Go to, foolish youth!" said he; "what, after I
have waited months and months for vengeance, would you have me fritter
it away for want of waiting a day or two longer? No, I will strike,
not the empty cup from his hand, but the full cup from his lips. Aha!
you have seen the Jew insulted and despised in many lands; have
patience now and you shall see how he can give blow for blow; ay! old,
and feeble, and without a weapon, can strike his adversary to the
heart."

Nathan's black eye flashed. "You are the master, I the scholar," said
he. "All I ask is to be permitted to share the watching for your
enemy's words, since I may not go abroad while it is day."

Thus the old and young lynx lay in ambush all day. And at night the
young lynx prowled, but warily, lest Crawley should see him; and every
night brought home some scrap of intelligence.

To change the metaphor, it was as though while the Western spider wove
his artful web round the innocent fly, the Oriental spider wove
another web round him, the threads of which were so subtle as to be
altogether invisible. Both East and West leaned with sublime faith on
their respective gossamers. nor remembered that "Dieu dispose."



CHAPTER LXXXII.

MEADOWS rode to Grassmere, to try and prevail with Susan to be married
on Thursday next, instead of Monday. As he rode he revolved every
argument he could think of to gain her compliance. He felt sure she
was more inclined to postpone the day than to advance it, but
something told him his fate hung on this: "These two men will come
home on Monday. I am sure of it. Ay, Monday morning, before we can
wed. I will not throw a chance away; the game is too close." Then he
remembered with dismay that Susan had been irritable and snappish just
before parting yester eve--a trait she had never exhibited to him
before. When he arrived, his heart almost failed him, but after some
little circumlocution and excuse he revealed the favor, the great
favor, he was come to ask. He asked it. She granted it without the
shade of a demur. He was no less surprised than delighted, but the
truth is that very irritation and snappishness of yesterday was the
cause of her consenting; her conscience told her she had been unkind,
and he had been too wise to snap in return. So now he benefited by the
reaction and little bit of self-reproach. For do but abstain from
reproaching a good girl who has been unjust or unkind to you, and ten
to one if she does not make you the _amemde_ by word or deed--most
likely the latter, for so she can soothe her tender conscience without
grazing her equally sensitive pride. Poor Susan little knew the
importance of the concession she made so easily.

Meadows galloped home triumphant. But two whole days now between him
and his bliss! And that day passed and Tuesday passed. The man lived
three days and nights in a state of tension that would have killed
some of us or driven us mad; but his intrepid spirit rode the billows
of hope and fear like a petrel. And the day before the wedding it did
seem as if his adverse fate got suddenly alarmed and made a desperate
effort and hurled against him every assailant that could be found. In
the morning came his mother, and implored him ere it was too late to
give up this marriage. "I have kept silence, yea even from good
words," said the aged woman; "but at last I must speak. John, she does
not love you. I am a woman and can read a woman's heart; and you
fancied her long before George Fielding was false to her, if false he
ever was, John."

The old woman said the whole of this last sentence with so much
meaning that her son was stung to rage, and interrupted her fiercely:
"I looked to find all the world against me, but not my own mother. No
matter, so be it; the whole world shan't turn me, and those I don't
care to fight I'll fly."

And he turned savagely on his heel and left the old woman there
shocked and terrified by his vehemence. She did not stay there long.
Soon the scarlet cloak and black bonnet might have been seen wending
their way slowly back to the little cottage, the poor old tidy bonnet
drooping lower than it was wont. Meadows came back to dinner; he had a
mutton-chop in his study, for it was a busy day. While thus employed
there came almost bursting into the room a man struck with
remorse--Jefferies, the recreant postmaster.

"Mr. Meadows, I can carry on this game no longer, and I won't for any
man living!" He then in a wild, loud, and excited way went on to say
how the poor girl had come a hundred times for a letter, and looked in
his face so wistfully, and once she had said: "Oh, Mr. Jefferies, do
have a letter for me!" and how he saw her pale face in his dreams, and
little he thought when he became Meadows' tool the length the game was
to be carried.

Meadows heard him out; then simply reminded him of his theft, and
assured him with an oath that if he dared to confess his villainy--

"My villainy?" shrieked the astonished postmaster.

"Whose else? You have intercepted letters--not I. You have abused the
public confidence--not I. So if you are such a fool and sneak as to
cut your throat by peaching on yourself, I'll cry louder than you, and
I'll show you have emptied letters as well as stopped them. Go home to
your wife, and keep quiet, or I'll smash both you and her."

"Oh, I know you are without mercy, and I dare not open my heart while
I live; but I will beat you yet, you cruel monster. I will leave a
note for Miss Merton, confessing all, and blow out my brains to-night
in the office."

The man's manner was wild and despairing. Meadows eyed him sternly. He
said with affected coolness: "Jefferies, you are not game to take your
own life."

"Ain't I?" was the reply.

"At least I think not."

"To-night will show."

"I must know that before night," cried Meadows, and with the word he
sprang on Jefferies and seized him in a grasp of iron, and put a
pistol to his head.

"Ah! no! Mr. Meadows. Mercy! mercy!" shrieked the man, in an agony of
fear.

"All right," said Meadows, coolly putting up the pistol. "You half
imposed on me, and that is something for you to brag of. You won't
kill yourself, Jefferies; you are not the stuff. Give over shaking
like an aspen, and look and listen. You are in debt. I've bought up
two drafts of yours--here they are. Come to me to-morrow, after the
wedding, and I will give you them to light your pipe with."

"Oh, Mr. Meadows, that would be one load off my mind."

"You are short of cash, too; come to me--after the wedding, and I'll
give you fifty pounds cash."

"You are very liberal, sir. I wish it was in a better cause."

"Now go home, and don't be a sneak and a fool--till after the wedding,
or I will sell the bed from under your wife's back, and send you to
the stone-jug. Be off."

Jefferies crept away, paralyzed in heart, and Meadows, standing up,
called out in a rage: "Are there any more of you that hope to turn
John Meadows? then come on, come a thousand strong, with the devil at
your back--and then I'll beat you!" And for a moment the respectable
man was almost grand; a man-rock standing braving earth and heaven.

"Hist! Mr. Meadows." He turned, and there was Crawley. "A word, sir.
Will Fielding is in the town, in such a passion."

"Come to stop the wedding?"

"He was taking a glass of ale at the 'Toad and Pickax,' and you might
hear him all over the yard."

"What is he going to do?"

"Sir, he has bought an uncommon heavy whip; he was showing it in the
yard. 'This is for John Meadows' back,' said he, 'and I will give it
him before the girl he has stolen from my brother. If she takes a dog
instead of a man, it shall be a beaten dog,' says he."

Meadows rang the bell. "Harness the mare to the four-wheeled chaise.
You know what to do, Crawley."

"Well, I can guess."

"But first get him told that I am always at Grassmere at six o'clock."

"But you won't go there this evening, of course."

"Why not?"

"Aren't you afraid he--"

"Afraid of Will Fielding? Why, you have never looked at me. I do
notice your eyes are always on the ground. Crawley, when I was
eighteen, one evening (it was harvest home, and all the folk had drunk
their wit and manners out) I found a farmer's wife in a lane, hemmed
in by three great ignorant brutes that were for kissing her, or some
nonsense, and she crying help and murder and ready to faint with
fright. It was a decent woman, and a neighbor, so I interfered as
thus: I knocked the first fellow senseless on his back with a blow
before they knew of me, and then the three were two. I fought the two,
giving and taking for full ten minutes, and then I got a chance and
one went down. I put my foot on his neck and kept him down for all he
could do, and over his body I fought the best man of the lot, and
thrashed him so that his whole mug was like a ball of beetroot. When
he was quite sick he ran one way, and t'other got up roaring and ran
another, and they had to send a hurdle for No. 1. Dame Fielding gave
me of her own accord what all the row was about, and more than one,
and hearty ones, too, I assure you, and had me in to supper, and told
her man, and he shook my hand a good one."

"Why, sir, you don't mean to say the woman you fought for was Mrs.
Fielding."

"But I tell you it was, and I had those two boys on my knee, two
chubby toads, pulling at my curly hair--! why do I talk of these
things? Oh, I remember, it was to show you I am not a man that can be
bullied. I am a much better man than I was at eighteen. I won't be
married in a black eye if I can help it. But, when I am once married,
here I stand against all comers, and if you hear them grumble or
threaten you, tell them that any Sunday afternoon, when there is
nothing better to be done, I'll throw my cap into the ring and fight
all the Fieldings that ever were pupped, one down another come on."
Then turning quite cool and contemptuous all in a moment, he said,
"These are words, and we have work on hand;" and, even as he spoke, he
strode from the room pattered after by Crawley.

At six o'clock Meadows and Susan were walking arm in arm in the
garden. Presently they saw a man advancing toward them, with his right
hand behind him. "Why, it is Will Fielding," cried Susan, "come to
thank you."

"I think not, by the look of him," replied Meadows, coolly.

"Susan, will you be so good as to take your hand from that man's arm.
I have got a word to say to him."

Susan did more than requested, seeing at once that mischief was
coming. She clung to William's right arm, and while he ground his
teeth with ineffectual rage, for she was strong, as her sex are
strong, for half a minute, and to throw her off he must have been much
rougher with her than he chose to be, three men came behind unobserved
by all but Meadows, and captured him on the old judgment. And, Crawley
having represented him as a violent man, they literally laid the grasp
of the law on him.

"But I have got the money to pay it," remonstrated William.

"Pay it, then."

"But my money is at home, give me two days. I'll write to my wife and
she will send it me." The officers, with a coarse laugh, told him he
must come with them meantime.

Meadows whispered Susan: "I'll pay it for him to-morrow."

They took off William Fielding in Meadows' four-wheeled chaise.

"Where are they taking him, John?"

"To the county jail."

"Oh, don't let them take him there. Can you not trust him?"

"Yes."

"Then why not pay for him?"

"But I don't carry money in my pocket, and the bank is closed."

"How unfortunate!"

"Very! but I'll send it over to-morrow early, and we will have him
out."

"Oh, yes, poor fellow! the very first thing in the morning."

"Yes! the first thing--after we are married."

Soon after this Meadows bade Susan affectionately farewell, and rode
off to Newborough to buy his gloves and some presents for his bride.
On the road he overtook William Fielding going to jail, leaned over
his saddle as he cantered by, and said, "Mrs. Meadows will send the
money in to free you in the morning," then on again as cool as a
cucumber and cantered into the town before sunset, put up black Rachel
at the King's Head, made his purchases, and back to the inn. As he sat
in the bar-parlor drinking a glass of ale and chatting with the
landlady, two travelers came into the passage. They did not stop in it
long, for one of them knew the house and led his companion into the
coffee-room. But in that moment, by a flash of recognition, spite of
their bronzed color and long beards, Meadows had seen who they
were--George Fielding and Thomas Robinson.

Words could not paint in many pages what Meadows passed through in a
few seconds. His very body was one moment cold as ice, the next
burning.

The coffee-room door was open--he dragged himself into the passage,
though each foot in turn seemed glued to the ground, and listened. He
came back and sat down in the bar.

"Are they going to stay?" said the mistress to the waiter.

"Yes, to be called at five o'clock."

The bell rang. The waiter went and immediately returned. "Hot with,"
demanded the waiter, in a sharp, mechanical tone.

"Here, take my keys for the lump sugar," said the landlady, and she
poured first the brandy and then the hot water into a tumbler, then
went upstairs to see about the travelers' beds.

Meadows was left alone a few moments with the liquor. A sudden flash
came to Meadows' eye, he put his hand hastily to his waistcoat-pocket,
and then his eye brightened still more. Yes, it was there, he thought
he had had the curiosity to keep it by him. He drew out the white lump
Crawley had left on his table that night, and flung it into the glass
just as the waiter returned with the sugar.

The waiter took the brandy and water into the coffee-room. Meadows sat
still as a mouse, his brain boiling and bubbling--awestruck at what he
had done, yet meditating worse.

The next time the waiter came in, "Waiter," said he, "one glass among
two, that is short allowance."

"Oh! the big one is teetotal," replied the waiter.

"Mrs. White," said Meadows, "if you have got a bed for me I'll sleep
here, for my nag is tired and the night is darkish."

"Always a bed for you, Mr. Meadows," was the gracious reply.

Soon the two friends rang for bed-candles. Robinson staggered with
drowsiness. Meadows eyed them from behind a newspaper.

Half an hour later Mr. Meadows went to bed, too--but not to sleep.



CHAPTER LXXXIII.

AT seven o'clock in the morning Crawley was at Meadows' house by
appointment. To his great surprise the servant told him master had not
slept at home. While he was talking to her Meadows galloped up to the
door, jumped off, and almost pulled Crawley upstairs with him. "Lock
the door, Crawley." Crawley obeyed, but with some reluctance, for
Meadows, the iron Meadows, was ghastly and shaken as he had never been
shaken before. He sank into a chair. "Perdition seize the hour I first
saw her!" As for Crawley, he was paralyzed by the terrible agitation
of a spirit so much greater than his own.

"Crawley," said Meadows, with a sudden unnatural calm, "when the devil
buys a soul for money how much does he give? a good lump, I hear. He
values our souls high--we don't, some of us."

"Mr. Meadows, sir!"

"Now count those," yelled Meadows, bursting out again, and he flung a
roll of notes furiously on the ground at Crawley's feet, "count and
tell me what my soul has gone for. Oh! oh!"

Crawley seized them and counted them as fast as his trembling fingers
would let him. So now an eye all remorse, and another eye all greed,
were bent upon the same thing.

"Why, they are all hundred-pound notes, bright as silver from the Bank
of England. Oh, dear! how new and crimp they are--where do they come
from, sir?"

"From Australia."

"Ah! Oh, impossible! No! nothing is impossible to such a man as you.
Twenty."

"They are at Newborough--slept at 'King's Head,'" whispered Meadows.

"Good Heavens! think of that. Thirty--"

"So did I."

"Ah! forty--four thousand pounds."

"The lump of stuff you left here hocussed one--it was a toss-up--luck
was on my side--that one carried them--slept like death--long while
hunting--found them under his pillow at last."

"Well done! and we fools were always beat at it.
Sixty--one--two--five--seven. Seven thousand pounds."

"Seven thousand pounds! Who would have thought it? This is a dear job
to me."

"Say a dear job to them and a glorious haul to you; but you deserve it
all, ah!"

"Why, you fool," cried Meadows, "do you think I am going to keep the
men's money?"

"Keep it? why, of course!"

"What! am I a thief? I, John Meadows, that never wronged a man of a
penny? I take his sweetheart, I can't live without her; but I can live
without his money. I have crimes enough on my head, but not theft,
there I say halt."

"Then why in the name of Heaven did you take them at such a risk?"
Crawley put this question roughly, for he was losing his respect for
his idol.

"You are as blind as a mole, Crawley," was the disdainful answer.
"Don't you see that I have made George Fielding penniless, and that
now old Merton won't let him have his daughter? Why should he? He
said, 'If you come back with one thousand pounds.' And don't you see
that, when the writ is served on old Merton, he will be as strong as
fire for me and against him. He can't marry her at all now. I shall
soon or late, and the day I marry Susan that same afternoon seven
thousand pounds will be put in George Fielding's hand, he won't know
by whom, but you and I shall know. I am a sinner, but not a villain."

Crawley gave a dissatisfied grunt. Meadows struck a lucifer match and
lighted a candle. He placed the candle in the grate--it was warm
weather. "Come, now," said he coolly, "burn them; then they will tell
no tales."

Crawley gave a shriek like a mother whose child is falling out of
window, and threw himself on his knees, with the notes in his hand
behind his back. "No! no! sir! Oh, don't think of it. Talk of crime,
what are all the sins we have done together compared with this? You
would not burn a wheat-rick, no, not your greatest enemy's; I know you
would not, you, are too good a man. This is as bad; the good money
that the bountiful Heaven has given us for--for the good of man."

"Come," said Meadows sternly, "no more of this folly," and he laid his
iron grasp on Crawley.

"Mercy! mercy! think of me--of your faithful servant, who has risked
his life and stuck at nothing for you. How ungrateful great men are!"

"Ungrateful! Crawley! Can you look me in the face and say that?"

"Never till now, but now I can;" and Crawley rose to his feet and
faced the great man. The prize he was fighting for gave him
supernatural courage. "To whom do you owe them? To me. You could never
have had them but for my drug. And yet you would burn them before my
eyes. A fortune to poor me."

"To you?"

"Yes! What does it matter to you what becomes of them so that _he_
never sees them again? but it matters all to me. Give them to me and
in twelve hours I will be in France with them. You won't miss me, sir.
I have done my work. And it will be more prudent, for since I have
left you I can't help drinking, and I might talk, you know, sir, I
might, and let out what we should both be sorry for. Send me away to
foreign countries where I can keep traveling, and make it always
summer. I hate the long nights when it is dark. I see such cu-u-rious
things. Pray! pray let me go and take these with me, and never trouble
you again."

The words, though half nonsense, were the other half cunning, and the
tones and looks were piteous. Meadows hesitated. Crawley knew too
much; to get rid of him was a bait; and after all to annihilate the
thing he had been all his life accumulating went against his heart. He
rang the bell. "Hide the notes, Crawley. Bring me two shirts, a razor,
and a comb. Crawley, these are the terms. That you don't go near that
woman--" Crawley, with a brutal phrase, expressed his delight at the
idea of getting rid of her forever. "That you go at once to the
railway. Station opens to-day. First train starts in an hour. Up to
London, over to France this evening."

"I will, sir. Hurrah! hurrah!" Then Crawley burst into protestations
of gratitude which Meadows cut short. He rang for breakfast, fed his
accomplice, gave him a great-coat for his journey, and took the
precaution of going with him to the station. There he shook hands with
him and returned to the principal street and entered the bank.

Crawley kept faith, he hugged his treasure to his bosom and sat down
waiting for the train. "Luck is on our side," thought he; "if this had
been open yesterday those two would have come on from Newborough."

He watched the preparations, they were decorating the locomotive with
bouquets and branches. They did not start punctually, some
_soi-disant_ great people had not arrived. "I will have a dram,"
thought Crawley; he went and had three. Then he came back and as he
was standing inspecting the carriages a hand was laid on his shoulder.
He looked round, it was Mr. Wood, a functionary with whom he had often
done business.

"Ah, Wood! how d'ye do? Going to make the first trip?"

"No, sir! I have business detains me in town."

"What! a capias, eh?" chuckled Crawley.

"Something of the sort. There is a friend of yours hard by wants to
speak a word to you."

"Come along, then. Where is he?"

"This way, sir."

Crawley followed Wood to the waiting-room, and there on a bench sat
Isaac Levi. Crawley stopped dead short and would have drawn back, but
Levi beckoned to a seat near him. Crawley came walking like an
automaton from whose joints the oil had suddenly dried. With infinite
repugnance he took the seat, not liking to refuse before several
persons who saw the invitation. Mr. Wood sat on the other side of him.
"What does it all mean?" thought Crawley, but his cue was to seem
indifferent or flattered.

"You have shaved your beard, Mr. Crawley," said Isaac, in a low tone.

"My beard! I never had one," replied Crawley, in the same key.

"Yes, you had when last I saw you--in the gold mine; you set ruffians
to abuse me, sir."

"Don't you believe that, Mr. Levi."

"I saw it and felt it."

The peculiarity of this situation was, that, the room being full of
people, both parties wished, each for his own reason, not to excite
general attention, and therefore delivered scarce above a whisper the
sort of matter that is generally uttered very loud and excitedly.

"It is my turn now," whispered Levi; "an eye for an eye, a tooth for a
tooth."

"You must look sharp then," whispered Crawley; "to-morrow perhaps you
may not have the chance."

"I never postpone vengeance--when it is ripe."

"Don't you, sir? dear me."

"You have seven thousand pounds about you, Mr. Crawley."

Crawley started and trembled. "Stolen!" whispered Isaac in his very
ear. "Give it up to the officer."

Crawley rose instinctively. A firm hand was laid on each of his arms;
he sat down again. "What--what---ever money I have is trusted to me by
the wealthiest and most respectable man in the cou--nty, and--"

"Stolen by him, received by you! Give it to Wood, unless you prefer a
public search."

"You can't search me without a warrant."

"Here is a warrant from the mayor. Take the notes out of your left
breast and give them to the officer, or we must do it by force and
publicity."

"I won't without Mr. Meadows' authority. Send for Mr. Meadows if you
dare." Isaac reflected. "Well! we will take you to Mr. Meadows. Keep
the money till you see him, but we must secure you. Put his coat over
his hands first." The great-coat was put over his hands, and the next
moment under the coat was heard a little sharp click.

"Let us go to the carriage," said Levi, in a brisk, cheerful tone.

Those present heard the friendly invitation and saw a little string of
acquaintances, three in number, break up a conversation and go and get
into a fly; one carried a great-coat and bundle before him with both
hands.



CHAPTER LXXXIV.

MR. MEADOWS went to the bank--into the parlor--and said he must draw
seven thousand pounds of cash and securities. The partners look blank.

"I know," said Meadows, "I should cripple you. Well, I am not going
to, nor let any one else--it would not suit my book. Just hand me the
securities and let me make over that sum to George Fielding and Thomas
Robinson. There! now for some months to come those two men are not to
know how rich they are, in fact not till I tell them." A very ready
consent to this was given by both partners; I am afraid I might say an
eager consent.

"There! now I feel another man, that is off me anyway," and Meadows
strode home double the man. Soon his new top-boots were on, and his
new dark blue coat with flat double-gilt buttons, and his hat broadish
in the brim, and he looked the model of a British yeoman; he reached
Grassmere before eleven o'clock. It was to be a very quiet wedding,
but the bridesmaids, etc., were there, and Susan all in white, pale
but very lovely. Father-in-law cracking jokes, Susan writhing under
them.

"Now, then, is it to be a wedding without bells, for I hear none?"

"That it shall not," cried one of the young men; and off they ran to
the church.

Meantime Meadows was the life and soul of the mirthful scene. He was
in a violent excitement that passed with the rustics for gayety
natural to the occasion. They did not notice his anxious glances up
the hill that led to Newborough; his eager and repeated looks at his
watch, the sigh of relief when the church-bells pealed out, the
tremors of impatience, the struggle to appear cool as he sent one to
hurry the clerk, another to tell the clergyman the bride was ready;
the stamp of the foot when one of the bridesmaids took ten minutes to
tie on a bonnet. He walked arm in arm, with Susan waiting for this
girl; at last she was ready. Then came one running to say that the
parson was not come home yet. What it cost him not to swear at the
parson with Susan on his arm and the church in sight!

While he was thus fuming inwardly, a handsome, dark-eyed youth came up
and inquired which was the bride. She was pointed out to him. "A
letter for you, Miss Merton."

"For me? Who from?"

She glanced at the handwriting, and Meadows looked keenly in the boy's
face. "A Jew," said he to himself. "Susan, you have got your gloves
on." And in a moment he took the letter from her, but quietly, and
opened it as if to return it to her to read. He glanced down it, saw
"Jefferies, postmaster," and at the bottom "Isaac Levi." With
wonderful presence of mind he tore it in pieces. "An insult, Susan,"
he cried. "A mean, malignant insult to set you against me--a wife
against her husband."

Ere the words were out of his mouth he seized the young Jew and
whirled him like a feather into the hands of his friends. "Duck him!"
cried he. And in a moment, spite of his remonstrances and attempts at
explanation, Nathan was flung into the horse-pond. He struggled out on
the other side, and stood on the bank in a stupor of rage and terror,
while the bridegroom menaced him with another dose, should he venture
to return. "I will tell you all about it to-morrow, Susan."

"Calm yourself," replied Susan. "I know you have enemies, but why
punish a messenger for the letter he only carries?"

"You are an angel, Susan. Boys, let him alone, do you hear?" N. B. He
had been ducked.

And now a loud hurrah was heard from behind the church. "The parson,
at last," cried Meadows, exultingly. Susan lowered her eyes, and hated
herself for the shiver that passed through her. To her the parson was
the executioner.

It was not the parson. The next moment two figures came round in
sight. Meadows turned away with a groan. "George Fielding!" said he.
The words dropped, as it were, out of his mouth.

Susan misunderstood this. She thought he read her heart, and ascribed
her repugnance to her lingering attachment to George. She was angry
with herself for letting this worthy man see her want of pride. "Why
do you mention that name to me? What do I care for him who has
deceived me? I wish he stood at the church door, that he might see how
I would look at him and pass him leaning on your faithful arm."

"Susan!" cried a well-known voice behind her. She trembled and almost
crouched ere she turned; but the moment she turned round she gave a
scream that brought all the company running, and the bride forgot
everything at the sight of George's handsome, honest face beaming
truth and love, and threw herself into his arms. George kissed the
bride.

"Oh!" cried the bridesmaids, awaking from their stupor, and
remembering this was her old lover. "Oh!" "Oh!!" "Oh!!!" on an
ascending scale.

These exclamations brought Susan to her senses. She sprang from George
as though an adder had stung her; and, red as fire, her eyes like
basilisks', she turned on him at a safe distance. "How dare you
embrace me? How dare you come where I am? Father, ask this man why he
comes here now to make me expose myself, and insult the honest man who
honors me with his respect. Oh, father, come to me, and take me away
from here."

"Susan, what on earth is this? what have I done?"

"What have you done? You are false to me! you never wrote me a letter
for twelve months, and you are married to a lady in Bathurst! Oh,
George!"

"If he is," cried Robinson, "he must be slyer than I give him credit
for, for I have never left his side night nor day, and I never saw him
say three civil words to a woman."

"Mr. Robinson!"

"Yes, Mr. Robinson. Somebody has been making a fool of you, Miss
Merton. Why, all his cry night and day has been, 'Susan! Susan!' When
we found the great nugget he kisses it, and says he, 'There, that is
not because you are gold, but because you take me to Susan.'"

"Hold your tongue, Tom," said George, sternly. "Who puts me on my
defense? Is there any man here who has been telling her I have ever
had a thought of any girl but her? If there is, let him stand out now
and say it to my face if he dares." There was a dead silence. "There
is a lie without a backer, it seems;" and he looked round on all the
company with his calm superior eye. "And now, Susan, what were you
doing on that man's arm?"

"Oh!"

"Miss Merton and I are to be married to-day," said Meadows, "that is
why I gave her my arm."

George gasped for breath, but he controlled himself by a mighty
effort. "She thought me false, and now she knows I am true. Susan,"
faltered he, "I say nothing about the promises that have passed
between us two, and the ring you gave. Here it is."

"He has kept my ring!"

"I was there before you, Mr. Meadows--but I won't stand upon that; I
don't believe there is a man in the world loves a woman in the world
better than I love Susan; but still I would not give a snap of the
finger to have her if her will was toward another. So please yourself,
my lass, and don't cry like that; only this must end. I won't live in
doubt a moment, no, nor half a moment. Speak your pleasure and nothing
else; choose between John Meadows and George Fielding."

"That is fair," cried one of the bridegrooms. The women secretly
admired George. This is a man, thought they--won't stand our nonsense.

Susan looked up in mute astonishment. "What choice can there be? The
moment I saw your face, and truth still shining in it, I forgot there
was a John Meadows in the world!"

With these words Susan cast a terrified look all round, and, losing
every other feeling in a paroxysm of shame, hid her burning face in
her hands, and made a sudden bolt into the house and upstairs to her
room, where she was followed and discovered by one of her bridesmaids
tearing off her wedding-clothes, and laughing and crying all in a
breath.

1st Bridegroom. "Well, Josh, what d'ye think?"

2d Bridegroom. "Why, I think there won't be a wedding to-day."

1st Bridegroom. "No, nor to-morrow neither. Sal, put on your bonnet
and let's you and I go home. I came to Meadows' wedding; mustn't stay
to anybody's else's."

These remarks were delivered openly, _pro bono,_ and dissolved the
wedding party. Four principal parties remained--Meadows, old Merton,
and the two friends.

"Well, uncle, Susan has spoken her mind, now you speak yours."

"George, I have been an imprudent fool, I am on the brink of ruin. I
owe more than two thousand pounds. We heard you had changed your mind,
and Meadows came forward like a man, and said he would--"

"Your word, uncle, your promise. I crossed the seas on the faith of
it." An upper window was gently opened, and a blushing face listened,
and the hand that they were all discussing and disposing of drew back
a little curtain, and clutched it convulsively.

"You did, George," said the old farmer.

"Says you, 'Bring back a thousand pounds to show me you are not a
fool, and you shall have my daughter,' and she was to have your
blessing. Am I right, Mr. Meadows? you were present."

"Those were the words," replied Meadows.

"Well! and have you brought back the thousand pounds?"

"I have."

"John, I must stand to my word; and I will--it is justice. Take the
girl, and be as happy as you can with her, and her father in the
work-house."

"I take her, and that is as much as to say that neither her father nor
any one she respects shall go to the workhouse. How much is my share,
Tom?"

"Four thousand pounds."

"No, not so much."

"Yes, it is. Jacky gave you his share of the great nugget, and you
gave him sheep in return. Here they are, lads and lasses, seventy of
them varying from one five six naught to one six two nine, and all as
crimp as a muslin gown new starched. Why? I never put this," and he
took pieces of newspaper out of his pocketbook, and looked stupidly at
each as it came out.

"Why, Tom?"

"Robbed!"

"Robbed, Tom?"

"Robbed! oh! I put the book under my pillow, and there I found it this
morning. Robbed! robbed! Kill me, George, I have ruined you."

"I can't speak," gasped George. "Oh, what is the meaning of this?"

"But I can speak! Don't tell me of a London thief being robbed!!!
George Fielding, if you are a man at all, go and leave me and my
daughter in peace. If you had come home with money to keep her, I was
ready to give you Susan to my own ruin. Now it is your turn to show
yourself the right stuff. My daughter has given her hand to a man who
can make a lady of her, and set me on my legs again. You can only
beggar us. Don't stand in the poor girl's light; for pity's sake,
George, leave us in peace."

"You are right, old man; my head is confused;" and George put his hand
feebly to his brow. "But I seem to see it is my duty to go, and I'll
go." George staggered. Robinson made toward him to support him.
"There, don't make a fuss with me. There is nothing the matter with
me--only my heart is dead. Let me sit on this bench and draw my breath
a minute--and then--I'll go. Give me your hand, Tom. Never heed their
jibes. I'd trust you with more gold than the best of them was ever
worth."

Robinson began to blubber the moment George took his hand, spite of
the money lost. "We worked hard for it, too, good folks, and risked
our lives as well as our toil;" and George and Robinson sat hand in
hand upon the bench, and turned their heads away--that it was pitiful
to see.

But still the pair held one another by the hand, and George said,
faltering: "I have got this left me still. Ay, I have heard say that
friendship was better than love, and I dare say so it is."

As if to plead against this verdict, Susan came timidly to her lover
in his sorrow, and sat on his other side, and laid her head gently on
his shoulder. "What signifies money to us two?" she murmured. "Oh, I
have been robbed of what was dearer than life this bitter year, and
now you are down-hearted at loss of money. How foolish to grieve for
such nonsense when I am so hap--hap--happy!" and again the lovely face
rested light as down on George's shoulder, weeping deliciously.

"It is hard, Tom," gasped George; "it is bitter hard; but I shall find
a little bit of manhood by and by to do my duty. Give me breath! only
give me breath! We will go back again where we came from, Tom; only I
shall have nothing to work for now. Where is William, if you please?
Has he forgotten me, too?"

"William is in prison for debt," said old Merton, gravely.

"No, he is not," put in Meadows, "for I sent the money to let him out
an hour ago."

"You sent the money to let my brother out of jail? That sounds queer
to me. I suppose I ought to thank you, but I can't."

"I don't ask your thanks, young man."

"You see, George," said old Merton, "ours is a poor family, and it
will be a great thing for us all to have such a man as Mr. Meadows in
it, if you will only let us."

"Oh, father, you make me blush," cried Susan, beginning to get her
first glimpse of his character.

"He doesn't make me blush," cried George; "but he makes me sick. This
old man would make me walk out of heaven if he was in it. Come, let us
go back to Australia."

"Ay, that is the best thing you can do," cried old Merton.

"If he does, I shall go with him," said Susan, with sudden calmness.
She added, dropping her voice, "If he thinks me worthy to go anywhere
with him."

"You are worthy of better than that, and better shall be your luck;"
and George sat down on the bench with one bitter sob that seemed to
tear his manly heart in two.

There was a time Meadows would have melted at this sad sight, but now
it enraged him. He whispered fiercely to old Merton: "Touch him on his
pride; get rid of him, and your debts shall be all paid that hour; if
not--" He then turned to that heart-stricken trio, touched his hat,
"Good-day, all the company," said he, and strode away with rage in his
heart to set the law in motion against old Merton, and so drive
matters to a point.

But before he had taken a dozen steps he was met by two men who
planted themselves right before him. "You can't pass, sir."

Meadows looked at them with humorous surprise. They had hooked noses.
He did not like that so well.

"Why not?" said he, quietly, but with a wicked look.

One of the men whistled, a man popped out of the churchyard and joined
the two; he had a hooked nose. Another came through the gate from the
lane; another from behind the house. The scene kept quietly filling
with hooked noses till it seemed as if the ten tribes were
reassembling from the four winds.

"Are they going to pitch into me?" thought Meadows; and he felt in his
pocket to see if his pistol was there.

Meantime, George and Susan and Tom rose to their feet in some
astonishment.

"There is a chentleman coming to put a question or two," said the
first speaker. And, in fact, an old acquaintance of ours, Mr.
Williams, came riding up, and, hooking his horse to the gate, came in,
saying, "Oh, here you are, Mr. Meadows. There is a ridiculous charge
brought against you, but I am obliged to hear it before dismissing it.
Give me a seat. Oh, here is a bench. It is very hot. I am informed
that two men belonging to this place have been robbed of seven
thousand pounds at the 'King's Head'--the 'King's Heads in
Newborough."

"It is true, sir," cried Robinson, "but how did you know?"

"I am here to _ask_ questions," was the sharp answer. "Who are
you?"

"Thomas Robinson."

"Which is George Fielding?"

"I am George Fielding, sir.

"Have you been robbed?"

"We have, sir."

"Of how much?"

"Seven thousand pounds."

"Come, that tallies with the old gentleman's account. Hum! where did
you sleep last night, Mr. Meadows?"

"At the 'King's Head' in Newborough, sir," replied Meadows, without
any visible hesitation.

"Well, that is curious, but I need not say I don't believe it is more
than coincidence. Where is the old gentleman? Oh! give way there, and
let him come here."

Now all this was inexplicable to Meadows, but still it brought a
deadly chill of vague apprehension over him. He felt as if a huge
gossamer net was closing round him. Another moment the only spider
capable of spinning it stood in front of him. "I thought so," dropped
from his lips as Isaac Levi and he stood once more face to face.

"I accuse that man of the theft. Nathan and I heard him tell Crawley
that he had drugged the young man's liquor and stolen the notes. Then
we heard Crawley beg for the notes, and after much entreaty he gave
them him."

"It is true!" cried Robinson, in violent agitation; "it must be true.
You know what a light sleeper I am, and how often you had to shake me
this morning. I was hocussed and no mistake!"

"Silence!"

"Yes, your worship."

"Where were you, Mr. Levi, to hear all this?"

"In the east room of my house."

"And where was he?"

"In the west room of his house."

"It is impossible."

"Say not so, sir. I will show you it is true. Meantime I will explain
it."

He explained his contrivance at full. Meadows hung his head; he saw
how terribly the subtle Oriental had outwitted him; yet his presence
of mind never for a moment deserted him.

"Sir," said he, "I have had the misfortune to offend Mr. Levi, and he
is my sworn enemy. If you really mean to go into this ridiculous
affair, allow me to bring witnesses, and I will prove to you he has
been threatening vengeance against me these two years--and you know a
lie is not much to a Jew. Does this appear likely? I am worth sixty
thousand pounds--why should I steal?"

"Why, indeed?" said Mr. Williams. "I stole these notes to give them
away--that is your story, is it?"

"Nay, you stole them to beggar your rival, whose letters to the maiden
he loved you had intercepted by fraud at the post-office in
Farnborough." Susan and George uttered an exclamation at the same
moment. "But, having stole them, you gave them to Crawley."

"How generous!" sneered Meadows. "Well, when you find Crawley with
seven thousand pounds, and he says I gave them him, Mr. Williams will
take your word against mine, and not till then, I think."

"Certainly not--the most respectable man for miles round!"

"So be it," retorted Isaac, coolly; "Nathan, bring Crawley." At that
unexpected word, Meadows looked round for a way to escape. The
hooked-nosed ones hemmed him in. Crawley was brought out of the fly,
quaking with fear.

"Sir," said Levi, "if in that man's bosom, on the left-hand side, the
missing notes are not found, let me suffer scorn; but, if they be
found, give us justice on the evil-doer."

The constable searched Crawley amid the intense anxiety of all
present. He found a bundle of notes. There was a universal cry.

"Stop, sir!" said Robinson, "to make sure I will describe our
property--seventy notes of one hundred pounds each. Numbers one five
six naught to one six two nine."

Mr. Williams examined the bundle, and at once handed them over to
Robinson, who shoved them hastily into George's hands and danced for
joy.

Mr. Williams looked ruefully at Meadows, then he hesitated; then,
turning sharply to Crawley, he said, "Where did you get these?"

Meadows tried to catch his eye and prevail on him to say nothing; but
Crawley, who had not heard Levi's evidence, made sure of saving
himself by means of Meadows' reputation.

"I had them from Mr. Meadows," he cried; "and what about it? it is not
the first time he has trusted me with much larger sums than that."

"Oh! you had them from Mr. Meadows?"

"Yes, I had!"

"Mr. Meadows, I am sorry to say I must commit you; but I still hope
you will clear yourself elsewhere."

"I have not the least uneasiness about that, sir, thank you. You will
admit me to bail, of course?"

"Impossible! Wood, here is a warrant, I will sign it."

While the magistrate was signing the warrant, Meadows' head fell upon
his breast; he seemed to collapse standing.

Isaac Levi eyed him scornfully. "You had no mercy on the old Jew. You
took his house from him, not for your need but for hate. So he made
that house a trap and caught you in your villainy."

"Yes! you have caught me," cried Meadows, "but you will never cage
me!" and in a moment his pistol was at his own temple and he pulled
the trigger--the cap failed; he pulled the other trigger, the other
cap failed. He gave a yell like a wounded tiger, and stood at bay
gnashing his teeth with rage and despair. Half a dozen men threw
themselves upon him, and a struggle ensued that almost baffles
description. He dragged those six men about up and down, some clinging
to his legs, some to his body. He whirled nearly every one of them to
the ground in turn; and, when by pulling at his legs they got him
down, he fought like a badger on his back, seized two by the throat,
and putting his feet under another drove him into the air doubled up
like a ball, and he fell on Levi and sent the old man into Mr.
Williams' arms, who sat down with a Jew in his lap, to the derangement
of his magisterial dignity.

At last he was mastered, and his hands tied behind him with two
handkerchiefs.

"Take the rascal to jail!" cried Williams, in a passion. Meadows
groaned. "Ay! take me," said he, "you can't make me live there. I've
lived respected all these years, and now I shall be called a felon.
Take me where I may hide my head and die!" and the wretched man moved
away with feeble steps, his strength and spirit crushed now his hands
were tied.

Then Crawley followed him, abusing and reviling him. "So this is the
end of all your maneuvering! Oh, what a fool I was to side with such a
bungler as you against Mr. Levi. Here am I, an innocent man, ruined
through knowing a thief--ah! you don't like that word, but what else
are you but a thief?" and so he followed his late idol and heaped
reproaches and insults on him, till at last Meadows turned round and
cast a vague look of mute despair, as much as to say, "How am I
fallen, when this can trample me!"

One of the company saw this look and understood it. Yielding to an
impulse he took three steps, and laid his hand on Crawley. "Ye little
snake," said he, "let the man alone!" and he sent Crawley spinning
like a teetotum; then turned on his own heel and came away, looking a
little red and ashamed of what he had done. My reader shall guess
which of the company this was.

Half way to the county jail Meadows and Crawley met William Fielding
coming back.

It took hours and hours to realize all the happiness that had fallen
on two loving hearts. First had to pass away many a spasm of terror at
the wrongs they had suffered, the danger they had escaped, the long
misery they had grazed. They remained rooted to the narrow spot of
ground where such great and strange events had passed in a few
minutes, and their destinies had fluctuated so violently, and all
ended in joy unspeakable. And everybody put questions to everybody,
and all compared notes, and the hours fled while they unraveled their
own strange story. And Susan and George almost worshipped Isaac Levi;
and Susan kissed him and called him her father, and hung upon his neck
all gratitude. And he passed his hand over her chestnut hair, and
said, "Go to, foolish child," but his deep rich voice trembled a
little, and wonderful tenderness and benevolence glistened in that
fiery eye.

He would now have left them, but nobody there would part with him;
behooved him to stay and eat fish and pudding with them--the meat they
would excuse him if he would be good and not talk about going again.
And after dinner George and Tom must tell their whole story; and, as
they told their eventful lives, it was observed that the hearers were
far more agitated than the narrators. The latter had been in a gold
mine; had supped so full of adventures and crimes and horrors that
nothing astonished them, and they were made sensible of the tremendous
scenes they had been through by the loud ejaculations, the pallor, the
excitement of their hearers. As for Susan, again and again during the
men's narratives the tears streamed down her face, and once she was
taken faint at George's peril, and the story had to be interrupted and
water sprinkled on her, and the men in their innocence were for not
going on with their part, but she peremptorily insisted, and sneered
at them for being so foolish as to take any notice of her
foolishness--she would have every word. After all was he not there
alive and well, sent back to her safe after so many perils, never,
never to leave England again!

"Oh, giorno felice!" A day to be imagined; or described by a pen a
thousand times greater and subtler than mine, but of this be sure--it
was a day such as, neither to Susan nor George, nor to you nor me, nor
to any man or woman upon earth, has ever come twice between the cradle
and the grave.



CHAPTER LXXXV.

A MONTH of Elysium. And then one day George asked Susan, plump, when
it would be agreeable to her to marry him.

"Marry you, George?" replied Susan, opening her eyes; "why, never! I
shall never marry any one after--you must be well aware of that."
Susan proceeded to inform George, that, though foolishness was a part
of her character, selfishness was not; recent events had destroyed an
agreeable delusion under which she had imagined herself worthy to be
Mrs. George Fielding; she therefore, though with some reluctance,
intended to resign that situation to some wiser and better woman than
she had turned out. In this agreeable resolution she persisted,
varying it occasionally with little showers of tears unaccompanied by
the slightest convulsion of the muscles of the face. But, as I am not,
like George Fielding, in love with Susan Merton, or with
self-deception (another's), I spare the reader all the pretty things
this young lady said and believed and did, to postpone her inevitable
happiness. Yes, inevitable, for this sort of thing never yet kept
lovers long apart since the world was, except in a novel worse than
common. I will but relate how that fine fellow, George, dried "these
foolish drops" on one occasion.

"Susan," said he, "if I had found you going to be married to another
man with the roses on your cheek, I should have turned on my heel and
back to Australia. But a look in your face was enough; you were
miserable, and any old fool could see your heart was dead against it;
look at you now blooming like a rose, so what is the use of us two
fighting against human nature? we can't be happy apart--let us come
together."

"Ah! George, if I thought your happiness depended on having--a foolish
wife--"

"Why, you know it does," replied the inadvertent Agricola.

"That alters the case; sooner than _you_ should be unhappy--I
think--I--"

"Name the day, then."

In short the bells rang a merry peal, and to reconcile Susan to her
unavoidable happiness, Mr. Eden came down and gave an additional
weight (in her way of viewing things) to the marriage ceremony by
officiating. It must be owned that this favorable circumstance cost
her a few tears, too.

How so, Mr. Reade?

Marry, sir, thus: Mr. Eden was what they call eccentric; among his
other deviations from usage he delivered the meaning of sentences in
church along with the words.

This was a thunder-clap to poor Susan. She had often heard a chanting
machine utter the marriage service all on one note, and heard it with
a certain smile of unintelligent complacency her sex wear out of
politeness; but when the man Eden told her at the altar with simple
earnestness what a high and deep and solemn contract she was making
then and there with God and man, she began to cry, and wept like April
through the ceremony.

I have not quite done with this pair, but leave them a few minutes,
for some words are due to other characters, and to none, I think, more
than to this very Mr. Eden, whose zeal and wisdom brought our hero and
unheroine happily together through the subtle sequence of causes I
have related, the prime thread a converted thief.

Mr. Eden's strength broke down under the prodigious effort to defeat
the effect of separate confinement on the bodies and souls of his
prisoners. Dr. Gulson ordered him abroad. Having now since the removal
of Hawes given the separate and silent system a long and impartial
trial, his last public act was to write at the foot of his report a
solemn protest against it, as an impious and mad attempt to defy God's
will as written on the face of man's nature--to crush too those very
instincts from which rise communities, cities, laws, prisons,
churches, civilization--and to wreck souls and bodies under pretense
of curing souls, not by knowledge, wisdom, patience, Christian love,
or any great moral effort, but by the easy and physical expedient of
turning one key on each prisoner instead of on a score.

"These," said Mr. Eden, "are the dreams of selfish, lazy, heartless
dunces and reckless bigots, dwarf Robespierres, with self-deceiving
hearts that dream philanthropy, fluent lips that cant philanthropy and
hands swift to shed blood--which is not blood to them--because they
are mere sensual brutes, so low in intelligence that, although men are
murdered and die before their eyes, they cannot see it was murder,
because there was no knocking on the head or cutting of throats."

The reverend gentleman then formally washed his hands of the bloodshed
and reason-shed of the separate system, and resigned his office,
earnestly requesting at the same time that, as soon as the government
should come round to his opinion, they would permit him to co-operate
in any enlightened experiment where God should no longer be defied by
a knot of worms as in ---- Jail.

Then he went abroad, but though professedly hunting health he visited
and inspected half the principal prisons in Europe. After many months
events justified his prediction. The government started a large prison
on common sense and humanity, and Mr. Lacy's interest procured Mr.
Eden the place of its chaplain.

This prison was what every prison in the English provinces will be in
five years' time--a well-ordered community, an epitome of the world at
large, for which a prison is to prepare men, not unfit them as
frenzied dunces would do; it was also a self-sustaining community,
like the world. The prisoners ate prisoner-grown corn and meat, wore
prisoner-made clothes and bedding, wire lighted by gas made in the
prison, etc., etc., etc., etc. The agricultural laborers had out-door
work suited to their future destiny, and mechanical trades were
zealously ransacked for the city rogues. Anti-theft reigned
triumphant. No idleness, no wicked waste of sweat.

The members of this community sleep in separate cells, as men do in
other well-ordered communities, but they do not pine and wither and
die in cells for offenses committee outside the prison walls. Here, if
you see a man caged like a wild beast all day, you may be sure he is
there, not so much for his own good as for that of the little
community in which he has proved himself unworthy to mix _pro tem._
Foul language and contamination are checkmated here, not by the lazy,
selfish, cruel expedient of universal solitude, but by Argus-like
surveillance. Officers, sufficient in number, listen with sharp ears,
and look with keen eyes. The contaminator is sure to be seized and
confined till prudence, if not virtue, ties his tongue. Thus he is
disarmed, and the better-disposed encourage one another. Compare this
legitimate and necessary use of that most terrible of tortures, the
cell, with the tigro-asinine use of it in seven English prisons out of
nine at the present date. It is just the difference between arsenic as
used by a good physician and by a poisoner. It is the difference
between a razor-bladed, needle-pointed knife in the hands of a
Christian, a philosopher, a skilled surgeon, and the same knife in the
hands of a savage, a brute, a scoundrel, or a fanatical idiot.

Mr. Eden had returned from abroad but a fortnight when he was called
on to unite George and Susan.

I have little more to add than that he was very hard worked and
supremely happy in his new situation, and that I have failed to do him
justice in these pages. But he shall have justice one day, when
pitiless asses will find themselves more foul in the eyes of the
All-pure than the thieves they crushed under four walls, and "The just
shall shine forth as the sun, and they that turn* many to
righteousness as the stars forever and ever."

* Not crush.

Thomas Robinson did not stay long at Grassmere. Things were said in
the village that wounded him. Ill-repute will not stop directly
ill-conduct does. He went to see Mr. Eden, sent his name in as Mr.
Sinclair, was received with open arms, and gave the good man a glow of
happiness such as most of us, I fear, go to the grave without
feeling--or earning. He presented him a massive gold ring he had
hammered out of a nugget. Mr. Eden had never worn a ring in his life,
but he wore this with an innocent pride, and showed it people, and
valued it more than he would the Pitt diamond, which a French king
bought of an English subject, and the price was so heavy he paid for
it by installments spread over many years.

Robinson very wisely went back to Australia, and, more wisely still,
married Jenny, with whom he had corresponded ever since he left her.

I have no fear he will ever break the Eighth Commandment again. His
heart was touched long ago, and ever since then his understanding had
received conviction upon conviction; for, oh, the blaze of light that
enters our souls when our fate puts us in his place--in her place--in
their place--whom we used to strike, never realizing how it hurt them!
He is respected for his intelligence and good-nature; he is sober,
industrious, pushing and punctilious in business. One trait of the
Bohemian remains. About every four months a restlessness comes over
him; then the wise Jenny of her own accord proposes a trip. Poor Tom's
eyes sparkle directly; off they go together. A foolish wife would have
made him go alone. They come back, and my lord goes to his duties with
fresh zest till the periodical fit comes again. No harm ever comes of
it.

Servants are at a great premium, masters at a discount, in the colony;
hence a domestic phenomenon, which my English readers can hardly
conceive, but I am told my American friends have a faint glimpse of it
in the occasional deportment of their "helps" in out-of-the-way
places.

Now Tom, and especially Jenny, had looked forward to reigning in their
own house, and it was therefore a disappointment when they found
themselves snubbed and treated with hauteur, and Jenny revolted
against servant after servant, who straightway abdicated and left her
forlorn. At last their advertisement was answered by a male candidate
for menial authority, who proved to be Mr. Miles, their late master.
Tom and Jenny colored up, and both agreed it was out of the
question--they should feel too ashamed. Mr. Miles answered by offering
to bet a crown he should make them the best servant in the street;
and, strange to say, the bargain was struck and he did turn out a
model servant. He was civil and respectful, especially in public, and
never abused his situation. Comparing his conduct with his
predecessors', it really appeared that a gentleman can beat snobs in
various relations of life. As Tom's master and Jenny's, he had never
descended to servility, nor was he betrayed into arrogance now that he
had risen to be their servant.

A word about Jacky. After the meal off the scented rabbit in the bush,
Robinson said slyly to George: "I thought you promised Jacky a
hiding--well, here he is."

"Now, Tom," replied the other, coloring up, "is it reasonable, and he
has just saved our two lives? but if you think that I won't take him
to task, you are much mistaken."

George then remonstrated with the chief for spoiling Abner with his
tomahawk. Jacky opened his eyes with astonishment and admiration. Here
was another instance of the white fellow's wonderful power of seeing
things a good way behind him. He half closed his eyes, and tried in
humble imitation to peer back into the past. Yes! he could just manage
to see himself very indistinctly giving Abner a crack; but stop! let
him see, it was impossible to be positive, but was not there also some
small trifle of insolence, ingratitude, and above all bungality, on
the part of this Abner? When the distance had become too great to see
the whole of a transaction, why strain the eyes looking at a part?
Finally Jacky submitted that these microscopic researches cost a good
deal of trouble, and on the whole his tribe were wiser than the white
fellows in this, that they reveled in the present, and looked on the
past as a period that never had been, and the future as one that never
would be. On this George resigned the moral culture of his friend.
"Soil is not altogether bad," said Agricola, "but, bless your heart,
it isn't a quarter of an inch deep."

On George's departure, Jacky, being under the temporary impression of
his words, collected together a mixed company of blacks, and marched
them to his possessions. Arrived, he harangued them on the cleverness
of the white fellows, and invited them to play at Europeans.

"Behold this ingenious structure," said he, in Australian; "this is
called a house; its use is to protect us from the weather at night;
all you have to do is to notice which way the wind blows, and go and
lie down on the opposite side of the house and there you are. Then
again, when you are cold, you will find a number of wooden articles in
the house. You go in, you bring them out and burn them and are warm."
He then produced what he had always considered the _chef d'oeuvre_
of the white races, a box of lucifer matches; this, too, was a present
from George. "See what clever fellows they are," said he, "they carry
about fire, which is fire or not fire at the fortunate possessor's
will;" and he let off a lucifer. These the tribe admired, but doubted
whether all those little sticks had the same marvelous property and
would become fire in the hour of need; Jacky sneered at their
incredulity, and let them all off one by one in a series of
preliminary experiments; this impaired their future usefulness. In
short, they settled there; one or two's heads had to be broken for
killing the breeders for dinner, and that practice stopped; but the
pot-bellied youngsters generally celebrated the birth of a lamb by
spearing it. They slept on the lee side of the house, warmed at night
by the chairs and tables, etc., which they lighted. They got on very
nicely, only one fine morning, without the slightest warning,
whir-r-r-r they all went off to the woods, Jacky and all, and never
returned. The remaining bullocks strayed devious, and the douce
McLaughlan blandly absorbed the sheep.

Hasty and imperfect as my sketch of this Jacky is, give it a place in
your notebook of sketches, for in a few years the Australian savage
will breathe only in these pages, and the Saxon plow will erase his
very grave, his milmeridien.

brutus lived; but the form and strength he had abused were gone--he is
the shape of a note of interrogation, and by a coincidence is now an
"asker," i.e., he begs, receives alms, and sets on a gang of burglars,
with whom he is in league, to rob the good Christians that show him
pity.

mephistopheles came suddenly to grief; when gold was found in Victoria
he crossed over to that port and robbed. One day he robbed the tent of
an old man, a native of the colony, who was digging there with his
son, a lad of fifteen. Now these currency lads are very sharp and
determined. The youngster caught a glimpse of the retiring thief and
followed him and saw him enter a tent. He watched at the entrance, and
when mephistopheles came out again, he put a pistol to the man's
breast and shot him dead without a word of remonstrance, accusation or
explanation.

A few diggers ran out of their claims. "If our gold is not on him,"
says the youngster, "I have made a mistake."

The gold was found on the carcass, and the diggers went coolly back to
their work.

The youngster went directly to the commissioner and told him what he
had done. "I don't see that I am called on to interfere," replied that
functionary; "he was taken in the act; you have buried him, of
course."

"Not I. I let him lie for whoever chose to own him."

"You let him lie? What, when there is a printed order from the
government stuck over the whole mine that nobody is to leave carrion
about! You go off directly and bury your carrion or you will get into
trouble, young man." And the official's manner became harsh and
threatening.

If ever a man was "shot like a dog," surely the assassin of Carlo was.

Mr. Meadows in the prison refused his food, and fell into a deep
depression; but the third day he revived, and fell to scheming again.
He sent to Mr. Levi and offered to give him a long lease of his old
house if he would but be absent from the trial. This was a sore
temptation to the old man. But meantime stronger measures were taken
in his defense and without consulting him.

One evening that Susan and George were in the garden at Grassmere,
suddenly an old woman came toward them with slow and hesitating steps.
Susan fled at the sight of her--she hated the very name this old woman
bore. George stood his ground, looking sheepish; the old woman stood
before him trembling violently and fighting against her tears. She
could not speak, but held out a letter to him. He took it, the ink was
rusty, it was written twenty years ago; it was from his mother to her
neighbor, Mrs. Meadows, then on a visit at Newborough, telling her how
young John had fought for and protected her against a band of drunken
ruffians, and how grateful she was.

"And I do hope, dame, he will be as good friends with my lads when
they are men as you and I have been this many a day."

George did not speak for a long time. He held the letter, and it
trembled a little in his hand. He looked at the old woman, standing a
piteous, silent supplicant. "Mrs. Meadows," said he, scarce above a
whisper, "give me this letter, if you will be so good. I have not got
her handwriting, except our names in the Bible."

She gave him the letter half reluctantly, and looked fearfully and
inquiringly in his face. He smiled kindly, and a sort of proud curl
came for a moment to his lip, and the woman read the man. This royal
rustic would not have taken the letter if he had not granted the
mother's unspoken prayer.

"God bless you both!" said she, and went on her way.

The assizes came, and Meadows' two plaintiffs both were absent:
Robinson gone to Australia, and George forfeited his recognizances and
had, to pay a hundred pound for it. The defendants were freed. Then
Isaac Levi said to himself, "He will not keep faith with me." But he
did not know his man. Meadows had a conscience, though an oblique one.
A promise from him was sacred in his own eyes. A man came to Grassmere
and left a hundred pound in a letter for George Fielding. Then he went
on to Levi, and gave him a parcel and a note. The parcel contained the
title-deeds of the house; and the note said: "Take the house and the
furniture and pay me what you consider they are worth. And, old man, I
think you might take your curse off me, for I have never known a heart
at rest since you laid it on me, and you see now our case is
altered--you have a home now and John Meadows has none."

Then the old man was softened, and he wrote a line in reply, and said:
"Three just men shall value the house and furniture, and I will pay,
etc., etc. Put now adversity to profit--repent and prosper. Isaac Levi
wishes you no ill from this day, but rather good." Thus died, as
mortal feelings are apt to die, an enmity its owners thought immortal.

A steam-vessel glided down the Thames bound for Port Phillip. On the
deck were to be seen a little girl crying bitterly--this was Hannah--a
stalwart, yeoman-like figure, who stood unmoved as the shores glided
by,

                   Omne solum forti patria,

and an old woman who held his arm as if she needed to feel him at the
moment of leaving her native land. This old woman had hated and
denounced his sins, and there was scarce a point of morality on which
she thoroughly agreed with him. Yet at threescore years and ten she
left her native land with two sole objects--to comfort this stout man,
and win him to repentance.

"He shall repent," said she to herself. "Even now his eyes are
opening, his heart is softening. Three times he has said to me, 'That
George Fielding is a better man than I am.' He will repent. Again he
said to me, I have thought too little of you, and too much where it
was a sin for me even to look.' He will repent--his voice is
softer--he bears no malice--he blames none but himself. It is never
too late to mend. He will repent, and I shall see him happy and lay my
old bones to rest contented, though not where I thought to lay them,
in Grassmere churchyard."

Ah, you do well to hold that quaint little old figure with that strong
arm closer to you than you have done this many years, ay, since you
were a curly-headed boy. It is a good sign, John; on neither side of
the equator shall you ever find a friend like her.

         "All other love is mockery and deceit.
          'Tis like the mirage of the desert that appears
          A cool refreshing water, and allures
          The thirsty traveler, but flies anon
          And leaves him disappointed, wondering
          So fair a vision should so futile prove.
          A mother's love is like unto a well
          Sealed and kept secret, a deep-hidden fount
          That flows when every other spring is dry."*

* Sophia Woodrooffe.

Peter Crawley, left to his own resources, practices at the County
Courts in his old neighborhood, and drinks with all his clients, who
are of the lowest imaginable order. He complains that "he can't peck,"
yet continues the cause of his infirmity, living almost entirely upon
cock-a-doodle broth--eggs beat up in brandy and a little water. Like
Scipio, he is never less alone than when alone; with this difference,
that the companions of P. C.'s solitude do not add to the pleasure of
his existence. Unless somebody can make him see that it is never too
late to mend, this little rogue, fool and sot will "shut up like a
knife some day" (so says a medical friend), and then it will be too
late.


It is nine in the evening. A little party is collected of farmers and
their wives and daughters. Mrs. George Fielding rises and says, "Now I
must go home." Remonstrance of hostess. "George will be at home by
now."

"Well, wait till he comes for you."

"Oh, he won't come, for fear of shortening my pleasure."

Susan then explains that George is so foolish that he never will go
into the house when she is not in it. "And here is a drizzle come on,
and there he will be sitting out in it, I know, if I don't go and
drive him in."

Events justify the prediction. The good wife finds her husband sitting
on the gate kicking his heels quite contented and peaceable, only he
would not pay the house the compliment of going into it when she was
not there. He told her once he looked on it as no better than a
coal-hole when she was not shining up and down it.

N. B.--They have been some years married. A calm but very tender
conjugal love sits at this innocent hearth.

George has made a great concession for an Englishman. He has solemnly
deposited before witnesses his sobriquet of "Unlucky George," not (he
was careful to explain) because he found the great nugget, nor because
the meadow he bought in Bathurst for two hundred pounds has just been
sold by Robinson for twelve thousand pounds, but on account of his
being Susan's husband.

And Susan is very happy. Besides the pleasure of loving and being
loved, she is in her place in creation. The class of women (a very
large one) to which she belongs comes into the world to make others
happy. Susan is skillful at this and very successful. She makes
everybody happy round her, "and that is _so_ pleasant." She makes
the man she loves happy, and that is delightful.

My reader shall laugh at her; my unfriendly critic shall sneer at her.
As a heroine of a novel she deserves it; but I hope for their own
sakes neither will undervalue the original in their passage through
life. These average women are not the spice of fiction, but they are
the salt of real life.

William Fielding is godfather to Susan's little boy.

He can stand by his brother's side and look without compunction on
Anne Fielding's grave, and think without an unmanly shudder of his
own.


END OF "IT IS NEVER TOO LATE TO MEND."